Karviná is a town in the northern part of the Czech Republic, about 18 km from Ostrava, near the Polish border.

Birthplace of the javelin throwing champion Dana Zátopková, tennis player Radek Štěpánek and top model Petra Němcova, today the town is known for its spa, top-level handball games, but also for the crooked church called "Česká Pisa".

FEATURES

The many significant sights of Karviná, which are gathered in the city's historic zone, look just like they did in the old days. The first steps will take you to the historical core of the town, which is based on Masarykovo náměstí (Masaryk Square). The dominant feature of the square is undoubtedly the town hall with its Renaissance tower, whose perspective is complemented by a historical cast-iron fountain in the middle of the square and a row of bourgeois houses with valuable stucco and front decorations. At the northern entrance to the square, it is impossible not to notice the extensive Fryštát Castle with its elegant 18th century empire-style appearance. Earlier, a Gothic castle of the Těšín Piast dynasty princes stood here. The castle underwent a thorough reconstruction in the 1990s and was opened to the public (tour in 3 parts).

The oldest Gothic monument in the town is the Church of the Elevation of the Cross, whose appearance was changed by the extension of the Moravian Chapel in 1611. Inside the church there are Baroque, Renaissance and Classicist elements. Both the interior and the surroundings of the church are rich in many valuable elements. On the occasion of the empire-style chateau reconstruction, the church was connected to it by a brick corridor, which creates a romantic entrance to the large chateau park.

A walk through this unique, very valuable nature park is literally breathtaking and is a unique experience when visiting Karviná.

You will then reach the part of the historical zone containing the Darkov spa area, where there are many architectural monuments in the style of spa buildings, as well as a beautiful spa park. The dominant feature here is the Community House in the style of Viennese Art Nouveau, which is the centre of cultural life at the spa.

The entrance to the sanatorium area is possible thanks to a unique technical monument - an arch bridge over the river Olza. Karvina has many other beautiful sights outside of the monumental zone. Before leaving, you must visit another technical monument - the water tower and, above all, the internationally unique Church of St. Peter of Alcantara, which has been preserved in the Karvina-Doly district as the only significant building of the original architecture of the disappeared 20,000 year old town of Karvinné. The church originally stood 37 m higher and its slope forced its lowering. That's why many people resemble the tower in Pisa, Italy.

WHAT TO VISIT AND EXPERIENCE IN KARVINÁ

Karvina is a city with a rich cultural and social life. Visiting Karvina at any time of the year, it is worth going to the theatre, to a concert or to follow numerous sports competitions. There are also numerous open-air events traditionally open to the public.

In addition to traditional attractions, tourists can choose from a wide range of "Experience Packages". - original proposals for spending your free time in Karviná and its surroundings according to your various interests and individual plans. Among the 'Experience Packages' there is something for everyone, as there are traditional and non-traditional, fun and romantic ways, which provide adrenaline and relaxation, with a bit of madness and relaxation, for skilful hands and an accurate eye and much more.

A strategic place, probably the most visited is probably Fryštát Castle, which offers sightseeing during the season from April to the end of October, and the National Gallery is open all year round. Romantics can choose the castle for their wedding or other ceremonies and parties.

The town's recreational area is Loděnice in the chateau park and a modern summer pool. In Karviná, you can choose from many sporting activities. There is an indoor swimming pool, a winter stadium with an ice rink and a multi-purpose hall with many tennis, badminton and squash courts and a fitness centre.

The beauty of the city and the surrounding nature can be explored on foot or by bike on regional and city bicycle routes and abroad in border Poland.

Karviná is known for its spa town, not only in the Czech Republic, but also in distant countries. The Darkov Spa, located in two places in Karviná, began operating in 1867. Today there is a Darkov Spa in the historical part of the town and a newer healing and rehabilitation sanatorium. Recently, there have been established relaxation and wellness centres - the Regeneration Centre and Vital World. Here you can enjoy unique healing procedures and comfort available to everyone. Come and enjoy the peaceful surroundings, the service staff, the pleasant discovery of the spa's specialities. Let yourself be pampered.

An invariably popular pilgrimage destination is the leaning church. Many visitors are fascinated by its complex history and at the same time want to feel what it's like to stand on level ground when the walls around them seem to fall.

St. Peter's Church in Alcantara - "Czech Pisa"

Tilt of 6.80, on an even surface and yet diagonally

Falling of the ground under the church - 37 m

Tailor-made tour with a lecture