Since I could not attend the two evenings at La Seine Musicale on July 4 th and 5 th, when “Napoléon” the silent film directed by Abel Gance, was projected with a full orchestra, Jean Lebrun, the writer and producer from France Inter and France Culture, whom I revere since I worked for him years go, has accepted to review it for Parisdiary. “When it was first shown at Palais Garnier on April 7, 1927, it was unachieved ( 3.27 h) and it remained so. Abel Gance worked on it all his life (it is said that there are 22 versions and close to 1 000 boxes full of reels), trying to adapt it to speaking movies, and even cutting into the negative to adapt it. And this is the difficulty of the restoration made by La Cinémathèque française, to whom the director had sold some of his films in order to pay for his debts. At the time, he had agreed to Kevin Browlow’s restoration work which led to three version s of 4.50 h, 5.13 h and finally 5.30 h. The version which can now be seen in movie theaters, is due to Georges Mourier‘s titanic efforts of 16 years: he found all the film reels, including some at Gance’s little sister’s house in Toulouse and it is meant to be the definitive copy. As for the musical partition, which was originally a short piece composed by Honegger which Gance did not agree on, it is now a “pot pourri” of grand music by Beethoven, Berlioz and more, put together by composer Simon Cloquet-Lafollye. The two orchestras of Radio France were present at the Seine Musicale and it is their recording which accompanies the film in Pathé movie theaters since July 10.”

The film starts at the military school of Brienne which Bonaparte attended between the ages of 10 to 15. The snow ball battle is probably the most beautiful scene of the film with the contrast of the black and white images, and the young Napoléon ordering his troops around. The courage of the young Bonaparte, who already shows a strong character, is illustrated with different signs and the eagle, constantly appears in the film. Then he is shown in Corsica, fighting Pozzo di Borgo who wants an alliance with England. Bravura is a constance in the film, starting with the most spectacular cavalry show through the natural landscapes of Corsica: Gance did not hesitate to fix a camera on the horse’s belly to film it. Then Bonaparte borrows a small boat and uses the tricolor flag as his sail.

While he flees Corsica, the Convention takes place and images of him and the revolutionaries alternate on the screen. He will bravely make his way through the Revolution and save France from military disasters against Britain in Toulon. The film ends on the Italian campaign where his discipline and strength lead the French army to victory.

The film is also intimist with his mother and siblings who are important characters and with Joséphine, the seducer. In this virtuoso maelstrom Gance (who briefly acts as Saint Just) includes a Corsican shepherd, Lord Nelson of course, Danton, the young Rouget de Lisle who presents his Marseillaise (sung by Benjamin Bernheim) at Couvent des Cordeliers, the character of Marat played by Antonin Artaud, and an ugly Robespierre who all strike the imagination. What is most fascinating is the way he films crowds and close ups on the people.

The British officers all wear elegant wigs and embroideries on their uniforms. The French seem less chic except in the second part at the Bal des Victimes where the future emperor falls in love with Josephine, one of the three “goddesses” of the time, who included Madame Récamier and Madame Tallier. And Napoléon is mostly scruffy.

When seeing it at Les Fauvettes, the ravishing Pathé cinéma in the Gobelins, I was fascinated by the beauty of the images. Each shot looks like a painting in black and white with numerous aesthetical details like striped men’s stockings and trousers. The music on the other hand is a little too overpowering and one walks out slightly dizzy…

The make up on the hundreds of characters is fabulous and one can only admire the filming effects and the framing of the battles and landscape. The battle of Italy appears on three different screens, making it even more powerful. You have to risk attending one of the two 3 H 30 shows: the restoration of this movie is a major event in the world of cinematography. And if the film is not showing on our holiday spot, you will be able to stream it in the fall, I am sure. On September 12 at 7 pm Georges Mourier will give a talk at the Cinémathèque française.

You can also listen to the history of Abel Gance by Philippe Esnault on France culture here.