The most abundant and continuous fossil record of the Early Cretaceous “Plagiaulacida” suborder of multituberculates comes from Western Europe and that of the Iberian Peninsula is becoming one of the most richest and continuous anywhere in the world. Evidence for that are the new finds found from both the Valanginian/Hauterivian and Hauterivian/Barremian transitions as well as from the early and late Barremian sites of the Central Iberian Range, in the Maestrazgo Basin and joined subbasin of Aguilón (province of Teruel and Zaragoza, northeastern Spain). The new discoveries involve new species of the Pinheirodontidae and Eobaataridae or Plagiaulacidae, new specimens of the Iberian eobaatariids Eobaatar hispanicus and Eobaatar? pajaronensis and of the Iberian pinheirodontid Lavocatia, and high number of upper and lower teeth of Eobaatar, including those poorly known within the genus, such us the upper incisors. The fossils we report here have considerably increased the Iberian “plagiaulacidan” multituberculate biodiversity and the biostratigraphic and paleobiogeographic resolution of these faunas during the Early Cretaceous.

Two eobaatarid multituberculates, Heishanobaatar triangulus gen. et sp. nov. and Eobaataridae gen. et sp. indet., and an ?albionbaatarid multituberculate, Kielanobaatar badaohaoensis gen. et sp. nov., from the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian to Albian) Shahai and Fuxin formations in Liaoning Province, northeastern China, are described. Heishanobaatar triangulus is a moderate-sized multituberculate characterized by lower jaw dental formula 1.0.3.2, slender lower incisor, single-rooted p2, triangular p3 in lateral view, p4 with eight serrations, m1 with cusp formula 2:2, and m2 with cusp formula 1 (coalesced):2. Kielanobaatar badaohaoensis is characterized by upper anterior premolars with relatively flat occlusal surfaces, roughly pentangular P1 in occlusal view, P1 and P2 with three cusp rows (cusp formulae 1:3:2), and P3 with four cusps (cusp formula 2:2). Together with already described three species of eobaatarids from the same localities, they demonstrate that there were quite diverse multituberculates in Asia in the late Early Cretaceous, and suggest that the mammalian fauna known from the Shahai and Fuxin formations probably show a transitional state from the mammalian fauna of the Yixian Formation to Late Cretaceous Asian faunas.

The multituberculate assemblage from the Early Cretaceous Khovoor locality in Mongolia, based on the study of 112 specimens in PIN collection, includes three taxa: arginbaatarid Arginbaatar dmitrievae Trofimov, 1980 (=Monobaatar mimicus Kielan-Jaworowska et al., 1987, new synonym) and two eobaatarids, Eobaatar magnus Kielan-Jaworowska et al., 1987 and Nokerbaatar minor (Kielan-Jaworowska et al., 1987), comb. nov. Both eobaatarid taxa from Khovoor differ from other known eobaatarids by lower incisors with enamel restricted to ventrolateral side. Contrary to the previous claims, in both Eobaatar magnus and Nokerbaatar minor P5 is sectorial tooth, as in other eobaatarids, different in morphology from P4. In Eobaatar and Nokerbaatar gen. nov., there is pronounced sculpture of radiating ridges on the upper premolars, which is partially also present on the upper molars. In Nokerbaatar, there is a ventrolingual groove on the lower incisor and p3 is relatively small, lacking serrations. In Eobaatar, there is a pronounced ventrolingual ridge on the lower incisor and p3 is relatively larger, with serrations. The number of infraorbital foramina is variable in Arginbaatar, with most specimens having two foramina. In Arginbaatar, the cusp ornamentation is poorly developed or absent on upper premolars and absent on upper molars. The sectorial dP5 was likely not replacing by P5. The molars (M2, m1–2) have conical cusps. The p4 is very large and highly variable in size and number of denticles (11–18). It lacks labial cusps and has restricted enamel. The p4 rotates mesioventrally during the ontogeny, which is unique for the Multituberculata. The p2 and dp3 are shed early during the ontogeny. The p3 is fully formed but cannot erupt because it is overhang by p4. In upper dentition, there is a replacement of dP3 by P3. Arginbaataridae are currently known only from Khovoor valley in Mongolia, while Eobaataridae were widely distributed in the Early Cretaceous in Asia and Europe.

Multituberculates, though among the most commonly encountered mammalian fossils of the Mesozoic, are poorly known from the North American Early Cretaceous, with only one taxon named to date. Herein we describe Argillomys marylandensis , gen. et sp. nov., from the Early Cretaceous of Maryland, based on an isolated M2. Argillomys represents the second mammal known from the Arundel Clay facies of the Patuxent Formation (Lower Cretaceous: Aptian). Though distinctive in its combination of characters (e.g., enamel ornamentation consisting of ribs and grooves only, cusp formula 2:4, presence of distinct cusp on anterobuccal ridge, enlargement of second cusp on buccal row, central position of ultimate cusp in lingual row, great relative length), the broader affinities of Argillomys cannot be established because of non-representation of the antemolar dentition. Based on lack of apomorphies commonly seen among Cimolodonta (e.g., three or more cusps present in buccal row, fusion of cusps in lingual row, cusps strongly pyramidal and separated by narrow grooves), we provisionally regard Argillomys as a multituberculate of “plagiaulacidan” grade. Intriguingly, it is comparable in certain respects to some unnamed Paulchoffatiidae, a family otherwise known from the Late Jurassic – Early Cretaceous of the Iberian Peninsula.

Multituberculata from the Lower Cretaceous (Barremian–Aptian) Balve locality in Germany are represented by two taxa, the pinheirodontid Bructerodon alatus gen. et sp. nov. and the eobaatarid Cheruscodon balvensis gen. et sp. nov. Bructerodon alatus gen. et sp. nov. is known from an upper premolar (P5) and an upper molar (M1) with a distinct distolingual wing showing three cusps. Cheruscodon balvensis gen. et sp. nov. is represented by a dentary fragment with p4 and isolated teeth (P1, p4, m2). The new taxon is similar to other eobaatarids by its small single-rooted p2, double-routed p3, p4 with a single distolabial cusp, and mesio–distally asymmetric lower molars. It differs from most other eobaatarids by a larger number of serrations (11) and a larger distolabial cusp on p4. Cheruscodon gen. nov. is similar to Arginbaatar from the Lower Cretaceous of Mongolia in having the roots of p4 exposed above the alveolar border and a mesially curved distal root of p4.