Paris Marriott Charles de Gaulle Airport Hotel, part of leading global hospitality company Marriott International, commissioned Brintons to manufacture bespoke carpets for its 2016 renovation. In this large-scale revamp Brintons developed approximately 1,800sqm of bespoke carpets for the hotels; ballroom, meeting room, corridors and pre-function room.

One of the big purchase items for this project was the Brintons carpets. This large-scale renovation needed the extensive knowledge if all three parties in the redesign: Brintons, Viserius Design and our team at Vöcker Hospitality. The designers from Viserius Design developed the carpet together with Kerstin Mahlmann from Brintons. Vöcker Hospitality then took care to fit in the carpet to the agreed design. Working with the knowledgeable Brintons team and their intricate eye for detail,, made this large-scale project manageable.

Virserius Studio created three bespoke designs for the carpets in a grey and orange colour scheme to remain in line with the hotels original, signature colours. Influenced heavily by existing contemporary minimalist interiors the inspiration for the grid pattern is taken from existing wood panelling that frames the stage in the prefunction room and decorated the walls of the corridors in the hotel. With a graphic and contemporary feel, each unique pattern was drawn line by line to compliment each space in the hotel.

Brintons carpet designs are a significant element to the hotels renovation. The design details in the carpets add a lot of value to the overall feel of the finished spaces. The detailing involved, like the fading effects from dark to light, the subtle grey tones employed and the dotted orange elements, together offer a graphic statement to the contemporary interiors of the hotel. The contrasting colour scheme of elegant greys and vibrant orange creates a fresh feel.

This beautiful renovation was a shortlisted project in the 2017 AHEAD Europe Awards, awarded a Bronze Award at the 2017 IDA International Design Excellence Awards and acknowledged as one of the year's best in the 'Opening - Renovation or conversion' category at the European Hospitality Designs Awards.