French aesthetic and style are adored all across the world, and multiple tourists attempt to emulate their version of it the minute they land at Charles De Gaulle. Think Breton stripes, neckerchiefs, berets, flat ballets and classic red lips; which are so very easy to spot in the city of love. But there’s a certain allure attached to sticking to your signature sartorial style—a notion that was projected by the Biebers in Paris. For a meet with Emmanuel Macron, the president of France, the couple packed classic pieces from luxury French fashion houses yet channelled the trends of Los Angeles.

Veering away from the iconic Parisian cliches, the couple took the streets (and the internet) by storm with their style. For supermodel Hailey Bieber, the roads are emblematic of runways and this holiday was no exception. Along with husband Justin Bieber, she served look after look and to be honest, we’re sold.

Young Hollywood

Donning laidback, relaxed separates; the couple enjoyed a dinner date in the 1st arrondissement of Paris on day one. Hailey went for a monochromatic look dressed in The Attico’s wide-leg pocket pants, cropped white shirt paired with the cult-favourite JW Pei’s Gabbi bag. As for Justin, the Peaches singer opted for a hockey jersey from Balenciaga and wore vintage, rectangular frame shades.

Invalid slider id. Master Slider ID must be a valid number.

Elevated Streetwear

For a shopping spree at Kith, the Biebers went for an overall casual streetwear vibe. Hailey gave her love for monochrome a refreshing spin by going for all-lavender. The supermodel was seen in a Raf Simons knit top, Attico miniskirt, Bottega Veneta pouch and Chanel penny loafers. While on the other hand, Justin stayed true to his signature style—a Kith hoodie, khakis and Nike Dunks.

Invalid slider id. Master Slider ID must be a valid number.

Modern American Way

To meet the French president, the couple opted for rather sharp looks with a touch of the States. Hailey stole the show in a beige, cut-out dress by LaQuan Smith with a croc-embossed mini tote from Little Liffner and barely-there strappy heels from Femme LA. Justin made a major statement in a black Celine suit and pinstripe shirt paired with sneakers (yes, to meet the president).

Invalid slider id. Master Slider ID must be a valid number.

Hollywood Glam

This look is proof that when Hailey likes something, she will buy it in every colour. For a quaint dinner, the star chose a sequinned blush pink Miu Miu dress, the same strappy heels in a different hue and the classic Bottega pouch in striking orange. Contemporary yet retro, Hailey brought the iconic 90s glam to the Parisian streets with this ensemble.

Invalid slider id. Master Slider ID must be a valid number.

Photographs: Instagram