(born 1942). U.S. Army officer Eric Shinseki was the first Asian American to reach the rank of four-star general. He commanded North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) peacekeeping forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1997–98 and served as army chief of staff from 1999 to 2003. From 2009 to 2014 Shinseki was secretary of veterans affairs in the administration of President Barack Obama.

Eric Ken Shinseki was born on November 28, 1942, in Lihue, Hawaii, less than a year after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The U.S. government classified his parents, like other Japanese Americans at the time, as “enemy aliens.” As a show of loyalty to the United States, three of his uncles enlisted in the army, serving in Europe during World War II. Inspired by his uncles’ service, Shinseki entered the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York, where he earned a bachelor’s degree in engineering and a second lieutenant’s commission in 1965. Later that year he began the first of two combat tours in Vietnam (see Vietnam War), earning three Bronze Stars for valor and a Purple Heart during his service. After spending almost a year recovering from wounds received during the war, he returned to active duty in 1971.

In 1976 Shinseki earned a master’s degree in English from Duke University in North Carolina and then taught at West Point. He steadily rose in the officer ranks while being assigned to the Pentagon and with an infantry division in West Germany. In 1991 he was promoted to brigadier general. Three years later he became commanding general of the 1st Cavalry Division, and he earned his second star later that year. Shinseki gained a third star in 1996, and he was named commander in chief of U.S. Army forces in Europe the following year. During this time he also commanded NATO land forces in central Europe, as well as the NATO stabilization mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He earned his fourth star in 1997, and two years later President Bill Clinton nominated him to the post of army chief of staff.

After George W. Bush became president in 2001, Shinseki continued as army chief of staff, but he often clashed with civilian leaders in the Pentagon. Shinseki believed that military force, if used, should be overwhelming in size, speed, and power. This conflicted with the strategy promoted by Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, who felt that advanced battlefield technology and precision weapons made large bodies of traditional infantry obsolete. This doctrinal clash eventually became public, and in 2003 Shinseki retired.

In 2008 President-elect Obama nominated Shinseki to serve as secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and the U.S. Senate approved his appointment in January 2009. In 2014 evidence emerged that some VA hospitals had covered up and misrepresented wait times for American veterans seeking treatment and that some had died before receiving care. Shinseki subsequently resigned in May 2014.