Former Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker and Super Bowl XL champion Clark Haggans has passed away at age 46, according to 93.7 The Fan's Collin Dunlap.

A cause of death has not yet been released, and it remains unclear where Haggans was when he died. A LexisNexis search found a Florida address for the former fifth-round pick.

The California native and father of two played 13 NFL seasons, eight of which were spent in Pittsburgh.

His best season came in 2005, when he recorded a career-high nine sacks and dropped Seattle Seahawks quarterback Matt Hasselbeck in Pittsburgh's 21-10 Super Bowl victory.

More recently, Haggans has been working in real estate and doing charity work.

Haggans will primarily be associated with Joey Porter Jr., his teammate and fellow outside linebacker with Colorado State and the Steelers.

'I was happy I was drafted – and to go and see Joey there with open arms,' Haggans told Steelersnow.com in 2019. 'They should have played that Reunited song.'

Drafted in 2000, one year after the Steelers took Porter, Haggans was playing regularly by his second season and began starting in his fifth, by which time he was one of the top pass rushers for legendary defensive coordinator Dick LeBeau.

Outside of an injury that sidelined him for three weeks, nearly everything came together for Haggans in 2005. He recorded sacks in each of his first four games, and ultimately took down Hasselbeck on the opening drive of Super Bowl XL - something that still resonates with Steelers fans.

'Clark Haggans' life was obviously so much more than one Super Bowl or the game of football,' team blogger Alex Kozora wrote on Twitter. 'But he was a key piece to some great Steelers' defenses. Nine sacks in 2005. Took down Matt Hasselbeck on the opening drive of SB 40.

'Rest in Peace, Clark.'

Haggans looked back on the Super Bowl win with Steelersnow.com in 2019, saying he was grateful to win alongside Porter.

'A cool memory of course is winning the Super Bowl,' Haggans said. 'The coolest though was that the first dude I saw when the confetti fell was Joey. We would wig out when we won the Holiday Bowl at Colorado State – that was the greatest thing to us then. Here we were winning a Super Bowl together.'

Haggans signed a one-year deal with the Arizona Cardinals in 2008, and eventually helped his new team reach Super Bowl XLIII, where he would lose to his former club, the Steelers, 27-23.

He would stay in Arizona for three more seasons before finishing his career with the San Francisco 49ers in 2012 at age 35.

In 2012, Haggans became involved with the Black Out Child Abuse campaign, which is a non-profit aimed at helping needy families. And, as the father of two said in 2019, he was embarking on a real estate career and focusing on his children.

'I'm just being a dad,' he said. 'I'm just happy and blessed to have put enough money away to be able to support my kids so they can do what makes them happy.'