IMPORTANT NOTE:

Please note that whatever we come to know after our study of the Quran, we share with everyone as our duty of ‘Iqra’- i.e., to proclaim to others. This website and its contents are for the purpose of sharing knowledge ONLY, It MUST NOT be treated as a REPLACEMENT of QURAN. Your duty as a Muslim to pick up the Quran, learn and study the Quran and Deen-E-Islam directly through the Quran by yourselves will remain imposed on you. This website, Smart Phone App ‘Quran (Words & Concepts) by WQT’, and the contents therein, should be treated as AIDS ONLY to assist your Quran Study. Additionally, since our research is continuous, this data is a compilation of our learning at THIS point of time only. It’s a work in progress. As and when we learn more, we update this website as well as our Smart Phone App ‘Quran (Words & Concepts) by WQT’. Since, we all are humans and can make mistakes, based on your study, if you come across any mistake or missing aspect in any of these contents or sections of this website, especially in Quran Translation and in vocabulary of Key Quranic Words, please notify us immediately through our ‘Contact Us’ section on our website or email us at infowqt@gmail.com. We would be highly obliged if you can get in touch with us along with reference from Quran to establish that particular mistake and/or missing content. Accordingly, we would correct, amend, revise, and add to reflect and explain the same in alignment with the gist of Quranic guidance.

Alphabet A

AA

A’ABA (يَأْبَ)- normally translated as refused but this is a wrong translation and does not fit in all the ayahs in Quran where the word Aaba is used. For instance, in the ayah 25:50 when Allah says “And We have certainly distributed it among them so that they may do Zikr but most of the people A’aby (normally mistranslated as refused) except Kafuran (rejected, denied, concealed) ´Here in this ayah the word Fayaaby, normally mistranslated as then REFUSED does not make sense, the correct meaning of the word is being UNABLE, therefore the phrase is “Most of the people Fayaabi (were unable) except Kufarun”. Similarly, in the ayah 33:72 “Indeed We offered the trust to the skies and the earth and the mountains, and they Aa’beyen (were unable) to bear it and they feared.” The word is used in the similar meanings of inability in the ayah 20:116 “And when We said to the Malaik to do Sajada to Adam, then they did Sajda except Iblees who A’abi (was unable).” Similarly in the ayah 20:56, the word for refusal and denial is already used as Kazaba therefore when Allah says “And We certainly showed him (the Firaun) our Ayaat but he Kazaba (denied, refused, rejected) and A’aba (was not able)” X-Reference – 2:282 , 9:8 , 9:32 , 15:31, 17:89, 17:99 , 18:77 , 20:56, 20:116, 25:50, 33:72. (يَأْبَ)

A’ABERE (عَابِرِي)- is normally translated as passing by, but the word is used in Quran only once. If we look at the classical and medieval Arabic, the broad meanings of the word are in terms of happening or existing before something takes place, doing the duties in terms of temporary, momentary, passing, short-lived, or transitory in nature. Therefore, when Allah says in Ayah 4:43 “...and do not Junuban (go far away, distant), except Aa’bere Sabeel (way, exit out option, route) until Tughtaselu (cleansed)…” It means that the word Aa’bere Sabeel is here in terms of both of its meanings- That is the divine guidance is that ‘do not go far away for your Salaat (your duties), except for the duties which continue to be performed as temporary, momentary, passing through, short-lived in nature in order to seek a Sabeel (way out, exit out, route out) from the current situation. This phrase could also be interpreted as saying that ‘do not go far away for your Salaat (your duties) except if you are already in a process of doing something, or something is underway as to provide an exit out option (Sabeel) from the current situation. X-Reference – 4:43. (عَابِرِي)

A’AEN (الْعَيْن) The word is normally translated as eyes in few ayahs of the Quran and in other ayahs it is translated as streams or springs of water but the word is used in Quran in the meanings to refer to anything that was hidden and then made to appear and brought to light- thus depicts the state of being brought to the Hidayah of Allah’s Noor, from the earlier state of being in the darkness of one’s Kufar; the Hidayah which was hidden from them earlier, but has now been brough to light to them- referring to the benefits of, the state of and being on Hidayah in terms of enlightened vision and the state of being on Hidayah. The word used in Quran in the meanings of vision or streams, however these meanings do not make sense for instance in Ayah 52:48, “And observe S’abar (persistence by being steadfast) for the Hikm of your Rabb. Then Indeed, to you with A’eenana (Our A’aen) and S’abah (strive with your whole being) with Hamd of your Rabb when you Taqumu (establish, strengthen)” here neither the eyes nor the streams would make sense. We can get a clue about the meanings of this word from the Ayah 54:12, “And WE Fajarna (caused to dawn, appear, become obvious) the earth A’ayunan, then Taqa (met) the Ma’aa (basis of life) A’ala (height of) Amaarin (the process of creation, order, natural laws of Allah) Qad Qadre (measured, powered, estimated).” describing the creation of the planet earth, during which all that was within the crust of the earth, was made to appear and come out in the light, including all the Ma’aa- the basis of life- Thus the word is described here as anything which was hidden and then made to appear and come to light. Therefore, the phrase “Jannatin and A’eyuun” for instance in Ayah 26:57 or 15:45, is used, it means Jannat- all that was hidden, unseen or not understood- all the blessings of Allah are now been made to appear and brought to light as A’eyun. In Ayah 26:132-134, “And observe Taqwa of the one who aided you with what you know. Allah aided you with Ana’am (Nai’mat) and Baneen (children) and Jannatin and A’eyunin.” Shows the description of those who have observed Taqwa, in this worldly life, and because of reaching the epitome of their Emaan and being Aabid of Allah, they have been aided by Allah, among other aspects with Jannatin and A’eyunin- depicting in the state of them being in bliss and heaven like state which was hidden from them earlier, but due to their Taqwa has now been brough to light to them- referring to the benefits of and being on Hidayah- Similar context and meanings are in Ayah 51:15, “Indeed, the Muttaqueen will be in Jannatin and A’eyunin.” In Ayah 5:45, “And WE Kutibna upon them- in it- the Nafs with the Nafs, and the A’aene with the A’aene, and the A’naf with the A’naf, and the Azaan with the Azaan, and the Sanan with the Sanan, and the Juroohu- is the Qas’aas. Then whoever Tas’adaq with it, then it is the Kaffara for him/her…..” means that Allah has Kutibna- made compulsory upon us the Kitaab, which has Hikm for Qis’as, which is basically the Hikm to Tas’adaq- sincerity and honestly forgiving the mistakes of others, since the current practice of Nafs- soul with Nafs, the A’aene- enlightened vision, something that was hidden before and now brought to light with the A’ene, the A’naf- exceeding, extras, additional revenges with the A’naf, the Azaan- proclamation, announcement of war & fight with the Azaan, and the Sanan- practice with the Sanan- is all leading towards Juroohu- damage, wounds, injuries, pain and sufferings. Thus, after highlighting the current practice of reacting to the Juroohu- damages, pains, injuries and wounds with the likes as revenge, causing hurt and wounds to the relationships and human connections too; Allah ordains Qis’as instead of the Juroohu, as a reaction to such acts and incidents and this Kutiba is based on S’adaqaat- sincerely and honestly forgiving others as acts of Is’lah and reform, healing such wounds- physical and allegorical. X-Reference – 2:60, 4:45, 7:160, 15:45, 18:86, 26:57, 51:15, 54:12. (أَعْيُنَهُمْ;بِالْعَيْنِ;وَالْعَيْنَ; أَعْيُنَ; اسْتَعِينُوا ; عَيْنًا ; أَعْيُنٌ ; أَعْيُنٌ)

A’AJAL (الْعِجْلَ) The word is normally mistranslated as CALF in few of the usages in Quran for instance as per Ayah 2:51 and at other places are translated as haste or hurry. However, the basic meanings of the word are in terms of rushing, hasting towards something, with lack of patience for instance as used in Ayah 21:37, “The Insaan (human kind) is created of A’ajal. I Araekum (prove, show) you MY Ayaat, so do not Tasta’jeluna” means that human kind has been created with the nature of being A’ajal- to be in haste, with lack of patience as a part of their nature. Allah will Ara’a (prove, show, evidenced) Allah’s Ayaat, therefore we should not be impatient. In Ayah 7:150, “And when Musa returned to his Quom, angry and grieved, Qala, ‘With Ba’as is what you have done in my absence from after me A’ajiltum Amar of your Rabb….” means that upon returned Musa was aggrieved over the fact that his Quom has not been patient for the Amar of their Rabb, and acted on their human nature of haste, hurriedness and rush. The same meanings of the word are used in Ayah 2:51 as well but mistranslated as calf here, “And when we appointed Musa for forty nights, you Attakhaztum (seize) the A’ejla from after him and you were Zalimona. Then we Afu’na (give you in abundance) from after that so that you may do Shukar”. Normally mistranslated as if they started worshiping the calf in Musa’s absence, whereas this ayah is talking about them rushing towards Kufar, as mentioned in Ayah 2:93. Had it been that they started worshipping a calf, then Allah would never Afua’a them (give them in abundance) or Aghfir them (provide protection) since Allah has clearly mentioned in Quran that Allah never Yaghfir (provides protection against the impacts of) Shirk (4:48). In Ayah 2:54, “…Indeed, you have done Zulm on your Nafs by seizing the A’ejla so do Touba (make a U-turn) to your creator and Qatal your Nafs…” Musa was not asking them to kill themselves, but by taking on the A’ejal- their nature of haste and rush, they have in fact gone against their Nafs-e-Mut’mainna and Musa was asking them to Qatal- restrain, control their Nafs-e-Ammara which had influenced them to rush towards Kufar. Similar meanings of rushing in haste, with lack of patience towards Kufar is used in Ayah 4:153 as well. In Ayah 20:82-84, “And indeed, I am the Ghaffar (protector, shield from impacts of wrong path) for whoever Taaba (makes a u-turn) and Amanu (have Emaan) and does Amal-e-Swalehaat (deeds of Is’lah) then remains on Hidayah. And do not A’ejalaka from people of Musa”. In Ayah in Ayah 11:69, “And certainly came our Messengers to Ibrahim with glad tidings. They said, ‘Salaman (peace be upon you)’. He said, ‘Salamun’. Then, he did not delay to bring with Aeja’lin Haneezan” the last phrase is normally mistranslated as ‘roasted calf’, which is not the correct interpretation. The word Haneezan means ‘at that time’. Therefore, here the phrase means that ‘what he delayed except that to bring with haste and hurriedness (with Aja’al) those ways and methods that they had employed at the time (Haneezan) in order to be verified and assessed by the Rasool, who were not there for them but for the Quomin Lut. – X-Reference – 2:51, 2:54, 4:153, 7:150, 11:69, 18:58, 20:82-84, 21:37. (الْعِجْلَ;الْعِجْلَ;;الْعِجْل;الْعِجْل تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ;تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ;الْعِجْلَ;الْعِجْلَ; الْعِجْلَ; أَعَجِلْتُمْ; عِجْلًا)

A’AJAZTU (أَعَجَزْتُ) The word is used in Quran in the meanings of inability of someone to do something which is based on the lack of Quwwat for that person or being in terms of their abilities, powers or resources, for instance in Ayah In Ayah 5:31, “…Wail to me A’ajaztu that Akuna the like of this Al-Ghurabe…” means, Wail- announcement of destruction to me that I would be disconnected from Allah’s blessings and the benefits of Allah’s system, if I A’ajaztu- unable, not able to Akuna- aim to reach the end result of similar to the Al-Ghurabe- the clear razor-sharp distinction. Similar meanings of inability due to one’s powers, abilities or resources are used in Ayah 8:59, “And do not Yahsabna those who do Kufar that they can Sabaqu. Indeed, not they Ya’jezuna” means that do not they Yahsabna- estimate, think those who do Kufar that they can Sabaqu- gain Sabaqat- dominion, power etc. but they do not Ya’jezuna- not able to as they do not have the powers, resources or abilities to do so. Similar meanings of the word is in Ayah 35:44, “Have they not travelled in the earth and observe how was A’aqibat (end result) for those from before them while they were stronger than them in Quwwat. And not Allah is to Ya’ejazu (unable)…” The word is also used in the same meanings in both the usages of the word in Ayah 72:12 as well. The word Mu’ajaz for instance as used in Ayah 46:32 means owners or possessors of Aa’jaz- the inability due to lack of powers, resources or abilities. In Ayah 42:31, when Allah says, “and what you with Mo’jazeen in the earth and what for you besides near Allah any Waliy nor Nas’eer” means what do you aim to achieve by considering anyone from the earth as Waliy or Nas’eer besides Allah, since they are all Mo’jazeen- those who are unable to be your Waliy or Nas’eer due to the lack of the required abilities, resources or powers, that only Allah can provide. X-Reference – 5:31, 8:59, 35:44, 42:31, 46:32, 72:12. (أَعَجَزْتُ;بِمُعْجِزِينَ)

AAKHIR (آخَرَ) & AAKHIRANE (آخَرَانِ) The word Akhir is the opposite of Awwal– Awwal means the first and Akhir means the last or the later. Therefore, when Allah uses the word Akhartana in Ayah 4:77 as in the phrase “Why did you not Akhartana to a Qareeb Ajalan” the word Akhartana is used here in the meanings of end or later. Basically, it means the last of a continuous series of events, things, people, generation etc. after which there is nothing further from the same series- the last of that particular series after which the next one will be different, for instance in Ayah 2:184, “Ayyaman Ma’adodatin, Then whoever Kana among you Mareezan or upon Safarin, then A’idat of Ayyain Akhara…” means that once you’re not going through these stages of life, such as not Mareez nor upon Safarin anymore, then in the Akhir- that is other than those periods of Safar and Mareez, when such periods are over, and the next day or period is different than the earlier periods, then it’s A’idat- confirmed and determined upon you to carry out the S’iyaam. Consequently the word also refers to anything, time period, anyone, any aspect which is other than that already discussed for instance in Ayah 5:106, “Oh you Amanu atu among yourselves when Hazara Ahadakum the Mout- Ha’en is the Was’iyyat- As’naane Zawa Adalin Among you or Aakhiran of Ghairakum so that you Darabtum in earth..…” addressed to those who Amanu, is the direct divine instruction, to be upholders of justice at its best (Shahada) among themselves, when presented with or come face to face with situations (Hazara) of any type of Mouth, death, physical as well as metaphorical in nature, in terms of extreme injustice, lack of moral and ethical value or darkness, the Ha’ena- the life is the Was’iyat, that is whole set of Allah’s laws and instructions as given in Quran, the laws of Deen that govern how to be upholders of justice and Shahada for Allah, is the Hayyat- the life is the Was’iyat and the Ayah thereafter and the subsequent ayahs describe how such situations can be countered to bring back the life, the Hayyat, Ha’en and to uphold the justice in all its meanings and interpretations. The laws of Deen (Was’iyat) that needs to be carried out with mutual help, coordination and support of each other (As’naane) who are owners and possessors (Zawa) of justice at its best (Adal). However, if one is not able to find such people (Akhirane) of if they are other than those who Amanu (Ghairakum), then the responsibility of those who Amanu still remains to uphold the justice whenever come across extreme death like situations of injustices, darkness, lack of moral and ethical values, since those who Amanu are the ones whose responsibility is to bring forth and establish (Darabtum) on earth the Allah’s message as upholders of justice (Shahada). These Ayahs give guidance as to how to uphold justice under such circumstances. Similar meanings of the word is in the subsequent Ayah 5:107 as well. Quran has referred to the day of Akhira as the last of temporary life here on this earth and the start of the hereafter. I.e., Hiyaat-ud-Duniya is the life on this earth and Qayyam Akhira is the life hereafter, where we will abide forever. X-Reference – 2:184, 4:77, 5:106-107 , (فَآخَرَانِ;آخَرَانِ;وَآخِرِنَا;آخَرِينَ;أُخْرَىٰ;آخَرِينَ;أُخْرَىٰ;يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ;لِأُخْرَاهُمْ;أُخْرَاهُمْ)

A’AKIFEEN (الْعَاكِفِينَ) A’KIFUNA (عَاكِفُونَ) A’akaf is to put all the beads together in a string, therefore in order to keep something secure, to connect them through a string of connection – a common connected ground, so everything remain connected and secure. If these are disconnected or shattered, they would be insecure and weak; therefore, they are connected together to stop these from being scattered, weak and imbalanced. Therefore, the word akaf means to correct, smooth out, and harmonize the matters between individuals. Al’Akoof means to go towards or strive towards something along with utter respect and conviction of its benefits and to remain connected to it on a permanent basis. It also means to stop something or someone or to stop one’s own self from doing something as in the ayah 48:25. In ayah 2:125 when the word الْعَاكِفِينَ is used, it’s meant for those people who ensure that the mankind, the community, the neighborhood etc. remains connected on the basis of Allah’s Deen, the laws and regulations built on the principals of love, justice, kindness, care and compassion, and the members remain connected through these laws with each other- connected and strengthened together through mutual respect, care and compassion. Similar meanings are used in ayah 22:25 Allah says …al-Masjid al-haram, which We made for the people – equal are the Al-Aakifufu and one from outside..”. In Ayah 2:187, when Allah says “And do not Tabaasheruhunna while you are Aakifuna in the Masaajid.” Means you should not go near and be with Sharr, and especially while you are Akifuna (strengthening, and connecting people, and aspects together so that everything remain connected and secured) in the Masaajid (any place where Sajda to Allah’s laws are being done) where you’re trying to ensure Sajda to the laws of Allah, as a part of the S’iyaam. Which means that if the aspects and people that you’re trying to connect become disconnected or shattered, the whole process of S’iyaam and ensuring Sajda to Allah’s laws, may become insecure and weak; therefore, focus on Akifeena, to connect together to stop these from being scattered, weak and imbalanced as well as to make sure that you correct, smooth out, and harmonize the matters between individuals, aspects and communities, and all this time you should not Baasharahunna- means you should exercise self-restraint and self-control against Shar of any type or form. X-Reference – 2:125 , 2:187 , 7:138 , 20:91 , 20:97 , 21:52 , 22:25 , 26:71 , 48:25. (يَعْكُفُونَ ; عَاكِفُون ; الْعَاكِفِينَ)

A’ALA (عَلَىٰ) The word is normally translated as proposition upon or on only, but the word is not used only in the meaning for the proposition on or upon in all of its usages in Quran, but in much broader scope of meanings. Therefore, the word is used in Quran in the meanings of “upon, as per, according to, depending upon, despite, as long as, provided for, however, nevertheless” as well as in the meanings of “eminence, glory, height, prestige, superiority or dignity’ for instance, in Ayah 16:60, “For those who do not Yuminuna with Akhira is like the S’awaa. And for Allah is like the A’ala- the one who is the Aziz and the Hakeem”. Since we know the word Aziz refers to Allah being the one to whom all powers, pride, prestige and honor belongs, who can give best of the best Izzat to anyone. Also, Allah as the one who is All-powerful, Almighty, the one to whom all powers, pride, honor belongs. This Ayah effectively defines the word the A’ala as the one, referring to Allah who is both the Aziz (best of the best Izzat) as well as the Hakeem (best of the best Hikm- wisdom, judgment and laws). The same meanings of the word “Al-A’ala” are used in many Ayahs such as Ayah no. 30:27, 53:7, or 92:20. In Ayah 5:8, “O you who Amanu! Kunu (aim to reach the final destination as) Qawwameena (Aquomu- upholders of justice) for Allah, Shuhada’a (each & every role & act to upholder justice) with Qiste (justice in accordance with situations, unique requirements and needs). And do not let them Yujremannakum (cause any doubts, uncertainties, fears as opposed to Amanu) you Shana’anu (act silly, weak in judgment without using one’s intellect) Quomin (acts of Aqwama) A’ala (best of the best, eminence, prestige, height, superiority, dignity), except Ta’adelu (you do justice) …”. The same meanings of glory, height and eminence is used in Ayah 28:4, “Indeed, Firaun A’ala in the earth…”, the word here does not means on, or upon, but in the meanings of exalt, height, glory and prestige. Accordingly, the word ‘Alliyan’ is used in Quran for instance in Ayahs 2:55, 4:34, 19:50 to mean, the highest, the exalted, the glorified one. X-Reference – 2:55, 4:34, 5:8, 16:60, 28:4, 30:27, 53:7, 92:20. (عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;وَعَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ; عَلَى عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;وَعَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَى;فَعَلَيْهَا;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;وَعَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَى; عَلَى;عَلَىٰ;عَلَى;عَلَى;وَعَلَى;عَلَىٰ; عَلَى; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَى; عَلَى; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَى; عَلَى; عَلَىٰ; عَلَى; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَىٰ; عَلَى; عَلَى ; عَلَىٰ ; وَعَلَىٰ ; عَلَىٰ)

AALA’A (آلَاءَ) The word is normally translated as favors or bounties but these meanings do not make sense for instance in the most frequent verse of Surah Rahman “فَبِأَىِّ ءَالَآءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ”, which is normally mistranslated as “so which of your lord’s favors will you deny?” Whereas if you read all the ayahs of this surah, it does not talk about favors only, for example Ayah no. 39 to 44 talks about the habitants of hell and the description of hell. The phrase does not use the words Na’mat or Ayat, but the word used here is ءَالَآءِ Aala. The word ءَالَآءِ Aala basically means to realize one’s responsibilities towards someone or something. By highlighting all these aspects that Allah is highlighting in Surah Rahman, Allah wants us not to deny, ignore, and neglect our responsibilities but to utilize our abilities including our intellect and reasoning, by exploring all these aspects of Allah’s Rabobiat, in seeking knowledge and then using this knowledge and wisdom for the benefits of the humanity and All of Allah’s creations. Similar meanings of the word are used in Ayah 7:69, “….then Azkaru A’ala’a Allah so that you Tuflehun” means realize your responsibilities towards the system of Allah so that you become successful in both the worlds. In Ayah 53:55, “Then which of A’ala’a of your Rabb do you doubt? Means which responsibilities that you need to realize towards your Rabb that you’re doubtful or confused about. X-Reference –7:69, 53:55 and several verses of 55. (آلَاءَ; آلَاءَ)

A’ALAM (عَالَمِ) & A’ALIMEEN (الْعَالَمِينَ) The word A’alimeen is normally translated as the worlds. The word Aalimeen is plural of the word Aalam (عَالَمِ) and is used in three broad meanings in Quran 1) The universe, everything in it or all that exists, 2) all realms, worlds, kingdoms, dominions, empires, or jurisdictions and 3) Refers to those who have Ilm (علِم), knowledge. It depends on the context and the discussions as to which ones or the combination of these meanings are used for instance in Ayah 5:115, when the phrase, “not Azaabahu Ahadan from the Aalimeen”, refers to the Azaab which is unmatched or which does not have any equivalent in the entire universe and among all the worlds, kingdoms, jurisdictions, and empires. Similarly in Ayah 7:80, “And Lut, when he said to his nation, ‘Do not commit the Fahashata, what can Sabaqakum (take sabqat, preceded you) therein of Ahadin of the worlds.”, the word is used in the same meanings of being matchless, unrivaled and inequivalent in terms of them being Fahasha in the entire universe, all realms, kingdoms, dominions or empires. Where ever the phrase ‘Rabb Al A’alimeen’ is mentioned for instance in Ayahs 7:54 and 40:09, the word A’alimeen is used in All three of these meanings, i.e. Allah is the Rabb who is carrying out the process of Rabobiat for each and everything in the entire universe, in all jurisdictions, dominions, worlds, empires, and kingdoms, as well as the source of all knowledge and learning and hence the Rabb of all those who have the knowledge, who are considered experts, knowers; masters; scientists; authorities; specialists- people with special knowledge and expertise in any field, whose opinions are greatly respected because of their knowledge. In Ayah 3:33, “Indeed, Allah As’t’afa (elevated, raised in status) Adam, and Nuh, and family of Ibrahim and family of Imran Aa’ala (height, prestige) of the Aalimeen…” Where the word A’alimeen is again used in all three meanings. In Ayah 3:96 “Indeed the first Ba’ait established for the humanity is the one which is with Bakkah (crowded, packed, full of) Mubarakan (blessings & increase) and Huddan (guidance) for the A’alimeen” The word A’alimeen is used in all its meanings and thus this means that the first Bai’ait of Allah that was established for the humanity was with Bakkah- i.e., crowded with, packed with, full of and a gathering of Mubarakan and Huddan for the A’alimeen, for the entire universe and everything in it; for all the worlds, dominions, kingdoms, jurisdictions, and empires and for those who are aware, who have the knowledge and who are considered experts and knowledgeable. X-Reference – 3:33, 3:96, 5:115, 7:54, 7:80, 40:09 . (الْعَالَمِينَ; الْعَالَمِينَ; الْعَالَمِينَ; الْعَالَمِينَ; الْعَالَمِينَ; الْعَالَمِينَ ; الْعَالَمِينَ)

A’AMAHU (عْمَهُ) The word is used in the Quran in the meanings of “wander from the right place, wander about; rove; stray; divagate; digress etc. for instance in Ayah 6:110 “….and Nazarahum them from T’ughyaniy Ya’mahun” ­in terms of cut off, end your association with them and they should be left in their Tughyani wandering and transgressing away from the path of Allah as a consequence of their behaviors which is that they would wander away from the path of Allah, towards the Taghut, they would digress, and stray away from the path of Allah and will be engulfed in the path of Taghut- include each and everything such as people, beings, things, laws, judgments, rulings, books, elements, systems, etc. which they follow instead of Allah’s revelations, the Kitaab in state of extreme transgression and crossing of boundaries. Similar expression and meanings are in Ayah 7:186, “Whoever Yuzalil of Allah, then not Haadi for them and they will be Yazrahum in their Tughyani Ya’amahun”. At most of the places the same expression “T’ughyane them – they Ya’ma’hun” is used for instance in Ayah 2:15, 10:11, 15:72 & 23:75 reflecting the concept that those who wander from the right path, they transgress and digress in extreme transgression and crossing the boundaries of Allah’s path by following Taghut- all such people, beings, things, laws, judgments, rulings, books, elements, systems, etc. which they follow, as act of Shirk, instead of Allah’s Deen, Hidayah and message. In Ayah 27:4, “Indeed, those who do not Yuminun with Akhira, Zayyin for them their A’maal, so they Ya’mahun” describing the other characteristics of those who Ya’ma’hun as those who do not Amanu with Akhira- they do not have Emaan on the concept of perfect recompense and the accountability. X-Reference- 2:15, 6:110, 7:186, 10:11, 15:72, 23:75, 27:4. (يَعْمَهُونَ;يَعْمَهُونَ ; يَعْمَهُونَ)

AAMEEN (آمِّينَ) The word is normally mistranslated as ‘those heading or coming to’, for instance as used in Ayah 5:02 in order to misinterpret the ayah as if it is talking about animal slaughtering, but these are wrong translation of the word. The word is the same as used for instance in Ayahs 7:68, 26:107, 26:193 and 44:51, which basically means trustworthy or secure. In Ayah 7:68, “I convey to you the Risalat (the Hidayah) of my Rabb and I am to you an Ameen Nas’ehun (advisor)” used here in the meanings of trustworthy, dependable, reliable, truthful, honorable and honest. The word is used in similar meanings in Ayah 26:193 for the Malaik of Jibrael with the phrase “Rooh al Ameen”. In Ayah 26:107, nabi Nuh addressing his people, “Indeed, I am to you an Ameen Rasoolun”. In Ayah 44:51, “Indeed, the Muttaqueen are in Ameen (safe, secure, trustworthy, reliable) Maqaam (place, prestige, status)”. In Ayah 62:02, when Allah says, “Allah is the one who sent among the Ameen Rasoolun from themselves…” Allah is not talking about among the unlettered or illiterate people as the word Ameen is mistranslated here normally, but talking about a Rasool from those who are trustworthy, honest, truthful, safe and secure. In Ayah 5:02, when Allah mentions “Sha’aira of Allah; the Shahar Al Haraam; the Hudya- Hidayah; the Qalalaida; Aaimeena of the Baiyt Al Haram” as parts of that Yureedu, the whole system of Allah on the basis of which Allah guides mankind to the Hidayah, the word Ameenal Baiyt al Harama, does not mean coming to the Kaaba as is normally mistranslated but basically refers to the Ameen-the trustworthy, the secure, Baiyt (of Allah) the Haram (the sacred), as part of the whole system of Allah’s Yureedu towards the Hidayah. X-Reference – 5:02 , 7:68, 26:107, 26:193, 44:51, 62:02. (أَمِينٌ; أَمِينٌ; آمِّين)

A’AMMAD (عَمَدٍ) & MUTA’AMMADAN (مُتَعَمِّدًا) The word is normally translated as intentionally or deliberately and used as an opposite to the word Khata’a (un intentional and unplanned mistakes) in Ayah 33:05 “there is no blame upon you for that in which you do Khatabut, but only what Ta’amadat (with strong basis or foundations of) your Quloob (intentional, well perceived decided acts)” here Ta’amadat refers to those acts done with strong foundations and basis of the Quloob- meanings intentional, with knowledge, well informed, well-planned and well-perceived acts. The word is also used in Quran in terms of pillars or foundations for instance in Ayah 13:2 Allah says “Allah is the one who has raised the skies without any A’madin…” Used here in the meanings of foundations, columns, or pillars. Similar meanings are there in Ayah 31:10 and 104:9 as well as the use of the word “Al-A’emade” in Ayah 89:7. Thus, A’ammad or Muta’ammadan also refer to foundations, or basis, reasonings or grounds on which something is based upon for its standing or footing, for instance in Ayah 5:95 the phrase “…and whoever Qatalahu among you Muta’ammaedan, then Jaza’aa (penalty, recompense) …” where the word is used in both its meanings in terms of whoever Qatal through planned, well-perceived, intentional and with knowledge on the basis of firm grounds, basis, or foundations. Similarly, in Ayah 4:93, the word is used to refer to Qatal of a Momin, with firm grounds, strong basis, reasons or foundations, after doing one’s work, after thorough preparedness, knowledge, intentions and planning. – X-Reference – 4:93, 5:95, 13:2, 31:10, 33:05, 89:7, 104:9. (مُتَعَمِّدًا;مُتَعَمِّدًا;عَمَد)

A’AMU (فَعَمُوا) & UMYUN (عُمْيٌ) The word is normally translated as blind or blindness but the word is used in Quran in much deeper and wider meanings in terms of not only the state of being blind, unable to see anything or blindness, but also used in terms of making something ambiguous, mysterious, cryptic, enigmatic, unknowable, puzzling, unfathomable, or obscure; To change someone’s or something’s appearance so that they look like someone or something else altogether; To hide something by making it look something else in terms of making it, or the reality of it blind or something else as perceived by others; Camouflage something, or cause something to be camouflaged; etc. for instance in Ayah 28:64-66, “And it will be said to them to Ada’u (call for) their Shurakaa and they will call for them but they will not respond to them. And they A’raa (personally experience, perceive) the Aza’ab. Only if they were Yahtedun (be guided). And the youm (well-known event when) they will be called and asked, ‘What were your response to the Mursaleen (messengers)?’. Then A’myat (become A’amu) upon them the Na’baa (news) of that Youm (well-known and confirmed event), so they do not Yutasaleun (ask them)”. Here it becomes very clear that they were blinded to the Hidayah because of their Shirk and by their Shuraka, because of which they did not pay attention to the many Rasool who brough to them the Hidayah, because they were A’myat- blinded, blindsided from the Hidayah, guidance being camouflaged from them, due to their own acts of Kufar and Shirk; and them becoming what they were not supposed to be as Humankind by blindly following their Shuraka’a. The concept is explained further in Ayah 11:28, describing the interaction of Nabiy Nuh, “He Said, ‘O my Quom, do you Ara’a (perceive, experience, observe) that I A’ala (height of) Bayyinaat (distinct proof) from my Rabb, while Allah has given me Rahmatan from Allah. Then, A’myat upon you to take it as an obligation while you are towards it Karehuna (averse, detesting it).” Means Am’yat- blindness, state of being camouflaged as well as making the Hidayah, the Bayyinat hidden and camouflaged to make it appear something else. Similarly, in Ayah 5:71, after talking about the many Rasool that were sent to humankind, who were either Kazabu (made fun of, denied, ridiculed) or Qatal (both physical and allegorical killing) making them ineffective as Rasool, Allah then says, “And they Hasabu except that Takuna Fitnatun, then A’amu and S’ammu, then Ta’ba Allah upon them, then A’amu and S’ammu many of them. And Allah is Bas’eerun with what they do.” Here it shows a repeated fashion of them doing of Kufar, then doing Touba (making a U-turn) towards Allah, then doing of Kufar again, but then many of them cementing their position at Kufar. Thus, one of the basic qualities of those who have gone and are in the process of going to extreme in Kufar, is the acts of A’amu- that is being blinded, unable to use their faculties due to the lack of using their Aqal, reasoning, intellect and the lack of not seeking knowledge; as well as them following a certain religion or ways and methods which are camouflaged to appear as Deen to them, but it’s nothing like it. These conducts and behaviors of blind followings also make them the worst creation of Allah, as being human means to use one’s intellect and reasoning. In Ayah 2:17, while talking about the extent of a person being in the state of Kufar exemplified by a person lighting a fire, and being surrounded by light from all sides, but still unable to benefit from it, thereafter in Ayah 2:18, Allah says, “S’ummun Bukum Umyun, so they will not Yarja’un.” Describing the condition, wherein, due to such extent of Kufar, none of their faculties are working anymore, and therefore they are not able to benefit from the most authentic source to be able to come back to the state of Amanu- Thus here, the word U’myun, not only reflect them being in the state of blindness, or unable to see anything as consequences of them doing Kufar, not seeking knowledge, not using their faculties; but also reflect the situation, wherein the actual Hidayah has been camouflaged, because of which the Deen-e-Islam has been hidden and camouflaged to look, be perceived and practiced in a manner which is not at all is the real essence of the Deen. Additionally, the use of the word Umyun here also refers to such people who are not only being blinded or unable to witness and follow the Hidaya, but also them being in a state of Kufar, which is not at all what humans have been created to be, they are not supposed to be blind followers, they are supposed to be curious for knowledge, seeking their Aqal, thinking and intellect and to be on the Hidayah- the guidance. Thus, they are changed and camouflaged to be the worse type of Allah’s creations, even worse than animals for instance as per Ayah 7:179. – X-Reference – 2:17-18, 5:71, 11:28, 28:64-66. (عَمُوا;فَعَمُوا;الْأَعْمَىٰ;عَمِيَ;عُمْيٌ; عَمِينَ)

AA’QIBAAT (عَاقِبَةُ) A’EQAAB (الْعِقَابِ)The word Aa’qebat is normally translated as either as ‘end’ or as ‘punishment’ whereas in Quran it is more used in the meanings of the outcome of one’s code and conductions (Including one’s Emaan) and deeds done in this worldly life, that one would face sooner or later, as a perfect recompense either in this world as well as in the Youm-al Akhira. Thus, this word refers to the outcome, the retribution, the payback, the reprisal of whatever was done and is being repaid in just manner in accordance with whatever was done as per Allah’s solid judicial principles and with justice at its best, for instance, in Ayah 16:126 “and if you Aqibtum then A’aqibu with the like of what you were A’uqibtum with it, but if you do Sabar, then Khair is for the Sabireen…” Here Allah is saying that if you like, you can give the same outcome, the same payback, retribution in just manner the likes of what you were afflicted with, but being persistent and steadfast (Sabr) is better and source of all good in life (Khair). In Ayah 3:137 and 6:11 when Allah says “travel in the earth and Anzur how was the A’qibatu of the Mukazibeen” Allah is talking about the outcome of their deeds, the end results of what they used to do, of what they earned as payback based on justice (A’qibatu) of those who made fun, rejected and ridiculed Allah’s Ayaat (Mukazibeen). Similar meanings are used in Ayah 7:84. The word A’eqaab is normally mistranslated as punishment for instance in Ayah 5:02, but the word is used in the similar meanings of end result and recompense. In Ayah 3:149 “O you who have Emaan if you obey (Tut’eu) those who do Kufar, they will make futile (Yuraddukum) on your A’qabekum…” that means they will make futile, useless, rendered useless, and negate on your end results and the recompense of your deeds (A’aqibekum). In Ayah 16:36 while talking about those who got misled and were the followers of the laws (Abideen) of the T’aghoot, Allah says “so travel in the earth and observe how was the A’aqibatu of the Mukazzebeen” Similar meanings are in Ayah 7:84 as well. In Quran, where ever the phrase is used as “Allah is most perfect, strong, severe (Shadeed) of the A’eqaab” for instance as used in Ayah 5:02 and 5:98, it means that Allah is most perfect in giving the recompense in accordance with one’s Amaal and deeds in terms of their end result as a consequence of their own actions and choices is to be given to them as per the most perfect accountability. X-Reference – 3:137, 3:149, 6:11, 5:02, 5:98, 7:84, 16:36, 16:126. (الْعِقَابِالْعِقَابِ;عَاقِبَةُ;عَقِبَيْهِ;أَعْقَابِكُمْ;عَاقِبَة;;عَاقِبَةُ;أَعْقَابِنَا;عَاقِبَةُ;الْعِقَابِ; عَاقِبَةُ; عَاقِبَةُ; عَاقِبَةُ; وَالْعَاقِبَةُ ; الْعِقَابِ ; الْعِقَابِ)

A’ARIZ (فَأَعْرِضْ) A’ARAZ (أَعْرِضْ) & A’URZATAN (عُرْضَةً) Normally translated as an excuse, as in the ayah 2:224, or ignore, or turn away, as in ayah 4:63 but the basic characteristics of the word is from the word Aarizan- that cloud which is spread out on the sky as used in the ayah 46:24 “Then, when they saw a cloud approaching their valley…”. Therefore the word is used in the meanings of exposing, spreading out as used in the ayah 57:21 when describing heaven as “..Jannat whose Araz is like the Araz of the skies and the earth…” Similar meanings of the word is in terms of presenting someone or something, making something obvious, or something being made to put in the front as a covering or exposing to something for instance in the ayah 40:46 “The fire, they are Yurazon to it in the morning and evening…” . In Ayah 4:81, When Allah says “…So Fa’ariz from them and Tawakul upon Allah” the ayah is talking about dealing with those who are Munafiquoon, in terms of exposing them, explaining to them, becoming a covering or shield against their behaviors and conducts. The word A’iteraz means to come out/spread out in front of something in a manner that it becomes a hindrance. Similarly, the word is used in Ayah 2:224, with all these meanings of spreading Allah as a front, as a shield or covering as a cause for not doing what they committed in their Aimenaukum related to Birra, Taqwa and Islah of people. When the phrase A’raz of this worldly life as used in the ayah 4:94 and 8:67, it is used in the meanings of everything in this worldly life that one gives focus to, that has spread out in terms of one’s priority, attention and desire. X-Reference – 2:224 , 4:63 , 4:94 , 8:67, 40:46 , 46:24 , 57:21. (تُعْرِضْ;أَعْرِضْ;عُرْضَةً;فَأَعْرِضْ;فَأَعْرِضْ;عَرَضَ;تُعْرِضُوا;فَأَعْرِضْ;وَأَعْرِضْ ; وَأَعْرِضْ)

A’ASA (عَسَى) the word is normally mistranslated as “Perhaps” or “May be” which does not make sense, especially when Allah talks about Allah’s own self- for instance in Ayah 66:8 “Oh you who have Emaan, Toubu (turn to, do touba) towards Allah in Toubatun Nas’uhan (sincere), A’asa your Rabb will Yukaffira from you the Sayyiaat…” here translating the word A’asa as perhaps is not the language or the expression of Allah- since Allah always talk in definite terms, Allah would never say in Quran that, ‘oh you who have Emaan, Toub to Allah in sincere Touban, ‘Perhaps/May be’ your Rabb will Yukaffir from you the Sayyiat’, as if Allah is not sure, whether Allah would Yukaffir the Sayyiat even after the sincere Touba by the Momin. Translating the word as perhaps or may be does not make sense at all. Similarly in Ayah 2:246 the discussion between Nabi Musa and his nation the phrase is “Would you A’asaetum if kutiba (ordained) upon you the Qitaal (fight) that you do not Taqtila (fight)?” Here the meanings of the word become obvious in terms of ‘do you dare, do you have the capability, the courage, the toughness, the power to not do Qital, if Allah kutiba Qitaal upon you. Thus, the word is used in Quran in the meanings of toughness, having capabilities, abilities or powers to do something. For instance, in Ayah 68:31-32 “They said, ‘Woe to us, indeed, we were transgressors, A’asa our Rabb that can substitute Khairan than it…” Here the word A’asa is used in the meanings of “that our Rabb has the powers and the abilities to substitute it with Khair’. In Ayah 2:216 “Kutiba upon you the Qitaal (in the sabeel of Allah) while it is hateful to you. And A’asa (you have the ability) that you dislike a thing which is Khair for you and A’asa (you have the ability) that you love a thing while it is Shar for you” X-Reference – 2:216 , 2:246 , 4:84 , 66:8 , 68:32 . ( ; فَعَسَى ; عَسَىٰ ; عَسَىٰ ; عَسَى ; عَسَى ; عَسَىٰ)

A’ASHIR & A’ASHIRUHUNNA (َاشِرُوهُنَّ) is normally translated as ‘live with them’ in ayah 4:19, which is a wrong translation. The word means consider them your kindred ones – friend, closed ones, allies and take their assistance and help as your friend, ally and assistance for instance in ayah 26:214 “and warn you’re A’sheerataka (Your kindred ones- associates, friends, allies, etc.) and the Aqreebeen (near and dear ones)”. In ayah 22:13 “He makes duaa for (call upon) the one whose Zarrahu (intense harm) is closer than the Nafa’a (benefit/earnings/advantages), surely Bai’sa (his compensation as a consequences of his choices/actions) is the Molaa (the one who is taken as a Waliyy) and surely Bai’sa is the A’sheer (assistance, friend, ally). Similar meanings of friends, relatives, close associates and allies are used in ayah 9:24 and 58:22. Similarly in ayah 4:19 when Allah says “…And A’aShiruhunna them with Ma’roof…” it does not mean to live with them with Maroof as is normally mistranslated but it means that to consider them your kindred ones – friend, closed ones, allies; take their assistance and help as your friend, ally and assistance and treat them with Ma’roof behavior. X-Reference – 4:19 , 9:24 , 26:214 , 58:22. (اشِرُوهُن)

A’ATAD (وَأَعْتَدْنَا;وَأَعْتَدْنَا) The word is normally translated as prepared and mostly used in Quran in terms of fire, or Azaab, or hell or recompense for the Kaafireen for instance in Ayah 76:3-4, “Indeed, WE give Hidayah to the Sabeel whether they are Shaakir (grateful) or whether they are kafuran (ungrateful). Indeed, WE have A’atadna for the kaafireen chains and shackles and blazing fire.” This ayah shows that the word A’atadna is used in Quran in the meanings of the Kaafireen earning the recompense due to their acts of Kufar. Similar meanings and usages are used in Ayahs 4:161, 17:10, 18:29, 25:11 and 67:5. It is also used in Quran in the positive sense for instance in Ayah 33:31, “and whoever is obedient among you to Allah and Allah’s Rasool and does Amal-e-Swalehan, WE will give them their recompense twice and WE have A’atadna for them a noble Rizq.” Not only that this ayah is telling us that the word A’atadna here is used in terms of these people earning their recompense for their Emaan and Amal-e-swalehat, but also shows that this recompense is being accorded to them twice, once here in this world in terms of Rizq (ways and means of their personality and character nourishment) as well as in the Akhira in terms of being recompensed with rewards in this world and the hereafter, basically telling us that this A’atadna is used in the meanings of giving of recompense based on one’s Emaan/Kufar and deeds, both in this world as well as the Akhira. X-Reference – 4:161, 17:10, 18:29, 25:11, 67:5, 76:4. (وَأَعْتَدْنَا;وَأَعْتَدْنَا)

A’ATAZALUKUM (اعْتَزَلُو) & YA’TAZELUKUM (يَعْتَزِلُوكُمْ) The word is normally translated as withdraw from but the word is used in Quran in all-encompassing meanings of ‘retire from, step aside, detach oneself from, dissociate one from, or isolate oneself from, seclude from, part with, withdraw from etc. for instance in ayah 19:48, when talking about the conversation of Nabi Ibrahim with his people, Allah says “And I A’atazalekum you, and what you make Duaa to besides Allah, and I will make Duaa to my Rabb, A’asa (who has the power to) that I do not become of those who make duaa Shaqeeyan (discord or rebellion) to my Rabb” here the word is used in all-encompassing meanings of isolating or secluding himself, as well as leaving and withdrawing from his people. Similar meanings are used for the word in the next ayah 19:49 as well, “So when he A’atazalahum and what they do Abd from besides Allah, We blessed to him Ishaaq and Yaqoob and WE made each Nabiyan”. In ayah 4:90, Allah says “and if Allah Yashao, Allah gives Lasalat’ahum (given ability of Salat’a- of being fearless, bold) to them over you, then to Qatal (fight) you’. So, indeed, A’atazalukum them, then if they do not Qatal (fight) you, and Alqu’ (meet) you the Ssalaam (submission, peace), then Allah has not made for you a Sabeel (way) over them” is talking about not to pick fight, avoid, withdraw from, those, on whom Allah might give them the ability of Salat’a (being fearless) over you and then the ability to them to fight you, therefore not to seek a way against such people who do not fight you, and meet you Salama. Similar meanings are used in next ayah 4:91 when Allah says “so if they do not Ya’tazelukum (isolate, withdraw from) you…”. In Ayah 44:21 “And indeed, if you do not Aamino (have Emaan) on me, then A’atazelone” means withdraw from me, isolate, part, step aside or detach yourselves from me. X-Reference – 2:222, 4:90-91 , 18:16, 19:48-49 , 44:21 . (يَعْتَزِلُوكُمْ;اعْتَزَلُو)

AA’TEY (أْتِي) The word is used in Quran in the meanings of to introduce, bring, to come, to source, approach, result, happen, give or grant, for instance the use of the word in the phrase ‘Aqueemu’s Salaat wa Aa’tuz Zakat’ as in Ayah 2:43 the word Aa’tu is used in terms of bring, source, give, dedicate one’s resources, time, wealth, skills etc. for the system of Salat in order for Zakeya- nourishment, purity, upkeep and to uphold and maintain the social care system as the concept of Aa’tu-z-Zakat. In Ayah 2:53, and 2:87 “And when Ate’na Musa the Kitaab…” the word At’eyna is used in the meanings of give, granted, blessed. Similar meanings are in Ayah 2:63, with the phrase “And Khusu what Atenakum with Quwat” meanings that grab hold strongly what all have been given, granted and blessed with, through full energy, resources, strength and courage. In Ayah 7:163, the use of the phrase “…Not Ta’atehim them this Nabluhum them with what kanu Yafsequn.” Means that they did not receive, what was given to them as blessing, except in the form of test and trial due to the fact that they were rebellious and Faasiq. Similar meanings are in Ayah 2:253, 3:79, 5:20, 17:2, 24:56 and many other usages of the Quran as well. – X-Reference – 2:43, 2:53, 2:87, 2:253, 3:79, 5:20, 7:163, 17:2, 24:56. (تَأْتِيهِمْ ; تَأْتِيهِمْ ; آتَيْنَاكُمْ ; يَأْتِهِمْ ; آتَيْنَاهُ ; تَأْتِيكُمْ ; آتَيْتَنَا ; آتَاهُمَا ; آتَاهُمَا ; تَأْتِهِمْ)

A’AUZU (أَعُوذُ) A’IZ (عِذْ) the word A’iz is used in the meanings of seeking refuge and protection, with Allah, in terms of complete Tawakkul, reliance and putting one’s trusts on Allah, in almost all the uses of the word for instance in Ayah 2:67, the phrase by Nabi Musa, “…he said, I seek refuge with Allah that I Akuna (aim to reach the final destination of being) among the Jahiluna.” Similar meanings are in Ayah 11:47, 19:18, 40:27, 23:97-98 and 44:20 as well. In surah 113 the phrase, “Qul A’auzu with Rabb’e’ Falaq” and Surah 114, the phrase “Qul A’auzu with Rabbe Naas” are both usages in the same meanings of seeking refuge, protection, putting one’s trusts on, in terms of complete Tawakkul on Rabb- Allah who is carrying out the process of Rabobiat for the whole of humanity and everything. However, the word is used in Quran in other than for Allah as well for instance in Ayah 72:6 “and that were Rijaal (stronger people) from the mankind- they Ya’uzuna in the Rijaal from the Jinn…” Here the word Jinn is used to refer to such human beings who are not visible or who do not usually live amongst the other human beings, in terms of them leading a high-end, lavish, extremely powerful, grand, luxurious lifestyle- thus this ayah is basically referring to the fact that those of the normal humanity with resources, Rijaal, they rely on, seek protection and refuge with the Rijaal of the Jinn. X-Reference 2:67, 11:47, 19:18, 23:97-98, 40:27, 44:20, 72:6, 113:1, 114:1. (أَعُوذُ ; فَاسْتَعِذْ)

A’AWANUN (عَوَانٌ) the word is normally mistranslated as middle aged in Ayah 2:68, while describing the concept of Baqaratun (misinterpreted as cow) whereas the basic characteristics of this word is in terms of Ta’awun meaning helping, cooperating with, and supporting each other, or doing something with the help and cooperation of each other for instance in Ayah 5:2 the phrase is “and Ta’wanu A’ala in the Birra and Taqwa and do not Ta’wanu A’ala in Ism and Awdwan” meaning help, support and cooperate with each other in the Birra and Taqwa but not in Is’m and Awdwan (transgression). In Ayah 18:95, the phrase is “….then A’wuny me with Quwwat….” meaning assist, help, support me with all your strength, resources, energy and zeal. Similar meanings of the word “A’anahu” is used in Ayah 25:4. In Ayah 2:68 while discussing the characteristics of the Baqaratun (the discord, divide, sects making, man-made laws to create discord in society) that Allah has asked Bani Israel through Nabiy Musa to Zabiha (Part with, separate from, disconnect with for good) the phrase is “Baqaratun Not Faariz and not Bikrun A’waanun between that” which is normally mistranslated as ‘cow that is neither old nor young but middle aged between that’ whereas this is not at all what Allah is saying. In fact, this phrase means that ‘Baqaratun is that kind of discord and divide in society that is neither Faariz (ordained as mandatory) nor is it any Bikrum (the first time, unprecedented, novel thing) to be A’waanun (helped, cooperated with each other, in support with and promoted) between that (i.e., between and in the Baqaratun)- means that neither is it obligatory, mandatory as per the laws of Deen, nor you (the Bani-Israel) are the one who are Faariz- the imposer, the forcer of these laws, who could propose any law as Faraz, obligatory and compulsory, only Allah is the Hikm- the lawmaker in Deen; nor is it the first time or unprecedented that people have helped and cooperated with each other in enforcing of such man-made laws in the name of Deen. X-Reference 2:68, 5:2, 18:95, 25:4. (عَوَانٌ)

AAZARA (آزَرَ) The word is used in Quran only once in Ayah 6:74 and misinterpreted as the name of Nabiy Ibrahim, whereas taking this word as just the name of father of the Nabiy, wouldn’t embody any divine wisdom and there is no need to mention the name of the Nabiy’s father- why would Allah mention the name of the father of one of the Nabiy, whereas would skip to mention the names of many Nabiyeen and Rasool. The Ayah is not talking about interactions of Nabiy Ibrahim with just his father, or one person at all, but with all his ancestors and forefathers. The word is basically used in the Ayah in the meanings of “come to the assistance of, to give support or countenance to, to make or become solid, to encourage, to help or to stand up for or stand by something or someone or to uphold, strengthen, support something or someone”. Thus, when Allah says in Ayah 6:74, “And when Qala Ibrahim to his Abehey, ‘A’azara Attakhezu As’naaman A’lehatan……” it means that when nabiy Ibrahim interacted with his ancestors and forefathers through his conducts, speech and behaviors that, ‘Have you uphold, strengthen, support, help and assist (A’azara) and seized and grabbed hold to strongly (Attakhezu) such lifeless and useless things, aspects, which you worship (As’naman) and taken as deities, whose laws you follow instead of Allah’s. X-Reference- 6:74. (آزَرَ)

AAZLAME (بِالْأَزْلَامِ) The word is normally translated as by dividing arrows or the practice of drawing lots or bidding or lottery process, which is a very restrictive interpretation of this word. The word is used in Quran in a much broader and all-encompassing manner to refer to the not only the practice of dividing arrows or the featherless arrows as used by ancient Arabs for the purpose of divination and prophecy, but also includes all such acts of fortune or foretelling, which are sortilege in nature- that is to refer to the practice of foretelling the future from a card or randomly drawn method, or other item drawn at random from a collection. Hence the definition of the word Aazlaame will not include weather forecast or any other scientifically based method of forecast or foretelling of future which are based on scientific knowledge and discovery. Hence when Allah says in In Ayah 5:90, when Allah says, “Oh you who Amanu! Indeed, the Khamru and the Mayser and the Ins’aabu and Azlaamu are Rijsun from the Amal of the Shaytaan so Ajtanebu it so that you may be Tuflahun.” Shows that Al-Azlaame are Rijsan, and the work (Amal) of the Shaytaan- the point to note here that the word Azlaam are mentioned here among the list of those aspects which are to be avoided at all costs (Ajtanebu), and therefore one cannot do it just for fun or recreational aspects, but in terms of the need basis only. Thus, going for weather forecast or looking at the earthquake or tsunami related foretelling in areas which are on the earthquake belt or in areas of high tsunami risk can and should be utilized which may or may not be based on scientific research, tools and methods. However there are some specific acts of Azlaam which are in fact mentioned in the list of prohibitions and one can never indulge in those, as defined in Ayah 5:03, through the phrase “Tastaqsemu with the Azlaame” is mentioned as one of the prohibitions, which basically means Tastaqsemu- seek division, divide, animosity, or separation between people by influencing their minds, or through votes with the help of the Azlaame- non-scientific fortune telling methods or sortilege – meaning the practice of foretelling the future from a card or other item drawn at random from a collection. Thus, each and every act, that aims to seek division, divide, animosity of people through non-scientific methods of cheating and deceiving, which are not based on scientific study, research and tools are prohibited. Thus, the prohibition is not only in terms of how these foretelling the future has arrived at (Azlaame) but more focused in terms of the purpose of such exercise (Tastaqsemu), If the purpose is not there, in terms of even if one is not trying to seek division among people, even then it should be avoided at all costs. X-Reference – 5:03 . (وَالْأَزْلَامُ;بِالْأَزْلَام)

AAZN (أَذًى)- Normally translated as being hurt, harmed or even being dirty as in ayah 2:222, but the meanings of this word, although includes physical hurt and harm as well, but are more on the emotional, verbal or psychological sense and nothing to do with being impure or dirty as it is normally mistranslated in ayah 2:222. For instance, in the ayah 2:262 “those who spend their wealth in the Sabeel of Allah, and then do not follow up with what they have spent and do not Aazn…” Here it’s used in the meanings of statements/acts causing verbal, emotional or physiological hurt such as hurtful comments or any such words or acts which is hurtful to the recipients of these wealth or sadaqat. The word is used in similar meanings in the ayah 33:53 advising people going to the Nabi’s house without invitation or overstaying afterwards, cause Aazn to the Nabi. It is also used in Quran as a step down of the word Zarar – used in the meanings of much intense hurt, harm and torture for instance in the ayah 3:111 “They will not cause Zarar to you, except Aazn..”. In ayah 2:262-264 the word Aazn is used as an opposite of Ma’roof words and Mughfirat to others, as in the phrase “Ma’roof words and Maghfirat are better than Sadaqat followed by Aazn”. In the ayah 33:48 “Do not follow the Kafireen and the hypocrites, but let go of their Aaznahum (their Aazn on you) and do tawakul of Allah..” The same meanings and context are used in the ayahs 3:186. X-Reference – 2:196 , 2:222 , 2:262-264 , 3:111 , 3:186 , 4:102 , 33:48. (أُوذِينَا; أَذًى; أَذًى ; الْأَذَىٰ ; أَذًى)

A’AZUHUMA (فَآذُوهُمَا) & AUZU (أُوذُوا) the word ‘A’azuhuma’ is normally translated as ‘punish them’ in the usage of this word in Ayah 4:16, which is a wrong translation and also it does not make sense since in ayah 4:15, Allah has already announced the punishment for those who have committed the Fahashi, and their acts have been confirmed. Thus, as per 4:15-16 when Allah says “…then Amsekuhunna (Maskan them, Settle or Contain them, as a state of Miskeen) in their Bayyoot (their houses) until death comes to them, or Allah makes a Sabeel (an exit, a way out) for them. And the two who commit it among you, then A’azuhuma them….” Here the word A’azuhumma does not mean to ‘punish them’ again, as the punishment is already announced in ayah 4:15 as being left within their houses in a state of Miskeen. The word is used in Quran in two broad meanings of (1) to be captive, entrapped and (2) without any contact with anyone else. Since this is the punishment which has been accorded to those who committed Fahashi, of being retain/contain in their homes in a state of Miskeen, held captive and without any contact with anyone, is a justified punishment as per the due right of the deeds of Fahashi, whose basic element of causing Fasaad, immorality, indecency and corruption among communities has to be curtailed. The word is used in similar meanings in Ayah 3:195 as well in the phrase, “…so those who Haajeru (migrated) and Akhraju (exited) from their Dyaar (homes) and Auzu in my Sabeel (Path of Allah) and Qatalu (literally or metaphorically get killed)…” referring to those who would be destined to Jannat, talking about those who got exited from their homes, entrapped, captive, isolated, and singled out because they have been steadfast in the path of Allah. Similar meanings are in Ayah 6:34, “and surely have Kazabat (reject, deny, made fun, ridicule) Rusulun from before in the past as well, then As’bar (remain steadfast) A’ala what they Kazabu and Auzu (single out, isolate)….” X-Reference – 3:195, 4:16, 6:34. (وَأُوذُوا;فَآذُوهُمَا;أُوذُوا)

AB

ABA’A (أَبَا) ABW’A (أَبَوَاه) & ABA’UKUM (آبَاؤُكُمْ) The word Aba’a (أَبَا)’s basic meanings are in terms of something inherited from forefathers and therefore also refer to fathers or forefathers for instance in Ayah 22:78 “And Wajahadu (your focus, attention, and desired destination) for Allah, is the Haqq (due right, your duty towards) Jehaadehi to Allah. Allah is the one who has chosen you and what would Ja’ala (appointed) upon you in the Deen any Haraj (difficulty)?- Millat of your Abae’kum (forefather) Ibrahim- He named you the Muslimeen from before…” This Ayah proves that Nabi Muhammad is the descendants of Nabi Ibrahim as clearly stated here as Ibrahim being one of the forefathers. In Ayah 33:40, “What Kana Mohammad Aba’a Ahadan from Rijalaukum but Rasool of Allah and Khatam of Nabiyeen” means what do you want to achieve as a final destination (Kana) which is the most praiseworthy (Mohammad) as inherited from forefathers (Aba’a) that is unrivalled and matchless (Ahadan) to be of the resourceful segment (Rijaal) but to be the Rasool of Allah since this is the distinction, the seal, the mark (Khatam) of the Allah’s Nabo’at (Kitaab and message). So here Allah is basically asking you, the addressee of the Quran to be Rasool of Allah since this is the most praiseworthy quality that one can have which is going to make you not only the most resourceful person but is also going to give you the seal, the distinction of delivering the message of Allah and this distinction is going to be matchless and unrivalled as compared to all the resources that one can inherit from their forefathers. X-Reference – 22:78; 33:40. (أَبَوَاهُ ;َلِأَبَوَيْهِ ;آبَاؤُكُمْ ;آبَاؤُكُمْ ;أَبَوَاه ; آبَاؤُهُمْ ; آبَاءَنَا ;لِأَبِيهِ ; آبَاؤُكُمْ ;آبَائِهِمْ ;آبَاؤُنَا ;آبَاءَنَا ;أَبَوَيْكُمْ ; وَآبَاؤُكُمْ ; آبَاؤُنَا; وَبَوَّأَكُمْ; آبَاءَنَا)

ABD (عۡبُد) & EBAAD (عِبَادِ) – the one who does abd – the word means submission to someone or someone’s laws with one’s complete being, obedience & following. The concept of Abd has a dual meaning of “efforts & comfort” i.e., one has to do efforts and go through difficulties first in order to achieve true benefits of and comfort later- for example; When a horse is being trained to utilize all its strength and abilities, there is a process of harnessing and breaking that horse wild nature, which is called “Ta’abed” in Arabic. Similarly, Abd is also a plant which has huge benefits for camel in terms of strength, nourishment and increased milk. But when camel eats this plant, it becomes thirsty. Therefore, the consumption of plant although has initial difficulties, efforts but finally leads to strength, nourishment and increase of milk for the camel. Another example is when the road is being made to make it hard, strong and smooth; the whole process that it goes through in order to get strengthened is also called “Ta’beed”. Therefore, Abd is not worship as is generally translated, as it does not involve any hardship or struggle, but the concept of Abd has “efforts and comfort”, to do Abd of Allah basically means to follow Allah’s commandments and rules and regulations as per the Divine guidance, which would follow a temporary period of hardship or struggle followed by long term benefits. X-Reference – 2:21 , 3:79 , 5:60 , 7:70 , 10:104 , 11:62 , 12:40 , 16:36 , 26:71 , 29:17, 34:41 , 36:60 , 51:56.

(وَعَبَدَعۡبُد;عِبَادِ;عۡبُدُ;الْعِبَادِ;عِبَادِهِ;تَعْبُدُونَ;بِالْعَبْدِ;الْعَبْدُ;لِلْعَبِيدِ;عَابِدُونَ;اعْبُدُوا;فَاعْبُدُوهُ;نَعْبُدَ;وَلَعَبْدٌ;عِبَادِي;بِالْعِبَادِ;تَعْبُدُونَ;عِبَادِكَ;عِبَادَتِهِ;عَبْدًا; أَتَعْبُدُونَ;اعْبُدُوا;عِبَادُكَ;اعْبُدُوا;عِبَادِهِ;أَعْبُدَ;عِبَادِهِ;عِبَادِهِ;فَاعْبُدُوهُ;لِعِبَادِهِ; اعْبُدُوا; يَعْبُدُ; اعْبُدُوا; لِنَعْبُدَ; اعْبُدُوا; اعْبُدُوا; عِبَادِهِ ; عِبَادٌ ; عِبَادَتِهِ)

ABRAS’A (وَالْأَبْرَصَ)The word is normally translated as the leper or any person who is suffering from leprosy or those who have been disabled or unable to use their faculties and abilities, but it’s worth noticing that the word is used in specific terms with the addition of Al- meaning ‘the’ in front of the word referring to the specific Abras’a- and mentioned within the same Ayah 5:110 for instance as those who are disabled or unable to use their faculties due to extreme nature of their Kufar, for instance in Ayah 5:110, “And when Qala Allah, ‘Oh Easa Ibne Maryam, Azkur my Na’imat upon you and your Ummi when I Aedetukua with Rooh il Qudoos, Tukalimu in the Mahde and in maturity. And when I taught you the Kitaab and the Hikmat and the Tourat and the Injeel. And when you created of the Ta’ene Khae’ate the T’aeer with MY Izan then you Tanfukhu from it, then it becomes T’aeran with my Izan. And you Tubrey the Akmahu and the Abras’a with my Izan. And when you Tukhrij the Mouth…” refer to a metaphoric conversation between Allah and Easa Ibne Maryam that ‘when Qala Allah, ‘Oh Easa Ibne Maryam, remember (Azkur) my blessings (Na’imat) upon you and your foundations (Ummi) when I strengthened your resources and efforts (Aedetukua) with Allah’s revelation (Rooh) those appointed for specified duties (Qudoos). You proclaim Allah’s words of wisdom (Tukalimu) in your communities (Mahde) and in maturity. And when I taught you whatever has been ordained by Allah (the Kitaab) and the wisdom (Hikmat) and the laws (Tourat) and the Wa’az- warnings (Injeel). And when you created among those human beings who have slipped away from Allah’s path, and became delusive, blind followers (Al-Ta’ene) in order to represent, protect, perform duties (Khae’ate) in accordance with that which does not belong to the earth (T’aeer) with MY announcement, proclamation (Izan) then you cause to transform these human beings (Tanfukhu) from it- T’aene- the blind followers with the help of Allah’s wisdom and Hidayah, the Kitaab and Hikmat, so that the desired destination is reached of the Hidayah from out of the earth (T’aeer) with my announcement & proclamation (Izan). And you rendered them innocent and free of any blame (Tubrey) those that were blindly following others, as well as those that were blind-sighted from Hidayah (Akmahu) and those that were incapacitated and disabled to unable to use their faculties (the Abras’a) with my proclamation (Izn) and that’s how you extracted, exited (Tukhrij) the living- those on the Emaan and Hidayah out of the dead- those from extreme Kufar (the mout). Similar expressions and meanings are in Ayah 3:49 as well. Similar expressions and meanings are in Ayah 3:49 as well. The same phrases can also be taken literally in terms of considering innocent and without blame those who are born blind and/or any disability of permanent nature. X-Reference – 3:49, 5:110 . (وَالْأَبْرَصَ)

ABTAGHU (ابْتَغُوا) The word is normally translated as seek, however the word is used not just in the meanings of seeking or to seek but in much more broader and multiple meanings such as ‘crave after, to desire, with the aim of, in quest of’ for instance in Ayah 3:85, “And whoever Yabtagh Ghair Al Islaam as Deen, then not will be accepted from them and they will in the Akhira be among the Khaasireen” here the word is used in the meanings of seeking but more so in the meanings of ‘with the aim of or in quest for’ and this would be translated as ‘and whoever aim for, or is in quest for any Deen Ghair, other than or contradicting the Deen-e-Islam’. Similar meanings are in Ayah 4:24 as well in the phrase, “…and Uhilla for you is what is beyond that, so that you Tabtaghu with your Amwaal Moh’sineen Ghair Musafeheen…” means that permitted for you is what is beyond that, so that you aim for, quest for becoming Mohs’ineen Ghair Musahefeen with your Amwaal. In Ayah 4:94, the phrase is “Tabtaghuna A’araza Hyyaat of this world” means seeking, desiring for, aiming for, in quest for and craving for the Hyaat- life of this world. In Ayah 4:139, “Those who seize the Kaafireen as Awliya from instead of the Momineen- Abtaghuna near them the I’izzata, then Indeed, the I’zzat is to Allah all together” means that they seize kaafireen as Awliya instead of the Momineen Abtaghuna- with the aim of, in quest for, craving for Izzat, whereas all Izzat is to Allah. X-Reference- 2:187, 3:85, 4:24, 4:94, 4:139. (ابْتَغُوا;تَبْتَغِيَ;أَبْتَغِي; )

A’BYAZZAT (ابْيَضَّتْ) & TABAYZZU (تَبْيَضُّ)- is normally translated as white in many ayahs such as 3:106, but this is a wrong translation. The word is used here in the meanings of clear, distinct and clearly recognizable. Similar meanings are used in ayah 2:187 “…until become bayyin to you the Abyazu thread from the Aswade thread of the fajar (dawn)…” If we translate Abyazu as white and Aswade as black, how can there be a black thread of the Fajar – the dawn. These words are used here not in the meanings of black or white, but in the meanings of Abyazu as clear, focused, distinct and clearly recognizable as opposed to Aswade as unclear, blurred, indistinct or faded and unrecognizable. Similarly the word B’ezaa’ in ayahs 7:108, 20:22 , 20:22, 26:33, 27:12 and 28:32, all with regards to hand of Musa is not used in the meanings of white but distinct, clear, unblocked, clean and straightened. Similarly in ayah 37:48-49 “and with them will be companions of modest gaze and eyes as if they were Ba’yazun well-protected” used here in the meanings of clear and distinct protection. In ayah 12:84 referring to the father of Nabi Yousuf “…and his eyes became Aubyazzat with grief…” Is not white from grief but becomes distinct and recognizable due to grief. Similarly in ayah 3:106 and 3:107, the word is used in clear, distinct and clearly recognizable meanings. X-Reference – 2:187 , 3:106-107, 7:108 , 12:84 , 37:49. (

(بَيْضَاءُ; الْأَبْيَضُ ; ابْيَضَّتْ ; تَبْيَضُّ ; تَبْيَض)

AD

A’DAL (عْدِلُ) TA’DILU (تَعْدِلُوا) is normally translated as justice. As per Quran, it means being fair and just. For instance, in ayah 5:03 “O you who have Emaan, be Qawameen for Allah and witness in Qist and do not let your hatred of Quom (people) prevent you that you do not do Adal. Be Aadil as it is near to the Taqwa…” Clarified the concept of Adal as being fair and just in all one’s dealings regardless of one’s own likeness or hatred towards people. In Quran there are multiple words used for justice, such as Adal and Qist and there is a difference between Adal – justice and Qist – justice as per Quran. Although the Adal is based on Equal rights being accorded to everyone as per the judicial system, the Qist on the other hand is in accordance with someone’s situation, the deserving conditions. For instance, if someone is more deserving than the other, based on the person needs and specific situations, Adal would be giving everyone equal regardless of the situation or their due rights, their needs and requirements, whereas Qist would be in accordance with the situations, their due rights, their specific requirements and needs whereby the person may get more or less than others, based on his/her unique and more deserving conditions and situations. Therefore, the difference between Adal and Qist is actually the difference between equality and equitable. Although both promote fairness and justice, equality i.e., Adal achieves this through treating everyone the same regardless of their due rights, needs, situations and unique conditions, while equity, i.e., Qist achieves this through treating people differently depending upon their unique need, situations and conditions for instance Ayah 4:135 and 4:03 also uses both the Adal and Qist highlighting the difference in the meanings of the word Adal and Qist. It’s because of this that whenever Allah talks about people who treat Allah as their Rabb equal to others whom they also treat equally as their Rabb, by treating both Allah and their Rabb on equal footings regardless of the due right of Allah as their one and only Rabb, the same word Adal is used, for instance in Ayah 27:60, after identifying all that Allah has created and appointed for duties different systems and laws in order to carry out the process of Rabobiat, Allah than says, “….Can there be any deity along with Allah? Nay, they are Quomun Ya’adelun.” Means that after asking a thought provoking question that is it even possible that there could be any other deity, whose laws you could follow on equal footings alongside with Allah, Allah then says, ‘Nay, for them, there is, since they are the ones who establish, support and strengthen (Quomin) creating of equals with Allah, as a concept of Adal, regardless of Allah’s due right of being treated the ONLY deity- whose laws are to be followed and no one else could be treated on equal footings with Allah, but not for such people. Similarly in Ayah 6:1, “The Hamd is for Allah- the one who has created the skies and the earth and Jaala the Zulumaat and the Noor. Then those who Kafaru with their Rabb Ya’dalun.” This is again a thought-provoking statement which is basically linked to the earlier Ayahs already discussed – the Ayahs no. 5:110-5:120 that discuss people taking Nabiyeen and their Ummy as their deities from besides Allah. Thus, this phrase basically is saying that those who treat other people/aspects/laws as their deities, their Rabb, from besides Allah, could do Adal- justice with Allah, only when they Kafaru, hide, conceal, reject and hide from themselves these Rabb. – X-Reference – 4:03 , 4:135 , 5:03, 6:01, 27:60. (عَدْلُ;عَدْلٍتَعْدِلُوا;بِالْعَدْلِ;تَعْدِلُوا;تَعْدِلُوا;اعْدِلُوا;تَعْدِلُوا;;عَدْلٍ;يَعْدِلُونَ;عَدْلٍ;تَعْدِلْ;وَعَدْلًا;فَاعْدِلُوا;يَعْدِلُونَ ; يَعْدِلُونَ ; يَعْدِلُونَ)

ADAM (آدَمَ)- Unlike the normal misunderstanding, Adam was not the name of the first Human, neither it was the name of the first Nabiy sent to the mankind or appointed by Allah, since it is nowhere mentioned in Quran. The word Adam is used in Quran as a distinct word to that of the word ‘Insaan’ or ‘Bashar’. While the word ‘Insaan’ means humankind or humanity in general; the word ‘Bashar’ refers to the physical or observable traits of humans; the use of the word ‘Adam’ in Quran is more in the meanings of knowledge, love, harmony and compatibility, referring to those who have knowledge, who use their faculties of thinking, pondering, reasoning, sense, logic and justice. The word ‘Adam’ refers to that stage of mankind, which has passed the initial evolutionary process of ‘Homo Sapiens’, that has now reached the stage of humankind of ‘Adam’ with faculties to seek knowledge and have capacity for intellect as well as to that stage where Malaik has done Sajda to humankind- as referred in Ayahs 2:30-2:39, the allegorical conversation between Malaik and Allah regarding the appointment of ‘Adam as (Khalifa)’ as successors of some previous creation of Allah. ‘Adam as Khalifa’ could also refer to Adam as trustee, caretakers of the earth, who has been handed over the job to look after the earth and other lifeforms on the planet. Since, the word Adam is used here instead of Insaan or Bashar, it means those amongst us, as humankind, who fits the criteria as ‘Adam & Khalifa’– who think and ponder by using their intellect & Aqal, are knowledgeable and act as Khalifa by helping others, spending their money on the needy, standing with Haqq, as caretakers of the planet earth. Humankind has been given autonomy and freedom of the freewill which means that we, as humans, can even disobey the Laws of Allah. Therefore, in Ayahs 2:30-2:39, Adam represents of all of humanity at that stage of evolutionary development. Same meanings and context are used in Ayah 7:11. The word Adam is also used in Quran in the meanings of a Nabi or Rasool as in the ayah 3:33 “Indeed Allah elevated Adam and Nuha and Zurriyat of Ibrahim and Zurriyat of Imran over the worlds” From this ayah it shows that since Adam is a very common name, therefore Adam was also a name of Allah’s Nabi/Rasool, could be before Nabi Nuh. Similar meanings of Adam as Allah’s Nabi and Rasool is used in ayah 19:58 with the phrase “…the Nabiyyin from the Zurriyat of Adam…”. Here it could also refer to Zurriyat (as in followers or in whose footsteps they followed) as Adam- referring to Adam as Khalifa. X-Reference – 2:31 , 2:33-35 , 3:33 , 3:59, 7:10-11 , 19:58 , 20:117 , 20:121 , 22:41 , 24:55 , 36:60.

(آدَمَ;آدَمَآدَم;;لِآدَمَ;آدَمُ;آدَمَ;آدَمَ;آدَمَ;آدَمَ)

A’DAT (عِدَّة) & MA’DUDATIN (مَعْدُودَاتٍ) The word is normally translated as numbers or measures, however in Quran the words are used not just as numbers or measures but in multiple meanings for instance in Ayah 11:8, wherein Allah is talking about those who do Kufar, “And if WE delayed upon them the A’zaab, towards Ummatin Ma’dutaatin, then they would have Yaquluna what Yahbasu it?….” here if we translate the word as measured or numbered as is normally done, what would it really mean by the phrase Ummatin Ma’dutaatin as we know the word Ummat refers to one’s foundations, their building blocks and fundamentals, on which they have been steadfast and working upon. The word Ma’dutaatin is used here, not in the meanings of measured or numbered, but in the meanings of determined, decided, concluded and fixed. Thus, this ayah is basically referring to the Azaab that has been concluded, determined, decided and fixed for them, based on their Ummatin- their foundations, building blocks and fundamentals, based on which they have been doing Kufar. In Ayah 11:104, talking about Aza’ab Al Akhira and Youm Al Majmu’aun (gathering), Allah says, “And what would Nuakhir it except for Aja’l Ma’adutaadin” is basically a thought provoking questions by asking, why would Allah Nuakhir it, delay the Youm Al Majmua’n for Akhir? It’s nothing except for Aja’al- postponement of Mua’dutaadin, their accountability, which is determined, decided and concluded based on their deeds and is confirmed to happen sooner or later. When the phrase Ayaaman Ma’adudat is used, the word Ayaaman means well-known and confirmed aspects, events or process, and Ma’adudat means determined, fixed and concluded, for instance in Ayah 2:80, “And they say never will the fire Tamassna us except Ayaaman Ma’adudat” means that they are under the impressions that fire could not surround them, mature on them, in terms of them being in the fire for a longer period, since as per their wishful thinking this is an established fact which is determined, fixed and concluded. This wishful thinking is depicted by most Muslims today, who are under the impression that being a Muslim, they would go to hell only to pay for their sins, and they fire of the hell is not going to be there for a long time which is a wishful thinking but is a well-known and concluded aspect as their beliefs. The same message is given to us in Ayah 3:24 as well. While taking about the whole process of Hajj (Ayah 196 & onwards) in Ayah 2:202 “And do Zikar of Allah in Ayyammin Ma’adudat..” referring to the whole process of Hajj, whereby one is endeavoring an investigative, finding evidence, learning, coming out of darkness period, and the concept of Zikar to include all the meanings as understanding and implementing the Ayaat of Allah, remembering the blessings of Allah to become Shakir and taking Ibrat/lesson from stories of earlier people as mentioned in Quran, the phrase “Do Zikar of Allah in Ayyamin Ma’adodat’ is aligned with the context of telling us that Zikar of Allah is Ayyamin- well-known and confirmed aspects as well as Ma’adodat- fixed and determined aspects of the Hajj. In Ayah 2:183-184, “Oh those who Amanu, Kutiba upon you the S’yaam, as Kutiba upon those from before you so that you may Tattaquna- Ayyaman Ma’adodat…” means that S’iyaam has been made obligatory upon us, as upon those from before, in order for us to observe Taqwa – The phrase ‘Ayaaman Ma’adodat’ means which have been Ayaaman- confirmed and well known and Ma’adodat, determined and fixed, both as a recompense in order to observe Taqwa as well as the duty as upholders of justice (Shahada) to control, restraint, put an end to and halt (S’ayyam) those aspects and periods which are difficult, wherein injustices are prevalent and humanity is at its worst in terms of moral and ethical values (Shahara Ramadan). Additionally, the phrase ‘Ayaaman Madodat’ is also applicable for our day to day lives, as a test, during our times here on earth, during which we need to exercise self-retrain and self-control through all across all of our experiences, indulgence, conducts and behaviors, use of all of Allah’s blessings (Fazal) or consuming, engaging, benefiting to or from (kulu) or getting indulged in, influenced by or overwhelmed by (Ashrabu) by trying our best to stay away from Shar, in all and any experience at all in terms of staying away from Shar in all-encompassing manner. The use of the word A’idat later on in the same Ayah 2:184, also shares the same meanings, thus when Allah says, “Ayyaman Ma’adodatin, Then whoever Kana among you Mareezan or upon Safarin, then A’idat of Ayyain Akhara…” means that once you’re not going through these stages of life, such as not Mareez or upon Safarin anymore, then in the Akhir- that is other than those periods of Safar and Mareez, it’s A’idat- confirmed and determined upon you to carry out, and resume the S’iyaam. X-Reference- 2:80, 2:184, 2:203, 3:24, 11:8, 11:104, 12:20. A’idatun () A’idatun () A’idata (الْعِدَّةَ;مَعْدُودَاتٍ;فَعِدَّةٌ;فَعِدَّةٌ)

ADBARA (الْأَدْبَارَ)- is normally translated as backs, but this is a wrong translation. Quran has used this word in the meanings of powers, resources, ways and means of providing strength and stability for instance in the ayah 6:45 “So cut off Dabiru of the Zaim nation/people/community…” Is used here in the meanings of cutting of the powers, resources, the ways and means of providing strength and stability to the Zalim Quom. Similar meanings are used in the ayah 7:72, 15:66 and 8:7 as well. When used along with the word Yuwalukum as in the ayah 3:111, in the phrase يُوَلُّوكُمُ الْأَدْبَارَ , i.e. turn back the Adbar, it means reversing, turning back, cutting out, all the ways and means of providing strength, powers and resources. – X-Reference 3:111 , 6:45 , 7:72 , 8:7 , 15:66. (الْأَدْبَار;;أَدْبَارِكُمْ َ;دَابِرُ; دَابِرَ ; دَابِرَ ; دُبُرَهُ ; الْأَدْبَارَ)

ADNA’ (أَدْنَىٰ)- is normally translated as more appropriate as in the ayah 4:03. Which is a wrong translation in that ayah. The word Adna is used opposite of Khair in ayah 2:61, “…Would you exchange Khair for Adna…” Therefore, in all of its meanings it would be opposite to the word Khair. Since Khair means better or superior in terms of food, rizq, honor, grace, Fazal or any pleasures of life etc., the word Adna would mean inferior for instance in ayah 7:169 “ Then succeeded from after them who inherited the Kitaab, taking the goods of this Adna…” Here the word Adna refers to the benefits of this worldly life, which are inferior and nothing as compared to the benefits of the hereafter. Similarly, if Khair means better or good or best, the word Adna would mean inferior, worse or worst, or bad for instance in ayah 58:7 the word is used in the meanings of lesser, worse, etc. If the word Khair means anything that one desires or is his/her most favorite, the word Adna would refer to everything that one would despise or unlike or detest. If the word Khair means money, property, state, wealth and prosperity, the word Adna means, poverty, scarcity, weakness, shabbiness, deficiency etc.. X-Reference – 2:61 , 4:03 , 7:169 , 58:7. (أَدْنَىٰ;أَدْنَى; أَدْنَىٰ ; الْأَدْنَىٰ)

ADRA’A (ادْرَءُوا) ADDARA’ATUM (فَادَّارَأْتُمْ) the word is normally translated as dispute for instance as per its usage in Ayah 2:72, however the basic meanings of the word is in terms of averting, repelling from, preventing the consequences of some actions or deeds for instance in Ayah 3:168, “Those who Qaalu to their Akhwanehim and they Qa’adu, ‘if they had obeyed what they would have been Qatal?’ Qul, ‘then Addra’au from your Anfusakum the Mout if you are Swadiqueen” here the word is used in the meanings of preventing the consequences of committing a wrong deed, in terms of regret of one’s Nafs and the Mout (death) of one’ Nafs. Similarly in Ayah 2:72, “and when you Qatal nafsan, then you Addraa’tum concerning it. And Allah brought forth what you Kuntum Taktumuna” means that when you Qatal (physical or allegorical killing) of a Nafs (either another person, or one’s own Nafs-e-Mutmainna) then you Addra’tum- tried to avert, repel and prevent the consequences of this acts of Qatal, but Allah brought forth what you Kuntum (aim to reach the final destination of) Taktumuna (used here in all the meanings in terms of not reading, understanding, or apply the Hidaya of the Kitaab, i.e., blindly follow others without using one’s own intellect and Aqal; not make an attempt to compile and gather the divine guidance in one self and practically in one’s life and not to take the Kitaab as great Amaanat, in terms of either not distributing it to others as it is, or communicating to others with distortions, mixed with falsehood, amendments and fabrications).- basically telling us that in case of Qatal of Nafs, whether metaphorically or allegorically killing someone else or one’s own Nafs-e- Mut’maiina (which compels one to do Amal-e-Swalehaat), your basic response was to try and prevent, avert, and repel to face the consequences of these act of Qatal, but Allah brought forth what you aimed to Taktumuna- as opposite of Iqra, in terms of your efforts to conceal and hide the truth, to not implement the Kitaab of Allah, to not proclaim to others, to go against the Meesaq of Allah, in terms of you trying to amend, change or falsify Allah’s Laws. X-Reference 2:72, 3:168. (فَادَّارَأْتُمْ)

AE

A’ED (عِدُ) The word is normally translated as promise but the word is used in Quran in terms of one’s calculations or result obtained by calculation, opinion; assumption; computation; supposition; notion; listing; count; idea or view for instance in Ayah 7:70, “….Then bring to us with what you ta’edna if Kunta of the Swadiqueen” meaning that bring to us with is the basis of your opinions, views, calculations, notions etc. if you are the truthful and sincere one. In Ayah 2:268, “the Shaytan – it Yu’adekum you with Fuqara and Ya’amarukum you with Fahasha…” means that the shaytan Yu’adekum- creates the results through assumptions, views, calculations and opinions that are based on Fuqara- poverty, deficiency, shortages and dearth and Amara- orders laws and actions which are Fahasha- based on laws from other than Allah and outside the boundaries of Deen. Similar meanings are in Ayah 4:120 and 17:64 “and what Yu’adehum them the Shaytan except Ghurur (deception, wishful thinking)’. X-Reference –2:268, 4:120, 7:70, 17:64. (تَعِدُنَا ; يَعِدُكُمُ)

A’EDEHIM (أَيْدِيهِمْ) YADA (يَدُ) the word is normally translated as ‘their hands’ for instance as used in ayah 2:79, however the word is not used in the meanings of ‘their hands’ in ALL of its usages in Quran but more so in the meaning of, consequences of one’s efforts and actions, putting in efforts for, making struggle for, or earning something for the day of Akhira as consequences of one’s efforts especially when used along with the word Qadamat (putting forward, sent ahead etc.) for instance in ayah 2:95 “and never will they wish for it (the death) ever, because of what Qadamat (sent ahead, put forward) A’iedehim (consequences of one’s efforts)…” Similarly in Ayah 3:182 ‘That is because of what Qadamat your Aiedekum and that Allah is not with Zulm towards Allah’s Ebaad”. Here the word is used in similar meanings of putting forward as consequences of one’s efforts and actions, sending towards, earning for the day of Akhira, in terms of earning with one’s efforts, deeds and struggles for the life ever after. However, the earnings are not only in regards to the Akhira for instance in ayah 4:62 “So how come when a disaster befalls them, for what Qadamat their Aidehim…” Shows the rules and the laws of the universe in terms of what one send is what one gets, whatever is being done, is to be repaid back sooner or later, as a whole system of recompense, whether it is in this world or in the Akhira. The word Yada is also used in terms of the end result of one’s actions, conducts and behaviors as well as refers to the basic aim of the whole system of Allah’s Deen, laws and Hidayah for instance in Ayah 5:64, “And the Yahood Qalat, ‘Yadu Allah Maghlulat.’ Ghulat their Aedehim…” means as per the obvious conduct, behaviors and statements of the Yahood- the religious scholars, that the whole focus, the basic purpose of Allah’s Deen, laws as in Yada of Allah is to Maghlulat- compulsive, restrictive, with shackles, whereas it is these Yahood- the religious scholars’ basic intention and their Aedehim- the resources and tools which force compulsion in Deen, not as per Allah’s Deen since there is no compulsion in Deen. X-Reference – 2:79 , 2:95 , 3:182 , 4:62. (يَدَيْهِ;يَدَيْهِ;يَدَيْهِ;أَيْدِيَهُمَا;أَيْدِيهِمْ;يَدَكَ;يَدِيَ;أَيْدِيهِمْ;أَيْدِيكُمْ;أَيْدِيَكُمْ;أَيْدِيَهُمْ;وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ;وَأَيْدِيكُمْ;أَيْدِيَهُمْ;أَيْدِيَهُم;;يَدَاهُ;يَدُ;أَيْدِيهِمْ;يَدَيْهَا;أَيْدِيكُمْ; أَيَّدْتُكَ; بِأَيْدِيهِمْ;يَدَيْهِ;أَيْدِيهِمْ;أَيْدِيهِمْ; يَدَيْ; يَدَهُ; أَيْدِيَكُمْ; أَيْدِيهِمْ ; أَيْدٍ)

AEMAAN (أَيْمَانٌ) & A’EMANIHIM (أَيْمَانِهِمْ) The word A’eman means oath, promise and covenant, for instance as used in Ayah 2:224-225. Any contract, covenant, oath or promise for any act of Shahdat, upholding of justice, is also termed as Aemaan, for instance as per the use in Ayah 5:108, referring to their Aemaanihim, of those who are other than the ones who Amanu. For those who Amanu, our covenant with Allah is also termed as Aiemaan- Thus, the basic characteristics of Ae’maan is in the same meanings of Aman and Emaan- i.e., to be at Aman, in terms of being with utter and deep conviction w.r.t. Allah based on one’s use of Aqal, intellect as well as seeking of knowledge, but with additional aspects of being committed in the covenant with Allah. This covenant with Allah becomes Meesaq, unbreakable & binding as soon as one receives Allah’s revelation, i.e., the Kitaab, the Hidayah, for instance Ayah 16:91 “And fulfill your covenant with Allah when you have taken it, and do not break the Aimana after its confirmation…”.In a nutshell, the word Emaan, Aimaan or Aemaan has multiple meanings and when we talk about protecting and nurturing our Emaan, as per the concept of Taqwa, it means being extra careful, cautious, nurturing and protective w.r.t. all these meanings of Emaan and Amanu. X-Reference – 2:224-225 , 4:3 , 5:108, 16:91. (أَيْمَانِهِمْ;أَيْمَانٌ;أَيْمَانِهِمْإِيمَانِكُمْ;إِيمَانِهِمْ;يْمَانُكُمْ;بِإِيمَانِكُمْ;أَيْمَانُكُمْ;أَيْمَانُكُمْ;بِالْإِيمَانِ;لِلْإِيمَانِ;إِيمَانًا;إِيمَانِهِمْ;إِيمَانِكُمْ;إِيمَانَكُمْ ۚ;بِأَمَانِيِّكُمْ;بِالْإِيمَانِ;;أَيْمَانَكُمْ; أَيْمَانِكُمْ;الْأَيْمَانَ;أَيْمَانِكُمْ;أَيْمَانِهِمْ;أَيْمَانٌ; إِيمَانَهُمْ;أَيْمَانِهِمْ;إِيمَانِهَا;إِيمَانُهَا;أَيْمَانِهِمْ ; إِيمَانًا)

A’ESH (عَشِ) A’SHEYE (وَالْعَشِيِّ) The word is normally translated as the evening or nights which is not the correct translation of this word. Whereas the word is defined via Ayah 43:36 as the act of ignoring, blocking, not paying attention or being blind-sighting from the Zikr of Allah, “And whoever Ya’ashu from Zikar of the Rahmaan..”, where the word Zikar means the requirement to understand and implement the Ayaat, to remember and in act of utter gratitude to follow the laws of Allah, to pay attention and take lesson from previous stories mentioned in the Quran. The definition of the word Aa’shiyee as the act of ignoring, blocking, not paying attention or being blind-sighting from the Zikr of Allah, is defined further in Ayah 30:18, “and for Allah is the Hamd in the Samawaat and the earth and A’ashiyan..” where the word is used in the meanings of something that is neither on the planet earth, nor from the space and cosmos, referring to the Zikar of Allah, the Kitaab. In Ayah 6:52, “And do not Tat’rude those who Yada’una their Rabb with Ghudawat and A’shiyey Yureduna Wajhahu…” is normally mistranslated as ‘do not send away those who call upon their lord in the mornings or evenings’ but, this Ayah is in fact talking about those who do Abd- follow laws of other than Allah, who take as deities, as their Rabb by doing Shirk, and who call upon such deities instead of making Dua’a to Allah, as well as the fact that such people are ignorant of, do not pay attention to, are blocked and blind sighted from the Zikar of Allah (A’ashiyee). Thus, this Ayah is a direct instruction to the addressee of the Quran, to not judge others or change their behaviors in accordance with others; but to continue to do our jobs in our endeavors to deliver Allah’s message by inclusion, and never by exclusion. The direct instruction is, even for those who do Shirk, who call upon their Rabb, in isolation, hidden and concealed manner (Ghuduwaat) instead of making Dua’a to Allah; who are blocked from, ignorant of and blind-sighted to the Zikar of Allah (A’ashiyey), whose only desired end result of all their actions and behaviors (Yureeduna) and their whole focus, attention and concern (Wajha) are their deities. Even then, you, as the addressee should not make them retreat in confusion, do not drive them out, do not dismiss them or to exclude them in any way or form, or to cause ejection, or rejection for them by casting them out or letting out or dislodge them in any manner (Tat’rude) them. Exactly similar phrases and meanings are there in Ayah 18:28 as well. In Ayah 3:41, the phrase is “…and do Zikar of Rabb Kas’eeran and Sabaha with the A’ashiyee and the Abkar” Is not saying do Zikar evening and morning as is normally mistranslated but basically Allah is asking to do Zikar, understand and implement Ayaat of Allah, learn lessons from stories narrated in Quran; remember Allah’s blessings and be Shaakir by following the laws of Allah in utter gratitude, most often and to a greater extent (Kas’eeran) and strive with your whole being by being persistent and steadfast in following the laws of the Kitaab (Sabah) and especially against those aspects that tend to block or blindsight from the Zikar of Rabb (A’ashiye). Similar phrase and meanings are in Ayah 19:11 as well. X-Reference- 3:41, 6:52, 18:28, 19:11, 30:11, 43:36. (وَالْعَشِيِّ)

AES’RI (إِصْرِي) is mistranslated as burden, but the real meanings of this word is “to refer a particular aspect or part of commandment” for instance in the ayah 2:286 “…do not let us carry Ies’ran like that was carried on those from before us…” is referred to particular commandments which was put as conditions by Allah on Bani Israel, such as the particular commandment related to Sabath and another related to what bani-Israel made haram on themselves, such particular commandments by Allah, which were hard on people to follow. The same is referred to in the ayah 7:157 “…and he relieved from them Aes’rahum (their Ies’ri) and shackles which were upon them…” here it is again referred to those particular commandments of Allah which were hard on them and in the case of Bani-Israel was imposed on them by Allah due to their own actions. Similarly in the Ayah 3:81 “…Allah said ‘Do you addirm and take on that Aes’ri…” refers to the particular commandment of Allah that they must have Emaan on and be a Nas’eer for the Rasool who confirms what is with them of the Kitaab. X-Reference – 2:286 , 3:81 , 7:157 . (إِصْرَهُمْ ; إِصْرِي)

A’EWAJAN (عِوَجًا) is normally translated as deviation or crookedness. The word is used in Quran in the meanings of deviance, nonconformity, deviation, variation or divergence of any sort. For instance in ayah 18:1 “ Al Hamd is for Allah who has revealed to the Abdihi, the Kitaab and not made in it any A’ewaja” Here it could be interpreted in three broad meanings that (1) it is the same Kitaab, the same Hidayah that has been revealed on all the Rasool and there is no A’ewajan meaning no non-conformity to any of the earlier revelations from each other and (2) Another interpretations could be that there is no A’ewajan within the Kitaab, meaning there is no difference, no deviations, no variations or divergence of any sort in the meanings of no contradiction between any of the ayat and (3) there is no A’ewajan could also mean w.r.t. Sabeel of Allah which is a straight path and in that path, there is no deviance or any sort, as in straight, with no turns or deviations etc. The same meanings are used in the ayah 20:106-108 as “then will leave it a level plain, and you will not see in it neither any A’iewajan nor any curve. On that day they will follow the caller with no A’iwaja from it”. Similarly in ayah 3:99 and 7:45 When the phrase “Yusuddon (Hinder, divert, stop) from the Sabeel of Allah” is used alongside with the phrase “and seek Baghi A’ewajan”, it means that the word Sabeel of Allah as opposite to Baghi A’ewajan means those who want to hinder, divert or stop from the Sabeel of Allah, their basic intention is to seek Baghi (rebelliousness, causing to cross the boundaries of Deen, to transgress) through A’ewajan, deviation, misleading, divergence from and non-conformity of the right path – X-Reference 3:99 , 7:45 , 18:1 , 20:106-108. (عِوَجًا ۚ; عِوَجًا;عِوَجًا)

AF

AFALA (أَفَلَ) The word is used in Quran in the meanings of evanescent, fading, passing, setting, sinking, transitory, grow weaker, becoming less bright or lose power, energy, resource or ability for something for instance in Ayah 6:76, talking about one of As’naaman (lifeless idols taken up as deities as discussed in the earlier Ayah of 6:74), when Allah says, “So, when Janna over him the Layl, Ara’a Koukaban, Qala, ‘Is this my Rabb?’ Then when Afala, Qala, ‘Not Auhibbu the Afeleen” means that when he was covered and hidden by the darkness/night, and the Koukab (star, beam of light) become obvious, apparent and witnessed, then he said, is this my Rabb? But when it Afala- grew weaker, diminishes and lost its energy, said, I do not like, love, connect with the Afaleen- those who lose their energy, brightness, grow weaker. Here if take the Koukab in the literal sense as a star, or a constellation, or a planet that is apparent at night; some distant star, planet or heavenly body that is apparent during the night and is assumed to hold some supernatural powers, then the use of the word Afala here would refer to their vision getting dim, them setting in terms of vanishing on the appearance of dawn. If we take the word Koukab in the allegorical sense, to refer to anything that is taken as a deity, who is worshiped and adored and whose laws people follow since that being/entity is ta