2. Surah Fat’h, 48:29 Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah; and those who are with him are strong against Unbelievers (but) compassionate amongst each other.

3. Mutual Love is from Allah (SWT) And (moreover) He has put affection between their hearts: not if you had spent all that is in the earth you could have produced that affection but Allah has done it: for He is Exalted in might Wise. Anfal 7:63.

4. 5 Aspects of this Relation Akhuwah Hubb WilayahNaseeha Takaful

5. 1-Akhuwah or brotherhood The believers are but a single Brotherhood: So make peace and reconciliation between your two (contending) brothers: And fear Allah that you may receive Mercy. Hujurat 49: 10.

6. 2- Hubb or Love But those who before them had homes (in Medina) and had adopted the Faith show their affection to such as came to them for refuge and entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the (latter) but give them preference over themselves even though poverty was their (own lot). Hashar 59:9.

7. Ahadith about mutual love:  You can not be true believers unless you love each other. (Muslim).  One who loves for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.), dislikes for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.), gives to others for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.) and withholds something for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.) then he has indeed perfected his faith or Iman.  Abu Zar reported that one day the Prophet (s.a.w.) came to us and asked us, “Do you know which deed is more beloved to Allah (s.w.t.)?” Someone named Salaah others named Zakat or Jihad. He said that most beloved deed to Allah (s.w.t.) is love for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.) and disliking for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.).

8. Ahadith on mutual love  Once he asked Abu Zar, “Do you know which chain of Iman is strongest?” He answered only Allah (s.w.t.) and his Prophet (s.a.w.) know the best. Prophet (s.a.w.) replied, “Friendship in the way of Allah (s.w.t.), love for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.) and disliking for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.).”  In one Hadith the Prophet described three qualities that one must possess in order to taste the sweetness of Iman (Halawah of Iman). One of the conditions he described was, “You love a person for no other reason except for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.).”  Mu’az bin Jabal states that he heard the Prophet (s.a.w.) saying, “Allah (s.w.t.) said that my love is a must for such people who love each other for my sake, sit together for my sake, visit each other for my sake and spend upon each other for my sake.”

9. Ahadith on mutual love:  Prophet (s.a.w.) also said that on the Day of Judgment when there is not going to be any shade from sun except the throne of Allah (s.w.t.), there will be people underneath this throne who have done 7 different types of noble deeds. One of the deeds included is love for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.).  Prophet (s.a.w.) said that on the Day of Judgment, Allah (s.w.t.) shall say, “Where are those who used to love each other for my Glory? I shall give them sanctuary under my shade when there is no shade today except mine.”  Mu’az Ibn Jabal reported from Prophet (s.a.w.) that Allah (s.w.t.) says, “Those who love each other for my sake shall have thrones of light (Noor) to sit upon and prophets and martyrs shall envy them.”Tirmizi. 

10. 3- Wilayah or Close Alliance Your (real) friends are (no less than) Allah His Apostle and the (fellowship of) believers those who establish regular prayers and regular charity and they bow down humbly (in worship).As to those who turn (for friendship) to Allah His Apostle and the (fellowship of) believers it is the fellowship of Allah that must certainly triumph. Maida 5:55, 56.

11. 4-Naseeha:  One must always think about all the good which could be done for his brothers.  One should not overlook any harm or suffering of his brother and be very concerned to relieve it.  One must prefer for his brother what one likes for himself. Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “I swear by One in whose Hand is my life, you can not be believers till you love for your brother what you love for yourself.”  In another Hadith, he described six rights of a Muslim upon another Muslim brother. One of these rights is, “To prefer for him what one prefers for himself.”  One must not tolerate anyone insulting his brother and should defend his honor in his presence or absence.  One must everything possible to provide material needs and comfort to his brother.  If his brother is heading to the wrong path, then one must enjoin to him what is right and forbid what is wrong in a loving way.

12. 5- Takaful  This is a very important aspect and duty of brotherhood.  It includes mutual financial, emotional and social support amongst the brothers/sisters.  This is achieved through knowing about the matters of our brothers just like we know our relatives.  Helping brothers/families in need (both social, financial, etc.) is essential duty of brotherhood.  All brothers should deal with the challenges and issues faced by brothers in need as their own and pool resources to address these together.

13. Foundations of these relations Esaar Adal Ihsan RehmaAfwu Trust Value

14. They give preference over themselves even though poverty was their (own lot). Hashar 59:10. A Few Examples of Esaar in the Prophet’s (s.a.w.) life: 1. Once, a man came to the Prophet (s.a.w.) and he had nothing to eat. Prophet (s.a.w.) did not find anything in his house to feed him. He said to his companions whoever will make him his guest; Allah (s.w.t.) shall be merciful to him. AbuTalha took him to his house. His wife told him that they have enough food to feed one person. He let his wife extinguish the light and let his guest eat while he and his family remained hungry. In the morning, when he met the Prophet (s.a.w.), he was told that Allah (s.w.t.) was very pleased with him.The above ayah was revealed at that occasion. 1. Esaar or sacrifice

15. Another incidence of sacrifice 2-At another instance, during a battle, it so happened that there were three Muslim soldiers who were thirsty and were desperate to get water.When a person arrived with some water for one soldier, he heard the call from his brother who needed water.This soldier told the person with water to take it to his brother.The same thing happened to the second soldier. When the water reached the third soldier, he had already passed away. The person with water rushed back to the second and then to the first soldier, but all of them had passed away.

16. 2. Adal or Justice Allah commands justice, the doing of good. Nahal 16:90. Implications of this justice  We must keep a balance in fulfilling the rights of people.  We should fulfill all social, legal, personal rights of individuals without any hesitation or delay.  If one decides that another should pay for their wrongdoing, then it should be only equal to the wrong done and not more.  The Prophet has further explained this justice in our attitude towards others. He said in one long Hadith that we should say, in accordance with justice, whether we are pleased with someone or we are angry.

17. 3. Ihsan Nor can Goodness and Evil be equal. Repel (Evil) with what is better: Ha-Mim 34:41. It means that we should deal with others with extraordinary generosity, courtesy, forgiveness, regard and giving . If justice is the foundation of good relations, then Ihsan brings beauty and sweetness in these relations. The Prophet (s.a.w.) taught us this attitude of Ihsan in the following Hadith: “I should meet one who wants to cut relations with me. I should give to one who wants to deprive me of my rights. I should forgive one who wants to do injustice to me.”

18. 4. Rahma or kindness Now hath come unto you an apostle from amongst yourselves: it grieves him that ye should perish: ardently anxious is he over you: to the believers is he most kind and merciful.Tauba 9:127.

19. Ahadith on this subject 1.A believer is the embodiment of love. One who does not love others and is not loved by others has no goodness in him. 2-Whoever is deprived of kindness is deprived of all good. (Reported by Jareer in Muslim and Mishkat). 3-Whoever is given a part of kindness is given part of goodness of this world and the hereafter. (Reported by Aisha (r.a.a) in Sharah Al Sunnah).

20. More Ahadith on this subject 1.Once, Prophet (s.a.w.) pointed out three types of people who will enter Jannah. One of them was the person who is very kind to all his relatives and Muslims. (Muslim). 2.Kindness is not removed except from unfortunate people. (Reported by Abu Hurairah in Ahmad,Tirmizi, Mishkat). 3.Those who show kindness to others, Rahman is Kind to them. Be kind to the ones on earth so that one in the Heaven shall be kind to you. (Reported by Abdullah Ibn Omar inTirmizi and Abu Dawood).

21. 5. Afuw or Forgiveness Those who spend (freely) whether in prosperity or in adversity; who restrain anger and pardon (all) men; for Allah loves those who do good. Ale Imran 3:134. Let them forgive and overlook: do you not wish that Allah should forgive you? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving Most Merciful. Noor 24:22.

22. Ahadith on the subject  Indeed the rage deteriorates Iman as Quinine alters the (taste of) honey. (Baihiqi and Mishkat).  Allah (s.w.t.) loves the most when his servant swallows (controls) his rage for His pleasure. (Reported by Hasan Ibn Omar, Ahmad, Mishkat).  Abu Hurairah reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) told us that once Musa (p.b.u.h.) asked Allah (s.w.t.), “Who is most beloved to him amongst his servants?” He replied, “One who forgives even though he was able to take revenge.” (Baihiqi).

23. More Ahadith on the subject  Jabir reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When a brother presents his genuine excuse to his Muslim brother and the latter did not accept it, his sin is equal to the person who collects illegitimate taxes.” (Baihiqi).  Sahl Ibn Mu’az reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” Whoever controlled his temper when he was able to express it, Allah (s.w.t.) shall call him before all his creation on the Day of Judgment and shall allow him to select any Hoor he likes.” (Tirmizi and Abu Dawood.)

24. 6-Mutual-Trust  Two aspects of this trust  1. A trusting person should share his secrets with his brother with no doubt these secrets will never be shared with others without his permission. If a person does not tell his brother about his business matters, his children or about his activities, then it indicates that he does not trust his brother. Then his brother cannot develop a place for him in his heart.  2. A person who is trusted and is told some secrets has great responsibility not to share those with any one else. This is a very sensitive matter and any violation of this principle can cause irreparable damage to the mutual relationships.

25. 7- Realize value of brotherhood  Everyone should realize how valuable mutual brotherly relations are in an Islamic jama’ah.  Whenever such relations are damaged, those affected must be eager to repair these relations as soon as possible. One must not wait for others to come forward to develop such relations.  There should be desire and effort to take positive steps and even make personal sacrifices to strengthen brotherly relations.  One must realize that when brotherly relations are damaged, the atmosphere of trust and peace of mind is gone. Then they can not achieve any progress but also everyone is in a state of chaos and disharmony.

26. Qualities which promote pleasant relations 1- Protecting honor 2-Material Assistance 3- Sharing sadness and joy 4- Visiting frequently 5- Muhasiba 6- Visiting sick 7- Expressing Love 8- Greeting with smile 9- Greeting with salaam 10- Hand- shaking and hugs 11- Call by favorite name 12- Interest in matters of concern 13- Exchange of gifts 14-Thankful for favors 15-Share meals 16-Respond to greetings in pleasant manner 17- Resolve differences promptly 18-Dua for each other

27. 1. Protecting a brother’s honor  • Jabir (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When a Muslim withdraws from helping another Muslim at a place where he was being insulted and his honor was being violated, then Allah (s.w.t.) withholds His help to him at a place where he wished he received help. When a Muslim stands up to help a Muslim at a place where he is being insulted and his honor is being violated, then Allah (s.w.t.) helps him at a place where he wished to get help.” Mishkat.

28. Protecting a brother’s honor  • Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When a Muslim stops someone from violating his brother’s honor, then it becomes his right that Allah (s.w.t.) should protect him form the fire of Hell.” Then he recited this Ayah, “It is obligatory upon us to help Muslims.” Mishkat.  • Anas (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When Ghiba (backbiting) of a brother is done in front of a Muslim and he is able to help him (by stopping it) and he helps him, Allah shall help him in this world and the hereafter. But if he was able to help him and he did not do it, then Allah (s.w.t.) shall catch him in this world and the hereafter.” Mishkat.  • “Whoever protected a believer from a hypocrite, Allah (s.w.t.) shall appoint an angel on the day of judgment who shall save his meat from hell fire.” Mishkat.

29. 2. Material assistance  • Abu Hurairah reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Allah (s.w.t.) is helping his servant as long as he is helping his brother.” Muslim, Tirmizi.  Abu Hurairah reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Whoever removes a trouble of this world from his brother, Allah shall remove his trouble on the day of judgment. Whoever brings ease to someone facing difficulty in this world, Allah shall bring ease to him on the Day of Judgment. Whoever covers believer (sin) in this world, Allah shall cover his sins on the day of judgment.” Muslim.  Abdullah Ibn Omar (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” A Muslim is a brother of another Muslim. He must not do injustice to him. He must not withhold his assistance to him or leave him insecure. Whoever fulfills his brother’s need, Allah shall fulfill his need. Whoever removes some Muslim’s suffering, Allah shall remove his hardship on the Day of Judgment.” Bukhari, Mishkat.

30. Material assistance  Ibn Abbas (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “He is not a believer who eats to full stomach and his neighbor sleeps hungry.” Mishkat.  Abu Hurairah reported that a person came to the Prophet (s.a.w.) and complained that he was hard- hearted. Prophet (s.a.w.) told him, “Place your hand (of kindness) upon an orphan’s head and feed the poor.” Mishkat.  Anas (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Whoever attends to a caller for help, Allah writes forgiveness seventy three times. One-time forgiveness is enough for reforming all his matters. The other seventy two times forgiveness shall bring higher grades (in Jannah).” Mishkat.

31. Material assistance  Abdullah Ibn Omar (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Most beloved to Allah is the person who provides more benefit to the people. The most beloved deed in the sight of Allah is to please a Muslim by removing his suffering, paying his loan or satisfying his hunger. It is dearer to me to walk with a brother to fulfill his need than to sit in this Masjid for one month in Itekaf. Whoever controls his temper when he was able to express it, Allah shall fill his heart with His pleasure. Whoever walked to fulfill his brother’s need then Allah shall grant strength to his feet on the Day of Judgment when people’s feet will be stumbling.”

32. 3-Sharing sadness and joy  Noman Ibn Bashir (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “You will find believers in their mutual love as a human body. When one part is sick, the whole body shares it with fever and being awake at night.” Bukhari and Muslim.  Abu Musa (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “A Muslim for another Muslim is like a building. One brick provides strength to the other.” Then he explained this further by putting fingers of one hand into the other hand’s fingers. Bukhari.

33. Two advantages of sharing feelings  1. Sincere feelings for others, when expressed on proper occasions in a timely manner, remain ever fresh in one’s heart and are intensified. However, if these feelings are not expressed, they deteriorate and negative feelings take over.  2. When such feelings are heard by a brother, then similar feelings are developed in his heart. If he already has such feelings then these are strengthened.

34.  Abu Zar (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Do you know that when a Muslim gets out of his house to see and meet his brother, seventy thousand angels make dua for him. O’ Our Rabb! He is joining (his brother) for your sake, you join him.” Then he said, “If you can do this with your body, you must do it.” Mishkat.  Abu Hurairah reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “A person traveled to meet his brother in another town. Allah (s.w.t.) sent an angel who met him on his way. The angel asked him, ‘Where are you going?’ He answered, ‘I am going to this town to see my brother.’ The angel asked him,’ Do you have any right upon him which you are going to collect?’ He said, ‘No, I am going there because I love him for the sake of Allah.’ The angel said, ‘Allah sent me to you with this good news that he loves you just like you love him for His sake.’ 4. Visiting frequently

35. Hadith on visiting  Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “In Jannah, there are diamond pillars supporting high rise apartments built of precious stones. Their doors are shiny like stars.” Companions asked, “O’ Prophet of Allah! Who are the ones who shall dwell in there?” He replied, “Those who love each other, sit together and meet for the sake of Allah.”

36. 5. Muhasiba and sincere advice  Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Each one of you is a mirror for his brother. So, if he sees some shortcoming in him, he should remove it.” Tirmizi, Mishkat.  “A believer is a mirror for another believer. He protects his right in his absence.” Mishkat.

37. 6. Visiting in sickness  • In one Hadith, the Prophet mentioned six rights of a Muslim brother upon us. One of these includes visiting him in his sickness.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) said that on the Day of Judgment, Allah (s.w.t.) shall ask individuals about our brothers in these words, “O’ Son of Adam! I was sick and you did not come to visit me.” He will answer, “O’ My Rabb! You are the Lord of the universe, how could I come and visit you?” Allah (s.w.t.) shall answer, “Did not you know that my servant was sick and you did not visit him. If you would have visited him, you would have found me there.”

38. Visiting in sickness or disease  The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When a Muslim visits his sick brother, till his return journey he is picking the fruits of Jannah.” Ahmad, Tirmizi.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” When a Muslim visits a sick Muslim in the morning, seventy thousand angels pray for him till the evening and if he visits him in the evening, seventy thousand angels pray for him till the morning. There are gardens of fruits for him in the Jannah.” Tirmizi, Abu Dawood.

39. Visiting in sickness or disease  • Jabir (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Whoever visits a sick person, he enters the river of mercy (of Allah). When he sits with him, he dives in the mercy.” Ahmad and Malik.  • Abu Amama (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “The proper way of visiting of a sick person is to put your hand on his hand or his forehead and ask how he is doing.” Tirmizi.  • Abu Saeed reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When you visit a sick person, encourage him. It cannot stop the decision of Allah (s.w.t.) but pleases his heart.”

40. 7. Expressing sincere love  • Miqdam Ibn Saad (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When someone loves his brother, he should let him know that he loves him.” Abu Dawood and Tirmizi.  • A person walked before the Prophet (s.a.w.). One person sitting with the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “I love this man for the sake of Allah (s.w.t.).” Prophet (s.a.w.) asked him, “Did you inform him (about that)?” He said, “No.” The Prophet (s.a.w.) told him to go and let him know. He went and informed that person (about his love for him.) That person replied, “May He (Allah) love you for whose sake you love me.” Baihiqi, Tirmizi, Mishkat.

41. 8. Greeting with love, happiness and smiles  • “Do not consider any righteous deed a minor one even though it may be meeting your brother with smiling face.” Muslim.  • “Meeting your brother with a smiling face is an act of charity.”  • Aisha (r.a.a.) reports when Zaid Ibn Haritha (r.a.a.) came to Medina and knocked on the door to meet the Prophet (s.a.w.), the Prophet (s.a.w.) came out dragging his covering sheet. By Allah! I did not see him like this before or afterwards. He embraced Zaid with love and kissed him.  • When Jafar Ibn Abu Talib came from Abyssinia, the Prophet (s.a.w.) hugged him and kissed him in between his eyes.

42. 9. Greeting with Salaam  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “You cannot enter Jannah till you believe. You cannot be true believers till you love each other. Should not I tell you something which shall help you to develop mutual love? You should say Salaam often among yourself.” Mishkat.  • Once the Prophet (s.a.w.) told spoke about six rights of a Muslim upon another Muslim. One of these rights he mentioned was to say Salaam to a brother whenever he meets one. Mishkat.

43. Greeting with Salaam  Abu Amama (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “That person is closer to the mercy of Allah who is first in saying Salaam.” Mishkat.  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Whenever one of you meets his brother, he should say Salaam. Then if they are separated by a tree or a wall, and meet again, then he should say Salaam.”  • Anas (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) told him, “O’ My son! When you enter the house, say Salaam. This shall bring blessings for you and your household.” Mishkat, Tirmizi.

44. 10. Handshaking and hugging  • Abu Azib (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When two Muslims meet and shake hands, Allah (s.w.t.) forgives their sins before they separate.” In another report it is said that when they shake hands, praise Allah (s.w.t.) and seek His forgiveness, they are forgiven. Abu Dawood.  • Abu Amama reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Your mutual Salaam (and greeting) is perfected with handshaking.” Ahmad, Tirmizi.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) encouraged hand shaking and said that it removes ill will.

45. 11. Calling by his favorite name  It is the natural desire of every human being that he should be called in a dignified way.  If he is called with love, he will feel closeness and sincerity and he will be pleased in his heart.  It is quite inappropriate to call someone with a name he dislikes.  Omar (r.a.a.) once said, “You must call your brother with his favorite name. This will strengthen the relationship.”

46. 12. Interest in matters of personal concern  When we have sincere brotherly relations, we must show interest in matters of personal concern to our brothers.  Their concerns should be as important as or more important to us than our own.  When we meet our brother, we should ask about him, his business and his family. This way, he is assured of our good will and sincere concern for his matters and this will strengthen our relationship.  For this purpose, we should have a detailed mutual introduction.  Yazid Ibn Mua’via (r.a.a) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When an individual starts a brotherly relation, he should ask his name, his father’s name and about his family. This (information) strengthens the foundations of mutual love.” Mishkat, Tirmizi.

47. 13. Exchanging Gifts  Exchanging gifts is an effective way of strengthening mutual brotherly relations.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) used to give gifts and encouraged us to give and receive gifts.  He (SAW) said, “You should give gifts to each other as this will develop love in your hearts and will remove ill will.”

48. Etiquettes of Gift Exchange  • Gift should be given in accordance to one’s financial ability. It is not the value of the gift which brings hearts together. It is the sincerity and the love behind that gift which binds the heart in a lasting relationship.  • When a gift is given, it should be accepted with an expression of thankfulness, with pleasure and a smile. This encourages the one who gave gift and indicates that his expression of love is deeply appreciated.  • One should try to reciprocate and give a gift back to the giver. The gift does not have to be of the same value. The gift should be according to one’s ability.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) used to reciprocate gift giving. One time he gave a gift back to someone and that person refused. The Prophet (s.a.w.) expressed his displeasure at this gesture.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) preferred the gift of perfume , but one can give any gift.

49. 14. Expressing thankfulness  One must express thankfulness to his brother for his love and for any favors his brother has done for him.  When one is thankful to his brother and expresses deep appreciation of his love for him, it enhances and strengthens this relationship.  However, if there is no appreciation expressed, then the feelings of love could gradually diminish and eventually die.  Companions reported that whenever someone presented a gift to the Prophet (s.a.w.), he used to accept it with thanks. Whenever someone helped him he would express his thankfulness to him. (Shim ail Tirmizi).

50. 15. Sharing meals  • When an invitation is given for meals, it should be accepted with thankfulness and pleasure unless there is a genuine excuse.  • An invitation to meals should be reciprocated.  • An invitation to meals does not mean a lavish party and expensive food. One must prepare the food in accordance with one’s financial ability.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) said that one person’s meal is good for two. Allah (s.w.t.) sends blessings to the food that is shared with others.

51. 16. Responding to greetings in a pleasant way  One should make an efforts to respond to his brother’s sincerity and brotherly love with more sincere love.  Therefore, when he gives us salaam we should return a better salaam, when he gives us a gift, we should give him a better gift and when he calls us we should respond in a better way.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When two brothers love each other, the one who loves more is better.”

52. 17. Listening to complaints and resolving differences promptly  • One should make every effort to ensure that his attitude is not cause for complaint.  • One should deal with his brothers with generosity in forgiveness.  • If a complaint is lodged , It must be clarified as soon as possible.  • When complained, one should not be angry or upset.  One should be thankful to the brother who told him about the complaint to his face and did not mention it behind his back.  • One should address it promptly. If this matter is delayed, then the complaint could be magnified.

53. Resolving differences promptly  If one has made a mistake, one should accept it, repent and apologize.  If there is a genuine excuse then one must present that.  If it is a misunderstanding, then he must offer an explanation to clarify it.  • When there is an apology, it should be accepted with open heart.  Similarly, if there is a genuine excuse or clarification, it should be accepted.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “If a Muslim brother presented his excuse to his brother and he did not accept his excuse, then he will have sin upon him equal to the person who commits the injustice of collecting excess taxes.’

54. Ahadith on the subject:  • Abu Ayub Ansari (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “It is not permissible for a Muslim to abandon his brother (in anger) more than three nights in a way that one’s face is on one side and the other’s is on the other side. The one who says salaam first is better than the other.” Bukhari and Muslim.  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “People’s deeds are presented (to Allah) two times in a week, i.e., on Mondays and Thursdays. Every Muslim is forgiven except the individual who has some anger against his brother. It is said leave their matter as such till they make up.” Mishkat.

55. Ahadith on the subject:  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “It is not permissible for a Muslim to abandon his brother for more than three days. If someone abandons him for more than three days and he dies, he will enter Hellfire.”  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “If someone abandoned his brother for a year (his sin is) just like he killed him.” Mishkat.

56. Ahadith on the subject:  • Anas (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “One who abandons the dispute even if he is right, a house is built for him in the middle of Jannah. One who adopted high moral ground, a house shall be built for him on the heights of Jannah.” Tirmizi, Mishkat.  • Abu Darda (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Resolve the disputes. Damaging the relations amongst the people is like shaving (destroying) the Deen.” Tirmizi, Abu Dawood.  • Umme Kalsoom (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “One who says good things and reports good news to bring peace between people is not a liar.” Muslim, Mishkat.

57. 18. Dua or praying for each other  • When we meet our brother and say salaam, this is a form of dua.  • We make dua for our brother at different occasions. When he sneezes we say ‘May Allah (s.w.t.) send Mercy upon you.’ When he is sick and we visit him, we make dua for his health. When we attend his there is funeral, we make dua for him.  • Dua can be made in our brother’s absence. It can be done individually and collectively. When our brother finds out that we remembered him in our dua, it creates more love and respect for us in his heart.

58. Dua for each other  We can make dua in his presence with and without his request. When we ask Allah (s.w.t.) Mercy and Forgiveness for our brother or ask for His Help for him, it develops so much closeness and love in our brother’s heart.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When you visit your sick brother, ask him to make dua for you since his dua is more acceptable to Allah (s.w.t.).” When Omar (r.a.a.) was going for Hajj, the Prophet (s.a.w.) asked him for dua and said this was dear to him in his life. He said, “O’ Our brother! Remember us in your duas.”

59. Actions which damage mutual relationships 1-Violating rights 2- Threat to life 3- Insults 4- Ghiba 5- Namima 6- Humiliation 7- Prying 8- Ridiculing 9- Ijab or looking down 10- Suspician 11- Buh’tan or false allegation 12- Causing harm 13-Causing grief 14- Deception or fraud 15- Hasad or jealousy

60. 1. Violating basic rights  There are two types of rights belonging to human beings; A-Rights to valuable things like peace, security, property, honor, life and liberty. B-Rights upon other individuals, e.g., parents, children, spouses, relatives, neighbors etc.  These rights have been well defined in the Sharia.

61. Ahadith about the rights of others  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Allah has forbidden Jannah for a person who swears to and then deprives a Muslim of his right.” Companions asked, “Does that apply to a minor thing?” He answered, “Yes. It applies even when he is deprived of the useless branch of a tree.”  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) once asked his companions, “Do you know who is a poor person?” Companions answered, “A poor person amongst us is one who possesses no money or any thing of value.” He said, “A poor person in my Ummah is one who shall come on the Day of Judgment with treasure of Salaat, Fasting and Zakat. He may have called names to someone, placed false allegations on someone, took someone’s money illegally, killed someone unjustly or hit someone wrongfully. Then his good deeds shall be given away (as a compensation) to those people. If his good deeds are exhausted before everyone gets his compensation, then their sins shall be placed in his account. Then he shall be thrown in the Hellfire.”

62. 2. Threat to someone’s life If a man kills a believer intentionally his recompense is Hell to abide therein (for ever): and the wrath and the curse of Allah are upon him and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him. Nisa 4:93. At the occasion of last Hajj, the Prophet (s.a.w.) warned Muslims in his last Khutbah with these words, “Beware! After I pass away, do not turn to Kufr and start killing each other.”

63. 3. Using insulting language and name-calling Nor defame nor be sarcastic to each other nor call each other by (offensive) nicknames: Ill-seeming is a name connoting wickedness (to be used of one) after he has believed: And those who do not desist are (Indeed) doing wrong. Hujurat 49:11.

64. Ahadith  • Ibn Masood (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” To call names to a Muslim is sinful and to fight with him is Kufr.” Mishkat.  Prophet (s.a.w.) gave the following advice to Mu’az Ibn Jabal. One of these included, “Hold your tongue.” He asked, “O’ Prophet of Allah! Shall we be asked about whatever words we utter?” He responded, “May your mother grieve over you O’ Mu’az! What else shall be the cause for people to fall in the Hellfire on their faces except the talks of the tongues?” Tirmizi.

65. Ahadith  • Sufyan Ibn Abdullah asked the Prophet (s.a.w.) that what he should be most afraid about. The Prophet (s.a.w.) responded by holding his tongue, saying, “Be fearful of this.”  • Harith Ibn Wahib (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “No one with evil character and a habit of harsh-talking harsh shall enter the Jannah.” Abu Dawood and Baihiqi.  • Jabir (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Those who talk too much, throw insults, showing false superiority over others and make false claims of knowledge shall be most disliked by me and shall be far away from me on the Day of Judgment.” Tirmizi and Ibn Maja.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “A believer never sends taunts or curses upon others. He never uses foul language or insulting language.”

66. 4. Ghiba or Backbiting Nor speak ill of each other behind their backs. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Nay ye would abhor it...but fear Allah: for Allah is Oft-Returning Most Merciful. Hujurat 49: 12.

67. Hadith on Ghiba Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) once asked his companions, “Do you know what Ghiba is?” They replied, “Allah and His Rasool know the best.” He said,” Ghiba is that you speak about your brother the way he dislikes. If you mention faults which are actually present in him, then it is Ghiba. If these faults are not present in him then you made false allegations.” Muslim.

68. 5. Namima or Gossiping Neither obey thou each feeble oath monger, Detractor, spreader abroad of slanders, Hinderer of the good, transgressor, malefactor Greedy therewithal, intrusive. Qalam 68:10-13.

69. Ahadith on Namimah  Huzaifa Ibn Yaman (r.a.a) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “A spreader of slander shall not enter the Jannah.”  Abdullah Ibn Masood reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) advised his companions,” No one of you should report to me any thing negative. I like to come to you in a state that my heart is clean for you.” Abu Dawood.

70. 6. Reminding mistakes in front of others to humiliate him Neither defame one another. Hujurat.49: 11 The Prophet (s.a.w.) said that if someone defames someone by mentioning his mistakes, then he shall not die till he commits it himself. (Tirmizi). Abdullah Ibn Omar (r.a.a.) reported that once the Prophet (s.a.w.) mentioned a Muslim’s rights. One of these rights was that a brother not humiliates him by mentioning his mistake or calamity. (Tirmizi & Mishkat).

71. 7. Tajussus or prying in someone’s private matters Do not pry. Hujurat 49:12 • If you pry in your brother’s matters and he finds out, he will have a negative opinion about you in his heart. • Abdullah Ibn Omar (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Do not look into their (Muslim’s) private matters. Whoever attempts to look into his brother’s private matters, Allah (s.w.t.) then is determined to publicize his private matters. When Allah (s.w.t.) is determined to do that, He humiliates that person even if he is hiding in his home.” Tirmizi, Mishkat.

72. 8. Tamaskhar or ridiculing O ye who believe! Let not some men among you laugh at others: it may be that the (latter) are better than the (former): Nor let some women laugh at others: it may be that the (latter) are better than the (former) Hujurat 49: 11. One form of ridicule is impersonating. One time, Aisha (r.a.a.) impersonated someone. The Prophet (s.a.w.) disliked it and said,” I would not do that even if I am given so much (material wealth).” Mishkat.

73. Hadith about ridiculing others  Prophet Mohammad (s.a.w.) is reported to have said the following regarding a person who ridicules others.  “A door of Jannah shall be opened for those who ridiculed others. One of those shall be asked to come and enter this door. He shall proceed in grief to the door. As soon as he shall come closer to the door, it shall be closed.  Then another door shall be opened and he shall be asked to enter this door. He shall again proceed in his grief to it. As soon as he shall come close to it, it shall be closed upon him.  This act shall be continued. Finally, when the door shall be opened for anyone and asked to come in, he shall not dare to go in because of his despair.” Baihiqi.

74. 9. Looking down upon our brother  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” To consider a person undesirable, is evidence enough that he looks down at his brother.” Mishkat.  • In another Hadith, he enumerated the rights of a Muslim upon another Muslim and he included these, “He must not humiliate him and he must not look down upon him.”  • Abdullah Ibn Masood (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “A person with a small amount of Kibr shall not enter Jannah.” He was asked “What is Kibr?” He replied, “To reject the truth and look down upon people.” Muslim, Mishkat.

75. Hadith on looking down with ijab  • Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that once the Prophet (s.a.w.) was telling him about three things which bring salvation and three things which bring disaster. Then the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “The worst thing which destroys a person is his ‘Ijab’ (or thinking that he is better than others).”

76. 10. Sinful Suspicion O ye who believe! Avoid suspicion as much (as possible): for suspicion in some cases is a sin. Hujurat 49:12. Abu Hurairah (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said,” You must avoid sinful suspicion since this is the worst lie.” Bukhari, Muslim.

77. How to avoid and correct sinful suspicion?  • One should never think or say anything evil about his brother’s intention.  • We should not provide any opportunity to others for being suspicious.  There is a clear example in the Prophet’s (s.a.w.) life. He was sitting in the Masjid for Itekaf (or seclusion). One of his wives came to see him. He left the Masjid to see her off. He met two Ansar companions on his way. He called them and told them that this was his wife. They said we could not imagine having any suspicion about you. The Prophet (s.a.w.) responded that Satan is circulating in the human body like blood. (So, it was necessary for him to remove all opportunity for suspicion.)

78. 11. Buhtan or False Allegation But if anyone earns a fault or a sin and throws it on to one that is innocent He carries (on himself) (both) a falsehood and a flagrant sin. Nisa 4:112. And those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly bear (on themselves) a calumny and a glaring sin. Ahzab 33:58.

79. 12. Causing harm  One should do no harm to his brother. Any act or statement which hurts his brother should be avoided.  This harm could cause mental anguish or physical harm to the body or to property.  The Prophet (s.a.w.) warned us all in the following words against this evil act.  • Abu Bakr Siddiq (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Cursed is that person who hurts a Muslim or deceives him.” Mishkat.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) also said, “Whoever hurts a Muslim, Allah (s.w.t.) shall hurt him and whoever causes suffering to a Muslim, Allah (s.w.t.) shall bring suffering to him.” Ibn Maja and Tirmizi.

80. 13. Causing sadness and grief  • Abdullah Ibn Masood (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “When there are three people together, then two of them should not talk secretly till they are with several people.” The reason behind this principle is to avoid causing grief in the heart of the third person present. Muslim, Mishkat.  • Anas Ibn Malik (r.a.a.) reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Whoever caused grief to a Muslim, he caused grief to Allah (s.w.t.).” Tibrani.

81. More ahadith on causing grief  • Anas Ibn Malik reported that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “If someone fulfils a brother’s need to please him, he indeed pleased me. Whoever pleased me, he pleased Allah (s.w.t.). Whoever pleased Allah (s.w.t.), he shall enter him in Jannah.” Baihiqi, Mishkat.  • The Prophet (s.a.w.) was traveling with his companions. When the caravan stopped at a place, one person took someone else’s rope (to annoy him). When The Prophet (s.a.w.) heard about this he said, “It is not justified for a Muslim to annoy another Muslim even as a joke.” Abu Dawood.  • One time, a companion hid his brother’s weapon for fun. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “It is forbidden to cause panic to a Muslim by hiding or taking his property even as a joke.”

82. 14. Deception or Fraud  Muslims are forbidden to deceive their brothers in conversations, both in personal and in business dealings.  They are not to give false information, lie or mislead them.  When a person is found committing such acts, there cannot be any mutual trust left in these relationships.  When there is no trust, there cannot be any mutual love.  Sufyan Ibn Asad (r.a.a.) reports that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “The greatest dishonest act is this that you tell your brother a lie but he believes it to be the truth.” Mishkat.

83. 16. Hasad or Jealousy  Hasad is an evil ailment of the heart which not only destroys the mutual relationships but also leads to the loss of good deeds.  It includes disliking of something good in another person, and the desire that good be removed from him and given to the jealous person.  Reasons for Hasad include personal sense of superiority, pride, vendetta, desire to dominate others, personal failures or just desire for power and status.