18.06.2018

FC Basel are a historic club, a powerhouse of Swiss football. They have won the Swiss Super League 20 times and also boast 12 Swiss Cups and 1 Swiss League Cup in their trophy cabinet. They celebrated the league title for seven consecutive seasons (since 2009-10) and are permanent representatives of Switzerland in European competitions since 1999, having also made it six times to the UEFA Champions League group stage.

PAOK will travel to Switzerland for the third time. In 1978-79, they faced Servette FC for the Cup Winners’ Cup and, despite winning 2-0 in Toumba Stadium, they lost 4-0 in the second leg and got eliminated. In 2002-03, they were paired with Grasshopper CZ. PAOK won 2-1 in Thessaloniki and edged out a 1-1 away draw with a buzzer beater by Dimitris Markos.

Last season’s trajectory

After seven years at the top, FC Basel surrendered their title. The RotBlau finished second, behind BSC Young Boys who were crowned champions after a 32-year dry spell. PAOK’s opponents collected 69 points, trailing the champions by 15 points, but boasted the best defence in the league with 41 goals conceded.

In the Swiss Cup, they made it all the way to the semi-finals, but didn’t get to defend their title, getting eliminated by BSC Young Boys.

Their European adventure last season was highly successful. FC Basel participated in the UEFA Champions League group stage and managed to finish second in their group behind Manchester United FC and ahead SL Benfica and PFC CSKA Moscow, playing brilliant football in the process.

In the last 16 stage, they were drawn against Manchester City FC. The Citizens proved too strong a rival and finished off qualification in the St.Jakob-Park leg, prevailing 4-0. The Swiss side won 2-1 in Etihad Stadium and saved face, despite getting eliminated.

Head coach

Raphaël Wicky. FC Basel’s head coach is the veteran Swiss midfielder, who enjoyed a brilliant career at FC Sion, SV Werder Bremen, Club Atlético de Madrid, Hamburger SV, Chivas Guadalajara and earned 75 caps for the Switzerland national team.

He learned his training trade at the academies of FC Thun and Servette FC and signed for FC Basel in 2013. He first took over the U18s and coached the U21s in the UEFA Youth League. He took the reins of the senior team last summer.

The coaching staff of the team includes legendary players of the club, such as Alexander Frei, Matías Emilio Delgado, Marco Walker and Marco Streller.

Star player

FC Basel’s main characteristic as a team is their flawless collective work. Their team spirit is uncanny, each player putting their ego aside, sacrificing themselves for their team-mates.

Mohamed Elyounoussi however managed to stand out last season. Cousin of former Olympiakos player Tarik, Mohamed was a joy to watch. In 44 encounters, he scored 13 goals and set up 17 more, distinguishing himself as top creative force of the team and one of their top scorers.

Squad and transfer moves

The Swiss club boast a top-quality, full roster. In defence, several names stand out: centre-backs Marek Suchý and Éder Balanta, along with left full-back Raoul Petretta and Swiss right full-back Michael Lang, the only player of FC Basel currently participating in the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Taulant Xhaka, Luca Zuffi , Kevin Bua and Serey Dié dominate midfield. Upfront, apart from Elyounoussi, Ricky van Wolfswinkel and Albian Ajeti also enjoyed an excellent 2017-18 season, along with Dimitri Oberlin who played on loan from FC Red Bull Salzburg and signed a permanent deal a few days ago.

On the transfer front, things are rather quiet so far. Apart from the deal reached about Oberlin, FC Basel have also announced the signing of Jonas Omlin from FC Luzern and Kostas Dimitriou from PAOK U20s.

Home ground

St. Jakob-Park

It’s the biggest football ground of Switzerland, with a capacity of 38,512 seats. Construction (on the site of the former St.Jakob Stadium) was completed in 1999 and the re-opening game took place in March 2001. The venue hosted the 2016 final of the UEFA Europa League, Sevilla FC beating Liverpool FC 3-1 to claim the trophy.

Summer schedule

PAOK opponents kick off their official fixtures on 21 July, hosting FC St. Gallen for the opening day of the Swiss Super League, three days ahead of the 1st leg of the UEFA Champions League 2nd qualifying round.

FC Basel start their friendly encounters on 22 June. In the next thirty days, they are scheduled to face Rapperswil-Jona, TSV 1860 München, FC Wacker Innsbruck, FC Illertissen, Wolves, FC Aarau and Feyenoord.