La Decima was a long cherished dream for Madrista’s and they did achieve it by winning the UEFA Champions League in style last season. After the victory a lot of the key players left and new players came in and it was expected that there will be a slump in the form to begin with, there were few hiccups in La Liga but they have been seamlessly winning in Europe. FC Basel on the other hand reigns supreme in their homeland by winning five back to back Swiss Super League titles however have only once qualified for Quarter Finals Stage in 2011-12 and other time gone through the second round in 2002-03. Will they progress to the next round on Liverpool’s expense? We will wait and see.

Real Madrid

Ten times Champions League Winner has gone all guns blazing in this year Champions League campaign. They have a hundred percent record and sit at the summit of their group and in all likelihood will qualify as the group winner in the next round. While Ronaldo is single handedly outscoring a lot of teams in Europe, his nemesis Lio Messi broke Rauls record for the maximum goal scored in Champions League by scoring a hat trick against APOEL last night. Ronaldo would like to score a couple of goals too to keep up pace with the gifted Argentine.

Possible Team Lineup

With Pepe not traveling with the team, there is likely to be some match time for talented Frenchmen Varane. Midfield is likely to remain unchanged and so does the two upfront with Ronaldo and Benzema to score goals.

Casillas; Carvajal, Sergio Ramos, Varane, Marcelo; Kroos, Isco, James; Bale, Ronaldo, Benzema.

Return from Injury: Illarramendi (was out with a groin injury, is expected to play some role in the course of the match)

Injured: Modrić (thigh), Jesé (knee),

FC Basel

Basel would like to erase the memories of opening night of this campaign, while they got hammered at the Bernabeu. Back at their home surroundings, Coach Paulo Sousa expects his team to put a fight against the defending champion. They head into the match with a five match unbeaten streak and surely have a uncanny knack of pulling upsets over the elite clubs from Europe, as seen last season with a double over Chelsea and a 1-0 defeat over Liverpool already under their belt from this season. The team will however will be without Bulgarian defender Ivanov and Swiss striker Streller, but even with the absentees it is unlikely that a veteran like Carlo Ancelotti will take the Swiss Champions lightly in this fixture.

Possible Team Lineup

Vaclík, Schär, Suchý, Safari, Xhaka/Degen, Frei, Elneny, Gashi; Gonzalez, Zuffi, Embolo.

Injured: Ivanov (knee), Streller (back)

Verdict

It is highly likely that Real Madrid will win the match against FC Basel with a couple of goals margin and Ronaldo (predictably) on the score sheet and also win the group in the process. However with a brewing crisis at Liverpool, we can still expect the Swiss team to make through to the second round on the expense of the side at Anfield.

Image Source: Getty Images