The Marina Bay MRT Station (NS27/CE2) is the southern terminal station of the North South Line in Singapore. This station is located on reclaimed land and there are no developments surrounding it, and hence contrary to what the name implies, there exists a slight distance between the station and the actual town of Marina Bay. The station is used now as a means for locals to travel from other parts of the island here to connect to a bus service that brings them to a recreational area nearby. In the future, this station will serve businessmen & office workers who work in the up and coming New Downtown, an extension of Singapore's Central Business District. This Station will also serve residents who live in the New Downtown, as well as tourists and locals visiting the attractions that are located there.

This station was one of 4 stations which participated in Exercise Northstar V, a mock terrorist exercise held on Jan 8 2006.

This station would be an interchange with the Circle Line in the future,[1] which is part of the rumoured Stage 6 of the Circle Line from Promenade to HarbourFront. It may be thought that the extension will go down via Keppel Road, stopping at Shenton Way after Marina Bay and terminating at Harbour Front.

With the Circle Line extension to Marina Bay, the North-South Line will have 3 interchanges with the Circle Line (Marina Bay, Dhoby Ghaut, Bishan) like the North East Line (HarbourFront, Dhoby Ghaut, Serangoon). Only the East West Line will have 2 interchanges with the Circle Line (Paya Lebar, Buona Vista). This station will join HarbourFront serving as a terminus for 2 lines, in 2012. This will not last long as Marina South Pier MRT Station will open in 2014. However, in the future, this station will serve as a terminus for 3 lines: Circle Line, Eastern Region Line and Thomson Line.

In the future, the North South Line will be extended to Marina South Pier with a new 1-km extension. An extension to Marina Barrage was previously planned but plans for that were shelved.

Contents

1 2009 Train Disruption

2 Future development

3 Train service

4 Current Station Layout

5 Bus services

6 References

2009 Train Disruption

On May 28, 2009, the launch day of the Circle Line, Southbound trains from Dhoby Ghaut were disrupted from 1.20 pm to 1.40 pm during the Lunchtime Xpress when a train broke down and was towed back to this station by another train. 3700 passengers were affected.[2]

Future development

There is a possibility that this station will become an interchange between four lines, namely the North South Line, Circle Line (Marina Bay Extension) and the future Thomson Line and Eastern Region Line, rivalling the current, three-line interchange station, Dhoby Ghaut MRT Station.

Train service

Destination First Train Last Train Mon - Sat Sunday &

Public Holiday Daily North South Line to NS1 Jurong East 6.01am 6.26am 11.46pm to NS7 Kranji - - 12.06am Circle Line to CC29 HarbourFront - - -

Current Station Layout

L1 Street Level B1 NSL Concourse Faregates, Ticketing Machines, Station Control B2

Platforms Platform A North South Line towards NS1 EW24 Jurong East via NS9 Woodlands (→) Island platform, Doors of trains at Platform A will open on the right, doors of trains at Platform B will open on the left Platform B North South Line towards NS1 EW24 Jurong East via NS9 Woodlands (→) B3 CCL Concourse Faregates, Ticketing Machines, Station Control B4

Platforms Platform A Circle Line towards CC29 NE1 HarbourFront (←) Island platform, Doors of trains at Platform A will open on the right, doors of trains at Platform B will open on the left Platform B Circle Line towards CC29 NE1 HarbourFront (←)

Bus services

The following bus services pass by the bus stop along Marina Station Road:

Bus Stop Code: 03311 (Marina Bay Station) Service Destination Note SBS Transit Trunk Services 133 Shenton Way Bus Terminal 133M Shenton Way Bus Terminal 400 Marina Gardens Drive (loop) 402 Marina Coastal Drive SBS Transit Express Service 502 Soon Lee Bus Depot

The following bus services pass by the bus stop along Marina Street:

Bus Stop Code: 03319 (Opposite Marina Bay Station) Service Destination Note SBS Transit Trunk Services 400 Shenton Way Bus Terminal 402 Anson Road (loop)