Marina Bay MRT Station (NS27/CE2/TE20) is an underground Mass Rapid Transit interchange station on the North South Line and Circle Line in Downtown Core, Singapore. The station is designed by Aedas. It was the southern terminus of the North South Line until late November 2014. However, most trains terminate at Marina Bay instead of Marina South Pier possibly due to the low passenger demand at Marina South Pier. Passengers who are going to Marina South Pier should observe the television screens on the station platforms and listen to announcements which will notify commuters when a train that is terminating at Marina South Pier arrives. Circle Line trains that begin from here terminate at Harbourfront MRT station, with a few trains terminating at Stadium during peak hours. However, during off peak hours, usually all trains departing here terminate at Stadium.

Contents

Marina bay mrt station

Toshiba elevator to platform marina bay mrt station nouth south line

History

Construction of Thomson East Coast Line

Station layout

Exits

References

The Circle Line station was awarded the winner of Small Project Award at the World Architecture Festival in 2012.

When the Thomson-East Coast Line part of the station opens in 2021, Marina Bay will be a triple-line interchange station, the third one in Singapore after Dhoby Ghaut and Outram Park. The Thomson East-Coast Line's station will connect to the concourses of NSL and CCLe. The platforms of the line will be at basement 4 (to Sungei Bedok) and basement 5 (to Woodlands North).

History

The station is located on a reclaimed land with no developed infrastructure surrounding it, and hence, contrary to what the name implies, there is in fact a slight distance between the actual town of Marina Bay and the station. This station is usually used for locals to travel from other parts of Singapore and connects passengers to a bus service that brings them to a nearby recreational area. After the opening of Marina South Pier station, most trains still terminate here despite not being the actual terminus for the North South Line. A few other trains do carry on and terminate at the actual terminus, Marina South Pier, possibly due to low demand at Marina South Pier itself. Circle Line trains that begin from here terminate at Harbourfront MRT station, with a few trains terminating at Stadium during peak hours. However, during off peak hours, usually all trains departing here terminate at Stadium.

On 8 January 2006, this station was one of the four stations that participated in Exercise Northstar V.

Since the opening of the Circle Line platforms, this station is the first underground station in the Singapore MRT to have its platform above the concourse level.

On 15 June 2015, train services between Marina Bay and Marina South Pier Stations was disrupted after a train fault at Marina Bay Station.

Construction of Thomson-East Coast Line

Ground freezing will be applied for the first time in Singapore rail construction when building the Thomson-East Coast Line part of this station, where it under-cross the existing North-South Line and Circle Line tunnels.

Station layout

Note: Every fourth southbound train terminates at Marina South Pier, while other southbound trains terminate at this station.

For example:

First train - Terminates at Marina Bay

Second train - Terminates at Marina Bay

Third train - Terminates at Marina Bay

Fourth train - Terminates at Marina South Pier

Exits

A: Bayfront Avenue Taxi Stand

B: 500m walk to Downtown MRT Station