3 Sizes available, 100mm dia, 150mm dia or 200mm, please use the drop-down box to select the size you require.

WIKI FACT: National Benzole was a petroleum brand used in the United Kingdom from 1919 to the 1960s. In 1957 the National Benzole Co. became wholly owned by Shell-Mex & BP (through British Petroleum) but continued its separate trading identity. In the early 1960s, National Benzole was re-branded as National and continued trading as a UK retailer of petroleum products until the early 1990s, when the brand was phased out by parent company BP.

Our stickers are created using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which you can use for both interior and exterior applications.

Description

1 x NATIONAL BENZOLE MIXTURE STICKER

3 Sizes available, 100mm dia, 150mm dia or 200mm, please use the drop-down box to select the size you require.

WIKI FACT: National Benzole, a petroleum brand used in the United Kingdom from 1919 to the 1960s. In 1957 the National Benzole Co. became wholly owned by Shell-Mex & BP (through British Petroleum) but continued its separate trading identity. In the early 1960s, National Benzole was re-branded as National and continued trading as a UK retailer of petroleum products until the early 1990s, when the brand was phased out by parent company BP.

Our stickers are created using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which you can use for both interior and exterior applications.

Application:

When applying stickers the first thing to remember is: Always make sure the surface is clean, smooth and dry. Free from grease, silicone and resin polish, including ceramic coatings for optimum adhesion. Apply with a soft clean cloth, do not rub the sticker. Simply prick with a pin to expel air bubbles.

We have many more stickers for you to see in our shop. Follow us on Instagram and Facebook, where you can keep up to date with any new stickers added, also special offers and sales.

If you have any questions or require more information please email us at sales@decalheads.co.uk

NATIONAL BENZOLE MIXTURE STICKER