3 Sizes available, 100mm dia, 150mm dia or 200mm, please use the drop-down box to select the size you require.

WIKI FACT: National Benzole was a petroleum brand used in the United Kingdom from 1919 to the 1960s. In 1957 the National Benzole Co. became wholly owned by Shell-Mex & BP (through British Petroleum) but continued its separate trading identity. In the early 1960s, National Benzole was re-branded as National and continued trading as a UK retailer of petroleum products until the early 1990s, when the brand was phased out by parent company BP.

Our stickers are created using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which you can use for both interior and exterior applications.

1 x NEIGHBOURHOOD WATCH SECURITY STICKER

Size 100mm diameter. Also available is a window sticker. Which is applied to the inside of a window, so it can be viewed from the outside.

Please use the drop-down box to select the type of sticker you require.

Did You Know: Neighbourhood Watch was started in the UK in 1982. Neighbourhood Watch is about people getting together with their neighbours to take action to reduce crime. They are community initiatives owned and run by their members which are supported by the police to cut crime and reduce the opportunities for crime.

1 x NETHERLANDS FLAG AND MAP STICKER

Size: 70mm wide x 80mm tall.

WIKI FACT: The Netherlands, informally known as Holland has an estimated population of 17,654,000. It’s capital is Amsterdam. Which is located to the north and is often referred to as ‘The Venice Of The North’.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

2 x NETHERLANDS FLAG AND POLE STICKERS (Handed) 1 for each side.

Size: Each sticker – 60mm wide 50mm tall.

WIKI FACT: The Netherlands, informally known as Holland has an estimated population of 17,654,000. It’s capital is Amsterdam. Which is located to the north and is often referred to as ‘The Venice Of The North’.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

2 x NETHERLANDS WAVEY FLAG STICKERS (Handed) 1 for each side.

Size: Each sticker – 60mm wide 40mm tall.

WIKI FACT: The Netherlands, informally known as Holland has an estimated population of 17,654,000. It’s capital is Amsterdam, located in the north and is often referred to as ‘The Venice Of The North’.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

2 x NICKY HAYDEN 69 STICKERS

Size 115mm wide x 65mm tall.

WIKI FACT: Nicholas Patrick Hayden, nicknamed “The Kentucky Kid”, was an American professional motorcycle racer who won the MotoGP World Championship in 2006. This was Hayden’s best year in motorcycle racing as when he won the MotoGP world title it ended Valentino Rossi‘s five-year consecutive streak.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

1 x NO CHEESE OR BAGUETTES LEFT IN THIS VEHICLE OVERNIGHT – Humorous sticker. Sister to the NO PIES LEFT IN THE VEHICLE OVERNIGHT sticker, also available in our shop.

Size 195mm wide x 53mm tall.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

1 x NO COLD CALLERS, SALESPEOPLE OR CANVASSERS STICKER

Size 100mm wide x 100mm tall, contour cut to the triangular shape. This sticker is designed to stop unwanted callers from knocking on your door. Eg election canvassers, religious groups, market researchers etc. You do not have to do business with anyone who knocks on your door, who you have never met before.

All of our stickers are made using high-quality vehicle grade vinyl, which is suitable for both interior and exterior use and will withstand all weather conditions.

2 x Number plate of origin stickers. For the front, the country of origin abbreviation in white and for the rear in yellow.

Size 34mm wide x 104mm tall, Please double check the size if they are to cover an origin sticker already on the number plate.

GB, England, Scotland, Wales & Euro

Please use the drop-down box to select the sticker required.