In Lin Huiyin's life, there are three men who cannot avoid the topic.

One is her husband Liang Sicheng, one is Xu Zhimo, who regards her as a confidant, and the other is Jin Yuelin, who regards her as a goddess.

(Lin Huiyin old photo)

Lin Huiyin first knew Xu Zhimo.

In a cliché, the interaction between the two of them should be "starting from appearance and respecting talent".

Lin Huiyin traveled to Europe with his father Lin Changmin at that time and temporarily lived in London, England.

It was there that Lin Huiyin met Xu Zhimo, a talented man who studied in Kangqiao.

At that time, Lin Huiyin was 16 years old and Xu Zhimo was 24 years old.

Lin Hui, who had just opened his heart, read Xu Zhimo's poems and saw him as personable and elegant, and it was inevitable that he would appreciate him.

Xu Zhimo was surprised that Lin Hui was outstanding at a young age, and his temperament and appearance made him admire him.

As a result, Xu Zhimo became a regular visitor to Lin Huiyin's family.

After Lin Huiyin returned to China, he also mentioned that past in his correspondence with Shen Congwen.

She said that when she was in Britain, her father often had to go out to meetings, and she lived alone in a big house, ate alone, and watched the heavy rain outside. She often felt cold, so she bit her fingers and cried, longing in her heart for someone to come in and talk to her and tell her stories.

Therefore, the appearance of Xu Zhimo gave her all the fantasies about romance.

(Xu Zhimo's old photo)

In his interactions with Xu Zhimo, Lin Huiyin often recited Xu Zhimo's poems in English, which made Xu Zhimo often tear up.

The two young men often traveled in pairs, and even when they were not going out, they wrote letters continuously.

In the process of communication, Xu Zhimo developed a fanatical love for Lin Huiyin. He not only wrote a great deal of poetry during that time, but also told him of his love.

However, there is one case that makes people unsatisfactory, that is, Xu Zhimo is not a free body.

Before xu Zhimo went abroad, he obeyed his father's arrangement, married Zhang Youyi, the daughter of a large family, and gave birth to a son.

Although he was a filial piety, Xu Zhimo, who was influenced by the new ideas, has always regarded Zhang Youyi as a "rural bun", so he is anxious to go abroad to get rid of the traditional and old-fashioned family.

It is Zhang Youyi to make a comparison, lin Huiyin is particularly valuable.

Xu Zhimo once thought of talking about marriage, and even divorced Zhang Youyi, who followed him, for this reason.

However, Xu Zhimo's actions frightened Lin Huiyin, who did not have much experience in life.

Lin Huiyin certainly has a good feeling for Xu Zhimo, but he does not think of talking about marriage.

Coupled with the influence of Lin Hui's original family, when she was young, because Lin Changmin loved concubines, her mother was quite snubbed. And she also suffered a lot of resentment from her mother, but fortunately, she was smart and easy to read, and she got the love of Lin Changmin.

Therefore, Lin Huiyin saw Xu Zhimo's determination of Zhang Youyi, and his heart was also quite cold.

In addition, Lin Huiyin is not a passionate woman in her bones, as she once said when she was studying in the United States, in China, a woman marries a family, not a person.

With Lin Huiyin's origin and talent, it is true that someone and Lin Changmin climbed into the family early on, that is, Liang Qichao, who was quite influential at that time.

(Liang Sicheng and Lin Huiyin)

Liang Qichao and Lin Changmin were colleagues in the early years of the Republic of China, and they were very good friends, it can be said that he grew up watching Lin Huiyin, so whether from the perspective of family lineage or appearance and talent, Lin Huiyin is impeccable, so he has booked this family affair for his son Liang Sicheng early.

Compared with the romantic and amorous Xu Zhimo, the handsome Liang Sicheng is not only loyal to people, but also more in line with her in terms of interests.

Most importantly, Liang Sicheng's family lineage is prominent. Marrying such a family and living a stable life in this world is her ideal marriage.

Facts have proved that Lin Huiyin's choice is not wrong, Liang Sicheng not only supports her in her career, but also has more tolerance and love for her in life.

However, Xu Zhimo, although he still had Lin Huiyin in mind, turned around and loved Lu Xiaoman to death.

Lu Xiaoman and Xu Zhimo are like twins in dealing with things, she abandoned her young husband, and Xu Zhimo, who has abandoned his wife and children, would rather be enemies of the world than come together.

(On the left are Jin Yuelin and Lin Huiyin)

It's just that this love like a fiery fire, once it enters marriage, has a lot of unbearable and torturous. At this time, Lin Huiyin not only had a gentle and jade husband, but also had a talented Jin Yuelin.

Jin Yuelin's admiration is different from Xu Zhimo's, he is generous and calm, but he has great respect for Lin Huiyin.

In the face of this excellent man, Lin Huiyin said that he was not moved.

So Lin Huiyin, who was troubled, told Liang Sicheng the truth.

Unexpectedly, although Liang Sicheng was sad, he told Lin Huiyin that she was free and that if she wanted to choose Jin Yuelin, he would bless them.

Liang Sicheng's move not only touched Lin Huiyin, but also made Jin Yuelin, a man, sigh to himself. Since then, he has voluntarily withdrawn from the lives of Lin Huiyin and Liang Sicheng, and has only been a good neighbor ever since.

In the end, Lin Huiyin not only gained the husband Liang Sicheng, who was considerate to her in life and helped her in her career, but also the cinnabar mole in Xu Zhimo's heart and the white moonlight in Jin Yuelin's heart.

(Reference historical materials: "Remembrance of Lin Huiyin", etc.)