Great visit to Bedford, NH, and the Ross A. Lurgio Middle School. Made it to NH on the third try, in between blizzards.

Here are some of the posters from their All School Read project for Tangerine!

Edward Bloor’s eighth novel, Summer of Smoke, is now available as an e-book exclusive at Amazon.com, BarnesandNoble.com, and Smashwords.com.

Click here for the Kindle edition!

Click here for the NOOK Book edition!

James Porter was a freshman in high school in 1967-1968. That was the year when his all-white soccer team got assaulted by the fans and players of all-black teams. It was the year when angry, disenfranchised blacks went out of their way to “bump” whites on the streets of Trenton, New Jersey. And finally, in the spring and summer, it was the year when all hell broke loose. Trenton and over 125 other American cities exploded into rioting, burning, and looting following the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.

Seven years after those riots, James returns to attend a high school reunion. He hopes to re-connect with old friends, and some enemies, and with the girl who got away. He re-lives the events of that summer, long buried in his memory. He searches for answers to what really happened to his family, to his classmates, and to his city behind the smoke and confusion of that tumultuous time in American history.

Edward Bloor’s sixth novel, Memory Lane, is now available as an e-book exclusive at Amazon.com and BarnesandNoble.com.

Click here for the Amazon edition!

Click here for the Barnes and Noble edition!

Memory Lane, America’s most popular new theme park, promises to provide its guests with “golden memories.” Choose any week—from 1950 to the present—and Memory Lane will recreate it for you in amazing detail: the foods, the clothes, the TV shows, even the schools. You will soon forget about the present and start living in the past.

But is that a good idea?

Alice hopes Memory Lane will provide a week of personal healing and of family bonding. Instead, Alice and her cousins Patrick and TJ find themselves struggling with a pair of psychotic bullies, and with the pain of young love, and with a shocking family secret that was, perhaps, better left buried in the past.

Smart, funny, and frightening, Memory Lane is Edward Bloor’s most powerful and insightful novel to date.

The tenth-anniversary hardcover edition of Tangerine, with an introduction by Danny DeVito, is now available!

Click here to buy it now!

Paul Fisher sees the world from behind glasses so thick he looks like a bug-eyed alien. But he’s not so blind that he can’t see there are some very unusual things about his family’s new home in Tangerine County, Florida. Where else does a sinkhole swallow the local school, fire burn underground for years, and lightning strike at the same time every day?

The chaos is compounded by constant harassment from his football–star brother, and adjusting to life in Tangerine isn’t easy for Paul—until he joins the soccer team at his middle school. With the help of his new teammates, Paul begins to discover what lies beneath the surface of his strange new hometown. And he also gains the courage to face up to some secrets his family has been keeping from him for far too long. In Tangerine, it seems, anything is possible.