Village vs City

Today’s human settlements are very complex. People have created a place wherein the political, economic, military, social, and environmental concerns of different countries are associated with one another affecting each other’s political and economic stability.

In ancient times this wasn’t the situation. People then were grouped in families that led nomadic lives in search of food and to evade natural enemies. They hunted animals and gathered fruits for food going from one place to another. They did not settle in one place like people do today living in cities, towns, and villages. These settlements are composed of several families. And although they are similar in terms of providing a permanent place for people to live, they are distinct entities.

A city is a big and populous settlement which is an important center of commerce and culture. It has local laws and intricate land, housing, sanitation, utilities, and transportation systems. It is a commercial hub providing its citizens with recreational facilities as well as their everyday needs.

The formation of cities started during the Neolithic revolution which introduced the cultivation of the land and the breeding of livestock or agriculture for sustenance. From being hunter-gatherers, they adapted to a life that is different from their nomadic past. They survived through agriculture. As more and more people settled in one place, a city slowly emerged from what is known as a village.

A village is a small group of settlements which is usually located in a rural area although they can also be found in several urban areas. It is larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town. It is comprised of permanent residences that are located close together for the purpose of its easy defense against enemies and to enable its inhabitants to socialize among themselves.

A village does not have local laws; its land, housing, sanitation, utilities, and transportation systems are not as complex as that of a city because it is a smaller entity in terms of land area and population. It may have a church and a handful of shops where people can buy basic necessities. In different parts of the world, villages can be found, and they have different characteristics. Some, like those in some U.S. states, are considered as local governments while in China they are parts of a town, and in Britain they are considered civil parishes administered by a parish council.

Summary:

1.A village is a small group of settlements while a city is a large group of settlements.

2.Although some might also be found in urban areas, villages are usually located in rural areas while cities are urban centers.

3.A city has local laws while a village does not; it is administered by a parish council and is a part of a town.

4.A village is located in a smaller land area while a city has a large land area.

5.The land, housing, transportation, utilities, and sanitation systems of a city are more complex than that of a village.

Sharing is caring!