From ages, it is seen that the lifestyle between a village (countryside) and a city varies. There is a huge difference in the way of living between the people living in the cities and villages. Each of them has its disadvantages and advantages. Cities are the main hubs of everything, starting from the fast-food chains to tall buildings. Cities represent the epitome of cultural integration along with globalization. City life also offers wide options for facilities and opportunities. The village is somewhere we find our inner peace there. Arrays of trees, ponds, and puddles, the patch of green lands marks the boundaries of any village. Only in villages, we can see dew on the grass, rituals, and celebrations with full celebration.

Village life is the representation of a rural lifestyle, whereas city life represents an urban lifestyle. The city is overpopulated compared to the villages where small numbers of people live. The air and water in the village is less polluted and the village has a cleaner environment, less noise, and fresh air compared to the cities. People in the villages are less busy than those in the big cities. Cities consist of innumerable numbers of buildings and vehicles and offer better medical care and education than villages.

Also Read: Benefits and advantages of Living in Cities, Advantages of Living in Countryside

Definition of Village

The word “Village” is derived from a French word that refers to a group of buildings. That is exactly what defines a village, a small community of people in a rural area. Sometimes the houses of the villages are incorporated into the towns as the municipality. Villages which represent rural areas are also known as countryside in many countries.

In a village, the environment is very calm and composed. Every population of the village tends to know everybody very well. Villagers are always warm-hearted and are always ready to help in any situation. But villages have fewer facilities when compared to cities. The villagers have difficulty with education, transportation and even medical treatment. Some villages do not have a fully modernized and equipped hospital or medical facilities, while in others the people of the villages have to cover hundreds of kilometers to reach the hospitals. Schools are also underdeveloped and do not have highly qualified teachers. Parents have to send their children to the cities for higher education. Employment is also a questionable situation in villages, as there is only an option of farming for the people there.

Definition of City

The word “City” is also derived from a French word that means citizenry. A city is a large important town. In the USA, cities are incorporated into municipalities with local governments. In Great Britain, A borough for the seat of the Bishop is called a city.

City life or urban life is full of advantages and facilities. Cities are endowed with higher education due to an ample number of schools and colleges present there. Apart from the schools and colleges, the city has cinema theaters, banks, stadiums for different types of sports, hotels, shopping malls, hotels, and clubs. A city is characterized by several pollution types, like air pollution, noise pollution, and water pollution. These pollutants are caused by numerous industries, factories and mills present over there.

Related: Disadvantages of Village Life or Living in the countryside, Difference between village life and city life

The Main Differences between City and Village Life

The following are some of the basic differences that can be observed in the life of the city and the village. They are:

Language of Communication

Villages use their local language for communication. The village schools generally follow the vernacular medium for instruction. English is an alien language there. Villagers who migrate from the rural community to the city for the first time are at a loss of words due to poor knowledge of the common language of communication. Cities are a hybrid of languages, people and cultures. Thus, to survive in a city, you have to know the common language to communicate with the people.

Food

Food, or the style of cooking, is one of the most important aspects of any social system. Due to a busy life in the city, food is in sync with the lifestyle of the dwellers in the city. City dwellers tend to opt for less healthy but quick to prepare food. That is why there are innumerable food joints, dining places and takeaways in the city. City dining during the working days is just grabbing a bite.

On the other hand, villagers believe in homemade food by using homemade raw materials like cow dung balls, hay and wood. In the village, you can find pure clarified butter, milk, and traditional dishes. Fresh food is a part of daily life of rural people.

Means of Transportation

In villages, horse carts, bullock carts, bicycles or walking are the main means of transportation. Long-distance travel is covered by the buses issued by the state government. The road conditions in the villages are also very poor and thus transportation systems are very primitive.

One of the main features of the city is the transportation facilities. Most city dwellers have their own private transport, like a bike or car. There is plenty of public transportation, like metro railways, cab services, buses, and even auto-rickshaws. Recently, due to financial and environmental concerns all across the globe, carpooling has also become one of the most renowned options for transportation in the city.

Social Life

The social lives of most people in the city are restricted to the virtual world of social networking sites. People hardly have any time for themselves in the city. Parties, occasions and holidays are the only events where people get to meet their loved ones and relatives.

On the flip side, people in villages, come in contact and hence talk to each other directly. No one can remain a stranger in the villages due to constant communication and interaction with a small population.

Ambiance

Villages serve as a hub of inspiration for simple living in the lap of nature. The ambiance of the village gives a soothing effect to your busy daily life. It also offers peace to the senses and picturesque views, that are too far away from all the dirt and dust. The air is completely free from any harmful emissions and pollution.

On the other hand, cities are polluted, noisy and crowded. People hustle over the speed of the internet and other small things rather than enjoying their lives.

Infrastructures

The striking difference that we can observe between a village and the city is the infrastructure and the buildings. The cities are full of skyscrapers that are made up of glass panels. Offices, as well as rooms for living, are getting smaller day by day.

The homes in the villages have large areas with open spaces. The houses in the villages are mostly one or two storeys high and are traditional.

People

People from the villages are native nature and warm hearted. This means that they have spent their entire life in a particular village. Most of the villagers are farmers or look after farm-related work. Simple and traditional ways of living and helpful nature are the main traits of the people living in the villages. Village people are often simple, hard working and like to follow tradition.

Pay cheques, work, and a modern lifestyle are the usual priorities of people in the city. Many people of various religions and beliefs migrate to the city in search of jobs and proper education.

Shopping and Entertainment

Shopping is a popular activity in the cities. There are large numbers of shopping malls that serve the success of this purpose. People from the villages come to the cities for shopping during any special occasion or festival. The city offers better quality and numerous options for the same product. The concept of malls has managed to get all types of customers with different requirements under one roof. For entertainment purposes also, there are plenty of alternatives to choose from the amusement parks, restaurants, pubs, exhibitions, clubs and movie theatres.

The villagers go to the local grocery shop that is within walking distance for their daily supplies. Moreover, the villages have fewer stores and are small. The villagers are often unaware of the types and names of the products that rule the cities. The concept of entertainment in the villages is different from in the city. The people of the villages meet in the evening and discuss their social life and other important matters. Walking in the green fields with loved ones, showered in the heavy rain, eating fruits directly from the trees, and socializing with fellow villagers are the different forms of entertainment in the village.

Holidays

Due to their hectic schedule and busy work life, most city dwellers wake up late on holidays. They spend that day of the week taking rests or maybe having an outing for dinner at the end of the day. Holidays in the villages are always filled with fun and entertainment.

Education

While discussing about advantages and disadvantages, education aspect cannot be less emphasised. In cities, there are arrangements for quality higher education. Due to the presence of big colleges and universities, the scope of first-class knowledge is more feasible there. You can avail of both private and government schools and colleges for the study. In villages, there are mostly government schools with no option for colleges. The quality of education suffers, options are limited. Rural people are often less concerned about the education and believe in simple life.

Employment

Most of the scope of employment is present in the city. There are small commercial companies, MNCs, and trading organizations as well to give you a job which is not possible in a village. Different types of people can get their type of job according to their level of education.

In villages, employment is mostly farming. Farming is a seasonal job and, thus, most farmers have to come to the city during the off season of cultivation.

Adulteration and Pollution

The air in the city is extremely unhealthy due to air, noise and water pollution. The people in the city do not get to see a clear sky or breathe fresh air often. Also, the foods available in big cities are unhealthy and adulterated. The villages are far away from such problems and do not have these drawbacks, they have clean air. There is a clear difference in the quality of environment which people get to enjoy in village life as compared to city life.

From all the above points, we have concluded that life in cities and villages represents different and contrasting pictures. Both the lifestyles come with both negative and positive aspects. Thus, it is up to the preferences of the individual if he/she wants to live in urban or rural settings.

Related Articles on Cities and Urban Development