Ljanik Map — Satellite Images of Ljanik

original name: Ljanik

geographical location: Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, Europe

geographical coordinates: 42° 18' 47" North, 21° 49' 5" East

detailed map of Ljanik and near places

Welcome to the Ljanik google satellite map! This place is situated in Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, its geographical coordinates are 42° 18' 47" North, 21° 49' 5" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Ljanik. See Ljanik photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Ljanik in Serbia and Montenegro. Ljanik hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Ljanik or add new placemark for Ljanik.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Ljanik hotel reservations

Book hotel in Ljanik online and save money

Ljanik hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Serbia and Montenegro »

Ljanik hotels – sortable list of all Ljanik hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Ljanik hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Ljanik, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Ljanik, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Ljanik hotels map

The location of each Ljanik hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Ljanik hotel map is available where all hotels in Ljanik are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Ljanik hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Ljanik hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Ljanik hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Ljanik hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Ljanik

Vranje Motel ** (in Vranje, distanced approximately 26 km)

Hotel Vranje *** (in Vranje, distanced approximately 28 km)

Zeleznicar Hotel (in Vranjska Banja, distanced approximately 30 km)

Hotel Olimpia *** (in Skopje, distanced approximately 40 km)

The Hunter's Lodge Kamnik **** (in Skopje, distanced approximately 44 km)

Motel Livija ** (in Petrovec, distanced approximately 45 km)

VIP Hotel *** (in Skopje, distanced approximately 46 km)

more Ljanik hotels »

Ljanik car rental

Compare Ljanik car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Ljanik rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Ljanik car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Ljanik — we will do it for you!

Car hire Ljanik and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Ljanik the city centre. Compare Ljanik car rental offers by various suppliers.

Kumanovo car rental (distanced approximately 21 km)

Skopje - Aleksandar ( - Downtown) car rental (distanced approximately 44 km)

Skopje car rental (distanced approximately 47 km)

Ohrid - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 48 km)

Skopje - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 48 km)

more offers and Ljanik car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Ljanik

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Ljanik »

Overview of flights to and from Serbia and Montenegro »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Ljanik. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Ljanik and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Ljanik are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Skopje Airport (distanced approximately 42 km) – airport hotels

Camp Monteith Airport (distanced approximately 43 km) – airport hotels

Camp Bondsteel Airport (distanced approximately 70 km) – airport hotels

Pristina Airport (distanced approximately 70 km) – airport hotels

Sofia Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Ljanik 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Ljanik in Serbia and Montenegro

You can also dive right into Ljanik on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Ljanik 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Ljanik, Serbia and Montenegro in Google Earth »

Get more out of Ljanik map

Add placemark to Ljanik

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Ljanik map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Ljanik google map link options

link to us:

small Ljanik google map image link

medium Ljanik google map image link

large Ljanik google map image link