Karl Marx Biography Karl Marx was born in Trier, Germany. His father was a Jewish Lawyer who converted to Protestantism prior to Marx’s birth to hold public office. He graduated High School in Trier, entered the University at Bonn at age 17 later in Berlin studied law, history and philosophy. Wrote poems, 300 page classification of legal concepts, a comic novel, a tragic play, and a doctoral thesis 1841. He studied law, history and philosophy. He joined &quot;Left Hegelians&quot; (with Bruno Bauer) who sought to draw atheistic and revolutionary conclusions from Hegel's philosophy. Marx moved to Bonn, hoping to be a professor. But Ludwig Feuerbach deprived of his chair in 1832 and in 1841 the government forbade Professor Bruno Bauer to lecture at Bonn and Marx was blacklisted for his radical ideas. In October 1842 Marx became editor-in-chief of radical paper called Rheinische Zeitung and moved from Bonn to Cologne. The government suppressed the paper January 1 1843. Marx was forced to resign the editorship, which suspended publication in March 1843. In 1843, Marx married to Jenny von Westphalen. His wife came from a bourgeois family (Prussian nobility) ( her elder brother was Prussia's Minister of the Interior 1850-58). Marx went to Paris in order to publish a radical journal abroad (1843). Marx and Engels wrote - The German Ideology. (A response to Feuerbach's materialism, laying out the ground work for the materialistic conception of history. Marx separated himself from Left Hegelian idealism with a critique against Bruno Bauer and Max Stirner. The Prussian government pressured France to banish Marx in 1845. Marx moved to Brussels joining the Communist League with Engels in 1847. Marx and Engels were requested to write the league's manifesto, they drew up the Communist Manifesto in 1848 and German Ideology. In 1848 the world looked to be headed toward revolution. Marx was banished from Belgium, returned to Paris, after the March Revolution, then to Cologne, Germany, where Neue Rheinische Zeitung was published from June 1 1848 to May 19 1849, with Marx as editor-in-chief. Marx was tried for his involvement in the revolution, he was acquitted on February 9, 1849, banished from Germany (May 16, 1849). Back to Paris, again banished after the demonstration of June 13, 1849, moved to London, where he lived until his death. Marx's life was an extremely difficult economically, Engels constantly had to help financially. He frequently asked his family members for money. Following the downfall of the Paris Commune (1871) – of which Marx gave a clear-cut materialistic analysis of these events in The Civil War In France, 1871 – and the Bakunin cleavage in the International), the organization was moved to U. Marx's health became undermined. He continued work to complete Capital, collected a mass of new material and studied a number of languages (Russian, for instance; Marx was fully fluent in German, French, and English). Marx's wife died on December 2, 1881, and on March 14, 1883, Marx passed away. He lies buried next to his wife at Highgate Cemetery in London. Marx is a theorist. One knows a theorist by his intellectual products. That is, his books. There is logic to the dates. He and Engels began by writing and disseminating a political propaganda pamphlet. Who was their audience? It did not produce the desired results. If you do not first succeed, try and try again. So what did they do next? The political propaganda pamphlet Marx and Engels wrote was the “Communist Manifesto”. The audience was the Bourgeoisie and the Proletariat. The main idea was the warn the audience that their dominance of the world was unjust and doomed. Class is an outgrowth of the means of production. It is this economic structure that gives certain people the power to exploit others. As long as this structure exists, there will be a ruling class and an exploited class. Reforms might improve the standard of living of the exploited class, but it cannot alter the fact that they are powerless socially. Marx refers to the advocates of such reforms as Conservative Socialists. These socialists are misguided because they don't realize that class struggle is integral to history, and is unavoidable in the capitalist system. They represent bourgeois interests, because they are trying to preserve bourgeois hegemony by dampening the revolutionary energy of the proletariat. These conservative socialists will ultimately fail, however, because the revolution is an unavoidable stage of history, and the proletariat will always be a revolutionary class. Biographical Information: his family, A middle class background based on father's occupation. Marx' education. he majored in philosophy at University of Berlin. Marx' political activities. Marx in the 1850s supported his family by working in which occupation? Who was his employer? His family: the son of Heinrich Marx, a lawyer, and Henriette Presburg Marx, a Dutchwoman. Both Heinrich and Henriette were descendants of a long line of rabbis (masters or teachers of Jewish religion). Barred from the practice of law because he was Jewish, Heinrich Marx converted to Lutheranism about 1817. Marx’s education: Karl attended the Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium in Trier for five years, graduating in 1835 at the age of seventeen. The gymnasium's program was the usual classical one—history, mathematics, literature, and languages, particularly Greek and Latin. Karl became very skillful in French and Latin, both of which he learned to read and write fluently. In later years he taught himself other languages, so that as a mature scholar he could also read Spanish, Italian, Dutch, Scandinavian, Russian, and English. As his articles in the New York Daily Tribune show, he came to handle the English language masterfully (he loved Shakespeare [1564–1616], whose works he knew by heart), although he never lost his heavy German accent when speaking. Marx enrolled in Bonn University in Bonn, Germany, where he attended courses primarily in law, as it was his father's desire that he become a lawyer. Marx, however, was more interested in philosophy (the study of knowledge) and literature than in law. He wanted to be a poet and dramatist (one who writes plays). In his student days he wrote a great deal of poetry. father took him out of Bonn and had him enter the University of Berlin, then a center of intellectual discussion. In Berlin a circle of brilliant thinkers was challenging existing institutions and ideas, including religion, philosophy, ethics (the study of good and bad involving morals), and politics. Marx joined this group of radical (extreme in opinion) thinkers wholeheartedly. He spent more than four years in Berlin, completing his studies with a doctoral degree in March 1841 mployment: He wrote for both German-and English-language publications. From August 1852 to March 1862 he was correspondent for the New York Daily Tribune, contributing a total of about 355 articles. Journalism, however, paid very poorly; Marx was saved by the financial support of friend and fellow writer, Engels. The Communist Manifesto. What are the purposes of each of the three sections 1) Bourgeois and Proletarians; 2) Proletarians and Communists; 3) The Socialist literature The Communist Manifesto reflects an attempt to explain the goals of Communism, as well as the theory underlying this movement. It argues that class struggles, or the exploitation of one class by another, are the motivating force behind all historical developments. Bourgeois and Proletarians: this section of the text that is considered the main body of the Manifesto, and is most often quoted. in this section, Marx famously states, 'The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.' The chapter lays out the position that the bourgeois, through competition and private ownership of land, are forever exploiting and oppressing the proletariat, otherwise known as the working class. Marx then states that the system always results in class conflict and revolution and should be replaced by Communism, a society without class distinctions. Proletarians and Communists: explains the relationship between the Communist party and other working parties, stating that the Communist party would not organize against them. The chapter also declares the intention of the party to focus on the interests of the proletariat as a whole, and not any particular group. This section of the Manifesto also clarifies the main points of the Communist platform, which includes the following ten short term demands: Abolishing ownership of all private property, Establishing system of heavy taxation, Abolishing the right to inherit, Centralizing credit and establishment of a state bank, Centralizing communication and transport with the state, Confiscating all emigrant and rebel property, Extending the means of production to the state,Equalizing liability to all levels of labor, Combining agriculture and manufacturing industries, Establishing a free public education system Socialist Literature: explains the differences between communism and other socialist doctrines of the day; reactionary socialism, bourgeois socialism and critical-utopian socialism. While they have their points, they all inadequtly address the underlying issues of perpertual class conflicts according to Marx. What are the differences and similarities between the revolutionary socialism, critical utopian socialism and bourgeois socialism. revolutionationary socialism: goal- COMMUNISM and the complete abolition of the capitalist economy and state, the achievement of a wholly egalitarian society based upon common ownership. critical utopian socialism: goals/means- theory that government should control production + property, everything is shared within a community/The first attempt by the proletariat to achieve their own aims. Still too early-didn't have the means or the motivation to form unions as a class brought about by severe capitalism. First group to really want a new system. Marx appreciated their thorough criticisms of capitalism, but they thought it'd be easier to break down classes because classes hadn't developed much yet Because it was too early for capitalism itself, they needed to pick a plan and force it to happen. Wanted to create social utopias, where workers would escape wage labor, rather than organizing as a class. Thought their ideas would appeal to everyone once everyone, so looked to the general public for support; reject revolutions, because they think they can achieve their ends through non-violence. Eventually became hostile to organized workers. bourgeois socialism:reflects the desires of a segment of the bourgeois to redress social grievances, in order to guarantee the continued existence of bourgeois society; &quot;economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, [and] hole-and-corner reformers of every kind&quot;; they want the proletariat to keep its weak role, but to stop hating the dominant bourgeoisie What are the key concepts that Marx and Engels introduced in the Manifesto. The Manifesto was written as an ideological justification of a social movement. It implore workers to recognize the true source of their alienation. The Manifesto's critique contains many axioms about capitalism. class struggle is the motivating force behind historical development: Marx focuses on the problems of bourgeois society, on bourgeois politics, and on the influence of class on every level of politics and history. capitalism is bad. proletariat will lead a revolution. History has been class struggle (Rich vs. Poor) (Capitalists vs. Proletariat). Capitalists take advantage of Proletariat. The Proletariat will eventually rise and overthrow capitalism --&gt; creating a new society. The Proletariat will control the means of production and make a classless society and everyone will be equal. The contributions of Marx and Engels to modern sociology and some of the logical criticisms of the theory’s contribution is in many core areas of sociology such as political sociology,economic sociology, methodology, sociological theories as well as sociological thought. Beyond this, Marxist/Marxism itself as a perspective has a different angle/dimension to look at the social issue in sociology. most of the theories are the focal point of discussion among the sociologists across the world. He changed the methodology of the historical analysis. Marx rejected the history of rise and fall of kings-kingdoms and their dynasties. through dialectal materialism he proved that material brings change in human as well as society. He corrected to Hegel through as Hegel was believing in spiritual dialectics. Though he borrowed the idea from Hegel, but he changed the entire perspective. He is often criticised on the basis that Marx was unaware of emergence of the middle class which is the centre of modern economy. And also, Marx

was not aware of cooperative movement that is the backbone of many countries, that brought huge change in society Miscellaneous Alienation: 1. Separates workers from products of their labor - workers don't control what they produce 2. Separates workers form the labor process - workers are alienated from their human nature = self-directed, creative, labor 3. Separates workers from their own bodies and mental life - working for a wage means using human life purely for survival, wage labor is simply a means to sustain life, not an ends 4. Separates us from each other - class relations (capitalist/worker, epmloyer/employee) prevent us fro relating to each other as equal human beings