Craig Ferguson is an actor, writer and comedian with a diverse career that encompasses film, television and the stage. In February 2017, Ferguson launched his SiriusXM program “The Craig Ferguson Show” which is broadcast live on Comedy Greats Channel 94 weeknights 6pm-8pm ET. After more than 20 years Craig will return in August to the Fringe Festival in Edinburgh, Scotland and will be broadcasting “The Craig Ferguson Show” live for ten days. In December 2014, Ferguson concluded his ten-year run as the host of CBS’ “The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson,” which had set all-time viewer records and earned him a Primetime Emmy nomination and the 2009 Peabody Award for Excellence in Broadcasting for his interview with Archbishop Desmond Tutu. As the host of “Celebrity Name Game,” Ferguson was awarded the Daytime Emmy for Outstanding Game Show Host two years in a row and was nominated for a third Daytime Emmy Award this year.

In May 2016, Ferguson launched The New Deal Tour, a 60-show comedy stand-up tour across North America. In the summer of 2017, Ferguson will continue The New Deal Tour across the East Coast and will return to the Just For Laughs Festival in Montreal. In February 2016, Ferguson debuted his original History Channel show, “Join or Die.” Ferguson is also known for his success on the North American comedy circuit. He has performed to sold out theaters all over the country including Carnegie Hall in October 2010 and New York City’s Radio City Music Hall in October 2012. Ferguson has four widely acclaimed stand-up comedy specials: “A Wee Bit O’ Revolution”, which premiered on Comedy Central in 2009; “Does This Need To Be Said,” on EPIX in 2011; “I’m Here to Help” on Netflix in 2013 and “Craig Ferguson: Just Being Honest” on EPIX in 2015. Ferguson’s film credits include, “How to Train Your Dragon,” “How to Train Your Dragon 2,” “Winnie The Pooh,” “Brave,” “Niagra Motel,” “Lenny the Wonder Dog,” “Prendimi l’anima,” “Life Without Dick,” “Chain of Fools” and “Born Romantic.” He has written the feature films “The Big Tease” and “Saving Grace.” Ferguson has also released two New York Times bestselling books, Between the Bridge and the River and American On Purpose, a book about why and how he became an American.