Reports from Down Under suggest that Russell Crowe's nine-year marriage to wife Danielle Spencer is over. According to The Sydney Morning Herald, the Australian star has separated from British-born Danielle and is now ensconced in the US, filming the biblical epic Noah while he tries to come to terms with the breakup. Things are said to be "amicable" for the sake of their two young sons, Charles, eight, and Tennyson, who is six. Both boys remain in Sydney with their mother.

In June, rumours began to swirl around one of the most resolute marriages in Hollywood when blonde Danielle was pictured enjoying a night out with her Dancing With the Stars partner Damian Whitewood. For his part, Russell has had no let-up in his schedule. Filming commitments for Iron Fist, Les Miserables, and Noah have kept him away from the family's sprawling $10m Rose Bay residence for the best part of a year. The actor tied the knot with actress and singer Danielle in an ultra-private ceremony at a chapel on his 560-acre Australian ranch back in 2003. The couple had enjoyed an on-off relationship since meeting on a film set 13 years earlier. And although they split up in 1995 following Russell's move to Hollywood, unassuming Danielle was always going to be the woman who tamed Gladiator's Maximus.

On December 21, 2003, the couple welcomed their first son, little Charles Spencer Crowe. His brother, Tennyson, followed on July 7, 2006. Part of the couple's appeal was always their reluctance to play the Hollywood game. Whenever Russell wasn't working, they enjoyed a low-key life in the picturesque harbour side suburbs of Sydney.

Sign up to HELLO Daily! for the best royal, celebrity and lifestyle coverage

Email Address

By entering your details, you are agreeing to HELLO! Magazine User Data Protection Policy. You can unsubscribe at any time. For more information, please click here.

More Celebrity News

See more

Matt Damon shares rare glimpse into Ben Affleck's marriage to Jennifer Lopez

The Instigators actor has been a close friend to Ben for over two decades

Expert trichologist reveals the ways collagen helps to thicken your hairProven tips, products and advice for longer, stronger locks

Fans spot tribute to Taylor Swift in Joe Alwyn's apartment – see

The Kinds of Kindness star has kept a memento from his time with the Anti-Hero singer

Maya Jama confirms she's split from Stormzy again: 'Announcing this feels so dramatic'

The celebrity couple have parted ways a year after rekindling their romance

Meet Harry Kane's wife Kate Goodland – all you need to know about football star's childhood sweetheart

The mum and fitness instructor has a growing fan base

Inside Cindy Crawford and Richard Gere's complex relationship: why they grew apart

The glamorous couple were married from 1991 to 1995