Prof. Dr. Hiroshi Masui and Prof. Dr. Natalie Konomi are paying a pre-Christmas visit to Aschaffenburg UAS (TH AB) this week. Professor Masui comes from the School of Regional Innovation and Social Design Engineering and heads the Information Processing Center of the TH AB partner university Kitami Institute of Technology (KIT). Natalie Konomi is a professor at the Global Strategies Office and Vice President for International Affairs and Diversity at Kyushu University in Fukuoka.

In the framework of the Bavarian Visiting Professors Programme, both lecturers are teaching at the Faculty of Business and Law and the Faculty of Engineering with Professors Renate Link and Galia Weidl as well as Professor Michael Möckel and Japanese language lecturer Yukimi Gelenk. They are also integrated into an event of the interdisciplinary doctoral programme iDoK and hold discussions to promote student exchange and to initiate joint research activities.

The KIT on the Japanese northern peninsula of Hokkaido, which is comparable to Germany in terms of climate, has already been a partner university of TH AB since 2018. It is characterised by an innovative interdisciplinary study approach at its two schools, the "School of Earth, Energy and Environmental Engineering" and the "School of Regional Innovation and Social Design Engineering", which allows a stronger specialisation already from the second year of studies. In addition to the bachelor's and master's degree programmes of the KIT, engineering students from Aschaffenburg UAS also have the attractive opportunity to complete a tuition-free doctoral programme at the KIT, which is comparable in size to TH AB.

Kyushu University is one of Japan's most prestigious public universities, located in Japan's fifth largest city, Fukuoka, on Japan's southwesternmost main island of Kyushu, with a subtropical climate. Over 18,000 students are enrolled in degree programs at twelve different schools and 19 graduate schools. Kyushu University is known for its research strength, high degree of internationalisation, and excellent student-to-faculty ratio. In the context of Professor Konomi's stay, exploratory talks are being held between representatives of TH AB and Kyushu University on a possible partnership.

The contact to both universities had already been established in August 2017, when students of the KIT had participated in the intensive German courses of Aschaffenburg UAS for the first time. They were accompanied by Professor Konomi, at that time still Head of the International Center at the KIT, who had become aware of TH AB through these summer courses in her German home country and had contacted the language course organiser Prof. Dr. Renate Link, Vice Head of the Language Center of Aschaffenburg UAS. The two professors are pleased that the contact has not broken off even after Prof. Dr. Konomi's transfer from the KIT to Kysuhu University and opens up the possibility for further, also trilateral cooperation between TH AB, the KIT and Kyushu University.