William Michael Halsey OBITUARY

William Michael Halsey, PHD March 15, 1945 – October 28, 2021 Resident of Napa, CA William Halsey 76, passed away peacefully at home in Napa, California on October 28, 2021. He was surrounded by family and loved ones.

Bill was born March 15 1945, in Port Huron, Michigan into a large Irish family. His grandmother was born in County Cork, Ireland. His mother, Veronica, lovingly referred to as Ma, was a school teacher. His father, Harry, worked for Chrysler Motor Company. The oldest of four, he was followed by Harry, Mary and Ann. As a youth, Bill was an accomplished hockey, baseball, and football player. Feeling the call of his faith Bill entered Sacred Heart Seminary in Detroit in ninth grade. He spent the next nine years studying to be a priest, culminating with a year of study in Louvain, Belgium and travel by motorcycle exploring Europe.

But life had other things in store. In 1970 he met Jill Harcke and they began a new chapter leaving Michigan for California. They were married and together had three adoring sons, Joshua, Benjamin, and William. During this time Bill received a PHD from the Graduate Theological Union and the University of California, Berkeley and published a book, “The Survival of American Innocence” a dissertation on Catholicism in an Era of Disillusionment 1920-1940.

While initially working as a teacher, Bill began a new career in commercial office furniture sales at Modern Mode, an Oakland based wood manufacturer. He quickly became Vice President of Sales and Marketing and traveled extensively throughout the country.

It was during this period that he met Raissa Sarantschin who later became his life partner of 35 years. Together they started The Halsey Group, a wholesale manufacturer sales organization, and had showrooms at 811 Sansome and 444 Jackson in San Francisco for many years. Later he spent 5 years working at Creative Wood in Oakland, Ca.

For many years Bill and Raissa lived in the Silverado Highlands in Napa. He was an avid golfer and could be found most weekends on the course with his loyal group of friends. That same group enjoyed a rotating weekly poker game. Often Bill would host and provide “Fred’s steak” to the group. There were no leftovers on those occasions.

As a dedicated father, Bill traveled across the Bay Area and beyond for countless basketball games from CYO through Junior College. He was always there as a supportive rock for his children. His calming presence and patience, coupled with his enthusiasm for sports and competition always set the right tone for the wins and the losses. Bill will be remembered in the hearts of those he loved for his dedication to family, his boisterous conversation, his laughter and his wildly fun dance moves. He will truly be missed, as there will never be another Bill Halsey.

He is survived by Raissa Sarantschin, Jill Harcke; sons Joshua and wife Blair, Benjamin, and William and wife Ash, and his four grandchildren Brogan, Jack, Gus and Billie. He also leaves behind his brother Harry (Vicki) Halsey, and sisters Mary (Wally) Smolak, and Ann (Joe) Goryl. He is also remembered by Tamara Sarantschin and his many nieces and nephews.

A special thank you to the providers at Queen of The Valley who so warmly and diligently provided for his care this last year.

A memorial service in his honor will be held on December 3, 2021 at 12pm at Christ the King, 199 Brandon, Pleasant Hill, California, 94523. Following the ceremony there will be a reception in the Parrish Hall.