Twenty One Pilots is an alternative rock duo from Columbus, Ohio. It started out as a band in 2009, formed by singer and songwriter Tyler Joseph, bassist Nick Thomas, and drummer Chris Salih. Joseph and Thomas were high school friends, and Joseph later met Salih while attending Ohio State University.

After bonding over their shared musical creativity, Joseph and Salih decided to form a band. Before their first performance, Joseph invited Thomas to join.

The trio named itself Twenty One Pilots and began playing a variety of venues around Columbus. The band became known for its attention-grabbing costumes and on-stage antics. Joseph’s mother helped promote the shows by giving away tickets outside of Ohio State.

Twenty One Pilots released its debut, self-titled album independently in 2009, recording from the basement of the house where its members lived at the time. The album peaked at number 139 on the US Billboard 200 chart, selling 115,000 copies.

Just two years later, in 2011, Thomas and Salih left the group to focus on school and work, respectively. Twenty One Pilots became a duo, with Joseph on vocals and Josh Dun on drums. The new Twenty One Pilots self-released its second album, Regional at Best, that July. Just a few months later, the band played its first sold-out show at Newport Music Hall, catching the attention of several record labels. The band then embarked on the Regional at Best Tour alongside the rock band Challenger, documenting the journey on YouTube.

In April 2012, Twenty One Pilots announced a deal with Fueled by Ramen, a subsidiary of Atlantic Records. The band released its first record under the label, an EP titled Three Songs, in July. The next month, the band joined Neon Trees and Walk the Moon on tour.

Twenty One Pilots’ third album dropped in January 2013. Vessel climbed to number 21 on the Billboard 200 charts and number 10 in the Alternative Albums Chart. The single, “Holding on to You,” became the band’s first charting single and reached number 11 on the Billboard Alternatives Songs charts.

Later that year, Twenty One Pilots joined Panic! at the Disco as a supporting act on Fall Out Boy’s Save Rock and Roll Arena Tour. The band continued to tour and play festivals throughout 2014.

In March 2015, Twenty One Pilots announced its upcoming album, Blurryface. The third single, “Stressed Out,” dropped that April. It peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and became the band’s biggest-selling single. The music video was also a hit, surpassing 2.5 billion views on YouTube.

Blurryface was released in May 2015 and became a breakout success. It was the band’s first number-one album, selling 134,000 copies in the first week. It’s also the first album ever to have every single track certified at least Gold by the RIAA. Blurryface won Top Rock Album at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards. Twenty One Pilots also took home the award for Top Rock Artist that year.

Twenty One Pilots’ popularity continued to surge throughout 2016. In June, the duo released “Heathens,” a song for the DC Comics film Suicide Squad. The song peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. This made Twenty One Pilots the third artist after The Beatles and Elvis Presley to have two Top 5 singles charting at the same time.

Since the success of Blurryface, Twenty One Pilots has released two more albums. Trench dropped in 2018, followed by Scaled and Icy in 2021. The latter is the band’s first album to feature Joseph’s younger brother Jay, who performs vocals on three tracks. Both albums were received positively by critics and fans alike. In 2022, Twenty One Pilots took the show on the road with The Icy Tour, to promote and support Scaled and Icy in North America.

Be sure to catch the band live on their newly announced Bandito world tour as well.

Read more

According to all known laws

of aviation,

there is no way a bee

should be able to fly.

Its wings are too small to get

its fat little body off the ground.

The bee, of course, flies anyway

because bees don't care

what humans think is impossible.

Yellow, black. Yellow, black.

Yellow, black. Yellow, black.

Ooh, black and yellow!

Let's shake it up a little.

Barry! Breakfast is ready!

Ooming!

Hang on a second.

Hello?

- Barry?

- Adam?

- Oan you believe this is happening?

- I can't. I'll pick you up.

Looking sharp.

Use the stairs. Your father

paid good money for those.

Sorry. I'm excited.

Here's the graduate.

We're very proud of you, son.

A perfect report card, all B's.

Very proud.

Ma! I got a thing going here.

- You got lint on your fuzz.

- Ow! That's me!

- Wave to us! We'll be in row 118,000.

- Bye!

Barry, I told you,

stop flying in the house!

- Hey, Adam.

- Hey, Barry.

- Is that fuzz gel?

- A little. Special day, graduation.

Never thought I'd make it.

Three days grade school,

three days high school.

Those were awkward.

Three days college. I'm glad I took

a day and hitchhiked around the hive.

You did come back different.

- Hi, Barry.

- Artie, growing a mustache? Looks good.

- Hear about Frankie?

- Yeah.

- You going to the funeral?

- No, I'm not going.

Everybody knows,

sting someone, you die.

Don't waste it on a squirrel.

Such a hothead.

I guess he could have

just gotten out of the way.

I love this incorporating

an amusement park into our day.

That's why we don't need vacations.

Boy, quite a bit of pomp...

under the circumstances.

- Well, Adam, today we are men.

- We are!

- Bee-men.

- Amen!

Hallelujah!

Students, faculty, distinguished bees,

please welcome Dean Buzzwell.

Welcome, New Hive Oity

graduating class of...

...9:15.

That concludes our ceremonies.

And begins your career

at Honex Industries!

Will we pick ourjob today?

I heard it's just orientation.

Heads up! Here we go.

Keep your hands and antennas

inside the tram at all times.

- Wonder what it'll be like?

- A little scary.

Welcome to Honex,

a division of Honesco

and a part of the Hexagon Group.

This is it!

Wow.

Wow.

We know that you, as a bee,

have worked your whole life

to get to the point where you

can work for your whole life.

Honey begins when our valiant Pollen

Jocks bring the nectar to the hive.

Our top-secret formula

is automatically color-corrected,

scent-adjusted and bubble-contoured

into this soothing sweet syrup

with its distinctive

golden glow you know as...

Honey!

- That girl was hot.

- She's my cousin!

- She is?

- Yes, we're all cousins.

- Right. You're right.

- At Honex, we constantly strive

to improve every aspect

of bee existence.

These bees are stress-testing

a new helmet technology.

- What do you think he makes?

- Not enough.

Here we have our latest advancement,

the Krelman.

- What does that do?

- Oatches that little strand of honey

that hangs after you pour it.

Saves us millions.

Oan anyone work on the Krelman?

Of course. Most bee jobs are

small ones. But bees know

that every small job,

if it's done well, means a lot.

But choose carefully

because you'll stay in the job

you pick for the rest of your life.

The same job the rest of your life?

I didn't know that.

What's the difference?

You'll be happy to know that bees,

as a species, haven't had one day off

in 27 million years.

So you'll just work us to death?

We'll sure try.

Wow! That blew my mind!

"What's the difference?"

How can you say that?

One job forever?

That's an insane choice to have to make.

I'm relieved. Now we only have

to make one decision in life.

But, Adam, how could they

never have told us that?

Why would you question anything?

We're bees.

We're the most perfectly

functioning society on Earth.

You ever think maybe things

work a little too well here?

Like what? Give me one example.

I don't know. But you know

what I'm talking about.

Please clear the gate.

Royal Nectar Force on approach.

Wait a second. Oheck it out.

- Hey, those are Pollen Jocks!

- Wow.

I've never seen them this close.

They know what it's like

outside the hive.

Yeah, but some don't come back.

- Hey, Jocks!

- Hi, Jocks!

You guys did great!

You're monsters!

You're sky freaks! I love it! I love it!

Read more

Report as inappropriate

Well, where do I start?

After months of heartbreak I managed to finally get a ticket to Twenty Øne Piløts at the Astor (on May 5th 2016) the Sunday before the show & I can remember it being one of the most amazing feelings I've ever experienced, to finally have that ticket that i've longed for, for so long in my hand! It was a balcony ticket so I knew I'd have a great view no matter what time I arrived, [my seat was 26 (row DD) which had an incredible view] however I still got to the venue and hour before the doors opened anyway!

When the time came for the support act to come on it was 8pm & the whole crowd went wild for E^ST but nothing compared to what we'd all be like when Twenty Øne Piløts came on stage at 9pm!

The lights and music dimmed until all that you could hear was the screams of the many fans in the room until a red light appeared at the back of the stage illuminating the drums & piano before the backing track for Heavy Dirty Soul (which is also the first song on the Blurryface album) came on & Josh (The bands incredible drummer) got on stage and immediately captured the crowds attention with the incredible drumming in the song before Tyler appeared with a microphone and started rapping the lyrics...then as the song progressed the music died down and Tyler fell to the stages floor before getting up with the tambourine and finishing the song!!!

It was an incredible entrance which shot energy through every single persons veins-starting the adrenaline rush that wouldn't cease for the rest of the night!

The boys then continued to play every song from the Blurryface album, pretty much sticking to the albums ordering of the songs before playing a cover of Elvis's Can't help falling in love & the majority of the songs from the previous album, Vessel, including Holding onto you, Fake you out, Migrane, House of gold, Guns for Hands & Car Radio...

During Car Radio the lights went off while Josh was absolutely killing it on the drums and suddenly they came back on and Tyler was on the balcony (he'd come upstairs & gotten onto the balcony by a side door) and started rapping the rest of Car Radio whilst standing half on the balcony's railing & half on a chair!

The rest of my section and I were in absolute shock & I couldn't control the tears of happiness running down my cheeks, probably giving my red eye makeup more of the panda look then what Josh's makeup is supposed to look like! But that was honestly one of the happiest & completely crazy moments in my life!!!

A few more songs where played, then for the finale they played trees (from the album Vessel) & towards the end of the song they just kept the backing track, laid out some lightweight platforms in the front of the crowd with two drums...they then got on the platforms which were held up by the crowd and both drummed for the last part of the song whilst standing upright on the platforms and drumming in complete unison & as they started drumming massive shoots of confetti and smoke shot up into the air covering the crowd in red, white and blue confetti strips!

What a way to end what was such an energy packed insane night!!!

It was honestly the best concert & the best experience I have ever had and considering that I have seen Queen, 5 Seconds of Summer, The Rolling Stones, Justin Bieber & more live I think that if that isn't telling you to buy a ticket to their next concert then there must be something wrong with you!

It was truly the most amazing night of my life & I wish I could go back and relive it again and again!!!

Read more

Report as inappropriate

As I've mentioned before, one of my favorite bands is Twenty One Pilots. I discovered this amazing duo back in early 2013, and saw them live four times that year alone. I reviewed shows of theirs last year at both Big Guava Music Fest and The Dome. The reputation that they've built for their live performance is second to none.

Twenty One Pilots released a new album earlier this year, entitled Blurryface. In its first week it was number one on the Billboard 200, showing just how strong this fan base is. The band also announced a US tour for the album, with all dates now being sold out. The guys have even dubbed it the 'sold-out tour' on social media outlets.

I chose to make my first New York trip of the year and went up to the Hammerstein Ballroom for back to back nights. New York is a city in which I've seen some of the best shows of my life. Oasis in 08, Mumford on their Babel tour in 2013, Arcade Fire back to back nights in 2014, Band of Horses acoustic, and even a show by Young the Giant at this same venue.

The capacity crowd of 3,500 anxiously waited through opener Echosmith, who I thought was less than impressive. Nobody seemed to be interested as this loyal fan base was clearly just ready for the main act. The Twenty One Pilots duo of Tyler Joseph and Josh Dun took the stage just shy of 9pm.

First song was Blurryface album opener 'Heavy Dirty Soul,' in which Tyler came out wearing his signature skeleton mask and sang into a microphone suspended from the ceiling. The crowd was nuts right from the beginning, as the moshing and crowd surfing started almost instantly. Second tune was current single 'Stressed Out,' giving the fans a chance to impressively sing and rap along with Joseph.

While most of the set was dedicated to the new material of Blurryface, Twenty One Pilots also paid tribute to the album that brought them to their current level of popularity in Vessel. Vessel was my favorite album of 2013 and is probably in my top 5 albums of all time. Even though the ovations for tunes from Blurryface were great, you could tell that fans are just a bit louder for songs off Vessel. They're more sing a long friendly and the crowd is accustomed to hearing them live.

A true highlight of the night was a medley of tunes that Joseph and Dun played on a stripped down drum kit and keyboard in the middle of the set. This included single verses and choruses of tunes off Vessel and the two albums that preceded it. It was a great way to fit more snips of songs into the set. My only complaint is that I would have loved to have seen full versions of personal favorites 'Ode to Sleep' and 'Forest.'

One of the reasons these guys are so entertaining live is because of their interaction with the audience. Joseph came into the crowd for both 'Holding On To You' and 'Car Radio.' Dun at one point hopped onto a drum set strapped down to a clear platform that was pushed out into the crowd. He killed a drum solo from this position for the end of 'Ride.'

My favorite part of the night may have been the encore. After Joseph played the softer 'Goner,' the duo went into fan favorite 'Trees.' Throughout all seven times I've seen these guys they've always ended with 'Trees.' It's the perfect Twenty One Pilots song and ends with the dueling drum solo the guys play on top of the crowd.

Overall, another expected and great show from one of my favorite bands. Completely worth the trip up to NYC and I'm glad there will be a night 2 for this review as well!

Concert Rating: 4 Stars

Read more

Report as inappropriate

I never knew a two-man show could create an atmosphere that feels like a full band making awesome music until I saw Twenty One Pilots perform on the first day of Lollapalooza last year. It had rained that morning, so the standing section in front of the stage was basically a muddy swamp - but that didn't stop my friends from getting as close as possible to the front as we could. I've considered myself part of the Twenty One Pilots clique for quite some time, and I was so ecstatic that I was finally getting to see Tyler and Josh in action. That concert was even better than I expected it to be, and it made me appreciate them even more than I already did. First of all, it's probably good to note that Twenty One Pilots is not a normal duo. They do weird and crazy things while performing, and their sound in general is so different from mainstream music. So when the guys both came out in skeleton jackets all the way zipped up, I wasn't surprised. They started with the opening song of their debut album Vessel, "Ode to Sleep" which got the crowd going crazy. We all tried to keep up with Tyler as he rapped, but he was just too good. From the start of the show to the end, there was a nonstop energy that emitted from the stage and spread throughout the thousands who came out to watch them. Because there were only two of them up there, Twenty One Pilots made sure to make the most of all the space they had on the stage. Tyler sang, rapped, played the piano, keyboard, ukulele, and other instruments while Josh played the drums. They played with so much energy and passion and had everyone screaming the lyrics to all the songs while jumping along with them. There was never a dull moment: Tyler would jump off the top of his piano, extend his hand out into the crowd multiple times and move back and forth across the stage, all while singing his heart out. Josh also showed us what he had by doing back flips off the top of the piano. Basically the whole show was this awesome party watching and listening to these two guys show off their amazing talent. By far the coolest part of the show was when both Tyler and Josh came out on two platforms that people in the crowd held up for them. They also had two drums held up by the crowd, and they just started playing on top of us! They played this amazing beat that was coordinated really well. I was close enough to them to help hold up the platform, and it was amazing seeing them so close to everyone, playing as if they did that every day. Even after that awesome performance on the crowd, Twenty One Pilots were still going strong. Closer to the end of the concert, Tyler had everyone crouch down and wait until he told us to jump up. There was so much adrenaline rushing through me the moment everyone started jumping together. That show left me breathless, high off excitement over everything that I witnessed - not to mention muddy. But I wasn't mad. I remember my friends and I walked out of the stage area still dazed, most likely attracting people's attention, wondering why we had mud up to our knees. If I had the chance to relive that concert I would, mud and all.

Read more

Report as inappropriate

Saying that it was the best night of my life hardly does it justice. It was that, and so much more.

We got there at 4:20, a little over 2 and a half hours before the doors opened, so we were in the first 100 in the queue. We only had two layers on and we were freezing. Even worse, the venue was the city's guildhall, so, every 15 minutes, a clock chimed to remind us of how slowly time was going. We ate our dinner in the queue and luckily, there were public toilets just around the corner of the queue line.

At 7, the doors opened and we all had a massive rush to file in and be there as soon as possible. We practically ran in, and made it into the second row of people in the pit, near the centre, but a little to the left. Unfortunately, the people at the front were very tall (but they had got there at 7 am, so I forgave them).

By the time Transviolet came on at 8, the venue was full, but there was still some breathing room in the pit. Transviolet were good, but the people around me seemed generally unimpressed. I had listened to their music for the past week to prepare myself, so I knew what to expect. They just didn't bring the energy to the crowd that some support acts do. Still, they were nice enough and filled the time.

At 9:00, twenty one pilots came out, and we got crushed in the pit as people swarmed and shoved towards their idols. They opened with lots of smoke, obscuring our vision, and a thrilling rendition of Heavydirtysoul, complete with masks, screaming and Tyler doing his dramatic 'fall' onto his back.

The setlist was amazing, but the crowd was insane. We were crushed against each other, but it was totally worth it.

During Lane Boy, the girl next to me fainted, so I had to help her to safety. Later in the song, we all had to 'stay low', which got the crowd pumped, especially when the beat dropped and smoke shot from the stage.

I squeezed into the front row after the girl fainted.

In Holding On To You, Tyler came out to the centre of the crowd, and Josh did the same with his drum kit during Ride.

When the played the Run and Go, people were told to get on each others shoulders, but understandably, very few participated.

For We Don't Believe What's On TV, the crowd interaction was fantastic, and in Car Radio, it was a thrill to see Tyler screaming from the balcony.

They then went off stage, but we screamed and yelled and clapped until they came back and played Goner for us.

Then in the finale, Trees, we got the platform that held up Josh Dun. I touched him and it meant so, so much to me. Th drum battle was exhilarating and the confetti cannon was amazing.

They finished with a Goner piano outro and their famous, "We're twenty one pilots, and so are you."

I would recommend this experience to anyone and everyone who can. I wish I could go back and do it again.

Read more

Report as inappropriate

My friend first invited me to this show. I obviously agreed immediately because

1) I love live music

and

2) I was interested in twenty one pilots.

Now by the time she had invited me I only really knew one song: Car Radio. Shortly after I learned Tear In My Heart, Kitchen Sink and The Run and Go. Then with the massive radio success of Ride and Stressed Out, I felt comfortable knowing a few songs I would be able to sing. It was then that I bought both Vessel and Blurryface and decided to give them a real, through-and-through listen.

Best. Decision. Ever.

Time skip to the show and I didn't really know what to expect. There were a lot of different looking people at the huge venue the show was at. From the super emos to hardcore rap fans and almost everything in between, the place was sold out, completely filled to the brim. This made me happy -- all of these people who don't look like they'd fit well together share this one common interest.

There were two opening acts. One was Chef Special, a band from the Netherlands who were AMAZING. Their music and energy were just fantastic and I honestly wanted them to play for longer. Then the second band came on. Mutemath, as they are called, were okay... Just not really my cup of tea. It took a while for twenty one pilot's stage to be set up, but when it finally was... Wow. I don't even know if I can explain to you the artfulness of the show. From getting into giant inflatable hamster balls and rolling onto the crowd to putting on gas masks and drumming marching-band style, it was a wild, beautiful rollercoaster that I am grateful to have ridden.

Tyler and Josh were the sweetest and most gracious people I'd ever seen perform on that stage, even though they didn't say too much. One of my favorite highlights was when they brought both of the opening acts onstage to sing The Beatles' Twist and Shout. They had the audience completely engrossed and present in the show and I was right along with them. It was quite possibly the best concert I've ever been to. 11/10, would recommend to literally anybody. twenty one pilots is a great band and they give a great show and I am so happy to have discovered them.

Read more

Report as inappropriate

Twenty One Pilots is an indie rock band that hails from Columbus OH comprised of Tyler Joseph, singer, songwriter, piano & ukulele player, and drummer and Josh Dun, drummer extraordinaire. I first saw twenty one pilots on April 8, 2013 when they opened up for Neon Trees at the Kirby Center in Wilkes-Barre PA.

I had no idea who they were and when they came out on stage in skeleton masks I was like WTF!, hence their fans are called the Skeleton Clique. After their set I went onto their web site as I found the music to be "different" and wanted to know more about them. It's really tough to classify the music as their songs contain bits of poppy & melancholy lyrics intertwind with soft rap in a melody that takes you on a roller-coaster ride, best example is Car Radio. So after reading their philosophy on the site, I became very intrigued as it is very cerebral.

What I truly like about twenty one pilots is the uplifting message Joseph provides at the beginning of every show such as "are you happy to be alive tonight" or "leave all your problems at the door". As I have said many times, when you go see twenty one pilots it's not just a concert it's an experience that Joseph & Dun make you feel a part of and after every show you can't wait for the next one, plus the crowd becomes like family.

My three favorite parts of their shows are when Dun (the drummer) plays his drums over the crowd on a platform held up by the crowd, when Dun does a back-flip off the piano and the finale, when both play a kettle drum on a platform over the crowd. What is truly unique about this duo is that after almost every show, Joseph & Dun will come out and meet their fans to take pictures or sign an autograph, provided they don't have to be somewhere early the next day or the weather is bad.

Just find Mike Gibson (a truly nice guy) their tour manager and ask if they will be out. Take it from a fan who has seen them 10 times over the past year, if you haven’t seen their show I highly recommend going at least once, but be prepared to get "hooked!"

Read more

Report as inappropriate

First off, a minor but not-so-minor detail: they were ON TIME. The second it turned 20:30 the background music turned into a "wait for it" sound and people started screaming. I've never been to a concert where they've been that precise. The last one I was at I had to wait for an hour.

So, this is THE best concert I've ever been to in my entire life. They just seemed to genuinely care about their audience and wanted to give everyone a great time. They moved around a lot, ran along the outline of the audience, moved to a stage in the back of the audience, used a 'magic trick' to turn up at the other end of the room, ran across the audience in a huge ball, drummed on top of the audience, stood on top of the audience and so on.. It was amazing, no matter where you stood in the audience you kinda got an intimate meeting with them. I ended up pretty far back but when Josh went into the ball and ran around he got the chance to reach most of the crowd, so I actually got to touch the ball he was in. I freaked ouuuut i did not expect that.

It was just really amazing, you never knew what they were gonna do next, they were so energetic but had such sweet sensitive moments in between. They also sang around 5 older songs and ended it with an older one (car radio) instead of stressed out like i kinda expected since it's normal to end with the most popular song.

Norway has very few people so huge bands are usually less popular here than wherever they're from, so I feel like most of the time artists kinda dull down their concerts here cause they just don't bother with us. Twenty One Pilots definitely gave us all they had, and they don't seem like the people to differentiate between countries and treat some countries better just because they have more fans there. They're just such good and genuine guys and you see it in everything they do. Officially my favourite band, they deserve that title.

Read more

Report as inappropriate

These boys definitely know how to put on an INCREDIBLE show! Their energy is palpable all the way back to he people in the lawn (which is where i was standing at,) and the singer, Tyler, has incredible vocals live. You can watch their shows on youtube and expect no less from the best pieces of film. Joshua Dun, the drummer, is very talented.

You could tell the boys loved what thy were doing and were having fun with it, while also connecting intimately with the crowd through the lyrics of their songs and woth Tyler's comments amidst it all. I was a bit nervous when the opening acts couldn't get the crowd amped up, but it was clear they were only saving their energy for the real show!!

My dad took me to see them where they were playing upstate and watched the show with me as well. He wouldn't call himself a fan of twenty one pilots, and he is mostly big on classic rock, so the techno-alternative indie style that is of this band's forté was not very appealing to him. However, after the show he told me he was very impressed by the variety of music these boys produced and played, and that he would definitely go to see them again (we both are going to try and get better seats for next year's show!)

All in all, if you are thinking about seeing these guys live, I can tell you that you would not regret it at all, even if you are not sure you love the sound of their music, I promise that the energy they posess and give out to the crowd will undoubtly cause you to jump around like everyone else. 10 out of 5 stars!!!!! Go see them!!! Seriously!!!!

Read more

Report as inappropriate

The energy of the crowd combined with the explosion of color and light and sound was nothing I've ever felt before. It was surreal and was easily was one of the greatest nights of my life. Seeing Josh and Tyler live was something I've dreamed of for over a year and I was beyond grateful to have the experience! (I even had a countdown in my phone six months prior to the concert). I recommend buying tickets as close to the front as possible to get the full experience, but it is still fun even if you're in the back of the stadium or theater. At the united center, it wasn't just a concert but a performance too! With Josh's back flip, Tyler inside a hamster ball rolling around in the pit, Tyler walking into the audience, the confetti, smoke and light, screens displaying creative and Tøp themed graphics- all of it just enhanced the OUTSTANDING music and sound this one of a kind band possesses. I will never forget this night, and I CAN NOT WAIT until they release their new album and start touring with it so I can see them live again! During the encore, the entire crowd was holding their breath and screaming at the top of their lungs for Tyler to come back. I've never heard a group of people cheer so loudly and so emphatically for someone. Everyone there loved Tyler and Jason so much you could feel it! This band is like nothing on the face of this earth. If you're a fan and don't see them live, you are missing out on one hell of a show.

Read more

Report as inappropriate