Twenty One Steak, named in honor of Pueblo’s ability to overcome the impact of the 1921 flood, has endured a new community disaster — the COVID-19 pandemic.

The restaurant is housed in the 1900 Water Front building, 101 S. Main St., Suite 200, on the Historic Arkansas Riverwalk which was purchased by Rudy and Berni Padula in 2005. The family lovingly remodeled the building over the next couple of years before opening it up with several businesses inside.

Twenty One Steak opened three years ago, said Toni Orozco-Joyce, chief operating officer.

“Our claim to fame are our Executive Chef Michael Degenheart and Sous Chef Tony Molinaro who make really great food,” Orozco-Joyce said. “Our food is homemade and farm-to-table, and you can come into our restaurant in jeans.

"We are not just a special occasion restaurant.”

While the chefs are the stars, their dishes are the supporting actors.

More: One Pueblo: 21 agencies set to collaborate to help strengthen Pueblo's economy

“It’s really hard to pinpoint a favorite — to say what is my favorite is impossible — but once a week I have to have a ribeye because of the quality of beef we utilize and the preparation with the particular grill we have in our establishment,” she said.

The specialties of the day also are favorites because they are made with daily-sourced ingredients

The restaurant also is known for hosting its wine dinners featuring food created for its ability to compliment the specialty wines.

“That’s when they (Degenheart and Molinaro) get to jump off their natural course and show their artistic talents and their abilities at the highest level. We get a lot of rave reviews of these wine dinners,” she said.

From Snake River Wagyu steak to Nebraska beef to Colorado lamb with some Pueblo green chilis and sweet potatoes to accompany them, the wine dinner menus are full of surprises.

“How much more Pueblo can you be than to have those pieces sewn into the tapestry of our menu,” Orozco-Joyce said. “Its pretty special.”

“We are always looking for locally grown produce,” she said and the chefs do a lot of daily purchasing and shopping. “We try to do the best caliber of seafood that can be day-boated and overnighted so that even though we are land locked you don’t feel that way with our menu,” she explained.

Pacific Northwest salmon is cured with “our own flavorful touch. He knows how to take the best of what it is and then give it our own local flare,” she said of Degenheart.

On Feb. 24, “We will be featuring our French wine dinner. We don’t post the menus until about a week out so we can get everything as fresh as possible.

"The wines are unbelievable,” she said. “It is a testament to finding the pairings that will help both of them (wine and dishes) become a star for the dinner.”

Story continues below

Twenty One Steak endures COVID-19 restrictions

The COVID pandemic has been hard on the restaurant.

More: How Pueblo's move to Level Blue on the COVID-19 dial will impact businesses, schools and more

“It is disheartening in a lot of aspects. I came on board in January (2020) and was just getting my feet wet when the pandemic hit,” Orozco-Joyce said.

“Your best assets always in all establishments that serve hospitality are your people."

Not knowing if the restaurant could keep its employees after not one, but two, shutdowns was a big part of the devastation. Without an exact timeline of knowing exactly when the restaurant could reopen, coupled with the timing of the holidays last November and December, Orozco-Joyce worried about how her employees were going to get through the tough time.

Payroll Protection Plan funds helped the restaurant make sure the employees were covered during the first shutdown. She tried to help her workers navigate unemployment filings during the second shutdown, but still some workers have not been paid even though they were told they qualify.

But when the restaurant reopened in January Orozco-Joyce said she was thrilled to have employees who wanted to work and were ready to come back after an eight-week hiatus.

“Working for a family in a small town, we were very fortunate that our staff was there and our guests were there and it was incredibly heartwarming to see,” she said.

Reservations are suggested for any day, especially Friday and Saturday, but drop ins are also welcome. The restaurant is operating at 50% capacity so space is limited.

Hours are 5-10 p.m. Wednesday through Saturday. Call 369-1112 or 543-9500 for reservations or go to opentable.com.