Netflix’s hit drama Twenty Five Twenty One is a decade-spanning romance that unravels over the course of 16 dense episodes (each one is over 70 minutes long). The finale episode of season one dropped this weekend, and now that this epic story has concluded, you probably have some questions.

Twenty Five Twenty One is about two young adults, Baek Ye-jin (Nam Joo-hyuk), a young man who’s new to town, and Na Hee-do (Kim Tae-ri), a high school fencing prodigy, who fall in love with each other after they meet, but the fate of their relationship as adults is unknown. The story of their relationship begins when Na Hee-do’s daughter, Kim Min-chae (Choi Myung-bin), discovers her mother’s old diary and begins to piece her mom’s love life together starting when she was in high school, when she meets a slightly older boy named Ye-jin. (The title, Twenty Five Twenty One, is a reference to the main couple’s ages at the time that they begin their romance.) But do the main characters end up together in the end?

Twenty-Five Twenty-One Ending, Explained

During the final episode of Twenty Five Twenty One, Hee-do and Ye-jin confront one another and break up after being together for years, but they both regret how angry and emotional they were when they called it quits. In her diary, Hee-do expressed her regret and says that she wishes things didn’t end so badly. Hee-do then accidentally leaves her diary on a bus, and she requests that the driver contact her if the diary is found. Eventually, the diary is sent to Ye-jin, because a card with his contact information was inside it, and he reads the diary which chronicles several years of his relationship with Hee-do, and he’s moved to tears when he realizes how much Hee-do loved him. They track one another down and tearfully embrace, but Ye-jin is about to move to America for work, so they remain broken up.

Seven years later, Hee-do’s mother, a reputable news anchor, is looking for a replacement to succeed her, and she chooses Ye-jin, now a successful journalist for the job, so he moves back to Korea. Hee-do, we learn, has gotten married. We know from earlier episodes that she also has a teenage daughter, and we learn that, while her daughter was staying at her grandmother’s house, a local bookstore owner gave her Hee-do’s diary. Ye-jin had asked the shop owner to keep it safe and return it to Hee-do, but it was put in storage and forgotten about for years. Hee-do’s daughter takes the diary and gives it to Hee-do who reads it and reminisces about her relationship, and realizes that there’s an entry on the last page that she didn’t write. While the book was in Ye-jin’s possession, he added a note to her, expressing his own regret for the way things ended.

Hee-do returns to the spot where the pair broke up and relives the moment, but instead of remembering the way they angrily fell out with one another, she imagines all the things they didn’t say to each other, wishing each other well and telling each other how much they mean to each other. She thinks back on their first summer together when they fell in love and spent time with their friends, as a montage of their best memories plays. With that, the season ends, and though nothing is declared definitively, Hee-do and Ye-jin don’t get back together. But there’s always more story to tell if we get additional seasons of Twenty Five Twenty One.

Will there be a Season 2 of Twenty Five Twenty One?

Netflix has not confirmed whether or not Twenty Five Twenty One will be renewed for a Season 2. The show was in their non-English-speaking Top Ten for several weeks after its premiere, though, so based on that success, a second season is always a possibility.