Hanwha Solutions Qcells Division (Hanwha Qcells), a global leader in complete clean energy solutions, announced an eight-year strategic alliance with Microsoft Corp., a global technology company, that solidifies Microsoft as one of the world’s largest purchasers of renewable energy.

In its largest module and engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) services agreement to date, Hanwha Qcells will supply Microsoft with 12 gigawatts (GW) of solar modules and EPC services over an 8-year period — the equivalent to powering more than 1.8 million homes annually. This includes a 2.5 GW module and EPC services commitment previously announced in January 2023 .

Hanwha Qcells is working on building a strong and secure U.S. solar supply chain while producing sustainably-made solar modules. Microsoft continues to invest in purchasing renewable energy and other efforts to meet its sustainability goals of being carbon negative, water positive, and zero waste by 2030. With those goals, the two companies will collaborate to bring an estimated 1.5 GW of solar panels a year to projects Microsoft has contracted through 2032.

The solar modules will be supplied by Hanwha Qcells’ highly anticipated, fully integrated solar supply chain factory in Cartersville, Georgia, which is a part of Hanwha Qcells’ $2.5 billion investment announced last year .

“We are pleased to be a part of such a substantial commitment that will accelerate the global shift to renewable energy solutions. Qcells is uniquely positioned to ally with Microsoft toward creating a clean, sustainable future because of our investment in building an American-made solar supply chain,” said Justin Lee, CEO of Hanwha Qcells. “We look forward to expanding renewable energy frontiers together today and tomorrow.”

“Our expanded agreement with Qcells is designed to drive large-scale domestic production of solar modules essential to advancing a resilient U.S. supply chain and clean energy economy,” said Bobby Hollis, Vice President, Energy, Microsoft. “Through long-term agreements like this, we are signaling Microsoft’s demand and bringing more renewable energy to the grid, faster.”

Both companies seek to advance a global clean energy economy. With Microsoft’s 2025 commitment to cover 100% of its electricity consumption with renewable energy, Hanwha Qcells offers a complete U.S. solar supply chain and one-stop energy solutions to support Microsoft in reaching its goals.