Jack Norworth was a singer, vaudeville performer and songwriter.

"Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Norworth is credited as co-writer of a number of Tin Pan Alley hits. He wrote the lyrics of the song "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" in 1908, his most long lasting hit. But it wasn't until 1940 that he actually witnessed a Major League Baseball game. His "Shine On, Harvest Moon" was an even bigger hit at the time. There is some disagreement about Norworth's involvement in the latter. Broadway historian John Kenrick credits Edward Madden and Gus Edwards, while the family of Follies songwriter Dave Stamper[1] claims he wrote the song while working as pianist for Nora Bayes, the credited co-writer.

Other popular songs credited to Norworth include "Back to My Old Home Town"; "Come Along, My Mandy"; "Dear Dolly"; "Good Evening, Caroline"; "Holding Hands"; "Honey Boy"; "I'm Glad I'm a Boy/I'm Glad I'm a Girl"; "I'm Glad I'm Married"; "Kitty"; "Meet Me in Apple Blossom Time"; "Over on the Jersey Side"; "Since My Mother Was a Girl"; "Sing an Irish Song" and "Smarty." "Turn Off Your Light, Mr. Moon Man" is a sequel to "Shine on, Harvest Moon."

In 1908 he married Nora Bayes, with whom he performed in vaudeville. Following the Ziegfeld Follies (1909), Norworth appeared in a number of Broadway theater productions and was heard on early radio, such as his March 1928 guest appearance on Acousticon Hour.

After Bayes, he was married to actress Louise Dresser. He appeared in early sound films with his third wife, Dorothy Adelphi. An inductee in the Songwriters Hall of Fame, Norworth died of a heart attack in Laguna Beach, California. He was portrayed by Dennis Morgan in the musical film Shine on, Harvest Moon (1944)". en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Norworth

"The Britney and Justin of the nineteen-tens and -teens were Nora Bayes and Jack Norworth, who married in 1908 and swiftly became the most sought-after vaudeville team in America. Vaudeville was the premiere pop form of the day, an evening’s worth of entertainment in which act followed act in a highly competitive and ruthless marketplace of entertainment, magicians and acrobats and singers and comedians and sideshow freaks and dancers one after another with a classical piece at the end to clear the room so that the show could start again with a new set of paying customers — or vegetable-throwers. Bayes and Norworth ruled vaudeville for five years together and then for nearly ten more separately; Bayes was the one with the pipes, and thin-voiced Norworth the one who got his name on a good two dozen song hits of the era (you’ll see him pop up in the credits several times.) Here he sings a dopey song imported from a British musical, but which struck a chord as the teens moved into the twenties; around the same time “I’m Forever Blowing Bubbles,” “I’m Always Chasing Rainbows,” and similar faux-naïve songs were popular on stage and record. It was part of the codified patter of the era’s entertainment: everyone below the level of opera diva spouted pieties about their life’s work being the gift of joy and laughter. Norworth, a trouper to the end, always sounded like he meant it."

- aceterrier.com/?page_id=1502 (Hear Norworth sing one of his tunes at this site)