This slideshow requires JavaScript.

LOCK HAVEN – Our 3 day format will include the Thursday evening fund-raising concert, Rockin‘ the Haven / Unforgettable Fire &Uptown Music Collective at the Price Performance Center, Commonwealth University/Lock Haven campus. This event helps to offset some the cost of the festival while raising funds for the Jeff Gummo / CCAC Scholarship for the Arts. Even though the majority of the festival is free to the public, we ask you to attend this worthwhile event on August 8 to help with the sustainability of our programing.

LH JAMS mission – The Clinton County Arts Council / LH JAMS goal has always been to expand how visitors view a wide range of musical genres and art, to never to be predictable and always push visitors into appreciating a unique cultural experience. We strive to bring a diverse crowd of ethnicity, music and art backgrounds together in a family friendly environment that exposes visitors to a cultural smörgåsbord right on Main Street. 2024 will not disappoint with art & craft vendors demonstrating their skills. This year we also have street artists creating giant chalk drawings along with performing stilt walkers and jugglers during the afternoon and evenings.

Delicious food and drinks will be available through cafe seating at local restaurants along with several food trucks that will offer unique selections. New this year: vendors have a choice to setup both Friday evening and all day Saturday. Straub Brewery and Oregon Hill Winery are just two of the vendors that will be there both days.

Bands – There are 10 bands playing during the festival. They come as far away as New York and Pittsburgh and as close as State College and Lock Haven. Musical genres include jazz, pop, rock, blues, and Southern gothic.

Festival Highlights:

1. Street Performers – Dani Long Leggs and Mister Leggs are new to the festival in 2024. They bring another element of uniqueness that LH JAMS is known for. A touch of ‘Burning Man East’ and ‘Carnival’ you’ll see 15’ giants juggling LED batons in bright colored costumes right on Main Street. A family friendly environment geared towards the young and young at heart, Dani and Andrew will interact with the crowds. They may even bring extra hula hoops and other fun props for all to enjoy!

2. Art & Craft Vendors: LH JAMS juried artisans and crafters are the mainstay of the Saturday Main Street festival. You can purchase one of a kind paintings, photographs, drawings, local honey, hand made soaps, organic salves and scents, tie dyed apparel, premium cigars and much more. A favorite part the Saturday Street festival is our demonstrating artists and crafters. You will be able to watch several artisans demonstrate their trade and ask questions. This is another educational layer to the festival that the CCAC has created to inform the public about the skill and dedication of our regional artisans.

3. Street Artists: Holly Foy and her creative group will again decorate Grove Street! You may see giant dragons, colorful butterflies, beautiful flowers or a variety of other concepts they come up with. Bring the kids over and discuss the process and maybe you can even be part of the art.

4. Plein Air Painters: One of the most popular parts of the festival is our group of Plein Air painters that create artwork right in front of you. This year we will have nine artists from all across Central PA. Many are award winning painters so this is your chance to purchase a master piece right off the easel! We consider our plein air artists to be ambassadors of the festival that are happy to interact with the public and answer any questions you may have concerning their artwork.

5. Food Vendors and Restaurant Cafe Seating – One of the most popular highlights of LH JAMS is the availability of local food and drinks. Adult beverages are allowed to be purchased and consumed within the festival perimeter. To keep the festival a safe family friendly environment, no outside drinks can be brought into the festival perimeter. Security will be present to enforce any infraction. Bags and purses may be searched. Please keep this in mind as you plan your stay. Most downtown restaurants will provide cafe seating during the festival.

Typically local restaurants offer specials during LH JAMS. It is also recommended that you make reservations to assure a table when you wish to dine. Straub Brewery and Oregon Hill will also be set up with their beer and wine garden on Friday evening and all day Saturday. Three food trucks will be offering a wide variety of cuisine, including egg rolls, tacos, burritos, BBQ sandwiches and other tasty selections.

Musical Highlights:

August 8th Rocking’ the Haven concert at Price Performance Center –

Unforgettable Fire, the world’s premier U2 cover band along with opening guest the Uptown Music Collective. This is the only ticketed event of LH JAMS. Not only will this be the musical event of the summer but it also helps raise funding for the Jeff Gummo / CCAC Scholarship for the arts. We ask that you purchase a ticket. By doing so, we can keep the rest of the festival free to the public while raising funds for our art scholarship programs.

August 9th – Main Street Block Party –

Willie Jack and the Northern Light – Starting at 6 pm, they are a newcomer to LH JAMS. This PA band brings a unique rock band style with saxophone and keyboard overtones that sets it apart from most great regional bands. Combine that with Jeff Oshetski’s high energy lead vocals and a tiny dash of Tom Waits style and you’ll have a perfect way to kick off the Main Street Block Party.

Velveeta – Anchoring our Block Party, Velveeta will be back for the 3rd consecutive year. It is highly unusual for LH JAMS to bring back a band in consecutive years but why not … Velveeta is the quint essential party band. Velveeta has played at opening events for the Pittsburgh Pirates and Steelers along with Penn State tailgating parties. Their reputation precedes them if you are looking for a good time band that is serious about 80’s & 90’s covers. No doubt about it … Brent, Bones Adam and Brian will pack the streets again for this extremely popular segment of LH JAMS.

Saturday Main Street Festival –

•Art & Craft Vendors open at 10 am. Music starts at noon and runs until 10:30.

Central Mountain Jazz Cats under the leadership of Ashley Crust – This is the second year the Jazz Cats will open the music festivities on Saturday. One of the priorities for the CCAC is to support education in the arts. At a time when many school districts are cutting back on art and music programs, we are proud to recognize this local youth ensemble’s dedication to practice several times a week after school. The CCAC, The Keystone Foundation and Uptown Music Collective have created programs to encourage student participation in music and art and will reap lifelong benefits.

FAYM Band – They say you can’t go home. Well don’t tell Faye DeBonis Meyer that because this is exactly what she will be doing on August 10. Faye DeBonis Meyer and leader of the FAYM band, is a singer songwriter that grew up in the Beech Creek Area and later moved to the Doylestown area. FAYEM has played extensively through southeastern PA both as a solo artist and with her band. She just released her new song ‘Run Around’ in late December of 2023 that she co-wrote with Brian Dibagio, Luke Tozour and John Hoff. The song has been well received by the public and critics alike. We are extremely thrilled to have Faye come back to the area and make her LH JAMS debut on August 10.

The Sorters – This northern tier PA band was nominated as “best folk band” for the 2023 CPMA awards, The Sorters emerged organically from the daily grind of Spencer, Callie, and Kyle at a farm store, where their shared passion for music led to post-work jam sessions in a cabin they constructed. Drawing inspiration from their morning task of sorting produce, the band aptly named themselves The Sorters. With James joining as a drummer and Sam contributing mandolin and harmonica skills, the lineup solidified, enhanced later by Danny’s lead guitar prowess. As they continue to captivate audiences and carve their niche in the folk rock music scene, The Sorters exemplify dedication, creativity, and a commitment to telling stories through their music.

Bonnie and the Mere Mortals – If this isn’t the best name for this Pittsburgh based group, I don’t know what is! Paint your nails black and put on the heavy eye shadow, because Southern Goth is coming to LH JAMS. Led by Bonnie Ramone, Bonnie and the Mere Mortals bring an infusion of Appalachian roots and the soul of the South to help deliver visceral punches ranging from acoustic ballads to anthems backed by thumping bass and electric guitars. They also do a killer set of unplugged selections along with the best Cranberries cover tunes this side of the Atlantic!

The ‘Dancin’ in the Street’ Finale with two dynamic bands.

James Supra and Sarah Ayers Band – From Junior Wells to Led Zeppelin and just about everything in between, James, Sarah and the crew will open the ‘Dancin’ in the Street Party with a bang! James Supra’s blues harmonica prowess is legendary in the world of blues. He had won so many awards that he was given the ‘LVMA Legacy Award’ along with ‘Best All-Around Performer’.

Classically trained Sarah Ayers began singing the blues while in college even before she graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in Opera Performance. Proving her chops early, Ayers has the honor of being one of the youngest ever to win an award at a Metropolitan Opera competition. She later sang with the Anchorage Opera Company in Alaska. While there she continued to expand her extraordinary vocal talent to the blues, jazz, and rock and roll. If you get the idea you’ll hear what you perceive as an classic opera voice, come prepared to be surprised. Sarah’s powerful soulful and bluesy voice is anything but dainty and high scaled. She can rock with the best of them.

If that wasn’t enough, add Lou Franco to the mix and you have an amazing lead guitarist with another dynamic voice that compliments Sarah and James.

Central City Orchestra – Another outstanding LH JAMS performance that will be SURE TO BRING THE PARTY! Central City Orchestra is the premier 10-piece ensemble for the most memorable parties and festivals throughout Pennsylvania, and the mid-Atlantic region. CCO is comprised of three talented vocalists and seven musicians and led by Katie Robinette and Amy Banks who have over 16 years combined experience. CCO is unique in its ability to accommodate virtually any style or request with utmost precision. The large repertoire encompasses classic standards from R&B favorites, disco, funk, contemporary rock, current pop and much more!

From Stevie Wonder, Creedance Clearwater Revival, James Brown, Aerosmith and Donna Summer to Bon Jovi, Queen, Lady Gaga, Bruno Mars, Justin Timberlake and Maroon 5, CCO is the quintessential Feel Good Party Band that covers 7 decades of the most popular music.