Hillary Rodham Clinton (born 26 October 1947) was the US Secretary of State from 21 January 2009 to 1 February 2013, succeeding Condoleezza Rice and preceding John Kerry. She also served as Senator from New York (D) from 3 January 2001 to 21 January 2009, succeeding Daniel Patrick Moynihan and preceding Kirsten Gillibrand. Clinton was the wife of President Bill Clinton and First Lady of both Arkansas and the United States during the 1980s and 1990s, respectively, and she became a well-known feminist and supporter of healthcare reform. During the 2016 presidential election, she controversially won the Democratic nomination over Bernie Sanders through machine politics, and she lost the election to Republican Party nominee Donald Trump in the Electoral College, while having over 3,000,000 more votes in the popular vote.

Biography[]

Hillary Rodham was born at Park Ridge, Illinois, United States in 1947. She was originally a Goldwater Republican, and she studied at Wellesley College and Yale Law School. She became a distinguished and successful lawyer associated with children's rights who practiced law in Arkansas and headed various state committees while her husband, Bill Clinton, was governor of that state. Rodham Clinton gave up her legal practice to become First Lady in 1993, but she maintained a prominent policy role by chairing the Task Force on National Health Reform, which produced proposals for the reform of the US healthcare system that were defeated in a venomous congressional battle in 1994. During her husband's first term as President, she became a controversial figure because of her futures deals whilst a lawyer in Arkansas (the Whitewater controversy). She was also criticized for her feminism and her strong influence on her husband, and she lost further credibility over suspicions about her role in appropriating the papers of her former law partner, Vincent Foster - a White House aide - after his suicide in 1994. During her husband's career, she was sometimes forced by public opinion to play to conservative images of femininity or risk personal attack. For instance, she added her husband's surname Clinton to her own to further his political prospects. Her marital relationship came under scrutiny after the Monica Lewinsky scandal, but she reaffirmed her commitment to the marriage.