Belgian Competition: Liège Basket – Okapi Aalst: 82-73 Nice win by Liège Basket who used a strong final quarter to pull away from Aalst to get the 82-73 victory to start off their season. Newcomer Ziga Fifolt had himself a very solid game and finished with the 19 pts & 13 rebs Double-Double for Liège….

Maxime De Zeeuw won the Balkan League on Thursday evening with Hapoel Holon. Holon defeated the Bulgarians of Plvodiv (91-75). The Belgian Lions recorded 13 points, 3 rebounds, 2 assists and 1 steal. It’s his first trophy with Hapoel Holon. After a bad first half, Holon reacted well in the last quarter to win the…

Maxime De Zeeuw helps Hapoel Holon beat Maccabi Rishon LeZion, with a nice performance. Now that the fans are allowed in arenas, Holon plays at the Toto Arena in front of their noisy fans. And Maxime De Zeeuw enjoys playing in front of Holon’s fans. The Belgian Lion had a nice performance for Hapoel Holon….

Big performance from Maxime De Zeeuw against Haifa, his biggest this season ! After his big performance against Cholet this week in Champions League, Maxime De Zeeuw continues to play at a very high level. Against Maccabi Haifa, he played the best game of his season. In 28 minutes, he recorded 27 points, 7 rebounds,…

Top 5 Plays | Gameday 11 | Basketball Champions League 2020/21 Check out the Top 5 from Gameday 11 of the Basketball Champions League 2020/21, featuring a big dunk from Maxime De Zeeuw!

Maxime De Zeeuw leads Hapoel Holon past Cholet in the Champions League (71-89). Maxime De Zeeuw recently extend his contract with Hapoel Holon. In the starting 5 against Cholet in Champions League, the Belgian Lion showed why Holon decided to extend his contract. In 28 minutes, he recorded 21 points, 5 rebounds and 3 assists….

As announced last month, Maxime De Zeeuw extends his contract with Hapoel Holon. Maxime De Zeeuw signed a short-term with Holon in November to replace Richard Howell. But the Belgian Lion was really happy in Israel. His performances on the court are also very good. In Winner League, he averages 11 points, 6 rebounds and…

Hapoel Holon and Maxime De Zeeuw beat AEK Athens and Matt Lojeski this Tuesday in Basketball Champions League (77-71). After a rather balanced first quarter (18-19), it was Maxime De Zeeuw’s teammates, who made the difference in the second quarter to join the locker room with an advantage (38-32). After the break, AEK with a…

Hapoel Holon beats Hapoel Tel Aviv thanks to a big performance from Maxime De Zeeuw (77-63). Maxime De Zeeuw loves his experience with Hapoel Holon. On the TIB Playground Podcast, the Belgian Lion explained how he liked this new experience in Israel. Against Hapoel Tel Aviv, he showed that he was still in form. He…

Maxime De Zeeuw was our guest on the TIB Playground podcast, he talked about a potential return in Belgium: “I really love Antwerp, but there is also Brussels” When asked about a potential return in Belgium, that’s what the Belgian Lion responded:” I don’t know. I want to say yes, but it depends on many…