Music, Film and Drama are art forms that speak to the very core of human experience; they impact our lives every day. This 4-year programme allows students to immerse themselves in the close study of these forms, to understand them from cultural and historical perspectives, and to explore the ways in which they influence and transform each other. Learn how to understand the inner workings of these art forms. Deepen your knowledge of their historical development. Research and write about the important place of these arts in society.

The first year of the programme builds students’ vocabulary and fluency in key analytical techniques and introduces students to the cultural and historical contexts of music, film and drama. Second year modules broaden the scope of inquiry, moving from central texts and practices to the representation of lesser-known voices and issues. In your third and fourth years of the programme, you will forge your own path, taking modules that focus on specific genres and/or issues in these art forms. You can also choose to incorporate a one-semester humanities internship or study abroad. In the final year, students will work on a major dissertation which will allow them to produce a sustained research project on a topic of their choice, working one-on-one with an expert in their field.

First Year

Composition, Performance, and Reception

Intro to Physical Theatre

Musicianship

The Theatrical Event

Introduction to Film & Media (including case studies in digital innovation, film, television and other media forms)

Music, Culture and Society

Theatre Context and Conventions

Performance Electives.

Second Year

Producing Music, Film and Drama

Popular Music and Culture

Staging Performance

Documentary and Ethnography

Music History Since 1750

History of TV

Irish Theatre

Action Adventure Cinema

Musics of the World

Performance Electives

UCD Special Collections: Archival Research Methods.

Third Year

You will choose from a range of options that will enable you to broaden your horizons and enrich your academic experience:

Apply for a competitive internship in an area that interests you and/or relates to your area of study.

Study abroad for a trimester/year to develop your language skills and immerse yourself in a new culture.

Deepen your knowledge by studying a dedicated range of Music, Film and Drama modules, including: The Symphony & European Culture, Contemporary Alternative Cinema, Staging Texts, Educational Drama & Augusto Boal, Topics in Ethnomusicology, Contemporary Theatre in Performance, Performance Electives.

Fourth Year

Dissertation

The Oedipus Myth

Modernism and Avant-Garde

Screen Comedy

Music and Film

Revolutions in 20th Century World Theatre

Animation

The Orchestra

Beckett in Performance

Melodrama in Film and Theatre

Performance Electives.

For detailed information on subject content click here.

You may be interested in the following Blog posts: A Stage 1 English with Film student discusses his involvement with UCD Drama Society.

“This is a perfect way to develop and find skills in modern arts studying three subjects in an equal capacity. I have been able to take some incredible classes and work with a wide variety of people. The course options are flexible, allowing you to study topics you are genuinely passionate about. The team of lecturers and tutors I have been lucky enough to collaborate with and learn from are incredibly experienced and dedicated to their work, making studying under them a pleasure. The people you meet in classes are like-minded students who, like me, are trying to grow their knowledge and skill set in their personal and professional lives. I have made lifelong friends and acquired skills that I will take with me throughout my career.”

Eli Young, Student