Noshi Gilani Poetry allows readers to express their inner feelings with the help of beautiful poetry. Noshi Gilani shayari and ghazals is popular among people who love to read good poems. You can read 2 and 4 lines Poetry and download Noshi Gilani poetry images can easily share it with your loved ones including your friends and family members. Up till, several books have been written on Noshi Gilani Shayari. Urdu Ghazal readers have their own choice or preference and here you can read Noshi Gilani poetry in Urdu & English from different categories.

Noshi Gilani Poetry in Urdu

Noshi Gilani Poetry -The most renowned female Urdu poetess and former academic of the Islamia University Noshi Gilani, has several books of poetry on his name. She gained international recognition due to her candour and frankness style of poetry. She has been represented Pakistan through performing at large poetry gatherings arranged in Pakistan, Australia, Canada and USA. She moved to Australia after her marriage to Saeed Khan an Australian-based Urdu poet in 2008. The couple lives in Sydney, Australia. Her poetry work has been translated into English and her poems were read in the UK Poetry Translation Center’s World Poet Tour in 2008. Noshi Gilani is co-founder of the Urdu Academy of Australia in 2009, located at Sydney and organizes monthly sittings to endorse Urdu Poetry and Literature. The remarkable books of Gilani in Urdu poetry include Mohabatain Jab Shumar Karna, Udas Honay Kay Din Naheen and Pehla Lafz Mohabat Likha. Some of her selected poems are Ay Meeray Shareek-E-Risal-E-Jaan and Hum Tera Intezaar Kartey Rahay. Her poetry work has been appreciated and admired by many famous poets and writers.

Read the latest and best collection of Noshi Gilani Shayari in Urdu and English available on HamariWeb.com. We serve you the best collection of Noshi Gilani Poetry to retrieve memories from some finest collection of Noshi Gilani Poetry, Shayari & Ghazal. Her recent notable book of poetry “Hawa Chupke se Kehti Hai (The Breeze Whispers)” has received warm response from her readers. You can access the latest collection of Noshi Gilani Poetry, Shayari and Ghazals from HamariWeb.com online. Read, submit and share your favorite Noshi romantic or sad poems and shayari online to your friends, family and loved ones.