LOS ANGELES — Sydney Pollack, the actor, producer and Academy Award-winning director of “Tootsie” and “Out of Africa,” who used love stories, politics and humor to explore loss and human frailty, has died.

Pollack, 73, died at his home after battling cancer.

He excelled at serious, sometimes melancholy movies that explored relationships strained by emotional and cultural differences.

The connection between man and woman is “a metaphor for everything else in life,” he told Newsweek in 1985. In a 1990 interview with the Los Angeles Times, he said he was drawn to “love stories in which the obstacle is too great to finally be overcome.”

Though a comedy, his biggest hit, “Tootsie” (1982) took an earnest look at gender equality by following a male actor who finds success by posing as a woman. Other movies took on press freedom and responsibility (“Absence of Malice”), lost love and the personal damage caused by McCarthyism and blacklisting (“The Way We Were”) and the dirty details of covert intelligence operations (“Three Days of the Condor”).

Pollack was in the vanguard of innovative American film directors, including Sidney Lumet and John Frankenheimer, who became disillusioned in the 1960s with what Pollack called the “straight-line melodramatic” fare Hollywood studios were turning out, Janet L. Meyer wrote in her 1998 book, “Sydney Pollack: A Critical Filmography.”

Pollack was widely hailed as an actor’s director, one who worked closely with his cast to find the emotions behind their characters. Twelve actors were nominated for Academy Awards for performances in his films.

He directed Hollywood’s top stars, including Robert Redford seven times, Harrison Ford and Jane Fonda twice each, plus Meryl Streep, Dustin Hoffman, Paul Newman, Al Pacino, Nicole Kidman, Tom Cruise, Natalie Wood and Sidney Poitier.

Nominated three times for the Academy Award for best directing, Pollack won on his third try for “Out of Africa” (1985).

“Tootsie,” voted by the American Film Institute as the second-funniest movie ever — behind only “Some Like It Hot” (1959), another movie about men dressing as women — gave new life to Pollack’s acting career even as it cemented his spot as one of America’s great directors.

“It was always fun for me to hide in the back of a theater and watch ‘Tootsie’ with an audience and hear them laugh,” Pollack said in a 2006 online chat hosted by washingtonpost.com.

Hoffman starred in “Tootsie” as an argumentative and struggling actor who lands a role, and a new public identity, as a woman. He urged a reluctant Pollack — who hadn’t acted in 20 years — to take the added responsibility of appearing on-screen in the role of the actor’s agent.

Pollack relented, and the antagonistic scenes between him and Hoffman provided some of the movie’s funniest exchanges.

In an interview for the 1999 book “Playing to the Camera,” Hoffman said he wanted Pollack for the role because their real-life battles for creative control were generating the same tension needed in the movie.

“Pollack’s refusal to see me in any role but that of an actor was somewhat paternalistic,” said Hoffman, who had played key roles in creating the movie and getting it made. “I think that some directors are close-minded about what an actor can contribute.”

“Tootsie” was nominated for 10 Academy Awards but landed only one Oscar — Jessica Lange for supporting actress. Pollack lost in the directing category to Richard Attenborough, for “Gandhi.”

He finally landed his trophy three years later for directing “Out of Africa,” which also won for best picture and in five other categories. The film, adapted from the 1937 memoir written pseudonymously by Danish Baroness Karen Blixen, tracked the obstacle-laden affair of two Western settlers in Africa, played by Streep and Redford.

Pollack told the San Jose Mercury News in 2006 that the movie posed a question he found compelling: “Is it possible for two people, or two countries for that matter, to maintain every bit of their own individuality, give up nothing, and have a relationship?”

His directorial debut was a 1961 episode of the television western series “Shotgun Slade,” according to Meyer. Pollack would focus almost exclusively on directing for years to come.

He won an Emmy for best director for the 1965-66 season of “The Game,” part of Bob Hope Chrysler Theater. Also in 1965 he directed his first feature film, “The Slender Thread,” about a student volunteer at a crisis center (Poitier) who tries to help a suicidal woman (Anne Bancroft).

Pollack earned his first Academy Award nomination for best director for his sixth picture, “They Shoot Horses: Don’t They?” (1969), about desperate contestants in a Depression-era dance marathon.

In “Jeremiah Johnson” (1972), Redford played a disgruntled 19th-century U.S. soldier who retreats into the mountains. “The Way We Were” (1973), starring Redford and Barbra Streisand as lovers divided by religion and politics, earned six Academy Award nominations.

Following “Tootsie” and “Out of Africa”, Pollack directed the poorly received “Havana” (1990), then “The Firm” (1993), “Sabrina” (1995), “Random Hearts” (1999), and “The Interpreter” (2005).

Pollack married Claire Griswold, an actress, in 1958. Their 34-year-old son, Steven, a student pilot, died in a 1993 plane crash near Santa Monica Airport. A daughter, Rebecca Pollack-Parker, formerly was an executive at United Artists. Another daughter, Rachel Pollack Sorman, is a professional singer.