WHY is a peaceful, Christian, democratic country like America so ADDICTED TO WAR?

"For me it was just the KILLING" Curtis LeMay actually said that.

Say it Curtis. Say 5 TRILLION DOLLARS. Say it a few times. Roll it around in your mouth. Taxpayers shelled out 5 trillion since 2001 just to do one thing --to 'kill Arabs' Was it to get their OIL, or was it revenge for Sept 11th? Or was there another reason? (Some suggest it is POPPY/ HEROIN in the case of AFGHANISTAN: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opium_production_in_Afghanistan

Superb flick "AIR AMERICA" with MEL GIBSON and Robert Downey Jr. is an accurate picture of the CIA's fund raising with heroin grown by the HMONG in LAOS and packed in GI corpses in Vietnam, to be shipped to American air bases at night where GI's opened the guts up for drug-rewrapping. The CIA had a 'family' business with drugs since BEFORE WORLD WAR II.. Coke and Heroin gave them the cash for dirty tricks. Congress wouldn't give them money for the really nasty stuff. They even had their own drug receipt bank, NUGEN HAND run by spooks. So that's REALLY addicted to war. But there are other addictions.

My teacher, (the screenwriter w. two oscars, also an ex OSS man in WWII, a lifelong CIA Research and Analysis fellow 1945 onwards... who in WWII was a captain in the Army in the OSS when he wasn't in action with a camera, was first stationed at Fort Roach, Hal Roach Studios, a propaganda center (he'd been a Pathe news cinematographer before war.) They made training films.

This gent, Edward Anhalt, told his Loyola Marymount screenwriting class that war is self perpetuating because the soldiers get so much out of keeping us at war. They get more fruit salad medals on their chest, each one giving the guy a serious pay upgrade. And the big boys, the decision makers, get the really big perks. Defense firms hire retired generals with multi million dollar salaries. If you want to see that revolving door in a fantastically amusing FILM, see Fred Ward in The Adventures of Remo Williams where he plays a CIA bozo who wakes up with a KOREAN martial arts guru, (JOEL GRAY) and sees what’s really happening. Our own, US pentagon and defense industries are in bed together and rife with corruption and graft. Daring subject. Brilliant and funny action suspense film. But boy do those facts hit the ole nail on the head. TEACH KIDS which end is up with THIS ONE! And have your entire family read the "ADDICTED TO WAR " COMIC BOOK

http://www.addictedtowar.com/atw2a.html just keep paging thru it hitting NEXT. Or order the book for 11 $ it's for kids to understand what we're up against.

So add the SOLDIERS AND GENERALS in particular to that list at upper left. Generals especially as they get the fruit salad two ways, medals and moola. They go From the Pentagon to the private sector In large numbers, and with few rules, retiring generals are taking lucrative defense-firm jobs. CORPORATIVE MOOLA.

THE SECOND IMPETUS TO WAR, SLIGHTS. If you've ever played poker with a best bud and been stripped of a lot of gelt, you know that bad feelings smush down good ones. At the end of WW I, America felt the divvy of plunder didn't favor them and decided to invade Canada. If you think this is a Belushi John Candy Movie, think again: http://nationalinterest.org/feature/revealed-americas-secret-war-plan-invade-canada-15359

WAR HOGS NEVER DIE AND THEY DON'T EVEN FADE AWAY: The elderly Generals who remember the "good wars" will always be willing to participate even if it's a BAD one. Revolving Door jobs at War Toy companies and Rand Think Tank jobs help influence peaceful colleagues to assent to war. Read this article By Bryan Bender from Boston Globe -- December 26, 2010

WASHINGTON — An hour after the official ceremony marking the end of his

35-year career in the Air Force, General Gregory “Speedy’’ Martin

returned to his quarters to swap his dress uniform for golf attire. He

was ready for his first tee time as a retired four-star general.

But almost as soon as he closed the door that day in 2005 his phone

rang. It was an executive at Northrop Grumman, asking if he was

interested in working for the manufacturer of the B-2 stealth bomber as

a paid consultant. A few weeks later, Martin received another call. This

time it was the Pentagon, asking him to join a top-secret Air Force

panel studying the future of stealth aircraft technology.

Martin was understandably in demand, having been the general in charge

of all Air Force weapons programs, including the B-2, for the previous

four years. He said yes to both offers.

In almost any other realm it would seem a clear conflict of interest —

pitting his duty to the US military against the interests of his

employer — not to mention a revolving-door sprint from uniformed

responsibilities to private paid advocacy.

But this is the Pentagon where, a Globe review has found, such apparent

conflicts are a routine fact of life at the lucrative nexus between the

defense procurement system, which spends hundreds of billions of dollars

a year, and the industry that feasts on those riches. And almost nothing

is ever done about it.

The Globe analyzed the career paths of 750 of the highest ranking

generals and admirals who retired during the last two decades and found

that, for most, moving into what many in Washington call the

“rent-a-general’’ business is all but irresistible.

From 2004 through 2008, 80 percent of retiring three- and four-star

officers went to work as consultants or defense executives, according to

the Globe analysis. That compares with less than 50 percent who followed

that path a decade earlier, from 1994 to 1998.

In some years, the move from general staff to industry is a virtual

clean sweep. Thirty-four out of 39 three- and four-star generals and

admirals who retired in 2007 are now working in defense roles — nearly

90 percent.

And in many cases there is nothing subtle about what the generals have

to sell — Martin’s firm is called The Four Star Group, for example. The

revolving-door culture of Capitol Hill — where former lawmakers and

staffers commonly market their insider knowledge to lobbying firms — is

now pervasive at the senior rungs of the military leadership.

Among the Globe findings:

¦ Dozens of retired generals employed by defense firms maintain Pentagon

advisory roles, giving them unparalleled levels of influence and access to

inside information on Department of Defense procurement plans.

¦ The generals are, in many cases, recruited for private sector roles well

before they retire, raising questions about their independence and

judgment while still in uniform. The Pentagon is aware and even supports this

practice.

¦ The feeder system from some commands to certain defense firms is so

powerful that successive generations of commanders have been hired by the

same firms or into the same field. For example, the last seven generals

and admirals who worked as Department of Defense gatekeepers for international

arms sales are now helping military contractors sell weapons and defense

technology overseas.

¦ When a general-turned-businessman arrives at the Pentagon, he is often

treated with extraordinary deference — as if still in uniform — which can

greatly increase his effectiveness as a rainmaker for industry. The

military even has name for it — the “bobblehead effect.’’

“We are changing the perception and maybe the reality of what it means to

be a general,’’ said retired General Robert “Doc’’ Foglesong, who retired as

the second-ranking Air Force officer in 2006.

“The fundamental question,’’ he said, “is whether this is shaping the

acquisition system and influencing what the Pentagon buys. I think the

answer is yes.’’

A post-retirement business

Some members of Congress who served in the military said the system needs

much stricter disclosure rules. With few exceptions, all the Pentagon

requires now is for retired officers to wait one year before directly

advocating for a contract before the specific military branch they served in.

“A lot of these guys earn two to three times their retirement money,’’

said Senator Jack Reed, a Rhode Island Democrat and West Point graduate. “If

you are deriving a significant portion of your nonpension income from defense

companies actively engaged in contracting — especially if you are also

involved in these advisory panels — that should be disclosed.

“When I was an officer in the 1970s, most general officers went off to

some sunny place and retired,’’ he added. “Now the definition of success of a

general officer is to move on and become successful in the business world.’’

Representative Joe Sestak of Pennsylvania, a retired three-star admiral,

said that when he was in uniform he saw firsthand the influence retired

admirals have when they are brought in to advise the Navy.

“Rank did mean something. The principal guy in the room really drove the

thing. There is a hesitancy to question them,’’ he said. “If there isn’t

transparency or knowledge of who they are working for when they are

advising the Pentagon, you are building a military that is not all it can be.’’

Martin and other generals interviewed by the Globe maintain that their

postretirement consulting business is ethical and beneficial for America’s

defense. They said it matches private-sector expertise with crucial

Pentagon missions.

“Access sounds sleazy, but it brings a value,’’ Martin said. “I am

interested in doing things that I think the Air Force or [Department of

Defense] might benefit from.’’

Martin and Northrop Grumman declined to discuss the details of his

activities on behalf of the company. Martin said his ongoing role as

chairman of the Air Force Studies Board is mostly limited to deciding what

to study, not making specific recommendations.

“I do not substantially influence the findings of studies that could help

my clients,’’ Martin said.

Yet judging the validity of such assertions is difficult. Even fellow

participants in the two-year stealth aircraft study, for example, said

they were not told of Martin’s industry clients. Seth Bonder, a member of the

National Academy of Engineering who also participated on the panel, said,

“I never knew what Speedy was doing elsewhere. I don’t inquire what he has in

terms of industry connections.’’

Bonder said disclosure of potential conflicts would be desirable, to

prevent confidential data from reaching contractors at an early stage.

“You get privied information,’’ he said. Clear potential for conflict

There was a clear sense of urgency as top Army officials and advisers

converged on the National Defense University’s campus on the banks of the

Potomac River for a high-level meeting in June 2009.

Their goal: develop ideas for the Army’s next ground combat vehicle. The

Army badly needed to get a new tank program rolling after its previous

effort resulted in an embarrassing, $14 billion flop.

A veil of secrecy surrounded the event. The Army did not publicly disclose

the guest list for the meeting. It required participants to sign

nondisclosure agreements.

And to block potential bidders from gaining an unfair advantage, defense

contractors were pointedly excluded.

Yet, defense contractors had a robust presence inside.

At least six retired generals invited by the Army were also consultants or

executives of defense companies that would bid on the new tank contracts,

according to a meeting roster obtained by the Globe. The roster did not

list their private-sector affiliations. Each was listed by the Army only as

“distinguished participant.’’

Contacted by the Globe, several generals said they disclosed their

potential conflicts of interest to the Army, on ethics questionnaires, before

arriving at the meeting.

The Army refused to comment on the ethical issues raised by the generals’

presence and declined to release copies of the ethics disclosure forms,

citing privacy concerns. It confirmed, however, that no one was

disqualified from participation based on their responses.

A look at some of those attending suggests that there was ample potential

for direct conflicts.

Retired Army Lieutenant General William H. Campbell oversaw all of the

Army’s information systems before leaving the service in 2000. Since 2002, he has

been employed as a senior vice president at BAE Systems, one of the Army’s

primary weapons suppliers and a major bidder for the new ground combat

vehicle.

Campbell said in e-mail responses that he did not have a conflict of

interest because he works in the electronics division of BAE, not the

ground combat division, which is bidding to build the new tank. Campbell and BAE

declined to say how much, if any, of the electronics system in the new

tank might be produced by Campbell’s division at BAE.

But Campbell suggested that other generals at the meeting may have been

skating closer to the edge.

“I think there is a danger of a real or perceived conflict of interest

when an individual who is working on a defense program provides external advice

to the military on the very same program, in either an official or

unofficial capacity,’’ he said.

Campbell did not name names.

BAE had another representative in the meeting room: retired Lieutenant

General Joseph L. Yakovac, formerly the top deputy to the Army’s senior

acquisition official, who was advising BAE on the ground combat vehicle as

a private consultant.

It was Yakovac who had overseen, while in uniform, the failed, $14 billion

“future combat system’’ program. And the office he once ran was in charge

of devising the new combat vehicle. Some of the active-duty officers now

running the unit previously worked for Yakovac, including Major General

John Barley. Nevertheless, Yakovac said he was assured by Army lawyers he could

offer advice without running afoul of any ethics rules.

The new system is considered a separate contract by the military, freeing

him to take an advisory role. As a rule, Yakovac said, he does not seek to

influence former Army colleagues on matters involving his private defense

clients. And he said he provides clients with advice that is based solely

on publicly available information.

“You spend 35 years in an ethical place,’’ he said. “You don’t leave that

at the door.’’

Another retired general at the session was General John H. Tilelli, who

was the vice chief of staff of the Army before retiring in 2000. He now runs

Cypress International, which has a consulting agreement with Science

Applications International Corporation, another bidder on the ground

combat vehicle program, confirmed Melissa L. Koskovich, a corporation

spokeswoman.

Retired General William S. Wallace, who ran the Army’s Training and

Doctrine Command before retiring in 2008, said he was not representing one of the

prospective bidders at the time of the meeting. Like the other

participants, however, one of the ethics questions he was asked to answer, according to

a blank copy, was whether he intended to consult in the future for a client

that may have a direct interest in bidding on the new tank.

Wallace declined to say how he answered that question. Wallace confirmed

that he is now a consultant for General Dynamics Land Systems Division,

which is seeking to win the ground combat vehicle contract. But he

insisted he does not use his Army contacts to further the business interests of his

clients.

On this point, the public is essentially left to trust the word of Wallace

and other retired generals that they do not improperly trade on their

influence and access. That’s because they are almost never required to

divulge their clients, or say how much they get paid. The few rules that

do guide the Pentagon influence trade prohibit only a narrow range of sales

activities.

Navigating ethical issues

The one-year “cooling off’’ period prohibits a retired general or admiral

from directly making a sales pitch to their former military branch. For

two years after retirement, the Pentagon prohibits them from participating in

“particular matters,’’ meaning ongoing contracts greater than $10 million

that were under their command. New editions of older weapon systems — like

the new ground combat vehicle — are not considered “particular matters.’’

“Even if restrictions apply, ‘behind the scenes’ work is permitted, so

essentially they can assist a new employer as long as they don’t place the

call or show up at meetings,’’ said Scott Amey, the general counsel at the

Project on Government Oversight, a watchdog group.

The generals who navigate these ethical minefields said they are capable

of managing potential conflicts without oversight, because of their own

integrity.

“You have to have a firewall in your head,’’ said industry consultant and

former Vice Admiral Justin D. McCarthy.

But a number of retired generals contacted by the Globe said they are

uncomfortable with the laxity of the system and refuse to use their

Pentagon contacts to win private clients.

Air Force Lieutenant General Kenneth E. Eickmann, who frequently dealt

with defense contractors when he was on active duty, is among them.

“I always felt uncomfortable dealing with former generals working for

those companies,’’ said Eickmann, who retired in 1998 and is now a senior fellow

at the Energy Institute at the University of Texas. “Sometimes I felt like

they were relying on a past friendship to get me to do something.’’

William “Buck’’ Kernan, a retired Army four-star general who recently left

Military Professional Resources, Inc., a company that provides training,

logistics, and other support to the military, believes trading on such

access and influence raises difficult questions.

“I didn’t like people doing it to me when I was a four-star, a three-star,

even a two-star — using a previous relationship as an entree to selling me

something,’’ he said. “The perception from the outside of a previous

superior now dealing with a previous subordinate can cause all kinds of

questions.’’

Navy Admiral William J. Fallon said he turned down consulting offers after

learning that defense industry clients were seeking “tactical’’

information from inside the Pentagon. Said Fallon: “I didn’t want to be a walking

Rolodex.’’

Humvee lobbying pays off

The Humvee is perhaps the most visible icon of modern warfare — bulky,

tough, and ubiquitous on battlefields in Afghanistan and Iraq. But this

year the Army said it would build them no more.

Instead, it proposed shifting half a billion dollars in money for new

Humvees to a program of fixing up old models, which Army officials

determined would be more cost-effective.

Whether or not it was a good move for the Army, it was a looming debacle

for the Humvee’s exclusive manufacturer.

The firm — AM General, of South Bend, Ind. — fielded a trio of former

military leaders with major Beltway clout, including retired Army General

Jack Keane, to try to reverse the plan.

A commanding presence at 6 foot 5, Keane, 66, turned in his fatigues seven

years ago for a pinstriped suit. He is now one of the most influential

retired generals in Washington, holding a seat on a high-level Pentagon

advisory panel, the Defense Policy Board, and counting among his defense

industry clients McAndrews and Forbes, the New York holding company that

owns AM General.

Keane contacted Army General Peter Chiarelli, as vice chief of staff the

Army’s second-ranking officer, to make the case that the service should

continue buying new Humvees, Keane confirmed in an interview. He said he

told Chiarelli that he believes the Army needs to maintain a “strategic

partnership’’ with AM General, whose relationship with the military dates

back to building Jeeps during World War II.

Chiarelli declined through a spokesman to be interviewed for this article.

Keane also helped AM General make its case to influential members of

Congress, according to a former defense industry official with direct

knowledge of the discussions.

Keane was involved in the effort on the Hill even though he is not a

registered lobbyist. He maintained in an interview that he was not

required to register because he does not spend more than 20 percent of his time

contacting Congress, as the lobbying disclosure laws stipulate. He said he

only helps clients reach the right decision makers in the Pentagon or on

Capitol Hill.

In addition to Keane, AM General was paying the Spectrum Group, a defense

consulting firm with a roster of retired generals, about $20,000 a month

to help arrange access to key decision makers, according to a former Pentagon

official with direct knowledge of the contract. According to a former AM

General executive, the AM General account at Spectrum was overseen by

retired Army Lieutenant General John Caldwell.

Caldwell’s last job before retiring in 2004 was as the deputy to the

service’s top acquisition official. Before that he served as commander of the Army’s

Tank-Automotive Command, the Michigan-based unit that is responsible for

acquiring Humvees and all other ground vehicles in the Army. Spectrum did

not return several calls for comment.

A third retired general helping AM General was General Paul J. Kern, a

member of the Pentagon’s Defense Science Board, an official military

advisory panel. Kern, who declined a request for an interview, retired in

2005 as the chief of the Army Materiel Command and was previously the

service’s top acquisition officer. Kern, who served as president of AM

General from 2009 to 2010, is also an associate at The Cohen Group, the

consulting firm that includes a number of high-profile retired generals

and admirals.

All that muscle appeared to pay off for AM General, which did not respond

to a request for an interview.

In July of this year, Congress denied the Army’s request to shift more

than $500 million to the refurbishment of Humvees and ordered the service to

use the money to keep buying new ones.

Tom Christie, a former senior Pentagon acquisition official, said the

Humvee debate is a prime example of how defense companies gain by deploying

retired generals. “They are very useful in opening doors.’’

A convincing proposal

As envisioned by Northrop Grumman, the Fire Scout — a nimble,

remote-controlled surveillance helicopter — would help troops pinpoint

enemies hiding beneath a jungle canopy. With hovering capability, it could

peer into places a Predator drone could not.

But before Northrop could get to work building Fire Scouts, it first

needed to convince the Army the project was a good idea. For persuasive

assistance, it turned to Burdeshaw Associates Ltd.

Burdeshaw was founded in 1979 and is one of the oldest “rent-a-general’’

consulting firms. It has a reputation for zealously guarding the identity

of its clients, and even its headquarters seems deliberately low profile,

housed above a Safeway grocery store in suburban Bethesda, Md.

To get the Fire Scout off the ground, Burdeshaw did more than just set up

meetings with key Army decision makers. It was hired by Northrop Grumman

to write a “concept of operations’’ for the aircraft, according to retired

General William Richardson, a former commander of the Training and

Doctrine Command and an adviser to Burdeshaw.

The concept of operations is an official document that is a crucial step

in defense procurement. It lays out exactly how a weapon is supposed to work

and what its mission will be, and provides the justification for pursuing

its development.

After the Army adopted the concept, it gave Northrop a 10-year deal and

paid the firm $109 million to build eight Fire Scouts. But they are still

sitting at Northrop Grumman’s Mississippi plant, unused. With little explanation,

the service decided earlier this year that it didn’t need the aircraft

after all.

The Army would not respond to questions about why it canceled the Fire

Scout. Notifying Congress early this year that it was killing the program,

it said it was focusing on other priorities.

Burdeshaw’s chief executive, retired Army General William Hartzog, who

until 1998 commanded the Army Training and Doctrine Command, did not respond to

repeated requests to discuss his company’s business.

An official at Northrop Grumman’s Aerospace Systems Division who was not

authorized to speak publicly disputed Richardson’s characterization of

Burdeshaw’s work, saying the firm’s consultants crafted a series of

briefing papers that helped make the case for the project, not an official concept

of operations. Northrop Grumman declined to comment on the record about

Burdeshaw’s work on the Fire Scout program.

The Army Aviation Center in Alabama, which is responsible for all Army

aircraft, did not respond to several requests to comment on how the

documents provided by Burdeshaw were used.

Retired officers frequently help industry and the military branches

develop the concept or justification for weapons, according to interviews with

military and industry participants. In other cases they try to influence

weapons projects more indirectly: by passing along “white papers’’ and

other documents drafted by their clients that question the rationale for

awarding contracts to their competitors.

Wallace, the Army four-star who retired in 2008 as the commander of the

Training and Doctrine Command, said the phenomenon has grown in recent

years. He cautioned that the Army should only use such private-industry

analyses as a starting point for further work.

“I hope [the Army] wouldn’t just take it and put an Army logo on it and

say it’s ours,’’ said Wallace, who now consults for General Dynamics on the

ground combat vehicle program, among other companies. “Doesn’t sound like

a good idea to me.’’

Tapping a niche market

The Four Star Group certainly lives up to its name. The heavyweights on its consulting roster, all retired from the Air Force, served as chief of staff; deputy chief of staff; chief of the Space Command; head of the Materiel Command (Martin); and commander of the Air National Guard. The newest adviser for the group is former Air Force Secretary F. Whitten Peters.

What sets these retired generals apart in the military consulting world —

aside from the blatant way their brand touts their old command authority —

is their market niche. They are using their influence and knowledge of the

Pentagon to build a business in equity investing.

The partners in the Four Star Group have an exclusive arrangement with a

$3 billion private equity firm in Los Angeles, the Gores Group, which awards

them an equity stake in companies that Gores acquires based on their

advice. What Gores gets in return is knowledge about which companies are drawing

attention from key Washington decision makers, or are developing

technologies that will be in demand by the Pentagon.

Through their relationship with Gores, the generals own shares, or could

own shares in the future, in firms that make communications devices for

soldiers, blast-resistant glass for embassies and military installations,

and radar equipment.

The Globe identified several other equity firms with defense expertise

that also are deploying retired generals as part of an investment strategy.

Critics say this emerging line of retirement business for generals raises

thorny questions about their access to privileged Department of Defense

information.

“The big question is should they be using their contacts in the military

to benefit their new investment?’’ said Charles Elson, director of the

Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware. “At what

point does your fidelity to the military dissipate or go away? Do the

contacts they have in the military benefit their new operations?’’

But Bill Patton, a former corporate executive who helped set up The Four

Star Group and is its chairman and chief executive, said the firm’s

principal owners scrupulously avoid trading on privileged information.

“I think this is how a company of ethical retired generals should operate,’’

he said. The generals’ role, he said, is limited to acting as “assisters,

advisers, and introducers.’’

The demand for the generals who can guide investment decisions is expected

to grow in the future, say observers of the trend.

Retired Army General Wesley K. Clark, who now works as a lobbyist and

investment banker for companies seeking alternative energy contracts,

believes the growing hunger among private equity firms and Wall Street

investors to enlist retired generals is a consequence of a broader

phenomenon: the increasing importance of the military to America’s

industrial base.

“It is the militarization of the economy,’’ Clark said in a recent

interview.

Note: what we didn't read was HOW MANY GENERALS are on BILDERBERGERS BOARD, the planet's decision making insider group!

Bryan Bender can be reached at bender@globe.com.

http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washington/articles/2010/12/26/defense_firms_lure_retired_generals/?page=full

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Our POSTER is ANITA SANDS HERNANDEZ, Los Angeles Writer, mother of 4 and career Astrologer. Catch up with her websites TRUTHS GOV WILL HIDE & NEVER TELL YOU, also The FUTURE, WHAT'S COMIN' AT YA! FRUGAL LIFE STYLE TIPS, HOW TO SURVIVE the COMING GREAT DEPRESSION, and Secrets of Nature, HOLISTIC, AFFORDABLE HEALING. Also ARTISANRY FOR EXPORT, EARN EUROS... Anita is at astrology@earthlink.net ). Get a free natal horoscope "my money/future life" reading now + copy horoscope as a Gif file graphic! No smarter, more accurate career reading out there!

<=== BACK TO THE WAR INDEX

<===BACK TO MONEY SECRETS ONLY THE EXPERTS KNOW

<=== BACK TO SECRETS THE GOV DOES NOT WANT YOU TO KNOW

<===BACK TO THE SECRETS OF THE OLIGARCHS, THE EMPIRE INDEX PAGE

<=== SHOW ME THE FIX INDEX PAGE.

<== SHOW ME THE HAPPY R)EVOLUTION PAGE

<=== BACK TO "GUERILLA CAPITALISM" -- THE SOLUTION!

<==== BACK TO THE "VITAL SIGNS OF A DYING ECONOMY" the "FUTURE" WEBPAGE

<==== BACK TO THE WALL STREET MELTDOWN WEBSITE, with "WHAT TO DO TO SURVIVE" TIPS

<=== BACK TO ENRON PLANET, the DOOMSDAY SCENARIO!

<====BACK TO THE HOLISTIC GOURMET, BON MARCHE

<=== BACK TO THE FRUGAL ARTISAN IMPORT/ EXPORT TYCOON AND HIS "STUFF"

<=== BACK TO THE GLEENERS PAGE

<=== HOW EVEN A POOR PERSON CAN BUY REAL ESTATE

<== BACK TO THE FUTURE INDEX PAGE

<=== BACK TO THE GENTLEMAN FARMER'S GARDEN INDEX

<=== INVESTIGATE DOING DRIP IRRIGATE- LINES for DROUGHT STATES: BIG $$. ONE HR to LEARN at Home Depot

<=== BACK TO "DONE WELL, ACTIVISM IS A DELIGHT and CREATES CAREERS as well as PLANETARY EVOLUTION"

<=== BACK TO THE MALTHUSIAN INDEX PAGE

<===BACK TO THE PHILOSOPHY INDEX PAGE

<=== BACK TO THE LUCK IN LOVE WEBSITE

<== BACK TO PROPAGANDA STUDIES --HOW GOV CONTROLS REPORTERS, SO THEY PROXY-LIE TO YOU DUPES

<=== BACK TO TRACKING THE ECONOMY, an INDEX PAGE

<=== BACK TO ALL POINTS OF THE COMPASS POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY TUTORIAL

<=== BACK TO JERRY'S REFRIGERATOR & the Tin Foil Hat Collection of CONSPIRACY THEORIES!

<====BACK TO THE FREE MONEY WEBSITE

<==== BACK TO THE HARD TIMES WEBSITE

<===== BACK TO THE POVERTY INDEX PAGE

<==== BACK TO THE "TIPS to SURVIVE THE FUTURE" INDEX PAGE

<=== BACK TO THE "FIX YOUR FLAGGING AMBITION" SEMINAR

<== BACK TO THE SNOOKERED INDEX PAGE

<===BACK TO THE REALITY 101 SEMINAR FOR TEENS

<==== BACK TO THE SHOW BUSINESS ARCHIVE, 4 wannabe Writers, Directors, Videographers & Producers

<====HOW TO TINKER WITH OTHER PEOPLE's BRAINS

<====BACK TO THE NEW AGE EMPOWERING INDEX

<===BACK TO "HOW TO MERCHANDISE YOURSELF" INDEX

<===BACK TO THE ALL ABOUT TAXES INDEX PAGE

<=== BACK TO THE FRUGAL TIPS and CHEAPO LIFESTYLE WEBPAGE

<=== MEET ANITA SANDS HERNANDEZ WHO WRITES ALL THESE ARTICLES

<=== TAKE ME TO THE HOLISTIC PET, HOW NEVER TO NEED a VET

<===== TAKE ME TO THE SALMONELLA TIMES, HOW TO SAVE THE CHICKEN

<=== BACK TO THE TRUTHS ABOUT DENTISTRY THAT WILL SAVE YOU 100 THOUSAND!

<=== BACK TO THE SNOOKERED WEBPAGE, HOAXES WE HAVE ALL KNOWN

<===BACK TO EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT WEB STUFF (for dummies)

<===BEAUTIES, HOW TO MARRY A BILLIONAIRE AND SAVE THE WORLD with HIS MONEY

<==== BACK TO THE JFK HIT, THE REAL SKIVVY

<====VISIT THE WHISTLEBLOWER EXPERTS at THE BEST SITES ONLINE

<=== THE SECRETS, THE TRUTHS 'they' don't want you to know, INDEX PAGE

<=== THE WAR INDEX. WHY THE OLIGARCHS LOVE WAR TO DEATH

<===BACK TO THE TRUTHS (LIES REALLY) THAT GOVERNMENT WILL NEVER LET YOU SEE