Robert Mitchum, the actor whose heavy-lidded eyes gazed on the world with cynical amusement as he radiated rugged strength in more than 100 movies, died in his sleep Tuesday at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif. He was 79.

The Associated Press reported that he had been suffering from emphysema for more than a year and was told in the spring that he had lung cancer.

Throughout his long career, Mr. Mitchum pretended to regard his profession casually, repeatedly remarking in his droning baritone, "It sure beats working."

But associates respected him as one of the most talented and dedicated people in their profession, a no-nonsense craftsman who was always punctual, word perfect in his lines and a battler for making his movies better.

He appeared in war movies, westerns and films noir. He was a villain in Hopalong Cassidy movies; he portrayed heroic GIs and battle-weary officers, flinty private eyes and homicidal killers.

"I think when producers have a part that's hard to cast, they say, "Send for Mitchum; he'll do anything,' " he once remarked. "I don't care what I play. I'll play Polish gays, women, midgets, anything."

Off the screen in his early years, he accumulated a reputation as a bad boy, a ladies' man and outlaw who shocked naive movie fans in the 1940s when he was arrested on a marijuana charge at the home of a starlet.

His first major role, as a dedicated infantry officer in Story of G.I. Joe, a film about Ernie Pyle's war reporting, won him an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor in 1945.

Other major portrayals were of a cynical private detective in Out of the Past (1947), a sympathetic hunter in Rachel and the Stranger (1948) and a weary rodeo performer in The Lusty Men (1952).

In The Night of the Hunter (1955), which was directed by Charles Laughton, Mr. Mitchum personified evil as a crazed evangelist, a terrifying killer who had the words "Love" and "Hate" tattooed on his hands.

He portrayed a gallant marine opposite Deborah Kerr's nun in Heaven Knows, Mr. Allison (1957), an earthy Australian sheep drover in The Sundowners (1960) and a sadistic killer in Cape Fear (1962).

Mr. Mitchum helped to popularize film noir in the 1940s and was a major figure in the 1970s revival of the somber, cynical genre, with movies like The Friends of Eddie Coyle (1973) and remakes of Farewell, My Lovely (1975) and The Big Sleep (1978), in which he played Raymond Chandler's noble private eye Philip Marlowe.

On television, he was Victor "Pug" Henry, the pivotal character in an 18-hour 1983 mini-series, The Winds of War, based on the novel by Herman Wouk, and was one of the stars of the sequel, War and Remembrance, in 1988.

The Mitchum image was evident even at the start of his career, when he first generated a world-weary toughness. Audiences' interest was further fueled by tales of his uprooted childhood, adventuresome youth, colorful early jobs, and a two-month jailing at 31 in a marijuana case in California.

The drug charge could have destroyed some careers, but at the time it enhanced his image as a rebel. He served 60 days on an honor farm, and in January 1951, after he completed a period of probation, his case was reviewed.

After an investigation, an innocent plea was ordered and the conviction was expunged from the record. Mr. Mitchum never attempted to publicize his exoneration.

When reporters asked him what jail was like, he replied, "It's just like Palm Springs without the riffraff."

Mr. Mitchum is survived by his wife, Dorothy Spence; sons, James and Christopher, both actors; and daughter, Petrine.