Hello all! I’m back again this summer to (hopefully) watch and review one movie a day for each actor honored in this month’s Summer Under the Stars on TCM.

I hope I have grown both as a writer and a critic compared to last year; I looked back on some of my posts and yikes! were they harsh. I feel like I’m more cemented in my knowledge and understanding of classic films and am looking forward to making this an enjoyable experience for me and all of you readers out there.

Without further ado, let’s get into the first subject: Lucille Ball!

Schedule:

Bunker Bean

Room Service

Dance, Girl, Dance

You Can’t Fool Your Wife

Too Many Girls

Valley of the Sun

Lured

Easy to Wed

Easy Living

The Long, Long Trailer

Forever, Darling

Meet the People

Du Barry was a Lady

Without Love

Film Review

Susan (Lucille Ball) and Lorenzo (Desi Arnaz) realize that their marriage is falling apart, which leads to the help of a guardian angel (James Mason).

I absolutely adore Lucille Ball, having grown up watching reruns of I Love Lucy. It wasn’t until quite recently that I started getting into her film career and found that she was a talented dramatic actor as well.

Hollywood attempted to cash in off the success of I Love Lucy with two films: The Long, Long Trailer and Forever, Darling. For me, Trailer was a much funnier film and felt more cinematic, while Forever, Darling was more like a series of sketches similar to the show.

Unfortunately, Ball and Arnaz didn’t have the same spark and chemistry in this film that they did in their other projects, making the bickering grow tiresome quite quickly. Certain scenes even felt too true-to-life as their own marriage was on the rocks. Many of the arguments felt like we were intruding on something personal rather than being amusing.

However, the movie was more fun when James Mason made an appearance as the guardian angel that only Ball’s character can see. He manifests as Mason because he is Ball’s favorite movie star. In an especially memorable scene, Ball literally inserts herself into a fake film-within-the-film as Mason’s love interest – treating us to hilarious reactions from Ball as she watches from the audience.

Forever, Darling didn’t take advantage of the guardian angel subplot as much as it should have, as Mason disappears from the film after the hour mark and it devolves into a camping screwball without much humor. I could have seen the movie doing a lot more with Mason and Ball’s interactions since she is the only person who can see him, but it mostly served as another thing for the main couple to argue about.

The film did offer an interesting peek into suburban ’50s life through the eyes of Hollywood and had some great costumes (it was neat to see a few of the costumes from I Love Lucy in color!), but as a comedy and romance it didn’t succeed at either.

Final Thoughts

Ball’s Performance: Probably the weakest work of hers that I’ve seen; while she did shine in several comedic scenes, her character became more grating the longer the movie went on. For me, it really just came down to weak writing and poor directing that didn’t play to her strengths as an actor.

Would I Recommend? Watch episodes of I Love Lucy or check out The Long, Long Trailer instead!

Comment below what you’re planning on watching today for Lucille Ball!