In May of 1880, King Chulalongkorn of Siam’s (Thailand) first of three wives, Sunandha Kumariratana, left the kingdom for a short pleasure trip to their lavish Bang Pa-In Summer Palace, just north of Bangkok. Pregnant with what was said to be a son and the heir-apparent to the King’s throne, she was accompanied by her daughter, Princess Karnabhorn Bejraratana (shown above with the Queen), only twenty two months at the time.

The royal family boarded a picnic boat, towed behind a royal barge, which was to deliver them safely to their destination.

As they headed down the turbulent Menam river (Chao Phraya river), accompanied by servants and guards, their boat suddenly capsized while “swinging against the swift current while rounding a bend.”

The pregnant Queen and her daughter were thrust into the water. A “multitude” of servants and guards, stood idly and without action, following instruction from the head guardian, amidst the Queen’s desperate pleas for help. Nineteen-year-old Queen Sunandha, her daughter and her unborn son, tragically drowned to death as onlookers refused to assist them.

As the headline of this gruesome event spread globally, “Siam” (Thailand) was charged with being “spiritually dwarfed” and “inhumane” for the guard’s refusal to interfere with the helpless pregnant Queen and her daughter. However, it was rarely noted in these written judgments and accounts that the head guardian was obeying an ancient and stringent Thai law that forbid any commoner from touching a royal, as the punishment for doing so was immediate death. It should also be noted that accidental drownings on the Menam river (Chao Phraya river) were so prevalent that a strange superstition developed in response. It was believed that “if you rescue any one from drowning, the water spirits will resent the interference and claim at some future time the rescuer as a substitute, hence the stolidity and indifference in Siam about rescuing the drowning.” And so the guards obeyed the law and the superstitions of the Menam river (Chao Phraya river) at the cost of the Queen and her only daughter and unborn son’s lives.