Name: Brett Alvarez

Year: Junior

Major: History/Education - Social Studies

Hometown: Plano, Texas

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined to be a part of a great community I found at CSU, and didn’t want to miss out on the college experience.

Fun Fact: Big nose ring guy

Name: Ethan Awtrey

Year: Sophomore

Major: Forest and Rangeland Stewardship - Forest Management Concentration

Hometown: Colorado Springs, Colorado

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined Sigma Pi in order to experience brotherhood. I wanted to experience life different from what I had in the past, which meant being more social and outgoing, and Sigma Pi gave that to me.

Fun Fact: I'm a classic Tetris nerd

Name: Nic Brownrig

Year: Senior

Major: Finance

Hometown: Sedalia, Colorado

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined Sigma Pi for the the brotherhood/family aspect of our fraternity. I came to CSU looking for that true fraternity experience and now Sigma Pi and my brothers are like my second family.

Fun Fact: I played in an All-star bowl in Football in Cowboy Stadium and got on the Jumbotron

Name: Trenton Chiga

Year: Sophomore

Major: Undeclared

Hometown: Colorado Springs, Colorado

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: To become more involved in the community both within and outside of CSU. My goal was to meet and become friends with students of various ages, and work to better our community with service events, and philanthropies

Fun Fact: He'll lay you out on a hockey rink

Name: Sam Derrickson

Year: Sophomore

Major: Technical Journalism - Minor: Film Studies

Hometown: Ft. Wayne, Indiana

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined because I was looking for a group of guys who I could always rely on and be myself with

Fun Fact: I want 3 pugs named Doug Dick and Dave they will be my legion of boom when I enter the house the triple Ds baby

Name: Babin Dinda

Year: Junior

Major: International Studies and Anthropology

Hometown: Kolkota, India

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: Sigma Pi is a fabulous group of individuals that supports you, inspires you and pushes you excel in every fork of life. They are my family away from my family.

Fun Fact: I can speak 4 languages, I love photography and guitars

Name: Max Fries

Year: Senior

Major: Microbiology

Hometown: Sacramento, California

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined Sigma Pi because as a freshman, I wanted to meet new people and rushing a fraternity was a good way to do that. I found Sigma Pi to be the fraternity that most represented my values and I’m glad to be part of this family.

Fun Fact: I'm a master baker

Name: Robby Grisanti

Year: Junior

Major: Marketing

Hometown: Monrovia, California

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined Sigma Pi as an out of state student to meet more people, make friends, and have a good time in college.

Fun Fact: I played water polo for 5 years

Name: Jack Johnson

Year: Junior

Major: Finance and Marketing

Hometown: Cleveland, Ohio

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: Coming to CSU, I wanted to find my home away from home and be a part of something bigger than just myself. The Brothers of Sigma Pi have become my second family.

Fun Fact: Plays like James Harden in IM Basketball

Name: J.C Houpt

Year: Junior

Major: Finance

Hometown: Columbus, Georgia

Why did I join Sigma Pi?: I really wanted to experience new things and meet new people after my first semester at college and I learned about the frat after hanging out with some brothers at a sorority formal.

Fun Fact: I love fly fishing for trout. Also is wet from 3.

Name: Trey Kerr

Year: Senior

Major: Corporate Finance

Hometown: Ortonville, Michigan

Why did you join Sigma Pi?: I joined Sigma Pi because I moved here from out of town looking for a good group of guys to hangout and create amazing experiences with, which I found.

Fun Fact: I have been skydiving