JACKIE ZEBROWSKI (Brenda)

Jackie Zebrowski is a comedian from Queens, NY who has been writing and acting in a sketch comedy group called Murderfist for ten years. She hits the scene solo with her character acting with monologues that range from sweet and silly to bizarre and dark. Jackie also currently works on a few comedy podcasts out of Cave Comedy Radio; she enjoys the freedom of developing different characters while being hidden in a recording studio. She is so excited to bring Brenda to life and to work further with such an amazing group of talented and dedicated people.

HALEY RAWSON (Alix)

Haley is an actress, producer, and native New Yorker. Recent TV/film credits include Steven Spielberg's Bridge of Spies, The Affair, The Slap,The Blacklist and upcoming feature We Only Know So Much (dir. Donal Lardner Ward). Other web credits: Whatever This Is (dir. Adam Goldman), SNAFU (by Chloe Sanders), Bodega (TSW), and Young Love (Vacation). On stage Haley has worked at the Lake Tahoe Shakespeare Festival, Incubator Arts Project, The Wild Project and three seasons at Allentown Shakespeare in the Park (dir. Moritz von Stuelpnagel). More at haleyrawson.com.

STEPHANIE GIBSON (Boss Lady)

Stephanie Gibson is best known for her performance in Cinderella on Broadway as the role of step-sister Gabrielle. She is a graduate of Cincinnati College-Conservatory of Music. Her other Broadway credits include Addams Family and Spamalot. She has also appeared in the national tours of A Chorus Line playing Judy and Happy Days playing Lori Beth. She was most recently seen in the new original musical National Pastime at the Bucks County Playhouse in the role of Betty Lou. Her film and telvision roles include the feature films "The Union", and "Are You Joking" as well as "Person of Interest", "Up All Night", “All My Children,” “As the World Turns,” and “Guiding Light,”. Other New York credits include City Center Encores production of Anyone Can Whistle, and New York Musical Theatre Festivals production of Fingers and Toes. She has been seen in productions across the country at multiple regional theaters including The Papermill Playhouse, The Old Globe, and The MUNY. Stephanie also writes and co-stars in the original webseries Dates, Mates and Clean Slates. Check it out!! datesmatesandcleanslates.com

CHRISTOPHER CHWEE (Uber)

Christopher Chwee is an Australian born actor living in New York. He found his calling as an actor whilst studying Business Management at the University of Queensland, which he later completed at Columbia. He is a graduate of Circle in the Square Theatre School and founded New Light Productions after graduation. New York stage credits include work with Primary Stages, The Workshop Theatre, EstroGenius Play Festival and the New York Fringe Festival. He can be seen in the series Bodega and the upcoming feature film The Night Before. More at www.christopherchwee.com

NANCY OPEL (Mom)

Nancy starred in Honeymoon in Vegas on Broadway, after playing the evil Stepmother in Cinderella on Broadway. She has also performed on Broadway in Memphis, Fiddler on the Roof, Gypsy and Urinetown among many other Broadway and Off-Broadway productions.

ZOE GELTMAN (Snooty Sales Lady)

Zoë Geltman is a performer and writer and a born and bred New Yorker. As an actor, she has had the privilege of performing at The Bushwick Starr, Incubator Arts Project [R.I.P.], the CUNY Graduate Center, Abrons Arts Center and Dixon Place, among others, and with such illustrious companies as Nellie Tinder, Target Margin Theater, ANIMALS performance group, Brave New World Rep, and Superhero Clubhouse. Her own work has been developed and performed at Catch performance series, Theater for the New City, Dragon's Egg Studio, and The Brick, and she was a 2014 finalist for the Soho Rep Writer/Director Lab. She is currently writing a show about stand-up comedy. Check her out! www.zoegeltman.com.