Working in the music business since the age of 15, Asya was born with music and an industrious spirit in her bones. Her mother, an accomplished violinist, guitarist and singer, and her father, a designer and mechanical engineer.

Raised in Toronto, the Los Angeles-based tech and music marketing entrepreneur keeps ahead of the curve of soulful music and culture and strives to stay fresh by introducing new sounds, events, and talent to a base of over 30K email subscribers.

Asya is the quintessential Renaissance woman, and is credited with heightening public awareness of critically acclaimed music artists and a trailblazer in the world of online marketing and promotion.

Shein travelled extensively at a young age, which exposed her to a global realm and appreciation of quality music. During her teenage years, she frequented the urban nightclub scene in Detroit, Toronto, New York and Chicago to get a feel for the industry, and quickly acclimated to the deep house scene, falling in love with this unique sound and community. Shein spent much of these teenage years, upon her discovery of house music, promoting parties all over the Midwest and East Coast.

Shein attended Wayne State University where she studied international affairs and business. However, she was determined to take a more prominent role in the house music scene, and would soon meet the first of her mentors, a highly respected female in the music industry, the late Laura Gavoor, CEO and President of Yin Sight Management.

Gavoor changed Shein’s life by being an integral supporter in the beginning stages of Shein’s career. Laura worked exclusively with managing tours, marketing and PR for the Originators of Techno aka The Belleville Three including Juan Atkins, & Kevin Saunderson plus Jeff Mills, Stacey Pullen, Laurent Garnier & other legendary dance music artists.

Within a few years of being schooled in the Detroit underground music industry with Gavoor, Shein began booking DJs and doing street promotions for clubs such as Motor Lounge with legendary DJ Mike Clark and various afterhours parties in the Detroit music underground scene promoting events with resident DJs Moodymann & Theo Parrish.

Seeking growth and experience, Shein felt the need to uproot and move to Chicago where she worked at Undaground Therapy and later at Dusttraxx Recordings with the likes of Glenn Underground and Boo Williams. She was responsible for marketing, promotions, and an assistant booking agent using skills acquired during her tenure under Gavoor. After several years of working in the industry, Shein started her own booking agency, Mir Media. With this new venture she started as a booking agent for DJs such as Vikter Duplaix, Kerri Chandler, Bugz in the Attic, Charlie Dark, Ron Trent, Chez Damier, Dennis Ferrer, Gene Hunt, Amalgamation of Soundz, Nick Holder, the late great Mike Huckaby and personal manager to acclaimed talent, Peven Everett who presently records and tours with the Gorillaz.

Shein, once again feeling the need for change, relocated to the West Coast. She acquired more clients, including such talents as the late-great Jay Dee aka J Dilla as his DJ booking agent, Questlove of the Roots, Common’s DJ Dummy, Maseo from De La Soul, Pete Rock, Ali Shaheed of A Tribe Called Quest, Osunlade, Jazzy Jeff plus live acts with the likes of Dwele, Raheem DeVaughn, Omar, Eric Roberson and others, bringing many international acts to the entertainment pleasure of loyal and grateful club denizens.

In 2003, Mir Media expanded, spawning a new venture, Fusicology, which has become the Premier Source for Progressive Events, Music & Culture via user generated and curated event calendar, now in over a dozen markets. Fusicology is a multifaceted media entity, offering boutique lifestyle marketing and the go-to site for the urban soul audience for shows, new music, videos, editorial and exclusive content.

In addition to its more business-oriented role, Fusicology also puts out a newsletter for Music Monday as an online community of over 75,000 total newsletter, social media followers and mobile app subscribers. Clients include Goldenvoice, AEG Live, Red Bull, Live Nation and various venues, record labels and Advertising & Experiential Agencies.

Asya also works with countless musicians and artists and recently helped produce the Miles Davis 90th Birthday Celebration, LA City Hall Prince Tribute in 2016 and DILLAart in 2015 commemorating Jay Dee aka J Dilla as well as Grammy Afterparties that have featured Stevie Wonder, Common, Robert Glasper amongst others.

In October 2018, Fusicology celebrated our 15 Year Anniversary with Louie Vega Performing Live with his band E.O.L. Soulfrito at the Ford Theatres. In the summer of 2018 Asya and Fusicology produced the 23rd Annual Central Avenue Jazz Festival for the City of Los Angeles, District 9. In 2017 for the district, we produced the 4th Annual Dia de los Muertos.

In 2021, Dilla Fest was officially launched, celebrating the life and music of the legendary James “J Dilla” Yancey and co-produced a virtual event in February and a concert at Grand Performances in August 2021. In 2023 Fusicology co-produced the 50th Anniversary of Hip Hop at Grand Performances and co-curating the anniversary at The Broad in Los Angeles. In January 2024 Asya co-produced the 50th Birthday of Dilla Celebration at NY Winter Jazz Fest and is announcing Dilla Fest at SummerStage Brooklyn on July 12 and Dilla Jazz at the Ford in LA coming up on July 18, 2024.

Along with Fusicology, Asya has been the lead project manager for the development other websites, mobile apps and develop decks for partners & sponsorships. Commemorating the 20th Anniversary in 2023 alongside launching the wellness platform, FuseLife, which will help bring forth and promote a healthy lifestyle through experiential, social and Web.

With Fusicology, Asya has been able to establish her inherent mission: To advocate progressive social change and community building through conscious quality music and similar mediums. Her goal is to expand the website, launch in more cities, and broaden to a worldwide audience as the base grows into the hub for progressive music and culture, a feat it has already spawned.

When she is not helming Fusicology with her online and event marketing expertise, the multi-faceted Shein can be found in the middle of the dance floor doing what she does best – dancing to the music she loves. “By incorporating a large spectrum of content and technology, Fusicology has become more than a website or an event production company – it is an expansive hub for the global progressive movement,” Shein concludes.

At the end of the day, Shein represents the steadily rising class of new media and technology creatives building power worldwide right now. As a member of the free agent, forward-thinking, globally-cultured psychographic herself, Shein has inadvertently created a co-operative new medium for communication; Information exchange for community and advertising rooted in a common ground – conscious, quality music and for making “alternative” healthy lifestyles the norm.