Asya is the Course Director for MA Media and Cultural Studies. She is also an integral part of the teaching team for BA (Hons) Music Industries. She also teaches and contributes to BA (Hons) Media and Communications, MA Global Media Management, MA Public Relations, MA Data Journalism, MA Multiplatform and Mobile Journalism, MA Media Production, and MA Events and Exhibitions Management.

Asya is committed to internationalism in education and the value of cultural and knowledge exchanges. This is central to her role as an international exchange academic lead for media students via Study Abroad.

Current research and publications for Asya include studies around heavy metal in popular music heritage, folklore influences in contemporary Bulgarian popular music, and the Canterbury Sound as an opportunity to study aesthetic, continuity, place and myth in popular music cultural identities. Asya co-leads the BCMCR Popular Music Research Cluster and is involved with a range of journals, edited collections, and projects.

Asya is the Course Director for MA Media and Cultural Studies. She is also an integral part of the teaching team for BA (Hons) Music Industies. She also teaches and contributes to BA (Hons) Media and Communications, MA Global Media Management, MA Public Relations, MA Data Journalism, MA Multiplatform and Mobile Journalism, MA Media Production, and MA Events and Exhibitions Management.

Asya works with students at all levels within Higher Education – from Level 4 or Year 1 of a standard undergraduate degree, through MA, to PhD. She is committed to exploring co-creative, empowering and inclusive student-centred teaching and learning practices. Asya supervises Major Projects at BA and MA levels as well as PhD research projects.

While her research is mostly in popular music culture, Asya has developed a broad teaching portfolio which includes areas such as:

Research methods

Popular music cultures

Music Industries

Media and creative industries

Media theory

Youth cultures

Design and visual theory

Asya has also participated in international teaching exchanges such as the International Teaching and Staff Exchange Week at the Oulu University of Technology, 2018 and 2019.

Asya’s PhD, supervised by Professor Shane Blackman at Canterbury Christ Church University and supported by full scholarship, was an ethnographic study into the creation and articulation of popular music within the social and political contexts of contemporary Bulgaria. Asya’s doctoral research became the basis for the monograph Popular Music in Contemporary Bulgaria: At the Crossroads (2019). This strand of her research – concerned with East European post-communist contexts and popular music – has produced a series of new research, especially around subcultural scenes in Eastern Europe.

Since completing her PhD, Asya has also been involved with research dedicated to the value of popular music for the heritage and contemporary identity of places and their communities. For example, Asya has been working on developing a study in collaboration with Professor Paul Long, focusing on the local and international significance of heavy metal. Working with Professor Andy Bennett (Griffith University) and Professor Shane Blackman (Canterbury Christ Church University), Asya is the first editor of a collection on the Canterbury Sound in popular music.

Asya has been actively involved in organising research and impact events such as the one-day festival Canterbury Sound: Music, Place and Myth (2017) in collaboration with the Canterbury Festival, and the Home of Metal Symposium at Birmingham City University (2019). She is also part of the dissemination committee of the international project Keep It Simple, Make It Fast: a biannual conference with a leading role for popular music, youth studies research, and cultural activism. Asya also engages with outward-facing, research informed activities as part of events such as Flatpack Festival and XChange Festival.

Asya is involved as an editor, advisory board member, and reviewer for multiple peer-reviewed journals with international following such as Riffs, Metal Music Studies, YOUNG, and Journal of Youth Studies. As a co-lead of the BCMCR Popular Music Research Cluster she is committed to nurturing the collective intellectual project of the cluster, the development of impactful projects, ideas, and publications.

Selected research publications

Draganova, A. Blackman, S. and Bennett, A. (eds) (2020, forthcoming) The Canterbury Sound in Popular Music: Scene, Identity and Myth, Bingley: Emerald

Draganova, A. (2020, forthcoming) “Pop-Folk, Traditional, and Popular Music in Bulgaria" in Beissinger, M. (ed.) Oxford Handbook of Slavic and East European Folklore, Oxford: Oxford Press

Draganova, A. (2019) At the Crossroads: Popular Music in Contemporary Bulgaria, Bingley: Emerald

Draganova, A. (2020, forthcoming) “The ‘New Flowers’ of Bulgarian Punk: Subcultural scenes, rituals of resistance, and social change” in Arnold, G. and McKay, G. (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Punk, Oxford: Oxford Press

Draganova, A. and Blackman, S. (2018) “A howl of the estranged: post-punk and contemporary underground scenes in Bulgarian popular Music” in Guerra, P. and Bennett, A. (eds.) Underground scenes and DiY cultures, London: Routledge, Preview: https://www.routledge.com/DIY-Cultures-and-Underground-Music-Scenes/Bennett-Guerra/p/book/9780415786980

Draganova, A. and Blackman, S. (2018) “In the Land of Grey and Pink: Popular music alternativity in the lived and imagined city of Canterbury” in Spracklen, K. and Holland, S. (eds.) Alternativity and Marginalisation, Bingley: Emerald, Preview: https://books.emeraldinsight.com/page/detail/Subcultures-Bodies-and-Spaces/?k=9781787565128

Draganova, A. and Nedeva-Voeva, N. (2018) “A New Generation Forever: The (Bulgarian) Revolution Goes On” in Riffs, Vol. 2(1): 38-48, Available at: http://riffsjournal.org/2018/07/31/volume-2-issue-1-neli-nedeva-voeva-and-asya-draganova-a-new-generation-forever-the-bulgarian-revolution-goes-on/

Draganova, A. (2015) “Book Review: Irving Seidman, Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education & the Social Sciences” in Qualitative Research, Vol. 15 (3)

Popular publications, zines, reviews, and blogs by Asya available online at:

BCMCR

Riffs Journal

The Arts Desk

Selected conference papers and invited guest talks

Draganova, A., with Bennett, A. (2019) Music scenes, Memory and Emotional Geographies (Conference Panel), IASPM 2019, The Australian National University, Canberra

Draganova, A. (2019) “The Canterbury Sound: Constructing Narratives of Place and Scene in Popular Music”, IASPM 2019, The Australian National University, Canberra

Draganova, A. (2019, invited speaker) “Progressiveness and Alternativity in Popular Music: The Canterbury Sound”, Griffith Centre for Social and Cultural Research, Brisbane

Draganova, A. (2019, invited speaker) “The New Mob Rules”, guest speaker at panel at the World Metal Congress, Shoreditch, London.

Draganova, A. (2019) “To Break a Wall”: On the genealogy and heritage of subcultural scenes in Eastern Europe, Home of Metal Symposium, Birmingham City University

Draganova, A. (2019) “From a Postgraduate Research Thesis to a Published Monograph”, Canterbury Christ Church University, Canterbury

Draganova, A. and Long, P. (2018) “Gotta let go? Women and Popular Music Heritage”, Keep it Simple, Make it Fast International Conference, University of Porto, Portugal, July 2018

Draganova, A. (2017) “Home of Metal, Homes of Metal”, Boundaries and Ties ISMMS International Conference, University of Victoria, Canada, June 2017

Draganova, A. (2017) “Some people think little girls should be seen and not heard, But I think…”: Women and the contradictions of rock music’s gendered cultural identities, Guest Lecture by Invitation of Birmingham Rock Society, University of Birmingham

Draganova, A. and Blackman, S. (2016) “In the Land of Grey and Pink”: Popular music in the lived and imagined city of Canterbury", Keep it Simple, Make it Fast: DIY Cultures, Spaces and Places, international conference. University of Porto. 17 - 21 July 2016

Draganova, A. and Blackman, S. (2016) “Sounds like Canterbury: Ethnographic observations on the local music scenes within a social, economic and cultural community”, MeCCSA Annual Conference 2016 – Communities, Canterbury Christ Church University

Draganova, A. (2015, invited speaker) “For every action – a counter action’: Post-punk, power, and resistance in Bulgarian Popular Music”, Power and Resistance conference, Griffith University, Australia

Draganova, A. (2015, invited speaker) “So we pose our questions to a whole nation forever” The genesis of youth cultures and resistance in contemporary Bulgaria, Youth Histories symposium, Griffith University, Australia

Draganova, A. and Blackman, S. (2015) “Rituals of ‘misrule’ within Bulgarian popular music”. Keep it Simple, Make it Fast: Underground Music Scenes and DIY Cultures, international conference. University of Porto. 15-17 July 2015

Draganova, A. & Blackman, S. (2014) “A howl of the estranged: Post-punk and contemporary underground scenes in Bulgaria.” Keep it Simple, Make it Fast: Underground Music Scenes and DIY Cultures, international conference. University of Porto. 9-11 July 2014