Popular St. Louis Blues radio analyst, Kelly Chase is stepping down after 18 years of calling Blues hockey.

“It’s tough for me to say I don’t want to broadcast games anymore, but this decision is mine and it’s time for a change,” Chase told stlouisblues.com.

- Advertisement -

Chase will still remain with the Blues, but in a vastly different capacity, assuming a role in business and community development for the franchise. The motivating factor behind Chase’s exit from the radio booth is a real estate development position with the Discovery Land Company.

“I’ve always wanted to be part of the St. Louis Blues and I’m grateful I have a chance in a different role that won’t consume as much of my time as broadcasting did,” Chase told StLouisBlues.com. “I have absolutely wonderful kids and a great wife who has been very patient with my job. It’s going to be a change for everybody and I’m expecting it will be positive.”

For the entirety of his 18-year tenure on Blues radio, Chase worked alongside play-by-play announcer Chris Kerber on KMOX, KTRS and back on KMOX again, both were hired in 2000.

“You rarely see that in sports where an entirely new team takes over from the previous year, but that’s what we had to do. I anticipated they would have chemistry, but it was better than I anticipated,” said Jim Woodcock, former VP of Marketing and Communications for the Blues who hired the broadcast team.

Chase, a 12-year NHL veteran who played more than half his career in St. Louis, brought unforced humor to the radio broadcast and was a natural fit with Kerber, making the duo popular among Blues fans. “Even a non-sports fan was wanting to hear more,” Kerber said. Kerber will continue his play-by-play role and will undoubtedly have say in choosing a new partner, although no candidates have been announced.

A replacement is expected to come within the next month. Blues games are primarily broadcast on KMOX, the team will make an analyst hire in conjunction with station management.