Kris Jenner is getting candid about her past.

The reality TV star was married to her ex husband Robert Kardashian for twelve years, and together they shared daughters Kourtney, Kim, and Khloe, and their son Rob.

Toward the end of their marriage, according to Daily Mail, Kris had an affair with soccer player Todd Waterman. This led to her divorce from Robert in 1991.

However, despite their separation, the pair remained close. Kris confirmed on a recent episode of The Kardashians that they were friends right up until Robert died from oesophageal cancer in 2003.

“We talked on the phone all day long, helped each other through things all the time,” she tells viewers in a confessional clip.

“And I did have regrets. I thought, ‘Wow, what I was thinking?”

As for why Kris engaged in the affair, the momager reflected on her actions in the episode.

“I think being really young and dumb is something that plays into it,” she confessed, adding “because you don’t really understand the consequences of your actions.”

She went on to admit that she may have been drawn in by the prospect of something better. “I think that I fell into a situation where I thought that the grass was greener somewhere else…”

Still, Kris expressed remorse for her decisions, noting that she isn’t exactly sure why she did it. “He was such a great husband and such a great dad.

“I made a huge mistake. That’s like, my life’s biggest regret.”

The conversation occurred after Kris’ daughter Khloe pushed her mother to think about what she had done, after the pair were discussing Khloe’s own experience with infidelity.

The father of Khloe’s children, Tristan Thompson, has cheated on her numerous times, including during her pregnancy.

Kris had been asking Khloe to be careful before she cuts off Tristan for good, leading Khloe to be confused as to why her mother wouldn’t want him totally separate from her.

In response, Kris explained that her own life experiences have made her wary of burning bridges. “I just want Khloe to be really careful when she makes these decisions, and she has to let somebody go.”

Going on to say that while she knows she made mistakes, she believes everything happens for a reason.

“You know, I’m not proud of the way that I behaved during that time, but you know what? Everything happens for a reason.

“I really do live my life by thinking God has a plan. And without that whole thing happening, there never would’ve been Kendall and Kylie [Jenner]”

Kris has been in a relationship with boyfriend Corey Gamble for eight years.