Kris Jenner was married to Robert Kardashian for 13 years until her affair with Todd Waterman was exposed and led to the end of their romance.

The former couple managed to remain close friends as they co-parented their four kids - Kourtney, Kim, Khloe and Rob Kardashian -and even professed their love for one another shortly before Robert died in 2003 from cancer. But the famous lawyer isn't the only high-profile romance Kris has had.

Her second marriage was to former Olympian Caitlyn Jenner and she's currently dating talent manager Corey Gamble. Here, we've taken a deep dive into Kris' dating history.

Cesar Sanudo

READ MORE: Who has Kim Kardashian dated? All her exes from Reggie Bush to Kanye West

Kris' first high-profile romance was with golfer Cesar Sanudo. Kris, who was 11 years younger than Cesar, dated him when she was a teenager.

He proposed to Kris shortly after her 19th birthday, but their relationship soon hit the rocks. Kris met Robert Kardashian at a race course and their relationship soon blossomed.

Cesar worked away a lot and it's alleged Kris and Robert would meet up secretly when he was away. Cesar and Kris eventually split and she went official with Robert.

Robert Kardashian

Kris' first marriage was to lawyer Robert Kardashian. The pair first met at a horse race in California in 1973 when Robert was 28 and Kris was just 17.

Their relationship was tumultuous and the pair split, with Robert going on to date Elvis Presley's ex-wife Priscilla Presley, while Kris dated photographer Alfred M. Garcia. On an episode of Keeping Up With The Kardashians, Kim Kardashian even claimed Robert was briefly engaged to Priscilla.

Kris and Robert later reconciled and they went on to get married in 1978. Kris gave birth to their first daughter, Kourtney Kardashian, in 1979.

Their daughter Kim was born in 1980 and Khloe Kardashian was born in 1984. Kris gave birth to their son Rob in 1987.

Kris and Robert eventually split in 1991 after Kris' affair with Todd Waterman was exposed. However, they managed to remain close friends until Robert's death in 2003 from esophageal cancer.

Before his death, Kris made a shocking confession to her ex-husband as he lay on his death bed. In an episode of The Kardashians, Khloe sat down to interview her dad's first cousin Cici Bussey.

Cici told Khloe: "And when your mom went over there before he passed away, remember Kim snuck her in?" Khloe asked what happened and Cici explained: "Well, they said their goodbyes. I think they professed their love and she said, 'You're the love of my life' and he said the same thing and he died."

Alfred M. Garcia

Join the Mirror's SMS news service to get the biggest breaking stories delivered straight to your phone. Click here to subscribe.

Kris started dating photographer Alfred M. Garcia during her first split from Robert. Kris and Alfred had been introduced by mutual friend Debbie Kathleen Mungle.

Alfred took a lot of photos of Kris during their romance as she pursued a career in modeling. The pair eventually split, but remained good friends.

The photographer later told the Daily Mail: "We went our separate ways. I was really involved in photography, and my attention was on that. I wasn't into having a steady girlfriend, but Kris and I stayed friends, and then she called me to do the model pictures, and then her wedding."

Todd Waterman

Kris split from Robert Kardashian after he found out about her affair with Todd Waterman. In her autobiography All Things Kardashian, Kris confessed to the affair but used the pseudonym Ryan.

"He was so cute: young, dark hair, great body. We started talking," Kris wrote in her book and revealed she fell in love with Todd after feeling ignored by Robert.

She also wrote about their first kiss, saying: "It was like a revival, a resuscitation, an awakening from some long, deep, unconscious sleep. I hadn't been kissed like that in ten years.

"It made me feel young, attractive, sexy, and alive. Along with these feelings came a wave of nausea. I actually wanted to throw up at the same time. Because it dawned on me that I had not felt that way with Robert for years."

In 2012, a year after the book was released, Todd revealed details of their illicit romance and said their affair began back in 1989. He said their time together had been "crazy and passionate".

Caitlyn Jenner

Click here to follow the Mirror US on Google News to stay up to date with all the latest news, sport and entertainment stories.

Kris married for a second time in 1991 when she wed retired Olympian Bruce Jenner, who came out as a transgender woman 20 years later, taking the name Caitlyn Jenner. The two had only dated for five months before their wedding, which took place just a month after Kris' divorce from Robert was finalized.

The pair had two children together - Kendall Jenner and Kylie Jenner. Kris and Caitlyn renewed their vows in 2011, but their romance took a turn for the worse.

They split in 2013 and were divorced a year later. Caitlyn announced her transition in June 2015, saying at the time: "I'm so happy after such a long struggle to be living my true self. Welcome to the world Caitlyn. Can't wait for you to get to know her/me."

Corey Gamble

Kris is currently dating talent manager Corey Gamble. The pair met in August 2014 while both in Ibiza to celebrate the 40th birthday party of their mutual friend, fashion designer Riccardo Tisci.

In early October 2014, Kris and Corey enjoyed their first public date together. They were spotted out to dinner in Sherman Oaks, California.

The couple took the next step in their relationship on March 22, 2015, when Corey made his debut appearance on Keeping Up With The Kardashians. During the season 10 finale of Keeping Up With The Kardashians, Kris called Corey her boyfriend for the first time.

In August 2018, Kris and Corey sparked engagement rumors after the momager was spotted with a huge diamond ring. However, Kris insisted she has no plans to get married again.

Appearing on Laura Wasser's podcast, Divorce Sucks with Laura Wasser, Kris said: "You know, you never say never, but I often say it's just not what I think I need to do again based on my past.

"I'm in a really great relationship right now, and I'm happy and I don't want to mess that up. I don't have the need to put on a long, white dress and walk down an aisle. I've done that. I've had the big wedding, I've had the babies and the kids."