Kris Jenner 's marriage to Robert Kardashian was torn apart by her scandalous affair with Todd Waterman.

Todd came forward to speak about his extra-marital relationship with the Keeping Up With The Kardashians momager after she released her 2011 memoir Kris Jenner... and All Things Kardashian.

On the surface, Kris was happily married to lawyer Robert, who was famously part of OJ Simpson's defence team during his trial for ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson's murder.

Together they had four children; Kourtney, Kim, Khloe and Rob.

But in reality, things were far from perfect.

Kris wrote about her affair in her book, naming the man she was seeing on the side from 1989 as Ryan, but after the book was released, Todd came forward to say it was him.

She penned: "His name was Ryan, and he was a producer. He looked like Rob Lowe. For a second, I thought he was Rob Lowe. He was so cute: young, dark hair, great body. We started talking."

Kris said that no one had paid that much attention to her "in forever" and she was besotted.

And everything changed when Todd (Ryan) kissed her for the first time.

Kris, now 64, wrote: "That kiss was more than amazing; it was like a revival, a resuscitation, an awakening from some long, deep, unconscious sleep. I hadn't been kissed like that in ten years.

"It made me feel young, attractive, sexy, and alive. Along with these feelings came a wave of nausea. I actually wanted to throw up at the same time. Because it dawned on me that I had not felt that way with Robert for years."

Later in the book, she spoke about how the affair brought about the demise of her marriage.

"I had lost Robert," she wrote. "Suddenly, I realized everything that was great about my marriage. Robert was the greatest guy in the world. He would never cheat on me. He only wanted the best for me."

She added: "He adored me, and I treated him so badly. To this day, I still cannot tell you why. Again, it was as if my body had been taken over by demons or aliens. I was really ashamed of myself.

"But I didn't try to get Robert back. I didn't want to insult him like that. I had been so wrong. I had embarrassed him, humiliated him, destroyed him."

They divorced in 1991 after 13 years of marriage.

Despite Kris' transgressions and their ultimate split, she went on to have a great relationship with Robert, who died in 2003, but has explained that it took them a long time to get there.

After the book landed, Todd spoke out to reveal he was the man who'd had an affair with Kris.

"I was attracted to Kris," he said in an interview.

He said they had first got together on a night out, and had sex for the first time inside a friend's closet.

He said: "I’m sure we danced and had a good time in the club. We came back to her friend’s home in Beverly Hills. And our first time [we had sex] was in her friend’s closet. We found a little place in the house and consummated the relationship.

"It was a magical night, surreal. I think it was two people who were both open to experiencing something in their life at that time. It was fate, we invited it and we just ran with it and from that point on. We didn’t hold back."

Todd added: "The love swept us away. We made our own different reality. It was special, it was a little crazy, a little wild - we didn’t exercise caution or self-restraint. I think we were both very much in love."

He was sure that Robert suspected something was going on.

He said: "We did some crazy things. I remember playing tennis at her home with my friend the soccer player Justin Fashanu. And Robert was watching us play. We’re in the affair now and I’m sure he suspected at this point.

"He was trying to throw me off my game actually. He was just calling out foot fault while I served."

Kris, who is now dating Corey Gamble, wrote in her book that she had sex with Todd aka Ryan in a number of places during their affair.

She said they had "wild crazy sex all the time. We had sex in cars, sex on the tennis court, sex in the pool house, sex in the garage when we got home, sex up and down the stairs, sex everywhere, all the time."

Kris' affair has caused from friction with her kids from time to time.

In 2018, Kourtney was seen in scenes from their family show blasting her mum for her actions.

Kourtney was seeing Younes Bendjima at the time and Kris told her: "You have your own Todd right now."

But Kourtney fired back: "No, I actually don't. I'm actually not married and I'm not having an affair.

"You can't compare one to the other, it's absolutely not true."

Kourtney later said in a camera confessional: "I don't even think it's about talking to my mom about it.

"I think it's like we all have different experiences with my mom and I think it's not something really that my mom can fix."

Todd once resurfaced during Kris' marriage to Bruce Jenner, who has since transitioned to Caitlyn.

In 2012, scenes on the reality show saw Kris meet up with Todd while Bruce was off golfing with former model Angie Everhart.

Kris met Todd for cocktails at the Wilshire Hotel, and she asked him why he'd never married.

He whispered something in her ear, and she then asked him: "How could you wait for someone for 23 years?"

Todd responded: "Timing is everything."

She had cancelled a meeting with him earlier in the season after they bumped into each other, but later changed her mind.