About Ramprasad Sen

Sadhak Rāmprasād Sen was a Hindu Shakta poet and saint of eighteenth century Bengal. His bhakti poems, known as Ramprasadi, are still popular in Bengal—they are usually addressed to the Hindu goddess Kali and written in Bengali. Stories of Ramprasad's life typically include legends and myths mixed with biographical details.

Muktinath and the Muktikshetra in Mustang

The holy water from Gandaki river gushing out of the 108 water spouts are said to cleanse the devotees of their sins and set them on a path to salvation. The waters are sacred to Buddhists as well and it’s called 'Chumig Gyatsa' in Tibetan language meaning "a hundred springs". The Muktinath pilgrimage The Himalayas are believed to be terrestrial dwelling place of saints and the home of the gods. The Muktinath temple situated at an .

Meditation Practices – To train the attention of mind & teach compassion

Meditation can be defined as a practice where an individual uses a technique, such as focusing their mind on a particular object, thought or activity, to achieve a mentally clear and emotionally calm state. Meditation has been practiced since antiquity in numerous religious traditions and beliefs. The earliest records of meditation (dhyana) are found in the Upanishads of Hindu philosophy, and meditation plays a salient role in the contemplative repertoire of Buddhism and Hinduism. Since the .

The Ancient Town of Panauti and its Heritage

Panauti is one of the oldest towns in Nepal situated at the confluence of the two rivers Punyamata and Rosi. Legend has it that a third invisible river also meets with the two rivers, making it a Triveni (a scared place where three rivers meet). Many believe Panauti was named after the Punyamata river. Moreover, Panauti has been called by different names throughout history like Punyawati, Punyamatinagar, Panchal desh, Punanti and Palaati. The Ancient Town The .

Gokarneshwar – A sacred site on the bank of the Bagmati River

The Bagmati River is a sacred body of water to Hindus. A holy dip in the Bagmati river is said to free people from all the sins they have committed in this lifetime. There are numerous legends surrounding the formation of the river and the creation of temples on its banks. Along with the great Pashupatinath temple, Gokarneshwar, also known as Gokarna is one of the holiest places located on the banks of river .

Yoga styles – The wide variety of traditional & modern practices

There is a wide variety of schools of yoga, practices, and goals in Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and other traditional and modern yoga styles practiced worldwide. Within the major branches of yoga such as haṭha, lāya, rāja, jñāna, and bhakti there are many different schools and lineages, both extant and defunct. Since the late 19th century, a great number of distinct new styles of "Yoga" have been introduced by individual teachers. Some schools and traditions are occasionally .

Buddhist monuments and the Kings of Patan

Long time ago, King Sarvananda of Dipavati invited sages around the country for distributing alms. Dipankara Buddha, a Buddha who reached enlightenment prior to Gautama Buddha, was also invited. However, instead of visiting the palace, Dipankara Buddha visited a nearby hut belonging to an old lady. In late 2021, a 1400-year-old stone inscription was discovered in front of the Bhimsen Temple at Patan Durbar. It was kept there by Lichhavi ruler Anshu Verma. The inscription .

Doleshwor Mahadev: The forgotten Head of Kedarnath

After a treacherous trip up the mountains, Bhimsen, one of the five Pandavas spotted a gigantic looking bull in a distance which he knew was Shiva in disguise. Bhimsen known for his brute strength, forcefully caught the bull. When the bull was caught, he tried to escape but unfortunately, the bull was torn into several parts because of Bhimsen’s strength. Mahabharata, the Sanskrit epic depicts the struggle for power and conflict between two groups of .

Hindu goddesses – The cosmic powers of the Vedas

Devī is the Sanskrit word for 'goddess'; the masculine form is deva. Devi and deva mean 'heavenly, divine, anything of excellence', and are also gender-specific terms for a deity in Hinduism. The concept and reverence for goddesses appears in the Vedas, which were composed around the 3rd millennium BCE. Goddesses such as Lakshmi, Parvati, Durga, Saraswati, Sita, Radha and Kali have continued to be revered in the modern era. The medieval era Puranas witness a major .

Ram Mandir and the legend of Battisputali

There were 32 scupltures of fairies placed inside the inner walls of Ram Mandir which led to the place being called Battisputali (32 fairies with butterfly wings). There is an enthralling story behind the fairies installed here. The ancient Sanskrit epic Ramayana written by Valmiki has captivated people from all over the world for centuries. Lord Ram is believed to be the seventh incarnation of Lord Vishnu. He is worshipped by Hindus from all over .