Heber City is a medium-sized city located in the state of Utah. With a population of 17,865 people and six associated neighborhoods, Heber City is the 50th largest community in Utah. There's nothing like the smell of a brand new house, and in Heber City, you'll find that a large proportion of houses were recently built. New growth in residential real estate is an indication that people are choosing to move to Heber City, and putting down their money on brand new construction. Heber City’s real estate is, on average, some of the newest in the nation. Heber City does seem to be experiencing an influx of affluent people, because the median household income is $98,934.00.

Heber City home prices are not only among the most expensive in Utah, but Heber City real estate also consistently ranks among the most expensive in America.

Of important note, Heber City is also a city of artists. Heber City has more artists, designers and people working in media than 90% of the communities in America. This concentration of artists helps shape Heber City’s character.

A relatively large number of people in Heber City telecommute to their jobs. Overall, about 10.26% of the workforce works from home. While this may seem like a small number, as a fraction of the total workforce it ranks among the highest in the country. These workers are often telecommuters who work in knowledge-based, white-collar professions. For example, Silicon Valley has large numbers of people who telecommute. Other at-home workers may be self-employed people who operate small businesses out of their homes.

Because of many things, Heber City is a very good place for families to consider. With an enviable combination of good schools, low crime, college-educated neighbors who tend to support education because of their own experiences, and a high rate of home ownership in predominantly single-family properties, Heber City really has some of the features that families look for when choosing a good community to raise children. Is Heber City perfect? Of course not, and if you like frenetic nightlife, it will be far from your cup of tea. But overall this is a solid community, with many things to recommend it as a family-friendly place to live.

The education level of Heber City ranks among the highest in the nation. Of the 25-and-older adult population in Heber City, 41.44% have at least a bachelor's degree. The typical US community has just 21.84% of its adults holding a bachelor's degree or graduate degree.

The per capita income in Heber City in 2022 was $35,858, which is upper middle income relative to Utah and the nation. This equates to an annual income of $143,432 for a family of four.

Heber City is a very ethnically-diverse city. The people who call Heber City home describe themselves as belonging to a variety of racial and ethnic groups. The greatest number of Heber City residents report their race to be White, followed by Asian. Heber City also has a sizeable Hispanic population (people of Hispanic origin can be of any race). People of Hispanic or Latino origin account for 16.96% of the city’s residents. Important ancestries of people in Heber City include English, German, Danish, Scottish, and Irish.

The most common language spoken in Heber City is English. Other important languages spoken here include Spanish and Italian.