With over 12000 residents in an area famous for nature and great cuisine, Heber City, Utah, is located in a mesmerizing mountain valley in Wasatch County. Like many cities in Utah, it was settled by a group of religious emigrants. Heber City is comprised of the outdoor types who enjoy being in nature and living in a place like this gives ample opportunity, year round, for outdoor recreation.

Heber City is known as Utah’s little Switzerland. Within the city limits, there is Heber Valley that has become a great place to take in the scenery and enjoy the cool mountain air. People come from far and wide to hike the trails, photograph the scenic views, go fishing, play golf, bike riding, hunting and more as there are an endless number of activities to participate in - the area is also very popular for its snow sports. There are a number of places to find lodging in the city, and restaurants and shopping venues are located throughout the city.

The community is friendly and energetic, they work together to create an amazing place to live and coordinate community projects such as the Heber Valley Community Garden, which is an excellent example of a public partnership and volunteer opportunity. The city has donated land for the garden and the community makes up the volunteers and gardeners to ensure that it is well taken care of.

Heber city is not only an outdoor recreation center, as there are office job opportunities and a continuously improving work environment. Heber City has one of the lowest unemployment rates in Utah with tourism being a major and year-round industry. There is also a well-developed education system in Heber City with one of the best school districts in the state. There are a number of opportunities for children to grow and learn in the community as well as in school, as the district follows a set of guidelines set forth by the state government in accordance with a balanced curriculum and education.

The town also holds various events throughout the year, such as Farmer's Markets, concerts in the Park, the Wasatch County Fair, Cowboy Poetry events and many others. If you are considering making the move to this beautiful part of the country, visit NewHomeSource and learn more about new home communities and home builders in the area and find a complete list of available homes in the area. We are committed to helping you find the perfect home for you and your family, wherever it may be.

There are many types of subdivisions across the Provo area including the many new luxury communities, new subdivisions , and condominium projects in Provo. Alternatively, you can widen your search from the 50 Heber City communities to browse all the Provo new home communities.

Narrow Your Search by Price

Stay within your budget. Here are all of the Heber City subdivisions with new homes in popular price ranges.

Under $600k

Under $700K

Market Overview: New Homes in Heber City, UT

Here is a quick overview of new housing developments in Heber City and the new construction market for new build homes in Heber City:

CityHeber CityStateUtahMetro AreaProvoSubdivisions50Move in Ready Homes41Homes Under Construction20Starting Price$406,990Average Price$634,944Price Per Square Foot$244New Home Builders28Builders in Heber City

Lennar

Toll Brothers

Pulte Homes

Customizable Options in Heber City