HENDERSON, WILLIAM JOSEPH

Name: William Joseph Henderson

Rank/Branch: O2/US Air Force

Unit:

Date of Birth: 1948 Dallas TX

Home City of Record: Milwaukee WI

Loss Date: 03 April 1972

Country of Loss: South Vietnam

Loss Coordinates: 165022N 1070455E (YD175602)

Status (in 1973): Returned POW

Category:

Acft/Vehicle/Ground: OV10A

REFNO: 1813

Personnel in Incident: April 2: Robin F. Gatwood; Wayne L. Bolte; Anthony

Giannangeli; Charles A. Levis; Henry M. Serex; (all missing from the EB66).

LtCol. Iceal Hambleton (rescued after 12 days from EB66). Ronald P.

Paschall; Byron K. Kulland; John W. Frink (all missing from UH1H rescue

helicopter), Jose M. Astorga (captured and released in 1973 from UH1H).

April 3: William J. Henderson (captured and released in 1973 from OV10A

rescue craft); Mark Clark (rescued after 12 days from OV10A rescue craft).

April 6: James H. Alley; Allen J. Avery; Peter H. Chapman; John H. Call;

William R. Pearson; Roy D. Prater (all KIA/BNR from HH53C "Jolly 52" rescue

chopper). Also in very close proximity to "Bat 21"on April 3: Allen D.

Christensen; Douglas L. O'Neil; Edward W. Williams; Larry A. Zich (all

missing from UH1H). April 7: Bruce Charles Walker (evaded 11 days); Larry

F. Potts (captured & died in POW camp) (both missing from OV10A).

REMARKS: 730327 RELEASED BY PRG

Source: Compiled from one or more of the following: raw data from U.S.

Government agency sources, correspondence with POW/MIA families, published

sources, interviews. Updated by the P.O.W. NETWORK. 2023

SYNOPSIS: On the afternoon of April 2, 1972, two Thailand-based EB66

aircraft (Bat 21 and Bat 22), from the 30th Air Division, were flying

pathfinder escort for a cell of B52s bombing near the DMZ. Bat 21 took a

direct SAM hit and the plane went down. A single beeper signal was heard,

that of navigator Col. Iceal Hambleton. At this time it was assumed the rest

of the crew died in the crash. The crew included Maj. Wayne L. Bolte, pilot;

1Lt. Robin F. Gatwood, LtCol. Anthony R. Giannangeli, LtCol. Charles A.

Levis, and Maj. Henry M. Serex, all crew members. It should be noted that

the lowest ranking man aboard this plane was Gatwood, a First Lieutenant.

This was not an ordinary crew, and its members, particularly Hambleton,

would be a prize capture for the enemy because of military knowledge they

possessed.

It became critical, therefore, that the U.S. locate Hambleton, and any other

surviving crew members before the Vietnamese did - and the Vietnamese were

trying hard to find them first.

An Army search and rescue team was nearby and dispatched two UH1H "slicks"

and two UH1B "Cobras". When they approached Hambleton's position just before

dark, at about 50 feet off the ground, with one of the AH1G Cobra gunships

flying at 300 feet for cover, two of the helicopters were shot down. One,

the Cobra (Blue Ghost 28) reached safety and the crew was picked up, without

having seen the other downed helicopter. The other, a UH1H from F Troop, 8th

Cavalry, 196th Brigade, had just flown over some huts into a clearing when

they encountered ground fire, and the helicopter exploded. Jose Astorga, the

gunner, was injured in the chest and knee by the gunfire. Astorga became

unconscious, and when he recovered, the helicopter was on the ground. He

found the pilot, 1Lt. Byron K. Kulland, lying outside the helicopter. WO

John W. Frink, the co-pilot, was strapped in his seat and conscious. The

crew chief, SP5 Ronald P. Paschall, was pinned by his leg in the helicopter,

but alive. WO Franks urged Astorga to leave them, and Astorga was captured.

He soon observed the aircraft to be hit by automatic weapons fire, and to

explode with the rest of the crew inside. He never saw the rest of the crew

again. Astorga was relesed by the North Vietnamese in 1973.

The following day, Nail 38, an OV10A equipped with electronic rescue gear

enabling its crew to get a rapid "fix" on its rescue target entered

Hambleton's area and was shot down. The crew, William J. Henderson and Mark

Clark, both parachuted out safely. Henderson was captured and released in

1973. Clark evaded for 12 days and was subsequently rescued.

On April 3, the day Nail 38 was shot down, a UH1H "slick" went down in the

same area carrying a crew of four enlisted Army personnel. They had no

direct connection to the rescue of Bat 21, but were very probably shot down

by the same SAM installations that downed Bat 21. The helicopter, from H/HQ,

37th Signal Battalion, 1st Signal Brigade, had left Marble Mountain

Airfield, Da Nang, on a standard resupply mission to signal units in and

around Quang Tri City. The crew, consisting of WO Douglas L. O'Neil, pilot;

CW2 Larry A. Zich, co-pilot; SP5 Allen D. Christensen, crew chief; and SP4

Edward W. Williams, gunner; remain missing in action.

On April 6, an attempt was made to pick up Clark and Hambleton which

resulted in an HH53C helicopter being shot down. The chopper was badly hit.

The helicopter landed on its side and continued to burn, consuming the

entire craft, and presumably, all 6 men aboard. The crew of this aircraft

consisted of James H. Alley; Allen J. Avery, John H. Call III, Peter H.

Chapman, William R. Pearson, and Roy D. Prater. Search and rescue noted no

signs of survivors, but it is felt that the Vientamese probably know the

fate of this crew because of the close proximity of the downed aircraft to

enemy locations.

On April 7 another Air Force OV10A went down in the area with Larry Potts

and Bruce Walker aboard. Walker, the Air Force pilot of the aircraft, evaded

capture 11 days, while it is reported that Potts was captured and died in

Quang Binh prison. Potts, the observer, was a Marine Corps officer. Walker's

last radio transmission to search and rescue was for SAR not to make an

attempt to rescue, the enemy was closing in. Both men remain unaccounted

for.

Hambleton and Clark were rescued after 12 incredible days. Hambleton

continually changed positions and reported on enemy activity as he went,

even to the extent of calling in close air strikes near his position. He was

tracked by a code he devised relating to the length and lie direction of

various golf holes he knew well. Another 20 or so Americans were not so

fortunate.

In July 1986, the daughter of Henry Serex learned that, one week after all

search and rescue had been "called off" for Bat 21, another mission was

mounted to recover "another downed crewmember" from Bat 21. She doesn't know

whether or not it is her father or another man on the EB66 aircraft. No

additional information has been released. When the movie "Bat 21" was

released, she was horrified to learn that virtually no mention of the rest

of the crew, including her father, was made.

In Vietnam, to most fighting men, the man that fought beside them, whether

in the air or on the ground, was worth dying for. Each understood that the

other would die for him if necessary. Thus, also considering the critical

knowledge possessed by Col. Hambleton and some of the others, the seemingly

uncanny means taken to recover Clark and Hambleton are not so unusual at

all.

What defies logic and explaination, however, is that the government that

sent these men to battle can distort or withold information to their

families, and knowingly abandon hundreds of men known or strongly suspected

to be in enemy hands.

Thousands of reports have been received by the U.S. Government indicating

that Americans are still alive, in captivity in Southeast Asia. It has been

17 years for those who may have survived the 1972 Easter crashes and rescue

attempts. How much longer must they wait for their country to bring "peace

with honor" to them and bring them home?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

William Henderson and his wife Colleen reside in Wisconsin.