Reseña del editor:

Please note that the content of this book primarily consists of articles available from Wikipedia or other free sources online. Pages: 101. Not illustrated. Chapters: Agovv Apeldoorn Players, Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, Sherjill Macdonald, Edgar Manucharyan, Dries Mertens, Sergio Hellings, Olaf Lindenbergh, Stefan Postma, Jan Michels, Ben Collett, Gonzalo García García, Yannick Salem, Kazuhiko Chiba, Ruud Ter Heide, Hans Van de Haar, Dennis Van Der Ree, Christian Tshimanga Kabeya, John Karelse, Paul Verhaegh, Nacer Chadli, Nyron Wau, Joost Terol, Darije Kalezić, Levi Risamasu, Martin Suchý, Daan Huiskamp, Timothy Cathalina, Remon de Vries, Raymond Van Driel, Ramon Leeuwin, Jurrick Juliana, Santinho Lopes Monteiro, Rachid Ofrany, Mirano Carrilho, Daniel Guijo-Velasco, Rihairo Meulens, Jaime Bruinier. Excerpt: Appearances (Goals). National team caps and goals correct as of 3 March 2010Klaas-Jan Huntelaar (born 12 August 1983), nicknamed The Hunter, is a Dutch footballer who currently plays as a striker for Serie A club Milan and the Dutch national team. Huntelaar is a prolific striker with technique and athleticism and has been compared in style to players such as Marco van Basten and Ruud van Nistelrooy. Former Netherlands and FC Barcelona, and current FC Bayern manager Louis van Gaal has been quoted saying about the player "in the penalty area, he is the best player in the world, bar none." Named Dutch Football Talent of the Year and Ajax "Player of the Year" in 2006, Huntelaar was a part of the Dutch side that won the 2006 UEFA U-21 Championship where he became the tournament's leading goalscorer. He was also named as one of two strikers in the UEFA Team of the Tournament. He is the all-time top scorer of the Netherlands U-21 national team with 18 goals in 22 appearances. In domestic competition he finished top scorer in the Eredivisie 200506 and 200708 seasons. Huntelaar played previously for PSV, De Graafschap, AGOVV Apeldoorn, SC Heerenveen, AFC Ajax and Real Madr...

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.