Megan Marshak—mistress of Nelson Rockefeller.

Where was Megan Marshak when Vice-President Nelson Rockefeller Died?

In recounting old news stories similar to the Monica Lewinsky case, the press has often invoked the name of 27-year-old Megan Marshak, whom, they say, was at the side of former Vice-President Nelson Rockefeller when he died on January 26, 1979.

However, that is a damn lie and everybody familiar with the case knows it. Megan Marshak was not "at his side" when Nelson Rockefeller died of a heart attack.

Megan Marshak

Where then was she?

The official coroner’s report, issued by the competent New York State authority, states that Nelson Rockefeller died of a heart attack while he was having sexual intercourse. You can look it up in the archives at 28th Street and First Avenue (provided they let you look at this one).

Megan Marshak was, in fact, underneath Nelson Rockefeller when he died.

The tragedy, which was recounted daily in the press at the time, was that had there not been political considerations, his life might have been saved.

Nelson Rockefeller was a big, heavy man. When he collapsed of a heart attack, Megan Marshak was pinned underneath him. She had to struggle to get out. He was naked. It was not known that he had a mistress. For these reasons, she was reluctant to call the ambulance. Instead, Megan Marshak called her girlfriend, who lived nearby.

The girlfriend walked over, arrived, saw the naked former Vice-President sprawled on the floor, and then she and Megan Marshak had a discussion about what to do about this.

Finally, fully one hour after Nelson Rockefeller had collapsed, the girlfriend called the ambulance. Megan Marshak did not make the call.

When the ambulance arrived, Nelson Rockefeller was still barely alive. However, he died in the ambulance on the way to the hospital.

These circumstances caused an investigation. Megan Marshak, whose existence was totally unknown prior to this incident, holed up in her town house, a gift she received from Nelson Rockefeller, while photographers maintained a vigil outside. She did not appear for weeks.

When the will was read, Nelson Rockefeller left Megan Marshak the deed to the townhouse at 13 West 54th Street plus $50,000 cash, a generous gift for a previously unknown mistress.

The newspapers of that time were more careful with their wording than they are today. Every New Yorker following the story knew exactly that Megan Marshak was his mistress and that he had died while having sexual intercourse with her. Yet, the newspapers never used those exact words.

What I thought was the greatest irony about this was that the Rockefeller family was so anxious to cover up this story that they had his body cremated almost before it got cold. Nelson Rockefeller’s body was cremated only 18 hours after he was pronounced dead, because Happy Rockefeller, his proper wife, did not want the Medical Examiner’s Office to examine his body for evidence for sexual ejaculation.

Here was one of the most powerful and famous men in the world, a multi-millionaire, a grandson of John D. Rockefeller and a former Vice-President of the United States and Governor of New York State, a man who had everything, and only 18 hours later he was ashes, because of the need to keep secret the fact that he had been having sex with a woman who was not his wife.

What happened to Nelson Rockefeller was not unusual or surprising. Medical studies say that one of the most common causes of death of men his age is a heart attack while having sexual intercourse with a woman not his wife (the reason being that when a man has sex with his own wife, he is used to her and is less likely to be under stress or excited or aroused).

Although Megan Marshak was once one of the most sought after women, I cannot find a photograph of her on the web. Apparently, the only published photograph of her is the one recently in the New York Post and elsewhere for the past few days. That was the photograph taken when Megan Marshak finally walked out of the townhouse where she had been holed up for weeks after the death of Nelson Rockefeller.

Here is the only photo I have ever seen of Megan Marshak. I scanned it myself. I believe this photo was taken when she finally emerged from the townhouse after being holed up for weeks there.

Megan Marshak could have sold her story for a million dollars easily. Instead, she kept quite and has not spoken about the incident from that day to this.

There are no reports of the current whereabouts of Megan Marshak.

Editor's Note

Rockefeller's wife, HAPPY, wasn't too happy when the old lecher was caught in the act so she had him cremated—bake and shke—before you could say "Rockefeller for President."