POSITION VACANCY ANNOUNCEMENT

WSLR-LP RADIO STATION MANAGER

WSLR Fogartyville Mission and History

WSLR is a non-profit community radio station committed to providing a platform for alternative voices and perspectives in Sarasota and beyond. The radio station’s goal is to fill a unique niche in music and local-interest programming that is refreshing, engaging, and helps expand our listeners’ viewpoints. Founded as a nonprofit in 2004 and broadcasting over the airwaves since 2005, WSLR is powered by hundreds of committed volunteers, programmers, and supporters. WSLR also operates a 100 seat indoor community space – the Fogartyville Community Media and Arts Center – where we host live concerts, art exhibits, educational events and community gatherings.

Job Summary

The WSLR Station Manager works directly with the General Manager to curate the sound and execution of all radio content in order to achieve optimal listener experience and consistency across all day-parts, schedules, and programs in a manner that supports WSLR’s mission.

After decades of commitment to WSLR Fogartyville, the original WSLR founders and management staff are transitioning into the next phase of their lives. This is a rare opportunity to build on their successes working with a volunteer-driven dynamic team as we reimagine the future of our station in the new reality of 21stcentury media consumption and content delivery options. The right candidate will play a significant role deepening and expandingaudience engagement through radio programming and the use of digital and social media resources.

The Station Manager is the essential coordinator of the operation and sound of WSLR, managing programming that entertains and informs our audience and brings in new listeners. The Station Manager will develop strategies and plans for the radio service and also work with other staff and volunteers to support the WSLR, Inc. mission and achieve success throughout the organization. The Station Manager will report to the WSLR Fogartyville General Manager and will be the staff representative on the Radio Program Committee. The work requires the Station Manager to be on call and occasionally work nights, weekends and holidays. Some travel may be required. For more information about WSLR, Inc. visit https://www.WSLR.org/.

Responsibilities:

Provide overall leadership and management of WSLR’s programming, programming staff and operations across all platforms. Evaluate and integrate listener and volunteer programmer ideas as appropriate.

Use best practices to program and monitor the live and automated hours of operation to assure seamless transitions and maximize audience time spent listening.

Identify station strengths and opportunities for improvement. Strategize with other management staff and stakeholders to implement compelling and dynamic new ideas with a focus on the 'sound', public service and community presence of the station.

Manage and coach programmers, on-air talent and the operations team.

Recruit, train, and coordinate volunteer radio programmers and staff.

Identify and lead new engaging projects to reach underserved audiences. Use data and audience research tools as appropriate to maximize our appeal, as well as our reach and revenue.

Oversee programmer communication through various channels, including social media & e-newsletters.

Assist with developing, creating and managing the WSLR schedule of on and off-air promotional strategies, underwriting credits, online & other off-air forms of advertising, as well as the organization’s branded inventory.

Maintain and update program information on the WSLR website and Facebook pages with special programming details and scheduling changes.

Collaborate with the development team to produce and manage on-air fundraising activities, including live on-air pitching, crafting on-air pledge messaging, and production of pre-taped pledge shows, including preparing staff and volunteers to support these efforts.

Engage in and support the organization's efforts to obtain underwriting and corporate support.

Schedule and provide leadership and training for our on-air hosts including regular "air-checks," voice coaching,production techniques and professional development.

Program and oversee the Megaseg automation and archiving system.

Act as primary contact when necessary to troubleshoot broadcasting and streaming quality, remote logins and programming issues.

Provide technical assistance for the production of studio, remote and recorded programs.

Use all available software and reporting mechanisms to research and expand audience data and identify relevant trends. Work with staff to make the best use of these resources for audience analysis.

Assure compliance with FCC rules and regulations, WSLR, Inc. organization policies and procedures, and funding agency requirements; communicate this information to others as needed.

Manage and submit all routine music licensing reporting for ASCAP, BMI and Sound Exchange.

Assist in preparation and administration of the broadcast radio and operations budget.

Work with management to plan for new technology and equipment.

Represent WSLR, Inc. before the public through presentations and regular participation in community events.

Oversee the News Team and News Internships.

Identify, create and oversee other Radio Internships and related volunteer opportunities.

Work with Management to ensure the proper operation, maintenance and protection of WSLR, Inc. facilities and equipment.

Other related duties as assigned or necessary to fulfill the WSLR, Inc. Mission.

Desired Qualifications:

Bachelor's degree or equivalent experience in broadcasting, journalism, communication or a related field, with knowledge and understanding of non-commercial radio mission, the industry, and trends.

3 years of experience programming and operatingradio or broadcast media, preferably non-commercial radio, including fundraising and membership growth activities.

1 years of experience in a supervision/leadership role with knowledge of inclusive organization principles.

Experience with non-profit organization management and mission driven work.

Commitment to diversity, equity and inclusion.

Audio production skills in both studio and remote environments.

Knowledge of broadcast content delivery systems and web-based content management software including digital platforms such as streaming, websites and apps.

Proficiency in audience engagement and growth strategies with proven outcomes, including the use of data and research to inform decisions.

Knowledge of FCC rules and regulations affecting radio broadcasting and non-commercial radio.

Strong interpersonal and communication skills.

Outstanding organizational skills, with the ability to pay close attention to detail and manage ongoing projects concurrently.

Proven ability to supervise and train staff and volunteers, including organizing, prioritizing and scheduling work assignments.

Highly collaborative, self-starter who can meet deadlines, with the ability to work both independently and as a member of a team.

Knowledgeable in word processing, spreadsheet, and Google platform.

Compensation:

Salary is $40,000 with two weeks annual paid vacation.

Application Instructions

Email cover letter, resume, two audio production samples and three references to: appropriate email address or mail hard copy to: WSLR Fogartyville, P.O. Box 2540, Sarasota, FL 34230. In the cover letter, in two pages or less, please let us know how this role aligns with your career aspirations and skill set.

Applicants will receive an email confirming receipt of their materials.

Application Deadline

WSLR, Inc. job openings are posted for a minimum of two weeks, but will remain open until filled.

WSLR Fogartyville is committed to Equal Employment Opportunity. Applicants are considered for employment without regard to race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, status as a veteran or any other basis prohibited by local, state or federal laws.

MISSION: WSLR FOGARTYVILLE IS A CENTER FOR CREATIVE EXPRESSION AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THAT AMPLIFIES THE VOICES OF OUR DIVERSE COMMUNITY AND PROMOTES PEACE, SUSTAINABILITY, DEMOCRACY AND ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL JUSTICE.

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $40,000.00 per year

Benefits:

Paid time off

Schedule:

Monday to Friday

Weekend availability

COVID-19 considerations:

COVID-19 vaccinations are now required for all WSLR Fogartyville staff,with exemptions allowed as permitted by Florida State law. https://www.floridahealth.gov/newsroom/2021/11/20211118-florida-department-health-covid19-vaccination-exemption-forms.pr.html

Ability to commute/relocate:

Sarasota, FL 34236: Reliably commute or planning to relocate before starting work (Preferred)

Education:

Associate (Required)

Experience:

radio: 1 year (Required)

Work Location: One location