Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures is an American animated television series. It is a revival of the Mighty Mouse cartoon character. Produced by Bakshi-Hyde Ventures (a joint venture of animator Ralph Bakshi and producer John W. Hyde) and Terrytoons, it aired on CBS on Saturday mornings from fall 1987 through the 1988–89 season. It was briefly rerun on Saturday mornings on Fox Kids in November 1992.

The quality of Mighty Mouse as compared with other 1980s animated television series is considered by animation historian Jerry Beck to "foreshadow the higher quality [animation] boom coming in the next decade." It was one of the first Saturday morning cartoons on CBS to be broadcast in stereo.

The series was a commercial half-hour format (22 minutes plus commercials), and each episode consisted of two self-contained 11-minute cartoon segments. It differed from the earlier incarnations of Mighty Mouse in many ways. It gave Mighty Mouse the secret identity of Mike Mouse, a sidekick in the form of the orphan Scrappy Mouse (who knows the hero's secret identity), heroic colleagues such as Bat-Bat and his sidekick Tick the Bug Wonder and the League of Super-Rodents,[3] as well as introduced antagonists like Petey Pate, Big Murray, Madame Marsupial and the Cow (actually a bull, because he is Madame Marsupial's boyfriend and he possesses male traits). The original Mighty Mouse villain Oil Can Harry made a couple of appearances. Pearl Pureheart was not always the damsel in distress and many episodes did not feature her at all. Mighty Mouse's light-operatic singing was eliminated except for his trademark, "Here I come to save the day!", which was sometimes interrupted.

Unlike other American animated TV shows of the time (and even Mighty Mouse's past theatrical shorts) the show's format was loose and episodes did not follow a particular formula. Episodes varied from superhero-type stories to parodies of shows like The Honeymooners ("Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy") and the 1960s Batman series ("Night of the Bat-Bat" and "Bat with a Golden Tongue"), movies like Fantastic Voyage ("Mundane Voyage") and Japanese monster films (the opening of "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy"), comic books ("See You in the Funny Papers"), and even lampooned other cartoons ("Don't Touch That Dial!") and specifically Alvin and the Chipmunks ("Mighty's Benefit Plan").

The series resurrected other Terrytoons characters, but acknowledged the passage of time: perennial menace Oil Can Harry returns to chase Pearl Pureheart once more ("Still Oily After All These Years"), 1940s characters Gandy Goose and Sourpuss and 1960s character Deputy Dawg are revived (Gandy and Dawg frozen in time in blocks of ice) in "The Ice Goose Cometh", "Gaston Le Crayon" has a cameo ("Still Oily After All These Years") and Bakshi's own 1960 creations the Mighty Heroes appear, aged, in the episode "Heroes and Zeroes". Fellow Terrytoons characters Heckle and Jeckle also appear in "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy".

Cast:

Patrick Pinney as Mighty Mouse (Mike Mouse) / Gandy Goose / Petey Pate

Maggie Roswell as Pearl Pureheart / Additional Voices

Dana Hill as Scrappy Mouse

Charlie Adler as Bat-Bat (Bruce Vein) / Additional Voices

Joe Alaskey as Sour Puss / Additional Voices

Michael Pataki as The Cow / Additional Voices

Beau Weaver as Fractured Narrator / Additional Voices

Created and Directed by Ralph Bakshi (supervising director) and

John Kricfalusi (senior director, series 1)

Starring: Patrick Pinney, Maggie Roswell, Dana Hill, Charlie Adler, Michael Pataki

Country of origin: United States

No. of seasons: 2

No. of episodes: 19 (38 segments)

Production

Executive producers; John W. Hyde (Season 1)

Producer Ralph Bakshi

Running time: 30 minutes

Production companies Bakshi Animation

Bakshi-Hyde Ventures Terrytoons

Distributor: CBS Television Distribution

Release : Original network CBS

Picture format NTSC

Audio format Stereo

Original release September 19, 1987 – October 22, 1988