Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures is an animated show produced by Bakshi Animation for CBS from 1987 to 1988. The show is a reboot of the original Mighty Mouse cartoons of the 40's and 50's made by Terrytoons. The show focuses on the adventures of Mighty Mouse who now works as a factory worker for Pearl Pureheart and is faced with new enemies and friends along the way.

Why The Mouse Still Saves The Day[]

The show is a perfect follow-up to the original cartoons.

While the animation might not be perfect, it’s still fitting for this show and bares a strong resemblance to the classic Mighty Mouse and Terrytoons cartoons, especially the ones animated by Jim Tyer.

Characters like Mighty Mouse and Pearl Pureheart have received a lot of character development on this show.

Outrageously hilarious Looney Tunes/MGM/DePatie-Freleng/Tom Ruegger-inspired slapstick humor and gags that fit so well with this Terrytoons reboot's brand of wacky, nutty, witty, goofy, surreal and over-the-top screwball comedy while having the usual charm the original Terrytoons cartoons are known for.

The excellent Spumco-inspired backgrounds are impressive to look at.

The show has introduced a wide range of new characters and villains such as Scrappy the orphan, Bat Bat (a parody of Batman), The Cow, Petey Pate, as well as a few others.

Great catchy theme song.

It's on par with House of Mouse and The Twisted Tales of Felix the Cat in terms of being a homage to wacky and silly cartoons from The Golden Age of American Animation both gag-wise and humor-wise

The show along with Who Framed Roger Rabbit has left a huge impact on animation which ended the Dark Age of Animation and has made way for the Renaissance Age of Animation which made much more fluid and wackier cartoons when compared to the flat and limited cartoons of the late 1960's, 70's, and early to mid 80's. A lot of inspiring cartoonists and animators had worked on this show such as John Kricfalusi (The Ren and Stimpy Show), Bruce Timm (Batman: The Animated Series), Bob Camp (The Ren and Stimpy Show, Cow and Chicken, The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy, Space Goofs, SpongeBob SquarePants, Blue Sky Studios), Kent Butterworth (The Simpsons, Tiny Toon Adventures, The Ren and Stimpy Show, Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog), Tom Minton (Animaniacs, Tiny Toon Adventures, Phineas and Ferb), Lynne Naylor (The Ren and Stimpy Show, The Powerpuff Girls (1998), Foster's Home For Imaginary Friends, Cow and Chicken, Batman: The Animated Series), Bob Jaques (The Ren and Stimpy Show, The New Woody Woodpecker Show, Family Guy, SpongeBob SquarePants), Jim Reardon (Pixar, The Simpsons), Jeff Pidgeon (Pixar), Rich Moore (Futurama), Mitch Schauer (The Angry Beavers, Rocko's Modern Life), Jim Smith (The Ren and Stimpy Show, Samurai Jack, Batman: The Animated Series, Tiny Toon Adventures), Jim Gomez (The Ren and Stimpy Show, Space Goofs, Tiny Toon Adventures), Tony Bancroft (Disney), Eddie Fitzgerald (The Ren and Stimpy Show, Tiny Toon Adventures), and many others. Chris Savino (Creator of The Loud House) said that he was inspired by this show to become an animator.

A lot of funny pop cultural references to other popular media of the 80's, such as Alvin and the Chipmunks as well as Pee Wee's Playhouse, which also aired on CBS.

The show is a great throwback to cartoons from the Golden Age of Animation of the 1930's to 1960's such as Bob Clampett, Tex Avery, Chuck Jones, Ward Kimball, Max and Dave Fleischer, Hanna-Barbera, UPA, Walter Lantz, Seymour Kneitel, DePatie-Freleng, Jay Ward, Robert McKimson, Frank Tashlin, Milt Kahl, Ub Iwerks, Jack Kinney, Mike Lah, Jack Hannah, Harman-Ising, Gene Deitch and especially Terrytoons.

Characters from the original Terrytoons cartoons make cameos on this show every now and then such as Gandy Goose and Sourpuss.

Bad Qualities[]

The animation is far from perfect and has a ton of animation errors due to the budget of the show at the time.

Like Mickey Mouse Works, some of the gags in this show can be a hit-or-miss.

The show only lasted for two seasons.

Other characters from the Terrytoons library such as Sally Sargent, The Mighty Heroes, Clint Clobber, Foofle, Luno the White Stallion, Gaston Le Crayon, The Terry Bears and Tom Terrific didn't quite make cameos.

Some episodes are clip shows which use stock footage from classic Terrytoons cartoons, the series finale was also a clip show that shows clips from previous episodes of the show. To be fair, this was done because of budget cuts.

Trivia[]