The graphs below provide an overview of the climate in Freiburg im Breisgau (Baden-Württemberg), Germany. They present long-term patterns and averages of weather conditions over a 30-year period.

Average day and night temperature

The mean minimum and maximum temperatures over the year.

Monthly hours of sunshine

The average monthly total hours of sunshine over the year

Monthly precipitation

The mean monthly precipitation over the year, including rain, snow, hail etc.

Monthly rainy days

The average number of days each month with rain, snow, hail etc.

Forecast for Freiburg im Breisgau

clear and no rain

partly cloudy and no rain

broken clouds and no rain

The best time of year to visit Freiburg im Breisgau in Germany

The climate in Freiburg is called a maritime climate. In summer months it can be very pleasant since the warm air lingers in the surrounding hills. However, this can also cause short but heavy thunderstorms. The winters in Freiburg are mild and have only a few days with snow and temperatures below freezing.

During the months of June, July, August and September you are most likely to experience good weather with pleasant average temperatures that fall between 20°C and 26°C.

Other facts from our historical weather data:

Which is the warmest month in Freiburg im Breisgau?

July has an average maximum temperature of 25°C and is the warmest month of the year.

Which is the coldest month in Freiburg im Breisgau?

The coldest month is January with an average maximum temperature of 5°C.

Which is the wettest month in Freiburg im Breisgau?

December tops the wettest month list with 129 mm of rainfall.

Which is the driest month in Freiburg im Breisgau?

April is the driest month with 93 mm of precipitation.

Which is the sunniest month in Freiburg im Breisgau?

July is the sunniest month with an average of 267 hours of sunshine.

No idea where to travel to this year? We have a tool that recommends destinations based on your ideal conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.