Paul was born in Newburyport. Son of Rose and John Tirone. Paul and all of his siblings attended the Immaculate Conception School. He also served as an altar boy at the Immaculate Conception Church. He finished school at Newburyport High School, Class of 69’.

As a young man he was very active in the Boy Scouts, and was extremely proud to have earned the rank of Eagle Scout. The Coca Cola Company ran a contest collecting bottle caps.Paul won on the opening day and ended up with free soda for a year. During John Kennedy's election Paul became very interested in politics. He sent President Kennedy several letters, and even invited him to visit Newburyport. Kindly very heartfelt responses were sent from the President. In later years, Paul became Newburyport's youngest City Councilor to be elected. During the same years Paul was involved with the Homecoming Committee.,Building his own float. He helped with Old Fashioned Sunday, the fireworks.and the Grand Prix offshore boat races with Ron Barrett.

There were a couple of years he was Santa for the city. All of the children would line up at the Santa House just to give Santa their wishes.

Paul belonged to several Chambers of Commerce. During WNBP's charity auction Paul volunteered even dressing as Elvis just to add some flavor.

When his children were growing up he coached Baseball and Softball for the Pioneer League. A total of ten years. After moving to Amesbury Paul became the President of the Rotary. He organized fishing tournaments, softball games, Meadow Muffin Megabucks and wonderful fireworks for Old Home Days. Money raised by the Rotary helped to eradicate Polio worldwide. Locally they provided scholarships to graduating seniors.

In later years Paul was elected State Representative for the First Essex District. He took pride in helping his communities. He was responsible for passing the bill to exonerate the last of the Salem witches, including Mary Martin from Amesbury.

Paul was an entrepreneur, an idea, a minute man. So multi talented. Caretaker for the mentally ill, a salesman, craftsman, a realtor, reporter, graphic designer, publisher, editor, and printer for his newspaper, and a legislator.

Most of all he was a people person. He was engaging with people no matter what their age. Wherever he went he was remembered fondly as a good man. He had a big smile, kind words, and a wonderful sense of humor.

When someone needed advice, he would listen and give the best advice. Always remember "Hey smiley" "How are you doing Big guy? "

Paul is survived by his beloved wife of 47 years Sharron, and his children John Tirone, and step children Eric and Stephanie Symmes, whom he raised as his own. John's partner Becky Shipkosky, and Eric's wife Maggie Goetz, and Stephanie’s partner Erik Chase. He leaves behind his sisters Dominica Joan (Sis) Robertson,Arlene Kelly, and Dianne Payne, and her partner Eric Groenburg, his brother Thomas and his wife Kathy, and his sister-in-law Sandy Tirone Sarri.

Paul is preceded in death by his brothers Jack, and Vincent, and his sister Alice Gooding. Paul will be lovingly missed by several grandchildren. Zachary and Avery Kozdra, Peter and Rachel Symmes, and Rosealee Tirone. Paul will also be missed by many nieces and nephews.

His Graveside Service will be held on June 21, 2024 at St Mary's Cemetery in Newburyport at 12:00 p.m. Following will be a celebration of his life at PITA Hall 8 Plum Island Turnpike Newburyport MA. We would like to invite family and friends to join us in his celebration of life.