Best time to go to Tyumen Average weather of Tyumen, Russia

When is the best time to go to Tyumen?

When is the best time to go to Tyumen? Here's some information to help you in your decision:

The best months for good weather in Tyumen are May, June, July and August

On average, the warmest months are June, July and August

January is the coldest month of the year

The rainiest months are June, July and August

Annual weather in Tyumen

To get all the information about the climate and weather in Tyumen for a specific month, scroll down below the table and choose a month from the tabs.

Month Our opinion January -18°C/-13°C 27mm very bad weather February -16°C/-10°C 28mm very bad weather March -8°C/-2°C 48mm very bad weather April 3°C/8°C 57mm very bad weather May 11°C/18°C 63mm good weather June 17°C/23°C 80mm good weather July 18°C/25°C 85mm good weather August 16°C/23°C 81mm good weather September 9°C/15°C 62mm tolerable weather October 1°C/6°C 57mm very bad weather November -7°C/-3°C 47mm very bad weather December -14°C/-10°C 30mm very bad weather

Weather detail month by month in Tyumen

Weather and climate in Tyumen

Tyumen enjoys a warm-summer humid continental climate (without dry season) in accordance with the Köppen-Geiger classification. The yearly average maximum temperature in Tyumen is 7°C (ranging from -13°C in january to 25°C in july). Annual rainfall is 659mm, with a minimum of 27mm in january and a maximum of 85mm in july.

Between january and april the climate is very unfavorable. It is for example 8°C as maximum temperature in april and it rains about 57mm each month.

From may to august the climate is favorable. It is for example 23°C as maximum temperature in august.

In september the climate is not good, but still OK. The temperature rises to 15°C and it rains about 14% of the time in september.

Between october and december the climate is very unfavorable. It is for example -10°C as maximum temperature in december.

Charts: temperature and rainfall in Tyumen

In the charts below, you can see the following seasonal norms for the city of Tyumen: the minimum and maximum outdoor temperature, the risk and amount of monthly rainfall, daily average sunshine, and relative humidity for each month of the year.

Outside temperature

Precipitation (rainfall)

Daily sunshine hours

Humidity

Peak visitor numbers and tourist seasons in Tyumen

Find out when Tyumen has its high tourist season (the period when the influx of tourists is highest) and off-peak tourist season using our data and figures.

Tourist seasons in Tyumen

Very low season in Tyumen

The months with the lowest number of tourists are: February and March.

Low season in Tyumen

The months with low numbers of tourists are: January, April and October.

High season in Tyumen

The number of visitors to Tyumen is high in: May, June, August, September, November and December.

Peak season in Tyumen

The largest number of tourists visiting Tyumen is during: July.

Figure: Visitor index for Tyumen month by month

Best time for low prices in Tyumen

Average prices of hotels in Tyumen month by month

Generally, April is the month with the lowest hotel prices in Tyumen. So this is a great time to save on your holiday! In contrast, February is statistically the most expensive month of the year for hotels.

Find the best price for your hotel room

Other cities and places near Tyumen

Best time to go to Russia

Chargement en cours