Weather in February in Tyumen Oblast

Are you planning a trip a to Tyumen Oblast in February and wondering what kind of weather to expect? This page has all the details you need.

What is the weather like in Tyumen Oblast in February?

Tyumen Oblast is a region in Russia. February in Tyumen Oblast generally has very cold temperatures, with low precipitation. The month of February is in the winter season.

Temperatures

You can expect very cold maximum daytime temperatures of around -9°C and nighttime temperatures around -18°C in Tyumen. In many regions in Russia, February is characterized by its biting cold temperatures. If you're venturing into these areas during this time, it's crucial to be adequately prepared. Ensure you layer up with warm clothing to fight off the chill and stay comfortable.

Precipitation

February is a dry month with an average snowfall of around 22 mm in Tyumen. Based on our climate data it is the driest month of the year in Tyumen.

Average sunshine

Most cities enjoy a balanced amount of sunshine, with around 122 hours of sunlight anticipated in Tyumen. This ensures the days are neither too dim nor excessively sunny.

For a closer look at February's conditions in Tyumen Oblast, see the map below. For a more detailed look at Tyumen Oblast's yearly weather, check out our Tyumen Oblast climate page.

Where to go in Tyumen Oblast in February

Find more information for the most popular destinations in the Tyumen Oblast on the map below. Click on a destination dot for more detailes.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

Popular destinations

What is the weather like in February for the most popular destinonation in Tyumen Oblast?

Tyumen

In February Tyumen generally has very low temperatures with maximum daytime temperatures around -9°C, minimum nighttime temperatures around -18°C and low monthly snowfall. So on average the conditions are poor that month.

Tyumen

Max temperature Max temp

Min temperature Min temp

Monthly sun hours Sun hours

Monthly snowfall Snowfall

Monthly rainy days Rainy days

Weather conditions Weather

-11°C

-19°C

67 hours

25 mm

14 days

-9°C

-18°C

122 hours

22 mm

10 days

0°C

-10°C

166 hours

29 mm

9 days

Climate in Tyumen

Is your destination not in the list? Have a look at other destinations in Tyumen Oblast, in Russia.

Is February the best time to visit Tyumen Oblast?

Given the typically poor weather conditions in Tyumen, February may not be the ideal time to visit Tyumen Oblast.

Generally speaking, June, July and August provide perfect weather in Tyumen. On the other hand, the weather in January, February, March, April, October, November and December tend to be poor.

Interested in more climate information?

We have much more information about the climate in Tyumen Oblast. Interested in the weather conditions in a specific month? Select the month below.

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Weather and climate has detailed information for every country in the world. Are you going to Russia? Get detailed historical weather averages for many cities in Russia.

Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.