Until 8/4: The Oyster Radio Hour A live radio show combining science, story, and song that celebrates the resilience of oysters and their crucial ecological roles. With special guests, the show blends hope and interconnectedness, spotlighting the humble oyster’s journey of revival. At Little island. You have until 8/11 the Whitney Biennial, this happens every two years. This year, the theme is “Even Better Than The Real Thing” and features the work of 71 artists and collectives. Restaurant Week is still going until 8/18, at hundreds of restaurants across the five boroughs. General reservations open July 16th.Also on display is Apollo: When We Went to the Moon at The Intrepid Museum. The exhibit is included with museum admission and goes until 10/2. The Rubin Museum, is permanently closing its physical space later this year and is open until October. If you’ve never been time to go. Until 10/27: The New York Botanical Garden is getting in on the Mad Hatter fun with a new, garden-wide exhibition for 2024 titled “Wonderland: Curious Nature.”

8/1: Broadway in Bryant Park with 106.7 LITE FM Host: Helen Little. Pre-show: A special performance by the students of AMDA College of the Performing Arts. Performances by:& Juliet, A Wonderful World, SIX The Musical, The Outsiders and Wicked.

8/1: Uptown Bounce, a block party series thrown by the Museum of the City of New York and El Museo del Barrio, with live performances, art making activities, special guests, music and dancing as well as free access to exhibits now on at the host museums. A live performance by Clave Y Cuba’s Afro-Cuban Music Collective, along with DJ sets by Marcus Logan and Taina Enikeyi at El Museo del Barrio; and an East Harlem celebration with DJ Ted Smooth at MCNY Free, but RSVP!

8/2: Museum of Modern Art UNIQLO NYC Nights offers free admission to New York City residents and extended hours on the first Friday of every month. Explore in the galleries, get creative with drop-in drawing sessions, enjoy music and see a film in the theaters. Just be sure to reserve a ticket in advance online. Tickets are released on week in advance; same-day film tickets are also free for New York City residents, available on-site, after 4pm. 8/3, 10 and 17: Summer Streets miles of no cars as walkers, runners, bicyclists and people-watchers rule Manhattan

8/3 -18: Harlem Week celebrates the history, food, art, and spirit of the uptown neighborhood. Attendees can enjoy an impressive range of activities from jazz performances and dance parties to running races and even a climate conference and career fair. Local organizations like The Apollo Theater also get involved, and it all kicks off this year with a Summer Streets block party in celebration of the 50th anniversary. For the full line-up of events.

8/4: Arrival (2016) Movies Nights in Bryant Park this summer with Paramount+. Screenings will take place every Monday at 8pm

8/ 10-11: Jazz Age Lawn Party and the Roaring ‘20s return to Governors Island for the 19th year. Live sets from Michael Arenella and His Dreamland Orchestra, one of the world’s premiere Jazz Age dance orchestras, and The Dreamland Follies, a 10-lady Art Deco dance spectacle. Dust off your bowler hat, and grab your tickets today.

8/10: JAPAN Fes on the Upper East Side, the largest Japanese food festival in the world, attracting 300,000 visitors and featuring 1,000 vendors every year. Expect dishes including takoyaki, ramen, matcha sweets, yakisoba, karaage, okonomiyaki, and lots more. on the Upper East Side

8/11 – 17: Battery Dance Festival.This year’s lineup includes local NYC companies as well as touring groups from all over the world, including Taiwan, the Netherlands, Canada, and more. Spectacular special events will return to the stage, including Young Voices in Dance, which gives artists between the ages of 15 and 22 a chance to perform their original works, and India Day, which presents Indian classical dance in styles rarely seen in the U.S. Register today and let yourself be moved.

8/12: Titanic Movies Nights in Bryant Parkthis summer with Paramount+. Screenings will take place every Monday at 8pm

8/18: JAPAN Fes on the Upper West Side, the largest Japanese food festival in the world, attracting 300,000 visitors and featuring 1,000 vendors every year. Expect dishes including takoyaki, ramen, matcha sweets, yakisoba, karaage, okonomiyaki, and lots more.

8/19: The U.S. Open fan day. Get ready to witness US Open legends Tommy Haas, Garbiñe Muguruza, James Blake and Bethanie Mattek-Sands as they hit the court once again for a on-of-a-kind exhibition match!

8/23: The Intrepid Museum opens its doors for free (tickets are usually $36/adult) on Friday, August 23, allowing visitors to explore the museum and enjoy free after-hours programming. On Free Fridays, visitors can explore the museum free of charge and enjoy after-hours programming. Doors open at 5pm and close at 8:30pm.

8/23-24: Afropunk Festival, a celebration of alternative Black music and artistry, at the Lena Horne Bandshell in Prospect Park.

8/24: JAPAN Fes in East Village, the largest Japanese food festival in the world, attracting 300,000 visitors and featuring 1,000 vendors every year. Expect dishes including takoyaki, ramen, matcha sweets, yakisoba, karaage, okonomiyaki, and lots more. 8/26 – 9/8: The U.S. Open in Queens.

8/27: JAPAN Fes in the East Village, the largest Japanese food festival in the world, attracting 300,000 visitors and featuring 1,000 vendors every year. Expect dishes including takoyaki, ramen, matcha sweets, yakisoba, karaage, okonomiyaki, and lots more.

Last night, I experienced one of the most magical nights of my life at The Watermill Center Gala. If you ever have a chance to visit or attend one of their events go, as it is one of the most spiritual, creative and freeing places I have ever been to and I felt so blessed to attend.

Founded in 1992 by avant-garde visionary Robert Wilson, The Watermill Center is an interdisciplinary laboratory for the arts and humanities situated on ten acres of Shinnecock ancestral territory on Long Island’s East End, offering year-round artist residencies and education programs. With an emphasis on creativity and collaboration, Watermill integrates contemporary artistic practice with resources from the humanities and research from the sciences to provide a global community with the time, space and freedom to create and inspire.

The Watermill Center Annual Summer Benefit celebrates the work of international artists through an engaging and dynamic evening. Described as “an enchanted forest” and ”performance art extravaganza,” the Annual Summer Benefit unites the worlds of art, theatre, design, and fashion to raise funds in support of our year-round programming. This summer, invited artists will fill The Watermill Center’s property with installations for guests to explore while enjoying cocktails and refreshments across our scenic campus. Presented by Van Cleef & Arpels

The chorographer Lucinda Childs was being honored and T2C had the honor to interview her. Child’ formed her own company in 1973 and three years later was featured in the landmark avant-garde opera Einstein on the Beach by Philip Glass and Robert Wilson, for which she won an Obie Award. In 1977, she and Wilson co-directed and performed in I Was Sitting on My Patio This Guy Appeared I Thought I Was Hallucinating, which they revived for the Festival d’Automne in Paris in 2021, where they also created an evening length work titled, Bach 6 Solowith the violinist Jennifer Koh. She was a constant choreographer with Wilson and Glass. Childs has choreographed over thirty works for major ballet companies.

I really want to thank Bonnie Comley and Stewart F Lane for having me as their guest, This was really a truly spectacular night of creativity.

Right now shows that harness dance and cult singer songwriters are captivating the theatre scene. You have Illinoise which won Justin Peck a Tony Award for best choreography, with songs from Sufjan Stevens to give it soul. The Tony winning musical The Outsiders with music by Jamestown Revival (Jonathan Clay & Zach Chance) and the brilliant choreography by Rick Kuperman & Jeff Kuperman, whose moves make their dancers soar. And now the newest kid on the block Ain’t Done Bad,Ain’t Done Bad, conceived, directed, choreographed and performed by Jakob Karr, with songs by country singer-songwriter Orville Peck.

Karr performed on on Broadway in Cats, Cirque Du Soleil’s Volta and Viva Elvis So You Think You Can Dance Season 6 – Runner Up, America’s Got Talent, Glee; Company XIV and many more. Peck, is a South African country musician based in the United States and Canada. He is well-known for wearing a mask and not showing his face publicly. In June 2020, in honor of the 50th anniversary of the first LGBTQ Pride parade, Queerty named Peck among the fifty heroes “leading the nation toward equality, acceptance, and dignity for all people”.

Ain’t Done Bad’s story is basic…gay boy (Karr) feels like a misfit in his hometown and leaves to find love in the big city. Has multiple trysts until he finds the one (Joshua Escover). Returns home to be accepted by his family, especially his dad (Adrian Lee).

The dancing is sensual, sexy, joyous and exuberant. Karr’s choreography athletic as he keeps his dancers fluid, yet precise. Karr is an exquisite dancer with extensions that go on for miles as he leaps, spins and splits mid air.

Also dancing were Megumi Iwama as the mother, Ian Spring as his brother, Caden Hunter, Madison O’Connor, Luke Quails, Yusaku Komori and Jordan Lombardi as his friends. Everyone in this cast is an accomplished dancer that is being given a chance to excel and show off their multiple skills. They are a joy to watch.

The costumes by Philip Lupo help define the characters, as each dancer plays multiple roles. I loved the scenic design by Lupo, Joey Coombs, and Blake Schulte of rustic wood and mirrors.

The show is a celebration of gay pride both in its story and music choice. This is a coming out, that is part fantasy and part what could and should be.

Ain’t Done Bad: Signature Center, 480 West 42nd Street, by Blue Topaz Productions and Renaissance Theatre Company until August 31st.