The vows have been exchanged, your cake has been cut, and all the hard work you put into wedding planning resulted in a celebration you—and your guests—won't ever forget. Now, on to the part that puts the focus back on just you two: the honeymoon! While heading out on an African safari or exploring the romantic cities of Italy do sound dreamy, there’s just as much magic to be found right here in the United States. “We often overlook the incredible destinations we have in our own backyard,” says travel adviser Julia Gregory. “With the right guidance, a domestic honeymoon can be just as special as an international honeymoon.”

Ready to start scouting your options? Read on for the top U.S. honeymoon destinations, as well as a look at the best new honeymoon resorts and hotels in the country right now, from sunny California to rustic Montana.

Why Choose a U.S. Honeymoon?

“The most appealing thing about a domestic honeymoon is the ease of travel,” says Gregory. “You’ve just spent six-plus months planning one weekend. Now, all you want to do is relax and bask in the memories. Whether you’re planning a road trip through the national parks or mini-mooning at a luxury hotel in California, [a U.S. honeymoon] gives you the chance to slow down, travel less distance, and be more present.”

Honeymoon Trends for 2023

“The biggest trend I’m continuing to see is more couples checking off those ‘bucket list’ trips for their honeymoon,” says Gregory. “They’re wanting luxury accommodations and unique experiences—and both are equally important.”

Another trend that’s making having it all possible? Traveling during shoulder seasons. “This is exciting, because couples are likely to encounter fewer crowds, and they’ll also receive better rates, which is great because prices are continuing to rise.” The takeaway: If you can, be flexible about when you honeymoon. There’s no rule that says you have to go the day after, or even the month after, your wedding. Book the trip for the time that makes the most sense for your budget and schedules. (And if you do want a quick weekend away right after you wed, there’s always the minimoon.)

The 25 Best U.S. Honeymoon Destinations