A couple’s honeymoon is a very special time. After the hustle and bustle that comes with planning and pulling off a wedding, the newlyweds finally get the chance to relax and be alone together in a foreign land, far away from family. Or do they?

Although the first recorded use of the term ‘honeymoon’ dates back to 1546, the custom of a couple going away on holiday together after they got married only became widespread on the continent in the 19th century. During this time, visiting family members who lived abroad during one’s honeymoon was an integral part of the holiday, and the newlyweds would often be accompanied by various family members and friends on their travels.

It’s hard to imagine a modern couple hauling off a handful of their family members with them as they savour the first few days of married life in a foreign country, and hopefully, none of your relatives will be tacky or rude enough to suggest it in the first place. A honeymoon is exclusively a time for couples, and while family time is important, there’s definitely a time and place for it. Trying to transform a honeymoon into an extended family holiday is just a terrible idea, and will lead to resentment and glum faces all round.

However, it’s certainly not too outrageous to think about taking some time out of your honeymoon schedule to visit a relative you haven’t seen in a long time, if you happen to be in the area – especially if they were not able to attend your wedding. First of all, ask your partner whether they would be all right with it. It’s a time for couples to bond, so you have to make sure it gets approval across the board, especially if they’ve never met the family member you plan on visiting, or they’ve met in the past but did not get on well.

Second, ask the family member you plan on visiting in advance whether they would be interested in meeting up, rather than showing up unexpectedly. You might think you’re giving them a nice surprise, but you don’t want to impinge on anyone’s plans.

Third – keep it brief. Meeting up with family members on your honeymoon is great as a one-off activity but don’t make it the focal of your journey abroad. This is about the two of you. Have fun!