Hoping to plan a romantic honeymoon in the United States but not sure where to start? From dazzling cities to jaw-droppingly beautiful mountains to some world-class beaches, the best honeymoon destinations in the USA are incredibly varied and truly offer something for every kind of couple.

We’ve put together this guide to the best honeymoon locations in the US to give you and your beloved plenty of ideas on where to go, all across the country.

We’ve also divided these romantic USA honeymoon spots (which vary from classic to quite offbeat) based on your interests, to help you quickly identify which American honeymoon is for you!

Best Cozy + Romantic Honeymoons in the USA

If you’re looking for honeymoon locations in the United States that are cozy, romantic, and idyllic–think small towns and cities or beautiful nature that doesn’t require an epic hike or big drive to access–these honeymoons in the USA fit the bill.

Nantucket

Tiny, beautiful Nantucket is perfect for couples looking for a small island boasting both an adorable town center and beautiful beaches for their honeymoon.

Located off the coast of Cape Cod in Massachusetts, Nantucket is a classic summer retreat and one of the best places to visit in New England.

While you’re there, consider renting bikes to explore the island together, tracking down all three of Nantucket’s beautiful lighthouses, visiting the whaling museum, and of course, enjoying a lobster roll or two!

Where to Stay in Nantucket

The Cottages & Loft: For a cute homestay environment these lovely cottages are the perfect honeymoon accommodation in Nantucket. With a pretty deck overlooking the water, lots of light, beachy decor, and comfortable beds, these are a fantastic stay. There are also bikes free for hire, perfect for exploring the island!

White Elephant Hotel: For some decadent hotel luxury this hotel is an amazing choice. Located right on the waters edge, with on site spa, huge bathrooms with deep bathtubs, stunning island views from every window, and giant beds. The hotel is next to some of the best restaurants in Nantucket as well as having it’s own excellent on site restaurant. Perfect for honeymoon indulgence!

Savannah

Beautiful Savannah, Georgia, with its incredible oak trees, ridiculously beautiful architecture, insanely delicious food scene, and slow-moving cadence, is one of our absolute favorite cities in the USA, and a ridiculously romantic one at that!

Slowly strolling the squares hand-in-hand, exploring the wonderful restaurant scene, ducking into a house museum or two, and visiting beautiful spots like Forsyth Park are all romantic things to do in Savannah.

In addition to the beauty of the city, though, Savannah is also located next door to a lovely beach getaway on Tybee Island, adding another layer to your retreat.

For a slightly longer US honeymoon idea, you can even combine it with a visit to St. Augustine in northeastern Florida if you’d like to add even more beach time to your honeymoon!

Where to Stay in Savannah

The Marshall House: For your honeymoon in Savannah you absolutely have to stay in one of the historic houses, this hotel is a perfect choice. Built in 1851 this is a staple part of Savannah’s history, rooms are decadent and cozy, and the hotel offers a nightly wine reception in the library and cocktails in the bar.

Hampton Inn & Suites: Another wonderful hotel in Savannah’s historic district, this provides a modern refresh of a classic luxury hotel. Rooms are bright and comfortable, and a fabulous complimentary breakfast is served on the hotel terrace each morning.

New England Road Trip

With its charming small towns, lovely landscapes, and rugged coastline, New England in general makes a classic US honeymoon spot.

While you can have an amazing honeymoon by simply choosing one adorable bed & breakfast and curling up for a week or two in Vermont, Maine, or elsewhere, you can also set off on a bit of an adventure and make a leisurely road trip of it.

From beautiful Boston to the stunning White Mountains to Acadia National Park to the many lighthouses of the coast, a New England honeymoon can include a huge variety of destinations.

And, if you and your beloved are scheduling a fall honeymoon and get to enjoy the region’s world-famous foliage, that’s all the better.

Where to Stay in New England

Boston – Found Hotel Boston Common: This boutique hotel in the Theatre District is perfect for exploring Boston. Rooms are bright and comfortable, and there is access to public transport a short walk from the hotel.

Burlington, Vermont – Green Mountain Suites Hotel: This stunning mountain style lodge is packed with amenities as well as luxurious bedrooms. Breakfast is also included in the restaurant overlooking the gardens.

Niagara Falls

Dial it back a few decades, and Niagara Falls was the place to be on a honeymoon in North America–and while it’s less iconic on the honeymoon scene now, it’s still a wildly romantic place, and home to some very romantic resorts!

While this blog post does cover honeymoon destinations in the USA specifically, I’d be remiss not to mention here that while the portion of Niagara Falls located in the States is lovely, it’s well worth bringing your passport along and crossing the border into Canada for a portion of your Niagara Falls honeymoon!

However, with boat tours, hiking trails, Old Fort Niagara, the magnificent Cave of the Winds experience that will take you right up to Bridal Veils Falls (prepare to get soaked!), and more available on the New York side, it’s safe to say that even a strictly American honeymoon to Niagara Falls has plenty of romance to offer.

Where to Stay in Niagara Falls

Stateside – The Butler House: For classic honeymoon accommodation this is the one to go with in the American side of Niagara Falls. Built in 1910 is the historic craftsman style, this is a cute and cozy hotel for your honeymoon. Location wise you also can’t beat this, just 10 minutes walk from the American Falls and a mile from the International Rainbow Bridge to Canada.

Canada – Hilton Fallsview: While not the greatest Hilton experience you might expect, but definitely worth it for the views. Expect the usual Hilton features of a good quality hotel but look over the as-close-as-you-could-get views of Niagara Falls.

Asheville

Located on the edge of the phenomenal Great Smoky Mountains National Park and practically around the corner from the stunning Blue Ridge Parkway, Asheville, North Carolina, is the perfect place to escape for a honeymoon if you and your beloved want a solid mix of city and country options.

Asheville’s hipster food and art scenes are legendary, allowing you to eat very well and enjoy life in a small city, but the hiking, white water rafting, and viewpoints nearby are also not to be missed.

Be sure to also squeeze in a visit to the ridiculously opulent Biltmore Estate, which will make you briefly wonder if you had been transported across the pond to a European honeymoon after all.

Where to Stay in Asheville

Cedar Crest Inn: This pink 1891 mansion house is a perfect place to base yourself in Asheville. Packed with historical details and stunning architecture you can imagine it as a mini Biltmore.

Aloft: If your honeymoon includes your furry family member this is the most pet friendly place you would wish for. Dogs and cats stay for free and are provided with beds, treats and facilities, exactly as human guests would expect from a luxury hotel stay. Almost no area of the hotel is off limits to your pup, and the hotel also partners with a local shelter offering homes for dogs until they are adopted.

Martha’s Vineyard

Featuring plenty of sandy beaches, charming lighthouses, and quaint towns, idyllic Martha’s Vineyard–located off the southern coast of Cape Cod in Massachusetts–makes a fabulous honeymoon for couples looking for a classic and charming New England getaway!

In many ways, Martha’s Vineyard is a similar honeymoon location to Nantucket, but Martha’s Vineyard’s larger size means there is more to explore (though on the flip side, it also takes a bit more effort to get around.

Where to Stay in Martha’s Vineyard

Narragansett House: This pretty Victorian house is a perfect place for your honeymoon in Martha’s Vineyard. With cute beachy decor, cozy beds, and views to the beach this is the perfect place to pass lazy honeymoon days.

The Attleboro House: Another quintessential Victoria property in Oak Bluffs is this hotel with views directly over the beach where the boats come in. Rooms are delightfully old-fashioned, many with lovely wooden features and quirky windows to take in the views.

Charleston

Located just two hours north of Savannah, the coastal city of Charleston is known for its architectural beauty, celebrated food scene, excellent nearby beaches, and intense history–especially in both the American Revolutionary War and the Civil War.

Often compared to its neighbor Savannah, Charleston is also incredibly charming, but actually feels incredibly different, with a coastal vibe accented by its many palm trees.

For honeymooners looking for a laid-back, slow-moving USA honeymoon spot in the south that combines a charming city with plenty of beach time (Folly Beach, Sullivan’s Island, and the Isle of Palms are all nearby), Charleston is an excellent option.

Where to Stay in Charleston

Market Pavillion Hotel: This hotel is a stunning honeymoon choice in the heart of the historical district. Rooms feature four poster beds and charming classic decor, but the hotel amenities are really special with a mosaic pool and even its own Executive Pastry Chef whipping up delicious pastries for breakfast.

French Quarter Inn: Another fabulous historical hotel is this one in the french quarter overlooking Charleston City Market. You are welcomed with champagne on arrival, there is also a port wine and cheese reception and freshly baked cookies with milk are served every evening. The perfect treats for your honeymoon! Rooms are vintage inspired and really beautiful. This is the loveliest spot for your honeymoon in Charleston.

Best Tropical Honeymoon Destinations in the USA

You don’t have to skip off to Asia or Latin America to find a fantastic tropical honeymoon!

These USA honeymoon destinations feature warm, humid climates, excellent beaches, and (in most cases) jungles as well!

Hawaii

The archipelago of Hawaii–and especially its four main tourism islands of Kauai, Maui, Oahu, and the island of Hawai’i (generally referred to as the Big Island)–is one of the most classic honeymoon destinations in the USA, and definitely one worth considering!

Understandably, choosing exactly which island(s) to visit as part of your Hawaii itinerary can often be just as hard as narrowing down your US honeymoon location to Hawaii.

However, whether you want to go hiking on Kauai, drive the Road to Hana on Maui, check out the otherworldly Volcanoes National Park on the Big Island, watch the sunset on iconic Waikiki Beach on Oahu, or some combination thereof, a Hawaii honeymoon has something spectacular to offer.

Where to Stay in Hawaii

‘Alohilani Resort: This stunninng resort on Waikiki Beach is perfect for your honeymoon. Rooms are luxurious with unobstructed views of the Pacific Ocean and Diamond Head. Relax in privacy in the cabanas around the pool and dance the night away at beach events.

Turtle Bay Resort: Spanning the tip of Oahu’s North Shore this is a great place for seclusion and acres of incredible beaches, right at the door. There are also private bungalow options tucked away for ultimate honeymoon privacy.

Puerto Rico

Want to honeymoon on a Caribbean island without dusting off your passport (or applying for one)?

Consider Puerto Rico!

Located due east of the Dominican Republic in the Caribbean Sea, Puerto Rico is home to a stunning coastline, an incredible rainforest, a delightful and colorful city in Old San Juan, and idyllic beach retreats like the small island of Vieques.

Plus, as a US territory, is incredibly simple for US citizens to visit, as no passport is required, the currency is USD, and generally, even your cell phone will work without issue.

Where to Stay in Puerto Rico

O:Live Boutique Hotel: This small luxury hotel is catered perfectly for couples looking for romance, rooms have huge bathtubs on the terraces and if you book a suite you also get a rain shower with hydromassage jets. If that isn’t enough water for you there is an infinity pool on the rooftop overlooking the Condado Lagoon.

Royal Isabela: Set on the cliffs of the Caribbean coast offering private cottages with stunning sea views, this hotel is the perfect tranquil retreat away for your honeymoon. The site has a fabulous swimming pool, or you can book your stay in a casita that has it’s own pool, so you never have to leave!

South Florida

From the vibrant Art Deco architecture of Miami to the tranquil beauty of the Keys, southern Florida makes a fantastic honeymoon location in the United States!

With plenty of sandy beaches, palm trees, delicious food, and world-class road trip views, a south Florida honeymoon has something to offer any couple looking for a little sunshine and warm air–there’s a reason it’s one of the most beloved places to visit in the south!

Consider starting your honeymoon in beautiful Miami, and spending a few days exploring the metropolis before hopping in a car and driving down to the whimsical towns and beautiful beaches of the Florida Keys–a route that is often considered one of the most beautiful road trips in the country!

For another romantic Florida honeymoon option, head due west from Miami in southeast Florida to Marco Island on Florida’s southwest Gulf coast for a completely unique and oh-so-romantic south Florida experience.

As the gateway to (and the largest of) the Ten Thousand Islands, Marco Island is a water-lovers paradise and a perfect island-y honeymoon destination where newlyweds can boat or kayak to nearby uninhabited islands and sand bars and have the entire beach to themselves for the day.

Given its small size, there are plenty of acclaimed restaurants on Marco Island and luxury beachfront hotels to choose from, all surrounded by the wondrous Everglades ecosystem.

Where to Stay in South Florida

Miami – The Betsy Hotel: Rooftop pool, marble bathrooms with deep tubs, a stylish cocktail lounge and spacious private balconies, this hotel is a great choice for your honeymoon.

Marco Island – Olde Marco Island Inn and Suites: This Victorian style inn is perfect for island honeymooning, book a suites for a private lanai and garden views. Rooms also have private kitchens, the suites have stunning family style kitchens if cooking is on the menu for your honeymoon!

Incredible Big City Honeymoon Ideas in the US

If you’re the kind of couple to dream of city lights, skyscrapers, and phenomenal dining during your romantic getaway, these great honeymoon spots in the USA are for you.

New York City

Iconic NYC has been a classic honeymoon spot in the United States for decades, but it still holds true: if your idea of the most romantic things to do includes exchanging a kiss at the top of the Empire State Building or paddling a rowboat in Central Park, a romantic New York getaway is a perfect choice.

NYC offers an almost overwhelming number of options for honeymoon activities, but it’s safe to say that city lovers, foodies, museum hoppers, theater fans, and more will all find something to love about spending their first days of marriage traipsing through New York.

Where to Stay in New York City

The Plaza Hotel: For a memorable place to stay, this is one of the most classic and luxurious hotels in New York. It is located right by Central Park, the Rockefeller Center, and some of NYC’s most popular museums.

The Renwick: Offering stylish residential style accommodation, this beautiful hotel is equipped with plenty of amenities and high class comfort. It is also a short walk to the Empire State Building and Bryant Park for exploring.

Las Vegas

Shows, shopping, and plenty of gambling: Las Vegas is nothing if not a playground for adults, and that makes it an excellent USA honeymoon destination for couples interested in all kinds of nightlife.

While Vegas may be known for its nighttime escapades, though, there’s plenty to keep you busy during the day, too, from pool parties to incredible desert day trips.

Want some memorable honeymoon photos?

Those quirky drive-thru chapels and get-married-by-Elvis elopement options aren’t legally binding (though since you likely have “get marriage license” somewhere on a wedding to-do list right now, that’s probably not a surprise)–they do make fun photos to look back on, though, and can be a funny addition to a honeymoon in Vegas!

Where to Stay in Las Vegas

The Venetian: As one of the most iconic hotels on the Las Vegas strip this is a fabulous choice for your honeymoon. Everything about this resort is luxurious and huge, from the 1.2-acre pool deck to the in house shopping mall. Book a suite and feel like a real star.

Bellagio: Fans of the Ocean franchise will know this hotel and its fountains, although almost any Las Vegas fans know the fountain show of the Bellagio! Stay within this famous hotel for the ultimate honeymoon treat.

New Orleans

From an epic party scene to sobering history, from luxurious (haunted) hotels to quirky museums, from beignets to gumbo, and from jazz clubs to Mardi Gras, New Orleans is easily among the most downright unique cities in the USA.

Because of this, it can, in all of its many contradictions and compliments, make for a downright fun American honeymoon!

And, while it’s possible to splurge on a luxury New Orleans honeymoon, you can have a fantastic time in NOLA on a budget, too.

We highly recommend adding a stroll through the beautiful Garden District, a splurge-worthy meal at one of the city’s legendary restaurants, and a ghost tour that will leave you clinging to each other on the walk back to your hotel to your list of honeymoon activities in New Orleans!

For bookworm couples like us, NOLA’s many bookstores are also worth checking out.

Where to Stay in New Orleans

The Ritz-Carlton: This stunning luxury hotel is a perfect honeymoon splurge close to Bourbon Street and the French Quarter. The onsite spa offers over 100 treatments. Rooms are as stunning as you would expect, with four-poster beds, soft furnishings, and all designer toiletries.

Omni Royal Orleans: Located on the most fashionable corner, St. Louis at Royal, the hotel has received the 4-diamond luxury award for the past 27 years. This hotel is the ultimate luxury experience in a classic New Orleans building.

Boston

Beautiful, historic Boston, with its cobblestone streets, long history, and beautiful architecture, is one of the best honeymoon destinations in the USA for those who want to experience a stunning, walkable, historic city without leaving the country (Savannah ranks right up there with it, though it is a very different city from Boston).

While you’re there, walk the Freedom Trail to learn about American Revolutionary War history, stroll through the beautiful North End and along the Harborwalk, relax in the Boston Common and Public Gardens, and hit the theater and food scenes, all of which rank among the best things to do in Boston.

If you’re visiting during the summer, don’t miss a whale watching tour, either!

For an easy and beautiful day trip, you can’t beat exploring the best things to do in Salem, which is located an easy train or boat ride away.

Where to Stay in Boston

Found Hotel Boston Common: This boutique hotel in the Theatre District is perfect for exploring Boston. Rooms are bright and comfortable, and there is access to public transport a short walk from the hotel.

Revere Hotel Boston Common: Also in the Theatre District and close to Boston Common is this stylish hotel with a stunning rooftop terrace and bar, perfect for afternoon drinks. Rooms are spacious and have a coffee machine for those of you who need coffee the moment you wake up.

Chicago

Nestled right on the shores of Lake Michigan, vibrant, beautiful Chicago makes a fantastic city honeymoon spot in the US!

Be sure to eat plenty of that famous deep-dish pizza, see a show, admire the city’s incredible architecture, and (if you’re visiting in the summer) enjoy hitting the lake.

Whether it’s from one of the city’s famous observation decks, a restaurant, or a rooftop bar, be sure to add a stunning skyline view to your list of what to do in Chicago–especially on a sunny day, it’s not a sight you’re likely to forget anytime soon!

Where to Stay in Chicago

Warwick Allerton: Situated on the Magnificent Mile in Downtown Chicago, the hotel is perfect for shopping and discovering iconic architecture.

Staypineapple: This oddly named hotel was designed by a world renowned architect and features stylish details such as mosaic floors and marble ceilings. No detail is spared and rooms are a testament to the thought that has gone into each part of the hotel.

Best Honeymoon Spots in the US for Outdoor Adventure

Of all the many, many travel highlights our country has to offer, our national parks and potential for outdoor adventure top the list.

If you are the kind of couple who can’t wait to get outdoors and go for a hike, these honeymoon spots in the US are for you, whether your idea of a great hike takes place in a searing desert, on a frozen glacier, or anywhere in between.

Arizona + Utah National Parks

Utah’s Mighty 5 National Parks, the iconic Grand Canyon, and several stunning places in between (looking at you, Horseshoe Bend, Antelope Canyon, the Wave, the slot canyons of Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument, and many more) can be combined into a truly epic US honeymoon road trip.

Outdoor-loving couples will be thrilled with the open-road aspect of this honeymoon, and it’s easily customizable for just about any length of getaway, from a long weekend to spending months away!

For a customizable road trip itinerary through southern Utah with easy ways to add on stops in Arizona and even Nevada, check out our Utah road trip itinerary!

Where to Stay in Arizona + Utah National Parks

Zion National Park – Zion View Camping: This site is a perfect way to experience camping with a touch of luxury. Book into one of the covered wagons with private deck and take in the epic views of Zion.

Arches National Park – Big Horn Lodge: For a refreshingly iconic lodge style accommodation this motel is a great option. With delicious on site restaurant as well as a heated outdoor swimming pool, this is perfect for resting after exploring the nearby parks.

Grand Canyon – Cabins at Grand Canyon West: It is hard to find somewhere closer to the canyon than these cabins. They are less than 3km from the Skywalk with amazing views from every cabin.

Alaska

There are few places in the USA that can possibly compare to the truly epic landscapes of Alaska–and what better time to plan a trip to the US’s largest state than on your honeymoon?

Admire the breathtaking beauty of Denali National Park, kick back and enjoy the views along the Alaska Railroad, go whale watching and glacier hiking near Seward, and possibly make friends with a sled dog or two along the way!

Where to Stay in Alaska

Denali Fireside Cabin & Suites: These lovely cabins in Talkeetna are a great place for your Alaskan honeymoon. Many of the cabins have fireplaces and all details are accounted for.

Otter Beach Lodges: For beachside accommodation, these are an excellent choice in Homer. Each deck opens onto the beach and has beautiful views from every window.

Pacific Northwest Road Trip

Road tripping along the coasts of Oregon and Washington, perhaps with a few dips inland to hit up epic spots like Crater Lake, is an idyllic honeymoon idea for couples who want nothing more than to explore open roads and mountain tops together!

From the majestic Olympic Peninsula to the out-of-the-way peaks in North Cascades National Park, and from lively cities like Portland and Seattle to quaint small towns like Leavenworth and Manzanita, there is no shortage of amazing hidden gems to uncover in the PNW.

… And that’s without even mentioning the world-class wine country, epic waterfalls, or incredible hot springs!

Home to a rugged coastline, phenomenal mountains, and some beautiful towns and cities, the Pacific Northwest is a fantastic place for couples who love the outdoors to enjoy a romantic getaway.

Where to Stay on a Pacific Northwest Road Trip

Portland – Portland Regency Hotel & Spa: This historic hotel offers a hot tub, steam room, full-service spa, and other luxurious amenities that will truly make your honeymoon one to remember!

Olympic National Park – Olympic Railway Inn: Turn your honeymoon road trip into a themed stay and book this unique accommodation. Each ‘room’ is in a renovated train carriage, each with a different theme. No detail has been spared, some rooms even have a roll top bath.

Jackson Hole

Surrounded by the stunning mountainous landscapes of northwestern Wyoming, Jackson Hole is known as the launching pad to two of the USA’s most beloved national parks: Yellowstone and the Grand Tetons.

As a ski resort town, though, Jackson Hole and its surrounding areas are also home to some luxurious lodges, allowing you the opportunity to balance adventure during the day and luxury at night during your honeymoon if you wish!

A trip spent exploring the sights in Yellowstone National Park and the best things to do in Grand Teton National Park will include a lot of driving–honestly, you probably won’t want to be based in Jackson Hole the whole time–but without a doubt, this beautiful small town is a fantastic launching pad for some of the best adventures that the American West has to offer.

Where to Stay in Jackson Hole

Rustic Inn Creekside: The perfect luxury resort for your honeymoon in Jackson Hole, with a 2,300 square foot onsite spa and huge cozy rooms overlooking Teton National Park.

Bentwood Inn: The small inn in Wilson is like staying in a Hallmark movie, rooms have fireplaces and chairs by the fire for you to cozy up at the end of the day. A fabulous honeymoon choice in Jackson Hole.

Lowkey Honeymoon Locations in the US

Prefer to plan a simple, lowkey American honeymoon, where you and your beloved can enjoy quiet days together–and maybe even stick to a budget price point?

If so, then these honeymoon destinations in the USA might be for you!

Outer Banks

The Outer Banks of North Carolina, featuring seemingly endless sandy beaches, barrier islands, and adorable lighthouses, are one of our personal favorite picks for the best honeymoon destinations in the USA, in part because I grew up spending summers on the shores of North Carolina and have never stopped going back!

Offering surprisingly bargain prices for some truly stunning beach getaways, the towns and beaches of the Outer Banks are the perfect place to kick back and relax on a beach with your beloved.

When you don’t have your toes in the sand, we highly recommend mixing in a little boating, parasailing, or horseback riding in while you’re there.

Where to Stay in Outer Banks

Outer Banks Beach Club: Better book fast because this hotel in Kill Devil Hills sells out fast! The resort is set up as residence style apartments for a homey summer vacation with access to indoor and outdoor pools and views of the ocean.

The Ocracoke Harbor Inn: This pretty inn is a great choice for your honeymoon, relax on the balcony outside your room, make use of the BBQ facilities, and enjoy the nature around you.

Sanibel Island

Located in southwest Florida, and yet tucked away in a corner that feels worlds away from the hustle of bustle in Miami, sits Sanibel Island, a romantic retreat known for its gorgeous beaches, beautiful shells that wash ashore, charming lighthouse, and a tiny footprint.

All of this works together to give Sanibel Island a downright cozy vibe that makes it perfect for honeymooners.

Want a mix of the quiet life and a bit of excitement during your trip? Consider splitting your time between Sanibel Island and Miami–Miami beach is less than a 3-hour drive away!

Where to Stay in Sanibel Island

Villa Sanibel: This private apartment is just 1km from the beach, with access to a pool and hot tub. A great spot for a secluded hideaway for a honeymoon on Sanibel Island.

Residence at Gulfside Place: Just steps from the beach and with panoramic views of the gulf this is a stunning honeymoon hideaway. Soak in the deep bathtub and relax on the deck for the perfect Sanibel Island honeymoon.

Texas Hill Country

Never considered adding the Lone Star State to your list of honeymoon options?

That’s understandable–but there are some truly romantic places in Texas, and the Texas Hill Country may just have the best of the best!

Packed with natural swimming holes, stunning spring wildflowers, small towns that are easy to love, great hiking, and a seemingly unlimited number of wineries and breweries to choose from, the Hill Country is an offbeat American honeymoon, but a delightful one.

The region, located in Central Texas, is bordered by both Austin and San Antonio, so you’ll be able to pack in some city sights during your Texas road trip!

Where to Stay in Texas Hill Country

Contigo Ranch: This charming rustic ranch is the perfect choice for the Lone Star vibes of Texas Hill Country. Stay in private cabins with pretty balconies, and enjoy leisurely breakfasts on the terrace.

Peach Tree Inn & Suites: For simple charming accommodation for your honeymoon this is a great choice, with a swimming pool, BBQ facilities, and a fitness center. Fredericksburg town center is a short walk away.

Gulf Shores, Alabama

Fun fact about Alabama: the beaches are quite lovely, with an under-the-radar vibe and affordable places to stay–especially compared to its next-door neighbor!

Located right next door to the more famous (and crowded, and expensive) Panhandle beaches of Florida, Gulf Shores is a lovely and peaceful alternative, perfect for a lowkey but incredibly charming Alabama honeymoon in the USA.

Where to Stay in Gulf Shores

Bluegrass Beach: Located on the beach with a huge deck and beachy decor throughout, this is the best you could wish for as a beachside honeymoon.

Shipwrecked by Meyer: This luxury beachside property is another fabulous choice for your honeymoon. If a swim in the ocean isn’t for you it has a pool on the deck, some rooms have private balconies, perfect for watching the waves.

Other Epic USA Honeymoon Destinations

Some of the best honeymoon destinations in the USA simply don’t fit into any of the categories above–but they are among the most classic US honeymoon locations!

Northern California

San Francisco. The Pacific Coast Highway. Redwoods. Yosemite. Wine country.

Northern California is such a fantastic USA honeymoon destination that it could conceivably fit into almost all of the honeymoon categories above!

If you’re looking for a romantic trip away that has a little bit of everything, northern California might be the honeymoon for you–from fun things to do in San Francisco to San Jose, from Yosemite to Napa, there is no shortage of variety that you can add to a honeymoon in northern California.

Where to Stay in Northern California

San Francisco – Petit Auberge: For an iconic honeymoon this adorable hotel in Nob Hill is the perfect place to base yourself. Styled like a French Auberge with cozy furnishings and fireplaces in the rooms, opening onto pretty terraces, the hotel also has private parking. Essential in the city.

Mendocino – Headlands Inn Bed & Breakfast: Keeping with the cute theme, this Victorian B&B is 5 minutes walk away from the beach and perfectly maintained. Rooms have fabulous feather beds and fluffy duvets, and many of the rooms have wood-burning fireplaces and ocean views. Breakfasts are also stunning, perfect for lazy honeymoon mornings.

Pacific Coast Highway

Northern California not quite enough for you?

The epic Pacific Coast Highway (also called Highway 1) can easily extend your honeymoon down the coast of California, reaching some of its most famous viewpoints and attractions along the way, including Big Sur, Monterey, and Malibu.

If you have enough time, start your honeymoon on the beaches of San Diego and drive all the way to the stunning Redwood National Forest!

Where to Stay on the Pacific Coast Highway

San Diego – Handlery Hotel: This stunning resort style hotel in Downtown San Diego is a perfect summer escape spot. Rooms are spacious and bright and there is a huge pool with a beautiful terrace, perfect for snoozing in the sun.

Monterey – Portola Hotel & Spa: This nature-filled hotel is a stunning honeymoon choice, all amenities are eco-friendly and you are surrounded by trees and natural materials.

Disney

And, of course, we can’t close out this USA honeymoon destinations blog post without mentioning one of the most beloved and classic honeymoon spots in the US of them all: Disney!

While the USA boasts two Disney parks, with Disney World in central Florida and Disneyland in California, it’s Disney World in Florida that makes the best honeymoon!

Featuring four parks, dozens of resorts, and an endless supply of that famous Disney magic, Disney-loving couples will have the time of their lives being wined, dined, and doted on by cast members during a Disney honeymoon in the USA!

Where to Stay in Disney