It was most certainly a challenge, and not an easy one either: the secretary of a newly-wed couple from an opulent Middle Eastern Royal Family contacted us. They were on their 5 month long honeymoon, travelling around the world, and just “happened to mention” they want to stop in Florence, for two, enchanted, days. They have never been to Italy and do not want to know what they will do, all they want is, well, magic.

Needless to say we were thrilled! We love creating exclusive experiences, and, when it comes to heavenly honeymoons, no city in the world can compete with Florence. But… all was just one week away… We brainstormed, daydreamed, conjectured: they were very young, well-read, extremely wealthy. Which aspects of Italy’s heritage would most appeal to their imaginations? What actually was Florence, in their dreams?

They arrived late at night, from the Maldives, on their private jet. Loads of luggage and a small army of ladies in waiting, security and attendants followed. They checked in at Florence’s most luxurious five-star property.

Italy’s most iconic features, we had decided, were art, culture, blissful cuisine and…fun! Especially for them we arranged a memorable full immersion into Italian food. We bought out Florence’s best pizza restaurant for the day, for them to experience actual pizza making, led by the master pizzaiolo! Located in a picturesque Medieval square, this pizzeria is the most charming of venues, full of character and local flavor. Hand embroidered aprons, chef’s hats with their names and the whole staff were ready, as the royal couple walked in, taking “their place” behind the counter. They dug into big bags of flour, mixed and measured and laughed. They learned to knead and roll out the dough, smelled the fresh basil and tasted olives. They smeared each other with tomato, chose seasonings and carefully lifted the pizzas into the blazing wood-fired oven. They challenged their staff to a pizza making competition and savored every bite… they simply had a ball!

Meantime, back at the hotel, we were working hard: calligrapher written scrolls were laid on their beds and clothes racks carried to a suite, 4 seamstresses following them. The couple returned to the hotel, unknowing of what awaited them. Led to the suite we had filled with gilded mirrors, they gasped: countless, dazzling, Renaissance costumes, elaborate head-dresses, velvet cloaks and plumed hats hung from the racks. The suite became a playground! They tried on the costumes and paraded, giggled and switched and swapped and changed. Finally, hand in hand, they descended into the grand hotel lobby, as other guests gazed in admiration.

Sipping premium juices they were whisked away aboard a gleaming Mercedes towards the cypress-clad Fiesole hill. The moon shone brightly above. In no time they were driving through a majestic gate, accessing the gardens of a superb private villa, lit by innumerable torches. Florence’s skyline appeared in all its splendor, framed by century-old oak trees.

As the velvety notes of ancient Renaissance instruments played by musicians in period costume filled the air, the princes crossed the garden in awe, reaching the stately façade. Alcohol-free Champagne was served while a red-caped troubadour started his story…“The villa dates back to the 13th century, when it was built by the Portinari family. They were wealthy indeed, and had a daughter, the lovely Beatrice… that very same Beatrice Portinari who stole Dante Alighieri’s heart…”

The couple walked from one frescoed room to the other, admiring paintings and stuccoes, relishing delicious tidbits. The mesmerizing tale continued, as they walked out into the loggia to the ancient well…“the great poet Dante met her here, at the well. She was 14, graceful and exquisite…”

Meantime our good friend Donatella Zampoli, award-winning Michelin-star chef, was in the kitchen, giving the final touches to her last creation: an accurate re-interpretation of an authentic Renaissance menu. All accompanied by the very best alcohol-free champagnes, of course.

The prince and princess followed the sweet sounds of the harp and flute into the frescoed drawing room, enhanced by the flickering of 100 candles. An imperial table, bedecked with boughs of fruit and flowers and set with antique crystal and china, awaited them. They savored a luscious meal, in full privacy, surrounded by enchantment, luxury, elegance.