There is relatively little to know about Prince Mehmed, although legend says that he was the favorite child of Hürrem and Suleiman I. The prince’s education, intelligence and capabality are also legendary, as is the mosque built for him, the Şehzade Mosque, one of the most fantastic mosques in Istanbul, radiating the greatest serenity and perfection. Fortunately, Prince Mehmed was portrayed fairly well in the series, but there were still plenty of lies about him: for example, his relationship with his older brother, the circumstances of his death...

Mehmed was born in 1521, presumably around September, as the son of Sultan Suleiman and his concubine, Hürrem. At the time of his birth, his father was on a campaign in Rhodes, so probably his grandmother, Ayşe Hafsa Valide Sultan named the newcomer. As with every child’s birth, there were celebrations and feasts in the harem and even throughout the city. Mehmed was the first prince to born during the reign of Sultan Suleiman, and even the first prince to be born in the capital for the last almost 50 years. For this reason, his birth certainly caused great joy not only for the family but also for the people of Istanbul, as he indicated that their ruler was quite active not only on the battlefield but also in bed. The joy surrounding Mehmed's birth was further enhanced by the fact that Suleiman, who was on a campaign, reaped brilliant victories, the fame of which certainly reached the capital by then.

However, Mehmed had little chance of ever becoming sultan, for by this time he already had three older brothers. But soon, a tragic event overshadowed the joy that arose after his birth. In October, the plague broke into the palace and killed Suleiman’s two older sons, Mahmud and Murad. With that, Mehmed's chances increased. Suleiman soon, in violation of all traditions, made Mehmed's mother, Hürrem his favorite concubine and only sexual partner, thus the little prince was followed in quick succession by his siblings. And with Hürrem's influence, Mehmed's future also shone brighter. His only rival was his older half-brother, Prince Mustafa.