There is relatively little to know about Prince Mehmed, although legend says that he was the favorite child of Hürrem and Suleiman I. The prince’s education, intelligence and capabality are also legendary, as is the mosque built for him, the Şehzade Mosque, one of the most fantastic mosques in Istanbul, radiating the greatest serenity and perfection. Fortunately, Prince Mehmed was portrayed fairly well in the series, but there were still plenty of lies about him: for example, his relationship with his older brother, the circumstances of his death…

Circumstances of his birth

Mehmed was born in 1521, presumably around September, as the son of Sultan Suleiman and his concubine, Hürrem. At the time of his birth, his father was on a campaign in Rhodes, so probably his grandmother, Ayşe Hafsa Valide Sultan named the newcomer. As with every child’s birth, there were celebrations and feasts in the harem and even throughout the city. Mehmed was the first prince to born during the reign of Sultan Suleiman, and even the first prince to be born in the capital for the last almost 50 years. For this reason, his birth certainly caused great joy not only for the family but also for the people of Istanbul, as he indicated that their ruler was quite active not only on the battlefield but also in bed. The joy surrounding Mehmed’s birth was further enhanced by the fact that Suleiman, who was on a campaign, reaped brilliant victories, the fame of which certainly reached the capital by then.

However, Mehmed had little chance of ever becoming sultan, for by this time he already had three older brothers. But soon, a tragic event overshadowed the joy that arose after his birth. In October, the plague broke into the palace and killed Suleiman’s two older sons, Mahmud and Murad. With that, Mehmed’s chances increased. Suleiman soon, in violation of all traditions, made Mehmed’s mother, Hürrem his favorite concubine and only sexual partner, thus the little prince was followed in quick succession by his siblings. And with Hürrem’s influence, Mehmed’s future also shone brighter. His only rival was his older half-brother, Prince Mustafa.

Early years and education

He certainly spent his early years with his mother, his teacher, within the walls of the Old Palace, but his father also frequently visited the family. Mehmed received parts of his education together with his older half-brother, Mustafa. He shared the most important event of their childhood with Mustafa also. In 1530, Suleiman staged a huge ceremony for Mustafa, Mehmed and his younger brother, Selim for their circumcision. The celebration lasted for days, with banquets, entertainment shows and a plethora of important, influential guests. A similar circumcision ceremony has never been held in the capital. During the ceremony, the princes also attended at the meatings with their father. In doing so, Suleiman actually introduced them to the public and to the statesmen as his heirs.

Mehmed was in the perfect age to be circumcised, so in his case, essentially after this event, his education became much more serious. This is evidenced by a letter, presumably from 1532, sent by Mehmed to father in his absence. In it, he reports about the conditions prevailing in the city, indicating precisely that the little prince had tracked every little detail from the accounts and reports. He mentioned that minor fires had struck twelve times since Suleiman’s departure, but it was always managed to stop the spread in time. In another letter, he reports to his father with surprising accuracy and precision, that the Admiral, Hayreddin Barbarossa was in a sea battle.

In addition, the prince’s letter also serves as evidence that the princes (at least Mehmed certainly) could make suggestions and could ask their father for requests, also on political issues. Namely, in his letter, Mehmed thanked his father a thousand times for accepting his proposal and elevating one of his men, Pilak Mustafa Pasha to a higher position. Mehmed liked Pilak Mustafa very much, so he wanted the pasha to rise up. His mother probably also supported his decision because she was the one who selected a girl from the harem to be Pilak Mustafa Pasha’s future wife.

In addition to politics, history, and other important topics, Mehmed also studied arts and languages. We know that he spoke Ottoman Turkish, Persian, Arabic, and some even say he learned Latin. It is clear, that his education was all-encompassing, and that Suleiman, as a true father, supported his son in his decisions, moreover he seriously considered the suggestions of the little prince. These already, and the relative immediacy of their letters, suggest that the Sultan and Mehmed were very close to each other.

The young prince

He was given the first really important position of his life in 1534. This year was very eventful for the family, as Suleiman’s mother, Hafsa Sultan, died in early spring, and Suleiman soon left for a campaign, but before that he married Mehmed’s mother, Hürrem, and also make her the head of the harem. Also, as he embarked on a long Iranian campaign, he left Prince Mehmed at Topkapi Palace to take care of the empire. This certainly filled the prince, just 14 years old, with immense pride, and placed a very heavy burden on the shoulders of his mother and teachers. It is probably during this period that the whole family moved from the Old Palace to the Topkapi Palace.

The prince’s position as defender of Istanbul and the fact that he successfully completed the task entrusted to him certainly increased in him the desire to have his own princely province as soon as possible and to gain real combat experience. He did not have to wait long for the latter, because in 1537 he was able to join to his father’s campaign in Corfu. However, he had to wait a few years for the province still.

Later, in 1541, together with his two brothers, Selim and Bayezid, he accompanied his father to his campaign in Buda, and after the campaign Suleiman appointed him to his first princely province, Manisa. Prince Mustafa had previously lived in Manisa, but Suleiman had transferred him to another province, where he could make better use of his experiences, long before Mehmed was appointed. Thus, the legend that Suleiman exiled Mustafa from Manisa for the sake of Mehmed is not true.

Mehmed finally arrived in Manisa on 12 November 1541. Based on traditions, his mother should accompany the prince, just as Mustafa was accompanied by his mother and as Suleiman was accompanied by Hafsa. However, because of Hürrem’s exceptional position, as the mother of more princes and as the sultan’s legal wife, she did not accompany Mehmed. However, that doesn’t mean he was left alone. Mehmed’s governess accomponied him, and usually the governesses were even closer to the children than their mothers, so Mehmed certainly did not suffer from a lack of support. The governesses were quite highly esteemed, in the eyes of both the public and the family. We know, for example, that Mehmed’s governess received an outstanding salary for the rest of her life. For being a governess was work for a lifetime, and in the absence of the prince’s mother, the governess was considered the embodiment of the princely mother, so her words and orders were sacred. Of course, because of the paramount importance of the post, it is clear that the governess could only have been a person who was extremely loyal to Hürrem.

In addition, Hürrem herself chosed carefuly the the most beautiful and loyal concubines, the best kalfas, and eunuchs for Mehmed’s harem. And indeed at the first capable time, Hürrem visited Mehmed. In 1543 Hürrem was already in Manisa, but the reason for her visit was not clear. She may have “just” wanted to visit her son, others say she went to Manisa for the birth of Mehmed’s first child. Mehmed’s first and only child, his daughter Hümaşah, may have been born around this time. Anyhow, when Hürrem left Manisa she wanted to visit her husband, who was nearby, since he was on his way to homa, after a campaign.

The tragedy

Hürrem had almost reached Suleiman’s camp in Adrianapole when she received the devastating news from Manisa: Prince Mehmed was dead. The messengers certainly reached Hürrem for the first time, as she was on her way just from Manisa to Adrianapole. Maybe when she got the knews, Hürrem wanted to return to Manisa immediately, but this was not allowed to her, as the prince had lost his life in an infectious disease. The Manisa registers wrote about the prince’s death the followings: “On the day when an agha brought news of the conquest of Esztergom and Belgrade, a huge ceremony and fireworks were held in Manisa, and at the same time Prince Mehmed fell ill. He was in bed for six days, and before the seventh night, the prince died. After a brief mourning period, his teacher and the treasurer Ibrahim Çelebi immediately set out for Istanbul with the prince’s body. Until his death, the prince spent a year and two days in Manisa.” The exact cause of death may be evidenced by an earlier post: “In the spring of this year, the plague reappeared in the city and buried a great many families underground.” Thus, it cannot be ruled out that the prince also died of the plague, but any other disease is possible, for there is no direct evidence. Either way, on 7 November 1543, Prince Mehmed died.

Legendary funeral

The princes were traditionally buried in Bursa, whether they were executed or died by natural causes. However, Mehmed’s body was quickly transferred to Istanbul. It is questionable whether Sultan Suleiman ordered this or whether Mehmed’s teacher acted by himself, for the sources do not match. But it seems unlikely that a teacher would dare to make such a serious decision without the Sultan’s permission.

When Mehmed’s body arrived to Istanbul on November 18, people, agas, pashas and everyone were amazed but accepted. It was expected that he will be buried in his grandfather, Selim I’s mosque complex as Suleiman’s previously deceased children or maybe in Bayezid II’s mosque complex. However, Suleiman and Hürrem had other plans.

Since the body had to be buried as soon as possible, the funeral was eventually held in Bayezid Square and the prince’s body was placed in a temporary tomb. During his funeral, the Suleyman were weeping unstoppably for more than 2 hours and he did not allow the body to be buried. After that, instead of the usual 3 days, he ordered prayers for his son’s soul for 40 days and the pashas had to wear mourning clothes for 40 days instead of the usual 3. Suleiman himself wore only black for a long time. This also shows well the father’s pain. Hürrem, meanwhile, tried to alleviate her grief by taking Mehmed’s little daughter and her mother to herself. But for months she also kept a close watch on Mehmed’s other concubines to see if any of them were pregnant. But unfortunately, none of the concubines were pregnant. In any case, Mehmed’s little daughter, Hümaşah, comforted the grieving sultan and his wife, as she became one of their favorite grandchildren, along with Mihrimah’s daughter and Selim’s son.

However, all this was not enough for Hürrem and Suleiman, so they decided to build a mosque for their son. The ambassadors expressed their shock in their reports and the people of Istanbul were also surprised to hear the news. Especially since the mosque was planned to be built at a very prominent point in Istanbul, on the site on which Sultan Suleiman had begun doing constructions months before Mehmed’s death. This clearly suggests that the sultan planned to set up his own complex on the wonderful place, but after his son’s death he changed his mind and recommended the complex to his son. It was not only a generous and unprecedented act, but also quite bold. Suleiman was no longer young, it was not at all sure that he would be able to build another complex for himself in his life, so he risked to never have his own construction project in the capital. We have to admit, this is no small risk from a sultan. Fate eventually gave Suleiman enough time to build his own huge complex almost next to the mosque of Prince Mehmed.

The construction of the Mehmed’s Mosque complex took about five years, during which time both Suleiman and Hürrem visited the construction site several times and commented on the work taking place there. Their care is a good indication that perhaps the rumor that Mehmed was Suleiman’s dearest son and that he would have been the most worthy for the throne may be true. And according to this, the death of the prince was a tragedy not only for the family but also for the whole Ottoman Empire.

Used sources: L. Peirce - The imperial harem; L. Peirce - The empress of the east; G. Yermolenko - Roxolana in European Literature, History and culture

* * *

Mehmed hercegről viszonylag keveset beszélnek, pedig a legendák szerint ő volt Hürrem és Szulejmán kedvenc gyermeke. A herceg műveltsége, intelligenciája és rátermedtsége szintén legendás, akárcsak a számára emelt mecset, a Şehzade mecset, mely Isztambul egyik legfantasztikusabb, legnagyobb nyugalmat és tökéletességet sugárzó mecsetje. Mehmed herceget a sorozatban szerencsére meglehetősen jól ábrázolták, azonban még így is rengeteg csúsztatás volt vele kapcsolatban. Így például viszonya bátyjával, halálának körülményei…

Születésének körülményei

Mehmed 1521-ben született, vélhetőleg szeptember környékén Szulejmán szultán és ágyasa, Hürrem fiaként. Születésekor édesapja éppen Rodoszon volt hadjáraton, így vélhetőleg nagyanyja Ayşe Hafsa Valide szultána nevezte el a jövevényt. Mint minden gyermek születésekor, ekkor is ünnepségek és lakoma volt a háremben, sőt az egész városban. Mehmed volt ugyanis Szulejmán szultáni uralkodása során az első herceg, sőt az első herceg aki a fővárosban született az elmúlt majd 50 évben. Emiatt születése bizonyosan nagy örömöt váltott ki nem csak a családból, de Isztambul népéből is, hiszen jelezte, hogy uralkodójuk nem csak a harcmezőn, de az ágyban is meglehetősen aktív. Tovább növelte a Mehmed születése körüli örömöt az, hogy az éppen hadjáraton tartózkodó Szulejmán, fényes győzelmeket aratott, melyek híre minden bizonnyal elérte a fővárost is addigra.

Mehmednek azonban meglehetősen kevés esélye volt arra, hogy valaha is a birodalmi trónra ülhessen, ekkorra ugyanis már három idősebb fiútestvére volt. Hamarosan azonban tragikus esemény árnyékolta be a születése után jelentkező örömöt. Októberben a pestis betört a palota falai közé és magával ragadta Szulejmán két idősebb fiát, Mahmudot és Muradot. Ezzel Mehmed esélyei egyre csak növekedtek. Szulejmán szultán hamarosan minden hagyományt és tradíciót megszegve kedvenc ágyasává és egyetlen szexuális partnerévé tette Mehmed édesanyját Hürremet, így gyors egymásutániságban követték a kisherceget testvérei. Hürrem befolyásával pedig Mehmed jövője is egyre fényesebben tündökölt. Egyetlen vetélytársa idősebb féltestvére, Musztafa herceg volt.

Korai évei és neveltetése

Korai éveit minden bizonnyal édesanyjával, nevelőnőjével töltötte a Régi Palota falai között, azonban édesapja is gyakorta látogatta a családot. Itt már megkezdődött alapvető oktatása is, melynek egy részét bátyjával, Musztafával együtt kapta. Musztafa, gyermekkoruk legfontosabb eseményén is Mehmeddel együtt vett részt. 1530-ban Szulejmán hatalmas ceremóniát rendezett Musztafa, Mehmed és annak öccse, Szelim részére. Az ünnepség napokon át tartott, lakomákkal, szórakoztatóműsorokkal és rengeteg fontos, befolyásos vendég felsorakoztatásával. Ehhez fogható körülmetélési szertartás sosem volt még a fővárosban. Az ünnepség alatt a hercegek részt vettek a meghallgatásokon is édesapjukkal. Ezzel pedig tulajdonképpen Szulejmán bemuatta őket a nyilvánosságnak és az államférfiaknak, mint örököseit.

Mehmed épp tökéletes korban volt a körülmetéléshez, így esetében lényegében ezután az esemény után komolyodott sokat az oktatása is. Egyre részletesebbé, felnőttesebbé vált. Erre bizonyítékul szolgál egy feltehetőleg 1532-ből származó levél is, melyet Mehmed édesapjának küldött, annak távollétében. Ebben beszámol arról, hogy a városban milyen állapotok uralkodnak, pontosan jelezve, hogy a kisherceg nyomonkövetett minden apró részletet a beszámolókból. Említette, hogy Szulejmán távozása óta tizenkét alkalommal ütötte fel fejét kisebb tűzvész, ám mindig sikerült időben megállítani a terjedését. Másik levelében pedig Hayreddin Barbarossa admirális egyik csatájáról tesz jelentést apjának, meglepő pontossággal és precizitással.

Emellett a herceg levele arra is bizonyítékul szolgál, hogy a hercegek (legalábbis Mehmed bizonyosan) tehettek javaslatokat, fordulhattak kéréssel apjukhoz, politikai témákban is. Ugyanis levelében Mehmed ezerszeresen megköszöni édesapjának, hogy a elfogadta javaslatát és egyik kegyeltjét Pilak Mustafa Pasát magasabb pozícióba emelte. Mehmed nagyon kedvelte ugyanis Pilak Mustafa Pasát, így szerette volna, ha a pasa felemelkedhet a ranglétrán. Döntésében valószínűleg édesanyja is támogatta, mert ő volt az, aki a háremből választott ki egy lányt Pilak Mustafa Pasa jövendőbeli feleségének.

Mehmed a politika, történelem és más fontos témakörök mellett művészeteket és nyelvet is tanult. Tudjuk, hogy az oszmán török nyelv meleltt beszélt perzsául, arabul is értett, sőt egyesek szerint latinul is tanult. Jól látható tehát, hogy oktatása mindenre kiterjedt volt és, hogy Szulejmán valódi édesapaként támogatta fiát döntéseiben, komolyan fontolóra vette a kisherceg javaslatait. Már ezek is, és leveleik viszonylagos közvetlensége is utal arra, hogy a szultán és Mehmed igen közel álltak egymáshoz.

Az ifjú herceg

Élete első igazán fontos pozícióját 1534-ben kapta. Ez az év igen eseméyndús volt a családnak, hiszen koratavasszal hunyt el Szulejmán édesanyja, Hafsa szultána, majd Szulejmán hamarosan felszabadította, feleségül vette és a hárem fejévé tette Mehmed édesanyját, Hürremet. Emellett, amikor egy igenhosszú iráni hadjáratra indult, Mehmed herceget hagyta a Topkapi Palotában, hogy vigyázza a birodalmat. Ez minden bizonnyal hatalmas büszkeséggel töltötte el a mindössze 14 éves herceget, és igen komoly terhet rótt annak édesanyjára és oktatóira. Valószínűleg ezen időszakban költözött át az egész család a Régi Palotából a Topkapi Palotába.

A herceg posztja, Isztambul védelmezőjeként és az, hogy sikerrel teljesítette a rá bízott feladatot, minden bizonnyal tovább növelte benne a vágyat, hogy mielőbb saját tartományt kapjon és valódi harci tapasztalatokat szerezzen. Utóbbira nem kellett sokat várnia, 1537-ben csatlakozhatott édesapjához annak korfui hadjáratán. A tartományra viszont még éveket kellett várnia.

Végül 1541-ben két öccsével, Szelimmel és Bayeziddel karöltve elkísérték apjukat annak budai hadjáratára, a hadjárat után pedig Szulejmán kinevezte őt első hercegi tartományába, Manisába. Manisában korábban Musztafa herceg élt, ám őt Szulejmán már jóval Mehmed kinevezése előtt másik tartományba helyeztette át, ahol tapasztalatait jobban tudja kamatoztatni. Így tehát az a legenda, miszerint Szulejmán Mehmed kedvéért száműzte Musztafát Manisából, nem igaz. Végül 1541 November 12-én érkezett meg Mehmed Manisába.

A tradíció azt diktálta volna, hogy édesanyja kísérje a herceget, mint ahogy Musztafát is elkísérte édesanyja és ahogy korábban Szulejmánt is elkísérte Hafsa. Azonban Hürrem kivételes helyzete miatt, mint több herceg anyja, mint a szultán hites felesége, nem kísérte el fiát. Ez nem jelenti azonban azt, hogy magára hagyta volna. Mehmed dajkája tartott vele, márpedig egy dajka abban az időszakban sokszor még az édesanyánál is közelebb állt a gyermekekhez, így Mehmed egészen biztosan nem szenvedett hiányt támogatóban. A dajkák egyébként meglehetősen nagy becsben álltak, mind a közvélemény, mind a család szemében. Tudjuk például, hogy Mehmed dajkája élete végéig kimagasló fizetést kapott, annyit, mint amennyi egy vezető hárem kalfát illetett meg. A dajkaság ugyanis egy életre szólt, és a herceg édesanyjának hiányában a dajkát tekintették a hercegi anya megtestesülésének, így szava szent volt. Természetesen pontosan a poszt kimagasló fontossága miatt, egyértelmű, hogy a dajka csak olyan személy lehetett, aki a végletekig hűséges volt Hürremhez.

Emellett Hürrem maga választotta ki a herceg háremét a legrátermedtebb ágyasokból, kalfákból és eunuchokból. Sőt! Hürrem az első adandó alkalommal meglátogatta fiát. 1543-ban Hürrem már Manisában is volt, ám látogatásának oka nem tisztázott. Lehet, hogy “csak” meg akarta látogatni fiát, mások szerint Mehmed első gyermekének születése miatt utazott oda. Mehmed első és egyetlen gyermeke, lánya Hümaşah ugyanis ekkortájt születhetett. Így tehát Hürrem lehetséges, hogy friss nagymamaként hagyhatta el Manisát, hogy meglátogassa férjét, aki éppen a közelben táborozott egy hadjárat után.

A tragédia

Hürrem már majdnem elérte Szulejmán Drinápolyi táborát, amikor hírt kapott Manisából: Mehmed herceg elhunyt. A hírvivők minden bizonnyal Hürremet érték el először, hiszen éppen Maniszából volt úton Drinápoly felé. Nem tudni, hogy Hürrem innen Szulejmánhoz sietett e, felthetőleg azonnal vissza akart fordulni Maniszába, ám ezt nem engedték neki, hiszen a herceg fertőző betegségben vesztette életét. A maniszai jegyzőkönyvek így írnak a herceg haláláról: “Azon a napon amikor egy aga hírt hozott Esztergom és Belgrád meghódításáról, hatalmas ünnepséget, tűzíjátékokat rendeztek Manisában is, és ugyanekkor Mehmed herceg beteg lett. Hat napig nyomta az ágyat. A hetedik éjszaka előtt a herceg meghalt. Egy rövid gyászszertatás után tanítója, a kincstárnok Ibrahim Çelebi és néhány aga azonnal útnak indultak a herceg testével együtt Isztambulba. Haláláig a herceg egy évet és két napot töltött Manisában.” A halál pontos okára pedig egy korábbi bejegyzés szolgálhat bizonyítékul: “Ezév tavaszán a pestis újra megjelent a városba és nagyon sok családot temetett a föld alá.” Így nem lehet kizárni, hogy a herceg is a pestistől hunyt el, ám bármilyen más betegség is lehetséges, ugyanis nincsenek közvetlen bizonyítékok. Akárhogyan is, Mehmed herceg 1543 November 7-én örökre lehunyta szemeit.

Legendás temetése

A hercegeket a hagyományok szerint Bursában temették el, akár kivégezték őket, akár természetes halállal haltak meg. Mehmed testét azonban gyorsan Isztambulba indították. Kérdéses, hogy Szulejmán szultán rendelte így vagy Mehmed tanítója maga cselekedett, a források ugyanis nem egyeznek. Ám valószínűtlennek tűnik, hogy egy tanító meg mert volna hozni egy ilyen komoly döntést a szultán engedélye nélkül.

Amikor Mehmed Isztambulba ért november 18-án az emberek, agák, pasák és mindenki csodálkozott, de elfogadták. Arra számítottak, hogy nagyapja I. Szelim, esetleg II. Bayezid mecsetjében helyezik majd örök nyugalomra, ahogyan Szulejmán korábban elhunyt gyermekeit is. Szulejmánnak és Hürremnek azonban más tervei voltak.

Mivel a testet mielőbb el kellett temetni, végül a Bayezid téren tartották meg a temetést, és egy ideiglenes türbébe helyezték a herceg testét. Temetése alatt a szultán több, mint 2 órán keresztül zokogott megállíthatatlanul és nem engedte, hogy a testet eltemessék. Ezekután pedig a szokásos 3 nap helyett, 40 napig rendelt el imádságokat a fia lelkiüdvéért és a pasáknak 40 napig kellett gyászruhában járni a szokásos 3 helyett. Szulejmán maga is sokáig csak feketét viselt. Ez is jól mutatja az apa fájdalmát. Hürrem eközben gyászát azzal igyekezett enyhíteni, hogy magához vette Mehmed kislányát annak édesanyjával együtt. De hónapokig szoros megfigyelés alatt tartotta Mehmed többi ágyasát is, hátha valamelyikük áldott állapotban van. Sajnálatosan egyik ágyas sem volt várandós. Mindenesetre Mehmed kislánya, Hümaşah vigaszt nyújtott a gyászoló szultánnak és feleségének, hiszen ő lett egyik kedvenc unokájuk, Mihrimah leánya és Szelim fia mellett.

Azonban mindez nem volt elég Hürremnek és Szulejmánnak, ezért úgy döntöttek, mecsetet építtetnek fiuk számára. A követek döbbenetüket fejezték ki jelentéseikben és Isztambul népe is meglepetten állt a hír hallatán. Főleg, hogy a mecsetet Isztambul egy igen kiemelt pontján tervezték megépíteni, azon a telken, melyen Szulejmán szultán már hónapokkal Mehmed halála előtt építkezésbe kezdett. A szultán ugyanis saját komplexumát tervezte felhúzni a csodálatos színtéren, amikor azonban fia halána után meggondolta magát és a komplexumot inkább fiának ajánlotta. Ez egyébként nem csak nagylelkű és példátlan húzás volt, de meglehetősen merész is. Szulejmán ugyanis már nem volt fiatal, egyáltalán nem volt biztos, hogy életében képes lesz még egy másik komplexumot is felépíttetni önmaga számára, tehát azt kockáztatta meg, hogy soha nem lesz a fővárosban saját építkezési projektje. Be kell lássuk, ez nem kis kockázat egy szultántól. A sors végül elég időt adott Szulejmánnak arra, hogy szinte Mehmed herceg mecsetjének szomszédságában felhúzhassa saját, hatalmas komplexumát is.

Mehmed mecset komplexumának építkezése nagyjából öt évig tartott, mely időszakban mind Szulejmán, mint Hürrem többször is meglátogatták az építkezést és véleményezték az ott zajló munkálatokat. Gondoskodásuk jól jelzi, hogy talán igaz lehet a pletyka, miszerint Mehmed volt Szulejmán legkedvesebb fia és ő lett volna a legméltóbb a trónra Szulejmán halála után. Eszerint pedig a herceg halála nem csak a családnak volt tragédia, de az Oszmán Birodalom számára is.