Years ago, historian from Valencia, Regina Pinilla Pérez de Tudela, during her research for doctoral thesis about Germaine de Foix, found documents, that would indicate Germaine and her step-grandson, Charles V, had a love affair.

Germaine was the second wife of Ferdinand II of Aragon, who married her in order to double cross his son-in-law, Philip the Handsome, allying himself with his natural enemy, Louis XII of France, and to get a male heir, given the salic law in his kingdom, according to which, the crown would go straight into Philip’s hands after Ferdinand’s death.

At the time Germaine was 17 and Ferdinand 53 years old. In May of 1509 Germaine gave birth to Ferdinand’s son, John, who died shortly afterwards. They did not have more children.

In 1515 the Venetian ambassador Zuan Badoer said that:

The Queen his wife, a French woman, the sister of Monseigneur de Fois, is very fat, and she will not bear children.

Ferdinand, exhausted by severe illness and his long, and turbulent reign, died on 23th January of 1516. In the instructions directed at his grandson, Charles, the king asked him to take care of his young widow:

…after God there is nothing more left to her but you…

In 1516 Germaine did not have anyone of her closest family, who could take care of her. She became an orphan before her marriage to king Ferdinand, her brother Gaston de Foix, died in the battle of Ravenna in 1512, and her uncle, Louis XII of France, passed away in 1515. Although she was a claimant to the throne of Navarre, it was conquered by Ferdinand in 1512 and annexed to the Crown of Castile three years later, making his daughter, Joanna I of Castile, its nominal Queen. Germaine was left alone in foreign and hostile country.

Charles came to Spain in 1517 already as the king (he had been proclaimed the King of Castile and Aragon, on 14th March 1516 at the church of St. Gudule in Brussels) accompanied by his older sister, Eleanor of Austria. During his first meeting with the Queen Dowager, Charles kissed and greeted her, doing the same with her ladies-in-waiting. The eyewitness of the meeting, Laurent Vital noted:

…I heard that he [Charles] had won then the love of one Lady…

Manuel Fernández Álvarez, one of Charles’ biographers, did not have any doubts as for the identity of the said lady. It was Germaine de Foix, the Dowager Queen of Aragon.

It seems that in spite of the age difference – in 1517 Charles was 17 and Germaine 29 years old – they had many things in common. They both spoke French and were raised in similar fashion, also they both found themselves at foreign and hostile court.

Germaine was seen in Spain as a symbol of betrayal and many misfortunes were attributed to her, including Ferdinand’s death, allegedly being a result of love potions that she had prepared.

Charles according to Ferdinand and many Castilians, and Aragoneses, was not the best candidate for the heir because as a foreigner, he did not speak the language and did not know the culture, and customs of the kingdoms that he would one day rule. In spite of the intense efforts and requests of Ferdinand and Isabella, directed at Philip the Handsome, the latter did not agree to send his eldest son to Spain where he would be raised.

Charles’ younger brother, however, was born and brought up in his grandparents’ kingdoms, and as such was a better option, according to many. But at the end of the day, Ferdinand the Catholic decided to respect the law and Isabella’s last will, and hence in his testament, dictated on 22th Januray 1516, in Madrigalejo, he designated Charles to be Joanna’s successor and regent.

The above mentioned historian, Manuel Fernández Álvarez, presents many proofs that would support his and Regina Pinilla Pérez de Tudela’s theory. It was Germaine in whose honour the young king threw banquets and tournaments and like Vital mysteriously added:

And no wonder because nothing is impossible for people who are in love…

Charles’ palace and Germaine’s residence in Valladolid were situated close to each other but it was not enough for Charles, who ordered a wooden bridge to be lifted between them:

…so the king and his sister could go to visit the said Queen in more privacy…

…and also the said Queen used it to go to the King’s palace…

…it was very useful and especially for these who were in love, who thanks to it [the bridge] could go to visit their beloved ones…

In spite of the Flemish chronicler’s suggestions, historians have ignored these adventures of the young king. It is possible, given the construction of Vital’s testimony, that they did not notice anything – for it was incestous relationship, against all the morals and Charles was always considered a very religious man and defender of the Christian faith. Maybe that’s why they also ignored other evidence that is stored at the Archivo General de Simancas and is much more solid than Vital’s insinuations, which may have been taken as innocent rumour.

There is the testament and last will of Germaine de Foix in which she said:

…we leave that string of thick pearls that belongs to us and is the best that we have, which consists of 133 pearls, to the Most Serene doña Isabel, infanta of Castile, daughter of His Majesty the Emperor, my lord and son… And I do this because of the great love that we have for Her Highness…

Germaine did not mention the mother of the said infanta but her third husband, Ferdinand of Aragon, Duke of Calabria, in the letter to the Empress Isabella, Charles V’s wife, in October of 1536, wrote:

Your Majesty will see the legacy of pearls that she leaves to the Most Serene Infanta doña Isabel, her daughter. Your Majesty will let me know if it serves You for it to be sent with proper man…

It is possible the said Isabel was being raised at her step-mother’s court or at some nunnery, however, it must have been a great secret, because this girl’s life is shrouded in mystery. She did not have a right to use the title of the infanta because Charles never recognized her as his child.

Certainly it was not one of the Emperor’s daughters by his wife, since none of them was named Isabel and the Duke of Calabria in his letter specifically said it was Germaine’s child.

Germaine accompanied Charles on his trip to Barcelona, where in 1519 she got married to the Marquis of Brandenburg.

Later we find her at Charles’ side again, on his trip to the Netherlands. In May of 1520 both of them visited England, as we can read in the base Letters and Papers:

Outside the gates of Canterbury were 60 dappled palfreys, saddled with women’s pillions, but empty; the pillions were all of cloth of gold, one of them being embroidered with fine pearls and jewels. These palfreys had been prepared for the Queen Germainede Foix, the French woman, relict of the late King Ferdinand the Catholic, now married to the Marquis of Brandenburg.

After dinner there was dancing, and in the evening, the Queen Germaine and 60 ladies on horseback, mounted on white palfries saddled with cloth of gold, made their entry. She was met, amongst the rest, by the Lady Mary, late Queen of France, and accompanied also by 200 Spanish ladies dressed according to their own fashion, but with long thin veils and small caps on their heads as worn in Flanders, with flaps (coste) and double brims, also in the Flemish fashion, some white, some green, and some tawney. These ladies were not handsome, but graceful (gratiate), and very attractive from their Spanish costume.

On the morrow, Whit Monday, at the hour of mass, the King accompanied by the ambassadors, and with no less pompous a retinue than on the preceding day, came from the abbey (his abode) to the cathedral; inside which, near the door, he awaited the Emperor and his train; and after they had embraced, placing him on the right hand, he took him to the high altar to the appointed pew.

Shortly after, the Queens came—first the Queen of England; and then Queen Germaine, and the Lady Mary, the former being on the right hand as a mark of honour for a foreigner, and she was accompanied to her abode by 120 ladies, besides the 20 Spanish dames, all most richly arrayed.

Queen Germaine was dressed in cloth of gold in the Flemish fashion.

The Queen Mary in cloth of silver lama.

In the Emperor’s company was the Prince of Orange, a youth about 18 years of age. His entire costume—doublet, hose, and shoes— was all of silver lama, striped longitudinally with cloth of gold; and so wide were the sleeves of his doublet, which were lined with cloth of gold lama, that they almost touched the ground; and the hose and doublet joined in jacket fashion, with three plaits; his shirt being of red murrey sarsnet, which contrasted admirably with his white arms.

The mass was celebrated in state, and the Sovereigns being then accompanied to the Emperor’s chamber, their Majesties dined together. The Emperor sat at the centre of the table; on his left the King; to the right of the Emperor, the Queen of England; to the left of the King, the Lady Mary; and to the right of Queen Katharine, Queen Germaine.

The right reverend Cardinal of York, Queen Germaine and the Lady Mary, having washed their hands together, seated themselves at table, and the Cardinal to the right of Queen Katharine, but there was space between them for another chair. To the right of the Cardinal was Queen Germaine, and to the left of the King, his sister, Queen Mary, these six sitting at the table placed at the head of the hall.

On the morrow, Tuesday, the Emperor and the King rested part of the day, and then sat in council until late in the evening, when, at about an hour after sunset, the Emperor quitted Canterbury, accompanied by the King and Cardinal, without the ambassadors, who were told to remain behind, though all the rest of the royal retinue followed by torchlight, the torches not being many, but of wax, and very long indeed, in the English fashion; and having quitted Canterbury together, their Majesties took leave of each other five miles thence. The Emperor however was accompanied towards Sandwich by Cardinal Wolsey; the King proceeding to Dover; the Queens also doing the like, and Queen Germaine taking leave of Queen Katharine.

Charles never forgot about Germaine and in spite of the fact that after Ferdinand the Catholic’s death, he arranged two more marriages for her, she often accompanied him on this journeys. In 1523 he designated her to be the Viceroy of Valencia and when her second husband passed away, she lived at his court. She was also present at the official betrothal banquet of Francis I of France and Eleanor of Austria, sitting next to Charles as his pair. In 1526 the Emperor decided to marry her off again.

Of course, it can be said that Charles simply fulfilled his grandfather’s will – it is weird that any ambassador or any of the Emperor’s enemies did not say a thing about his suspicious relationship with the Queen Dowager. But even thought Germaine’s presence at the court and the chronicler’s suggestions may be taken as details of no importance, such documents as the Queen’s last will and her husband’s letter to the Empress, can not be simply dismissed and ignored.

There is a new thesis in regard to the identity of the mysterious Isabel de Castilla, daughter of Charles V and Germaine, of whom we don’t have any records besides the above mentioned documents. Pere Maria Orts put forward a theory that one of the Emperor’s illegitimate daughters, known as Margarita de Parma and Isabel de Castilla are, in fact, one and the same person.

Margarita went down in history as the daughter of Johanna Maria van der Gheynst, one of Charles’ mistresses and was one of the two illegitimate kids, whom the Emperor officially acknowledged. (In general Charles sired at least five bastards by as many different mothers and recognized only two of them.)

She was born in 1522, in Oudenaarde and was raised at the court of Margaret of Austria, Charles’ aunt. Margaret provided her with solid education and had done everything in her power to persuade Charles to acknowledge the girl, which he eventually did, in 1529. After Margaret of Austria’s death, it was the Emperor’s sister, Mary of Hungary, who took care of her niece.

Charles mentioned Margarita in his last will:

…being in Flanders, before I got married and betrothed, I had had a natural daughter whose name is Madame Margarita…

Pere Maria Orts based his theory on some documents and Margarita’s portrait, made by Antonio Moro, where she wears the string of thick pearls – allegedly the same that once belonged to Germaine de Foix.

The historian points to the document that was signed by Charles in February of 1537. It refers to the matrimonial tax that should be paid by the inhabitants of Valencia, on the occasion of the wedding of his illegitimate daughter, Isabel, and Alessandro de’ Medici, that had taken place a few years earlier. It is well known that Margarita de Parma was Alessandro’s wife and after his death in 1537, she got married again, this time to Ottavio Farnese, Duke of Parma.

Orts did not establish whether Germaine was, in fact, Margarita’s mother but it seems there is no certainty that she was born in Oudenaarde as the daughter of Johanna Maria van der Gheynst. If Margarita and Isabel were the same woman, assuming that her mother was Johanna Maria, it is hard to explain why Germaine de Foix would leave her the most precious jewels that she had, speaking of her with such tenderness and love in her testament and last will. Given Margarita was brought up at the court of Margaret of Austria, being born in 1522, the Queen Dowager would not have a chance to meet her, let alone form a bond with the girl.

Some claim that the incestous relationship between Germaine and Charles did not take place because no one noted her pregnancy and the ambassadors, as well as the Emperor’s enemies, would use this against him. No one, however, has found a way to explain Germaine’s last will and the letter, in which it was clearly stated that Charles and the Queen Dowager had a daughter.

Sources:

1. Carlos V, el César y el hombre, Manuel Fernández Álvarez

3. (x)

4. (x)

5. (x)