by Susan Flantzer

© Unofficial Royalty 2022

Germaine of Foix was the second wife of Ferdinand II, King of Aragon. Born Ursule-Germaine de Foix circa 1488, possibly in Mazères, Kingdom of France, Germaine was from the noble French family, the House of Foix. She was the eldest of the two children and the only daughter of Jean de Foix, Count of Étampes, Viscount of Narbonne and Marie of Orléans, a sister of Louis XII, King of France. Germaine’s paternal grandparents were Gaston IV, Count of Foix and Eleanor, Sovereign Queen of Navarre. Her maternal grandparents were Charles, Duke of Orléans, and his third wife Marie of Cleves.

Germaine had one younger brother:

Gaston of Foix, Duke of Nemours (1489 – 1512), unmarried, served as a general for his uncle Louis XII, King of France, and died at the Battle of Ravenna during the War of the League of Cambrai

On November 26, 1504, Isabella I, Queen of Castile and León died. Isabella’s crown was inherited by her daughter Juana and her husband Philip of Habsburg. Ferdinand II, King of Aragon, Isabella’s widower and Juana’s father, therefore lost control of Castile and León which he had ruled only by jure uxoris (by right of his wife). Upon his death, Ferdinand’s Kingdom of Aragon would pass to Juana and her husband or their heirs, putting most of the Iberian peninsula in the hands of the House of Habsburg. This could be prevented by the birth of a male heir to Ferdinand, who would displace his half-sister Juana in the order of succession to the throne of Aragon. As part of a treaty with the Kingdom of France, Ferdinand agreed to marry Germaine of Foix, niece of King Louis XII of France, and he hoped that Germaine would give birth to a son.

On October 19, 1506, 18-year-old Germaine married 54-year-old Ferdinand by proxy in Blois, Kingdom of France. Six months later, Germaine traveled to Dueñas in the Kingdom of Castile and León, where she met her husband Ferdinand II, King of Aragon for the first time, amid great celebrations. The marriage was accepted in Ferdinand’s Kingdom of Aragon but it was poorly received by the people of the Kingdom of Castile and León who saw Ferdinand’s marriage to Germaine as a betrayal of their late queen, his first wife Isabella I, Queen of Castile and León. On May 3, 1509, Germaine gave birth to a son Infante Juan of Aragon, Prince of Girona, who died shortly after his birth. Had he survived, the crown of Aragon would have been separated from the crown of Castile and León. There were no further children from the marriage.

In 1513, Ferdinand granted Germaine the Viscounty of Castellbó, a former possession of her family, the House of Foix. Germaine was not very politically active but she did represent her husband at the 1512 Cortes Generales and the 1515 Cortes of Aragon due to Ferdinand’s ill health. On January 23, 1516, Ferdinand II, King of Aragon, died at the age of 63 and was buried next to his first wife Isabella I, Queen of Castile and León at the Royal Chapel of Granada as Isabella requested in her will.

Before he died, Ferdinand ordered his grandson Carlos, the son of Juana I, Queen of Castile and León, to take care of Germaine. Carlos I was not only the first King of a united Spain but was also Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor; Charles I, Archduke of Austria; and Charles II, Lord of the Netherlands, among many other titles. In 1517, Germaine moved from Aragon to Carlos’ court. Apparently, the 17-year-old Carlos and the 29-year-old Germaine had an affair that resulted in the birth of a daughter Isabel in 1518, who lived and was educated at the court of Castile. Isabel died at the age of 19, a year after her mother’s death, and never married.

In 1519, Carlos arranged a marriage for Germaine to Johann of Brandenburg-Ansbach, the son of Friedrich I, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach and Sophia of Poland. In 1523, Carlos, in his role as Holy Roman Emperor, appointed Germaine and Johann Viceroys of Valencia. Germaine’s second marriage was childless and abusive, and Johann died in 1525 in Valencia.

In 1526, once again, Carlos arranged a marriage for Germaine to Ferdinando, Duke of Calabria, the son of the deposed Federico, King of Naples and his second wife Isabella del Balzo. Germaine and her third husband continued as Viceroys of Valencia, but their marriage was childless. Germaine and Ferdinando were patrons of literature and music and maintained a Renaissance court. Germaine was instrumental in working toward the gradual integration of Valencia into Castile-dominated Spain.

Germaine died on October 15, 1536, aged forty-eight, in Llíria, Valencia, probably from edema caused by obesity. She was buried at the Monastery of San Miguel de los Reyes (link in Spanish) in Valencia, now in Spain, which Germaine and her third husband Ferdinando, Duke of Calabria had founded. Germaine’s third husband Ferdinando made a second marriage to Mencía de Mendoza y Fonseca and they became famous for their patronage of literary and artistic works. Ferdinando survived Germaine by fourteen years, dying on October 20, 1550, aged 67. As intended when Germaine and Ferdinando founded the Monastery of San Miguel de los Reyes, Ferdinando was buried with Germaine at the monastery.

This article is the intellectual property of Unofficial Royalty and is NOT TO BE COPIED, EDITED, OR POSTED IN ANY FORM ON ANOTHER WEBSITE under any circumstances. It is permissible to use a link that directs to Unofficial Royalty.

Works Cited