Germaine of Foix (1488 - October 18, 1536) was Queen Consort of Aragon by her marriage to Ferdinand II. She was a French noblewoman, and the step-mother to Ferdinand's child: Joanna of Castile, Maria of Aragon, and Catherine of Aragon. She was also a noted lover of her step-grandson Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor. Germaine was also a follower of the Catholic Church.

Germaine of Foix was the daughter of Marie of Orléans who was the sister to Louis XII of France, making Germaine of Foix a niece to Louis and Anne of Brittany.

Early life[]

Germaine of Foix was born somewhere in 1488, she was born in Foix, France. She was the daughter of Marie of Orléans and John of Foix. Germaine was only a member of nobility so her childhood is unknown and un-talked about.

Queenship[]

In Spain, a king by the name of Ferdinand II, King of Aragon's wife Isabella I died, the kingdom of Castile wen't to there daughter Joanna the Mad. Ferdinand wanted to prevent Joanna's husband Phillip the Handsome from ever becoming King of Aragon. Ferdinand needed a new wife. Ferdinand met Germaine of Foix and married her not long after they met.

Now Queen her job was to produce a male heir to succeed Ferdinand in Aragon tearing apart a treaty to unite Spain. She became the step-mother to all of Ferdinand's surviving children; Joanna the Mad, Maria of Aragon, and Catherine of Aragon. She became the step grandma to Eleanor of Austria and all other children of Maria and Joanna, Catherine would have children later.

Germaine of Foix gave birth to Isabella of Aragon and Juan of Aragon, but they both died in infancy thus saying Joanna the Mad was still heiress to Aragon, when Ferdinand's son-in-law Phillip died, Ferdinand took regency of Castile and had Joanna the Mad imprisoned.

Second and third marriage[]

When Ferdinand died in 1516 Joanna the Mad became Queen of Aragon (Joanna is called the Mad because she was mentally ill), Joanna's son Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor acted as her regent. Germaine remarried Johann of Brandenburg, but Germaine had an affair with Joanna the Mad's son Charles whom was noted to be very in love with Germaine.

Charles was very close to Germaine despite the fact Ferdinand married Germaine to block Joanna and Charles from inheriting Aragon.

When Johann of Brandenburg died Germaine married a rich Italian prince named Ferdinand, Duke of Calabria. Ferdinand was the only husband to out-live Germaine.

Death[]