ArtIII.S1.8.2 Historical Background on Establishment of Article III Courts

Article III, Section 1:

The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.

Before the Founding, each state had its own system of courts, while the Articles of Confederation did not provide for an independent Federal Judiciary. At the Constitutional Convention, the delegates agreed early on to depart from existing practice and establish an independent federal Judicial Branch including a Supreme Court. The Framers generally accepted that state courts would play a significant role in interpreting and applying federal law. But, in light of concerns about whether state courts would apply federal law correctly, uniformly, and without bias, the Framers provided for a federal Supreme Court with the power to review state judicial decisions involving issues of federal statutory or constitutional law.

However, the Framers debated whether the Constitution should also provide for the existence of lower federal courts. James Madison’s proposal for the new government, known as the Virginia Plan, provided for a “National Judiciary [to] be established to consist of one or more supreme tribunals, and of inferior tribunals to be chosen by the National Legislature.” In the Committee of the Whole, the proposal to establish a national Judiciary was adopted unanimously. A clause providing that the Judicial Branch would “consist of One supreme tribunal, and of one or more inferior tribunals” was initially agreed to, but later reconsidered. Critics of the provision argued that state courts could adequately adjudicate all necessary matters in the first instance, while appellate review the supreme tribunal would protect national interests and assure uniformity, and the provision for inferior tribunals was ultimately stricken out.

Madison and James Wilson then moved to authorize Congress to “appoint inferior tribunals.” That proposal, sometimes called the Madisonian Compromise, carried the implication that Congress could, in its discretion, either designate the state courts to hear federal cases or create federal courts. Over the course of the Convention, the phrasing of the provision evolved into its present form, which vests federal judicial power in the “one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.” Beyond that provision, the Constitution imposes few specific requirements related to the organization of the federal Judiciary.

The first Congress exercised its discretion to create lower federal courts promptly in the Judiciary Act of 1789, the first legislation related to the Federal Judiciary. Since that time, the Federal Judiciary has always consisted of one Supreme Court and multiple inferior federal courts, though Congress has periodically enacted legislation to change the size of the Supreme Court and the size and structure of the lower courts.