Article III of the Constitution establishes the national government’s judicial branch: the federal judiciary, headed by a single Supreme Court. The judicial branch is responsible for interpreting the nation’s laws.

Interestingly, the text of Article III is very short and doesn’t lay out many details about the Supreme Court and how it should work—or even what the federal judiciary as a whole should look like. Furthermore, Article III can be a bit hard to understand without some background context. The basic ideas are pretty simple, but the language is a bit more technical than other parts of the Constitution.

Let’s walk through some of Article III’s key passages—beginning with Article III, Section 1.

Article III, Section 1

Here’s the text of Article III, Section 1:

“The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.”

Article III begins with (what scholars refer to as) a Vesting Clause—vesting the “judicial power of the United States” in one Supreme Court and whatever lower courts Congress decides to establish. In other words, Congress controls the details of the national court system and even the shape of the Supreme Court’s docket. In practice, this means that Congress has considerable authority to change the following:

The size of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court began with six Justices. Over time, there’s been a low of five Justices and a high of 10 (during the Lincoln presidency). Congress has altered the size of the Supreme Court six times (the last time was in 1869).

Congress may also shape the jurisdiction of the federal courts. In other words, it has the power to shape what cases federal judges can (or must) hear.

Finally, Congress can also change the details of the federal court system as a whole. In other words, it has the power to determine the number of federal judges, the number of courts of appeals (if any), the number of district courts (if any), etc.

Article III, Section 1, also tells us that federal judges—including Supreme Court Justices—hold their offices for life (“during good behaviour”). This creates an independent judiciary. Federal judges can’t be fired, fined, or otherwise controlled once confirmed to the federal courts.

The big constitutional principle here is judicial Independence: The idea that the federal courts must be independent from the control of the other branches. This is done by giving judges and Justices life tenure and guaranteeing their salaries. The independence of the judiciary is a key element of the American constitutional system.

The Founders’ vision of judicial independence grew out of the colonists’ own experience under the British system. Judges were not independent within the British system. Instead, colonial judges were seen as officers of the Crown, who carried out the orders of the King and could be removed at his whim.

Not so under the new Constitution! Judges can only be removed through the impeachment and removal process. Only one Supreme Court Justice has ever been impeached: Justice Samuel Chase by a Jeffersonian Congress during the Jefferson Administration! But Chase wasn’t removed!