Abstract

The future biorefining industry presents opportunities for developing bioprocesses by which renewable resources, broadly defined, may be transformed to low-carbon footprint products. Research has made major advances in defining and developing locally appropriate feedstocks, understanding the role of plant cell wall structure and chemistry on recalcitrance, and identifying design criteria for cost-effective biomass conversion at a commercial demonstration scale. However, the scale-up of processes that overcome the resistance of biomass to conversion to biofuels and bioproducts remains a challenge. Numerous chemical, physical, and hydrothermal pretreatments of lignocellulosic feedstocks are known to enhance both rates and extents of enzyme hydrolysis but also generate inhibitors that prevent effective cellulose conversion. This seminar will present developments in research that address recalcitrance and scale-up based on the work of many dedicated researchers. The insights gained, particularly with respect to interactions and roles of proteins at surfaces during enzyme hydrolysis, will help to enable scale-up of biorefineries while at the same time resulting in science that could inform new applications ranging from pathogen detection to delivery of protein therapeutics in people.

Biography

Michael Ladisch is Distinguished Professor of Agricultural and Biological Engineering with a joint appointment in the Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering and Director of the Laboratory of Renewable Resources Engineering (LORRE). His BS (1973) from Drexel University and MS (1974) and PhD (1977) from Purdue University are in Chemical Engineering. The research of Ladisch, students, and colleagues addresses transformation of renewable resources into biofuels and bioproducts, bioseparations, food pathogen detection, and injectable biologics - all of which involve the science of proteins at interfaces. This work has addressed the study and development of bioprocesses by which renewable resources, broadly defined, may be transformed to low-carbon footprint bioproducts. The resulting foundational science and engineering has been translated into industrial practice and numerous publications, two textbooks, and 20 patents. He co-founded biofuels company Celsys in 2006 and served as CTO at Mascoma Corporation from 2007 to 2013 after Mascoma acquired Celsys.

Professor Ladisch is Fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He received the Marvin J. Johnson Award in Biochemical Technology of the American Chemical Society, and was named as one of 100 engineers of the Modern Era by AIChE. He received the Charles D. Scott Award and is fellow of ACS, AAAS, the National Academy of Inventors, and AIChE. He is Secretary of the Board of the Foundation for Food and Agricultural Research and serves on editorial boards of a half dozen journals. He is a member of the scientific advisory board of Agrivida, as well as a member of the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences Committee of the National Academies and the Research Report Review Committee of the National Research Council.

Watch Dr. Ladisch's Presentation