The iconic 2020 tune gets a electro reggaeton re-imagining from the Parisian producer

French producer extraordinaire Herve Pagez has crafted an electro reggaeton remix of Ultra Naté’s 2020 hit ‘Free (Live Your Life)’, out on BMG.

Revitalising the 2020 dance anthem, the Parisian brings his Latin-infused sound to ‘Free (Live Your Life)’, blending elements of electro reggaeton, dancehall shuffle and funk guitar with Ultra Naté’s iconic, life-affirming vocal. Crafting dramatic synth breakdowns and fierce horn-fuelled drops, Herve Pagez breathes new life into this modern classic.

The track is also a revisit to the original Ultra Nate dancefloor staple ‘Free’, which celebrated its 25th anniversary last year as one of the biggest dance anthems of the ‘90s, reaching #1 in Italy and on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart, and peaking inside the top 10 in Canada, France, Iceland, Ireland, Switzerland and the UK. The song “Free” was highlighted at this year’s Eurovision in a medley as a full production dance number broadcast to roughly 160 Million people worldwide.

Paris-based producer Herve Pagez makes highly energetic, complex EDM tracks informed by styles such as moombahton, trap, and baile funk, with a major pop sensibility. After steadily releasing tracks throughout the 2010s, he received widespread attention in 2019 when he collaborated with Diplo and Charli XCX on the single ‘Spicy’, the Mad Decent-issued single reached number 18 on Billboard’s Hot Dance/Electronic Songs chart, additionally charting high in Sweden and New Zealand.

As a teenager living in Guadeloupe, Pagez began making EDM tracks in his bedroom. Laidback Luke heard some of his demo tracks in 2012, and Pagez was signed to Mixmash. Several Pagez tracks were released through Mixmash’s Ones to Watch imprint, and further releases followed on Tommie Sunshine‘s Brooklyn Fire, as well as performances at major festivals such as Tomorrowland. Most recently, his single ‘WWU’ with Lu City came out on RCA last year as well as his remix of Aazar’s ‘The Carnival’.

Baltimore singer/songwriter/DJ/producer and music legend Ultra Naté has long been adored by electronic, dance and pop fans since the early 90’s. Having debuted on the scene in 1989 with the early underground favorite, ‘It’s Over Now’ and her revered 1990 album, Blue Notes In the Basement which spawned the hits ‘Rejoicing’, ‘Deeper Love’, ‘Scandal’ and ‘Is It Love?’, Ultra was one of the first house music artists signed to a major label deal when she inked with Warners UK and was recently named one of Billboard’s Greatest Dance Artists of All Time.

Three decades on with massive crowd stompers such as ‘Twisted’, ‘Automatic’, ‘Party Girl’, ‘New Kind Of Medicine’, ‘Found A Cure’, ‘How Long (Ultra Flava)’ and the Top 10 pop nugget, ‘If You Could Read My Mind’, 2023 finds Ultra Naté joyously celebrating the enduring anthem ‘Free’, which turned 25 last year – a period which saw Ultra collaborating with Icona Pop, Pete Tong, LP Giobbi, David Morales, Paris Hilton, Blue Lab Beats, House Gospel Choir, NYC’s esteemed Lincoln Center, UEFA Women’s EURO Finals at Wembley with Becky Hill and Stefflon Don, numerous festivals, Prides and ushering in her 10th album titled, ULTRA.

A dancehall-flavoured celebration of an Ultra Naté gem, Herve Pagez does the original ‘Free (Live Your Life)’ more than justice with this vibrant and inventive re-imagining.

FOLLOW HERVE PAGEZ: