Joe McCluskey, a 1932 Olympic medalist who won more United States track and field titles than any other runner, died yesterday at his home in Madison, Conn. He was 91.

Although Henry Laskau, a long-retired race walker, won 42 national titles, no runner has approached McCluskey's 27. From 1930 to 1948, running mostly for the New York Athletic Club, McCluskey won his titles at distances as short as the 3,000-meter steeplechase on the track and as long as 15 kilometers on the road. In the steeplechase, a demanding seven-and-a-half-lap race requiring the runner to clear a water jump and three additional hurdles every lap, he won the outdoor title 9 times in 13 years.

He did it with little speed (his fastest quarter-mile was only 55.8 seconds) and no speed workouts. He ran with almost a shuffle, his knees never getting high, and at times he had to grab a hurdle to clear it. He attributed his success to desire.

''I don't think I had as much ability as some others,'' he said, ''but I put more into it. When you can't stand at the end of a race, you know you've given everything. I ran a lot of races when I couldn't stand at the end.''

Joseph Paul McCluskey was born June 2, 1911, in South Manchester, Conn. Running success came early, and as a Fordham University junior he won a bronze medal in the steeplechase in the 1932 Summer Olympics. Had officials not made a basic error, the medal could have been silver.

In the final, a substitute official ran the board showing how many laps remained. The first time the runners passed him, he failed to hold up the sign. From then on, he was always one lap behind. At the end of the regulation 3,000 meters, McCluskey was second, but the officials told the runners that one lap remained. On that lap, McCluskey fell back and finished third.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.