SmarTone Telecommunications edged ahead of the pack in Hong Kong's competitive mobile market on Thursday when it posted growth in both average revenue per user (arpu) and handset sales.

The company saw arpu for the year to June climb slightly to $188 per month, up from $183 a year ago. Mobile services contributed revenue of $2.48 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.98 per cent.

Sales of handsets and accessories jumped 57.91 per cent to $878 million.

'Our handset business manages to make money as we give out handset subsidies selectively,' chief executive Douglas Li said.

Analysts believe SmarTone is the only 2G mobile operator in Hong Kong that has managed to keep arpu growing. Peoples Telephone has seen arpu drop 8.1 per cent to $158, while Sunday Communications reported earlier this week a flat arpu at $140. Sunday, the territory's smallest operator, also said first-half handset sales dropped to $54 million from $65 million last year while handset subsidies increased to $10 million from $3 million.

'SmarTone has the best fundamentals among them all,' said Vincent Ha at Sun Hung Kai Securities. 'While Sunday competes over price, Orange's network is not stable, One2Free and HKCSL have higher tariffs - SmarTone provides a satisfactory service at a reasonable price.'

SmarTone's full-year profit rose 23.29 per cent to $466.45 million on total revenue of $3.36 billion, up 18.91 per cent from a year ago. It declared a final dividend of 33 cents per share, which contributed to a full-year dividend of 53 cents per share. That represented a dividend yield of 6.05 per cent over yesterday's closing price of $8.75.

SmarTone had 1.06 million customers in June and a monthly churn rate of 2.6 per cent, which, it claimed, was lower than the industry average.

'SmarTone is benefiting from mainland individual traveller arrangements,' said DBS Vickers Securities analyst Wallace Cheung. 'About 25 per cent of arpu is from the roaming service, which is free of bad debts and has a higher margin.'

The company said it would roll out a third-generation (3G) mobile service this quarter and would have full coverage along MTR lines by the end of next year. It had lined up with a number of handset providers with 3G phone capability, Mr Li said.

The firm has planned an annual capital expenditure of $700 million - compared with $630 million in the previous year - more than 50 per cent of which will be spent on 3G development.