Posted by Ra Moon

The Showtime limited series Your Honor is set and was filmed in New Orleans, boasting magnificent Crescent City filming locations. The second season was also shot partially in California.

This is the first series starring Bryan Cranston since Breaking Bad finished, and both thrillers have a lot in common.

Cranston plays judge Michael Desiato, whose son Adam (Hunter Doohan) accidentally runs over Rocco Baxter, the son of a New Orleans preeminent gangster.

Here is our comprehensive spoiler-free guide to all the filming locations of Your Honor. You’ll find the new season 2 updates below in the report.

Your Honor Locations

Your Honor opens with Michael jogging through the historic Lafayette Cemetery No. 1, where his wife is buried.

Located in the Garden District neighborhood, this beautiful 19th-century burial ground with a French perfume name contains many tombs and mausoleums of great architectural significance.

The cemetery has been featured in several productions like the AMC post-apocalyptic series Into the Badlands.

(You can open all the locations on Google Maps by clicking on the links below in the captions ↴)

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

In Episode 8, the address of the Desiato home is printed on a piece of mail addressed to Adam: 1309 7th Street in the Garden District.

The house is located just one block away from Lafayette Cemetery No. 1.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The courthouse is the Orleans Parish District Court, hosted in the impressive building of large corridors pictured in the series.

Image courtesy of Showtime and Google Maps

The Jimmy Baxter family home (played by Michael Stuhlbarg) is located at 100 Audubon Boulevard, a fancy tree-lined street in New Orleans.

According to Zillow, this 6360 square foot mansion built in 1920 with 4 bedrooms and 5 bathrooms has an estimated market value of $2,300,000.

The house location from The Perfect Date Netflix movie was also filmed here in this exclusive street.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

Almost every movie or series set in NOLA, including the new Russell Crowe's film Unhinged or the Netflix production The Lovebirds, have a sequence showing the Crescent City Connection, the iconic twin bridges over the Mississippi River.

The lower pic is from the scene at the end of the first episode when Michael dumps the remainder of the evidence over the Claiborne Avenue Bridge in the middle of the night.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Maps: Greater Nola Bridge / Claiborne Bridge

Kofi Jones's family house is located at 5700 Royal Street, near the old water tower in the Lower Ninth Ward.

This distinctive New Orleans neighborhood, featuring many beautiful 19th-century buildings, experienced catastrophic flooding during Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The convenience store is Ya-Ya's Auto Repair and Painting at 2550 North Prieur Street in the St. Roch neighborhood.

However, the next scene was filmed a bit far away from here; Adam runs Rocco over in the intersection of North Galvez Street and Caffin Avenue in the Lower Ninth Ward.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Maps: Store / Intersection

The gas station is the Claiborne Express at 1249 North Claiborne Avenue.

The Professional Funeral Services sign is from a real funeral home in New Orleans.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Map

The bar from the third episode is Robert's Bar and Liquor Store at 3125 Calhoun Street in Marlyville - Fontainebleau.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Map

Ted's Frostop Diner, where Michael meets Charlie (played by Isiah Whitlock Jr.) at the beginning of the second episode, is located at 3100 Calhoun Street in the Uptown area.

This location also appears in the fourth episode of the second season.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Map

In the third episode, Rocco Baxter is buried in the monumental Metairie Cemetery, which is not located in the city of Metairie, but in New Orleans' Lakewood district.

This elegant 19th-century park was built over a former horse race track, and today still remains the original oval contours of the track itself.

Rocco's candlelight memorial in the fourth episode was filmed at Sophie Wright Park, in the Lower Garden District.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Maps: Cemetery / Park

The Baxter Hotel in New Orleans

The Baxter House restaurant is the Belle Epoque-style Bourbon Orleans Hotel in French Quarter.

The white church in the background is St. Louis Cathedral in Jackson Square.

The interior dining room of the hotel in the last episode is the Rib Room at the Omni Royal Orleans Hotel, located three blocks away from there.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Maps: Hotel / Interior

The veterinary clinic of the 5th episode is real: The MidCity Veterinary Hospital is hosted in a lovely building located at 3821 Orleans Avenue.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Map

In the 6th episode, the abandoned "Wonderland" park where Adam and Fia (played by Lilli Kay) sneak in is the Six Flags New Orleans near Little Woods.

The amusement park opened in the year 2000 but has been closed since 2005 when Hurricane Katrina flooded most of the facilities.

The complex was also featured in the Jamie Foxx movie Project Power, in Jurassic World, and in an episode of the Claws series.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Map

The 7th episode features scenes filmed at the Fair Grounds Race Course (pictured) and the Tad Gormley Stadium.

The bar where Michael has a drink with Sara LeBlanc (Lorraine Toussaint) is the Coquette restaurant at Magazine Street and Washington Avenue.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Maps: Horse racing spot / Stadium / Bar

The bar with the cool elliptical windows is Buffa's Lounge Restaurant Dive Bar, located at 1001 Esplanade Avenue on the border of the French Quarter since 1939.

On the other hand, Big Mo's house (the leader of the Desire gang played by Andrene Ward-Hammond) is located at 527 Flood Street in the Lower 9th ward.

Here is where she tests Eugene (Benjamin Flores Jr.) with the roll of cash and they have the barbeque after the funeral.

Image courtesy of CBS Studios - Maps: Bar / House

The 8th episode restaurant is the superb Commander's Palace at 1403 Washington Avenue in the Garden District.

Since 1893, this famous eatery has been a New Orleans landmark known for serving quality Haute Creole cuisine in a charming Louisiana-style house.

Image courtesy of Google Maps

The new season 2 locations

The Boutin State Penitentiary Prison Rodeo was filmed at the Pico Rivera Sports Arena, a multipurpose arena in California.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The spot near the bus station where Eugene leaves the city was filmed in Los Angeles, at the Joe's Auto Parks parking lot at 916 South Hill Street.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The home of Michael's mother-in-law, Elizabeth (played by Margo Martindale), is a double gallery house located at 1322 Felicity Street in the Garden District of New Orleans.

Built in 1870, this beautiful four-bedroom house has an estimated market price of two million dollars.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The historic U.S. Custom House at 423 Canal Street in New Orleans served as the City Hall.

Completed in 1881, the grand Marble Hall that appears in the series is considered of the finest Greek Revival interiors in the United States.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The exterior of the club that Big Mo wants to buy, Dezi Boule, is actually the Crescent City Cigar Shop at 730 Orleans Street in the French Quarter.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The spot in the third episode where Jimmy is projecting the Baxter District was filmed at New Orleans Downtown View in Algiers Point.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The Woody's Bar-B-Que in Houston is a real restaurant located at 3446 West Slauson Avenue in Los Angeles.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The Houston Police Department building featured in the fourth episode is the old Glendale Police Station in California.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The church is St John's Episcopal Cathedral in Los Angeles.

This gorgeous church near downtown was built in 1925 in the Romanesque Revival style.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

The last scene in "Part Eighteen" with Michael and Lee Delamere (played by Carmen Ejogo), was filmed at the Newman Bandstand in Audubon Park.

Image courtesy of Showtime - Map

Can you help to improve this article about the filming locations of Your Honor? To complete and correct this report, any feedback, info, or images that you may have are more than welcome, thank you!

NOTICE: If you’re using this information on your website, please credit and link to this page as a source.

*****

8 comments:

1- Aubrey Smithwick - December 20, 2020 at 10:43 PM

What cemetery was used where Rocco Jones was supposed to be buried in?

2- Anonymous - December 21, 2020 at 6:44 PM

More, please! What bar is at the beginning of Episode 3?

3- Aadrock83 - January 5, 2021 at 9:06 PM

This is amazing! Thank you. I’m planning a trip to cover this entire season of locations once the season wraps. This will be a HUGE help.

4- NolaGirl13 - January 1, 2021 at 8:01 PM

I’m actually from New Orleans, in love about 25 minutes away in Laplace currently. You have done a great job explaining these locations.

5- MVM - February 21, 2021 at 5:23 PM

Here is a correction for you! The Baxter House restaurant is actually The Rib Room at the Omni Royal Orleans on St. Louis. I believe the outside, hotel, and pool scenes are the Bourbon Orleans. Even the last scene in Chapter 10 is the Rib Room for sure because we have a wine cellar there that I can see in the background.

6- Anonymous - April 30, 2021 at 6:33 PM

I think the bad in episode 3 is Robert's Bar, next door to Frostop.

7- Anonymous - Feb 18, 2023, 2:07 PM

What was the filming location for the prison in this series? For example, season 2 episode 1?

8- Anonymous - Mar 19, 2023, 12:32 PM

What is the location of the coffee house with white tile walls, where they have two espressos, in the first or second episode? It looks like a restaurant on Magazine Street, closer to the quarter that I think was called Camisa‘s, but I could be wrong.

Ra Moon

Atlas of Wonders is looking for wonderful Filming Locations all around the world. We are constantly updating and improving our posts with new details and images. Follow us here: