Ranging from the essential works of Kubrick and Tarkovsky to recent hits like Villeneuve's Dune, there's no shortage of excellent sci-fi flicks to choose from on HBO Max. And if you're looking for something to watch, we've rounded up some of the best ones you can stream right now below.

Here are the best of HBO Max's sci-fi movies as of March 21.

The Thirteenth Floor (1999)

A sci-fi murder mystery with comparisons to The Matrix, this underrated flick is worth a gander. When the inventor of the VR simulator of 1937 Los Angeles is murdered, his protegé becomes the primary suspect. Notably, Vincent D'Onofrio is among the cast.

The Rover (2014)

Following the world's economic collapse, Australia becomes a dangerous Wild West in this post-apocalyptic drama from Animal Kingdom director David Michôd. Robert Pattinson and Guy Pearce are immense as survivors brought together in an action-filled, cross-country quest.

Godzilla vs. Kong (2021)

Two titans come together in this enjoyable -- but forgettable -- monster flick. Living up to its title, Godzilla vs. Kong sees a couple of rounds play out between the two behemoths, while humans tinker around with creating a secret weapon. At least there's a decent soundtrack. Alexander Skarsgård, Millie Bobby Brown, Rebecca Hall, Brian Tyree Henry, Shun Oguri, Eiza González and Julian Dennison star.

Edge of Tomorrow (2014)

This adaptation of Japanese novel All You Need Is Kill is... all you need in a sci-fi actioner. Tom Cruise. Emily Blunt. A plot with time travel. A smart script. Cruise plays Major William Cage, a public relations officer who finds himself at the forefront of a battle with an alien race. Unpredictable and ambitious, The Edge of Tomorrow is a home run.

War of the Worlds (2005)

More Tom Cruise. Tom Cruise and Steven Spielberg, that is. And Dakota Fanning! This sci-fi actioner, based on the 1898 H.G. Wells novel, follows a father who must protect his children and reunite with their mother when giant aliens invade Earth. Big action and heart make this basically everything you want from an alien movie.

Dune (2021)

Denis Villeneuve's sci-fi blockbuster is back on HBO Max. The epic based on Frank Herbert's novel recently scored a host of Oscars, including best original score and cinematography. Catch the sprawling story of the Atreides family, who find themselves at war on the deadly planet Arrakis. Timothée Chalamet, Rebecca Ferguson, Oscar Isaac, Zendaya and more stack out a hugely impressive ensemble cast.

Ex Machina (2014)

One of the best Alex Garland films featuring one of the best robot dance scenes.

Under the Skin (2013)

Prepare to be both deeply unsettled and riveted by this unique sci-fi horror. Scarlett Johansson plays an alien roaming the streets of Scotland, preying on unsuspecting men. With amateur actors, unscripted sequences shot with hidden cameras and a lens capturing the alien's perspective, this mesmerizing flick is unique in more ways than one.

Signs (2002)

An M. Night Shyamalan sci-fi horror starring Mel Gibson, Joaquin Phoenix and Abigail Breslin. A priest stumbles on a series of crop circles in his cornfield, created by extraterrestrial life. It's no Sixth Sense, more of an exercise in building suspense than delivering a eureka moment twist, but still worth a dip if you're after a sci-fi horror chill.

Predator (1987)

A classic action flick starring Arnie, Predator follows an elite paramilitary rescue team stalked by a technologically advanced alien.

Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978)

Remakes are rarely better than the original, but sometimes there comes a remarkable exception. The 1978 version of Invasion of the Body Snatchers builds on the already excellent 1956 sci-fi horror, telling the story of a health inspector and his colleague who realize the people of San Francisco are slowly being replaced by drone-like replicas. Creating a dread and paranoia-infused atmosphere, with Donald Sutherland in the lead, Invasion of the Body Snatchers has been hailed as one of the best sci-fis of all time.

Total Recall (1990)

Arnie stars in this sci-fi actioner based on a Philip K. Dick short story. A construction worker receives an implanted memory of an exhilarating adventure on Mars. Things get more and more wild from there in this ambitious sci-fi classic.

Strange Days (1995)

A cyberpunk thriller from Oscar-winning director Kathryn Bigelow (The Hurt Locker). Strange Days stars Ralph Fiennes as a former LAPD officer who uses an illegal technology involving memory to solve the murder of a prostitute. Some would say this is an underrated sci-fi gem of the '90s. Now that it's back on streaming, give it a fresh go.

The Maze Runner (2014)

Based on James Dashner's young adult dystopian sci-fi novel, The Maze Runner kicked off an entertaining film franchise. Dylan O'Brien stars as Thomas, a 16-year-old who wakes up in the middle of a ginormous, intricate maze, joined only by a group of other boys. This intriguing setup provides a solidly entertaining adventure -- the best of the trilogy.

The Matrix (1999)

If you haven't seen The Matrix, and somehow don't know its major plot points, well done for avoiding spoilers for 23 years. The sequels Reloaded, Revolutions and Resurrections are also on HBO Max.

Colossal (2016)

Colossal might look like a romantic comedy on the surface, but it has surprisingly dark layers underneath. This black comedy stars Anne Hathaway as an alcoholic out-of-work journalist who moves back home to New Hampshire after her suave British boyfriend (Dan Stevens) dumps her. What happens next is both hugely unexpected and a massive metaphor: She discovers she has a connection with a colossal Kaiju monster destroying Seoul, in South Korea. Yes, Colossal has a ton of soul, a standout performance from Jason Sudeikis and an imaginative, at times thrilling story.

The Fly (1986)

An '80s classic, The Fly is a remake of the 1958 film of the same name, just with added gore and Jeff Goldblum. The David Cronenberg film has become a classic in its own right.

2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)

"Alexa, play 2001: A Space Odyssey."

Reminiscence (2021)

This sci-fi mystery from one half of the duo that created Westworld (Lisa Joy) is pure mind boggle, but the interesting ideas are worth a gander. Reminiscence follows Hugh Jackman's Nick Bannister, who uses a machine that can see into people's memories.

Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)

The best Terminator movie? Make your judgment by watching The Terminator sequel.

District 9 (2009)

The sci-fi actioner that put director Neill Blomkamp on the map. The hybrid found footage flick takes you right into the intense action of an alternative 1982, when an alien spaceship appears over Johannesburg, Africa. A unique, exciting and slightly political classic.

Gravity (2013)

Gravity is the ultimate scary and stomach-lurching space movie, featuring a total of zero aliens. It follows Sandra Bullock's Dr. Ryan Stone, an astronaut stranded in space, as she attempts a seemingly impossible return to Earth.

Stalker (1979)

Make it through Stalker's slow start and you'll be able to say you've watched an existential masterpiece of Russian cinema.

Solaris (1972)

Before Stalker, Andrei Tarkovsky made huge leaps for sci-fi cinema, with his complex, character-driven piece about astronauts having wild hallucinations that may or may not be real. The 2002 American remake of Solaris is also on HBO Max, with added George Clooney romance.

Moon (2009)

This immense low-budget sci-fi starring Sam Rockwell has everything. It has Sam Rockwell. A Clint Mansell score. A claustrophobic retro set and gorgeously moody moonscapes. Hard sci-fi ideas. The basic premise: A man coming to the end of a three-year solitary stint on the far side of the moon suffers a personal crisis. A must-watch.

Scanners (1981)

A warning for the body horror-averse before hitting play on this David Cronenberg sci-fi. Scanners follows people with special abilities, including telepathic and telekinetic powers. Not the first in this list to become a cult classic after a lukewarm initial response, Scanners left a lasting impression, not least because of a memorable scene involving a head explosion.

Don't Worry Darling (2022)

This tentative entry to a sci-fi movies list makes the cut because it includes elements of sci-fi thrillers. Set in a utopian company town in what appears to be the '50s, a housewife (Florence Pugh) begins to suspect the founder (Chris Pine) of the place is hiding a dark secret. It might not be a 10 out of 10 movie, but Don't Worry Darling is an absorbing mystery in more ways than one.

Donnie Darko (2001)

Rabbits have never been scarier. Donnie Darko is as dark as its title suggests, starring Jake Gyllenhaal as the titular high schooler whose sleepwalking sees him inadvertently escape a fatal accident. Donnie has visions of Frank, a creepy figure wearing a rabbit outfit who tells him the world will end in 28 days. Manipulated by Frank, Donnie begins to commit crimes.

The Faculty (1998)

Robert Rodriguez isn't the most popular among Star Wars fans at the moment, mainly for making a character do a pointless ballerina twirl in the divisive The Book of Boba Fett finale. The Faculty, directed by Rodriguez, isn't great, but it isn't bad either, following teens who investigate mysterious happenings at their high school.

Moonfall (2022)

The box office of this Roland Emmerich disaster flick bombed harder than the falling moon at its center. Yet, as a cheesy B-movie, Moonfall isn't a total disaster. Astronauts, conspiracy theories and a falling moon are just some of what you can expect from a story that follows a mission to save humanity.

Free Guy (2021)

A light action-comedy starring Ryan Reynolds isn't always going to hit the spot, but sometimes that's what you need of an evening. Free Guy follows a bank teller named Guy who discovers he's a non-player character in a massively multiplayer online game.

New Movies Coming in 2023 From Marvel, Netflix, DC and More

See all photos