this movie is about climate change. or at least the root of it is, i think it just became “miscellaneous sci-fi war” somewhere in the process

great alien design!! sam richardson should've been in way way way way more of this movie but him repeatedly yelling "shit" on the stairwell got me. nothing about this movie makes even a lick of sense and that's fine. i built a shelf while watching it!

edit: everywhere i go people stop me on the street. "where's the shelf" "show me the shelf" "did you kill jfk" "can i see the shelf." well here it is.

A supposedly $200 million dollar sci-fi spectacle about contemporary people being conscripted into a future war that pits the human race against some very hungry aliens, “The Tomorrow War” sure is a mighty huge thing to watch at home on a (comparatively) small screen. And yet, strange as it is that this summer’s biggest original blockbuster is skipping theaters altogether — a result of Paramount’s COVID-related decision to salvage its investment and sell the movie to Amazon — it can feel even stranger that something this anodyne and algorithmic wasn’t conceived by a streamer in the first place.

While the action only scales up and up and up as its world speeds towards its final battle, even the most IMAX-sized…

Takes a legitimately horrifying concept--what if multiplayer, battle royale fps games were made real and civilians with no training were conscripted into doing suicide wave attacks where they're sent to the time travel lobby, dropped into a map and then slaughtered by unbeatable NPCs--and covers it up with a heavy coat of "I freakin' love science." Also Chris Pratt's eyes are are half-closed most of the time, too unexpressive to be a movie star, get this guy out of here.

Second movie since Tenet to channel our growing anxiety about climate apocalypse by being about how future generations want us dead and are literally at war with us. Here, our kids are going to be battle hardened extinction war veterans sending us to the front without emotion or hesitation. However, as I said the main thing about this movie is making the prospects of this seem fun and cool.