Mike Dunleavy had come a long way from Brooklyn. He was at the

Harvard Club, in midtown Manhattan, all leather chairs and low

voices. He was there to tell NBA war stories to a couple dozen

businessmen over lunch, fellow graduates of Nazareth Regional

High in East Flatbush. Dunleavy played with Julius Erving and

against Michael Jordan, and he coached Magic Johnson. He's an

insider's insider. But in the middle of his talk, Dunleavy

strayed from the pro game and made a passing comment about his

son Mike Jr., then 17 years old. "He's tall, he's good, he's

bright," the coach said. "You'll be seeing him." The men in the

room knew Dunleavy, knew he was not a braggart. They took note.

That was two years ago, when Dunleavy was in his first season as

coach of the Trail Blazers and his oldest son was a junior at

Jesuit High, a private school in Portland. Big Mike, 45, is

still coach of the Blazers, who at week's end had a 42-11

record, the best in the NBA. As for the kid, he's grown into

more than an aside. Little Mike--who at 6'7" has a good four

inches on his father--is a freshman at Duke, playing guard and

forward. He's the first player off the bench, and through Sunday

he was averaging 25.2 minutes, 9.5 points and 4.2 rebounds for

the second-ranked Blue Devils. Though tests last weekend

revealed that Mike Jr. has mononucleosis (he hopes to be back by

the start of the ACC tournament on March 9), Mike Sr. was

correct. You'll be seeing him--if you haven't already.

It doesn't always work out this way. Being the kid of the coach

is like being the son of the minister. You're expected to be

dutiful and perfect and follow in Dad's footsteps. Often, the

expectations are too weighty and the son wanders off to find a

career and an identity of his own. But in this case the son

always loved what his father loved, and he was good at it too.

Wherever Big Mike went, Little Mike went--to shootarounds, to

practices, to games in college gyms and NBA arenas. Mike Jr. was

forever on the floor or in the stands, watching, experimenting,

dreaming. Mike Jr. will not be wandering off. "Saw your boy

making a Dr. J move last night," a Portland player recently told

his coach. "Where'd he learn that?"

Not from the old man. When Dunleavy left South Carolina with a

degree in psychology and joined the Philadelphia 76ers as a

sixth-round pick in 1976-77, his job was to take the charge,

make the smart pass and hole the open jumper. He did that with

high competence if not highlight-reel flair for nine seasons,

averaging 8.1 points per game for four teams. After two years as

a trader with a New York investment firm, he joined the

Milwaukee Bucks as an assistant; in the stretch runs of 1988-89

and '89-90 he even came out of retirement to help out in the

backcourt. In his first season as a head coach, 1990-91, his Los

Angeles Lakers reached the Finals, in which they lost to the

Chicago Bulls. In those waning days of Showtime, Magic Johnson

made two new friends: the Dunleavys, big and little.

"Little Mike wasn't your regular gym rat," Johnson says. "When

the kids got chased off the court [at practice], they'd all

scamper, but Mike would sit in the stands and study the game.

When I see him playing now, I see a freshman with the court

sense of a senior or an NBA rookie. He'll play in the league, no

question. He's got Larry Bird's shot, my passing game and his

father's smarts."

Dunleavy Jr. throws a Magical no-look pass and also hurls a

Johnson-style baseline-to-baseline outlet bomb. He learned some

other things from Johnson: that a shooter can rebound, that a

big man can dribble, that life is fickle. Little Mike was 11 on

that grim November day nine years ago when Johnson announced he

was HIV-positive. Big Mike had learned the awful news the night

before the world did. Johnson's agent, Lon Rosen, had gone over

to the Dunleavys' house to tell him. Mike's wife, Emily, and

their three boys, Mike Jr., Baker and James, were asleep. "When

I told Mike, the only thing he worried about was Earvin," Rosen

says. "What the loss of Earvin meant to his team--that was the

furthest thing from his mind. Then, much later, he says, 'What

am I going to tell the kids? What am I going to tell Mike [Jr.]?'"

The next day the father explained Johnson's plight as candidly

and succinctly as he could. Magic was not so much Mike Jr.'s

idol as his big buddy. Little Mike's first thought was that his

big buddy would be dead in three or four years. He was

terrified. The entire Dunleavy household sagged. "I remember Dad

coming back after the press conference," Mike Jr. says. "He was

wearing sunglasses in the house. He didn't want us to see his

eyes. I had never seen him weep before. I tried to act like

nothing was happening. I never want people to worry about me."

The Dunleavys are a tight unit. The parents say that frequent

moves--Mike Jr. lived in a dozen houses before graduating from

high school--have made the family members uncommonly reliant on

one another. During the family's two years in Los Angeles,

Little Mike and his brothers thought they were in heaven: The

sun shone, the ocean glistened, their father was the coach of

the Lakers. At the end of the 1991-92 season, though, father

Dunleavy was handed a rare opportunity: an eight-year contract

to be the coach and vice president of basketball operations back

in Milwaukee, a city whose solid Midwestern values the Dunleavys

knew well. The parents told the kids it was for the best, for

everybody. Little Mike wasn't thrilled at the news. But he

didn't fuss. He never did.

Mike Jr. enrolled at the University School of Milwaukee, an

academically superior private school. All through middle school

he excelled at soccer, football, basketball, tennis, baseball,

his studies. He made friends. Everywhere he went, people were

impressed by his poise, his intelligence, his manners. He took

neither his privilege nor his talents for granted. "I'd see him

at Bucks games," says Garry Howard, sports editor of the

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. "He'd say, 'How are you, Mr.

Howard?' And I was like, Whoa--from a coach's kid!"

All the while, another dimension of the boy was developing. The

kid's polish and manners masked a grittiness that his father had

developed on the playgrounds of Brooklyn, that his paternal

grandfather had brought over from Ireland. Little Mike knew

early on that he didn't want to be another suburban rich kid

with a pretty jumper but no heart, and he did all that he could

to make sure of that. People who play tennis with Mike Jr. on

Nantucket--Emily Dunleavy's Texas family has been spending

summers on the island since World War I--say he is a bull

terrier. Like his father, he has to win, no matter what he's

playing.

As a freshman at University, Dunleavy started on the varsity and

became close with the team's sixth man, classmate Fred Bell, a

scholarship kid from Milwaukee. Bell would sometimes spend the

night at the Dunleavys' house in River Hills, one of Milwaukee's

most affluent suburbs. On Saturdays when the Bucks were at home,

Fred, Mike Jr. and Mike Sr. would play one-on-one in the

driveway, winner keeps the court. Mike would hack, talk a little

trash, do whatever he had to do. Mike Sr., that is. "It wouldn't

get to fistfights," says Bell, now a freshman on the basketball

team at Lake Forest College, outside Chicago. "But he played us

like he was playing Michael Jordan."

The father has never been a passive observer of his oldest son's

athletic life. Mike Sr. was impressed with a University teacher,

Dave Liccione, who coached Little Mike's seventh-grade

basketball team. When Little Mike was a freshman, his father

urged the school to make Liccione the varsity coach. Liccione

got the job, started Mike Jr. and improved the team's record by

five games. But when the season was over he was relieved of his

coaching duties. Two school officials declined to discuss the

firing, but Liccione knows what he was told. "They said I was

too intense," he says.

Mike Jr. was floored. He loved playing for Liccione, who told

him something his father never had--that he was talented enough

to play for a Kentucky, a Duke, a big-time program. Mike and

Fred resolved to transfer to a public high school, Homestead.

Mike Jr. knew that the transfer would mean he'd have to sit out

his sophomore basketball season. But Liccione's firing had

angered him. He had to leave. That's what he told his parents.

"I was proud of him," the father says. "He thought the coach was

being treated unfairly, so he took a stand. It was his decision.

I respected it."

In the summer before he was a junior, after sitting out his

sophomore year, Mike Jr.'s father took the coaching job in

Portland, and the family was on the move again. No fussing from

Little Mike, of course. At Jesuit he blossomed. Named all-state

as a junior, he averaged 23 points and 8 rebounds as a senior,

leading his team to the Class 4A title and winning MVP honors in

the state tournament.

Pulitzer Prize winner David Halberstam, a friend of the

Dunleavys on Nantucket and the author of three books on

basketball, has observed the Mikes together over the years.

"It's very hard to be the son of a famous father and in the same

profession," Halberstam says. "In this case the son of a famous

father has skills that may be even more natural than the

father's, and he goes naturally down the same course."

According to Halberstam, Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski told the

senior Dunleavy that he wanted Mike Jr. more than any player

since Grant Hill. Coach K knew that the boy's playpen had been a

basketball court, that his early tutorials had come from NBA

pros. Junior's regal basketball education might have intimidated

some coaches, but Krzyzewski embraced it. "His maturity has had

a lot to do with why we've been successful this year,"

Krzyzewski says. "He understands what I say during practice,

during timeouts. He gets my dry sense of humor. Most freshmen

are afraid to talk. He's not, because he knows what's going on."

This has been an odd basketball season for the Mike Dunleavys,

big and little. Except for rare occasions, they see each other

only on TV and talk to each only over the phone. Back in

Portland, Emily runs a family press service, keeping her husband

abreast of the basketball activities of Baker, 17, a junior on

the Jesuit varsity, and James, 12, a rec league player, when

Mike Sr. is on the road. He waits until he's back home to watch

the Duke games that he has taped.

When Mike Jr. knocked down two overtime free throws to help seal

a Blue Devils victory over North Carolina recently, Mike Sr. was

on a plane, flying to yet another road game, thinking up new

ways to parcel out minutes among the highly paid Blazers and to

keep forward Rasheed Wallace out of foul trouble. Last week,

with Mike Jr. playing despite his illness, Duke clinched at

least a share of its fourth straight ACC title, while Mike Sr.'s

team stretched its winning streak to eight. Come May, his

freshman year done, Little Mike will fly west to Portland,

hoping to join his father as the Blazers march to the NBA

Finals. If the Blazers don't get that far, he'll still head to

Portland. That's where his family is now. That makes it home.

COLOR PHOTO: PHOTOGRAPH BY BILL FRAKES BE LIKE MIKE He may be the younger Dunleavy, but at 6'7", Little Mike has four inches on his 45-year-old father.

COLOR PHOTO: BOB DONNAN AIR BORN While Mike Jr.'s off to a flying start as Duke's sixth man, it was grit and savvy that kept Mike Sr.'s pro career afloat for nine years.

COLOR PHOTO: ANDY HAYT [See caption above]