The program begins with a week-long introduction to the Philippine health care system, visits to key exposure sites in Metro Manila and nearby areas. The remainder of the program will be an immersion in a remote island site as determined by the CFHI Philippines team (NOTE: not all remote island sites are available at all times; CFHI determines placement sites). For a 2-week program, participants will be in Manila approximately 3 days.

Metro Manila – Also known as the National Capital Region (NCR) of the Philippines, Metro Manila is composed of 16 cities and one municipality, whose overall population is estimated at 12 million. It is considered one of the most densely populated cities in the world. NCR is the center of culture, economy, education and government of the Philippines, which makes it the country’s hub for finance and commerce.

Alabat Island – Alabat Island is located in the province of Quezon and is one of the program’s original sites. It is located about 250 km (155 miles) southeast of Metro Manila, situated between the Pacific Ocean and Lamon Bay. From Metro Manila, Alabat Island is reachable by 6-8 hours land travel plus one hour boat ride. It is composed of three municipalities or towns: Perez in the north, Alabat in the middle and Quezon in the south. Participants who will be assigned to Alabat Island will be specifically placed in the town of Alabat, working closely with the Rural Health Unit staff.

Lubang Island – Lubang Island is located 183 km (75 miles) southwest from Metro Manila. It is separated from the main island of Mindoro and Luzon by the Verde Island passage. The island is divided into two municipalities: Lubang and Looc. The Municipality of Lubang is one of the eleven municipalities of Occidental Mindoro and it occupies the northeastern part of Lubang Island, including the island of Cabra. From Metro Manila, Lubang is reachable by a 3-hour van ride to Nasugbu Port, Batangas, followed by a 3-hour boat ride to Tilik Port, Lubang. Participants who will be assigned to Lubang will be placed within the Poblacion, working closely with the Rural Health Unit staff.

Marinduque Island – The town of Torrijos is the primary immersion site in the island province of Marinduque. Located 249 kilometers (156 miles) southeast of Manila, it can be reached via a 45-minute flight from Metro Manila, or a passenger ship from the Port of Lucena City in Quezon Province. Dubbed as the “Heart of the Philippines”, Marinduque is composed of 6 municipalities all reachable through a three-hour trip around the island via the Marinduque Circumferential Road. Participants who will be assigned in Marinduque will be specifically placed in the municipality of Torrijos, working closely with its Rural Health Unit staff.

Tablas Island – Tablas Island is about 367 km (228 miles) south of Metro Manila, situated between Tablas Strait and Sibuyan Sea near the geographic center of the Philippines. It is the largest island among the 7 islands that comprise the province of Romblon. From Metro Manila, Tablas Island is reachable by 2-3 hours bus trip to the Port of Batangas, followed by an 8-10 hours travel by passenger ship to the Port of Odiongan. It can also be reached via a one-hour plane ride from Manila. Participants who will be assigned to Tablas Island will be specifically placed in the town of Alcantara, working closely with the Rural Health Unit staff.