In the Philippines, FHI 360 has partnered with the government, private sector, civil society, and local organizations in finding sustainable solutions to health and development challenges. We use a comprehensive approach to achieve national, regional and community goals.

FHI 360’s health programs in the Philippines have focused on tuberculosis (TB), HIV, nutrition, neglected tropical diseases, emerging infectious diseases and noncommunicable diseases, targeting key populations and vulnerable groups, including those living in geographically isolated and disadvantaged areas and conflict zones. Working closely with the Philippines’ Department of Health, we use our expertise and scalable tools to deliver quality and integrated health services — from screening and diagnosis to treatment and prevention.

Through the Meeting Targets and Maintaining Epidemic Control (EpiC) project, we are working to control the HIV epidemic by improving case finding, prevention, treatment programming and viral load suppression among key and priority populations. Through the TB Innovations and Health Systems Strengthening (TBIHSS) project, we are using data-driven insights and the latest technologies, such as advanced diagnostics, artificial intelligence and digital tools, to accelerate the fight against TB. Health care providers, stakeholders and policymakers across multiple sectors are engaged to co-create and institutionalize innovative interventions and solutions for strengthening health systems to make TB and related primary care services available to all Filipinos.

FHI 360 has also implemented two projects, Infectious Disease Detection and Surveillance (IDDS) and EpiC, to support the Philippines in preventing, detecting and responding to COVID-19. We helped strengthen referral and transport systems, laboratory capacity, and clinical case management. We also helped frontline health workers access mental health support.

Through data-driven insights, global resources and strong relationships with local partners, our community-led programs have put health within reach for people throughout the Philippines.