A train derailed at the Friedrichstrasse station in Berlin-Mitte on Thursday night. Why a bogie of a wagon jumped off the rails is still unclear, said a railway spokeswoman on Thursday morning. Experts are on site. The RBB had previously reported on it.

The accident happened shortly after midnight. Nobody was injured. The vehicle was parked directly on the platform and the passengers could have alighted normally. The line 2 train was supposed to run from Bernau to Lichtenrade.

[Wenn Sie aktuelle Nachrichten aus Berlin, Deutschland und der Welt live auf Ihr Handy haben wollen, empfehlen wir Ihnen unsere App, die Sie hier für Apple- und Android-Geräte herunterladen können.]

The train is now to be towed to the workshop in Wannsee. The route between Potsdamer Platz and Oranienburger Straße is closed.

On an internal website, the railway predicts a closure until 1 p.m. From this it can be deduced that the damage is not that great. The train did not derail on a switch, they said. First, a track should be released.

It is not the first train to derail at Friedrichstrasse station. The last time a historic train derailed at the site was in 2008. Even during the time of the Wall there were derailed trains; in 1962, passengers had to run back through the tunnel to the platform after their train derailed.

Traffic is currently interrupted in both directions on the north-south lines S1, S2 and S25 between Potsdamer Platz and Nordbahnhof, and replacement buses have been set up. The railway recommends a wide bypass, for example with the BVG or over the ring.

The S-Bahn informed on Twitter in the morning: According to the information, the S1 runs between Wannsee and Potsdamer Platz every 20 minutes and between Oranienburger Straße and Oranienburg.

The S2 runs between Blankenfelde and Potsdamer Platz every 20 minutes and between Nordbahnhof and Bernau every 20 minutes. The S25 runs between Teltow Stadt and Südkreuz and between Nordbahnhof and Hennigsdorf. The S26 does not operate.