Jimmy Wales is the founder of the online non-profit encyclopedia Wikipedia and co-founder of the privately owned Wikia, Inc. including its entertainment media brand Fandom. Wales serves on the board of trustees of the Wikimedia Foundation, the non-profit charitable organization he established to operate Wikipedia. In 2019, Jimmy launched WT Social – a news focused social network. In 2006 Jimmy was named in Time magazine’s ‘100 Most Influential People in the World’ for his role in creating Wikipedia.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Jimmy was an avid reader as a child and used to devour the World Book Encyclopedia.

He took a cautious and conservative approach to entrepreneurship, taking manageable risks, learning to fail fast, and always spending less money than what he took in.

“I like to get up and do the most interesting thing I can think of to do and I try to live my life like that every day.”

The core value of Wikipedia, which is to present high quality, neutral, factual information, is what allows the organization to maintain its integrity and consistency.

He set a very aspirational mission for Wikipedia which is to give every person on the planet free access to the sum of all human knowledge.

The success of Wikipedia is staggering. It’s now a top 5 website globally with over 54 million articles in 300 languages and 1.5 billion visitors each month and growing.

To be a successful leader, you have to have clear and consistent values that people can buy into.

“Excellence is about doing something interesting and having fun. It’s got to be interesting because otherwise what’s the point?”

Charles Schwab is the founder and chairman of The Charles Schwab Corporation. What began as a small discount brokerage company in the 70’s has evolved to become the nation’s largest publicly traded investment services firm, with close to $4 trillion in client assets. He is also the chairman of The Charles and Helen Schwab Foundation, a private foundation focused on education, poverty prevention, human services, and health. He is the author of several bestselling books with his latest memoir titled Invested.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

He had to work extra hard to build his self-confidence to overcome his dyslexia and to keep up in class.

People with dyslexia are conceptual thinkers who tend to not get lost in the weeds. Some people are very literal in learning and need to go from step 1 to 2 to 3 while dyslexics can go from step 1 to step 10.

Seeing an inherent conflict of interest between commissioned stock brokers and the customers, he invented a new contrarian business model by paying salaries to people placing trades with a bonus tied to the overall success of the company.

After the tech meldtown of the early 2000’s, Charles had to come out of retirement to run the company again. He had to lay off thousands of employees and get the company turned around. Sometimes founders are the only ones who can make the tough calls and drive huge fundamental changes to the business.

He was a consummate innovator who continually pivoted, redefined the business, and opened up new markets. He knew it was important to disrupt yourself before someone else did it for you.

When hiring, beyond skills and experience, he looks at their character and ethics and their responsibility to the customer.

“Excellence is an ongoing pursuit. You are always striving for it but you never achieve it.”

Jill Heinerth is a cave diver, underwater explorer, writer, photographer, and filmmaker. She has starred on TV series for PBS, National Geographic Channel, and the BBC, and has consulted on movies for directors, including James Cameron. Her new book is titled: Into The Planet: My Life as a Cave Diver.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Fighting off a burglar during college taught her how to deal with challenges in life. Having had this harrowing dance with fear probably saved her life in the long run.

Despite having enormous success as an entrepreneur in the advertising business, she knew in her heart that it wasn’t what she was meant to do so she built up the courage to quit and begin her life of adventure under the water.

There’s very little margin for error in cave diving. More people die while diving underwater caves than climbing Mt Everest.

Most accidents happen before someone even steps foot in the water. It is the lack of planning and preparation that causes most issues. They are entirely preventable.

There is significant mental preparation. Before each dive, she closes her eyes and walks through all the worst case scenarios and rehearses all of the solutions.

She has the 7R gene which explains much of her risk seeking behavior. She is always seeking new challenges, new adventures.

“Excellence is your willingness to nurture and support the next generation. To ensure that if something’s important to you, the people below you eventually move beyond you.”

Cindy Eckert is an entrepreneur who built and sold two pharmaceutical companies, notably Sprout Pharmaceuticals, creator of “female Viagra,” for more than $1B. She subsequently founded The Pink Ceiling which invests in companies founded by, or delivering products for, women.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Moving every year during her childhood taught her how to be comfortable being uncomfortable. This experience of constant change would lay the foundation for the rest of her life.

While she had been surrounded by incredibly smart and hard working people in prior companies, she knew in her heart they weren’t any smarter or harder working than she was, so why not take a chance on herself.

She initially got turned down by the FDA for her drug for female low libido but rather that accept the verdict, she had the guts to challenge the FDA which eventually led to a reversal of their decision and approval for the drug.

After just four short years from the time she first purchased the drug, following the FDA approval, she sold the company for a billion dollars.

Culture is very important. Her company is the land of the misfit toys and they actually hire for quirkiness. There is permission to bring your entire self to work and to be respectfully irreverent.

She tries not to get too obsessed with where things will lead. She’s just focused every day on getting up and doing a great job and creating value.

“I fail every day. Failure is just part of the test of how committed you are to the venture.”

“Empathy is the female DNA of a rule breaker.”

“Success isn’t about having all the answers. It’s about having the courage. If you feel you need to have all the answers, you’ll never succeed at entrepreneurship.”

“Why do we treat our career like a ladder? Why can’t it be a jungle gym?”

At the age of 17, Chris Wilson was sentenced to life for murder. He turned his life around while in prison and was released after 16 years. Today he is the owner of Barclay Investment Corporation, a social enterprise specializing in residential and commercial contracting work and employing out of work Baltimore residents. His other business ventures include the House of DaVinci, a high-end furniture restoration and design company, and Master Plan Productions, a social impact content development company. His book is called: The Master Plan: My Journey from Life in Prison to a Life of Purpose.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

At the age of 17, Chris Wilson was sentenced to life in prison for murder.

Despite being sentenced to life, Chris believed that if he focused on turning his life around, he would get his sentence reduced and be set free after 7 years. He called this kind of thinking a “positive delusion”.

While in prison, he created a “Master Plan” which was a list of goals he wanted to accomplish in his life. He shared the list with his grandmother and the judge because he felt it was important to have others hold him accountable.

It was also important to include a number of shorter term goals on the Master Plan which were easier and quicker to accomplish to boost his confidence and create momentum.

He went to therapy to learn how to stop making excuses and take full responsibility for his past actions in order to move forward.

Instead of chasing money and living an easy life, he chose to give back to the community by starting a company which employed out of work residents including recently released prisoners.

It’s important to surround yourself with a support system of people you can turn to in order to stay on track and not revert back to bad habits.

“Excellence is pushing yourself to achieve high standards and doing so in a way that’s humble and considerate.”

Roger McNamee has been a successful Silicon Valley investor for thirty five years. He co-founded Silver Lake and Elevation Partners, two very successful private equity funds. He also plays bass and guitar in the bands Moonalice and Doobie Decibel System. He holds a BA from Yale and an MBA from Dartmouth’s Tuck School. He has written 4 books, the latest one titled Zucked: Waking up to the Facebook Catastrophe.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Roger had a very unusual approach to tech investing which allowed him to be highly successful.

Learn why he started Elevation Partners with U2’s Bono.

Hear how one pivotal meeting with Mark Zuckerberg would forever alter the course of Facebook.

It was Facebook’s lack of anonymity that Roger felt was key to bridging the gap to a much larger mainstream audience that prior social media companies had failed to reach.

While they are technically a platform, Facebook acts more like a media company by using sophisticated algorithms to control the content that users see on the site.

Social media manipulates us by exploiting the weakness in human psychology.

Learn what filter bubbles are and why they’ve contributed to our accepting and spreading false information.

“Technology has changed the way we engage with society, substituting passive consumption of content and ideas for civic engagement, digital communications for conversation.”

“Excellence is an outcome that reflects mastery of an activity in a time and in a place.”

Daniel Negreanua (aka “Kid Poker”) is a professional poker player who has won six World Series of Poker (WSOP) bracelets and two World Poker Tour (WPT) championship titles. The independent poker ranking service Global Poker Index (GPI) recognized Negreanu as the best poker player of the decade in 2014. As of 2018, he is the 2nd biggest live tournament poker winner of all time, having accumulated over $39,500,000 in prize money. He is the only player in history to win WSOP Player of the Year twice.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

He was making more money than his teachers playing poker so he quit high school to pursue his passion full time.

He would keep a journal during his games where he would track his mood and observe how it affected his game play. This allowed him to better control his emotional states and be more steady and focused.

His advantage and edge is mental preparation and the ability to deal with adversity when it comes.

It’s important to get clear on what your intention is going into something. It’s about knowing what the steps are to accomplish whatever intention that you set.

“Whenever you think that you’ve mastered something in life, that’s the exact moment when someone’s about to surpass you.”

There’s a difference between being a victim to circumstance and standing completely responsible for your results.

Excellence is the pursuit of ultimate integrity which means doing exactly what you said you were going to do.

Lonnie Johnson is a former Air Force and NASA engineer who invented the massively popular Super Soaker water gun. He currently oversees Johnson Research and Development, a company which commercializes technologies with a recent emphasis on alternative energy. He studied at Tuskegee University where he earned his bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering and a master’s in nuclear engineering. He lives in the Atlanta area.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how he created one of the world’s top 20 all-time best selling toys.

He made his own toys from a young age including a go-kart he built from junkyard scraps.

He was told by his high school counselor that he shouldn’t aspire beyond a career as a technician but he didn’t let that advice deter him from his goal of becoming an inventor.

“The only thing that really leads to success is perseverance.”

His original goal with licensing the super soaker was simply to generate enough income to allow himself to become a full time inventor.

His latest invention, the Johnson Thermoelectric Energy Converter, is a game changing technology that can dramatically improve the efficiency of alternative energy sources.

“Excellence is setting goals that are tough so you can wake up every day knowing that you’re doing something worthwhile.”

Morten Andersen is a former professional football kicker who spent most of his career with the New Orleans Saints and Atlanta Falcons. He played in a record 382 games during his 25 year career and is the all-time leading scorer in NFL history with 2,544 points. In 2017, he was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. These days Morten is a motivational speaker and also oversees his family foundation. He resides in Atlanta, GA.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

As an exchange student, he never intended to stay in the United States for more than a year but when he tried out for the high school football team on a whim, he made the team which led to a full scholarship at Michigan State which led to one of the greatest NFL careers in history.

The goal is to practice enough so you can get to a level of “unconscious competence”.

He had to swallow a “humility pill” after he hit a performance plateau and hire a team of experts to get him back to a high level and extend his career many years.

He kicked on 8’ goalposts during practice so come game time, he would have a much easier time executing with 18’6” goal posts.

As an athlete, all you can control is effort and attitude. Everything else is white noise.

If you focus more on the process than the results, the results will follow.

His sports psychologist introduced the idea of “goal windows” which altered his mindset about how to measure performance and hence, how to feel successful.

He had his best year statistically over his 25 year career in his final season at the age of 47.

Jeff Seder is the founder and CEO of EQB, a consulting firm which advises thoroughbred racehorse owners. He utilizes proprietary big data analytics to predict the success of racehorses, most notably the 2015 triple crown winner American Pharoah. He has his undergraduate, law and business degrees all from Harvard and he currently resides on a farm in Pennsylvania.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how he used utilized big data to predict the success of American Pharoah, the first Triple Crown winner in 37 years.

Success is all about hard work: “It took 35 years and $7 million to become an overnight success.”

On why competitors haven’t replicated his methods: “I can give someone a violin and an instruction manual but they’re not going to play a symphony right away.”

On following your passion: “My Harvard professor asked me what I was passionate about and I said ‘horses.’”

Learn how he used a slow motion camera to study the U.S. Olympic bobsled team and help them turn the tide and start winning medals for the first time.

“Excellence is learning your instrument and then forgetting it all and just wailing.”

Jon was the Founder and CEO of Krave Pure Foods, a gourmet jerky company. The company became one of the fastest growing food brands in the country and was acquired by The Hershey Company for around $220 million in 2015. Today he is the CEO of Sonoma Brands, an investor and incubator for new branded food startups. Jon lives in Sonoma, California.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how he reinvented the entire jerky category and broadened its appeal.

The most important litmus test as to whether a new product will succeed is simply whether it makes sense to you. If it’s a problem you can personally relate to, that’s a good start.

The lean startup method isn’t just for technology companies but consumer packaged goods businesses as well.

Learn how he brought a new product to the market for just $10,000.

His experience in the ultra-competitive wine industry gave him a “PhD” in branding.

While serendipity plays a role, there is a playbook that allows new brands to come to life.

Excellence is an aspiration that you never quite reach. It’s a mindset.

Seth Goldman is the Co-founder of Honest Tea, a company he started in 1998 and has grown to over $200 million in revenue. Today, Honest Tea is the nation’s top selling ready-to-drink organic bottled tea. The Honest Tea brands are available in over 130,000 outlets across the United States. The company was acquired by Coca Cola in 2011.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how he reinvented the entire bottled tea industry.

Being a relentless optimist helped get him through the tough times.

The company wasn’t just about a better tasting drink but about an expression of his personal values (health, the environment, working conditions in developing countries).

To successfully launch a startup, start with a very strong vision of the brand and then everything else will fall into place.

The best way to learn is simply by doing. Market research will only get you so far and doing too much of it could become a hindrance.

Excellence is having a vision and being able to execute on that vision without compromise.

Dave Perkins is the Founder and former CEO of High West Distillery, a craft whiskey producer. He sold the company in 2016 after 12 years to Constellation Brands for $160 million. He had a successful career in biotech marketing prior to that. He lives in Park City, Utah.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how his biotech background prepared him for building a whiskey business from scratch.

He moved to Utah to start the company despite the state’s tight liquor laws.

He chose to become a distiller, not just a blender, despite the much larger investment and longer waiting period.

Learn how good contingency planning can help mitigate risk in a startup.

In addition to hard work, good planning and a distinctive product, serendipity played a key role in his success.

Excellence is taking pride in your work and giving it your best.

Rich Wilson is the fastest American skipper to race solo around the world. He completed the Vendee Globe 27,000 mile solo round-the-world yacht race this year in 107 days. At 66 years old, he was also the oldest skipper to complete the race. Rich is the founder of the SitesAlive Foundation, a non-profit platform to connect K12 classrooms to adventures and expeditions around the world. He has a degree in mathematics and an MBA from Harvard and a Masters in interdisciplinary science from MIT. He currently resides in the Boston area.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn how his lifelong battle with asthma has provided the motivation to persevere both on and off the water.

80% of success on the water is done prior to the start of the race.

Ironically, even in a solo racing voyage, the team is the most critical element of success.

Learn how he had not just one but two incredible strokes of luck which helped save his life when his boat capsized during one of his races.

Learn how he educated hundreds of thousands of kids around the world through the experiential learning platform of his sailing expeditions.

Excellence is knowing you put out your best effort on whatever axes are part of the equation.

“Most people will have a dream about what you should do but find what you dream to do and go do that one.”

Morris Robinson is a world-renowned bass opera singer. He has regularly performed at the Metropolitan Opera as well as opera houses all over the world. He is also a highly regarded concert singer and has performed with many of the well-known symphony orchestras across the United States. He is a graduate of the Citadel and currently resides in Atlanta with his wife and son.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

A 3 time All American football standout in college, at 6’3” and 290 pounds, he was deemed too small to make it in the NFL.

Learn why he quit the corporate world cold turkey to pursue a singing career.

If you do what you love, you’ll never have to work a day in your life.

Learn how football helped prepare him for a career in the opera.

Talent is important but it’s not everything. You have to be willing to make sacrifices, work hard and apply yourself to achieve something great.

“If you have a dream, you have a right to go after it.”

“If you give your best at whatever you do, the product will be excellence.”

To some, Morris Robinson can be an intimidating presence. He’s a big and powerful looking guy. Remember Popeye’s powerful nemesis Bluto? Sort of like him. There is also no pretense about Morris. When he showed up for our interview, he was wearing workout shorts, a t-shirt and sandals. If I told you that he’s an ex 3 time all American collegiate football player, that probably wouldn’t be much a surprise. But if I then told you he’s now one of the great bass opera singers of our generation, you’d probably do a double take. And Morris would have it no other way.

Morris has always relished the dichotomy of his existence – a 6’3”, 290 pound aggressive offensive lineman on the one hand and a talented performance artist on the other. Those two seemingly contrasting personas have been a part of his identity throughout his life. Even today with his football playing days well behind him, he certainly doesn’t “look” or “act” the part of a world-renowned opera singer (not that I personally know any of them). An image of a polished, clean-shaven and formally dressed sophisticate driving a Mercedes may come to mind but certainly not a casually dressed, scruffy-looking former athlete driving around town in a Hummer. That’s one of the things I love about Morris Robinson – he is who he is and he makes no apologies.

So what do you do when you finally come to the realization that your lifelong dream of playing football in the NFL isn’t in the cards? Like most of us, you do what you feel you have to do to make your way in the world. That is, you settle. For Morris, that meant getting a job in corporate sales for a technology company. That is what he did for seven tedious years until he woke up one day and felt empty inside. Despite his success at it, the passion just wasn’t there. He knew deep inside that it wasn’t in God’s plan for him to spend the rest of his days toiling away in corporate America.

His wife Denise also noticed that the spark was missing which is why, unbeknownst to Morris, she had secretly set up an interview for him at the prestigious Choral Arts Society of Washington. The Director fell in love with his beautiful voice upon the very first note. And that’s all it took for Morris to embark upon a new journey to rediscover this remarkable gift he had always had but which had laid dormant for many years. It wasn’t so obvious at first how he could leverage his vocal talent into a career but that was beside the point. Corporate sales had become a grind and he needed some excitement in his life. With singing, he got just that.

With a voice as naturally sweet and powerful as his, it didn’t take long for Morris to get discovered. But the road from salesman to opera star wasn’t an easy one. Talent notwithstanding, becoming an opera singer meant going back to school, both literally and figuratively. He had to relearn how to sing operatically. He had to learn how to act. He had to learn multiple foreign languages (most operas are in Italian and German). And he had to learn how to take critique. And lots of it. While he had the advantage of a beautiful voice, singing opera is not something you just do. It would be years of hard work and sacrifice and swallowing his pride to learn this difficult craft and make it as a professional opera singer.

So why did he do it? Why did he decide to take this risk and essentially start over when he was already well ensconced in his corporate career? Because according to Morris, “If you have a dream, you have the right to go after it.” And he believed in himself. His attitude from day one was that if someone else could do it, then he could do it too. In his heart of hearts, he knew that if he wanted something badly enough and was willing to truly devote himself to it, he could accomplish anything. No goal would be beyond his reach, even if that goal were as bold and audacious as becoming a world-renowned bass opera singer.

Doug Ammons is a scientific editor and researcher, a business owner, an accomplished author and filmmaker and a classical guitarist. But what he’s most known for is being an extreme kayaker. He’s run several first descents in the US and overseas and soloed multiple challenging class v runs that most people would never touch, most famously the Grand Canyon of the Stikine. Because of his many incredible kayaking accomplishments, Outside Magazine has named him one of the ten greatest adventurists over the last century. He has degrees in mathematics and physics and has a PhD in Psychology.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Kayaking extreme waters safely requires relaxation but also hyper awareness.

Learn why it’s important to have a “beginners mind”.

Water is the ultimate metaphor for life.

Why he takes extraordinary risks by soloing class v rapids.

The “Red Bullying” of America is bad for the sport.

If you could control everything in your life, life would be pretty boring.

Hearing Doug Ammons opine about water being the ultimate metaphor for life, you’d think you’re listening to a philosophy professor, not one of the most distinguished adventure athletes over the last century. Then again, this is no ordinary adventure athlete. This kayaker, who holds dozens of first descents on treacherous Class V rivers, also holds a PhD in psychology and double degrees in math and physics.

At first blush, Doug may appear to be a study in contrasts. His thirst for running incredibly dangerous rapids that could crush you juxtaposed with his intellectual curiosity and thirst for knowledge and meaning. But that’s not how Doug sees it. To him, it’s all a continuum. He is a classically trained guitarist and likes to use music as a metaphor. He speaks of the fusion of the power, the complexity and the raw emotion of the water with the music that he loves. Kayaking is much more akin to music or even poetry for Doug than it is a thrill-seeking, adrenaline-fueled sport.

But don’t be fooled. While Doug may like to wax poetic about being on the river, elite-level kayaking is an extremely demanding and potentially catastrophic adventure sport. Any single wrong move while navigating through explosive whitewater can have fatal consequences. And he knows this reality firsthand. Doug has lost way too many friends on the water, friends who were highly skilled, experienced and even cautious kayakers. Doug will be the first to admit the role that serendipity plays in one’s fate on the water. The difference between life and death can be a matter of inches. He has had his share of near-death experiences himself. Even with the best training and most thoughtful planning, you can only control so much. The river has a mind of its own and cannot ever be tamed.

So what exactly does it take to kayak at the elite level? Years and years of training for starters. Of course, that goes without saying. But what’s really critical is that you have a “beginner’s mind”, according to Doug. That is, an openness and readiness to learn something new with each run. No two rivers are the same and for that matter, no one river ever looks the same with each run. Running rivers over and over will increase one’s confidence for sure but if that confidence ever turns into cockiness, it’s a recipe for disaster.

The other critical ingredient for success on the water is the ability to be both incredibly relaxed yet hyper aware at the same time. If you’re too tense, you’re sure to make mistakes. But you still need to be very focused and able to react without hesitation to whatever the river throws your way. If there’s one thing that’s predictable about the water, it’s its unpredictability. That’s what makes it so appealing but so dangerous.

While Doug’s reflective, philosophical nature pushes him far away from the adventure athlete stereotype, there’s a very good reason Outside Magazine named him one of the ten greatest adventurists over the 1900’s. One could easily make the argument that he has done as much for the sport of kayaking as any athlete has done for any other sport on this planet. The unexplored runs he conquered and the way he went about them – being the first and being alone – will forever brand Doug Ammons as a pioneer in kayaking and a pioneer in the world of extreme sports.

Kevin Gillespie is a chef, author and media celebrity. He owns two of Georgia’s hottest restaurants: Gunshow and Revival. Gunshow has been on GQ’s list of “12 Most Outstanding Restaurants”. In 2015 he was a semi-finalist for the James Beard Best Chef in the Southeast award. He was also a semi-finalist for the James Beard Rising Star Chef of the Year award. He is the author of two cookbooks: Fire in my Belly and Pure Pork Awesomeness. He was a finalist on the sixth season of Bravo’s Top Chef cooking show and was voted the Fan Favorite for the season.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

He got accepted to MIT but turned it down to pursue his passion.

How his appearance on Top Chef turned his restaurant and his career around.

Life opens doors for us all the time but we frequently walk right past them.

How fame has been a mixed blessing.

Learn how he reinvented the entire dining experience with Gunshow.

Hear about his plan B if money weren’t an issue and he could do anything in the world.

If you make great food and put smiles on customer’s faces, that’s success.

Some kids watch cartoons on TV. Others watch sports. But on most days you could find the young Kevin Gillespie glued to the TV watching any number of cooking shows. There was something mesmerizing watching the chefs work their magic in the kitchen. His passion for cooking only grew more intense through the years to the point where he recognized that this was more than just a passion – it was a calling. A calling so strong that he was able to turn down one of the most prestigious universities in the world – M.I.T. Had he listened to his parents or his friends or his teachers, he’d probably be a nuclear engineer today. But fortunately he had the good sense to turn inward and listen to his heart. And that’s how he knew that the only engineering he’d be doing in the future was in the kitchen.

The restaurant Kevin Gillespie was running at the time – Woodfire Grill – was struggling to fill seats and had only a month’s worth of cash left in the bank when he got that auspicious call from one of the producers of Top Chef. He wasn’t really seeking the spotlight but he decided to throw caution to the wind and give it a shot. His well-received appearance on the 6th season of Top Chef would turn his restaurant, his career and his life around.

Kevin was voted the fan favorite on the show from that season which soon translated into his being a fan favorite in Atlanta’s restaurant scene. Woodfire Grill went from having half empty dining rooms to being booked solid months in advance. Without a doubt, his celebrity status helped fill seats but the show did something for Kevin which was much more impactful. Without the use of cookbooks or any lifelines, he had to rely entirely on his gut instincts to create recipes on the fly. He learned how to cook with passion for the very first time in his career which allowed his true personality to surface in his unique culinary inventions.

Gunshow is a restaurant unlike any other. Describing it as a Brazilian churrascaria-style steakhouse meets Chinese dim sum isn’t quite doing it justice. In fact, it’s just about impossible to pin down its menu since there is no menu. The food options change on a daily basis and are entirely up to the whims of the chefs. Whatever they feel inspired by is what you’ll find on the plate that evening. This novel concept doesn’t just make the dining experience more fun and spontaneous for the guests but for the chefs as well.

Beyond the ever changing menu, Kevin has also completely flipped the service model on its head. The chefs themselves break down that “invisible wall” to the kitchen and come pitch their inspirations directly to the guests. After all, who better to explain the vision behind the dish than the very person who invented it. So the chefs not only make their dishes, they explain their dishes and then they serve their dishes. It’s a complicated system but they’ve somehow figured out a way to make it work seamlessly.

Kevin’s the most down to earth “celebrity” you’ll ever meet. He’s finally gotten used to the lack of anonymity that comes with stardom but it’s taken a while. He was never after fame but is incredibly grateful for the good fortune that has come as a result of it. He doesn’t take any of his success for granted, recognizing that you’re only as good as your last meal. And how does he measure success? It’s not the dollars and cents or the 5 star Yelp reviews one would expect. It’s much more simple. If at the end of the day you feel like you gave it your all and had guests leave with huge smiles on their faces, for Kevin Gillespie, that is the definition of success.

Jay Faison is the Founder and Chairman of SnapAV, a high growth technology company that designs and distributes audio-video products. SnapAV has been on the Inc 500 List for several years and was acquired by General Atlantic in 2013 for around $200 million. He is also the Founder and CEO of ClearPath Foundation, whose mission is to accelerate conservative clean energy solutions. Jay has received many accolades including the Ernst and Young Entrepreneur of the Year for the Southeast region award and Politico’s Top 50 visionaries transforming American politics.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

How his ADHD is a contributing factor to his entrepreneurial nature.

The biggest challenge in scaling the company was himself.

Intellectual humility is a key to growing as a leader.

Find a niche that others aren’t in so at least if you’re swinging for the fences, there aren’t any other batters to worry about.

Why he decided to give away the vast sum of his wealth while still in his 40’s.

How his pattern recognition allows him to see around corners where others can’t.

“If you don’t know where you’re going, you’re probably not going to get there.”

When you’re running a small audio/video business and being overcharged and underserved by your suppliers, what do you do? If you’re like most people, you get angry and frustrated and complain. But not if you’re Jay Faison. Because if you’ve got the mind of an entrepreneur like Jay, you see that broken supply chain not as a problem but as an opportunity. And you seize upon it. And that is how SnapAV was born.

Why didn’t anyone else see this obvious disintermediation play to create the Amazon of the audio video industry? Jay has a unique gift of pattern recognition. Some people who are incredibly bright can see several moves ahead on the chess board. Jay admittedly isn’t one of them. But Jay is able to see multiple games being played at once and can choose which one has the best odds of success. When you’re an entrepreneur trying to disrupt an industry, that intuition can help dramatically improve the odds of success.

There’s another gift Jay possesses that few entrepreneurs have. It’s intellectual humility. When you’re intellectually humble, you can recognize your blinds spots. And when you can see your blind spots, you know how to ask for help. In Jay’s case, he understood that the biggest hurdle in scaling his company was himself. Like many entrepreneurs, he was great at doing but not at leading. He had to learn how to let go and transition from being a tactical entrepreneur to being a strategic leader. His vision, his leadership and his grit would allow him to build and eventually sell one of the fastest growing companies in the country.

For most entrepreneurs, selling the majority ownership in your business for $200 million is an accomplishment of a lifetime. It’s a good excuse to kick back, relax and live the good life. Buy a few vacation homes, a couple limited production sports cars and of course a private jet for good measure. You can simply rest on your laurels and not ever have to take on the monumental challenge and stress of starting something again. But not if you’re Jay Faison.

Jay knew that the right thing to do is to give away most of his newly acquired wealth while he’s still in the prime of his life. Of course, the easiest thing to do would be to write checks to a bunch of non-profits. But never one to take the easy path, he contributed $165 million into a foundation called ClearPath. It’s mission – simply convince conservatives of the importance of clean energy. In other words, he chose to essentially launch another startup whose goals were far more daunting that those of his for-profit venture.

It hasn’t been easy. The environment has become a very polarizing issue and while capital has provided him access to key people in Washington, convincing them to create and adopt environmentally friendly legislation has been a grind. He’s well aware that success won’t happen overnight. But he continues to chop away at it with the guiding philosophy that “we don’t inherit the Earth from our parents but rather, we borrow it from our children”. It’s hard work but it’s well worth it. Because according to Jay, when you’re trying to change the world, there’s simply a satisfaction you can’t get anywhere else.

Michael Coles is a successful entrepreneur, investor, advisor and community leader. He co-founded The Great American Cookie Company and grew it into the largest franchisor of cookie stores with 350 locations and sales of over $100 million when he sold the company. He was also the CEO of Caribou Coffee which became a publicly traded company. He is a big supporter of Kennesaw State University, whose business program is fittingly named the Michael J Coles College of Business.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

How he turned $8,000 into a $100 million cookie empire.

One minor detail almost derailed his entire business on opening day.

How a near fatal motorcycle accident inspired him to set a transcontinental bicycle record.

“If it ain’t broke, you haven’t looked hard enough.”

It’s not about being the biggest but being the best.

“The biggest handicaps we face are the limitations we place on our vision and our imagination.”

Real learning comes from understanding our personal responsibility with setbacks instead of blaming others

There are two levels of entrepreneurialism for kids. The one that 99% of kids fall into which is the “go hustle and make a buck” kind. Delivering papers on a route, raking leaves, etc. Then there’s the 1% who have the vision and hustle to go to the next level of securing all the contracts with the homes in the neighborhood and then hiring all the other kids to service those homes. That’s Michael Coles for you. His entrepreneurial brilliance shone through at a very young age. Michael realized the real money wasn’t in raking leaves or shoveling snow. It was managing the leave rakers and snow shovelers. It wasn’t hard to see how the future career of Michael Coles would unfold.

He never set out to build a cookie empire. His goal when he opened his first cookie store was a modest one – simply to bring in some extra income while trying to figure out his next career move. But there was one little problem. Michael was way too savvy of an entrepreneur and the industry was way too stagnant for him to settle for just a little extra income. While most the cookie store owners operated as bakers, Michael saw this opportunity through the lens of a retailer. He expanded the merchandise offerings, added promotions, introduced cross-selling and upselling and started sampling. These days such commonplace retailing strategies are straight out of the merchandising 101 playbook but not back in the 70’s and 80’s and not in the cookie business. Michael reinvented the way bakery products were marketed and sold.

While his vision and tenacity allowed him to persevere in the end and build a thriving business, like with any good story, he had his fair share of setbacks along the way. The biggest one was a near-fatal motorcycle accident just a few weeks into starting the company. He was lucky to be alive but was told that we would never walk again unaided. For most people, such a fire prognosis often becomes a self-fulfilling one and they’ll be content to lead the rest of their lives as a cripple. But not Michael. He was so driven to prove the doctors wrong that he not only fully recovered but actually increased his exercise regimen from before the accident. He picked up a bicycle, which he hadn’t done since he was a kid, and started riding. And riding. And riding. He rode across the state of Georgia and didn’t stop peddling until he reached San Diego. He ended up setting a new transcontinental bike record which would be broken just a few years later… by Michael once again.

As many endurance athletes can attest to, the benefits of exercise usually spill over into other parts of one’s life. Such was the case with Michael. He came back from record-setting rides refreshed and hungrier than ever. He was suddenly able to see the business in an entirely new light. Sure, the business was doing fine. It was profitable and growing. But fine wasn’t good enough. The market was evolving, the competition was increasing but The Great American Cookie Company more or less stayed the same. So he reengineered the business from the ground up – new recipes, a modernized store design and better training just to name a few areas. It wasn’t about being the biggest but the best. These changes allowed him to scale the business to over $100 million in revenue and the rest, as they say, is cookie history.

While Hollywood couldn’t write a better script than Michael’s wild success in the cookie business, not every story in his life would have such a Hollywood ending. He took over the helm of Caribou Coffee but while he doubled the size of the business and took the company public, the stock took a tumble. Running a public company with the constant pressure of meeting quarterly expectations was not a great experience. And his bids for the U.S. House and Senate would not prove successful. But he’s the first to tell you that we learn more from our setbacks than we do from our successes. Real learning comes from understanding our personal responsibility with such setbacks as opposed to blaming others.

Michael is one of a kind. He’s more than earned the right to pack it in and enjoy the good life. But he’s still very active sitting on Boards, mentoring first time entrepreneurs and overseeing multiple philanthropic efforts. He’s as passionate today about giving back as he was about business success over the course of his illustrious career. He’s made his mark in many areas but he’ll forever be known as the Cookie King.

Sid is the co-founder and owner of Sid Mashburn men’s clothing store. Both Esquire and GQ have named Sid Mashburn one of the best menswear shops in America. Today they have five stores in five cities and 135 employees and are continuing to add new stores every year.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

How Sid sees himself in the hospitality business, not the retail business.

To find the white space, just follow your heart.

How a company culture kit is critical to scaling a business.

What are economy of time, economy of mind and economy of money.

How trying to be all things to all people can be an effective business strategy.

You can have enormous success by just taking things one step at a time.

Aiming to be the best at something is more important and rewarding than trying to be the biggest.

Walking into a Sid Mashburn store is not like walking into any other men’s clothing store. It’s a full sensory experience, from the classic rock ‘n’ roll tunes cranked up high to the stuffed wildlife protruding from the walls to the seagrass on the floor to the aroma of freshly brewed coffee. Oh, and of course there’s also the ping pong table. This is all part of a master plan to make the store feel like a warm and inviting place to anyone who walks through the doors. “The store is meant to feel like a fraternity that everybody gets a bid to”, as Sid conveys the ambiance he’s trying to capture.

This unique in-store aesthetic is just the tip of the iceberg in Sid Mashburn’s retail experience. It’s all about the high-touch service you’ll find the minute you enter the shop. You’ll be greeted with a smile and offered a beverage of your choice. They’ll ask if you’d like to have a seat while they hang up your jacket. What you won’t find here are high pressure sales tactics. That’s because the sales people are not on commission. The goal is simple – to have you feel like you’re walking into someone’s home.

Sid was raised in a small town in Mississippi and it’s not hard to see how the southern hospitality he grew up with has become a core piece of the brand DNA. It’s not fake. It’s not for show. It’s just an authentic expression of who Sid is as a person. He doesn’t see himself as being in the retail or clothing business but rather, the hospitality business. He craves having that intimate relationship with the customer which is why he likes to benchmark against best-of-breed hospitality brands – think Danny Meyer in the restaurant space and the Ritz in the hotel world.

Marketers are taught that you need to have a well-defined target audience to succeed. Sid never got that memo. He wants everyone to feel welcome in his shop which is why you’ll find a $65 pair of Levis just a few feet away from a $10,000 suit. Customers range in age from 11 to 87 and between his physical stores and his e-commerce business, he touches pretty much every corner of the country.

We’ve all heard the cliché to follow your passion. It’s usually easier said than done. But Sid Mashburn has done just that since day one. He’s as enamored today about fashion as he was in his youth when clothing defined his childhood as much as music and sports. And you can see that he truly just enjoys helping people. He’s as happy to patch and repair an old worn pair of pants if that’s what you need as he is to sell you an elegant handmade suit. His business goals are much more centered on taking care of people, both employees and customers, than they are on growth and profits.

This isn’t to say Sid isn’t ambitious. He’s very success-oriented. It’s just that success in his mind is defined much more by quality than it is by quantity. The overarching goal is simple – to become the best shop in the world. And judging by the accolades bestowed upon him by GQ and Esquire, he’ll already well on his way.

Raj Raghunathan is a Professor of Marketing at the McCombs School of Business at the University of Texas. He has also become an expert in the field of happiness. He is the author of the book If You’re So Smart, Why Aren’t You Happy. He teaches an MBA course on happiness as well as a class on the online learning platform Coursera entitled: A Life of Happiness and Fulfillment. Over 170,000 students have taken the course and it’s consistently ranked as one of the top ten courses (amongst thousands of others).

Some interesting insights from this episode:

If you’re so smart, why aren’t you happy?

Why do we devalue happiness even though we know how important it is?

How fear of failure often prevents us from trying things we know would make us happier.

How having wealth and status and success can make us happy, yet the pursuit of those things can make us miserable.

Once you stop comparing yourself to others and just focus on immersing yourself in your work (or activity), you’ll actually increase your likelihood of success.

How we can rewire ourselves to increase our level of happiness.

If you’re so smart, why aren’t you happy? This counterintuitive philosophical question is the aptly named title of Raj’s quintessential book on happiness. Generally speaking, smart and successful people are pretty good at setting goals and achieving them. So one would think that if they are able to set goals around wealth and success, they could just as easily set goals around happiness. But more often than not, they don’t.

So why exactly do we devalue happiness? Why is it that despite knowing intuitively how important happiness is, we rarely prioritize it? One reason is what Raj refers to as “Medium Maximization”. That is, we focus on the means to the end (i.e. money, status) and not the end itself (happiness). Since we think the money and success will naturally lead to happiness, we end up concentrating all our efforts on the money and success while forgetting about the very reason we were wanting it to begin with. While the money and success may boost happiness levels initially, those feelings quickly subside in which case we need even greater levels of wealth and power to maintain those levels. It’s a vicious cycle that repeats itself over and over.

We also have a difficult time articulating what happiness means to us. And if we can’t visualize the goal in concrete terms, we don’t prioritize it. So we end up prioritizing those things which are easier to measure (and easier to control) such as money and accomplishments.

Raj also points out that as humans, it’s in our DNA to seek superiority. In fact, studies show that higher status does indeed enhance the quality of our lives and our happiness levels. Yet, paradoxically, the actual pursuit of that higher status can backfire and cause us misery. Tethering your happiness on being superior to others is ill advised. Instead, if you focus solely on immersing yourself in your work (or hobby or activity), you’re much more likely to enjoy yourself and actually end up being more successful as well. This “immersion” is what’s commonly known in positive psychology circles as “flow”.

So while we may have a better understanding intellectually why happiness is so elusive, how do we reverse course and become happier people? Raj offers a few action items:

Do the things on a day to day basis that are meaningful and enjoyable. It doesn’t have to be work-related (although that’s ideal). It can be tennis or guitar or gardening. Anything that brings you joy.

Spend more time on personal relationships. Don’t take your friends and family for granted. Your interactions with the people you care about in your life are as important as anything else.

Build habits that give an internal sense of wellness (i.e. exercise, meditation). Being physically and mentally healthy are essential ingredients to happiness.

As Raj reminds us of the cliché we all know too well, days and weeks will become months and years and next thing you know, you’ll be 70 and regretting your life. So don’t wait another year or even another day. Start today. Take baby steps if you need to. But take action. Do something. Anything. After all, this is your life. You deserve to be happy.

Andrew Skurka is an accomplished adventure athlete, known for his solo ultra-long-distance backpacking trips. In total he has traveled by foot, ski and raft over 30,000 miles. He has been named “Adventurer of the year” by Outside Magazine and National Geographic Adventure and “Person of the year” by Backpacker magazine. And he’s also an ultra-runner with top 3 finishes in a couple of the big 100 mile races.

Some interesting insights from this episode:

Learn about his Alaska/Yukon hike which covered over 4,700 miles in the frigid temps of the Alaskan backcountry without using any trails or guidebooks.

How he learned to follow his heart and pursue happiness despite all the pressure from family and friends.

“Fun” is when you’re pushing yourself to the limit, both physically and mentally.

It’s not just about the destination but the journey that matters.

The key to accomplishing something incredibly challenging is to simply start small and figure things out one step at a time.

How he feels so strongly about his expeditions that he’s willing to risk his life.

The steps he took to turn his passion into a full time career.

You’ve likely heard of the Appalachian Trail (commonly called the A.T.), a 2,200 mile trail stretching from Georgia to Maine. It’s considered the granddaddy of long distance trails and quite an impressive feat if you can hike the entire thing. Andrew knocked that one off just for fun one summer during college. And he loved it. It was at that moment that he knew he was hooked.

But always seeking a greater challenge to push the envelope, he later hiked a 7,800 mile Sea to Sea trail connecting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans across the northern United States. That’s the equivalent of doing the entire A.T. three times over and then throwing on another 1,200 miles for good measure. What’s even more amazing is that this incredible accomplishment wasn’t the culmination of a long hiking career, but rather, just the beginning of it.

Never wanting to stay too long in his comfort zone, he would continue to discover and conquer even bigger challenges. When marked trails became too boring, he bushwhacked his way in the untouched backcountry. When the weather became too comfortable, he moved his expeditions to regions with sub-zero temperatures. And when hiking wasn’t enough, he added skiing and rafting to the mix.

You might be wondering how in the world someone can balance these multi-month expeditions with a career. The answer is simple. These adventures are his career. He’s figured out how to monetize his passion and feels anyone can do the same if you’re entrepreneurial and resourceful enough.

It was in the beautiful Blue Ridge Mountains over the summer during college when he was first exposed to people who were living life much more spontaneously and pursuing happiness above everything else. Life was about climbing mountains and running rapids, not about pursuing careers and accumulating wealth. That was when he had his first aha moment. That’s when the tired cliché “life is short” came into sharp focus.

So instead of caving into the peer pressure and following the herd, he decided to follow his heart. And he’s been following it ever since. Have you ever felt such joy and pleasure about something that you’d be willing to risk your life for it? Very few of us have. Andrew Skurka has.

Strauss Zelnick is the CEO of Take Two Interactive, a publicly held video game publisher which makes Grand Theft Auto amongst many other hit titles. He is also the Founder and Managing Partner at ZMC, a several hundred million dollar private equity fund focused on media and communications. He has also served as CEO of BMG Entertainment, one of the world’s largest music publishers at the time, and President of 20th Century Fox, one of the biggest movie studios.

Some interesting insights in this episode:

How Strauss successfully climbed the corporate ladder to become the President of 20th Century Fox by the time he was just 32.

His approach to turning around one of the largest interactive entertainment companies in the world.

Knowing what you want out of life and setting goals to achieve them is a big part of success.

To achieve great things, it’s sometime necessary to take calculated risks.

Being smart and ambitious is nice but being in the right place at the right time also helps.

Learn to put your ego aside, surround yourself with super ambitious and talented people and then step out of their way.

Motivation should be driven by the joy and fulfillment it brings, not by money or ego or power.

Leadership is about being your authentic self. It’s best to present yourself all the time as you truly are, not as you wish to be seen.

A consistent and strenuous physical fitness routine can have positive spillover effects in your working life.

Strauss Zelnick has had a remarkable career. His ambition and passion for entertainment can be traced all the way back to his childhood when he declared that he would one day run a movie studio. He graduated with double MBA/JD degrees from Harvard and less than a decade later at the young age of 32, he achieved his childhood dream by becoming the President of 20th Century Fox. It was this amazing achievement that rightfully earned him the moniker wunderkind.

When he acquired Take Two Interactive, the company was a mess. They had just lost over $200 million and the CEO had been fired for fraud. Less than a decade later, he’s still running the company which he completely turned around while creating billions of dollars of value in the process.

It helps when you can figure out where your passion and talents intersect. He loves the entertainment business and is most effective and happy as a turnaround executive. He’s also self-aware, knowing where his true strengths and weaknesses lie. He has learned that being your authentic self and not hiding behind a façade is one of the keys to being an effective leader.

Recently Strauss has become as passionate about fitness as he is about buying and turning around companies. He founded a daily fitness meetup group called The Program where he does rigorous high-intensity interval training alongside people less than half his age including professional athletes. He not only appreciates the way it makes him look and feel but also the nice byproduct of enhanced productivity and happiness in the workplace.

Strauss is confident in his abilities but humble in his accomplishments. He doesn’t downplay the fact that ambition, goal setting and risk taking are among the key ingredients to success but also acknowledges that serendipity has a vital role to play as well. If you congratulate him on all his success, he’ll quickly point out how there are others a lot more successful. I guess it’s a testament to how life is relative.

While early on his career moves might have been on autopilot, now in his late 50’s, he has become more reflective as a leader, as an individual. He’s now at a point in his life where he knows what’s truly important to him. And ultimately that’s about discovering happiness. And from my brief hour-long conversation with him, I can see that he’s definitely found it.