RIYADH: The Prince Mohammed bin Salman College for Management and Entrepreneurship announced on Thursday a new partnership with the Saudi Press Agency to provide specialized training and development programs for the Kingdom’s news industry.

The partnership was co-signed by Zieger DeGreef, dean of MBSC, and Fahad bin Hassan Al-Aqran, president of SPA, during the “Human Capabilities Initiative” conference held in Riyadh on Feb. 28-29.

“We are proud to partner with the Saudi Press Agency,” DeGreef said. “We are proud to partner with a number of very prominent ministries and organizations in the Kingdom to develop business acumen in Saudi Arabia.”

He told Arab News that the partnership will train journalists in a variety of “interpersonal effectiveness skills,” such as teamwork, negotiation, presentation, influencing, decision-making, and communication — all of which “are very relevant for journalists (and) for professionals in the media.”

DeGreef added that although “there is already good education in the Kingdom,” it has “a long way to go in excellence in business education.”

He added: “The college tries to fill that void.”

In addition to joining media-focused training programs under the agreement, Saudi journalists will also be able to obtain graduate degrees in business administration and finance.

“We will welcome journalists in those degree programs in business, but we are also developing an exciting portfolio of executive education programs again for the media,” DeGreef said. “So, most of our partnerships are already in those two areas, but the third area is research.”

He highlighted that MBSC’s faculty “will work with journalists from SPA on particular research projects, mostly linked to data, data analysis, data presentations, (and) data communication.”

SPA announced on Thursday the launch of its first news training academy in partnership with several organizations, including the Technical and Vocational Training Corporation, the Prince Mohammad Bin Salman College of Business and Entrepreneurship, the Institute of Public Administration, the Human Resources Development Fund, Sky News Arabia Academy, and the Austrian International Center for Qualification and Quality.

LONDON: Israeli government spokesperson David Mencer accused BBC presenter Mishal Husain and the broadcaster of exhibiting pro-Palestine bias.

In a heated exchange during an interview with BBC Radio 4’s Today program on Monday, Mencer criticized the broadcaster for its coverage of the war in Gaza, which began following the Oct. 7 attacks last year by Hamas on Israel.

“So is this your impression of impartial news coverage, Mishal? Because I think you just warrant the pro-Palestinian reporter of the year award, and I congratulate you for that,” he said.

“So these are the facts: We were attacked on Oct. 7, not in a war that we wanted; we were invaded; they (Hamas) want to destroy our country; it’s being controlled by IRNA (the Islamic Republic News Agency); we have a duty to defend our own people.”

A BBC spokesperson defended Husain and said the questions she posed to Mencer were “legitimate and important” and conducted “in a professional, fair and courteous manner.”

Throughout the interview, Mencer repeatedly defended Israel’s actions and dismissed criticisms of the actions of the nation’s military forces during the conflict.

Asked about an airstrike on a Gaza school on Saturday, which Palestinian health authorities said killed almost 100 people, Mencer expressed skepticism about the reports, arguing that the casualty figures have been inflated by “pseudo-medical staff” throughout the conflict in Gaza.

He said that the strike on the school had targeted 19 Hamas fighters and there were “no women and children present.”

Mencer added that while Israel is winning the war on the battlefield, it was losing the media battle, and blamed the BBC for playing a part in that.

“You, as the BBC, you do no credit to ordinary Gazans by just blindly repeating what terrorist organizations, (Daesh-like) organizations, the information which they feed you. It simply doesn’t bear any resemblance to the truth,” he said, adding that there was “no justice” in journalists “parroting” the numbers they are given.

Challenged on the ban imposed by Israeli authorities on international journalists that prevents them from reporting from Gaza and seeing the situation for themselves, Mencer said that unrestricted media access could hinder efforts to rescue Israeli hostages still held by Hamas and other groups.

A British media and public relations specialist, and a former director of the British parliamentary group Labour Friends of Israel, Mencer has been the Israeli government’s spokesperson since last fall.

During her interview with him, Husain also asked about a recent report by B’Tselem, a human rights organization in Jerusalem, which included allegations of abuses against Palestinian detainees carried out by the Israeli military.

Mencer dismissed the claims, saying there was “no such thing” and the Israeli government had to “make accommodations … for tens of thousands of terrorists.”

He added: “You pandering to fringe elements within Israeli society, that have every right to speak their minds, … that doesn’t make it fact, that doesn’t make it so. You guys just parroting it just produces radicalism that makes Jews in the UK afraid to walk the streets.”

LONDON: Elon Musk should face “personal sanctions” and potentially even the threat of an “arrest warrant” if he is found to have encouraged public disorder on his social media platform X, according to a former Twitter executive.

Bruce Daisley, who previously served as Twitter’s vice president for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, argued on Monday that it was unacceptable for the billionaire owner of X, formerly Twitter, to sow discord without facing personal consequences.

Daisley’s comments come in the aftermath of week-long far-right riots across England and Northern Ireland, during which asylum hotels and mosques were attacked, The Guardian reported on Monday.

The unrest was stirred up and inflamed by online posts, including one from Musk stating that “civil war is inevitable” in the UK — a remark that Justice Minister Heidi Alexander condemned as “unacceptable.”

Musk also criticized Prime Minister Keir Starmer, labeling him “two-tier Keir” and a “hypocrite” for his handling of policing, and shared, then deleted, a false post claiming Starmer planned to establish “detainment camps” in the Falkland Islands.

Daisley suggested that Starmer should “beef up” online safety laws and reconsider whether the media regulator, Ofcom, is adequately equipped to manage the rapid actions of individuals like Musk.

He argued that the threat of personal sanctions could be more effective than corporate fines, particularly in influencing the lifestyles of tech billionaires.

Daisley, who worked at Twitter from 2012-2020, described Musk as someone who “has taken on the aura of a teenager on the bus with no headphones, creating lots of noise,” The Guardian reported.

“Were Musk to continue stirring up unrest, an arrest warrant for him might produce fireworks from his fingertips, but as an international jet-setter it would have the effect of focusing his mind.

“Musk’s actions should be a wake-up call for Starmer’s government to quietly legislate to take back control of what we collectively agree is permissible on social media.”

He argued: “In my experience, that threat of personal sanction is much more effective on executives than the risk of corporate fines.

“The question we are presented with is whether we’re willing to allow a billionaire oligarch to camp off the UK coastline and take potshots at our society. The idea that a boycott — whether by high-profile users or advertisers — should be our only sanction is clearly not meaningful.”

Daisley also pointed out that under existing laws, Musk and other executives could be held criminally liable for their actions.

He called for Britain’s Online Safety Act 2023 to be strengthened as a matter of urgency and added: “Musk might force his angry tweets to the top of your timeline, but the will of a democratically elected government should mean more than the fury of a tech oligarch — even him.”

Following the fatal stabbing of three young girls at a Taylor Swift-themed holiday dance class in Southport last month, the UK government has urged social media platforms to act responsibly, accusing them of enabling the spread of false claims about the attacker being an asylum-seeker. Police are already increasingly targeting individuals suspected of using online posts to incite violence, The Guardian reported.

TEHRAN, Iran: Iranian courts have reduced jail terms for two female journalists charged with collaborating with the United States, their lawyers told reformist newspapers on Sunday.

Elaheh Mohammadi, 37, and Niloufar Hamedi, 31, are out on bail after more than a year in Tehran’s Evin prison for their coverage of the September 2022 death in custody of Mahsa Amini which had sparked nationwide protests.

In January, Iran’s judiciary said it had launched new proceedings against the two women for posing for pictures without the mandatory headscarf upon their release that month.

Two separate appeals courts in Tehran ruled to acquit the women of the charge of collaboration with the United States, the lawyers were quoted as saying by Shargh and Ham Mihan dailies.

Originally, Mohammadi had been sentenced to six years in jail while Hamedi had been handed a seven-year sentence, according to the judiciary.

The pair were also each given five-year sentences for collusion and conspiring against state security and one year for propaganda against the Islamic republic.

The lawyers said these sentences were upheld by the appeals court and would be served concurrently, adding, however, that they hope the journalists would be freed under an amnesty announced last year by supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

“Considering that the remaining two accusations meet the full conditions of the amnesty directive of 2023, we hope that Elaheh Mohammadi will be pardoned, and this case will be closed by issuing a suspension of execution order,” Mohammadi’s lawyer Shahab Mirlohi told Ham Mihan newspaper.

Hamedi’s lawyers issued a similar statement.

Hamedi, a photographer for Shargh, was arrested less than a week after Amini’s death after posting a picture of the young woman’s grieving family on social media.

Ham Mihan reporter Mohammadi was arrested after going to Amini’s hometown of Saqez, in the western Iranian province of Kurdistan, to cover her funeral which turned into a demonstration.

Amini, a 22-year-old Iranian Kurd, had been arrested for an alleged breach of strict dress rules for women, in place since shortly after Iran’s 1979 Islamic revolution.

Following her death, months-long protests shook Iran, with hundreds of people, including dozens of security personnel, killed in the unrest, and thousands of demonstrators arrested.

Nine men were executed in cases related to the protests which Iranian authorities generally labelled “foreign-instigated riots.”

keywords

RIYADH: Just as Walt Disney founded one of the world’s largest and most influential entertainment conglomerates, an Egyptian journalist is hailed as the “Walt Disney of the UAE” for his pivotal role in shaping the region’s media landscape with Majid Magazine.

For many Arab adults now in their 50s, the magazine and its beloved characters, like Majid, Kaslan Jiddan and Captain Khalfan, are cherished symbols of childhood joy. Yet, few recognize the creative genius behind these treasured memories: Ahmed Omar, who passed away on Aug. 9 at the age of 85.

His vision and storytelling prowess were crucial in shaping the magazine’s enduring legacy.

Born in Egypt in September 1939, Omar embarked on a lifelong journey with words and stories.

His passion for reading blossomed at a young age, and school and public libraries became his sanctuaries, where he delved into a world of diverse books and nurtured a profound love for literature.

Omar’s frequent visits to Cairo’s Azbakeya Book Market, where he discovered affordable secondhand books, helped him build a personal library filled with diverse titles. His extensive reading played a crucial role in shaping his vision and enriching his ideas, which later shone through in his literary works.

He read to build a deep reservoir of knowledge, with classical literature captivating him from an early age. Naguib Mahfouz’s novels, which delve into the intricacies of life in Egyptian neighborhoods, had a profound impact on him. Omar was also shaped by the works of renowned Egyptian writers like Yusuf Idris, Gamal El-Ghitani, Mohamed Hassanein Heikal and other prominent authors.

He began his professional career at the UAE’s Al-Etihad newspaper, where he was a founding member and contributed to laying its foundation. He later managed the local news section.

The most significant achievement of his career was establishing Majid Magazine for children and becoming its editor-in-chief in 1979. The idea for the magazine was born within Al-Etihad daily and eventually transformed into one of the most important children’s magazines in the Arab world.

Omar recognized the need for Arab children to have a publication that represented them, stimulated their imagination and nurtured their minds. Working alongside a talented team of journalists and illustrators, he turned the magazine into a platform for expressing the thoughts and emotions of Arab children through words and drawings.

Through his tireless efforts, Omar made the magazine a symbol of Arab childhood and a cherished part of the memories of successive generations.

He spent most of his time in the magazine’s offices, creating, planning, overseeing writers and content, and preparing issues. When a new issue was printed, he had several weeks’ worth of issues ready in advance.

The inaugural issue of the magazine was published on Feb. 28, 1979, with 5,000 free copies that quickly vanished from the shelves. Majid, a character representing human values rather than superpowers, struck a chord with children. Majid Magazine maintained a weekly publication schedule every Wednesday without fail, gaining significant popularity throughout the region.

Omar oversaw and managed the magazine with ultimate care and interest for almost 30 years. He provided guiding articles for children and wrote scripts for comic stories, enriching each issue with beloved characters such as Zaki the Clever and Captain Khalfan, among others.

His editorials in Majid Magazine served as weekly lessons for both children and adults, filled with educational messages and moral guidance. His contributions established him as an educational pioneer, as he dedicated his knowledge to serving the younger generation and imparting valuable lessons.

Through his deep understanding of the nuances and secrets of childhood, Omar succeeded in capturing the attention of children from across the Arab world. The magazine’s readership grew to hundreds of thousands of young readers.

The late journalist believed that nurturing a love of reading in children is a collective duty of families, schools and magazines alike. He famously remarked: “Instilling a reading habit early in life is crucial, as it is difficult to cultivate later on. Introducing a child to a magazine is not just about providing entertainment — it’s a crucial step toward nurturing a lifelong passion for reading.”

Since the inception of the magazine, Omar was dedicated to imbuing it with a distinctly Gulf Arab flavor, reflected in its content, stories and characters. He attracted leading children’s writers and cartoonists, ensuring the magazine resonated deeply with young readers across the Arab world by preserving the unique identity of Gulf children.

Notable characters such as Kaslan Jiddan, Fadooli, Abu Al-Dhurfaa, Zakiyah Al-Zakiyah, Shamsa and Dana, and Captain Khalfan and his assistant Fahman became beloved figures among the magazine’s young audience.

Omar emphasized that his magazine was designed to appeal to children growing up in a traditional environment, instilling religious values, cultural awareness and pride in their Arab heritage.

As a testimony to his magazine’s success, mail subscriptions to Majid flourished throughout the Arab World as fans eagerly awaited each issue every Wednesday. For decades, it managed to compete with translated comics magazines such as Mickey (licensed from Disney and translated in Egypt) and Little Lulu (licensed and translated in Lebanon).

Consequently, the magazine evolved alongside the UAE’s social progress and embraced digital advancements with a YouTube channel and a website, although critics would argue that it is nowhere as influential today — despite the additional reach provided by modern technology — as it once was in the 1990s and 1980s.

ISTANBUL: Turkiye said on Saturday it had restored access to social media platform Instagram after the company agreed to cooperate with authorities to address the government’s concerns.

Turkiye blocked access to the social media platform on Aug 2 for failing to comply with the country’s “laws and rules” and public sensitivities.

A top Turkish official accused Instagram of blocking condolence posts over the assassination of Ismail Haniyeh, leader of the Palestinian militant group Hamas.

Turkiye has denounced Israel’s attacks on Gaza, called for an immediate ceasefire and criticized what it calls unconditional support for Israel by the West.

The nine-day ban triggered protests from users and small businesses who reach their customers through the platform.

Turkiye ranks fifth in the world in terms of Instagram usage, with more than 57 million users, following India, the United States, Brazil and Indonesia, according to data platform Statista.

“As a result of our negotiations with Instagram officials, we will lift the access block...after they promised to work together to meet our demands regarding catalog crimes and on censorship imposed on users,” Transport and Infrastructure Minister Abdulkadir Uraloglu said in a post on X.

Catalog crimes in Turkish law include acts such as murder, sexual assault, drug trafficking, abuse and torture.

“Significant gains have been achieved in increasing security in the digital environment in Turkiye, legal compliance, protection of user rights and the development of a fair inspection mechanism,” Uraloglu said.

Instagram parent Meta had agreed to comply with Turkish law and ensure efficient removal of posts and content if they carry elements of certain crimes or “terrorism propaganda,” Uraloglu said.

Instagram was not immediately available for comment when contacted by Reuters.

“Live metrics show Instagram is being restored across Turkiye’s main Internet providers after national restriction spanning nine days. This is the country’s longest ban of a major social media platform in recent years,” Internet monitor NetBlocks said.