incavs-livingston.jpg

Shaun Livingston of the Cleveland Cavaliers, left, says he was not a goof fit with the Washington Wizards.

(Photo by Scott Shaw, The Plain Dealer)

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Shaun Livingston's season has come full circle.

Livingston started at point guard in place of the injured Kyrie Irving on Tuesday night against the Washington Wizards -- the team that cut him just before the Cavaliers picked him up on Christmas.

"Victim of circumstances," Livingston said with a smile. "It's one of those ironic seasons I guess. Just another chapter in my crazy book. I'm good with that."

Coach Byron Scott acknowledged the unusual circumstances, but he figures it's just another example of the dedication that has kept Livingston in the league after a horrific knee injury threatened to end his career in 2007.

"It's kind of weird," Scott said. "But it's also a blessing, No. 1, that he's back playing and he's healthy and he's playing well. He stuck with it through all the hard times that he's had to face with the surgery and the injury that he had to be able to be back at this point in his career is unbelievable. It just shows the type of courage and grit and determination that he has as a basketball player. I think coming full circle, going against the team that cut him earlier this season, it should be interesting to see how it plays out."

Livingston insisted that he never worried his career was over when he got cut by the Wizards. He just felt it was not a good fit.

"It's one of the worst spots I've been in my career," he said.

What was wrong?

"Everything," he said. "I'm such a cerebral player. I just didn't have the right pieces. I'm not a guy who goes out and gets 30 a game. I'm trying to make guys better. It just wasn't bonding. There was no chemistry. It wasn't there. I'm a structure guy. It was more a lack of structure from an organizational standpoint. It wasn't the most beneficiary system for me. Maybe for other guys, it is."

And Cleveland?

"It's a godsend here," he said.

Washington coach Randy Wittman, a former Cavs head coach, acknowledged Livingston wasn't a good fit.

"It was a situation where we wanted to go in a different direction," he said. "I love Shaun. I'm always rooting for a guy like Shaun. Shaun went through one of the more horrific injuries that we've seen in the NBA and to fight his way back to where he's back in the league, you always root for guys like that."

Wall to Wall: Speedy Washington point guard John Wall is facing Cleveland for the first time this season, and the Cavs know they'll have their hands full.

"The biggest challenge is you've got to get back in transition," Scott said. "This guy is so fast, he's a one-man fast break and if one guy's back, he's going to get to the basket. If you get two guys back, he's still going to look to attack. We've got to get in front of him as much as possible and make him a jump shooter. He is fantastic getting to the basket. One of his downfalls is he's not a great shooter. We want to make sure he shoots a lot of outside the paint shots tonight."

Livingston, 27, isn't as quick as the 22-year-old Wall, but he's much taller -- 6-7 to Wall's 6-4. The Cavs veteran will try to use that to his advantage.