In an effort to cut down on brain injuries across the NFL, several Patriots as well as players across the league have been wearing Guardian Caps for extra protection throughout training camp.

Offensive and defensive linemen, tight ends, and linebackers on all 32 teams across the league are wearing the padded shell on top of their helmets. This is the first year players are required to do so and they must wear them until the second preseason game.

Guardian Caps provide “additional impact protection during the period when the league sees the greatest concentration of helmet impacts,” according to the NFL’s press release. “When worn, the Guardian Cap results in at least a 10% reduction in severity of impact if one player is wearing it, and at least a 20% reduction in impact if two players are wearing them.”

The NFL is no stranger to the risk of concussions, but since 2015 they have begun to take precautions that have lowered the number each year. The league introduced them in the preseason because many of the concussions have come during the weeks before the regular season.

In 2015, there were a total of 275 concussions, including 83 during the preseason. Fast forward to 2021, there were a total of 187 concussions, with 52 coming from preseason, numbers that were impacted by the reduction in preseason games from four to three and the increase in regular season games from 16 to 17.

Guardian Caps were first created in 2010, but they were primarily used by youth football players rather than professionals. In 2017, the caps won the NFL HeadHeathTECH Challenge and three years later they were used throughout multiple practices to collect data.

Many players have their own opinions on these new caps.

“It just looks funny, right?,” linebacker Josh Uche said last week. “I’m sure everyone’s seeing guys running around with this big, goofy little cap on. We look like Q-tips, almost. It is what it is. I didn’t really notice that much of a difference. Still, working hands, still working feet, techniques and stuff like that. It didn’t really bother me

“Man that’s heavy,” defensive lineman Davon Godchaux added. “I don’t look good with extra padding on my helmet, but that’s the ruling the NFL wants to do so we got to apply to it.”

One player chose to take a more positive approach.

“It’s good protection,” tight end Hunter Henry said. “I saw some high schools that have done it, but personally I’ve never worn one. But, anything to increase the safety obviously.”

Head injuries in the NFL have become a serious concern in recent years with more information about Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE) and the other long-lasting effects of head trauma being released.

CTE was first discovered and studied by Dr. Bennet Omalu who found it in the brain of former Pittsburgh Steelers center Mike Webster after he committed suicide in 2002. This was just the start of the research, with former NFL players’ brains being examined following their deaths in the years that followed.

A study released in 2017 by Dr. Ann McKee found that 99 percent of former NFL players, 91 percent of college football players, and 21 percent of high school football players had CTE. Those with this condition can show symptoms such as depression, anxiety, memory loss, and behavioral changes.

Due to the physical nature of football, head trauma and concussions are common, and the abundant new research being conducted and released has allowed the NFL to make changes accordingly. The Guardian Caps are just one step in the league’s attempt to lower the number of brain injuries going forward.

With this being the first year they have begun using Guardian Caps, they have decided to require them just for the preseason. But will they become a permanent fixture in the near future? Jalen Mills doesn’t think so.

“No way,” Mills said about whether he believes the NFL would ever begin using these during games. “It’s taking away the physicalness of football.”

The Patriots will wear them through the completion of their joint practices with the Carolina Panthers this week.