The Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilization is presenting a series of films from Iran in collaboration with the Seattle Art Museum. The films are:

Feb. 16, Ceasefire

From the award winning feminist director Tahmineh Milani comes a new comedy. Ceasefire explores, with refreshing humor, the tensions of marital relationships.

Feb. 17, The Fish Fall in Love

This debut film by director Ali Rafiee interweaves the story of a long-lost love with the beautiful imagery of food. The protagonist is a political prisoner who returns to his home after 20 years to find it converted into a restaurant by the woman he left behind.

Feb. 23, A Little Kiss

From the veteran director and former political exile Bahman Farmanara comes a new film about the reunion of two friends — writers living unproductive lives in exile — after 38 years. This is Farmanara’s skillful commentary on death in a language that is both meaningful and funny.

Feb. 28, Stray Dogs

The second feature film by Marzieh Meshkini, Stray Dogs is an intimate portrayal of two sibling street children in Afghanistan. In order to get closer to their imprisoned mother they go on a crime spree in Kabul.

March 7, Sounds of Silence

This documentary by Amir Hamz and Mark Lazarz gives a grounded portrayal of musicians struggling with censorship. Through interviews with musicians in Tehran’s underground rock and hip-hop scene, the film allows the viewer a rare glimpse into the lives of a new generation of young artists searching to merge Iranian and Western musical traditions.

March 10, Kamancheh and Behjat Sadr

These short documentaries explore two artistic traditions: music and painting. Kamancheh follows master players of this challenging string instrument into Iran’s outlying provinces. Behjat Sadr looks at the life and works of one of Iran’s most famous modern women painters. Sadr herself leads the viewer through her canvasses, discussing major influences in her art.

All films will be at 7:30 p.m. at the Museum of History and Industry. Tickets are $10, $8 for students. To purchase tickets in advance call the Seattle Art Museum Box Office, 206-654-3121. Tickets will also be available at the door but can be purchased with cash only.