Stray Dogs (2004)

Director: Marziyeh Meshkini

Marziyeh Meshkini's beautifully crafted and moving insight into post-Taliban Afghanistan follows the fortunes of a young brother and sister and the di... Read more

Buddha Collapsed Out of Shame (2007)

Director: Hana Makhmalbaf

This remarkable and beautifully shot Iranian film explores the fundamentalist Muslim Taliban regime through the eyes of children; too young to fully u... Read more

Men at Work (2006)

Director: Mani Haghighi

Starring: Mahnaz Afshar, Ahmad Hamed, Mahmoud Kalari, Reza Kianian

Four friends returning home from a skiing trip stumble upon a curiously large rock on the side of a mountain. What begins as a lighthearted project to... Read more

Offside (2006)

Director: Jafar Panahi

Starring: Sima Mobarak-Shahi, Shayesteh Irani, Ayda Sadeqi, Golnaz Farmani, Mahnaz Zabihi

In Iran, women are banned from sporting events, but during their country's 2006 bid for the World Cup, a handful of die-hard fans just can't resist se... Read more

Turtles Can Fly (2004)

Director: Bahman Ghobadi

Starring: Soran Ebrahim, Hirsh Feyssal, Avaz Latif

On the border of Iraq and Turkey, in the days leading up to the second US-led war, a young technology-obsessed boy nicknamed Satellite convinces the v... Read more

Joy of Madness (2003)

Director: Hana Makhmalbaf

Starring: Agheleh Rezaie, Agheleh Farahmand, Bibigol Asef, Sima Asef, Haji Rahmodin, Razi...

Based on the premise that nobody would notice a 14-year-old girl brandishing a handheld camera, Hana Makhmalbaf, daughter of renowned Iranian filmmake... Read more

Close-Up (1990)

Director: Abbas Kiarostami

Starring: Hossain Sabzian, Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Abolfazl Ahankhah, Mehdrad Ahankhah

Regarded as one of the greatest films of the '90s, acclaimed director Abbas Kiarostami's brilliant exploration of a misguided cinephile's attempts to... Read more

Baran (2001)

Director: Majid Majidi

Starring: Hossein Abedini, Mohammad Amir Naji, Zahra Bahrami, Hossein Rahimi, Hossein Mahj...

From the acclaimed director of "Children of Heaven" comes the uplifting tale of the relationship between 17-year-old worker Lateef and the illegally... Read more

Crimson Gold (2003)

Director: Jafar Panahi

Starring: Hussein Emadeddin, Kamyar Sheissi, Azita Rayeji, Shahram Vaziri

Masterfully directed by Jafar Panahi ('The Circle'), scripted by Abbas Kiarostami ('Ten') and based on a true story, "Crimson Gold" is a moving portra... Read more

At Five in the Afternoon (2003)

Director: Samira Makhmalbaf

Starring: Agheleh Rezaie, Abdolgani Yousefrazi, Razi Mohebi, Marzieh Amiri

Samira Makhmalbaf's "At Five in the Afternoon" was the first film to be made in Afghanistan following the fall of the Taliban regime. Set in the ruine... Read more