**La Recomendación Telegram GC #1**

Recommended by

Manikanta Aravind

Wow, What a great start into this challenge. Stray dogs is definitely a heart-warming drama that never fails to make you connect with the innocence of the two children, who are just amazing throughout the film. They both are main souls of the film. It gently talks about the struggle of many people, not only in iran but throughout the world from the stories of these two children. Iranian/Persian Cinema always gave me that punch into reality and Stray Dogs is no exception for that. Also that "Bicycle Thieves" reference, absolutely loved it. People may call it torture porn or whatsoever but this wasn't aiming for that.

[Favorites—Iranian Cinema]

If it weren’t obvious enough by the film’s focus on the harsh realities of everyday life in a war-torn land and with its use of documentary locations and non-pro actors, late in Stray Dogs (Sag-haye velgard) director Marziyeh Meshkini literally forges a relationship with Italian neorealism by staging a scene inside a movie theater showing Vittorio De Sica’s Bicycle Thieves (1948). Yet she also does so, I think, to distinguish her film from the more melodramatic tendencies of the Italian classic—highlighted, according to her, by its very prominent score.

As the end of that movie is unfolding onscreen, she flash-forwards once to a similar street scene with her young protagonists waiting to steal a bicycle (in their case…

In the three years I have been using Letterboxd to log and review the films that I have watched, I have watched films from 86 countries. Looking at my world map, the only areas that have no green are the north-eastern coast of South America, large sections of Africa, and the ‘stans in Central/South Asia. Some of that is about what is readily available, even in this era of world cinema, and some is about the shrinking options for seeing films from these regions, even in a place like Melbourne which, in pre-Covid times, had national cinema festivals that filled nine months of the year.

So it is entirely possible that I could still be ignorant about the Makhmalbaf family…

Like so many other great Iranian films, this film manages to comment on cinema and the world at the same time. Here we follow two homeless children as they desperately try to reconnect with their mother, who is in prison on a charge that seems cartoonishly villainous (and following the rule of "stranger than fiction"/my cynicism is probably more or less a true thing), and in the end, the (flawed) answer to their problem comes from a neo-realist classic that has overwhelming tragedy at its core. As much as anything, the film plays with that style, blending reality with fiction in the vein of so many great Iranian films, while also cutting into the conflict in Afghanistan and both America and the Taliban.

December count: 65/100

The canine wore three heads

two were human, the third of a hound

They were sealed in the chambers of the cruel characteristic land

so much so they seeked the maternal embracings

of the stone prison walls

to pacify that displacement and pain

The world spat on their plans

and on multiple times

they stood by the door

not always greeted by the same face

Fires they made

bread they broke

heads they took

the land of the dead

over running with with mutts

ones that barked

over fallen bovine decapitations

symbols of the countries current infirm form

The tragic Cerberus visited the picture house

taking tips from the grey world depiction upon the screen

and like a worm

was subsequently further displaced

and split...

two heads left

one in steel bars...

...not a dry eye in the house

Their father imprisoned as a Taliban extremist and their mother imprisoned on adultery charges, a brother and sister try to fend for themselves on the streets of Kabul in this grim but gripping drama. The title ostensibly comes from a dog who they rescue, but metaphorically the kids are stray dogs too with nobody to look after them as both parents are locked up. As the siblings become set on getting sent to jail (in the hopes of reuniting with their mother), the film becomes quite an indictment of not only Afghan society but indeed any society that neglects those in need. At times, the film drifts towards sentimentality and the dog is sometimes overly cute, but everything always remains down-to-earth and even harrowing thanks to the lead performances, especially Gol-Ghotai as the sister who often guides her older brother. The conclusion - which boasts an amazing shot that tracks backwards through a cycling crowd - is very impactful too.

Gol-Ghotai might be the most soulful young actress find since Ana Torrent. Her face is the real canvas through which Meshkini shows the devastation of post-Taliban Afghanistan. That being said, there are so many other things going on at the same time but it all returns to this face. Everything that has always made cinema great is present here.