HE was a constant exasperation and affront to the conventional and conformist. He had no pre-arranged pattern in his play, could miss the simplest of goals and then score the most spectacular from difficult angles with any part of his body.

Unique describes him, Trevor Thompson, centre-forward extraordinary, was idolised by Glentoran supporters in the Fifties and Swinging Sixties - a cult figure. They had many names for him, Big Trev, Big Sadie, and, on his delayed arrival to join the Detroit Cougars in 1967, John Colrain introduced him to the US media as "My Secret Weapon."

Born in Glengormley, Thompson, (64) last week and now retired, had an astonishing career at the Oval where he scored almost 400 goals, collected virtually every honour in the local game, including Ulster Footballer of the Year in 1964. He was the delight and despair of Glenmen. One week brilliant, the next week bad. Like the little boy who when good, was very good and when bad, horrid.

Yet, those discerning supporters took him to their hearts for they realised there was no more loyal or dedicated player, an ideal successor to the legendary, Sammy Hughes, and, above all, a goal-scorer who has a chapter to himself in the illustrious history of Glentoran.

Ironically, he began his career as a defender with Glengormley PES and St Mary's on the Hill, Carnmoney, a Protestant-Catholic side run by Jack Miles; then came spells at Mossley YM and Whiteabbey Presbyterian while earlier he was goalkeeper of the 99th Boys Brigade whose team included Eddie and Jimmy Dubois.

"My father, William, was a coach builder along with Harry Cavan in the NITB and, through him, I was persuaded to join Ards managed then by George Eastham," said Trevor. "It didn't work out at Castlereagh Park so I went to Derry City, played in the reserves and, as nothing happened there either it was back to Mossley.

"When I told them I would like a chance in the forwards and out of defence they agreed. That was the launch pad for a new phase of my football life and led to the eventual signing for Glentoran in 1955-56 after a recommendation from their scout Freddie Steadman," he said.

"I felt I wasn't making much of an impact at the Oval until Jimmy McIntosh - one of the many managers I played under - put me in against Coleraine and I performed reasonably well as I did against the Blues in the next match. The ice had been broken.

"It is my contention that the Fifties and Sixties were the fun periods in soccer. We had a fantastic spirit at the Oval with players like Billy Neill, Jimmy Murdough, Albert Finlay, Walter Bruce and Harry Creighton "the senior pro" to name a few. We went everywhere together even spending some weekends with our families at Butlins. It was a wonderful feeling just to be part of that happy set-up."

His greatest memories? "First, there was the 8-1 win over Linfield. I've that date imprinted in my mind - April 4, 1964. We had, if I'm correct in thinking, gone 17 years without beating the Blues at Windsor Park. It would be difficult, however, to surpass the Detroit Cougars two month coast-to-coast tour of the United States and Canada in 1967.

"We were sponsored by the Ford Motor Company in what was a major attempt by big business to get football established in the States. Ford selected the name Cougars to promote a new model which had just come off the production lines. It was a fabulous never-to-be forgotten experience."

The basis of the Cougars side, one of the most accomplished of all time in Northern Ireland domestic football, had been laid from 1962 onwards but the appointment of John Colrain, former Celtic and Ipswich player, was a master stroke. "He was the right manager at the right time. He may not have built the team but it took someone with his expertise to guide it. He just had that little something which made him different - motivation they call it now," said Trevor.

"I first met him when playing for the Irish League B against the Scottish Central League around 1955-56 and he was in the opposition. He was a fantastic larger-than-life character with great charisma.

"You know every time those of us who were on the Cougars trip meet - and by that I mean everyone in the party and not just the players - the subject, invariably, switches to those days in Detroit, Boston, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago, New York, and Toronto. There is a great bond between us.

"It was a superb squad and the results were impressive. I often think of that night at the Varsity Stadium in Detroit when we played Bangu of Brazil - a night of high temperature and humidity. Eric Ross and myself came off at half-time, went to the changing room which was in a different part of the stadium, showered and dressed and then went to re-join the rest of the lads on the bench.

"A fight had developed among the players with some of the Brazilians running around using the corner flag poles as if they were spears. The match was abandoned 17 minutes from the finish with Bangu leading 2-0."

Glentoran certainly made their mark on this trip. Who will ever forget the welcome home parade when crowds lined the route from the City Hall to the Oval. It was the climax to a wonderful adventure.

Trevor also took part in those crowd-pulling European Cup games against Benfica and Rangers, won an Irish Cup medal in the 1966 victory over Linfield, Terry Conroy scoring both goals; two Irish League championship medals and inter-league caps against Scotland, England and the League of Ireland.

"I retired in 1995 through ill health. Four years earlier I had a heart attack. I never thought I would be a candidate for that but, fortunately, I have recovered and now relax by playing golf or spending time at our other home in Ballycastle. I was past captain of the club there." Trevor was a Glentoran icon in his heyday, a modest man who like his great friend, the late Billy Neill, built his life around the tenets of the Boys Brigade - reverence, discipline, self respect and service to his fellow man.