Revolver, 1973, Dir. Sergio Sollima, 11 mins, Blu-Ray

Well, something of a curio- my first exposure to Italian crime cinema is this fine Blu-ray edition from Eureka. I wonder what kind of sub-genre rabbit-hole I may have unearthed… (the Italians made lots of these crime-thrillers, I gather). It also serves as my introduction to Italian director Sergio Sollima. My ignorance regards Italian directors is profound- I know of Sergio Leone, obviously, but other than Sergio Corbucci (The Great Silence) that’s about it.

Revolver is a very solid film, rewarding in all sorts of ways. Oliver Reed plays Vito Cipriani, an Italian prison warden married to beautiful, albeit dubiously young, Anna (Agostina Belli). The age difference here (when the film was shot, Reed would have been a slightly overweight, drunk and unfit 34 and Agostina a svelt 23 years old) likely betrays its age, and how male actors were habitually cast with flatteringly young romantic interests (I remember Kirk Douglas and Farrah Fawcett in Saturn 3)- in this case, Agostina could have gotten away with playing Reed’s daughter. This age gap is accentuated by a very odd love-making scene, after which Anne is kidnapped, and the kidnappers demand that a French prisoner, Milo Ruiz (Fabio Testi), be released in order for Vito to get his wife back. Vito arranges Milo’s escape from his prison but then kidnaps Milo himself, to ensure the kidnappers return his wife safely. What follows is a decidedly violent game of cat and mouse, crossing from Italy to France, as both men try to discover who wants Milo released and why (Milo has no ‘freinds’ and no idea why anyone would be in the slightest bit interested in his freedom). The desperate lawman and escaped convict gradually form an unlikely bond (shades of, and possibly an influence on, the later Midnight Run here), eventually unearthing a massive conspiracy involving high government and lowlife criminals in a film that proves to be very dark and nihilistic, perfectly capturing themes of paranoia so common it was almost a cultural zeitgeist in American cinema of the early 1970s, but obviously giving it a very European spin.

I’m not certain what it was, but something struck a chord in me regards this film – maybe it was that delicious feel of 1970s paranoia which is gradually becoming both prescient and timely here in 2023, with corruption in authority seemingly increasingly common and individuals in society feeling less control of their lives and situation. Maybe its Oliver Reed’s very good, albeit bizarre, performance (a Brit playing an Italian with, of all things, an American accent?). Its actually remarkable how good Reed is in this, when one considers how drunk he apparently was most of the time- he started drinking early and by mid-afternoon it was allegedly not worth filming him in any scenes. Maybe its the excellent soundtrack score by Ennio Morricone, with its typically lush, romantic sweep that is hugely cinematic (the love theme was later used by Quentin Tarantino in his film Inglourious Basterds), but which is otherwise sprinkled with a relentless, propulsive rhythm that influenced his more widely-known score for The Untouchables a decade or so later. I don’t know if it was just simply the gritty setting with its curious, 1970s fashions/cars and horrible, miserable city streets. Or maybe its the exquisite cinematography by Aldo Scavarda, whose tendency for golden-hour shots makes everything look so pretty while also so unrelentingly dismal. Maybe its the art direction and canny location shooting. Maybe its a combination of all the above, that curious alchemy that makes some films better than their individual parts would usually warrant.