When Jason Richardson leaped toward the rim, defenders were vulnerable and at his mercy. Richardson, one of the best dunkers ever, regularly put players on posters during his 13-year NBA career.

Richardson made his name in the Bay Area, showcasing his high-flying abilities with the Golden State Warriors for the first six seasons of his career.

While playing with the Warriors, Richardson flew around the court. Richardson’s combination of quickness, agility and hops molded him into an underrated player during his era. Aside from throwing down jams, Richardson could score and shoot at a solid clip.

Richardson scored 18.3 points per game and shot 35.0% from the 3-point line during his time with the Warriors. According to Basketball Reference, he ranks third all-time in Warriors history for 3-pointers made (700).

Though Richardson was talented, he was never an All-Star and only went to the playoffs four times during his career. One of those seasons was in Golden State during the 2007 postseason, the year where the “We Believe” Warriors shined.

Playing alongside Monta Ellis and Baron Davis, Richardson and the No. 8 seed Warriors defeated the Dallas Mavericks, 4-2, in the first round of the playoffs. Richardson averaged 19.5 points per game and 6.8 rebounds in that series.

The Mavericks were the top seed in the Western Conference, and they had the best record in the league. That season’s Warriors are one of five teams in league history to defeat a No. 1 seed. Golden State lost in five games against the Utah Jazz during the semifinals.

Some of the most exciting moments of Richardson’s career came during All-Star weekend, when he had all-time performances at the 2002 and 2003 slam dunk contests.

Richardson won in both years, throwing down windmills and reverse jams among others.

After playing for the Warriors, Richardson played for the Charlotte Bobcats (now the Charlotte Hornets), Phoenix Suns, Orlando Magic and Philadelphia 76ers. He averaged 17.1 points per game and shot 37.0% from deep during his career. Richardson scored a career-high 23.2 points during the 2005-06 season, his second-to-last season with the Warriors.

He might not end up being a Hall of Famer, but as a two-time dunk contest champ, his archive of jams and posters will serve as a reminder: Richardson is one of the ultimate high flyers in basketball history.