Afghanistan is a country in Asia which most Americans probably spent little time thinking about before the September 11 attacks in 2001. Even after the subsequent US invasion and thirteen year occupation of Afghanistan, I don’t recall ever seeing a single Afghan face in any media and I’d bet that most Americans wrongly think that Afghanistan is an Arabic country in the Middle East rather than one that shares a border with China. Afghans have been coming to the US in small numbers for about a century and small communities have coalesced in Fremont, northern Virginia, the Northeast, and the Los Angeles area, the focus of this piece.

A CONDENSED HISTORY OF AFGHANISTAN

Archaeological evidence suggests that Neanderthals and other early humans lived in what’s now Afghanistan at least 52,000 years ago. Around 3000 BCE, farming communities of the Indus Valley Civilization arose in the area. Aryan people arrived in the area around 2000 BCE. In 330 BCE, after conquering Persia, Alexander the Great and his army arrived. The area’s strategic importance owed to its being located along the Silk Road and throughout its history the land has been contested and ruled by a succession of peoples, including Arabs, Durranis, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Greco-Bactrians, Hephthalites, Hotakis, Indo-Parthians, Indo-Scythians, Kidarites, Kushans, Mauryas, Mughals, Mongols, Pālas, Saffarids, Samanids, Sassanids, Shahiya, Timurids, and Uzbeks. So many dynasties have met their end in Afghanistan, in fact, that it’s acquired the nickname, “the Graveyard of Empires,” an historic lesson the British, Soviets, and Americans would arguably have done well to heed.

The Afghan tribes were united under Mīrwais Khān Hotak, and the Last Afghan Empire (the Durrani Empire) was founded by Ahmad Shah Durrani with its capital at Kandahar, today the second largest city in Afghanistan. The British, Persians, and Russians all attempted to conquer Afghanistan in the 19th Century and after the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878–1880) the British, though ostensibly victorious, withdrew and officially established (with the Russians) the modern borders of Afghanistan, initially a British Protectorate. A third Anglo-Afghan War convinced the British to completely relinquish control in 1920.

In the 20th century, efforts to modernize Afghanistan were made under King Amanullah Khan, who made education both compulsory and co-ed. He also banned the muslim veil and which aroused the hostility of tribal and religious leaders, who forced him to abdicate the throne in 1929. Afghanistan’s next two leaders were both assassinated and Afghanistan’s political situation in the years that followed saw drought, corruption, extremism, and outsider meddling stymie democratization, liberalization, and modernization, which nevertheless developed gradually, culminating with the creation of the Republic of Afghanistan in 1973.

The country’s first President, Mohammed Daoud Khan, and his family were killed in a 1978 military coup led by members of the communist People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) who through brutal oppressive force attempted to transform Afghanistan into an egalitarian, secular, Marxist-Leninist country. To achieve their aims the PDPA invited help from the USSR, and when the Afghan people revolted in 1979, the USSR responded by launching an invasion. The US and Saudia Arabia responded by arming a largely foreign, Arabic jihadis known as the Mujahideen with $40 billion worth of cash and weapons. In the ten year conflict that resulted, some 1,500,000 Afghans were killed and roughly six million fled, mostly to Iran and Pakistan, but also to Europe and the US.

The USSR withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989 and their state collapsed two years later. Afghanistan plunged into civil war which ultimately ended with the creation of the Islamic State of Afghanistan. Violence continued, largely fueled by local forces who received support from India, Iran, Pakistan, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkey, and the US — all keen to shape events to their advantage. The Pakistan-backed Taliban ultimately conquered the country and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan in 1996. In 2001, al-Qaeda, a force comprised largely of former American-armed Mujahideen and supported by the Taliban, attacked the US killing 2,996 people (excluding the hijackers). The US, in turn, invaded Afghanistan, an invasion which turned into America’s longest war, and one in which (as of 2015), 2,326 Americans and an estimated 92,000 Afghanis have died.

AFGHAN-AMERICANS

Despite the creation of a unity government and renewed efforts at self-sustainability, Afghanistan remains highly unstable and the flow of refugees has increased since the war’s official end. Afghan-Americans include people of various ethnicities including Pashtun, Baloch, Hazara, Tajik, Uzbek, and others. As of 2014 there were an estimated 97,865 Afghani-Americans. According to census data, 9,711 arrived between 1991 and 2000; 13,533 arrived between 2001 and 2010. In California, the largest communities are in Aliso Viejo, Fremont, Irvine, and Simi Valley.

AFGHAN CULTURE IN THE US AND LOS ANGELES

Despite the US’s long and complicated relationship with Afghanistan, most of us probably know little about Afghans. My mother referred to the crocheted couch throw as an afghan and I knew what an Afghan hound looked like. In 1985, a portrait of a young refugee named Sharbat Gula was famously featured as the cover of National Geographic. James Bond and Rambo both teamed up with the pre-al-Qaeda mujahideen in The Living Daylights and Rambo III. In college, a pakol was briefly part of my winter get-up.

Even with their increased presence in the US, overt displays of Afghan culture remain rare and obscure. Nowruz, the widely observed Vernal Equinox/New Year, sometimes is the basis of cultural festivals in the US, although it’s more closely associated with Persians than Afghanis. Occasionally an Afghanistan-focused photo exhibition will open, invariably of the war porn variety. In 2012, there was an event called Sounds and Rhythms of Afghanistan with Ballet Afsaneh, Walt Disney Concert Hall.

Despite the existence of an Afghan-American community, there are no locally based Afghan-American organizations that I know of. There are, however, a few prominent Afghan-Americans. One of the first, and most interesting, was Wallace Fard Muhammad, founder of the Nation of Islam, who may or may not have been Afghani. Little of certainty can be said about Muhammad. The FBI, who produced a good deal of spurious information about Muhammad, alleged that he used 58 aliases. Before he arrived in Detroit in 1930, where he went door-to-door in the black community, peddling silks and claiming to have come from Mecca, he lived in Los Angeles, where he was involved with the short-lived Moorish Science Temple and acquired a police record with charges including a violation of the “California Wolverine Possession Act.” His World War I draft registration card listed his birthplace as Shinka, Afghanistan — although at other times he claimed to be from New Zealand. Karl Evanzz, author of The Messenger: The Rise and Fall of Elijah Muhammad, asserts that Wallace Fard Muhammad’s father was Zared Fard, a New Zealander whose parents hailed from a part of India now in Pakistan. The same author claims that the mysterious Muhammad died in Chicago in 1971, afther he disappeared from public in 1971.

Azita Ghanizada was born in Kabul in 1979 and her family left the country soon after the Soviet invasion. After receiving degrees in English and Journalism she moved to Los Angeles to work as an actress. She’s appeared as a guest star in numerous television series and as a regular on General Hospital: Night Shift and Alphas.

Daveed Kapoor is an sustainability advocate and architect who founded the architecture firm, Utopiad, which has given the adaptive reuse treatment to create homes, art spaces, offices. The green agenda has also extended to the creation of parcels and the proposal to cap freeways with parks.

Khaled Hosseini (خالد حسینی) is an Afghani physician, novelist, and former Angeleno. He was born in Kabul in 1965 to a diplomat in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and a Persian language teacher at a girls’ high school. When Khaled was eleven, the family moved to Paris and, four years later, to San Jose. In Southern California, Hosseini earned his MD at University of California, San Diego and completed his residency at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. After ten years of practicing medicine he wrote a novel, The Kite Runner, which was adapted into a successful Hollywood film of the same name after which Hosseini retired from medicine to pursue writing.

Naim Popal (نعیم پوپل) is an Afghan composer and singer born in Kabul in 1954. In high school he formed the band, Lalaha, in which he sang and played keyboards. He worked as a sound technician at the state-run Afghan Film and a producer at Radio Kabul. In 1975 he moved to Tehran in the pursuit of stardom, only to flee to Los Angeles after the Iranian Revolution.

AFGHAN MUSIC

Traditional music of Afghanistan reflects the cultural influences of Arab, Chinese, Indian, Mongolian, and Persian music. The lute-like dombra is favored by Hazaras and Tajiks. The rubab, a forerunner of the Indian sarod, is widely thought of as Afghanistan’s national instrument. One of the instrument’s best known players, Homayun Sakhi, now lives in Fremont.

The Taliban banned most music but since their removal from power, Kabul and Herat have re-emerged as important Afghan music centers. Religious sects such as the Sufis and Shi’a make music in a variety of genres, including manqabat, mursia, na’t, nowheh, and rowzeh. Chazals, ragas, and tarana — collectively referred to as klasik (or “Classical music”) — are composed by muusicians reputedly descended from those of the Indian royal court.

Afghanistan’s first radio station was founded in 1925 and destroyed in 1929. Radio Kabul was established in 1940. Ustad Farida Mahwash, the “voice of Afghanistan,” was a pop singer who enjoyed fame in the 1970s, a period widely considered to be the golden age of Afghani pop. She now lives in Fremont. Since the removal of the Taliban, pop and rap have emerged and enjoy a degree of popularity.

AFGHAN FILM

Given the nearly continuous instability throughout much of the 20 and 21st centuries, it should come as no surprise that the history of Aghani Cinema is a slight one. The first film produced in Afghanistan was Reshid Latif’s Ishq Wa Dosti (Love and Friendship, 1946). The government began funding the production of documentaries in 1968. Afghanistan never had a film academy and under the Taliban, the nation’s cinemas were closed, destroyed, or turned into teahouses. The Taliban also destroyed many of the films in Afghan Film’s archives.

Although Iranian, celebrated director Mohsen Makhmalbaf‘s Afghanistan-set film قندهار (Kandahar, 2001) seems to have helped spur the reinvigoration of Afghan Cinema. Siddiq Barmak’s اسامه (Osama, 2003) received widespread international acclaim and attention. Since the fall of the Taliban, though, most films made in Afghanistan have been foreign productions like the British In This World or the Hollywood film, The Kite Runner. Afghan directors have, conversely, mostly worked outside Afghanistan. Affandy Yacoob and Ajmal Yourish‘s Al Qarem was filmed in New York. 2012’s سنگ صبور (The Patience Stone), directed by French-based Atiq Rahimi, opened domestically in New York and Los Angeles.

AFGHAN CUISINE

Afghan Cuisine is largely based upon barley, bread, chutney, grapes, maize, melons, milk, pomegranates, rice, torshi, wheat, whey, and yogurt. Kabuli palaw is widely regarded as Afghanistan’s national dish. Bata, dumplings, kebabs, korma, and quroot are also popular dishes and doogh is the most popular beverage.

The first Afghani restaurant in the US, Bamian, opened in Falls Church, Virginia in 1975. In Los Angeles County, Azeen’s Afghani Restaurant restaurant opened in Pasadena in 2004 and Afghan Express opened in Gardena in 2010. Sadly, Afghan Express closed in 2013 and Azeen’s closed in 2016. I swear when Agra Cafe opened in Sunset Junctions it advertised itself as both an Indian and Afghan restaurant but I can’t prove that and perhaps it was just a dream. Agra is, after all, a city in Uttar Pradesh, far from Afghanistan… although it is a Balti house, and Baltistan does border Afghanistan. There is a place called De Lux Cafe in Montrose, which has only one (positive) review on Yelp and is listed as Afghani.

There are restaurants which though not dedicated to Afghani cuisine nevertheless serve Afghani items (are are claimed to by the highly suspect experts on Yelp). Those include Ariana (in Tarzana), S Gyros & Kabob House and Khybar Restaurant (both in Reseda),Family Meat Market (in Northridge), Kebab House (in Panorama City), all of which are not surprisingly in the San Fernando Valley.

*****

As always, if you have any corrections or additions, please suggest them in the comments. Thanks!

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

Every schoolchild hopefully learns about the 19th century Chinese immigrants who built America‘s rails, the largest network in the world (if embarrassingly outpaced and outdated). The moderately engaged Angeleno will have spied names like Nippon Sharyo, Kinki Sharyo, and Hyundai Rotem our modern (and not embarrassing) local urban trains and correctly surmised that the very trains are Asian immigrants of a non-human sort. If you pay even more attention, or just read this Asian Pacific American Heritage Month-inspired piece, you can find out about a little about the Asian-American artists who created the art in several of Metro‘s bus and train stations.

*****

REUNION (Union Station)

The six, wing-like, sculptural, glass and metal bus shelters at Patsaouras Transit Plaza, known as ReUnion (1995), were designed by artists Kim Yasuda and Noel Korten in collaboration with architects Torgen Johnson and Matthew Vanderborgh. Yasuda was born in California and is a professor of art at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Patsaouras Transit Plaza — part of Union Station — is located in Downtown‘s Civic Center neighborhood and is the city’s main transit hub.

EPOCH (Union Station)

Patrick Nagatani‘s collage Epoch (1996) depicts ships, trains, and other forms of transit. It also includes a series of Eadweard Muybridge photos from 1887, which though safe enough for Victorians proved so offensive to some in the 1990s that they were briefly covered with a plastic tarp. Nagatani was born and raised in Chicago and obtained his Bachelor of Arts from California State University, Los Angeles (UCLA) and his Master of Fine Arts from the UCLA in 1980. In the 1980s he moved to Albuquerque where he teaches photography at the University of New Mexico.

REAL GREEN (Vermont/Athens Station)

Artist Kim Yasuda and architect Torgen Johnson again collaborated on real green (1995). Its inspiration is the nearby city of Gardena‘s agricultural past and represents a tree which, after protest, was spared by Caltrans when they made the station’s park-and-ride. The poetic text was penned by Michelle T. Clinton and Rubén Martínez. Vermont/Athens Station is located on the border between the communities of Harbor Gateway North, Magnolia Square, and West Athens at the edge of South Los Angeles’s Westside and the Harbor Area. It is served by the Green line.

SPACE INFORMATION (Redondo Beach Station)

Carl Cheng‘s Space Information Station (1995) was made in collaboration with Escudero-Fribourg, Architects, and features sculptures of satellites and blue glass meant to evoke the South Bay‘s coastal geography and history of the aerospace industry. Cheng was born in San Francisco and raised in Los Angeles, where he received his BA and MFA from UCLA. He currently lives in Santa Monica. Redondo Beach Station is located on the border between the suburbs of Hawthorne and Redondo Beach in the South Bay and is served by the Green line.

HOLLYWOOD/WESTERN STATION INTERIOR

May Sun‘s design for the Hollywood/Western Station interior (1999), created in collaboration with Escudero-Fribourg Architects, pays homage to the pan-ethnic heritage of Los Angeles with copper, granite, and porcelain panels combined with text and set in a field of tiled walls. May Sun was born in Shanghai and raised in Hong Kong and San Diego. She received a BFA from UCLA and a MFA from the Otis College of Art and Design. Sun formerly taught at the California Institute of the Arts (CalArts). Hollywood/Western Station is located on the border of the Hollywood neighborhoods of Franklin Village, Little Armenia, and Thai Town and is served by the Red line.

THE WHEELS OF CHANGE (Chinatown Station)

Chusien Chang‘s The Wheels of Change (2003) is based on the 9th century text, 易, commonly known as the I Ching. The 八卦, an eight-sided Taoist symbol, pays tribute to the Chinese who built the US’s railroads. The design of the station’s benches reference the neighborhood’s historic Italian, Croatian, Mexican, and Chinese inhabitants. Chang received her MFA from UCLA. Chinatown Station is located on the border between the Downtown neighborhoods of Chinatown and Dogtown and is served by the Gold Line.

RIVER OF TIME (Monrovia Station)

The centerpiece of Cha-Rie Tang‘s River of Time (2015) is a sculptural, monolithic rock topping and surrounded by a ceramic and glass tiled motif which extends throughout the station. Tang is a Pasadena-based artist who received a Bachelor of Science in Art and Design from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a Master of Architecture from the University of Colorado, Boulder. Monrovia Station is located in the San Gabriel Valley foothill suburb of Monrovia and is served by the Gold Line.

BUFFER ZONE (Little Tokyo/Arts District Station)

Buffer Zone (2009) is a collaboration between artist Hirokazu Kosaka and Ted Tokio Tanaka Architects. The station’s canopies are meant to evoke Japanese archery bows whilst the benches are modeled after targets. The platform itself is modeled after a tatami. Kosaka was born in Wakayama, moved to California in 1966 and graduated from the Chouinard Art Institute. Little Tokyo/Arts District Station is located in Downtown’s Little Tokyo neighborhood. With the completion of the Regional Connector, Little Tokyo/Arts District Station will be supplanted by the 1st Street/Central Avenue Station, currently under construction.

LANDINGS (Soto Station)

Nobuho Nagasawa‘s Landings (2009) is comprised of stainless steel bird sculptures and a a ceiling-mounted fiberglass sculpture, incorporated into an interactive steel, glass, and acrylic setting. New York-based Nagasawa was born in Tokyo and raised in Europe and the US. She studied at the CalArts. Soto Station is located in the Eastside neighborhood of Boyle Heights and is part of the Gold Line.

THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS OR TRAVELING AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT (RAIL) (East LA Civic Center Station)

Clement Hanami‘s Through the Looking Glass or Traveling at the Speed of Light (Rail), (2009) is a Lewis Carroll-inspired steel sculpture depicting oversized plants and a giant magnifying glass. Hanami was raised in East Los Angeles and is currently the Art Director at the Japanese American National Museum. East LA Civic Center Station is located in Eastside community of East Los Angeles and is served by the Gold line.

LUCKY CALIFORNIA (Laurel Canyon Station)

Phung Huynh‘s Lucky California (2005) is a series of steel panels and terrazzo decorated with surrealistic depictions of cherubic Chinese taikonauts, flying oranges, and California poppies inspired by China’s charming space program posters of the 1960s, ’70s, and ’80s. Huynh is Associate Professor of Art at Los Angeles Valley College, where she teaches courses in drawing, painting, and design. Laurel Canyon Station is located in the San Fernando Valley neighborhood of Valley Village and is served by the Orange line.

*****

So there you have it, something to look for next time you’re waiting for a bus or train… and something to dream about if you’re at one of the 6,200 bus stops (77.5% of them) which lack any sort of shelter or aesthetic considerations whatsoever! As always, additions and corrections are welcome.

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

Uyghurs are an Asian people who mostly live in the Chinese province of Xinjiang, which most view as their homeland. There are significant diasporic populations in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkey, and Russia. The US also has a small population, most of whom live in either the Washington, DC or Los Angeles metropolitan areas. Unrecognized by US census and lacking either their own state or a fashionable political cause (e.g. Tibet), they’re decidedly low profile. In Los Angeles their cultural profile is so far almost entirely limited to the restaurant scene.

*****

The first people known as the Uyghurs were a coalition of nomadic Tiele tribes in the Altai Mountains, the valleys south of Lake Baikal, and the Yenisei River. They overthrew the Turkic Khaganate and established the Uyghur Khaganate in 744 CE. At its most expansive, the Uyghur Khaganate stretched from the Caspian Sea to Manchuria and had its capital as Ordu-Baliq, in modern day Mongolia. The Khaganate was invaded by the Yenisei Kirghiz and collapsed in 842 and many of the Uyghurs resettled among the Karluks and in Gansu, Turpan, and the Tarim Basin.

The Uyghurs went on to found two kingdoms, the Ganzhou Kingdom (established in 850 with its capital near Zhangye), and the Kingdom of Qocho (established in 856 with its capital in Qocho). The first kingdom was absorbed by the Western Xia in 1036. The Kingdom of Qocho, also known as Uyghuristan lasted into the 1335.

The Uyghurs were absorbed by the Mongol Empire and the Tarim Basin was conquered by the Dzungars in 1680. The Qing Dynasty Chinese arrived soon after and from 1687–1758 waged the Dzungar-Qing War, with the Uyghurs generally siding with the Chinese. The long conflict culminated with the genocide of an estimated 600,000 Dzungars, after which China began settling Chinese of various ethnicity in the region.

The Republic of China was founded in 1912. In the 1920s, the Uyghurs staged several uprisings against Chinese rule and in 1933 successfully regained their independence, forming the East Turkestan Republic, which was re-conquered by China the following year. The Second East Turkestan Republic, backed by the USSR, existed from 1944-1949, when Mao Zedong established the People’s Republic of China (PROC). After they were made part of the PROC, many of East Turkestan’s republicans fled to Turkey and elsewhere. The PROC conquered neighboring Tibet the following year and for whatever reason, that has long been a cause cause célèbre inspiring Hollywood films, benefit albums, protests, concerts, and “Free Tibet” bumper stickers. Both Tibet and East Turkestan were admitted to the UNPO on 11 February 1991.

The highest profile incident involving Uyghurs came with the detainment of 22 Uyghurs in Guantanamo Bay in 2002. Although none viewed the US as an enemy, they’d been rounded up by China as “terrorists.” Although determined not to be enemy combatants, the last of the Uyghurs remained in Guantanamo Bay until 2013, when they were transferred to Slovakia.

UYGHUR CUISINE

As mentioned in the introduction, the most obvious signs of Uyghur presence in Los Angeles is in restaurants. Several of the local restaurants offering Uyghur dishes are Hunanese. Around 5,000 Uyghurs live around Taoyuan County and other parts of Changde in Hunan province, believed to be descended from Uyghur general Hala Bashi and his soldiers, who were sent to Hunan by the Ming Emperor in the 14th century to crush the Miao rebels.

Uyghur cuisine bears the influences of Central Asia and China. Common meats include sheep, cow, camel, chicken, and goose. Common vegetables include carrots, eggplants, celery, tomatoes, onions, and peppers. The typical Uyghur breakfast included tea, naan, hardened yogurt, olives, honey, raisins, and almonds. The most common dish is polu (pilaf), usually cooked with rice and a mix of carrots, raisins, apricots, chicken, or mutton. Chuanr (kebabs) are also popular, as is the stir-fried noodle dish, leghmen, which may have originated with Chinese lamain. There are several varieties of lamb pies including samsa, göshnan, and pamirdi. Shorpa is lamb soup. Other typical items include sangza (crispy, fried, wheat flour), youtazi (steamed bread), toghach (tandoor bread), and the bagel-like girde.

In Southern California, Uyghur restaurants and restaurants serving Uyghur dishes include China Islamic Restaurant (in Rosemead), Feng Mao Lamb Kebab (in Wilshire Park), Omar’s Xinjiang Halal Restaurant (in San Gabriel), Silk Road Garden (in Rowland Heights), Mao’s Kitchen (in Melrose), and Mas’ Chinese Islamic Restaurant (in Anaheim).

UYGHUR ORGANIZATIONS

Among the few organizations representing Uyghurs are the World Uyghur Congress, base in München, Germany, and the Uyghur American Association, based in Washington, DC.

FURTHER READING

For more about Uyghurs in Southern California, check out Trip Advisor’s “A Rare Uyghur Restaurant, and Worth the Trip!,” and Clarissa Wei’s “Silk Road Garden: Discovering Uyghur Cuisine In Los Angeles” and “Xinjiang Cuisine in Los Angeles: Halal Food And Hand-Pulled Noodles.”

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

HMONG LOS ANGELES

The Hmong are a stateless people who mostly live in Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam. Approximately 281,000 Hmong lived in the US, as of the 2010 census, and the state with the largest population is California. While most California Hmong live in either Fresno or Sacramento Country, several thousand live in Southern California, mainly in and around San Diego, North Orange County, and Long Beach. There are few obvious indications of their presence, and just as they are stateless at home, they are similarly enclave-less here.

*****

Both DNA and linguistic evidence suggest that the Hmong lived in Southern China at least 2,000 years ago. The Chinese refer to the Hmong as “Miao,” an official designation which collectively encompasses several southern minorities, including some neither linguistically nor ethnically closely related. According to their own history, the Hmong originated in Zhuolu Town, Hebei, in China’s north, around the third millennium BCE. The legendary king, Chiyou (known in Hmong as Txiv Yawg), is claimed as their ancestor. According to various historical accounts, Chiyou was said to have been a fierce leader, possessed of four eyes, six arms, and a bronze, bull-like head with two horns. He is also claimed not just to be the ancestor of the Hmong (and all Miao), but the Dongyi (“eastern barbarians”), Nanman (“southern barbarians), and the Koreans. Conflict between the dominant Chinese people, the Han, and the Hmong led to their long migration, ultimately into Southeast Asia, where most live today.

During the Vietnam War and the so-called Secret War (the Laotian Civil War), the American military and CIA recruited Hmong to wage guerrilla war against the Viet Cong and Laos’s Pathet Lao insurgents. Saigon, the last stronghold of the US-backed South Vietnam, fell to North Vietnam on 30 April 30 1975. Vietnam invaded Laos in December 1975, and under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975, 3,466 Hmong insurgents were allowed admission into the US. In May 1976, 11,000 more Hmong were admitted. By 1978, the population of Hmong-Americans had grown to about 30,000, still mostly comprised of fighters affiliated with the US-led effort and including General Vang Pao, who transitioned from Major General in the Royal Lao Army into community leader of the Hmong-American community. After the passage of the Refugee Act of 1980, more Hmong arrived, this time many more not directly involved in the US-backed insurgency. They continued to settle primarily in California and Minnesota. Today there are also a large Hmong communities in Milwaukee and Wasau, Wisconsin.

ORANGE COUNTY COMMUNITY

In Southern California, most Hmong were presumably processed at Camp Pendleton, in northern San Diego County. About 3,000 Hmong lived in North Orange County in the early 1980s — a not insubstantial number — but one dwarfed by much larger influx of Vietnamese, who established Little Saigon in the late 1970s in Westminster and whose highly visible presence soon spread across a vast area which today includes parts of Garden Grove, Fountain Valley, Santa Ana, Midway City, Stanton, and Huntington Beach. Today Vietnamese comprise over 6% of Orange County’s population whilst Hmong are outnumbered by Koreans, Taiwanese, Chinese, Filipinos, Indians, Japanese, Cambodians, Pakistanis, Thais, Indonesians, and Laotians. Garden Grove is home to the Hmong of Orange County Association, though, who are responsible for organizing Hmong New Year festivities, held in November or December at the end of the rice harvest.

In 2007, Vang Pao, then living in Westminster, was charged with attempting to overthrow the government of Laos. The federal government dropped all charges in 2009 and the former military leader died in 2011 at the age of 81, after attending Hmong New Year celebrations in Fresno. He was survived by his youngest wife, May Song Vang, who assumed his position as a community leader but herself passed away in the city of Orange in 2013.

LONG BEACH COMMUNITY

A larger Hmong community arose in Long Beach, where in the 1980s they were estimated to number around 8,000. There, too, the Hmong are overshadowed by another refugee population from Southeast Asia, the Cambodians. Numbering around 20,000, Long Beach is home to the largest community of Cambodians outside of Cambodia. In 2007, an area home to many Cambodians and Hmong was designated Cambodia Town, the first recognized Cambodian enclave in the US.

The Hmong Association-Long Beach, was founded by Yang Cha in 1981. Programs they offer include instruction of traditional Hmong dance (taught by Gorlia Xiong and Shayna Lee), music programs Qeej not Gangs (taught by Qeej Master Nao Lee Thao) and a drum group (led by Master Chang Kai), Paj ntaub Hmong needlework (taught by Paj ntaub instructor, Chong Lee Vang), and Hmong language classes taught by Teng Yang, Nancy Yang, and Mary Yang. Since 1980, they’ve hosted Hmong New Year festivities in Cambodia Town, Long Beach’s El Dorado Park.

BRENDA SONG

Actress Brenda Song was born in Carmichael (in Sacramento County) in 1988 and currently lives in Los Angeles. Her father is Hmong and her mother, Thai. Song began working as a child model and commercial actress before landing a lead female role on the Disney Channel’s insufferable The Suite Life of Zack & Cody in 2005. She went on to star in Wendy Wu: Homecoming Warrior (2007), and had a prominent role in the well-received David Fincher film, The Social Network (2010).

JERRY YANG

Xao “Jerry” Yang is a poker player from Temecula and the winner of the 2007 World Series of Poker Main Event. Yang was born in Laos in 1967 and his family spent four years in a refugee camp in Thailand before coming to America. Yang currently lives in Madera.

HMONG RADIO AND MUSIC

Of California’s estimate 91,224 Hmong, far more live in the Central Valley than in Southern California, something I only became aware of a couple of years ago when I was driving back from Sequoia National Forest and I stumbled across a radio station playing some very appealing, soulful and funky pop music sung in an unfamiliar language. Of course Shazam couldn’t just admit that it didn’t recognize any, suggesting over and over again that I hold my device closer to the speaker rather than admit any shortcoming. When I got home I looked up the station and found out that it was KBIF 900 AM, “the Central Valley’s Asian Voice.” I’m not sure whether the music that I heard was Hmong or Lao, as the station plays both. Whatever the case, I was surprised to learn of the Central Valley’s Hmong population. Having gone to college in the Middle West, I knew of the Hmong community in St. Paul but no others.

Maly Vu & X2V Concert 1995 – France

Back then I remember hearing about Hmong rappers and it seemed that hip-hop was popular in the community. There are also pop singers like Maly Vu, Blong Yang, and Cua Yaj. Traditional Hmong music is often vocal or features traditional instruments like the qeej and raj (two types of reed pipe), the ncas (a jaw harp), and nplooj or nblaw (leaves).

HMONG CINEMA

I’m not aware of any Hmong films having been made in Asia but there are not surprisingly, Hmong-Americans making films, including directors Kak Lee and Moua Lee. In 2008, Hmong actors and non-actors were featured prominently in director Clint Eastwood’s Gran Torino. Its star, Bee Vang (from Fresno), is apparently working on his own short, Sunset on Dawn/Kho Neeg. Co-star Ahney Her, sometimes as Whitney Yang, has gone on to act in several films. Co-star Choua Kue has also continued to work in film.

HMONG FOOD

Most dishes of the Hmong kitchen aren’t unique to the Hmong people and are merely Hmong adaptations of Chinese, Lao, Thai, and Vietnamese dishes. I couldn’t find any restaurants which claim to specialize in Hmong cuisine but Vientiane Thai Laos in Garden Grove serves Hmong sausages as well as Thai and Laotian dishes commonly eaten in Hmong households.

HMONG ORGANIZATIONS & MEDIA

In addition to the already mentioned Hmong organizations, the Southern California Hmong are also served by the Association of Hmong Students, UCLA, the Lao Hmong Family Association of San Diego, the Hmong Alliance Church Santa Ana, and the Hmong Alliance Church San Diego. The Hmong are a member of the UNPO. Hmong media and websites include Hmong Journal, Hmong Times, Peb Hmong, and The Hmong Tribune.

*****

As always, hit me with any additions and corrections. Thanks!

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

In Europe there are several formalized traditions of botanical garden design including the Dutch, English, French, Greek, Italian, and Spanish. In Asia, there are at least long-established Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Persian schools and May being Asian Pacific American Heritage Month, I’m focusing on Los Angeles’s Asian-style gardens.

The tradition of Japanese-American nurseries stretches back to the 1850s, when Japanese immigrants began establishing them in California. Takanoshin Domoto began importing azaleas, camellias, carnations, chrysanthemums, lilies, and wisterias in the 1880s. The California Flower Growers Association was formed by Japanese-Americans in 1906. The European vogue for Japanese art and design began at least as early as the 1860s and continued into the early 1900s, when some wealthy westerners created their own Japanese-inspired gardens. Japanese-Americans dominated not only the floral and gardening trade, but the landscaping one as well, into the late 1960s, around the time the gasoline powered leaf blower transformed landscaping into an artless, noisy, and pointless “blow-and-go” chore.

There are still signs of Asian influence on Southern California lawns whether they be the Buddhas, shi, and tōrō which share yard space with gnomes and pink flamingos; the occasional, carefully sculpted shrub; or the five gallon Pearl River Soy Sauce bucket containing a money tree placed on an apartment staircase.

Obviously I’m not going to make a directory of every private patio jungles, backyards, nor attractive but fenced off parks such as the small but pretty one in front of the LA Korean Festival Foundation’s Koreatown headquarters. Nor is this directory limited to purely public spaces — but all are open to the public. As always, corrections and additions are welcome.

*****

JAPANESE GARDEN and CHINESE GARDEN (San Marino)

The Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens was founded by railroad magnate and art collector Henry E. Huntington. The Japanese Garden was created in 1912 and opened to the public in 1928. Within the garden is a Japanese home (built around 1904) a teahouse (built in Kyoto in the 1960s), a bonsai collection, the moon bridge (built by Toichiro Kawai), and a zen court and has been used to portray Japan in films like Beverly Hills Ninja.

The Chinese Garden’s Chinese name is 流芳園 (or, “garden of flowing fragrance”). It’s among the largest Chinese gardens outside Asia. It was made in collaboration between architects and artisans from Suzhou and local builders and gardeners. It opened in 2008.

Both gardens and all of the Huntington are worthy of frequent visits although San Marino is underserved by public transit. Metro‘s 177 stops 1.75 kilometers away at the campus of the California Institute of Technology and their 177, 180/181, 687/686, Rapid 780, and Foothill Transit‘s 187 lines all stop about 2.5 kilometers north at the campus of Pasadena City College.

YAMASHIRO (Hollywood Heights)

Yamashiro was originally designed by architect Franklin Smalls as the private residence of cotton importers Charles and Adolph Bernheimer, built between 1911 and 1914. It was supposedly modeled after a fortress the brothers saw near Kyoto. The brothers sold the estate in 1924 and built another Japanese-inspired estate in Pacific Palisades, which before long slid into the ocean. Yamashiro and the Bernheimer Gardens passed through several hands, serving as a club house, event space, school, and apartments until 1960, when Thomas Y. Glover began its transformation into a bar, then a restaurant. It’s served by Metro’s 156, 212/312, 217, 222, and Red lines.

HANNAH CARTER JAPANESE GARDEN (Bel-Air) — TEMPORARILY CLOSED

The Hannah Carter Japanese Garden was designed by Nagao Sakurai and built from 1959-1961, inspired by gardens in Kyoto. The .6 hectare garden is named after the wife of Edward Carter, chairman of the Regents of the University of California. It was donated to the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1964. UCLA announced its intention to sell the garden in 2011 and began receiving bids in 2012 but the Los Angeles Superior Court granted a temporary injunction halting the sale of the garden and activists are trying to save it. Although closed right now, assuming it is saved and again opens to the public, it’s served by Metro’s 2/302, 234, and Rapid 734 lines.

DESCANSO GARDENS’ JAPANESE GARDEN (La Cañada Flintridge)

Descanso Gardens is a 61 hectare botanical garden which was formerly the property of newspaper magnate E. Manchester Boddy. He ceded the site to Los Angeles County in 1953. It began as a camellia garden, the plants of which were acquired from two Japanese nurseries during World War II, when mainland Japanese-Americans were sent to concentration camps. Over time a rosarium, lilac garden, live steamer, bird sanctuary, xeriscape, gift shop, and Japanese Garden were added, the latter designed in the early 1960s.

The Japanese Garden includes a Japanese tea house known simply as “茶室,” designed by Wayne Williams and Whitney Smith. During the summer it becomes the “Camellia Lounge” and serves cocktails. The Japanese Garden annually hosts an annual Cherry Blossom Festival in spring and the Japanese Garden Festival in autumn. The garden is served by Glendale Beeline‘s 3, 32, 33, and 34 lines and LA DOT‘s Commuter Express 409 line.

GAN IWASHIRO (Little Tokyo)

Gan Iwashiro is a rooftop garden that created in 1977, located on the rooftop of what was originally a New Otani Hotel. Although it’s modeled after a 16th garden created in Edo for 加藤 清正 (Katō Kiyomasa), a Japanese daimyō, it’s referred to by its current stewards, the DoubleTree by Hilton Los Angeles Downtown, as Kyoto Gardens, presumably because before DoubleTree took over it was a Kyoto Grand Hotel. The first time that I visited it it there was such a dense fog that I couldn’t see the street below, which was pretty amazing. It’s served by Metro’s 30/330, 40, and 442; and LA DOT’s DASH Downtown A and Commuter Express 534 lines.

JAMES IRVINE JAPANESE GARDEN (Little Tokyo)

It’s Japanese name is the Seiryu-en Garden but principal funding came from James Irvine, hence its honorific title. The 790 square meter garden was created in 1979 by Takeo Uesugi for the newly inaugurated Japanese American Community & Cultural Center. Work was largely done by volunteers from the Southern California Gardeners’ Federation and the Pacific Coast Chapter of the California Landscape Contractors Association largely using trees donated by Frank Yamashita and the San Gabriel Nursery. It’s served by LA DOT’S DASH Downtown A line.

CALIFORNIA SCENARIO (Costa Mesa)

Being in Orange County, California Scenario obviously isn’t in Los Angeles County, but adding “Orange County” to the title of this piece would be as clunky as this sentence. California Scenario was created in 1980 by Isamu Noguchi for Henry Segerstrom, developer of Costa Mesa’s two main cultural hubs: the Segerstrom Center for the Arts and South Coast Plaza. The serene oasis is tucked between anonymous corporate highrises, the 405, a TGIFriday’s, and a parking structure — which just makes it feel that much more magical. It’s served by Orange County Transit Authority‘s 172, 211, and 464 lines.

EARL BURNS MILLER JAPANESE GARDEN (Long Beach)

The Earl Burns Miller Japanese Garden is a half-hectare Japanese Garden situated on the campus of California State University, Long Beach. It designed by Edward R. Lovell for Loraine Miller Collins in honor of her late husband Earl Burns Miller. Work began in 1980 and it was dedicated in 1981. I once helped set up a wedding there although I can’t remember who it was that was getting married! It’s served by Long Beach Transit lines 91, 92, 93, 94, 0121, 121, 171, and 173.

DONALD C. TILLMAN WATER RECLAMATION PLANT JAPANESE GARDEN (Sepulveda Basin)

The 2.5 hectare Donald C. Tillman Water Reclamation Plant Japanese Garden was designed by Koichi Kawana and is actually three gardens, the Zen meditation karesansui, wet-strolling chisen, and the Shoin Building which includes a teahouse. Located in the Donald C. Tillman Water Reclamation Plant, its purpose is in part to get Angelenos to overcome their aversion to reclaimed water. Its design is modeled after the 19th century chisen-kaiyushiki gardens built for private estates. It was dedicated in 1984. It’s served by Metro’s 154, 164, 236/237, and Orange lines.

HSI LAI TEMPLE’S ARHAT AND AVALOKITESVARA GARDENS (Hacienda Heights)

Hsi Lai Temple (佛光山西來寺) is a Buddhist monastery in the built as the first overseas temple of Taiwan’s Fo Guang Shan sect. It was built from 1986-1988. The site includes several buildings: The Bodhisattva Hall, the memorial pagoda, the meditation hall, the dining hall,the Fo Guang Shan International Translation Center, and the main shrine. It also includes two gardens, the Arhat Garden (十八羅漢), the statues of which depict the Buddha’s first eighteen disciples, and the Avalokitesvara Garden (慈航普度), in which statues depict the bodhisattva, Avalokitesvara (Guan Yin), and her acolytes, the Four Heavenly Kings. It’s served by Foothill Transit’s 185 and 285 lines.

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

Samoan-Americans are the second largest group of Pacific Islanders in the US, after Hawaiians. In fact, there are more Samoans living in the US than in the Samoan Islands. The largest population on the US mainland live in Los Angeles, home as of 2010 to 54,000. Nearby San Diego is home to 31,000. In neither are there official Samoan enclaves but there is evidence of their presence reflected in the existence of Samoan churches, restaurants, cultural expressions, and organizations.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF SAMOA

Archaeological evidence suggests that the Samoan Islands were first colonized by Polynesians perhaps as many as 3,500 years ago or as recently as 800 years ago. Polynesians are an ethnic subset of the Austronesians, who originated in Taiwan. Whereas the leaders of most Polynesian societies were appointed based upon heredity, Samoan leaders were chosen in part based on demonstrable skills in a system known as Fa’amatai.

In 1722, Dutchman Jacob Roggeveen was the first European to site the islands and they were renamed the Navigator Islands by French explorer Louis-Antoine de Bougainville in 1768. However, since there were none of the spices, silks, or precious metals which European explorers sought, the islands remained relatively unmolested by Europeans until the 1830s, when missionaries and traders began arriving and establishing rubber, coconut, and cocoa plantations.

In the late 1800s, England, Germany, and the US all struggled to colonize Samoa and the islands were divided into two territories, one a German colony known as German Samoa, and the other an American territory known as American Samoa. Rule of German Samoa was transferred to New Zealand and independence was finally granted in 1962. American Samoa, on the other hand, remains an unincorporated and unorganized territory, ruled by America but whose citizens are afforded few of the same rights. As nationals, rather than citizens, Samoans serve in the US military and are free to seek employment in the US but cannot vote in US elections or hold political office unless they relocate to the US and become citizens.

SAMOAN AMERICANS

The largest population of Samoans outside of Samoa live in Honolulu. The second largest community live in Long Beach, where as of 2010 there were 4,513. There are also substantial populations of Samoans in the neighboring Harbor communities of Carson and Wilmington, the South Los Angeles Eastside community of Compton, and the Southeast Los Angeles community of Hawaiian Gardens. Elsewhere in Southern California, there are Samoan communities in Garden Grove and Oceanside. There is also a town called Samoa in Humboldt County, featured in the 1986 film, My Chauffeur… although it’s not home to any Samoans.

Many came to Los Angeles in the early 1900s, finding work on farms or in factories. As American nationals, Samoans didn’t face the same restrictions and national quotas as other Asians and Pacific Islanders. Many more Samoans immigrated to California after 1951, when the US Navy closed its base in Pago Pago and afterward recruited 1,000 Samoans to come to the US to fill military-related jobs. Many settled in the Harbor town of Carson and the Los Angeles neighborhood of San Pedro.

*****

SAMOAN SPORT

Although rugby, cricket, netball, volleyball, and football are all more popular in Samoa, the islands are known amongst American football spectators for producing athletes in that sport. In 2015 there were 200 on the American Samoans on the rosters of Division I college American football teams and quite a few play for NFL teams. One such player is Troy Aumua Polamalu, who was born in Garden Grove in 1981. He played for USC, reportedly claiming that he believed that the Almighty had influenced his parents to name him “Troy” because the Lord desired that he play for the Trojans (although at least ten universities have Trojans as mascots). After college he played for the NFL team, the Pittsburgh Steelers.

SAMOAN CHURCHES

Religion plays a big part in the lives of most Samoans. The Congregational Christian Church of Samoa (CCCS) was established by missionaries of the London Missionary Society who arrived in 1830. By 1839, Samoans were already sending their own missionaries to other islands of the Pacific to spread the gospel. The Congregational Christian Church of Samoa became an independent denomination in 1963. In 1980, the Congregational Christian Church of American Samoa split from the Christian Church of Samoa.

Samoan congregations in Southern California include Compton Samoan SDA Church (Compton), Congregational Christian of New Hope (Santa Ana), Dominguez Congregational Christian Church (Compton), Fale Ole Faipu Omea Samoan Congregational (San Bernardino), First Samoan Congregational (Carson), First Samoan Congregational Christian (Harbor City), First Samoan Congregational Christian (Huntington Beach), First Samoan Congregational Christian Church (Oxnard), First Samoan Congregational Christian Church of San Luis Rey (Oceanside), First Samoan Congregational Church of Mesa Margarita (Oceanside), Fourth Samoan Church (Long Beach), Garden Grove Samoan Assembly (Garden Grove), Los Angeles First Samoan Church (West Athens), Malamalama Community Church (Long Beach), Methodist Church of Samoa (Long Beach), Ola Fou United Samoan Church of America (Lomita), Ola Mo Keriso (San Diego), Samoan Church of Long Beach (Long Beach), Samoan Community Christian (Pico-Union) Samoan Congregational Christian Church of South LA (Carson), Samoan Congregational Church, Second Samoan Church (Long Beach), Taeao Ole Talalelei (Carson), The Congregational Christian UCC in Hacienda Heights (Hacienda Heights), United Samoan Congregational, Vai Ole Ola Congregational (Lakewood), and Wilmington Peteli Christian Church (Long Beach).

SAMOAN MUSIC

Traditional Samoan musical instruments include the fala, a rolled up mat beaten with sticks, blown conch shells, jaw harps, nose flutes, and panpipes. The traditional Samoan dance is the siva. The pātē, a type of drum, was introduced for the Cook Islands by missionaries. Missionaries later introduced the guitar and the ‘ukulele, which are also popular. In the 20th century, pop, rock, and rap became popular with Samoans although it should be noted that Van Nuys punk band Angry Samoans do not include any Samoans amongst their members.

The best known Samoan-American music group Boo-Yaa T.R.I.B.E., from Carson and comprised of brothers Paul, Ted, Donald, Roscoe, Danny, David, and Vincent Devoux. All were or are members of either the West Side Pirus or Samoan Warrior Bounty Hunter gangs. After their brother Robert DeVoux was shot to death in a San Pedro gang fight, the surviving brothers moved to Japan, where they originally amassed a following as The Blue City Crew.

SAMOAN GANGS

In Southern California, gangs have been an issue for Samoan immigrants since the 1970s. As with many immigrant populations, the Sons of Samoa formed in 1976 to protect Samoans from black and Latino gangs in the Harbor and South Los Angeles. As with most protectionist gangs, the Sons of Samoa themselves eventually became involved in methamphetamine trafficking, extortion, and murder, often of fellow Pacific Islanders in other gangs, such as the Scott Park Pirus, West Side Pirus, and Park Village Compton Crips. In 1992, Jean-Pierre Gorin released the documentary, My Crasy Life, now part of the Criterion Collection, about Samoan gangs in the Harbor area.

In 2004, a Samoan gang members Frankie “Dirt” Pule and Walley Tuuamalemalo killed rival gang member Tasene Tauanuu at the annual Los Angeles Samoan Flag Day festivities, something which Dirt bragged about in a rap, which helped earn him a 40 year sentence for second degree murder. Another fatal gang fight disrupted the weeklong festival in 2008.

SAMOAN FESTIVALS

Los Angeles Samoan Flag Day has been the biggest locally observed Samoan festivity since it was implemented in 1985. Although the holiday commemorates the first time the US raised the American flag in their country, it’s been tweaked into a celebration of Samoan heritage and culture. It’s held for a week in August every years in Carson’s Victoria Park. Long Beach’s Aquarium of the Pacific also hosts the Pacific Islander Festival – Tafesilafa’i Festival, which brings together not just Samoans but all Pacific Islanders and showcases crafts, food, music, and dance.

SAMOAN DANCE

Samoan dance is an important aspect of Samoan culture and traditional Samoan dances include maulu’ulu moa’ (“to sprinkle”), manu siva tau (a war dance), siva afi (fire knife dancing), taualuga (“jumping”), sa’asa’a, fa’ataupati (“slap dance”) and sasa (“clap dance”). Dance group Samoa Matalasi performed somewhere.

The Tama’ita’i Dance Group was founded in 2009 by choreographer and costume designer Kuegi Toilolo in Long Beach. Leaso Tufuga and Unica Luna formed Tausala Polynesia in Carson in 2010. Tui Letuli founded the Pacific Talent Academy of the Arts in Torrance in 2012.

SAMOAN CUISINE

Samoan Cuisine is, like all Polynesian cuisine, based primarily on the animals and plants found on the islands. Plant ingredients include bananas, coconut, rice, taro, and various sea vegetables such as sea grapes. Commonly eaten animals include crayfish, pigs, octopus, snapper, and tuna. A popular and emblematic dish is palusami, coconut cream wrapped in taro leaves baked in an earth oven called an umu.

The second most popular variety of Girl Scout Cookie, the Samoa (also marketed as Caremel deLites) — caramel coated vanilla cookies sprinkled with toasted coconut and laced with chocolate stripes — are not Samoan in origin.Spam, whilst not Samoan in origin, is also popular in Samoa. Health officials believe the heavily processed, super caloric tinned meat, part of England’s lasting colonial legacy, is largely to account for the fact that over 80% of Samoans are obese and suffer from obesity-related illnesses.

Local restaurants serving Samoan dishes in Southern California include and Island’s Best (Long Beach), and Poly Grill & Bakery (Carson). As far as Samoan markets go, Samoana Market & Bakery, formerly in Long Beach, seems to have recently closed but Boutique Samoa remains open in Anaheim.

SAMOAN ORGANIZATIONS

Other organizations representing Samoans include Samoan National Nurses Association, Samoan Affairs Central Region, and the Samoan American Federation.

FURTHER READING

Adele Salamasina Satele’s An Emerging Samoan-American Community in Los Angeles, California (1977)

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

A comprehensive playlist of the music of Los Angeles would have to include film scores, the cool jazz, surf bands, frat rock, folk-rock, Sunset Strip psychedelia, Chicano soul, country rock, hardcore punk, Paisley Underground, hair metal, gangsta rap, and G-funk, and lists of performers and bands associated with Los Angeles invariably include plenty rock groups, soul singers, and rappers, nearly all of whom are either black or white. Even though Los Angeles is the world’s great Pan-Asian city, and Asians comprise both the city’s largest and fastest-growing racial minority, they’re practically invisible from nearly every musically-related listicle cluttering local blogs and weeklies, in the process rendering our colorful music history black and white. This being Asian Pacific American Heritage Month, however, I decided to do something about that.

I started by thinking about the Sooyoung Park‘s Ear of the Dragon — but for some of the nineteen Asian-American (and Canadian) bands on that seminal compilation, their entire recorded output seems to be limited to their inclusion on the album and in most cases they’re not from California. So this list is primarily drawn from my own admittedly knowledge with the addition to a few unfamiliar K-pop stars I found out about on Wikipedia.

I know there are loads more Asian-Angeleno musicians out there, because I’ve seen some of them performing at Jologs Fezt, the Lotus Festival, night markets, Songkran, and Tết; at Thai restaurants, on Paris By Night, on videos shot at La Lune, and elsewhere — and I’ve seen the stores selling instruments all over the San Gabriel Valley and North Orange County and think it’s fair to assume that they’re aren’t just for show. I know this can never be a comprehensive directory (I don’t even think that I’d want it to be — apologies to my fifteen year old neighbor who briefly took guitar lessons and learned that awful song by fun.) but of course additions and corrections are encouraged.

*****

apl.de.ap

apl.de.ap is the stage name of Allan Pineda Lindo, born in Angeles City, Pampanga, in 1974. He came to the US when he was fourteen and attended John Marshall High School in Los Feliz and apl.de.ap still gets his nails done nearby at Nails Station. He began rapping in 1988 in ATBAN Klann (ATBAN is an acronym for A Tribe Beyond a Nation) which evolved into the Black Eyed Peas, who themselves evolved from a backpack rap group into a mainstream pop act.

AMBER LIU

Taiwanese-American vocalist Amber Josephine Liu was born 18 September 1992 in Los Angeles and went to highschool in Woodland Hills. Known professionally as Amber, she’s currently a member of Korean pop group f(x). She released her solo debut, the EP Beautiful, in 2015.

BEI BEI

Bei Bei He (荷蓓蓓) was born in Chengdu and began playing guzheng when she was seven. She studied guzheng performance in Central University of Nationalities in Beijing and the Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts. After relocating to Los Angeles she continued to study at Azusa Pacific University, Citrus College, and Fullerton College. She released her debut, Quiet your mind and listen, in 2006. She owns Hacienda Music in Hacienda Heights.

CHARMAINE CLAMOR

Charmaine Clamor is a Filipina jazz singer who interprets traditional Filipino songs. Clamor was born in Subic–Zambales, Philippines. She moved to the US when she was sixteen. She released her debut, Searching for the Soul, in 2005.

CHHOM NIMOL

Chhom Nimol was born in Cambodia and as a child lived in a refugee camp in Thailand. She won Cambodia’s Aspara Awards in 1997 and moved to the US in 2001. That year she joined Dengue Fever, a band who make pre-Khmer Rouge-style rock music, when members (including Dr. San) approached her after a solo performance in Cambodia Town.

DUMBFOUNDEAD

Dumbfoundead is the stage name of rapper Jonathan Park, born in Buenos Aires in 1986 and raised in Koreatown from the age of three. He attended John Marshall High School and released his first solo album, DFD, in 2011.

ELI KIM

Ellison “Eli” Kyong Jae Kim was born in Los Angeles in 1991 and is currently a member of K-pop band, U-KISS, where he performs the group’s raps.

EMILY’S SASSY LIME

Emily’s Sassy Lime was the first all Asian-American rock band, comprised of Wendy and Amy Yao, and Emily Ryan. They formed in 1993 and in 1995 they released their album Desperate, Scared But Not Social and appeared in the video for The PeeChees‘ “Mad Doctor.” They broke up in 1997 after which the Yao sisters continued making music and Emily Ryan starred in the film, Scumrock. Fliers for their shows were featured in the Orange County Museum of Art‘s Alien She exhibition in 2015.In 2016, a fanzine “focused on writings and artwork by and about Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders” was launched, titled named Would Be Saboteurs Take Heed after one of Emily’s Sassy Lime’s songs.

FAR★EAST MOVEMENT

Far★East Movement was formed in Los Angeles in 2003 by Kev Nish (Kevin Nishimura), Prohgress (James Roh), J-Splif (Jae Choung), and DJ Virman (Virman Coquia). They released their debut, Folk Music, in 2006. They had a number one hit with “Like a G6” in 2010, making them the first Asian-American group to top the charts.

FROM THE VALLEY

From the Valley are a Woodland Hills-based band comprised of Edizon Dia (guitar and vocals), Leonard Zipagan (guitars), Macky Domingo (bass), and Francis Nuega (drums).

HIROSHIMA

Hiroshima is an Asian-American Jazz group formed in Los Angeles in 1974 by Dan Kuramoto, (wind instruments and band leader), Peter Hata (guitar), June Kuramoto (koto), Johnny Mori (percussion and taiko), Dave Iwataki (keyboards), and Danny Yamamoto (drums). Their first vocalist was Nancy “Atomic Nancy” Sekizawa, later celebrated for her role in transforming Little Tokyo‘s Atomic Cafe into a popular punk and new waver hangout. All were born in Los Angeles except Kuramoto, who moved to Los Angeles at a young age from Saitama Prefecture. They released their self-titled debut in 1979. In the years since they’ve moved into smooth jazz and new age territory.

IAMMEDIC

IAMMEDIC is a pop group formed in 2010 Enik Lin, formerly of Burning Tree Project. Lin soon added Danny Park, Andre Harris, and DJ Yup to the line-up.

JOHN LEE

Korean-American guitarist/vocalist John Lee formed aMiniature in San Diego by with bassist Colin Watson in 1990. The “a” in the band’s name is silent and was added to avoid confusion with a jazz combo named Minature. They disbanded in 1997.

JOANNA WANG

Joanna Wang (王若琳) is a singer-songwriter and daughter of producer Wang Zhi-ping (王治平). She was born in Taiwan but raised in San Gabriel, where she attended Gabrielino High School. She released her debut, Start from Here, in 2008 – a double disc set including one disc of the songs sung in English and the other in Chinese. Although she began her career as a pleasant if fairly conventional jazz vocalist, she quickly evolved into a wonderful weirdo who seems to improbably draw upon early baroque, film scores, pico pop, and shibuya-kei in a way that manages to somehow evoke Jonathan Richman, Toog, and Wendy Carlos — all at the same time.

LEMONA

Lemona is a Los Angeles-based rock band comprised of Jazzie, Reden, and Leonard Zipagan; Jan Bersamira; and Dave Janiola.

LIU QICHAO

Liu Qichao (刘起超) is a Los Angeles-based, Chinese born multi-instrumentalist associated with the Asian-American Jazz scene. He graduated from Shanghai Conservatory of Music. He’s collaborated with the Kronos Quartet, Jon Jang and the Pan Asian Arkestra, and the African Chinese Sextet. He also leads his own ensemble, Chi Music. He was married to guzheng player Zhang Yan (张燕), who died in 1996.

LYNDA TRANG DAI

Lynda Trang Đài was born Lê Quang Quý Trang Đài in 1968 in Vietnam and came to Orange County‘s then-emerging Little Saigon community in 1979. She was a popular singer in the Vietnamese-American community, where she was often described as the “Vietnamese Madonna,” making her recording debut with 1989’s “Crazy Love.” She was also a staple of the popular Vietnamese variety program, Paris By Night. She currently operates Lynda Sandwich, a Westminster bánh mì cafe.

MARIQUEEN MAANDIG

Mariqueen Maandig was born in 1981 and became the singer of West Indian Girl in 2004. She left that band in 2009 after her engagement to Trent Reznor. In 2010, Maandig and Reznor formed How to Destroy Angels.

MIKE SHINODA

Michael Kenji Shinoda was born in 1977 in Agoura Hills, where he co-founded Linkin Park in 1996. In 2003 he formed Fort Minor. He’s also produced tracks for several rap artists and co-founded the music label Machine Shop Recordings. Additionally, several pieces of his art have been featured in the Japanese American National Museum.

MING & PING

Ming & Ping are an electronic pop duo, comprised of one person — Bao Vo. Vo began the project in San Francisco in 2002 before moving to Downtown Los Angeles. His debut, MingPing.com, was released in 2004.

MR. CAPONE-E

Mr. Capone-E is a Pakistani-American sureño rapper, born Fahd Azam in West Covina. He began his recording career in 2000 and later founded Hi Power Entertainment, one time home to former Bone Thugs-N-Harmony members Bizzy Bone and Layzie Bone, as well as Chicano rappers including Mr. Criminal, Lil Tweety, and others.

NICHKHUN HORVEJKUL

Nichkhun Buck Horvejkul was born in Rancho Cucamonga in 1988. After completing high school he briefly coached the Rosemead High School badminton team. He joined K-pop band 2PM in 2008.

NICOLE JUNG

Nicole Yongju Jung was born in 1991 in Los Angeles and went to school in Glendale. She later moved to Korea and became a member of K-pop group, Kara, in 2007. In 2014 she embarked on a solo career, releasing her debut, First Romance, in 2014.

SANDRA VU

Sandra “Sandy Beaches” Vu was born in Orange County. She played flute on Giant Drag‘s “Hearts and Unicorns” in 2005. She joined Midnight Movies and appeared on their second and final album, Lion The Girl. She began recording as Sisu and released the single, “Sharp Teeth” in 2010. She was the drummer for Dum Dum Girls from 2011-2015 but is now focused on Sisu.

STEVEN CHEN

Steven Chen joined rock band Airborne Toxic Event in 2006. They released their self-titled debut in 2008.

STEVE LEE

Steve Lee is the younger brother of comedian Bobby Lee. He previously performed as Quangou both solo and in the duo, Noblehops. He’s currently known as SteeBee WeeBee as part of the group, Mangchi.

TIFFANY HWANG

Stephanie Young Hwang was born in 1989 in San Francisco and raised in Diamond Bar, here she attended Diamond Bar High School. In 2004 she joined K-pop bands Girls’ Generation-TTS and is currently based in Korea. She released her solo debut EP, I Just Wanna Dance, in 2016.

TIMOTHY DELAGHETTO

Timothy DeLaGhetto, also known as Traphik, was born in 1986 in Billings, Montana and raised in Paramount. After graduating from Paramount High School he attended California State University, Long Beach, from which he dropped out to pursue rapping and YouTube stardom. He released his debut, Rush Hour, in 2009.

TONY KANAL

Tony Ashwin Kanal is best known as the bassist of pop band No Doubt. He was born in London in 1970 and came to Anaheim when he was eleven. He joined No Doubt in 1991 and began a relationship with singer Gwen Stefani. During the band’s first hiatus, Kanal began collaborating as co-writer with other pop stars and production.

TQ

After singing primarily in Vietnamese venues for over a decade, TQ (née Nadine Nguyen) made her recording debut in 2012 with the Italo-inspired “Let’s Go to Tokyo.” She signed with ZYX Music, the well known Eurodisco label.

TYGA

Tyga is a pop star Micheal Ray Stevenson in 1989. His stage name is an acronym for Thank You God Always. He was born to Vietnamese and Jamaican parents. He was engaged to Blac Chyna, who later married Rob Kardashian whilst Kardashian’s stepsister, Kylie Jenner, dated Tyga.

ZIP CODE

Zip Code are a rock band comprised of Jojo, Reden, and Rendez Zipagan with Tim de Ramos and Jan Michael Bersam. They formed as Brownsugar in 2000.

*****

More biographical information needed for Ann Do, Chhim Sreyneang, Choeun Oudom, Chhom Chhorvin, Colleen Deekan, Darany, Dariya, Hem Vannak, Jennifer Hwang (Meho Plaza), Jolida,Kavee Thongprecha,King Soriya, Lim Molyna, Meas Somaly, Ram Roeun, Rithy, Romaly, Sothy Eng, and Sok Srey Lalin.

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

One of the great things about traveling is seeing things in other countries that it would be nice to have at home, things like arts funding, betel nut beauties, caning, compulsory voting, developed cycling infrastructure, elevenses, free state colleges, green roofs, gun control, pub culture, universal healthcare, pot cafés, salted licorice, and trains that travel faster than mobility scooters, to name a few. When I visited Taiwan a few years ago, I fell in love with night markets and it heartens me that they’re now starting to proliferate in Southern California. As an Angeleno who doesn’t particularly like our weather or the Hollywood superhero franchise factory, night markets are the sort of thing that make Los Angeles the place I choose to live.

For the unfamiliar, night markets are nighttime open air street markets in which crowds of food-loving urbanites stroll and eat and shop and eat. Having only been to ones in Taiwan I can only comment with personal experience on the ones there, where they sometimes occupy purpose-built marketplaces but even more often occupy streets and thus resemble nocturnal open streets events, like a ciclovia with a focus on stinky tofu rather than cycling. They’re quite popular in Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, and especially Taiwan. Since the Los Angeles area just happens to have the largest Cambodian, Korean, Filipino, Thai, Vietnamese, and Taiwanese communities outside of their respective homelands, it’s natural that night markets would flourish here.

As far as I know, the first American night market was San Francisco‘s intermittent Chinatown Night Market Fair, which I believe was inaugurated in 2001. Soon after, however, the nascent American night market seen migrated to Los Angeles, the world’s great pan-Asian city. Ideally, night markets are tightly interwoven into the fabric of a city, not placed in the suburban Oort Cloud. They also function better as regular occurrences than special events. Although few are thus far placed in accessible areas or occur more than a few times a year, they’ve nonetheless reached the point where it’s hard to keep them all straight. So for that reason, and because summer is night market season, and in recognition of Asian Pacific American Heritage Month, here’s my guide to Southern California’s night markets.

*****

D6 NIGHT MARKET

The D6 Night Market was inaugurated in 2015, at San Diego‘s Mira Mesa Community Park, in the Mira Mesa neighborhood. It’s served by several lines of San Diego’s MTS buses but is very far from any train stations. It returned on 21 May 2016 and admission was again free.

DTLA NIGHT MARKET (one-off event)

DTLA Night Market was held at a parking lot near Staples Center, within a block of stops on Metro‘s Blue, Expo, and Silver lines, making it arguably the most integrated into the urban fabric of all Southern California night markets, thus far, but sadly, a one-off event. Specific efforts were made with DTLA Night Market to appeal to non-Latinos, not just by featuring more Anglo and Latino vendors, but by banning stinky tofu! It was held on 20 and 21 June, 2014.

KTOWN NIGHT MARKET

KTown Night Market is held in Los Angeles’s most densely-populated and most vibrant neighborhood, Koreatown. The first one was held in 2014 and it’s now held once a year, next on 17 and 18 June. Admission at the door is $5. It takes place on the campus of Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools, conveniently located between Wilshire/Normandie and Wilshire/Vermont stations, less than half a kilometer from each.

LITTLE SAIGON NIGHT MARKET

The Little Saigon Night Market, launched in 2014, is held at Phước Lộc Thọ, a mall known in English as “Asian Garden Mall” — despite the fact that that’s not a translation of its Vietnamese name. This year the night market will take place every Friday, Saturday, and Sunday from 17 June – 14 September. The mall is intermittently served by OCTA 64 bus and the nearest train station, Santa Ana Station, is located nearly eleven kilometers east. Admission is free.

LONG BEACH NIGHT MARKET IN CAMBODIA TOWN (scheduled)

The Long Beach Night Market in Cambodia Town was scheduled to take place in Cambodia Town in 2015 but was pushed back due to construction. The group’s Facebook page doesn’t currently list a specific date or location but assuming it takes place somewhere in Cambodia Town, that neighborhood is well-served by Long Beach Transit buses and the Blue line’s Anaheim Street Station is located just east of the walkable neighborhood.

MALAYSIAN KITCHEN NIGHT MARKET (one-off event)

Santa Monica‘s Malaysian Kitchen Night Market was Los Angeles’s second night market, a one-off event held in December 2010 on the Third Street Promenade. It was organized by Malaysia External Trade Development Corporation with the stated purpose of promoting Malaysian culture and food.

MONTEREY PARK NIGHT MARKET (defunct)

In 2004, Monterey Park hosted a small night market on Saturdays, not to be confused with the MPK Night Market. It lasted for a couple of years and I think it took place near City Hall. It was almost certainly the first night market in Southern California andany additional information would be much appreciated!

MPK NIGHT MARKET

Night markets returned to Monterey Park in 2014, with the launch of the MPK Night Market, organized by the folks behind the KTown Night Market (KCM Agency). The first year it began in July and continued once a month in August and September, always with free admission, in Barnes Park. In 2015 it returned as a mere two day event, which occurred in 17 and 18 July. There’s no mention of a 2016 MPK Night Market yet, which doesn’t bode well. If it does return, however, Barnes Park is served by Metro’s 70 bus and is located 4 kilometers from Atlantic Station, the nearest train station.

OC NIGHT MARKET

The OC Night Market is organized by the same folks behind 626 Night Market. It’s currently held three times a year (13-15 May, 17-19 June, and 26-28 August) at the OC Fair & Event Center in Costa Mesa. Admission is $5. It’s served by the occasional OCTA bus but the nearest train station, Tustin Station, is located 12.5 kilometers away.

SAN DIEGO NIGHT MARKET

The San Diego Night Market is takes place at Kearny Office Park (in the Convoy District) on 25 and 26 June. It was first launched in 2013 and admission is $2. It’s served by San Diego MTS‘s 27 bus and is quite far, I believe, from any train station.

626 NIGHT MARKET

The first 626 Night Market was held on a single city block in Old Town Pasadena, in 2012. It was organized by Jonny and Janet Hwang who seemed like all of us to underestimate the untapped craving for such an experience. In the end, perhaps 20,000 people descended onto a single city block, completely overwhelming vendors, the neighborhood, and expectations. It was thus relocated to Pasadena’s Civic Center District where it was alloted sufficient breathing room and almost overly organized. For the third installment, the night market moved to the vast, disconnected parking lot desert of Arcadia‘s Santa Anita Racetrack. The nearest train station, Arcadia Station, is located about 2 kilometers east. The 626 Night Market is currently held four times a year, 2-4 July, 22-24 July, 5-7 August, and 2-4 September. Admission is $3.

TASTE OF NIGHT MARKET (one-off event)

Taste of Night Market was a one-off (so far) event held in Santa Monica and organized by the folks behind 626 Night Market. In order to avoid a disaster on the level of the first 626 Night Market, tickets were priced at $65. However, in the monied Westside, where $65 ain’t no thang by a chicken skewer, the high price failed to prevent the event from being overwhelmed, judging by the harsh one star average review on Yelp. Yelpers are a notoriously hard to please and perhaps overly entitled bunch, but when the highest review is just two stars, something is up. To me this just proves that even Westsiders need night markets… but perhaps a better location would be a more transit friendly location like Palms or Culver City — both of which have sizable Indonesian and Indian presence. Think about it!

*****

FURTHER READING AND LISTENING

Elizabeth Lee‘s “Asian Night Market Finds Home in Southern California“

Elson Trinidad‘s “The Night Market Sees the Light of Day” and “2014 Is the Year of the Night Market“

Alex Schmidt‘s “626 Night Market Highlights Southern California’s Asian Cuisine“

Richard Chang‘s “Food-filled night markets are crossing into the mainstream and headed our way“

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

I’ve heard Vietnamese and Koreans friends talk about how much Koreans and Vietnamese drink. More than once have I found myself drinking more than I should, egged on by Thai friends, Filipino family, and in one case a Japanese salaryman. No one drinks like Europeans, though, and European nations predictably occupy the top ten rankings of alcohol consumption per capita. The top Asian nation, Korea, only ranks #17. The top 100 only includes a few Asian and Pacific Island nations, in fact: Kazakhstan, Palau, Laos, Japan, Thailand, Mongolia, China, and Vietnam — in that order. That’s not to suggest that alcohol isn’t an important part of Asian culture and history, though. Asia, after all, gave us sake, soju, cheongju, choujiu, gouqi jiu, goryangju, huangjiu, kumis, meijiu, shōchū, umsehu,Singha, and cognac. Asia also gave us Asian bars, and while Asian restaurants are the fodder of a thousand listicles, acknowledgments of Asian bars are almost non-existent.

If a bar doesn’t serve Asian alcoholic beverages, what makes it Asian? And if it serves food, which it probably does, is it a bar? What if karaoke is the focus and drinking merely a helpful social lubricant? What if a bar is a white guy’s inauthentic kitsch version of an Asian or Pacific Islander bar, such as a tiki bar? Where is the line drawn between Asian bars, lounges, and nightclubs? What if the bar is owned by an Asian-American but mostly caters to non-Asians, or the other way around? Those all sound like fine things to discuss over drinks and I will consider adding any and all to my map of Los Angeles’s Asian bars.

So help me build this map of Asian bars by giving me your suggestions be they Asian-owned dives, Little Saigon bikini bars, Koreatown booking clubs and hostess bars, Little Tokyo izakayas, San Gabriel Valley pijiu wus, lounges with table service, nightclubs, taverns, tiki bars, &c. Please do not give me any hookah bars, coffee bars, juice bars, noodle bars, strip bars, sushi bars, oyster bars, or bar-b-ques — unless there is a wet bar within them.

*****

MY TOP LOCAL ASIAN AND PACIFIC AMERICAN BARS

CAFE BLISS (Koreatown)

Cafe Bliss is an almost intimidatingly sterile, dimly lit, norebang which I imagine is what a bar on a space station might look like, not one situated within an historic Churrigueresque building designed as one of the West’s first car-centric markets (Chapman Park Market, 1929). The bar scenes in Michael Mann‘s film, Collateral, were filmed here and I’ve still yet to see that despite being a Cruise-head! It’s served by Metro‘s Red and Purple lines.

EBISU (Little Tokyo)

Ebisu is a Japanese tavern with a nautical theme. The bar’s namesake, Ebisu (恵比須) is the Japanese god of fishermen and luck. It’s served by Metro’s Gold Line.

FAR BAR (Little Tokyo)

Far Bar is a nice little bar tucked into an alley with a big selection of Japanese whiskeys. Once inside it turns out to be a much larger place, with an upstairs, a main room, a bar and a fairly secluded outdoor patio. The downside is long waits at the two needlessly gender-specific restrooms. Far Bar is served by the Gold Line.

GOOD LUCK BAR (Los Feliz)

A visit to Good Luck Bar is presumably nothing like a visit to China, but it is a bit like a visit to the set of a 1940s Hollywood film set (if not filmed) in China. Although it feels like a relic of the mid-20th century, the Los Feliz bar was only established in 1994, at the height of the so-called Swing Revival. That’s because its kitschy, retro, “exotic” Chinese atmosphere came courtesy of owner Sean MacPherson, who based it upon the aesthetics of the long-closed Chinatown bar, Yee Mee Loo. It’s served by Metro’s 2/302 and 175 lines as well as LA DOT’s DASH Los Feliz lines.

HONDA-YA (Little Tokyo)

Honda-Ya is an izakaya located on the top floor of Little Tokyo Galleria. Although large and located within a mall, the atmosphere and decor make it one of Los Angeles’s most relaxing izakaya. It’s served by the Gold Line.

JURASSIC (Industry)

Jurassic is a themed Taiwanese pijiu wu with a dinosaur theme. Historical inaccuracy is never of major importance at themed pijiu wu’s and Jurassic is no exception. The centerpiece is a large, fake skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus Rex, a creature unknown until millions of years after the end of the Jurassic Era. The staff usually wear fringy Coachella-type clothing, I suppose to suggest a sort of primitivism that humans presumably would’ve shown if the Flintstones were viewed as a documentary. Then again, the lunacy is part of the theme because as often as not, the staff also dress as anime characters, French maids, gothic lolitas, sexy schoolgirls, &c. Jurassic is served by Foothill Transit‘s 281 and 282 lines.

OB BEAR (Koreatown)

I used to come to OB Bear for the beer served in water cooler-like jugs. After they got rid of those, I went to Beer Town but they started demanding that patrons order food in addition to beer. So then I went next door to Soju Town. Both have since closed so maybe I should go back to OB Bear, which still has nice atmosphere. It’s served by Metro’s Purple and Red lines, which stop less than half a kilometer away at Wilshire/Vermont Station.

THE PRINCE (Koreatown)

The Prince began life as “The Windsor” in the 1920s and has a British theme not dissimilar to that of the nearby HMS Bounty, which is no doubt why it was chosen to portray a Manhattan restaurant on Mad Men. However, where the Bounty feels like a relic of the early 20th century, the Prince acquired new layers as time has passed and now hip-hop plays over the speakers for a mostly Korean clientele drawn as much by the fried chicken as the drinks. The Prince is served by Metro’s 20, 61, and 481 lines and the Metro Purple line’s Wilshire/Vermont station is only half a kilometer away.

TONGA HUT (Valley Glen)

Brothers Ace and Ed Libby opened the Tonga Hut in 1958, during the height of the Tiki craze. By the early 2000s it had literally faded under the neon beer signs… or maybe that was just the thick layer of dust. It still had charm, albeit the sort one associates with abandoned buildings inhabited by a dedicated group of characters. In 2005, the fountains began flowing once again and it presumably took on an appearance resembling the original. The Tonga Hut is served by Metro’s 164 and 167 lines. The nearest stops on the Orange line are about 2.5 kilometers south.

UNCLE YU’S (San Gabriel)

The full name of Uncle Yu’s is “Uncle Yu’s Indian Beer House,” which is sort of confusing because the food is typical of a Taiwanese pijiu wu, and thus not remotely Indian. The “Indian” is used in the sense of Columbus‘s historical mistaking of Native Americans for East Indians. Thus the staff dress vaguely like the indigenous people of the plains did hundreds of years ago and the log cabin ambiance that suggests a Clearman’s North Woods Inn rather than a tipi. If none of this makes sense, just imagine that when Taiwanese open beer houses they draw a theme out of a hat, do zero research into the subject, and then run with it. Sometimes, as with Uncle Yu’s it works. Other times, as with Magic Restroom Café, it does not. Uncle Yu’s is served by Metro’s 76 line.

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650 Gallery. Brightwell has been featured in the Los Angeles Times, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Magazine, LAist, Eastsider LA, Boing Boing, Los Angeles, I’m Yours, and on Notebook on Cities and Culture. He has been a guest speaker on KCRW‘s Which Way, LA? and at Emerson College. Art prints of his maps are available from 1650 Gallery and on other products from Cal31. He is currently writing a book about Los Angeles and you can follow him on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Click here to offer financial support and thank you!

California has by far the largest population of Laotian-Americans of any state, 58,424 as of 2010. There are large communities in both northern and southern California, with roughly 7,120 living in the Los Angeles area. There they maintain a relatively discreet profile, reflected mostly by the presence of a handful of restaurants either specializing in Laotian food or offering Lao dishes.

LAOTIAN HISTORY

Modern humans have lived in what’s now Laos for at least 46,000 years. A human skull discovered in Tam Pa Ling Cave in the Annamite Mountains is the oldest human fossil yet found in Southeast Asia. Agricultural villages emerged in Laos around 4000 BCE and by around 1500 BCE, a complex society had developed.

The history of Laos can be traced back to the kingdom of Lan Xang Hom Khao, founded by Lao prince Fa Ngum in 1354. The kingdom dominated much of Southeast Asia for four centuries until the death of Sourigna Vongsa in 1694. A few years later, in 1707, it split into three kingdoms: Luang Phrabang, Vientiane, and Champasak.

In 1893 the three kingdoms were reunified by colonial France part of French Indochina. Laos produced tin, rubber, and coffee for the French but was primarily viewed and used as a buffer between their more economically important occupation of Vietnam and British-influenced Thailand. At various points during World War II, France, Thailand, Japan, and China all occupied Laos. Laos declared independence in 1945 but in 1946, France re-conquered the state.

The Indochinese Communist Party formed the organization Pathet Lao to resist (alongside the Vietnamese Việt Minh) French Colonial forces and Laos won a more lasting independence in 1953, when it was re-established a constitutional monarchy. In 1960, Laos (already involved in a civil war between the royalists and communists) was dragged into the Vietnam War and a secret military operation in which was known amongst the CIA Special Activities Division (and later the public) as the Secret War, in which the US dropped tons of cluster bombs on Laos, killing an estimated 350,000 Laotians. In 1975, Laos’s king was overthrown and the Pathet Lao made installed a Communist government. In the aftermath, the US began accepting Laotian refugees.

From 1975-1996, about 130,000 ethnic Hmong and 120,000 Laotians of other ethnicities came to the US. Laos is a multi-ethnic society and Laotians include ethnic Lao, Khmu, Hmong, Thai, Puthai, Lü, Katang, Makong, Chinese, Vietnamese, and many others. Other Laotian refugees settled in France or Canada. Within the US, following California, Texas, Minnesota, Washington, Tennessee, Illinois, North Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Oregon all have small but substantial populations. Most Laotian-Americans live in urban areas, the largest being around Seattle. After Seattle, smaller communities are found around the San Francisco Bay, Dallas-Fort Worth, Sacramento, Minneapolis-Saint Paul, San Diego, Fresno, and Los Angeles, where an estimated 7,120 Laotians are estimated to live.

About 2,588 Laotians live in Orange County, particularly in diverse North Orange County, where most live in Santa Ana, Anaheim, Garden Grove, Fullerton, and Westminster. In 1990, when Seng Chidhalay launched the Lao language paper, Laos Sampanth, he did so from Santa Ana. When the exiled Laotian royal family visited California in 1995, they toured the city of Westminster.

PROMINENT LAO-CALIFORNIANS

My not-terribly-intensive research has turned up a handful of somewhat prominent Laotians with ties to California. Two b-boy brothers from San Diego who refer to themsevles as Lancer and EraNetik were featured on a talent show called America’s Got Talent as part of a team called Body Poets. Khan “Bob” Malythong, a badminton coach in Fremont, is also a notable competitive badminton player. Authors TC Huo, Nor Sanavongsay, and Bryan Thao Worra are associated with the communities of Oakland, Dublin, and Hemet, respectively. Lao-Chinese-Indian-Thai-American comedian and Upright Citizen’s Brigade veteran Kulap Vilaysack is co-founder of Garage Comedy.

LAOTIAN CUISINE

Typical Lao items include sticky rice, larb, chicken salad, jaew (a dipping past made from chilis), tam mak hung (a sour and spicy papaya salad), kaeng no mai (a bamboo soup), herbs, vegetables, and fruits. Wild game and insects, especially red fire ants, are not uncommon. Common beverages include beer (beerlao) and lao-lao, a rice whiskey, or the less alcoholic lao-hai. Lao cuisine is similar to Thai cuisine, albeit characterized by greater extremes of sourness, bitterness, and heat.

Lao cuisine is recognizably influenced by its neighbors Thailand and Vietnam. Khao-pun from the former and pho and spring rolls from the latter are both common. Yunnanese food is common in the capital and largest city, Vientiane. The influence of colonial France is evident in the presence of khao jii (baguettes), omelets, pâté, coffee, condensed milk, and croissants.

Local restaurants serving Lao food include Spicy Lao and Vientiane Thai Laos Restaurant (both Garden Grove), Tai-Kadai Kitchen (Rosemead), and The Original Hoy Ka Hollywood (Hollywood Studio District). San Diego is home to Bane Phonekoe. There are Laotian markets for sale on the shelves of Thai & Laos Market in Anaheim’s Little Arabia. Sadly, Hoy Ka Lao (Monterey Park) closed in 2015.

LAOTIAN RELIGION

Roughly two thirds of Laotians are Buddhist. Nearly a third follow polytheistic, animistic, and often shamanic indigenous religions. A small minority, about 1.5%, practice Christianity. In the US, Lao Buddhist congregations often first meet in a home, gradually adapted into a house of worship through the addition of decorative art. In Southern California, Lao wats include Wat Lao Buddhasamakhee (Santa Ana); Wat Phosayaram of Orange County (Stanton); Wat Lao Buddhist Samakitham (Riverside); and Wat Lao Buddhaharam, Wat Lao Boubpharam, and Wat Lao Navaram Buddhist Monastery (San Diego). Local Lao Christian congregations include Lao Baptist Church (Whittier) and Laotian Vientiane Church (Riverside).

LAOTIAN FESTIVALS

Several public holidays are observed in Laos, including Boun Khoun Khao (a rice harvest festival), Lao National Day (marking the establishment of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in 1975), and the Rocket Festival, to name a few. Perhaps the most important festivals are the various New Year’s observances, with Hmong observing theirs around December, Chinese and Vietnamese observing theirs around February, and Lao New Year, celebrated around April and related to the New Year also observed by Cambodians, Nepalis, Sinhalese, Tamil, and Thai. Also known as Songkran, the holiday is observed with festivities at local Lao wats and San Diegos’ Lao Community Cultural Center.

LAOTIAN MEDIA & ORGANIZATIONS

Paul Odom launched Lao Roots Magazine in San Diego in 2007, which has since ceased publication. Former contributor Siamphone Louankang then launched LaoAmericans.com. Local organizations serving the Laotian community include the Laos-Chinese Friendship Association, based in Monterey Park.

*****

Eric Brightwell is an adventurer, writer, rambler, explorer, cartographer, and guerrilla gardener who is always seeking writing, speaking, traveling, and art opportunities — or salaried work. He is not interested in writing advertorials, clickbait, listicles, or other 21st century variations of spam. Brightwell’s written work has appeared in Amoeblog, diaCRITICS, and KCET Departures. His work has been featured by the American Institute of Architects, the Architecture & Design Museum, Boom: A Journal of California, the Craft & Folk Art Museum, Form Follows Function, Los Angeles County Store, Skid Row Housing Trust, and 1650