Ronald Norman Reid

May 29, 1942 -

Jan 13, 2022

Longtime Alaska resident Ronald Norman Reid, "RNR," passed away on Jan. 13, 2022, at age 79.

A Celebration of Life will be held outdoors on May 29, 2022, at a location TBD. Please contact the family for further details.

Ron was born on May 29, 1942, in Glendale, Calif., to Russell and Mildred Reid. Ron graduated from Sparks High School, Nev., in 1960. Ron enlisted in the Army in 1964 and served in Vietnam. Ron drove up the Alcan in April 1968 and made Alaska his home. Ron Reid was a trucker through and through, and so proud of the many years of work he put into growing Alaska. He helped build the pipeline and multiple roads and structures around Alaska, worked on the oil spill, was a Teamster and a bus driver and co-owned RNR Services. Ron had an absolute love for his family, friends, animals, nature, snowmachines, wheelers, camping, hunting, fishing, drag racing and football. He was happiest outdoors and with family and friends.

Dad would literally give the "shammy" shirt off of his back. He was generous, kind, protective and strong. He loved annual events - Arctic Man, the Iditarod, Empty Bowl Project, the Alaska State Fair, etc. - collected pottery and knives, gave to multiple charities and surrounded himself with memories. Dad loved photography and took beautiful photos. He believed in birthday cards and family gatherings. His heart was as big as this state that he loved so much. He enjoyed every moment he had with all of us and will be missed beyond measure.

Ron is survived by son, Dennis Reid of Bremerton, Wash.; daughter-in-law, Catie Doolittle of Sequim, Wash.; daughter, Summer Keelan and son-in-law Simon Keelan of Wasilla, Alaska; nine grandchildren, James Reid, Heidi Reid, Krystofer Reid, Mitchell Calcote of Sequim, Daniel Reid and Logan Jacobson of Wasilla, Hunter York, Kaden Keelan and Meadow Keelan of Wasilla; sisters, Merrylin and Betsy Clark of California; ex-wife and friend, Patricia Reid of Anchorage, Alaska; as well as so many others who were blessed to know him. He was preceded in death by mother, Mildred; father, Russell; and twin brother, Donald.