Introduction

The Philippine Peso, which is the national currency of the Philippines has a past that directly intertwines with the country’s economic and colonial history. In the American colonial era, the peso’s value was directly tied to the value of the US dollar — establishing a fixed exchange rate. Additionally, in this era, the Philippines became one of the most prosperous countries in Southeast Asia, as things such as modern banking and the credit system were introduced (The Evolution of Philippine Peso, 2022). However, since the day the Philippines declared independence, the peso underwent a transformation where it adopted a floating exchange rate system that allowed its value to be determined by global currency markets. Furthermore, an important turning point in the history of the Philippines’ money was the establishment of the Central Bank in 1949, which signaled the reintroduction of the country’s official currency. The English series banknotes were first issued, but as the 1960s came to an end, a change toward a more regional currency occurred. The addition of the Filipino language and the images of the country’s heroes on the banknotes, which represent a rising sense of pride in the country, were characteristics of this change (The Evolution of Philippine Peso, 2022). During this period, the peso had phases where it was comparable to the value of the dollar, showing stable and robust economic growth. Nowadays, the Philippine peso has been experiencing a notable decline when compared to the US dollar. This signifies implications for the country’s economy which affects the country at a macro-level and micro-level from the cost of imports to the value of remittances from overseas Filipino workers.

Main Issue

The declining strength of the Philippine peso against the American dollar is a significant and multifaceted issue that affects the country as a whole. Last August 14, 2023, the Philippine peso fell against the US dollar to a nearly nine-month low, nearly reaching the P57 mark due to factors including rising interest rates and oil prices worldwide (Rivas, 2023). This decline would be one of the primary causes of the nation’s inflation picking up speed, burdening Filipinos with growing costs for necessities on top of their already precarious wages and earnings (Africa, 2022). Apart from this, the trade balance is affected as imports will become more costly with foreign debt also becoming more difficult to repay. The confidence of foreign investors may also waver due to the unstable economy and Filipino families who depend on income from OFWs will struggle more when converting remittances to pesos. Overall, the weakening of the Philippine peso against the dollar is a complex issue with extensive economic implications, making it a national concern that demands urgent attention and action.

Stakeholders Involved

Primary Stakeholder

The main or primary stakeholder in this issue is the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP). The Philippines’ central bank is called Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, or BSP. Under the New Central Bank Act of 1993 and the 1987 Philippine Constitution, it was founded on July 3, 1993. The Central Bank of the Philippines, which was founded on January 3, 1949, was replaced as the nation’s central bank by the BSP (Bangko Sentral Ng Pilipinas about the Bank, n.d.). The Banko Sentral is the primary stakeholder as it is the central monetary authority in the Philippines, putting it at the forefront of addressing problems related to our economy and its growth. This is because the BSP’s policies and interventions are crucial in managing the value of the peso when faced with problems such as inflation and instability.

Secondary Stakeholders

The secondary stakeholders are the OFWs, import and export businesses, and foreign investors as they are largely affected by the decline of the Philippine peso. First of all, it affects the trade balance as it makes imports inflated and more expensive — meaning that all the oil and coal, rice, food, raw materials, and capital equipment we import from other countries will continue to become more expensive (Mioten, 2022). Apart from this, paying off international debt will be more difficult. Like many third-world countries, the Philippines borrows money in foreign currencies. As of right now, the total debt is P14.15 trillion as of June 2023 (BUREAU OF THE TREASURY, 2023). With the value of the peso continuing to decline, repaying these obligations will take more local currency which will put pressure on the national budget and the country’s credit rating. Overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) will also be affected even if the money they send back home will have more value. This is because if domestic prices rise, the buying power of the relatives they are sending the money to may not grow and with that, their standard of living may suffer. In 2021, the amount of cash remittances sent home by overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) hit a record $31.418 billion. According to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the total amount of personal remittances from overseas Filipino workers reached a record high of $34.884 billion, or 8.9% of the nation’s gross domestic product (Mioten, 2022). These statistics show how much money OFWs bring into the country and the value they bring to the economy, and despite this, many of their family members are still experiencing hardship. Another effect is that potential investors may be scared off by the declining currency — seeing the economy as unstable which will further weaken the strength of the Philippine peso. On a microeconomic level, regular citizens will feel the impact of the declining peso in their daily lives in things such as the price of their groceries, the price of fuel, and the overall cost of living.

Proposed Solution

With this, the Banko Sentral ng Pilipinas should employ a proactive approach to not only mitigate the effects of the declining value of the Philippine peso but also stabilize the currency and secure the economy. To do this, the BSP should focus on three main areas: foreign exchange reserves management, policy rate adjustments, and the deepening of financial markets. First, to ensure that the country has healthy foreign exchange reserves, the BSP must maintain and strategically manage them. This can help as when the currency is facing pressure, the BSP can buy pesos to prevent a free fall which will soothe investor confidence and keep them prepared for future market problems. Secondly, the BSP can also adjust policy rates because this can help control inflation and stabilize the currency. In the event that the peso is losing value, the BSP may decide to raise interest rates to draw in foreign investment and boost demand for the currency. These choices must be carefully considered, though, as higher interest rates have the potential to impede economic development by making borrowing more costly. As a result, the BSP has to maintain a balance between protecting the peso and creating an atmosphere that encourages economic growth. Lastly, the BSP should also deepen the financial market of the country by developing new financial products, improving the infrastructure of the market, and ensuring an environment that is opportune for innovation and growth. This will reduce market volatility as it promotes investment, strengthens the resilience of the economy as a whole, increases market stability, and offers instruments for risk management. Apart from this, the BSP should also make sure that they have open lines of communication with stakeholders such as the government and the private sector to be more in line with government and economic policies. This will create a more holistic approach, which is important to foster a resilient economic environment and stabilize the currency.

Conclusion

Overall, the weakening of the Philippine peso against the American dollar is an issue that requires an urgent response. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) is at the forefront of this issue and must implement measures that will stop the decline of the peso and protect the economy from the effects of the decline. The BSP can do this by strengthening foreign currency reserves, carefully modifying policy rates, and expanding financial markets. Furthermore, these efforts must be combined with communication and collaboration with both government and private sectors to make sure that the measures are for all and not a select few, therefore stabilizing the currency and creating a more resilient economy.