Celebrated Name:PrinceReal Name/Full Name:Prince Rogers NelsonGender:MaleAge at the time of death:57 years oldBirth Date:7 June 1958Date of Death:21 April 2016Birth Place:Minneapolis, Minnesota, United StatesNationality:AmericanHeight:1.58 mWeight:61 kgSexual Orientation:StraightMarital Status:DivorcedWife/Spouse (Name):Manuela Testolini (m. 2001–2006), Mayte Garcia (m. 1996–2000)Children:Yes (Amiir Nelson)Dating/Girlfriend

(Name):N/AProfession:Singer, Songwriter, Musician, Record Producer, Dancer, Actor, and FilmmakerNet Worth:$350 million

Prince was an American musician. Some of his popular singles include ‘Little Red Corvette,’ ‘While My Guitar Gently Weeps,’ ‘I Wanna Be Your Lover,’ ‘Little Red Corvette,’ and ‘Darling Nikki.’ He sold over 100 million copies of his albums worldwide. He has also won 7 Grammy Awards and three honorable inductions.

Maybe you know about Prince very well But do you know how old was he at the time of his death and what is his net worth in 2021? If you do not know, We have prepared this article about details of Prince’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.

Early Life

Prince was born as Prince Rogers Nelson in 1958 on 7th June to Mattie Shaw and John L. Nelson. He also has a sister named Tyka Nelson. He was born and brought up in Minnesota, United States. Prince completed his schooling at Bryant Junior High School. He is also trained to play instruments like guitar, keyboard, piano, bass, and drums.

Personal Life

Prince married twice in his lifetime. He married his first wife, Mayte Garcia, in 1996. The couple was madly in love and became pregnant just a few months after their marriage; sadly, their first child Boy Gregory Nelson was born with a rare case of Pfeiffer syndrome, which killed him in just one week of his birth.

Later during her second pregnancy, his wife faced a miscarriage. The grieving destroyed the intimacy between the couple, which led to their divorce in 2000. He married his second wife in 2001 but also divorced her in 2006.

Prince lived a rock-star life, where he was linked with pretty much every beautiful female celebrity of his time, be it Madonna or Kim Basinger. Prince died in 2016 on 21st April in Minnesota, US, because of a Fentanyl overdose. The whole world was shocked by the death of the singer, which left fans in tears.

Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 7 June 1958, Prince was 57 years old at the time of his death. His height was 1.58 m tall and weighed 61 kg.

Career

Prince started off his career in 1976. He made his debut in 1978 with ‘For You.’ He has made over 40 studio albums in his lifetime. Some of his popular albums include ‘Dirty Mind,’ ‘Diamonds and Pearls,’ ‘Batman,’ ‘Around the World in a Day,’ ‘Crystal Ball,’ ‘The Chocolate Invasion,’ ‘The Gold Experience,’ ‘The Black Album,’ ‘One Nite Alone,’ and ‘The Truth.’

Prince was a true icon, who loved to perform life; he has been on over 20 tours for his albums and songs promotion. Prince also established himself as a songwriter. He used to write songs under the following names Jamie Starr, Joey Coco, Tora Tora, Alexander Nevermind, and Christopher Tracy.

He was known for making music in R&B, rock, soul, funk, and Minneapolis sound. He also worked with record labels like Universal, EMI, Columbia, Paisley Park, Warner Bros, and NPG. Prince has also appeared in movies and TV shows like ‘Purple Rain,’ ‘Under the Cherry Moon,’ ‘New Girl,’ ‘Muppets Tonight,’ ‘Graffiti Bridge,’ and ‘Sign o’ the Times.’

Awards & Achievements

Prince has been nominated for over 48 awards and has also won 32 awards, excluding them. Some of his wins include awards like ‘Academy Award,’ 4 ‘American Music Award,’ 2 ‘American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers’, 2 ‘BET Awards’, ‘Billboard Music Award,’ 6 ‘Brit Awards,’ ‘Golden Globe Award,’ 3 ‘Golden Raspberry Award,’ 7 ‘Grammy Awards,’ and 4 ‘MTV Video Music Awards,’ etc.

Net Worth & Salary of Prince

Prince had an estimated net worth of over $350 million. He fueled most of his fortune through his album sales. He also made millions through his tour endeavors. He also enjoyed modeling for several magazine covers as well as brands because of his popularity.

Prince is probably the only musical artist who can or was compared with Michael Jackson. Prince was truly a music legend of the American Music industry. It was a true delight to watch him live, as the singer never lip-synced in his life. He was, without a doubt, one of the sexiest male musicians of his time.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7u7PRZ6WerF%2Bau3DDyKSgaKiinruksdJmpZ6sXay8s8DHZpignV2dsqqzx61ksJ2ZnLW1edainZ5lm56xtHnBoqZmr5mgtnA%3D