…his relationship with a lost star.

Guys, I found this interesting, really nice article from Neal Karlen. I found it somewhat calming. ..Neal maintained a 31 year friendship with Prince in which most of the conversations took place, by phone, during the wee hours. Here’s an intro and the link:

Minnesota native Neal Karlen was 25 years old when he landed the first of two in-depth interviews with Prince for Rolling Stone. What followed were 31 years of handwritten notes, late-night calls and an unlikely friendship.

There's a copy of a handwritten letter from Prince to Neal accompanying the article.

Link > http://www.startribune.co...377555951/

Some really telling hints dropped there about P's 'inner life'. I wonder if this guy will tell us all a little more, or is that tantalising glimpse all we'll ever get to hear?

I can't deny I shed a couple at the end.

This is exactly why I couldn't buy into the whole "beautiful death" idea posted by someone else. This sounds a lot closer to the truth from somebody who actually knew him over the years.

Dying alone in that elevator.

I have fresh tears now.

Fuck Neal Karlen! Weeks before Prince died, this guy talked about how the pains he went through to distance himself from being the "Prince Guy"e. Also, said that he would sell the many hours of audio recordings he has of Prince being interviewed to the highest bidder after Prince died. This guy is a douche and if he planned on writing a biography about Prince, I would not buy it. What a snake in the grass that guy is smh.

bashraka said:

Fuck Neal Karlen! Weeks before Prince died, this guy talked about how the pains he went through to distance himself from being the "Prince Guy"e. Also, said that he would sell the many hours of audio recordings he has of Prince being interviewed to the highest bidder after Prince died. This guy is a douche and if he planned on writing a biography about Prince, I would not buy it. What a snake in the grass that guy is smh.

Lanks people, lanks?

He did confess his sin but if you think his article is self serving you should step to him.

I remember this guy's interview on a local radio station here in Minneapolis after Prince's death. He expressed remorse for joking about selling off his Prince stuff. He said something like, he just never imagined Prince would actually die. He seemed genuinely grief stricken and sad, yet there was something about him and his stories that gave me reservations. Not sure what it was... I'll make sure to read this later.

[Edited 6/11/16 12:11pm]

This article made me cry for the glimpse of Prince it gave. I guess because I know what it's like to be up most nights, unable to sleep and feeling terribly lonely with no one to call and talk to. I hate that Prince ever felt that way.

.

I love you, Prince.

That made me cry again....damn it. I watched a few youtube shows regarding his legacy, how he started etc and you can see the loneliness/insecurity he dealt with. While I really wonder what happened to him when he was a kid and I think it was more than just being thrown out at 12 or so....I am glad that I don't know. Emotional/mental trauma really fucks people up for good.