Emmylou Harris is an American musician and songwriter with one of the most unique voices in country, pop, rock, and folk music. His expressive and distinctive songs have earned him a place in American pop history.

Emmylou Harris’ career as a musician has grown over more than forty years and during this time Lou has worked with such famous musicians as Bob Dylan, Dolly Parton and Linda Ronstadt. His passion for music and his hard work have won him numerous awards and allowed him to top the national charts.

Who is Emmylou Harris? – Biography, Age

Emily Lou was born into a military family in Birmingham, Alabama on April 2, 1947. Her father was a decorated Marine Corps officer. He spent ten months as a prisoner of war in Korea in 1952, when his mother was a servicewoman.

Emily Lou’s childhood years were spent in North Carolina and Woodbridge, both located in the city of Virginia, where she graduated from high school as a class champion. She then won a scholarship to study theater at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro. There, she also began to seriously study music and thus learned to play the songs of Bob Dylan and Joan Baez on the guitar.

However, Emily Lou dropped out of college and moved to New York to fully pursue her musical ambitions. She worked as a waitress to support herself as she played folk music in cafes in Greenwich Village.

Having become a star, Emily briefly put her music career on hold after marriage to give herself time to adjust to married life. The hiatus lasted longer than expected, but then returned to her passion when said marriage fell apart and they divorced. While performing the songs of Gerry Mule and Tom Guidera at a particular bar, she met the famous ‘Flying Burrito Brothers’ who introduced her to their band’s former leader, Gram Parsons. This meeting was exactly what Emmylou needed, as Parsons was looking for a singer to collaborate with on his first solo album titled GP at the time. They toured together and released an album – Grievous Angel – which was released posthumously in 1974 when Parsons died on September 19, 1973.

Parsons’ death caused Lou to eventually settle in LosAngeles after signing with Reprise Record after founding her own singing group which she called the Angel Band. She was working with her second husband. producer Brian Ahern to produce what would later become his 10 major albums. His first big debut Pieces of Heaven came out in 1975 and the album featured a diverse fusion of covers from the Beatles to Merle Haggard.

Harris’ award-winning second album Elite A Hotel was recorded with a newly formed band called ‘Hot Band’. She released five more albums; Luxury Liner, Quarter Moon in a Dime Town, Profile: The Best of Emmylou Harris and Blue Kentucky Girl in the 1970s. The latter earned him a second Grammy.

Her third husband, Paul Kennerly, worked with her to release a semi-autobiographical album called “The Ballad of Sally” and two other solo albums, Thirteen and The Angel Band. She also recorded a trio in 1987 with stars such as Dolly Parton and Linda Ronstadt, which became Lou’s best-selling album of all time.

In 1995, she released her experimental album – Destruction Ball which became a huge hit and won her a Grammy Award. She released more albums in 2000 with her last single released in 2013.

In total, she released 26 studio albums, 3 live albums, 11 compilation albums, 3 video albums and 70 singles. Harris has 13 Grammys and three CMAs to her name.

Her husband and daughter

EmmyLou Harris met and married composer TomSlocum in 1969 while performing in Greenwich Village. She recorded her first album, Gliding Bird, in 1970. Harris and Slocum’s marriage fell apart when she learned she was pregnant with Slocum, and then her record label collapsed over the marriage proposal. She returned to her parents’ farm near Washington, DC, to raise her newborn daughter whom she named Haille.

In 1977, Emmylou married her producer Brian Ahern at his home in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Their union produced a daughter Megan and the two divorced in 1984. She soon found love again in singer and songwriter Paul Kennerly and they married in 1985; divorced in 1993.

Height and other facts

Harris is 1.65cm tall and weighs 58kg.

She received an Honorary Doctor of Music from the Berklee School of Music in 2009.

She is a vegetarian and a registered member of PETA.

She is an animal lover and named her shelter-refuge Bonaparte Retreat in Nashville after her dog who died in 2002.

Emmylou is strongly involved in the defense of women’s rights. She performed several times at the Lilith fair, a concert reserved for women.

She is a strong supporter of the LGBT community and believes in equality.

She didn’t start out as a country singer. she began her career in folk music.

Although she received her first Grammy Award for Best Country Vocal Performance in 1976, it was until 1992 that she was named a member of the Grand Ole Opry.