Very exciting news today as we partner with THUNDERBIRD ENTERTAINMENT in Canada! What could we possible be cooking up…

THUNDERBIRD INKS FIRST-LOOK DEAL WITH SKYBOUND NORTH

VANCOUVER, BC – October 19, 2016 – Thunderbird Entertainment is proud to announce a new partnership with Skybound North, a division of Skybound Entertainment. The agreement between the companies gives Thunderbird an exclusive first-look at all animated and non-animated properties being developed for television by Skybound North in Canada.

Earlier this month it was announced that Los Angeles-based multimedia entertainment company Skybound Entertainment, led by Robert Kirkman and David Alpert, and managing partner Jon Goldman, have expanded their operations with the launch of Skybound North in Canada. The team behind such notable projects as The Walking Dead, Fear the Walking Dead and Outcast have appointed former LucasFilm Animation executive Catherine Winder to lead the team. The Canadian operation, based in Vancouver, is a full-service production entity focusing on the development and production of content with top Canadian talent.

“We are thrilled to continue building our relationship with Catherine and her team. Her experience on projects like The Angry Birds Movie and Star Wars: The Clone Wars speak to her success as a leader and innovator, and Skybound’s emphasis on homegrown creator-driven projects is something that really appeals to us,” said Thunderbird President & CEO Tim Gamble.

“The entire Skybound North team is thrilled to work with Thunderbird. Tim [Gamble] and the rest of the Thunderbird team have a proven track record of having produced some of the most innovative programming to come out of Canada,” said Skybound North CEO/Partner Catherine Winder. “This partnership is just the beginning of what will result in ground-breaking content through collaboration with the top and emerging Canadian talent.”

The AMC comic-docu series, Heroes and Villains: The History of Comics, will be one of the first projects produced through the Skybound North and Thunderbird Entertainment partnership.

About Thunderbird Entertainment

Thunderbird Entertainment is a rapidly growing Vancouver-based multiplatform entertainment company with offices in Los Angeles, Toronto and London. Thunderbird creates award-winning programming for Canadian and International broadcasters and boasts divisions in scripted development, theatrical distribution, production, and animation.

Thunderbird’s most recent projects include the upcoming Blade Runner Sequel Blade Runner 2049 starring Ryan Gosling and Harrison Ford, Canadian comedy Kim’s Convenience and the animated Netflix original series Beat Bugs, featuring reimagined songs from the Beatles catalogue featuring artists such as Sia, Eddie Vedder and P!nk.