Background

Thunderbird Entertainment Group (formerly Thunderbird Films) is a Canadian film and television entertainment company with offices in both the Canada and the United States of America. The company was founded in 2003.

1st Logo (2003-2010)

Visuals: On a black background, there is an orange eagle. Below it was the words "THUNDERBIRD FILMS, INC." in a Papyrus font.

Variant: An in-credit version of the logo exists.

Technique: A still, digital graphic.

Audio: The end theme of the show.

Availability: Seen on such shows, like Intelligence and Zixx, among others.

2nd Logo (2010-2014)

Visuals: On a white background is the blue letters rise and zoom out, that reveal it was the words "THUNDERBIRD" in a sports-like serif font.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: A drone with an eagle calling, then a piano note. Sometimes, the end theme plays over.

Availability: Seen on some Thunderbird shows, like Mr. Young and season 1 of Package Deal, among others.

3rd Logo (2014-2021)

Visuals: On a black background, a pattern draws in. Then it zooms out to reveal more abstract patterns, and then the white word "THUNDERBIRD" is shown below the patterns, which was split up into four pieces.

Variants:

On the last season of Continuum, the Reunion Pictures logo appears below.

Sometimes, the logo is blue and then the logo morphs into either the Reunion Pictures or Great Pacific Television logos. Also, the black background has a vignette.

A short variant exists with the logo sped-up; it was used in Some Assembly Required.

Technique: 2D animation for the normal variant. CGI for the morphing variant.

Audio: A writing sound, none or the ending theme of the show.

Audio Variant: A morphing variant has a drone with a whoosh or sometimes a different whoosh is only heard.

Availability: First seen on season 2 of Package Deal, and can be seen on many Thunderbird shows from the era.

4th Logo (2021- )

Visuals: On the same background from the previous logo's morphing variant, we see the blue word "THUNDERBIRD ENTERTAINMENT" fading in and shines.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: The ending theme of the show.