History

Beverly Hills' history unfolded as a saga of resilience and transformation. The area was originally inhabited by the native Tongva tribe who poetically called their spot El Rodeo de las Aguas, or "the gathering of the waters." Initially ranch and farmland, the region later transitioned to lima bean fields which was then bought by oil investors led by Burton E. Green. In the early 1900s, the land would be developed for residential property after Green struck water instead of oil, thus creating the Rodeo Land and Water Company.

To attract potential home buyers to the burgeoning enclave, The Beverly Hills Hotel was built in 1912 by Margaret Anderson, two years before the City of Beverly Hills was incorporated on January 28, 1914. This luxurious establishment not only accommodated travelers, but also served residents as a city hall, community center, movie theater and church. The Beverly Hills we know today became the “home to the stars” in the 1920s when a migration of entertainment industry figures made their move into the city after the era’s most glamorous couple, Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks, bought land and built their estate, Pickfair.

When water supply concerns brought annexation by the City of Los Angeles to the political agenda, it was Mary Pickford and other Hollywood heavyweights of the time who would lead opposition and bring the 850 residents to vote against annexation and keep Beverly Hills independent on April 24, 1923. In the 1930s, the iconic Beverly Hills Shield was designed by the Warner Bros. art department at the request of studio president and resident Jack Warner to mark Beverly Hills city limits, which are still in use today.

Beverly Hills: The First 100 Years by Robert S. Anderson

Getting Acquainted

Getting to Beverly Hills

Being centrally located and convenient to all major airports makes getting into Beverly Hills easy. If you’re coming to Beverly Hills from Los Angeles International Airport (LAX), a taxi or rideshare fares cost between $45-$55, plus gratuity.

Getting Around Beverly Hills

Beverly Hills is known for being one of the most walkable areas in all of Los Angeles, so getting around the city has never been easier! You can stroll through the city and discover the parks, arts, shopping and dining it has to offer within the Golden Triangle and surrounding areas. A rental car or Uber and Lyft will help you explore more of the city.

Looking for a fun way to see the city? Head towards a Starline Tours stop to explore the hills, the flats and celebrity homes. Or, if you’re feeling more active book a bike tour with Bikes and Hikes and visit popular filming locations, star-studded hotels and more.

Parking in the City

Parking in Beverly Hills is affordable, plentiful and conveniently located throughout the city for access to the Golden Triangle, Rodeo Drive and other popular destinations. Many lots offer free 2-hour parking before 6 p.m. in the Golden Triangle and metered street parking is also available throughout the city. Valet services are also available at restaurants and hotels for a hassle-free option.

The Beverly Hills Visitor Center, centrally located at 9400 South Santa Monica Boulevard, is available to provide visitors with information and resources.

PLAN YOUR VISIT

Hotel Offerings

Beverly Hills' hospitality scene is synonymous with luxury and sophistication. The city boasts a selection of world-class hotels, each with its unique charm and style. From iconic establishments that have hosted Hollywood legends to modern boutique hotels and five-star and diamond rated accommodations, Beverly Hills caters to a range of preferences.

Visitors can expect not only plush rooms and exceptional service but also amenities such asspas, rooftop pools and bars and gourmet dining options. Staying in one of Beverly Hills' hotels is not just about accommodation; it's an immersive experience that complements the city's opulent reputation with comfort and style. Our hotels offer a variety of specials and packages to make your stay memorable from glamorous experiences to coastal voyages and upgrades fit for family travel.

Beverly Hills extends its hospitality to four-legged friends with pooch pampering! Your furry friends can enjoy everything from tail-wagging stays that include gourmet treats and custom beds to exclusive, designer pet accessories and exceptional dog grooming salons.

YOUR BEVERLY HILLS GETAWAY AWAITS

Dining Delights

You’ll satisfy any of your cravings thanks to our 200+ dining options in the city. From Italian to Japanese to Mediterranean, Beverly Hills has it all! Dining in Beverly Hills provides a perfect opportunity to experience the city's diverse flavors in an inviting and unique atmosphere, welcoming locals and visitors alike.

Al Fresco Dining

The pleasant weather and sunshine in Southern California make for a wonderful al fresco dining atmosphere. Many restaurants, from casual bites to elevated sit down meals, offer charming outdoor seating, allowing guests to soak in the city’s ambiance alongside their meal.

Culinary Wonders

Food aficionados will find themselves in paradise when they visit Beverly Hills. From Michelin-starred restaurants to quaint bistros and trendy influencer-favorite cafes, the city offers a myriad of dining options catering to every palate. Celebrity owned restaurants, like Salt Bae’s Nusr-Et Steakhouse and rooftop dining like Dante, go hand-in-hand with a full 90210 experience!

Casual Favorites

Beverly Hills isn’t just about upscale dining; it also embraces a vibrant casual dining scene that caters to various tastes. Visitors can unwind and savor delicious meals in charming settings, whether it's indulging in comforting brunches at local cafes like Urth Caffé or savoring classic comfort foods like pizza and pasta at Mulberry Street Pizza or Il Tramezzino.

EXPLORE BEVERLY HILLS DINING

World Class Shopping

Beverly Hills is a shopper’s paradise with hundreds of stores. Everything you can think of from world-renowned fashion houses to unique boutiques to big name department stores like Saks Fifth Avenue and so much more.

The Golden Triangle is the focal point of Beverly Hills and the city's central business district where you can find designer flagship stores, unique boutiques, top tier dining, art galleries and more. This area is also one of the most walkable in all the city with easy access to hotels, tour busses and more.

A must-see is the iconic Rodeo Drive. This palm-lined street is home to high-end boutiques and designer stores. Even if shopping isn't on your agenda, a leisurely stroll down Rodeo Drive is a must-do activity. The sheer glamour and elegance of the area are unparalleled.

SHOPPING IS ALWAYS A GOOD IDEA