TELLER J.

Defendant in error was plaintiff in a suit to have a receiver appointed for plaintiff in error, defendant below, and had judgment appointing a receiver. The cause is now before us on error.

From the record it appears that plaintiff and one Hoye furnished an equal amount of funds to open and operate a coal mine, for the working of which they incorporated the defendant company. Each was to have 3,400 shares of the capital stock of said company, of the par value of $10. E. J. Churchill, in his lifetime, was the counsel of the company, and with the two persons named formed the board of directors. Churchill having died, McGowan undertook to purchase of Churchill's heirs the one share of stock held by him to qualify him as a director, and brought suit to compel a transfer of said share to him.

In the complaint in the instant case it is alleged that Hoye, the secretary of the company, had unlawfully obtained possession of a certificate for one share of stock originally issued to one Crowley, and that he refused to transfer to McGowan, on the company's books, the share of stock acquired from the heirs of Churchill; that the plaintiff owning one-half of the shares, was denied all voice in the management of the company; that the business was mismanaged, and that, until the title to the said two shares of stock is determined, an election of directors cannot be held. The court found that this was a proper case for the appointment of a receiver, pending the election of a new board of directors, and appointed a receiver accordingly.

Plaintiff in error contends that the court acted without jurisdiction, because the receiver was appointed in an independent action, and not in a cause pending. Counsel rely on Jones v. Bank of Leadville, 10 Colo. 464, 17 P. 272, and People v. District Court, 33 Colo. 293, 80 P. 908, but if the opinions in those cases are read in connection with the facts there presented, and the language applied to those facts, it cannot be said that they settle the law as to this case. The question involved in this case was not, and could not properly have been considered in those cases.

Under the final paragraph of section 179 of 1908 Code, courts are authorized to appoint receivers 'in such other cases as are in accordance with the practice of courts of equity jurisdiction.' What, then, has been the practice in courts of equity in such a case as this?

That a receiver may be appointed for a partnership when the partners' quarrel imperils the firm property is well established. This case is but slightly different from that of a quarrel between partners, and when there is no board of directors in being to manage the property, it is clearly the duty of a court of equity to take charge of the property, through a receiver, until the emergency be passed. The authorities to this effect are numerous.

In Pomeroy's Eq. Jur. (4th Ed.) ยง 1545, it is said:

...