MAMS Taylor is the co-president of KSI’s boxing promotion Misfits Boxing.

The Misfits partnership is set to be one of the most anticipated boxing promotions and it is already attracting massive audiences.

Who is Mams Taylor?

Mams Taylor is a British boxing promoter, singer, songwriter, manager and producer with more than 66,600 followers on social media (as of October 2023).

As well as this, Taylor is the President/CEO of talent management company and record label Proper Loud, formerly known as Premier League Music.

He executive-produced KSI’s debut album, Dissimulation, which debuted at No2 on the UK Album Charts, and represents Grammy-winning songwriter Rico Love.

In 2022, Taylor was nominated for Manager of the Year at the Music Week Awards.

Taylor has written and produced as well as collaborated with a wide list of artists such as Good Charlotte, Blink 182’s Travis Barker and Snoop Dogg.

Outside of music, Taylor founded Misfits Boxing with British YouTube sensation KSI, who is also represented by Taylor’s talent management company.

Taylor, who is of Persian descent, was born and raised in Cricklewood, England.

What is Mams Taylor's net worth?

His estimated net worth is said to be between £2.5million and £4million.

Taylor has facilitated major deals for his clients in publishing, recording, and selling of music catalogues.

His music label, Proper Loud, has achieved an impressive 31 plaques of gold or platinum status.

How does Mams Taylor know KSI?

According to Music Week, Brit singer S-X introduced Taylor to un-managed rapper KSI in 2019.

He signed him with RBC in America and BMG in the UK - and the rest is history.

In February 2021, the pair announced their first partnership on the creation of record label The Online Takeover.

American-British singer Aiyana-Lee and young British rapper Yxng Dave were two early sign-ups to their label.

In June 2021, the pair collaborated again with brothers Kalle and Nisse Sauerland of Wasserman Boxing, to create Misfits Boxing.

Misfits is an emerging crossover boxing promotion, which has already sealed a broadcasting deal with DAZN to broadcast their live events.

On Saturday, October 14, 2023, in Manchester, KSI and Tommy Fury will feature on the boxing card, alongside fellow YouTube star Logan Paul and MMA's Dillon Danis.

Who is Mams Taylor ex-wife Krista Allen?

Krista Allen is an American actress, model and stand up comic.

Allen is best known and most recognised from her work in the television series Days Of Our Lives while also featuring in Baywatch Hawaii.

She has also made brief cameos in hit television series such as Friends, Hawaii Five-0, and Frasier.

Krista and Taylor got married in 2010 but were divorced just two years later in 2012.

Krista has one child called Jacob "Jake" Nolan Morritt from her first marriage with Justin Moritt, a production manager.

What songs did Mams Taylor sing?

Taylor had a very brief and short music career outside of producing and representing artists, only releasing two songs of his own.

The first was LA Girls, which featured Good Charlotte singer Joel Madden and appeared on hit MTV series The Hills.

The music video for LA Girls featured UFC Champion Quinton Jackson, and actresses Mila Kunis and Carmen Electra.

Taylor’s second and last single was Girls Gotta Girlfriend which featured Snoop Dogg and Bobby Valentino, and was released in 2009.