While Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Daytime Drama Series, Krista Allen (Taylor Hayes), was walking on the red carpet last night at the 50th Daytime Emmy Awards, earlier in the day the news had broke, that the reason viewers of CBS’s The Bold and the Beautiful had not seen her on-air, is that the show decided not to pick up the third year of her contract.

Allen told Deadline, that she was told back in October that her contract wouldn’t be renewed. Smart B&B viewers had noticed that she has not appeared in any episodes since November 8th. Given Eric Forrester’s (John McCook) failing health storyline, where her children Thomas (Matthew Atkinson) and Steffy (Jacqueline MacInnes Wood) were greatly impacted, many were wondering where was Taylor?

Now the answers became clear: Krista was told the show opted out of her contract, but the events surrounding it didn’t initially add up to her. Allen expressed, “The craziest thing is right before I got dropped, I did the cast photo shoot, and then the next week they called and said, ‘We’re not going to keep your third year and thank you very much, you were wonderful and thank you, goodbye.’ And I was like, what?”’

Krista said it was very challenging for her to keep quiet about the whole situation: “I haven’t known what to say. And then when I got dropped, I was like, ‘oh, okay, is the show going to announce this?’ But they never did.”

When Allen checked out X (formerly Twitter) on December 10th, she realized it was the two-year anniversary of playing Taylor and many of her fans were posting messages to her about, but she didn’t know how to respond.

However, a source also told Deadline that Allen was offered to go recurring with the series, and turned that down. Krista’s rep shared that she had been offered three lines in an episode in late November, after “a couple of nothing months.”

No word yet if the role will be recast, but Allen shared that following the Daytime Emmys, she was moving to Atlanta, Georgia and out of Hollywood. nterestingly, Krista’s former leading man, Thorsten Kaye (Ridge Forrester), took home the Emmy for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series

What do you think of Krista confirming her exit from B&B? Share your thoughts on the situation via the comment section below.

Three-time Emmy winner, and two-time Tony winner, Judith Light (ex-Karen Wolek, One Life to Live) has been announced as part of the cast of the third season of AMC Network’s Horror anthology series The Terror.

Season three, is entitled, The Terror: Devil in Silver, and will star Downton Abbey alum, Dan Stevens, as a man who’s wrongly committed to a psychiatric hospital and finds himself fighting a supernatural force.

Light joins other new cast additions including: CCH Pounder (Rustin, The Shield), Chinaza Uche (Dickinson), Hampton Fluker (Shades of Blue), Aasif Mandvi (Evil), John Benjamin Hickey (The Big C), Stephen Rooy (Barry), Hayward Leach (Tom Swift), Michael Aronov (The Americans), Marin Ireland (Justified: City Primeval) and Phillip Ettinger (First Reformed).

While details on Judith’s role are being kept under wraps for now, Deadline shares on the story, “Once (Dan Steven’s character) of Pepper winds up at New Hyde Psychiatric Hospital, he finds it filled with people society would rather forget. There, he must contend with patients who work against him, doctors who harbor grim secrets, and perhaps even the very Devil himself.”

Filming of the six-episode limited series for AMC/AMC+ is currently underway in New York / New Jersey for a 2025 premiere.

Light won her first primetime Emmy in January of this year in the Guest Star category for her work Poker Face. She is a five-time Emmy nominee. Previously, she won two Lead Actress Daytime Emmys in 1980 and 1981 for her work on One Life to Live. In addition, she took home two Tony Awards for her performances in Other Desert Cities and The Assembled Parties with back to back wins in 2012 and 2013 in the Featured Actress in a Play category.

So, are you looking forward to Judith’s mystery role in the upcoming The Terror: Devil in Silver series? Comment below.

Soap fans are eagerly awaiting the first new daytime soap opera in over 25 years when The Gates is set to premiere early next year on CBS.

Now in partnership with CBS Media Ventures, Black-owned sales company, NuTime Media is onboard to help sell national ad opportunities for the new soap, which has as its center a story about a wealthy Black family living in an upscale gated community.

Previously, NuTime struck a partnership with CBS in March of 2021 to represent many of the other CBS Media Ventures shows to advertisers.

In a statement, Morris McWilliams, executive at NuTime Media, shared with Variety, “We are thrilled to add The Gates to our portfolio of products. A daytime drama of this kind has not been on broadcast television in over 35 years, and we are certain it will fill that void and have positive appeal with African American audiences.”

As previously reported, Michele Val Jean serves as the creator, writer and showrunner of the series. Val Jean has a long history in daytime, having written for the soap operas: General Hospital, The Bold and the Beautiful, and Santa Barbara.

Michele is also one of the executive producers of The Gates along with Sheila Ducksworth, Leon Russell, Derrick Johnson and Kimberly Doebereiner.

The unique content partnership of The Gates brings together CBS Studios, the NAACP and P&G Studios, a division of Procter and Gamble, who also has a history of soap opera television productions including: As the World Turns, Edge of Night, and Guiding Light.

So, glad to know that CBS and NuTime Media are actively looking for national advertisers to support ‘The Gates?’ Comment below.

The soap opera world has been in mourning over the weekend, with the news of the death of Esta TerBlanche, who played Gillian Andrassy Lavery on ABC’s All My Children from 1997-2001.

Esta’s leading man during her run in Pine Valley was Cameron Mathison (ex-Ryan Lavery, AMC now, Drew Quartermaine, GH). The love story of Ryan and Gillian was complex. He believed that Gillian was a wealthy princess; and she believed Ryan made enough money to support her. When Ryan discovered that Gillian was penniless, he chose to stay with her and the two were eventually married. Later, Gillian was killed when TerBlanche wanted to return to her native South Africa.

In an exclusive statement to Michael Fairman TV on Sunday, Mathison expressed, “Esta was somebody very, very close to my heart. We both came to New York around the same time and basically started and learned acting together. Ryan and Gillian are such a beautiful sweet couple … and hold a very, very special place in my heart.”

Speaking on TerBlanche’s love of animals and reconnecting with her in 2023, Cameron recounted, “Esta was literally one of the sweetest kindest people I’ve eve met. When she heard that my dog (Red) was sick and paralyzed last year, she volunteered to take him for a few days to try to care for him to give me a break. We hadn’t really been in touch for a long time so it came out of nowhere and after spending time with her, he learned how to walk again. 🙏”

In closing Mathison shared, “She was just a beautiful soul and had a healing spirit.” TerBlanche died unexpectedly on Thursday. The cause of death has not yet been determined.

Cameron also took to his Instagram Story on Sunday, sharing some images of himself and Esta with one said from All My Children, which read,”RIP my sweet princess.”

When All My Children came to its conclusion in 2011, Ryan was reunited with Gillian one more time when he received a ‘heavenly’ visit from his princess. Now with TerBlanche’s death, it makes the scenes all the more poignant. Watch it below.

Share your thoughts on Cameron’s sentiments on the death of his AMC co-star, Esta TerBlanche, and let us know if you were a Ryan and Gillian fan via the comment section below.