So much for that report that Bold & Beautiful leading lady Krista Allen wasn’t going anywhere: In a new interview with Deadline, the actress reports that she has been let go.

When the actress was hired to step into the popular role originally created by Hunter Tylo at the tail end of 2021, the deck was stacked against her. “There was a lot of pushback early on from fans who said, ‘we do not want [Taylor] recast,” Allen says, adding that was hard for her. “But somehow, the fans accepted me and it became this beautiful love affair with the fan base as this new Taylor. So when the Emmy nominations came out and I was nominated, I was blown away. It was my first year as a recast. It was kind of like against all odds.”

Ironically, the news of her being let go came on the very day that the award for which she is nominated will be handed out. This is not, however, breaking news for Allen, who was told several months ago that her contract was not being renewed.

“The craziest thing,” she admits, “is right before I got dropped, I did the cast photo shoot, and then the next week, they called and said, ‘We’re not going to keep [you on through the third year of your contract] and thank you very much, you were wonderful, and thank you, goodbye. I was like, what?”

Her absence was almost immediately noticed by viewers. “The fan base was going insane during this time,” she says. “The show just said that my character wasn’t really needed.”

As we’ve pointed out countless times, there was endless potential story for Taylor outside of the rehashed and re-rehashed triangle with Ridge and Brooke. Allen threw sparks with Don Diamont, whose Bill is currently languishing on the backburner. She clicked with Sean Kanan, whose Deacon is showing everyone how reformed he is by committing to merry murderess Sheila. And there was always the option to introduce someone new for Taylor. (Review the choices here.)

Instead, the character and her social-media-savvy portrayer are being shown the door. When asked for confirmation, the show told Deadline that they do not comment on the status of actors or their contracts.