Leicestershire broiled today in the hottest day ever recorded in the county. The temperature reached 35.6C (July 18) for the first time according to the official Met Office reading.

The day began in the high 20s with warnings to the public to stay inside and only travel if necessary. Rail services were affected and events were cancelled due to the sweltering heat.

Local weather expert Phil Morrish watched the mercury rise throughout the day as the Met Office forecast an unbelievable 37C. Morrish told LeicestershireLive: "The first model for this heatwave came up about two weeks ago and people thought 'Is this really going to happen?' but it's arrived."

READ MORE: Live Leicestershire heatwave updates with temperatures to hit a scorching 39C

The new record, breaking the previous official Met Office record of 34.5C, is not expected to stick around for long - even higher temperatures are predicted for Tuesday, July 18.

This is the tenth time Leicestershire has reached 35C since the year 2000, said Morrish.

He explained: "Temperatures are rising locally as well as globally and it's indicative of global warming and climate change. They are going up all the time and it will continue to happen if things don't change."

Parks and local high streets were almost empty with only a few souls braving the scorching sun. Despite an unexpected drizzle of rain in some parts of the county, it only got warmer as the day went on. Health officials warned people to stay indoors during the warmest part of the day.

Morrish added: "I would not go out in this heat - and if it does get as hotter than 36C it could reach as high as your blood temperature. Your blood is around 37C, if it gets that hot it will be exceptionally dangerous as people will dehydrate very quickly.

"This is not the weather to go sunbathing in."

He advised people to keep their curtains closed and only open the windows after sunset. It is expected to be a couple of "very uncomfortable" nights as temperatures are not expected to dip any lower than 24C.

Meanwhile, temperatures across Europe are also sky-rocketing this week with reports of forest fires and heat-related deaths across the continent. But unlike many of the warmer countries, Morrish says the UK is "not equipped to handle this weather".

READ MORE: