TYPE: Documentary Feature

GENRE: Documentary

STATUS: Post-Production

LOGLINE

At 89, director and choreographer Rhoda Levine seeks to understand her legacy and finds it lives on in the careers of those she has guided.

SYNOPSIS

An Uncommon Woman explores the life-work of opera, stage and television director, Rhoda Levine. 60-years behind the scenes, she has had a profound impact on the performing arts. Reflecting back on her distinguished career at age 89, Rhoda begins to understand what it means to leave a legacy.

ARTISTIC STATEMENT

An Uncommon Woman joins a class of recent documentaries about true breakers of the mold, some little known outside their spheres of influence. Films such as Seymour: An Introduction, a portrait of Seymour Bernstein, a classical pianist who stopped performing to teach; Bill Cunningham New York about the idiosyncratic New York Times fashion photographer; and Casting By, a biography of the unsung but powerful Hollywood casting director, Marion Dougherty. All impactive life stories that begged to be told. An engaging documentary could be made by simply having Rhoda Levine recount stories of her exceptional career directing opera, theater and television. Footage of her archived correspondence, annotated scores, libretti, performance notes, and audio/visual recordings would add context and depth. And because she worked intimately with some of the great artists of the second half of the twentieth century – from Luchino Visconti to Doris Lessing, from Beverly Sills to Edward Gorey and Philip Glass – Rhoda does not lack for riveting stories of artists at work. Or play. However, An Uncommon Woman uses such anecdotes and archival materials as springboards to grapple with the existential impulse to leave a legacy. This is brought to high relief for Rhoda who has seen many of her leonine colleagues pass on. Living alone with no descendants, she finds herself questioning the choices she has made. So, in Act One we unpack Rhoda’s charmed, secular Jewish upbringing and follow her into the prime of her creative, extraordinarily collaborative life. As her cat "Jeoffrey" acts as docent, wandering from one memento to another in her cluttered home, we watch as Rhoda revisits and reflects upon the artistic successes she has experienced during her distinguished career. In Act Two of the film, Rhoda walks, talks and dines with some of the cultural titans whom she has directed - or with whom she has collaborated. Facing their own thoughts of mortality and legacy, they share stories and reflect back on their great work together. These exuberant conversations, each a master class in creative fulfillment, nevertheless leave a whiff of melancholy behind. We return periodically to Rhoda’s home, the visible heart and mind of her life that, nevertheless, does not offer the solace of knowing what of one’s life will meaningfully survive. But, in the documentary’s Last Act, watching Rhoda at work, teaching her jazz class at the Manhattan School of Music, she revels in the joy she has seeing her young students blossom. It is in the last moments of the film when we hear a former student and accomplished mezzo-soprano call her “Rhoda the Great” that we, and Rhoda, know her legacy lies in the lasting artistic impact she has had. Manifest in the creative lives she helped build, in the careers she continues to nurture. For the last shot, the camera looks up at her window as her answering machine message plays: “Please repeat your message twice as this is a temperamental answering machine.”

KEY CREW