The powerHouse Arena invites you to

a kids reading:

An Afternoon with

The New York Review Children's Collection

featuring

Rhoda Levine

Alastair Reid

and

Fulvio Testa

Sunday, November 4, 3–4 PM

Ages 5–10

The powerHouse Arena · 37 Main Street (corner of Water & Main St.) · DUMBO, Brooklyn

For more information, please call 718.666.3049

RSVP appreciated: Kids@powerHouseArena.com

Rhoda Levine (He Was There From the Day We Moved In), illustrator Fulvio Testa (Pinocchio) and Alastair Reid (Ounce Dice Trice and Supposing…) come to the store to read from their classic picture books.

About the Readers:

Rhoda Levine is the author of seven children's books and is an accomplished director and choreographer. In addition to working for major opera houses in the United States and Europe, she has choreographed shows in New York and in London's West End.

Levine has taught acting and improvisation at the Yale School of Drama, the Curtis Institute of Music, and Northwestern University, and is currently on the faculty of the Manhattan School of Music and the Mannes College of Music. She lives in New York, where she is the artistic director of the city's only improvisational opera company, Play It by Ear.

Alastair Reid is a poet, a prose chronicler, a translator, and a traveler. Born in Scotland, he came to the United States in the early 1950s, began publishing his poems in The New Yorker in 1951, and for the next fifty-odd years was a traveling correspondent for that magazine. He has published more than forty books. The substance of one of the books, Supposing…, he gleaned from the many children who have influenced him, to all of whom he owes and dedicates the text. He lives in New York City.

Fulvio Testa is one of Italy's most distinguished artists and illustrators and has had many exhibitions in the United States and Europe. In addition to his own prize-winning titles, he has illustrated books by authors such as Anthony Burgess and Gianni Rodari. He divides his time between New York City and Italy.