Compensation for cancelled flights, data privacy online or sustainable investments that are truly sustainable – these are important rights you have as a consumer.

What if the airline won’t refund your money after cancelling your flight, your customer data at an online shop is hacked or the sustainable aspects of a savings plan turn out to be fake? Consumer protection regulations and institutions that provide information and advice offer help in these situations. Protecting consumers is a central pillar of a fair and socially equitable market economy.

What is consumer protection and why is it important?

As consumers, we make numerous decisions every day: picking up groceries, installing new apps on our mobile phones, buying insurance policies online, changing energy providers. The list goes on. Comparing products, understanding prices, rates and terms of service, selecting the right provider or assessing labels are some of the challenges we face in everyday life.

The Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection (BMUV) is strengthening all of our consumer rights at national, European and international level and is protecting our interests. These efforts focus in particular on those in need of special protection such as children, young people and low-income households.

How does consumer protection work?

Information and education about

The BMUV supports a variety of projects related to consumer information and empowerment.

Stiftung Warentest and other product testers about

Testing organisations, advisory services and other institutions provide independent information and guidance.

Advice and arbitration about

Consumer associations and arbitration services can help with issues with companies.

Legal representation about

Consumer associations enforce consumer rights by means of collective action. They also respond to infringements of rights by companies.

Enhancing rights about

Laws strengthen consumer rights to make commerce and services fair and transparent. For example, investment advice must now take the sustainability of investments into account.

Enhancing sustainability about

The BMUV supports sustainable products and services that are affordable for all consumers.

Product safety about

The BMUV is responsible for certain regulations that ensure safe, non-hazardous products. The monitoring authorities of the federal states ensure compliance with the regulations.

Ensuring healthy food about

The BMUV focuses on healthy food products. The ministry provides some tips on food safety. The Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture supports special projects on nutritional advice.

Research and networking about

The BMUV promotes scientific research on consumer issues. It also facilitates dialogue with businesses, NGOs and interest groups.

Hilfsangebote bei Problemen mit Urlaubsreisen about

Als Verbraucherschutzministerium setzen wir uns aktiv für die Rechte und Anliegen von Reisenden ein, damit der Urlaub so entspannt wie möglich wird.

Recognising safe products

Products must be safe for all and pose no health hazards. This is the main objective for the BMUV, which is responsible for regulations on cosmetics, tattoo products and the safety of textiles. The BMUV played a major role in negotiating new regulations on product safety on behalf of Germany at EU level. The ministry is also very active in further developing European legislation on toys, particularly with regard to aspects of chemical standards.

There are a few labels for recognising safe products:

The GS mark stands for “tested safety” (geprüfte Sicherheit). It is voluntary and federally regulated.

The CE marking shows that the product fulfils the legal requirements for its product category. The CE marking can only be used for certain products where it is mandatory. It is not required for all products, for example, cosmetic products do not carry the CE marking.

The VDE mark is backed up by external testing and confirms that an electronic product is safe and uses current technology.

How are consumers protected online?

Digital consumer protection is becoming more and more important. A few examples:

Special attention needs to be given to online shopping due to the huge selection available and sometimes manipulative user interfaces. There are many cases where ordered products never arrive because payment went to a fake shop.

Artificial intelligence can draw false and unfair conclusions, for example, in issuing loans, because it assesses your creditworthiness incorrectly on the basis of irrelevant or outdated data. In some situations, the loan may cost you more or not be approved.

It frequently happens that personal data is stolen or used for purposes that are not in line with data privacy rules. Hate speech and disinformation are widespread on social media.

The Internet of Things makes household appliances like refrigerators digital and accessible from anywhere. This means they are also vulnerable to misuse of data and hacker attacks.

The Federal Consumer Protection Ministry is working to give consumers online protection that matches their protection in the real world. This includes, in particular, protection and safety for personal data, protection against discrimination, from unconscious influence and preservation of general consumer rights. The ministry is working on laws on these issues. In addition, businesses are being encouraged to voluntarily establish corporate digital responsibility measures that go beyond the legal requirements.

Where can you find independent guidance on consumer choices?

If you need help assessing what you should pay attention to when making purchases, concluding contracts or deciding what deals are credible and safe, Stiftung Warentest can provide guidance. Stiftung Warentest, a foundation set up by the German government, has been testing products and services since 1964. It compares more than 30,000 products annually. The foundation is independent from influence and advertising revenue and finances itself from interest on the foundation capital, sales revenue and licensing fees for its logo.

Consumer associations: providing consumer advice nationwide

There are consumer associations in all 16 federal states. Nationally, there are more than 200 advice centres. Their work is financed by the federal states. Their aim is to provide independent information for consumers on private purchases, give advice, support consumers and offer legal assistance. The consumer associations are all part of the Federation of German Consumer Organisations (Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e. V., vbzv). The vbzv, which also includes 27 other organisations, represents the interests of consumers at federal level. The vbzv receives institutional support from the BMUV.

As a consumer, you benefit from the advantages of the European internal market. For example, you can fly with a Spanish airline or order products from a Belgian retailer. In the case of issues with these kinds of transboundary activities, consumers receive independent support from the European Consumer Centre Germany. This centre is linked to the national consumer centres all around Europe. The BMUV supports the European Consumer Centre Germany.

Video

YouTube video:

We would like to show you external content hosted by a third party. Activating this content will potentially provide this third party and others the opportunity to collect your data. If you would prefer not to share data, please do not activate this content.

Where can consumers get help in conflicts with businesses?

If a business has infringed on your rights or you have a specific disagreement with a business, you can take your issue to consumer arbitration. Arbitration services, sometimes called ombuds services, exist for various business sectors. If there is no arbitration service for a specific sector, the General Conciliation Body (Universalschlichtungsstelle des Bundes) supported by the Federal Justice Ministry can help.

Consumers can also submit complaints about businesses to specific authorities using online portals. The authorities evaluate the complaints and, in some cases, take action against the business. Complaints can be submitted to authorities, for example, on the following sites:

Authorities overview

The Bundesnetzagentur (Federal Network Agency) is responsible for infrastructure and regulates the markets for telephone, internet, postal, electricity and rail services. It can help with situations including disallowed telemarketing, router hacking, expensive hotlines with long hold periods or telephone harassment.

Bundesnetzagentur

The Bundeskartellamt (Federal Cartel Office) protects competition, for example in food retail or fuel sales, and carries out investigations where it finds systematic infringements of consumer rights.

Bundeskartellamt

The Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) monitors banks and insurances and provides information on the financial market.

BaFin

The Federal Office of Consumer Protection and Food Safety (BVL) coordinates national programmes for testing cosmetics, tattoo products, consumer goods, food, pesticide residues and veterinary medicines and reports on the results.

BVL

The Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) evaluates the health risks of foods, chemicals and products. It publishes statements and recommendations on risk reduction, independent of economic, political and social interests.

BfR

On behalf of the BMUV, the German Environment Agency supports the EU-wide investigation or sweep of the Consumer Protection Cooperation Network. In 2023, the sweep focused on potential dark patterns on retail websites. Dark patterns refer to misleading web design intended to funnel consumers into purchases or commercial decisions that they may not have taken otherwise.

UBA