The Holy Roman Empire, prior to its abolition in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars, included hundreds of German-speaking states. During the French administration of those states, a nationalist movement arose that was determined to free Germany from foreign rule and create a unified country. Among the organizations active in that cause was the Lützowian Free Corps, whose members wore uniforms of black with gold and red accessories. Other groups, including the Jena Students’ Association, subsequently adopted the same three colours for their flags. The 1832 mass rally at Hambach included thousands of students from throughout Germany marching under a horizontal tricolour of black-red-yellow (the latter colour the heraldic “gold”). Many people believed that those colours were derived from the black eagle (with red beak and claws) appearing on the gold shield of the Holy Roman Empire, even though this was not the inspiration for the tricolour. That flag was also briefly used by the German Confederation of 1848–52.

When Germany was unified at the end of the 19th century, the national flag had stripes of black-white-red. After the defeat of the Second Reich in World War I, that flag was replaced by the black-red-yellow under the Weimar Republic. Many Germans, however, rallied around other flags they felt better represented the true German spirit. The red banner of the communists, the black-white-red of the Second Reich, and the new swastika flag of the Nazis all contended for allegiance. From 1933 to 1945 the Nazi symbols were dominant. The Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) restored the old black-red-yellow flag on May 9, 1949, and the government made use of a similar flag with the eagle shield in the centre. The plain tricolour was also used in the communist-dominated German Democratic Republic (GDR; East Germany), although its coat of arms was added to the tricolour in 1959. The GDR flag disappeared in 1990 when the two Germanys were reunited as a single state. No changes were made in the symbols of the Federal Republic at the time of reunion.