CHANNEL 4 MIDJUNE A THIRD SEASON of The Handmaid’s Tale is strapping on its brown boots and marching towards us, wimple starched and eyes burning with silent rage. But viewers who endured the torments of Elisabeth Moss’s beleaguered handmaid, Offred, in Seasons 1 and 2, just aren’t sure if they can go through it all again. I’ve lived every second of Offred’s suffering, from her initiation at the Red Centre when I read Margaret Atwood’s brilliant novel aged 15, to our heroine’s crazy decision to stay in Gilead as her friend and baby sped off to Canada at the end of Season 2. Nobody said it was going to be easy, but the constant dangling of the freedom carrot in front of her nose, only to snatch it away again,…

IT’S 25 YEARS since Quentin Tarantino stormed Cannes with Pulp Fiction (which Empire, then only four-and-a-half years old, reviewed as “brilliantly written and unfathomably cool” before slapping it with five stars). Nearly three decades on, he’s back. And while a lot of things do change, have changed, some things don’t. Firstly, Quentin Tarantino is as singular, as sure as ever. And secondly, a new Tarantino movie is still a major landmark moment. So when we found out Tarantino’s Once Upon A Time In Hollywood would be a meditation on the dying embers of Hollywood’s golden age, with Brad Pitt, Leonardo DiCaprio and Margot Robbie, no less, we had more than a few questions. Features editor Nick de Semlyen was dispatched to Los Angeles to sit with QT in the edit suite…

HOLY MEMORY LANE, BATMAN! I first found Empire in the summer of 1989, buying issue 2 in Heathrow airport. Then a 14-year-old kid, I was hooked. I remember reading about the making of Tim Burton’s Batman, seeing the models and huge sets at Pinewood. I’ve collected every issue (see pic, from the home cinema I built myself ), and now my kids are reading it, too. Congrats on an amazing 30 years! ALEX PERDIOS, VIA EMAIL 364 issues, 30 years, five Batmen, one Mr Freeze. It’s been a wild ride — thanks for joining us, Alex. Enjoy your Picturehouse passes — Joker’s on the horizon… Empire’s star letter wins a Picturehouse Membership, plus one for a friend! Valid for one year at 23 Picturehouse Cinemas across the UK, including the flagship Picturehouse Central in…

THE HANDMAID’S TALE When Offred was carted off in the back of a van, season one ended roughly in the same way as Margaret Atwood’s original novel, and her sequel doesn’t arrive until later this year. So for Seasons 2 and 3, showrunner Bruce Miller asked Attwood to act as plot-consultant/co-writer with him. He thinks the show could go on for ten seasons. GAME OF THRONES Jon Snow died at the end of season 5, and that was pretty much how author George R.R. Martin left things in his fifth and, to date, last novel in the series. From then on it was up to show creators DB Weiss and David Benioff to steer the plot, albeit with Martin providing “some guidance”. So they resurrected Snow and the rest is…

BBC1 LATE SUMMER SEASON 1 Birmingham, 1919. The Peaky Blinders gang – named after their flat caps in which they hide razorblades to blind anyone who dares cross them – are led by the charismatic Tommy Shelby (Cillian Murphy), along with his psychotically violent older brother Arthur (Paul Anderson) and hard-as-nails Aunt Polly (Helen McCrory). The Shelbys have –literally – fought their way from being a poor gypsy family to a criminal force to be reckoned with. When they steal a consignment of government rifles, Winston Churchill sends Inspector Campbell (Sam Neill) to deal with the Blinders. SEASON 2 The Shelbys continue to expand their criminal empire, but there are plenty of people wanting to relieve them of their ever-increasing wealth. Step forward Tom Hardy as Alfie Solomons — an…

JAMES CAMERON’S FIRST two Terminator films both rested upon the shoulders of a powerful female hero. But even the black-clad paramilitary Sarah Connor of T2 couldn’t hope to go punch-for-punch with a Terminator and come out on top. That all changes in Dark Fate, with the arrival of Mackenzie Davis’ Grace. “She’s been specially enhanced to fight Terminators,” explains director Tim Miller. “In the movie’s first big action sequence she’s just beating the living fuck out of him with a sledgehammer. It’s great!” Last seen changing nappies and downing shots in Tully, Mackenzie Davis’ latest role is a million miles from Jason Reitman’s super nanny. As a battle-worn fighter she’s all muscle and menace: a saviour from the future who’s neither human nor Terminator but somewhere in-between. “Mackenzie is fantastic,” says…