The history of the bank known today as Wells Fargo & Company parallels the history of the United States.

A lot of people might not know it, but Wells Fargo didn't start off as a strictly financial institution like it is today—there was a time when it offered a logistics component to its services.

Back in 1852, it was founded as a banking and express delivery company linking the busy East Coast with the booming Gold Rush in California.

Today Wells Fargo is the country's third-largest bank by market capitalization and the third-largest U.S. bank by assets.

It's currently one of the most dominant forces in the financial industry, not just in the United States, but across the whole planet.

To understand Wells Fargo today, we need to look closely at its past, from its roots as an Old West stagecoach company all the way up to its current dominance.

The Founding of Wells Fargo & Co.

Go west, young bank!

Back in 1848, gold was first discovered in Sutter's Mill, California, and the subsequent "Gold Rush" saw 300,000 "Forty-Niners" move to the state over the following year.

In 1846, San Francisco was nothing more than a tiny settlement of 200 residents.

By 1852, San Francisco was a boomtown with 36,000 inhabitants.

Businessmen in the east took notice. The rapidly emerging West Coast economy caught the attention of American Express co-founders Henry Wells and William D. Fargo.

(Fargo, by the way, is also known for his tenure as the Mayor of Buffalo, New York, from 1862 to 1863 and again from 1864 to 1865).

Wells and Fargo couldn't convince their third American Express co-founder—John Warren Butterfield—to extend the company's operations to California.

The eponymous pair stayed on with American Express but also partnered to create their own separate company, forming Wells Fargo & Co. in 1852.

A focus on banking and long-distance delivery

Wells Fargo's new offices were established in San Francisco, where it operated as a bank and a delivery service for the gold industry and all of its offshoots.

They invested in procuring the best stagecoaches available at the time. Each one weighed 2,500 pounds and cost about $1,200 in the 1860s (the equivalent of around $30,000 in today's money). The system of Wells Fargo stagecoaches covered 3,000 miles, starting in Nebraska and ending up on the west coast.

Then in 1860, Wells Fargo took over a company called the Butterfield Overland Mail Company, giving it control over the western leg of the Pony Express delivery route. Although this business venture was killed off by the telegraph in 1861.

Fortunately, Wells Fargo & Co. was so well established, the demise of the Pony Express didn't cause the company to fail.

More than just a delivery service.

Although its early years saw Wells Fargo & Co. establish itself as the go-to for moving freight between New York and California, it also offered banking and financial services.

You could go to a Wells Fargo & Co. office to buy or sell gold in the form of bullion, dust, or coins.

The company established express delivery and banking offices in communities throughout the California gold fields.

All aboard the railroads

Just as the invention of the telegraph made mail delivery by horse obsolete, the introduction of the U.S. transcontinental railroad system rendered stagecoaches useless as well.

Wells Fargo's stock began to fall, but it was saved by its 1869 purchase of the Pacific Union Express Company (which operated the Central Pacific Railroad).

In return for paying a super-high price for the company, Wells Fargo got exclusive rights to use the railroad for its express freight deliveries for the next 10 years.

A period of rapid expansion and growth

In 1871, there were 436 Wells Fargo & Co. banking and express offices in existence.

By the turn of the century, there were 3,500 Wells Fargo branches.

The final 30 years of the 1800s were particularly successful for the company.

Coast-to-coast on one train. Wells Fargo established the very first railroad route operating uninterrupted from New York to San Francisco.

It was known as the Transcontinental Express and was created through the integration of more than a dozen smaller railroads.

On its very first trip, the Transcontinental Express pulled into San Francisco just three-and-a-half days after it left New York City—a truly amazing feat at the time.

Expansion across the USA. By 1876, Wells Fargo & Co. had branches in Virginia City, Nevada; Carson City, Nevada; and Salt Lake City, Utah.

An office was opened in New York City in 1880, and the company was shipping freight within the lucrative East Coast market by 1888.

Other innovations in the 1880s included the implementation of refrigerated rail cars in California and the introduction of money orders as a financial product.

Up until 1876, Wells Fargo's express shipping and banking departments operated in the same San Francisco building.

That year, the banking and express locations were separated into two different San Francisco buildings.

Express and banking services were split up. By 1905, the banking and express operations were completely separated.

Wells Fargo Bank merged with the Nevada National Bank to become the Wells Fargo Nevada National Bank in 1905.

Meanwhile, the Wells Fargo & Company Express shipping company continued to operate until 1918.

That year, the U.S. government forced it to merge with all the other major rail carriers.

World War One killed Wells Fargo Express. The creation of the amalgamated American Railway Express was a response to World War One and basically caused Wells Fargo & Company Express to cease to exist.

All of the company's logos were taken down from trains and stations and replaced with the American Railway Express logo.

All that remained of Wells Fargo were its banking operations, which have continued to this day despite multiple financial crises.

The 2008 Financial Crisis

Gaining strength in the midst of chaos

No financial institution was left unscathed by the damage brought in by the subprime mortgage crisis that started a year earlier in 2007.

But some, like Wells Fargo, fared much better than others.

Benefited from a bailout. As part of the industry-wide federal bank bailout of 2008, Wells Fargo received $25 billion in capital through the sale of its stock to the U.S. Treasury Department.

Wells Fargo then made more stock in the company available to the public and raised an additional $8.6 billion.

By the end of 2009, the federal government was able to sell back its $25 billion in stock and collect more than $130 million in dividends.

Snapping up companies left and right. In 2007 and 2008, Wells Fargo acquired at least six different banks, financial institutions, and companies.

Many of these acquisitions were a steal.

For example, in 2007 Wells Fargo bought Greater Bay Bancorp for just $1.5 billion, even though the company had $7.4 billion in assets.

Wachovia was the ultimate coup. In September 2008, in the middle of the Wall Street financial panic during which companies like Lehman Brothers folded, Wells Fargo made an offer to purchase Wachovia Corporation.

Wachovia (a bank specializing in investment products) had already agreed to sell to Wells Fargo's competitor Citigroup for $2.2 billion.

Wachovia was on the brink of going under as a result of the financial crisis, so it was ready to take whatever it could get to cut its losses.

Wells Fargo offered $15.1 billion, and Wachovia accepted (much to Citigroup's chagrin).

As a result, Wells Fargo was transformed into a super bank, with coast-to-coast operations, $1.4 trillion in assets, and 48 million customers.

It was also able to establish the Wells Fargo Securities line of investment services based on the strength of Wachovia's investment banking.

Once again, through savvy management, shrewd tactics, and strategic decision-making in a time of crisis, Wells Fargo was able to grow in strength while many companies wasted away and finally perished.

"It's a New Day at Wells Fargo"

News of Wells Fargo's illegal activities was a shock to the banking industry, which had viewed the company as rock-solid, especially after weathering the 2008 crisis.

The company immediately invested $50 million to increase oversight on the level of individual branches.

No more quotas. Today, employees at Wells Fargo are no longer required to meet sales quotas.

It was a hard but necessary move to make.

The bank has since experienced a decrease in earnings and currently plans to close 400 of its 6,000 branches in 2018.

Technology instead of the hard sell. Wells Fargo's current plan is to cut costs and increase profitability by investing in technology in favor of relying on salespeople to generate profits.

Wells Fargo's strength will continue to ensure its growth. The company that has survived all economic crises over the past 160+ years continues to be a solid financial institution.

It's the third-largest bank in the United States by assets, with a total of more than $1.9 trillion (JP Morgan Chase and Bank of America hold the top two spots).

With a market capitalization of $314 billion at the end of 2017, it also stood in a solid third place.

Today Wells Fargo is the eleventh-largest bank in the entire world.

Although it came in at number 27 in the 2016 Fortune 500 list of the biggest companies in the USA, it's primary shareholder—Berkshire Hathaway—is fourth on the list.

The "Oracle of Omaha" approves. Berkshire Hathaway—the investment company led by financial guru Warren Buffett—owns 9.9% of Wells Fargo.

The bank is Berkshire Hathaway's biggest single investment, with a stake valued at $29 billion.

Buffett has declared his confidence in the new CEO, Tim Sloan, and his hard work in renewing the company and restoring trust in Wells Fargo.

Wells Fargo's history parallels the United States

When America was expanding West in the 1850s, Wells Fargo was there with delivery and banking services to help make it happen.

At the moment railroads appeared, Wells Fargo was right on board, creating the first coast-to-coast express rail service to ever travel in the United States.

Wells Fargo has been through the trenches of depressions, recessions, panics, and other economic crises and always came out the other end stronger than ever.

Its history demonstrates how strong leadership delivering on strategies like acquisitions and investments have been the key to its ongoing success.

Regrettably, Wells Fargo has fallen victim to its own thirst for success in recent years.

Its misplaced emphasis on cross-selling got completely out-of-hand, and many people lost their jobs or their money as a result.

It was one of the darkest times in its 166-year history.

Despite these challenges, Wells Fargo remains one of the dominant banks on the national and international level.

I find it somewhat inspiring to know Wells Fargo Bank is returning to its trusted historical roots to rebuild the faith it has lost from its customers.

What are your thoughts about Wells Fargo's "Re-established in 2018" campaign?

Do you use any of Wells Fargo's financial products?

How have they worked for you?

Let us know in the comments below.