by Dr. Robert J. Chandler, Retired Senior Historian Wells Fargo Bank History Department

Founded in 1852 by Henry Wells and William G. Fargo, president and secretary respectively of the American Express Company, to do business in Gold Rush California, Wells Fargo Bank is the sole survivor of those rough boom and bust days. It is as it says it is, the Oldest Bank in the West. Despite eight major mergers in its long history, the Wells Fargo name has always survived. With Wells Fargo’s 2009 merger with Wachovia it gained the Oldest Bank in the East for its family tree. This is Philadelphia’s Bank of North America, chartered by the Continental Congress in 1781, and thereby predates the United States Constitution.

American Express and its family of expresses founded by the same men to serve different parts of the country—Wells Fargo, United States, and National—and Adams & Co. were rivals in the east and the west. California conditions, that is, an abundance of gold, a universal demand to transform dust into coin, and a means to remit funds between both coasts, made these two eastern express companies into western bankers. Since the California state constitution of 1849 forbade the state to charter any banks, they had the field wide open.

A July 1853 Wells Fargo circular declared that “a draft on New York is good at any place on which we draw”—and Wells Fargo drew on 65 of the largest cities in New York, Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, and Canada reached by American Express, “and at by far the most of them it would command a Premium varying from ½ percent to 2 percent.”

Of note, from 1852 to 1905 and the merger of Wells, Fargo & Co’s Bank with the Nevada National Bank to become Wells Fargo Nevada National Bank, Wells Fargo used the same design: parallel gray lines that acted as safety paper. Areas of absence spelled out in large white letters, “First,” “Second,” and “Third.”

At first Adams, which arrived in that pioneer year of 1849, and then Wells Fargo established strings of banking and express offices throughout the gold region. They primarily bought gold, accepted deposits, sold exchange, and ran a profitable Letter Express. Certificates of deposit and envelopes with express hand stamps are other long-established collecting areas. Envelopes from the Pony Express, which Wells Fargo supervised for its final six months, are at the very apex.

American Express Shipping Receipt (1853)

Besides regular commercial checking accounts, these express and banking offices furnished bills of exchange to be used within California. They were what English banker William Leatham termed “Inland Exchange.” In England, they made up four-fifth of the circulating bills of exchange. As noted earlier, in 1852 Wells Fargo agent John Q. Jackson spent his days in Auburn “drawing checks on the offices below, when men wish to take money to the cities, as it is a great convenience to them to have a check instead–and it saves us the trouble of shipping coin up from below for purchasing dust.”

The slime balls running Adams & Co’s bank used its deposits for their own purposes, causing it to fail in the Financial Panic of 1855. Like their later peers who brought on the Financial Panic of 2008, they escaped punishment. Adams’ express business reorganized as the Pacific Express, but ties to equally shady bankers brought its demise.

Wells Fargo Express Co. Deadwood Treasure Wagon and Guards with $250,000 gold bullion from the Great Homestake Mine, Deadwood, S.D., 1890

Wells Fargo emerged from the February crisis resolving to remove banking functions, such as receiving deposits and loaning that money, from its upcountry offices. By the end of 1855, it had 56 offices throughout California, in the agricultural areas as well as the mining districts and Wells Fargo kept growing. These offices, of course, sold bills of exchange. As a safety measure, the San Francisco office made them out to the agent in charge and his endorsement is a boon to autograph collectors.

Those Wells Fargo agents that now bought gold dust did so under their own names as their own private business. At the same time, the fixed price for gold dust broke down and purchasers bought dust on its assayed value. Dust-buying became a very local business. Charles T. Blake, as agent at Michigan Bluff, knew a hundred different varieties from the area’s mines, ranging from 630 to 930 fine. Therefore, Blake continued, a local buyer had to know “gold and its value the moment they see it.” By 1857, several Wells Fargo agents learned assaying. Thereby, said William Daegener, Wells Fargo’s agent in Columbia, “I shall be sure to pay the highest price and have profit left.”

How does this fit into collecting bills of exchange and checks? Those agents who bought gold sold checks to local merchants drawn on their San Francisco accounts. Their inland exchange system mirrored Wells Fargo cycle sending gold and bills of exchange between the east and west coasts. 1860s Agents Checks are available in decent numbers from Daegener at Columbia, Charles Theodore Hart Palmer at Folsom, and Cornelius C. Beekman, at Jacksonville, Oregon.

San Francisco – Wells Fargo Express, Montgomery St.

As records survive for packrat C.T.H. Palmer, he becomes the example. Wells Fargo deposited Palmer’s proceeds from gold sales into his San Francisco checking account. In turn, Palmer sold Folsom merchants and miners Wells Fargo checks drawn on this account and payable in San Francisco. “Checks on San Francisco at Par” drew customers. Rival dust buyers made similar arrangements with other banks, such as the Bank of D.O. Mills in Sacramento and the Bank of California in San Francisco. With no system to clear out-of-town checks, interior merchants jumped at this chance to pay Bay City wholesalers.

As an example, in the summer of 1860, Palmer wrote and average of 237 checks monthly. When his gold deposits did not quite cover his check clearings, Wells Fargo charged him daily interest on the overdraft, figured at 1/15 percent per day, or 2 percent per month—charges comparable to current credit cards. Through this arrangement of continually buying dust and selling checks, Palmer reused his capital. For instance:

Gold Checks Difference June 1860 $85,457 $92,299 -$6,842 July 1860 $116,105 $103,782 +$12,323 August 1860 $95,898 $98,786 -$2,888 Total $297,460 $294,867 +$2,593

This is a brief survey of collectible Wells Fargo financial documents. Wells Fargo’s eastern banking offices at New York, Boston, and Philadelphia also sold bills of exchange, generally with black printing on white paper, payable in California. San Francisco, New York, and Boston, also sold exchange payable in Europe. Wells Fargo banks in Virginia and Carson City, Nevada, and Salt Lake City, Utah, drew bills of exchange, while in the 1870s, some interior agents had their own decorative bills of exchange payable by Wells Fargo in New York. Naturally, Wells Fargo checks used by customers reflect all of the current printing styles and Federal Government stamp tax laws. The variety of fiscal paper is endless.