Wells Fargo is an American financial services company with banks in many states, especially in the western United States. The company provides services including banking, mortgages, insurance, and financial management.

The original company was founded as Wells, Fargo & Company in March 1852 by Henry Wells and William George Fargo (the two had earlier helped establish the American Express Company). The purpose of the company was to handle the banking and express business prompted by the California gold rush. In California the company handled the purchase, sale, and transport of gold and other goods that moved from the West to the East Coast by ship, across the Isthmus of Panama. In the decade following 1855, Wells Fargo expanded into the stagecoach business with overland routes from Missouri and the Midwest to the Rockies and the Far West. In 1866 a grand consolidation brought almost all Western stagecoach lines under the Wells Fargo name. The days of using stagecoaches gradually declined, however, after completion of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869.

In 1905 Wells Fargo’s banking operations in California were separated from its express operations. After several mergers and name changes, the banking operations materialized in the late 20th century as Wells Fargo Bank. Headquartered in San Francisco, California, Wells Fargo Bank had more than 300 branches throughout California as well as subsidiaries, affiliates, and branches worldwide. Mergers and acquisitions continued into the 1990s, so by the early 21st century Wells Fargo had become one of the largest banks in the United States.

Wells Fargo was an express carrier until 1918, when its domestic operations were taken over by the American Railway Express Company (which became REI Express, Inc., in 1971 but declared bankruptcy in 1975). Wells Fargo’s foreign express business continued independently until 1924, when the American Express Company gained a controlling interest in Wells Fargo stock and took over the remaining Wells Fargo express business. During the years under American Express, Wells Fargo also developed security services; these, together with rights to the Wells Fargo name, were sold in 1967 and survived as the Wells Fargo Armored Service Corporation. In 1997 the Wells Fargo Armored Service Corporation merged with Loomis Armored Inc., and four years later that company merged with Securitas AB, a Swedish company.