The Bold and the Beautiful actor Krista Allen is wowing fans as Taylor Hayes. The actor made her debut in December 2021, and viewers are curious to know more about the actor. With a career spanning over two decades, Allen’s raked up a lot of projects and money. Read on to learn more about her career and net worth.

‘The Bold and the Beautiful’ star Krista Allen’s personal life and net worth

Allen was born on April 5, 1971, in Ventura, California. Her acting career started in 1994 when she was cast as Emmanuelle in the TV film franchise. She would appear in shows such as Baywatch Hawaii, Married…Children, and big-screen movies like Liar Liar and Anger Management. But her rise to fame came with the soap opera Days of Our Lives.

Allen’s TV and film roles helped earn her a nice nest egg. According to Celebrity Net Worth, the actor’s worth $4 million. Aside from her professional success, Allen is also a mother to Jacob from her marriage to producer Justin Moritt. Allen and Morritt married in 1996 and divorced in 1999.

The actor also dated George Clooney and Nathan Fillion. In October 2012, she married rapper Mams Taylor, but they divorced in February 2012.

Her first soap opera role was on ‘Days of Our Lives’

Allen is no stranger to daytime. In 1996, she was cast as Billie Reed on Days of Our Lives, replacing Lisa Rinna. Billie returns to Salem and begins a love triangle with Bo Brady (Peter Reckell) and Hope Brady (Kristian Alfonso). Although Bo loves Hope, he’s forced to marry Billie when his undercover mission is threatened.

Bo and Billie’s relationship becomes more complicated when she discovers she’s pregnant. Billie goes into premature labor and losers her daughter; however, she keeps it a secret from Bo. Billie later fakes a fall during an argument with Hope and claims Hope pushed her, resulting in Billie’s miscarriage. However, Billie’s lies are exposed, and she leaves town while Bo and Hope reunite.

Krista Allen is happy to be on ‘The Bold and the Beautiful’

Allen returned to her soap opera roots in December 2021 with her The Bold and the Beautiful debut. She had big shoes to fill, taking over a role made famous by Hunter Tylo. In an interview with Soap Opera Digest, Allen described her approach to portraying Taylor. “She is a woman of great strength, and that’s what I am prepared to bring to the role.”