Krista Allen is an actress, model, and comedian who was born on April 5, 1972, in Ventura, California. She began her career as an actress in 1994 and has worked in both television and film. She is best-known for her roles in the television series ‘Baywatch’, ‘Days of Our Lives’, and ‘Significant Mother’. In the latter, she played the eponymous role from 2015 to 2016. She is also known for the film ‘The Final Destination. Despite having a successful career, there are many facts that people do not know about this talented actress. Here are five things you probably don’t know about Krista Allen.

1. She Apprehended a Burglar in Her Home

Krista Allen recently attracted media attention to herself after she apprehended a burglar in her home. She had arrived home to find the transient woman inside and immediately dialed 911. She then restrained the woman until the police arrived. It is rumored that the woman had drunk Krista’s alcohol, ingested pills from the house, and had taken the actresses vibrator. The unknown woman also injured Allen’s pet dog in the incident.

2. She Has Been Married Twice

Allen’s first husband was production manager and producer Justin Morritt. They were married on September 14, 1996. Their son, Jacob Nolan, was born in the July of the following year. Sadly, the marriage didn’t last and they were divorced in 1999. In October 2010, she married her second husband Mams Taylor who is an Iranian rapper. Unfortunately, her second marriage also failed and they separated in 2011. Their divorce was finalized in February 2012.

3. She Was in the Erotic Series ‘Emmanuelle in Space’

Krista Allen first rose to prominence when she landed the role of Emmanuelle in the erotic science fiction series of TV movies ‘Emmanuelle in Space’. This series consisted of a total of eight TV movies, all of which were aired in 1994. She starred in these films opposite Paul Michael Robinson who played Captain Heffron Williams. The films are loosely based on the character ‘Emmanuelle’ who was created in the 1960s by Emmanuelle Arsan. Alain Siritzky produced this series of television films.

4. She Has a Degree and Has Pursued Different Careers

Allen attended Austin Community College where she majored in education. While she was a student, she worked in the beauty department of a FOley’s store. She then went to the University of Texas where she graduated with a degree in education. She undertook an internship as a teacher in a Kindergarten as she had initially intended to pursue a career in education. She has also earned qualifications to become a certified yoga teacher. Despite these qualifications, she decided that she wanted to become an actress and moved to California to achieve her goals.

5. She Was in ‘Black Widow’

In the 2010 thriller film ‘Black Widow’, Krista Allen played the role of Jennifer. The film also starred Janine Turner, Jennifer O’Dell, and Jack Scalia. The movie was written, directed, and produced by Mark Roemmich. It received mixed reviews from critics but was a commercial success as it grossed $34 million despite being made on a budget of only $4 million.