CHENGDU, CHINA--(Marketwired - Jun 23, 2015) - Chengdu's newest retail landmark Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu yesterday unveiled the 10 meter by 2 meter canvas painting "Chengdu Garden", jointly created by world renowned pop art artist James Warhola and eight-year-old Australian art prodigy Aelita Andre. The stunning painting will kickstart a week of spectacular arts, music, cultural and fashion events to celebrate the retail complex's global launch.

Government officials from Sichuan province, City of Chengdu and Chengdu Jinjiang Disctrict, foreign consulate, Chengdu based international companies and councils attended the ceremony. Chengdu Municipal Government Mayor Tang Liangzhi, Director of Sichuan Provincial Department of Commerce Xie Kaihua, Secretary of Communist Party Committee of Jinjiang District Zhou Siyuan, together with Sino-Ocean Land Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer Li Ming, and Swire Properties Executive Director Davy Ho, participated in an unveiling ceremony for the painting "Chengdu Garden". The painting is the two artists' rendition of a prosperous and harmonious modern Chengdu, using an ingenious blend of colours to showcase the city's vibrant spirit. Before the unveiling ceremony, a press conference themed "Building the International Shopping Paradise in Chengdu" was held in the Guangdong Hall at Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu and attended by Vice Mayor of Chengdu Municipal Government Fu Yonglin, Chairman of Municipal Commission of Commerce Guo Qizho and District Chief of Jinjiang district Chen Lizhang.

Davy Ho, Executive Director of Swire Properties, commented: "This painting was created by two iconic artists of different eras and it embodies the very essence of Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu, reflecting the development's colourful and diverse character. Our retail complex is an excellent example of how an urban city centre can be redefined through cultural, lifestyle and commercial landmarks. Thank you very much to the continuous support by the Chengdu city government and leaders, we are honoured that it is playing a defining role in the "Colours of Chengdu."

Li Ming, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of Sino-Ocean Land, said: "We are delighted to have created this unique landmark in the heart of Chengdu and it is our hope that it will become the city's new fashion and cultural hub. Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu sets a new benchmark for the industry and for commercial real estate development in China. It would not have been possible without the strong support and encouragement of the Government and the people of this great city."

The unveiling ceremony of "Chengdu Garden" signified the beginning of the global launch campaign in Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu. Between 22-29 June, a number of luxury and lifestyle brands at Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu will join the "Colours of Chengdu" celebrations by hosting a series of retail and cultural activities.

Located in the heart of Chengdu Jinjiang district with close proximity to the Chunxi Road commercial zone, Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu spans more than 100,000 sq. m. of open-plan, low rise and lane driven shopping urban space. Surrounding the thousand-year-old Daci Temple, Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu provides a new interpretation to the traditional architectures, while adding radiance to the retained historical streets and traditional courtyards. The international perspective and innovative design concept behind the development has revived the distinctive appearance of Chengdu city centre and injected new vitality in the traditional commercial district. The retail complex is complemented by the Temple House, a boutique hotel and serviced apartments managed by Swire Hotels, and Pinnacle One, a 47-storey Grade A office tower.

Please click the link below for further information:

http://tinyurl.com/pwmyvb4

Image

International artists James Warhola (left) and Aelita Andre (right) collaborated on canvas painting "Chengdu Garden" to kickstart the celebration of the global launch of Sino-Ocean Taikoo Li Chengdu

http://release.media-outreach.com/i/Download/3294

Chengdu Municipal Government Mayor Tang Liangzhi (middle), Director of Sichuan Provincial Department of Commerce Xie Kaihua (second right), Secretary of Communist Party Committee of Jinjiang District Zhou Siyuan (first left), Sino-Ocean Land Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer Li Ming (second left), Swire Properties Executive Director Davy Ho (first right), James (third right), Aelita (front)

http://release.media-outreach.com/i/Download/3297

Chengdu Garden

http://release.media-outreach.com/i/Download/3298

Company Logo

http://release.media-outreach.com/i/Download/3293