Oira Sukeban (2006)

Written and directed by Noburu Iguchi

based on the manga by Go Nagai

Also known as Sukeban Boy

This is an amazing movie. This is as mind-blowingly good as it gets. Somehow a whirlwind of disparate influences syphon through a digital video camera and lands on its feet, teeth bared, ready to can-can kick your ass into submission. It should be impossible to watch: a horror of bad writing, cheesy costumes and production values normally found in camcorder theater; the actors read lines and then trail off, converse in choppy exchanges and set themselves for shots; the music is recycled from a third rate funk soundtrack filtered through the heartless interpretation of a session band and a Pro-Tools studio.

But it ties together, commands your attention and then slaps you in the face. You’re laughing hysterically and your hand wants to cover your eyes before the next ludicrously profane act but there’s no way you’ll miss what’s coming. There’s rampant nudity, extreme violence and an ever present sense that a line will be crossed which will forever change the viewer’s ability to act like an upstanding member of society. The real world will forever be a boring place with muted colors, distant sounds and an utter lack of the absurd. You’ll feel lonely, wondering where the gangs of schoolgirls have gotten to and why no one laughs anymore.

Sukeban (Asami, recently in The Machine Girl) has been cursed with a pretty face which leads to his daily torment by classmates and random beggars on the street. His only defense is to become a violent sociopath which leads to his expulsion from every school in town and his disappointed single father/biker to confront his son (in the bathtub) and send him off to an all-girl’s school. Suffering the humiliation of dressing like a girl Sukeban struggles to hide his roguish ways and avoid detection but is immediately challenged (by a thrown knife or two) and forced to protect himself. Another student and fellow outsider, Mochiko (Emiru Momose), reveals to him that the school is overrun with gangs and they become best friends with severe sexual undertones. Their first date? Visiting the new school club which teaches girls to be more feminine through humiliation.

Humiliation? Yes, girls strip naked while crying how ashamed of their bodies they are as their classmates taunt them. Mochiko is coerced to strip to her underwear but Sukeban, being a boy (although one played by a girl), knows he cannot do as is expected of him. This leads to a stand-off with the club leader Kanko (Saori Matsunaka) while Mochiko’s clothes are torn apart by half-naked girls wearing football padding and helmets. A fight ensues, and respect is earned. Suddenly Mochiko finds she isn’t the only girl with a crush on Sukeban and there’s something about her quiet consideration and tendency towards rumination that promises this competition will be for keeps.