Crayon Shin-chan Manga Genre Comedy

Slice of Life Demographic Seinen Writer Yoshito Usui Illustrator Yoshito Usui Publisher Futabasha Magazine Weekly Manga Action

Manga Town Volumes 50 Started August 1990 Ended present Anime Directed by Mitsuru Hongo

Keiichi Hara

Yuji Muto Studio Shin-Ei Animation Original run April 13, 1992 - present

Crayon Shin-chan (or more simply known as Shin-chan) is a manga series written and drawn by Yoshito Usui, which originally ran from August 1990 to February 2010 until a new series titled New Crayon Shin-chan began in August 2010.

The series primarily focuses on the crude, comedic, and raunchy situations of a 5-year-old boy named Shinnosuke Nohara (who often goes by "Shin") alongside his parents, baby sister, dog, and friends from school.

An anime series based on the manga was produced by Shin-Ei Animation in April 1992 and is still currently airing with over 900 episodes. Several animated films based off the anime were also produced and have been released annually since July 1993.

Manga

Volume 1

Volume 2

Volume 10

Volume 13

Misae tries dieting after fantasizing about gaining weight, but soon succumbs to the stresses of day-to-day life and orders a pizza.

Anime

Fun With Balloons (E08a) (Vitello Dub)

Vacation Fun (E09b) (Vitello Dub)

The Noharas overeat during their vacation.

Fatboy Shin! (S01E16a) (Funimation Dub)

Shin gains weight after excessively eating and tries hard to lose it to impress Nanako.

(E451)

Shiro Got Fat (E1052)

Let's Go On A Bus Tour! (E1129)

Crayon Shin-chan Spin-off

To Earth (S1E13)

TV Specials

Crayon Shin-Chan! B-Class Gourmet Survival!! (Rough Translation) (Special 71)

The Noharas compete in an eating tournament.

Unknown Episodes

Eating a Jumbo Ramen (Unknown episode number)

The family tackle a challenge to finish giant bowls of udon in under 30 minutes

Our Takoyaki Feast (Unknown episode number)

Hotel Buffet Restaurant Food Notes (Unknown episode number)

Shin-Chan and Misae both overeat at a buffet.

Unknown Episode

The Noharas clean out their refrigerator, resulting in a lot of food that needs eating.

Unknown Episode

Unknown Episode

The Noharas host a dinner party.

Unknown Episode

Unknown Episode

Films

Crayon Shin-chan: Fierceness That Invites Storm! Operation Golden Spy (M19)

thumb The Queens of the Republic of Sukashipestuan test their MegaBomb II solution on Shin and his family, causing them all to swell up with gas.

Later on, Shin and Lemon eat even more of the MegaBomb II solution to dispose of it, forcing them both to swell to an immense size and effectively destroy the Queens' facility. The Queens are then ultimately defeated shortly after Shin and Lemon force them to ingest the formula themselves and subsequently bloat before blasting off into the sky.

Crayon Shin-chan: Shrouded in Mystery! The Flowers of Tenkazu Academy (M29)

Ahoka Teramori shows off her many athletic accomplishments, which include two separate competitive eating wins.