Sharr Prohaska, History of the Development of Bridal Veil, Oregon and the Bridal Veil Lumbering Company

In November 1882, J. Frank Buchanan, Richard Oakley, and Willard P. Hawley acquired title to property around the site of the paper mill. ... The title to the property included land from the Columbia River to a point above the falls on the creek known as "Big Gall Creek or Bridal Veil Creek". They received the "right to take water from the creek at a distance of not more than 60 feet above the top of said falls to an amount equal to 55 horsepower based upon a 95 foot fall by Laffels measurement".

...

Bridal Veil received its name from a lady who was traveling along the Columbia River on a stern-wheeler, Bailey Gatzert. When the lady saw the cascading waterfalls from the stern-wheeler, she exclaimed that the falls reminded her of "a delicate misty brides veil". Through the years her remark has become a "legend" as more and more people began to refer to this special place in the Columbia Gorge as Brides Veil, Oregon.

When the first post office opened at the site, the community was officially named, "Bridal Veil". About the same time, the O.R. & N Railroad built a small train depot and the train schedule officially named the stop, Bridal Veil."

Prohaska, Sharr. "History of the Development of Bridal Veil, Oregon and the Bridal Veil Lumbering Company." Portland: Multnomah County, Oregon. June 1992. Qtd. in Topinka, Bridal Veil. http://columbiariverimages.com/Regions/Places/bridal_veil.html Accessed April 21, 2020.

Steve the Amateur Historian: Columbia River Gorge Ghost Towns

Comment by Clyde Senger, May 2022

About 1945, I was logging 2nd growth on some of the former timber company holdings on Larch Mt. There was a road, very steep, down to Bridal Veil. I thought I remembered a mill building there but do not specifically remember houses. The rails were gone from the RR but trestles with ties remained south of the Larch Mt highway.. You could still see logs embedded in the dirt where they skidded logs. There were scattered huge logs of cedar that had been left. No idea why. My boss built a cabin from 10 foot shakes he split from some of the cedar logs. Still in good shape. We built a small sawmill and cut some of the logs for the Portland market.

Comment by Shasta Lin Photography, 2021

The grave of Jesse O Amend in the Bridal Veil cemetery... She traveled with her family to Oregon to visit her grandparents who lived in Bridal Veil (now the Bridal Veil B&B), while in Oregon she contracted diphtheria and passed away, her family never returned back east after she passed. Also, there is a grave of the Luscher children, 4 children, all passed away in December of the same year as Jesse, from diphtheria as well. The Columbia River had flooded over the railroad tracks that year.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FSOhpvvN-Zg&t=374s (Accessed:A June 21, 2022)