United States

Oregon

Bridal Veil Falls

Corbett, Oregon

Rated 4.1/5 based on 8 reviews

4.1/5

based on 8 reviews

Details

Distance

0.54 miles

Elevation Gain

144 ft

Route Type

Out-and-Back

Description

Added by Michael Matti

Bridal Veil Falls is a beautiful waterfall located right off the Columbia River Gorge Highway just east of Portland, Oregon. The trail to the waterfall is relatively short at less than one mile roundtrip. Plan for 20 minutes of trail time to stop and take in the falls.

The trailhead for this short hike is right off of the Columbia River Highway just west of Multnomah Falls. You can't miss the parking lot for it; there is a sign for Bridal Veil and the parking lot is visible from the road.

The hike is only 0.6 miles and has hardly any elevation gain (70 feet). The trail is well traveled and is definitely good for families. The hike may not be much, but it does go through some pretty woods and crosses a bridge over the stream. The waterfall is a beautiful 2 tiered falls. You can view the falls from the observation deck or take a small path to the big rock in front of the falls.

This is a good hike to tack onto the end of a trip to the Columbia River Gorge as it's on the way back to Portland.

Read More

Download the Outbound mobile app

Find adventures and camping on the go, share photos, use GPX tracks, and download maps for offline use.

Get the app

Download GPX File

Features

Photography

Hiking

Bathrooms

Dog Friendly

Easy Parking

Family Friendly

Forest

River

Waterfall

Bridal Veil Falls Reviews

Clayton Lukens

07/01/20

The 0.6 hike doesn’t make this very worth it to drive out to but it is still beautiful to photograph once ya get there

3.0

Kristina Kifyak

05/29/18

I thought it was a very pretty waterfall. Simple, short, and easy hike. Family friendly yes, but don’t take a stroller down as there are stairs along the trail. Loved the greenery around the waterfalls!

5.0

Lindsy Dugan

11/05/16

This was not my favorite stop along HWY 30, but it is a good stop for a short hike. This one would be good for kids, but there isn't much to explore around the waterfall so I found it anti-climatic.

3.0

Jhamil Bader

07/26/16

It's not my favorite Oregon waterfall, but it's still beautiful! a fun short hike to this pleasant falls and creek. as always, choose wisely when planning a trip to the gorge as it gets SUPER busy, especially during the summer months! weekdays (and early morning starts on weekends) are your friend.

4.0

Alex E

Explorer

07/18/16

Young and Old can make it down this short an easy hike for a spectacular view!

5.0

Lilly Kim

01/24/16

Went in the pouring rain today! Ended up being a lot shorter than I expected, but it still was a sight to see.

4.0

Leave No Trace

Always practice Leave No Trace ethics on your adventures and follow local regulations. Please explore responsibly!

Nearby

Devil's Rest-Wahkeena Falls Loop

This loop takes advantage of the western Columbia River Gorge's vast network of trails - hidden behind the roadside waterfalls - to allow you to visit several popular attractions without fighting traffic along the historic highway. All told, the loop hits 3 named waterfalls (Coopey Falls, Fairy Falls, and Wahkeena Falls) and 2 spectacular viewpoints (Angel's Rest and Devil's Rest). The only dow...

Angel's Rest

The Columbia River Gorge is absolutely full of incredible hikes - that said, this is one of the best and requires less time and energy than some of the others. Starting at a paved parking lot right off the Historic Columbia River Gorge Highway (note: it's a very popular trail so arrive early or you'll be parking somewhere else, even off-season), the trail immediately cuts into scenic Oregon fo...

Latourell Falls Loop

Heads up! There's construction going on at the eastern part of the trail and the main parking lot is closed. But don't worry, you can still get to the trail from the west entrance turning this hike into an out-and-back. For the latest updates, check out the Oregon State Parks website: https://stateparks.oregon.gov/.. Take a short walk to the base of Latourell Falls, where there is a small poo...

Hike to Upper Bridal Veil Falls

At the parking lot for Angel's Rest, turn left uphill on to Palmer Mill Road. Drive for about a mile, and park right past a tributary stream/small waterfall (pictured above) on your left that flows through a small pipe under the road. You will see a small space to park on the right. Park here and you will see a faint trail beaten down only by foot. Start walking down the trail, and it will grad...

Cape Horn Trail

The Cape Horn Trail is great for those who are short on time, but still want to get outside for something close by with great views. Located just 35 min east of Portland, the Cape Horn Trail offers a few different possibilities for you to hike. The whole loop (lower section is closed from Feb 1st to July 15th for bird nesting) is around 6.5 miles and offers great views up high and a pretty low...

Fairy Falls

Fairy Falls sits in the heart of the Columbia River Gorge, not much more than a mile from the Wahkeena Trailhead. The parking lot is right off the Old Columbia River Highway and will be packed with cars in the summer. Head up the trail towards Wahkeena Falls, which is not far up the hill. This falls is impressive for sure, but tends to be quite busy in the summer. After taking in the view cont...

© 2024 The Outbound Collective - Terms of Use - Privacy Policy