————————————————

2 Thunder monsters

Once per opponent’s turn (Quick Effect): You can discard 1 card, then target 1 Thunder monster in your GY, except a Link Monster; Special Summon it to your zone this card points to.

————————————————

Can Be Found In: Soul Fusion (SOFU-EN049)

Thunder monsters are some of the most unorthodox Types in the game, having unique playstyles and strong cards periodically appearing in some builds. Some monsters like “Thunder Dragon” and “Zaborg the Thunder Monarch” became popular in many strategies to the point of obtaining their own archetypes, others like “Denko Sekka” and “Thunder King Rai-Oh” are strong choices for an Anti-Meta approach, and their archetypes can range from lockdown by Watt to beatdown like Batteryman. Is a diverse Type with many themes and strategies to choose from, yet besides of some competitive builds don’t gain the recognition of more popular Types despite their great efficiency in various fields.

“Some Summer Summoner” is a particular Link Monster, offering a strong effect compared to many others but with an odd timing to do so. During the opponent’s turn, “Some Summer Summoner” let us discard a card to revive a non-Link Thunder monster from our Graveyard and placing it below one of its arrows. Special Summons of this kind are nothing new and quite recurrent in many Decks nowadays, but the fact is activated during the opponent’s turn makes it not as simple to benefit from. However, if we manage not only our Graveyard but also the cards we could discard for its effect, “Some Summer Summoner” offers lots of potential beyond summoning monsters in response of some opponent’s actions.

Thunder might not be as discussed as more popular Types, but they have more than enough resources to summon “Some Summer Summoner” right from the first turn. A single “Photon Sanctuary” will suffice for its Link Summon, bringing two Thunder tokens ready to use as materials as this Type easily bypasses its demerits. Other method is the consecutive Normal Summon provided by “Pahunder” and “Mahunder”, and thanks to the searching effects of “Brohunder” and “Thunder Sea Horse” we can easily gather these monsters together to swarm the field with. Things will go even further if we focus arround an archetype, ranging from Thunder Dragons using their hand effects as well cards like”Thunder Dragonhawk” and “Thunder Dragons’ Hundred Thunders” to summon their members, to Batteryman as members such as “Batteryman Charger” and “Batteryman Fuel Cell” along other options won’t take long to prepare the Link Summon. In combination with the usual staple cards to Special Summon monsters with, not only “Some Summer Summoner” will be easy to summon but also let us keep a steady hand ready for its effect.

While other summoning effects are available during our turn to gain momentum on our summons and setups, “Some Summer Summoner” takes an odd approach by limiting its ability to the opponent’s turn. It is possible to revive a Thunder monster right when the opponent’s turn is about to end, specially if we summon this Link Monster during their turn by a revival effect or other methods. However, the true power of “Some Summer Summoner” comes from which cards we will use as cost as well which Thunder monster we will summon afterwards. Obviously we can discard monsters which “Some Summer Summoner” will revive immediately (As long there was a proper target beforehand), but we can use monsters like Thunder Dragons which search their own copies while also have multiple uses by being either on the field or the Graveyard. However, since this monster summons during the opponent’s turn its best choice is to summon monsters which could disrupt the opponent’s game, ranging from “Lightning Rod Lord” and “Thunder King Rai-Oh” shutting down certain cards with their pressence, to the revival of “Thunderclap Skywolf” as wipes out all face-up monsters on the opposite field. And even in the worst situations it can provide some solid results, as summons monsters like “Thunder Dragonroar” in response of a removal effect to obtain other monster(s) in return.

Because of the timing of its effect and poor ATK to survive the opponent’s turn, “Some Summer Summoner” might not be as prevalent compared to many other summoning options. However, by building arround the chainable nature of its effect “Some Summer Summoner” can become quite troublesome to deal with. While similar options often focuses on gathering materials and lead monsters, “Some Summer Summoner” instead can go from supporting archetypes like Thunder Dragons to shutting down the opponent’s plans as summons monsters like “Thunderclap Skywolf”. While might not be suitable for every Thunder Deck, “Some Summer Summoner” can become a dangerous monster even if has to answer its own defeat by reviving another creature.

Personal Rating: A-

+ Revives a non-Link Thunder monster during the opponent’s turn

+ Very easy to summon

+ Sinergy with various monsters including those with effects during the opponent’s turn