NameWilliam Allen , M

Birth Date14 Feb 1810

Birth PlaceLondon, England

Death Date28 Feb 1839 Age: 29

ReligionEpiscopal

FlagsMilitary

Military notes for William Allen

Militia:William Allen was appointed a “Captain of the first Company of the fourth Regimental districts of this Militia” by Henry Dodge, Governor of the Territory of Wisconsin on 17 April 1837.

Notes for Huldah (Spouse 1)

Obituary, Red Wing Daily Republican, Published January 7, 1889: Mrs. Hulda Freeborn - It is with feelings of sorrow, shared by all our citizens, that we announce today the death of Mrs. Hulda Freeborn, one of the earliest settlers in Red Wing, which occurred Sunday night at her home on Fourth Street. She had been ailing for a long time past, gradually sinking until the end came, general debility and age being the cause of her death. Mrs. Hulda Freeborn was born in New York state, Oct. 25, in the year 1800, being as a consequence at the time of her death, 88 years, 2 months and 12 days of age. She lived in that state through the earlier years of her life. In 1832, she came west and settled at Dubuque, Iowa, where she married Capt. Ethan Allen. They erected the first house there, where we now find one of the most prosperous cities in the west, and lived in it for nineteen years. Her husband died while they resided there. In 1851 she came to St. Paul, then but a village and remained there three years. She then removed to this city which was her home up to the time of her death. When she first arrived here Red Wing was nothing but an Indian village and where the elegant business blocks now stand there were but the rude tepees of the red men. She endured many hardships here such as usualy attend settlement in a new country. She built the first boarding house in the city. Soon after settling here, she was married to William Freeborn, who had settled here several years prior to her coming. She was for many years landlady of the American House. She resided for many years in the house on Fourth street, where she was living at the time of her death. She was a member of the Episcopal church, a true and devout Christian and most estimable woman. She was loved by all who knew her and her good deeds will live long in their memories. Two sons, William G. and Ethan Allen, of St. Paul, and one daughter, Mrs. Hoag, of Dubuque, Iowa, survive her.

Obituary, Red Wing Daily Republican, January 9, 1889: Mrs. Hulda Freeborn -

The funeral of Mrs. Huldah Freeborn took place at 2 o’clock yesterday afternoon from Chritst-church. Rev. C.H. Plummer officiated and read the simple, yet impressive and beautiful service of the Episcopal church, being asisted by Dr. E. E. Edwards, who made a short and touching address on the life and character of the deceased, with whom he was well acquainted in the pioneer days of the city. A quartet sang the music of the service. Pall bearers: T. B. Sheldon, N. Swift, F. Joss, P. F. Giardon, S. A. Hart and George Shakespeare. The interment took place in Oakwood Cemetery.

Research notes for Huldah (Spouse 1)