The Wall Studio album by Pink Floyd Released November 30, 1979

December 8, 1979 Recorded December, 1978 - November, 1979 Studio Britannia Row Studios

Super Bear Studios

Miraval Studios

CBS 30th Street Studio

Producers Workshop

Cherokee Studios Label Harvest • EMI • Columbia • CBS Length 80:42 Genres Progressive rock • art rock • progressive pop Producers Pink Floyd Singles

Released November 23, 1979(UK) A-side "Another Brick in the Wall (Part II)" B-side "One of My Turns"

Released April, 1980 A-side "Run Like Hell" B-side "Don't Leave Me Now"

Released June 23, 1980(US) A-side "Comfortably Numb" B-side "Hey You"

The Wall is the eleventh studio album by the English rock band Pink Floyd, released on November 30, 1979. It is the final Pink Floyd album to feature the band’s classic ‘70s lineup, comprising Roger Waters (vocals, bass, synthesizers, acoustic and electric guitars), David Gilmour (electric and acoustic guitars, vocals, bass, keyboards, synthesizers), Nick Mason (drums), and Richard Wright (keyboards), who left the band under pressure from Waters prior to the album’s release.

Releases and track listings[]

UK release (November 30, 1979) runtime: 80:42 Side one

20:11 No. Song name Writer(s) Lead vocals Length 1 "In the Flesh?" Roger Waters 3:16 2 "The Thin Ice" Waters • David Gilmour 2:27 3 "Another Brick in the Wall" (Part I) 3:11 4 "The Happiest Days of Our Lives" 1:46 5 "Another Brick in the Wall" (Part II) Waters • Gilmour 3:59 6 "Mother" Waters • Gilmour 5:32 Side two

18:43 1 "Goodbye Blue Sky" Gilmour 2:45 2 "Empty Spaces" 2:10 3 "Young Lust" Waters • Gilmour Gilmour 3:25 4 "One of My Turns" 3:41 5 "Don't Leave Me Now" Waters • Gilmour 4:08 6 "Another Brick in the Wall" (Part III) 1:18 7 "Goodbye Cruel World" 1:16 Side three

20:09 1 "Hey You" Waters • Gilmour 4:40 2 "Is There Anybody Out There?" Waters • Gilmour 2:44 3 "Nobody Home" 3:26 4 "Vera" 1:35 5 "Bring the Boys Back Home" Waters • New York Opera 1:21 6 "Comfortably Numb" Waters • Gilmour Waters • Gilmour 6:23 Side four

21:39 1 "The Show Must Go On" Gilmour 1:36 2 "In the Flesh" 4:15 3 "Run Like Hell" Waters • Gilmour Waters • Gilmour 4:20 4 "Waiting for the Worms" 4:04 5 "Stop" 0:30 6 "The Trial" Waters • Bob Ezrin 5:13 7 "Outside the Wall" 1:41

Tracks From Film[]

"When The Tigers Broke Free" (Composed for the movie--released on a vinyl single, Echoes: The Best Of Pink Floyd and 2004 re-release of The Final Cut)

"What Shall We Do Now?" (Extended version of "Empty Spaces" left off the original album due to vinyl's time limits, used during live show)

Tracks From The Concert[]

The live version of The Wall, Is There Anybody Out There? The Wall Live 1980-81, included the following tracks not on the original album:

"What Shall We Do Now?" after "Empty Spaces"

"The Last Few Bricks" after "Another Brick In The Wall (Part III)"; usually a medley performed while the construction crew was finishing off the massive wall on stage

Tracks Intended, But Not Used[]

Originally written to be a triple-LP, although cut it down and left material out for the band's next release, The Final Cut.

"Is There Anybody Out There (Part II)" features previously unheard lyrics, part of which were later worked into "Hey You"

"Your Possible Pasts" later re-written for use on The Final Cut, however, the line "Do you remember me/How we used to be/Do you think/We should be/Closer?" was used in the film.

"One Of The Few" - working title, "Teach" - was later re-written for use on The Final Cut

"The Final Cut" also re-written for use on The Final Cut. A line from this song goes: Dial the combination / Open the priest-hole / And if I'm in, I'll tell you what's behind the wall. A gunshot is played over "behind the wall" in the final version of the song, to sever its connection to the album The Wall. The complete lyrics are still written in the inside sleeve of the album.

In 2012, several versions of The Wall were released as part of a Pink Floyd re-release campaign called "Why Pink Floyd...?" The versions were called Discovery, Experience and Immersion

Discovery[]

The original album remastered on two discs

Experience[]

The original album remastered on two discs as well as a third disc containing unreleased demos from The Wall. Track listing for Disc 3 is as follows:

Prelude (Vera Lynn) (0:56)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 1 (4:48)

The Thin Ice (3:31)

Goodbye Blue Sky (2:22)

Teacher, Teacher (2:50)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 2 (1:31)

Empty Spaces (1:53)

Young Lust (4:26)

Mother (4:38)

Don't Leave Me Now (4:34)

Sexual Revolution (5:00)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 3 (1:25)

Goodbye Cruel World (1:13)

In The Flesh? (3:25)

The Thin Ice (2:35)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 1 (3:41)

The Happiest Days Of Our Lives (1:44)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 2 (1:57)

Mother (4:33)

One Of My Turns (2:29)

Don't Leave Me Now (4:04)

Empty Spaces (0:51)

Backs To The Wall (1:33)

Another Brick In The Wall, Part 3 (1:22)

Goodbye Cruel World (1:05)

The Doctor (Comfortably Numb) (3:15)

Run Like Hell (3:06)

Immersion[]

The original album remastered on two discs

"Is There Anybody Out There? The Wall Live 1980-81" remastered on two discs

Two discs of unreleased demos from Roger Waters and Pink Floyd

DVD of videos relating to The Wall, which includes a Gerald Scarfe interview, the "Behind The Wall" documentary, "Another Brick In The Wall" promotional video, and a performance of "The Happiest Days Of Our Lives" live from Earl's Court. Total running time of DVD is 72:00

44-page booklet

Photo book by Jill Furmanovsky

Scarf designed by Storm Thorgerson

Three marbles with "The Wall" design with pouch

Coasters

Gerald Scarfe art print

Four collector's cards

Backstage pass replica

The Wall tour ticket replica

Poster containing all of the lyrics to the album, hand written by Gerald Scarfe.

Credits[]

Roger Waters — vocals, bass guitar, co-producer, synthesizer, electric guitar, acoustic guitar, sleeve design

David Gilmour — guitars, vocals, co-producer, sequencer; synthesizer, clavinet, bass guitar, percussion

Richard Wright — piano, organ, synthesizer, clavinet, bass pedals

Nick Mason — drums, percussion

with

Lee Ritenour — Rhythm Guitar on "One Of My Turns" and Acoustic Guitar on "Comfortably Numb"

Jeff Porcaro — Drums on "Mother"

Joe Porcaro — Marching Snare Drum on "Bring The Boys Back Home"

Blue Ocean — Marching Snare Drum on "Bring The Boys Back Home"

Freddie Mandell — Hammond Organ on "In The Flesh?" and "In The Flesh"

Bobbye Hall — Percussion

Ron di Blasi — Classical guitar on "Is There Anybody Out There?"

Larry Williams — Clarinet on "Outside The Wall"

Trevor Veitch — Mandolin

Frank Marrocco — Concertina

Bruce Johnston — Backing Vocals

Toni Tennille — Backing Vocals

Joe Chemay — Backing Vocals

Jon Joyce — Backing Vocals

Stan Farber — Backing Vocals

Jim Haas — Backing Vocals

Fourth Form Music Class, Islington Green School, London — Backing Vocals

Bob Ezrin — co-producer; Orchestra Arrangement; Keyboards

Michael Kamen — Orchestra Arrangement

James Guthrie — Co-Producer; Engineer; Percussion; Synthesizer on "Empty Spaces" (in collaboration with David Gilmour), Sequencer; Drums on "The Happiest Days Of Our Lives" (in collaboration with Nick Mason), remastering producer

Nick Griffiths — Engineer

Patrice Queff — Engineer

Brian Christian — Engineer

John McClure — Engineer

Rick Hart — Engineer

Robert Hrycyna — Engineer

Phil Taylor — Sound Equipment

Gerald Scarfe — Sleeve Design

Doug Sax — Mastering, Remastering

Info[]

At the beginning of the live 1980-81 album, the Vera Lynn song We'll Meet Again can be heard. In the live and studio versions of the song "Vera," it's referenced directly ("Does anybody here remember Vera Lynn? / Remember how she said that we would meet again some sunny day?"). The Vera Lynn song The Little Boy That Santa Claus Forgot is the first song in the movie.

"Empty Spaces" begins with a secret message recorded backwards:

Roger Waters: "Congratulations, You have just discovered the secret message. Please send your answers to 'Old Pink', Care of 'The Funny Farm', Chalfonte..." [interrupted by James Guthrie who says] "Roger, Carolyne's on the phone..."

"Waiting For The Worms": Near the end of the track, Roger (as Pink) barks out instructions and directions in street names (most of the words are inaudible):

We're (waiting to succeed) and going to convene outside Brixton Town Hall where we're going to be… WAITING…to cut out the deadwood… The Worms will convene outside Brixton Bus Station. We'll be moving along at about 12 o'clock down Stockwell Road… (Abbot's Road)… twelve minutes to three we'll be moving along Lambeth Road towards Vauxhall Bridge. Now when we get to the other side of Vauxhall Bridge we're in Westminster (Borough) area. It's quite possible we may encounter…

Brixton Town Hall and Stockwell Road are both in South London, and in areas with large black populations. It also mentions Lambeth Road, Vauxhall Bridge and Westminster, which fit, if we move north from Brixton, crossing the Thames at Vauxhall Bridge. What was implied is unclear.

The beginning and end of the album features a continuity; perhaps the most famous tape loop.

"Outside The Wall": "Isn't this where…"

"In The Flesh?": "…we came in?"