Atrial septal defect — PFO redirects here. For the airport, see Paphos International Airport. Atrial septal defect Classification and external resources Heart of human embryo of about thirty five days ICD 10 … Wikipedia

Congenital heart defect — Classification and external resources The normal structure of the heart (left) in comparison to two common locations for a ventricular septal defect (right), the most common form of congenital heart defect.[1] … Wikipedia

Casting defect — A casting defect is an irregularity in the metal casting process that is undesired. Some defects can be tolerated while others can be repaired otherwise they must be eliminated. They are broken down into five main categories: gas porosity,… … Wikipedia

Crystallographic defect — Crystalline solids exhibit a periodic crystal structure. The positions of atoms or molecules occur on repeating fixed distances, determined by the unit cell parameters. However, the arrangement of atom or molecules in most crystalline materials… … Wikipedia

Birth defect — Any defect present in a baby at birth, irrespective of whether the defect is caused by a genetic factor or by prenatal events that are not genetic. Birth defects may involve many different organs including the brain, heart, lungs, liver, bones,… … Medical dictionary

crystal defect — Crystall. defect (def. 3). * * * ▪ crystallography imperfection in the regular geometrical arrangement of the atoms in a crystalline solid. These imperfections result from deformation of the solid, rapid cooling from high temperature, or… … Universalium

TechExcel — Infobox Company company name = TechExcel Inc. company company type = Private company slogan = Accelerate Your Business foundation = 1995 location = Lafayette, California num employees = 180 est. (2008) industry = Computer software products =… … Wikipedia

cardiovascular disease — Introduction any of the diseases, whether congenital or acquired, of the heart and blood vessels (blood vessel). Among the most important are atherosclerosis, rheumatic heart disease, and vascular inflammation. Cardiovascular diseases are a … Universalium

syndrome — The aggregate of symptoms and signs associated with any morbid process, and constituting together the picture of the disease. SEE ALSO: disease. [G. s., a running together, tumultuous concourse; (in med.) a concurrence of symptoms, fr. syn,… … Medical dictionary

Disease — Illness or sickness often characterized by typical patient problems (symptoms) and physical findings (signs). Disruption sequence: The events that occur when a fetus that is developing normally is subjected to a destructive agent such as the… … Medical dictionary