1. TechExcel White Paper Optimize CRM Processes TechExcel CRM Introduction passive role, inefficiencies are inevitable. Individual’s roles may be different, with varying levels of authority, visibility, access, and control, but within these parameters each person must The Internet has fundamentally changed the way we do actively participate in the process to achieve the greatest results. business, and it has created huge opportunities for entirely new business models, from Web portals to e-commerce. Many of Companies that embrace this active-process model and these new companies have succeeded, and many have failed, implement it to the full extent that technology will allow will but this first wave of the Internet economy has set the stage quickly achieve a significant competitive advantage. Today the for even more innovation and success throughout all sectors of foundation of all business processes is software, and the best business. As exciting as the dot-com revolution was, the Internet software solutions will always take full advantage of the available continues to provide an even greater opportunity for more technology to optimize the business processes for which they traditional businesses. were designed. Optimizing Today’s Business Traditional CRM Systems Processes The most critical processes for any company are those that All successful business models are based on process. It is directly touch their customers, since it is the customers that efficient, well-defined business processes that differentiate will ultimately determine a company’s success or failure. average companies from exceptional ones, and the Internet now Traditionally CRM systems represent the core of every business provides the opportunity to truly re-define and optimize these and typically included Marketing, Sales, and Customer Support. processes. Companies that do not recognize this fact will soon find themselves unable to compete in the new economy. Even though CRM processes are all focused on the customer, software applications in this area have historically treated To fully optimize any business process it is essential that every customers as very passive elements. In the 1990s CRM person involved be an active participant in the process itself. applications were designed around conceptual models When key players are outside of the process, and play only a optimized for the available technology. Windows-based client/server systems allowed for elaborate collaboration 1 Optimize your CRM processes

2. TechExcel White Paper within organizations, yet customer involvement was limited to basic The Active Customer Model communication via phone, fax, e-mail, and limited Web sites. This Passive Customer model, while fundamentally flawed, was the only feasible In today’s extremely competitive Internet economy it is more important approach given the technological limitations of the time. than ever for companies to fully embrace new technology to optimize their business processes. Advances in Internet and wireless technologies now Figure 1 illustrates the traditional Passive Customer model. CRM software allow companies to fully incorporate their customers and partners into providers have developed many creative ways to graphically represent their core business processes as truly active participants. this model, but they all share the same common focus on the interaction between the core business groups, and the customers and business partners To achieve this, however, requires powerful software solutions based do not have any directly access to, or interaction with the central database. on more sophisticated conceptual models than the traditional Passive Customer approach. One unique new approach that provides a framework for this new generation of CRM is called the Active Customer model. The Active Customer model incorporates the three core business groups - employees, customers, and partners - directly into each of a company’s CRM processes. The model no longer focuses on the interaction and communication between these groups, but instead emphasizes the incorporation of each group into the process itself. Communication between the company, its partners, and its customers simply becomes a Technological advances such as personal computers, wireless natural byproduct of the system, not the basis of the system itself. communication, and the Internet have significantly enhanced our ability to communicate with customers, but the architecture of established Figure 2 illustrates the Active Customer model, highlighting how applications remains tied to the traditional Passive Customer model. These customers and business partners are incorporated directly into the business systems focus almost exclusively on the interaction, communication, and processes, each having appropriate and controlled access to the central collaboration within the organization, and simply relay the pertinent database. information to customers and business partners. To fully realize the Active Customer model, however, it must be integrated While today’s communication methods are very efficient, utilizing directly into the software application’s low-level architecture. Every elaborate Web pages and e-mail systems, the customer is still simply being aspect of the system from individual field customization to advanced served and does not play an active role in the process itself. Every company workflow and process automation must be conceived and designed from has a Web site today and many provide customers with Web access to the beginning with this model mind. Unless the Active Customer model is account information, but having a sophisticated Web presence is vastly designed into the system from the very beginning, there is little chance of different from truly Web-enabling your business processes. achieving the optimal results. 2 Optimize your CRM processes

3. TechExcel White Paper The well-established CRM software providers developed their software architectures at a time when the Internet and wireless technologies were in their infancy. While many of these products are mature and well designed to manage the Passive Customer model, they simply cannot be easily re-designed to support this new, more optimized approach. So, as with most significant technological trends, it is the small innovative software providers that have the advantage by designing comprehensive CRM solutions around these new Active models from the very first line of code. Below are a few examples of how the Active Customer model must be integrated into the application’s low-level architecture. • One of the basic process automation features in high-end systems is automatic notification. Simply stated, the right people need to be notified about the right events at the right time. Under the Active Customer model, both customers and partners can be easily configured to be notified in the same manner as the support team, keeping them fully informed about all actions taken with respect to their issues. • While all customers and partners should be active players, each of them does not require the same level of access, visibility, or authority within the system. So software solutions based on the Active Customer model must allow for multiple customers access types, each with its own definable set of privileges. Intelligent Implementation is • With the Active Customer model the customers themselves should Essential be able to be assigned ownership of specific tasks within the process. These tasks can be completely defined by the company, but the software Adopting the right conceptual model is critical for any business software architecture must easily allow these tasks to be defined and assigned to the application, but that is only the beginning. The implementation of appropriate customer contact. In some cases these customer-owned tasks this model must be well conceived and well executed, and requires a or events should even be automatically created as a designed part of the sophisticated approach to ensure success. One such approach, which business process workflow. TechExcel refers to as eIntelligence, asserts that to optimize any business process software solutions must be powerful, configurable, deployable, Software developers must have the right conceptual model in mind at accessible, scalable, and secure. Each of these software requirements is the very early stages of software development in order to optimize their outlined below. solution. Once a system has been designed and implemented around one approach, such as the Passive Customer model, it is nearly impossible to 1. Powerful change that underlying model by simply adding new features, modules, or interfaces. At the most basic level, optimized software solutions must provide all of the high-end features and functionality required for the process, and adopt the conceptual model most appropriate for the business process. 3 Optimize your CRM processes

4. TechExcel White Paper 2. Configurable Summary These powerful features must be completely configurable to reflect every In today’s competitive economy, companies will succeed or fail to a large aspect of each company’s unique processes, and must be easily customized degree based on how well they manage their customer relationships. This directly by the people with the most intimate knowledge of the process. requires a careful evaluation of all customer-focused business processes, including Marketing, Sales, and Support, and then implementing 3. Deployable intelligent high-end software systems to optimize these processes. Once configured, the system must provide easy deployment throughout The traditional Passive-Customer model of CRM, on which most of the any size organization. This includes fast and complete data migration from established software solution are based, is fundamentally limiting in that previous systems, efficient end-user setup and installation, ease of training a company’s customers and business partners cannot be included as active and ease of use, and rapid user acceptance and system adoption. participants of the processes themselves. They are only viewed as the recipients of information that is generated from the process. 4. Accessible A new, more powerful approach is the Active-Customer model, pioneered Once deployed, every internal user, customer, and business partner must by TechExcel, Inc. With this model every person involved in a business have the appropriate access path to the system, whether Web, wireless, process is treated as a truly active player, and given the appropriate level of or client/server. All users must have the full and complete power of the visibility, authority, and control. system available, regardless of the access path, and all access paths must be usable in any combination, synchronized to a common database in real Companies that embrace this new model of Customer Relationship time. Management will quickly gain a sustainable competitive advantage within their market by fully optimizing their CRM business processes. These are 5. Scalable the companies that will succeed and grow in the new Internet economy, and those companies that do not adopt such a model, will quickly be left The fully deployed and accessible system must easily grow with any size behind. organization, from start-up to fortune 500, and easily expand as the number of users, customers, and partners increase. Systems must allow TechExcel Service Suite gives organizations the total visibility and critical features to be added or enabled to support changing and evolving actionable intelligence you demand for all service desk, asset management processes. and customer support business processes. TechExcel Service Suite enables organizations to begin their quest for holistic service and support 6. Secure management at any point in their evolution. Start with one product - or two - or even the whole suite. No matter where you begin, your Throughout configuration, deployment, and use all aspects of the system organization will always benefit from configurable workflow, centralized must remain completely secure, and system administration privileges must data repositories and a knowledge-based view of your support initiatives. be tightly controlled. Password-controlled access must be implemented Contact us today at 1-800-439-7782 ext 5 or email to sales@techexcel.com for everyone using the system, and extensive and definable privileges must and jump start your service and help desk today. be assigned for every user, customer, and partner. 4 Optimize your CRM processes