1. Dan Brown: A history of success Vyrodova Maria, RIMO-206

2. The aim of my project is to prove that Dan Brown is one of the most successful and talented writers and that his books are popular among great number of people...

3. Contents 1. Early years and education 2. Musical career 3. Writer career 4. Sentiment analysis 5. Dan Brown’s books 1. Digital Fortress 2. Deception Point 3. The Bald book 4. Robert Langdon 5. Angels & Demons 6. The Da Vinci Code 7. The Lost Symbol 6. Quotes about Dan Brown 7. Conclusion 8. Links

4. Early life and education Dan Brown was born June 22, 1964 and raised in Exeter, New Hampshire, USA, the eldest of three children. Sophie Neveu and Cryptex Brown's interest in secrets and puzzles stems from their presence in his household as a child, where codes and ciphers were the linchpin tying together the mathematics, music and languages in which his parents worked. The young Brown spent hours working out anagrams and crossword puzzles, and he and his siblings participated in elaborate treasure hunts devised by their father on birthdays and holidays.

5. Amherst College Alan Lelchuk •After graduating from Phillips Exeter, Brown attended Amherst College, where he was a member of Psi Upsilon fraternity. He played squash, sang in the Amherst Glee Club, and was a writing student of visiting novelist Alan Lelchuk. •Brown spent the 1985 school year abroad in Seville, Spain, where he was enrolled in an art history course at the University of Seville.Brown graduated from Amherst in 1986 University of Seville

6. Musical Career After graduating from Amherst, Brown dabbled with a musical career, creating effects with a synthesizer, and self-producing a children's cassette entitled SynthAnimals, which included a collection of tracks such as "Happy Frogs" and "Suzuki Elephants"; it sold a few hundred copies. •In 1990 self-published a CD entitled Perspective •In 1991 he moved to Hollywood to pursue a career as singer-songwriter and pianist.

7. •In 1993, Brown released the self-titled CD Dan Brown, which included songs such as "976-Love" and "If You Believe in Love." •In 1994, Brown released a CD titled Angels & Demons. Its artwork was the same ambigram by artist John Langdon, which he later used for the novel Angels & Demons. The CD included songs such as "Here in These Fields" and the religious ballad "All I Believe.”

8. Writer Career In 1993, Brown read Sidney Sheldon's novel The Doomsday Conspiracy, and was inspired to become a writer of thrillers. He started work on Digital Fortress, setting much of it in Seville, Spain, where he had studied in 1985. His pseudonym was "Danielle Brown." The book's author profile reads, "Danielle Brown currently lives in New England: teaching school, writing books, and avoiding men."

9. Sentiment analysis for dan brown (twitter) Nowadays Dan Brown is one of the most popular authors in our world. People love him, respect and read his books with great pleasure.

10. Novels •Digital Fortress, 1998 •The Bald Book, 1998, co- written with his wife Blythe Brown. •Angels & Demons, 2000 •Deception Point, 2001 •The Da Vinci Code, 2003 •The Lost Symbol, 2009

11. Digital Fortress Digital Fortress is a techno-thriller novel written by Dan Brown and published in 1998 by St. Martin's Press. The book explores the theme of government surveillance of electronically stored information on the private lives of citizens, and the possible civil liberties and ethical implications using such technology. “Reread Digital Fortress by Dan Brown over the recent mount. Yeap, still a great book.”

12. Deception Point Deception Point is a 2001 techno-thriller novel by Dan Brown. The plot concerns a meteorite found within the Arctic Circle that may provide proof of extraterrestrial life, and attempts by dark forces to prevent this finding from becoming public. “Just finished reading Dan Brown's Deception Point. Top class writer, top class #fiction!!! #books #top_fiction” “Dan Brown's Deception Point holds such an amazing potential to become a stellar sci-fi political blockbuster film adaptation..”

13. A few months later, Brown and his wife released The Bald Book, another humor book. It was officially credited to his wife, though a representative of the publisher said that it was primarily written by Brown.

14. Robert Langdon He is a fictional Harvard University professor of religious iconology and symbology (a fictional field related to the study of historic symbols, which is not methodologically connected to the actual discipline of Semiotics). The character was created by author Dan Brown for the novels and later movies, Angels & Demons (2000), The Da Vinci Code (2003) and The Lost Symbol (2009). Tom Hanks portrayed Robert Langdon in the 2006 film adaptation of The Da Vinci Code, reprised the role in the 2009 film adaptation of Angels & Demons, and will play the role again in the 2012 film adaptation of The Lost Symbol.

15. Angels & Demons Angels & Demons is a 2000 bestselling mystery-thriller novel .The novel introduces the character Robert Langdon, who is also the protagonist of Brown's subsequent 2003 novel, The Da Vinci Code, and 2009 novel, The Lost Symbol. It also shares many stylistic literary elements with its sequel, such as conspiracies of secret societies, a single- day time frame, and the Catholic Church. Ancient history, architecture, and symbolism are also heavily referenced throughout the book. A film adaptation was released on May 15, 2009.

16. The Da Vinci Code It became a bestseller, going to the top of the New York Times Best Seller list during its first week of release in 2003. It is now credited with being one of the most popular books of all time, with 81 million copies sold worldwide as of 2009.Its success has helped push sales of Brown's earlier books. In 2004, all four of his novels were on the New York Times list in the same week, and in 2005, he made Time magazine's list of the 100 most influential people of the year. Forbes magazine placed Brown at No. 12 on their 2005 "Celebrity 100" list, and estimated his annual income at US$76.5 million. The Times estimated his income from Da Vinci Code sales as $250 million. “5 of 5 stars to The Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown”

17. Brown's third novel featuring Robert Langdon, The Lost Symbol, was released on September 15, 2009.According to the publisher, on its first day the book sold over one million in hardcover and e-book versions in the U.S., the U.K. and Canada, prompting the printing of 600,000 hardcover copies in addition to the five million first printing. The story takes place in Washington D.C. over a period of 12 hours, and features the Freemasons. Brown's promotional website states that puzzles hidden in the book jacket of The Da Vinci Code, including two references to the Kryptos sculpture at CIA Headquarters in Langley, Virginia, give hints about the sequel. This repeats a theme from some of Brown's earlier work “Dan Brown - The lost Symbol! Its a must!!”

18. Quotes about Dan Brown •Dan Brown has to be one of the best, smartest, and most accomplished writers in the country. The Da Vinci Code is many notches above the intelligent thriller; this is pure genius. Nelson DeMille in a promotional blurb at Doubleday •Critics have found in the narrative a veneer of erudition that cloaks nothing more than a James Bond-style romp, albeit a highly addictive one. His publisher has described it as 'a thriller for people who don't like thrillers'. One newspaper put it thus: 'It is terribly written, its characters are cardboard cutouts, the dialogue is excruciating in places and, a bit like a computer manual, everything is overstated and repeated — but it is impossible to put the bloody thing down. David Smith in "Veni vidi da Vinci" in The Observer (12 December 2004)