Adrien Brody hit the headlines on Saturday after making his red carpet debut with girlfriend Georgina Chapman at the premiere of his new movie Clean in New York.

The Oscar winner, 48, looked pleased to formally introduce his new partner, 45, who is the ex-wife of convicted sex offender and former film producer Harvey Weinstein.

And while fans turn their attention to the loved-up couple, it's often forgotten that Adrien was once in a relationship with actress Elsa Pataky - who is now perhaps best known for being the wife of Australian actor Chris Hemsworth.

Before she tied the knot with the Thor heart-throb in 2010, 44-year-old Elsa had dated Adrien from 2006 to 2009.

Their romance appeared to be pretty solid from the beginning - so solid, in fact, that in October 2008 Adrien surprised Elsa by purchasing and renovating a stone-built castle in New York for the pair to live in.

He unveiled the mammoth surprise to her on her 31st birthday.

'I blindfolded her. Right at the castle there's a giant, beautiful church bell. And I said, "When you hear the sound of the bell, you can open your eyes and you'll see your surprise." And then I rang the bell,' he told HELLO! magazine at the time.

'When I saw the castle, I asked Adrien, "Is this ours?"' the Spanish actress added. 'He said, "Yes – welcome home."'

The magazine did a full 35-page spread of their brand new home, complete with a cheesy photo shoot of the pair posing in a forklift outside the property.

The former couple were even rumoured to be engaged in 2008 - but sadly, their love story wasn't meant to be.

They called time on their romance in 2009, yet no official announcement was made from either party.

Just a year after her romance with Adrien ended, Elsa met Chris through their representatives in 2010. They married in December that year.

The genetically blessed pair, who live in a $30million mega-mansion in Byron Bay, have three children, daughter India Rose, eight, and twin sons Sasha and Tristan, six.

Adrien ended up keeping and renovating the castle himself, and made a documentary about it named Stone Barn Castle in 2015.

The film follows his efforts fixing up the structure, serving as a metaphor for the pursuit of one's dreams.

Meanwhile, Georgina's relationship with Adrien appears to be her first serious coupling since she divorced Weinstein in 2018.

Although their relationship wasn't confirmed until March 2020, the two were said to have been together 'for a while', People reported.

A source said the pair work well together because they share 'many similar interests'.

'She thinks he’s unusual and interesting,' the source revealed, adding that Georgina was drawn to Adrien's 'deep passion for his work', which reminds her of her own dedication to her fashion label.

The Pianist star also 'diverts her attention from the pain of her situation [with Weinstein] and subsequent split,' the insider claimed.

Adrien had starred in 2006’s Hollywoodland, a film which was co-produced by Weinstein’s former company Miramax Films.

Georgina's divorce from Weinstein was finalised in January of 2018, and by May the disgraced superproducer had been charged with 'rape, criminal sex act, sex abuse and sexual misconduct for incidents involving two separate women' by the New York District Attorney's Office.

He was convicted in February 2020 of two of the five charges: one count of sexual assault in the first degree and one count of rape in the third degree.

Weinstein was sentenced to 23 years in prison the following month.