Elsa Pataky has recently been in the spotlight after it was revealed that she made Academy Award winner Adrien Brody uncomfortable during their relationship. Even though Brody and the Spanish actress broke up after dating for three years, their time together clearly left an indelible mark on the Hollywood star.

Advertisement

How Brody and Pataky met and fell in love was the subject of an interview with Hello Magazine. The actor said her beauty spellbound him, and their first meeting was nothing short of a miracle.

Adrien Brody and Elsa Pataky’s Relationship

Adrien Brody claims that he and Elsa Pataky first met in 2006 when the actor was studying the role of Manolete. He contacted Julie Adams, his voice-dialect coach from The Pianist because he wanted to practice a southern Spanish accent. Pataky was also working with Adams on her English pronunciation at the time.

Advertisement

Suggested Article: “I don’t fear killing characters”: The Last of Us Showrunner Addresses Pedro Pascal’s Joel Death in Season 2 After Emotional First Season Finale

Brody was “completely spellbound” and “very self-conscious” the first time he laid eyes on Pataky. He vividly recalled every detail of their first encounter.

“I was there at Julie’s house and Elsa walked in – she was coming in for a lesson after me.”The first time I saw her I was completely spellbound. I told Elsa later that I was so uncomfortable because she was so beautiful and so lovely and sweet. I became very self-conscious.”

After their initial meeting, Adrien Brody asked Elsa Pataky out for lunch, and they later went to a romantic tapas bar in Spain. It didn’t take long for their relationship to flourish, and soon they were walking the red carpet together.

Advertisement

Also Read: “She felt she was mistreated”: Amber Heard Has No Intentions to Retire From Acting After Potential Career Ending Trial With Johnny Depp

Throughout their relationship, Adrien Brody and Pataky were head over heels for each other, often talking about how they felt in interviews. Brody gushed about his relationship with Pataky in a 2008 interview with Hello Magazine.

“Do you remember when we were at a party in Cannes, and a woman sitting behind us told us, ‘Thank you for making me believe in love again’? We both feel really blessed to have found someone that we not only love, that we are deeply attracted to, but also who shares similar views on life. Elsa has brought so much positive energy into my life.”

Adrien Brody and Elsa Pataky called it quits only six months after the interview came out. Neither actor has commented publicly on the reasons for their split, but Pataky quickly moved on, starting a relationship with Thor actor Chris Hemsworth.

Advertisement

The Role Chris Hemsworth Played

Elsa Pataky was introduced to Chris Hemsworth by her talent agent, William Ward. While speaking to Elle, Hemsworth claims that he and Pataky hit it off instantly and fell in love quickly.

“There was no light bulb moment. From the first time we met, we just made sense. She’s fun. She’s outgoing, and she has a sense of humor and a passionate attitude toward life, which is nice to try and keep up with.”

Read More: Margot Robbie Making Her DCU Return After Lady Gaga Replaced Her? James Gunn Breaks Silence on Harley Quinn Rumors

Hemsworth and Pataky’s romance was lightning fast, as the couple wed after only five months of dating. In an interview with Good Morning Britain, he admits that his decision to get married to his now wife “did happen quick,” but “it just felt right”

Advertisement

“It did happen quick and it just felt right, just, it made sense. There was no great plan to any of it to be honest, we were on holiday and we said ‘why don’t we get married too?’ and then the next minute.., There probably should have been some planning but it all worked out. Honestly, we had both our families on holiday at the same time, just randomly, and we said this is a good opportunity with everyone together so we just did it.”

Elsa Pataky and Chris Hemsworth have been married for over a decade, and they’re doing great with their three children. As to what happened with Brody and Pataky, we may never know.