Adrien Brody has been under the Hollywood spotlight for fairly just a little now, and even supposing he's got a number of hit motion pictures and an Academy Award under his belt, apparently as though we have not heard from Brody in moderately some time.

Throughout Adrien Brody's career, the actor has found himself in a handful of relationships, with partners starting from his personal assistants to other big names corresponding to actresses Keira Knightley, Elsa Pataky, and January Jones, all of which Brody dated in short.

Despite having fallen off the face of the Earth these previous few years, Adrien Brody was the "it" actor right through the 90s and 2000s, even changing into the youngest star to win an Oscar for Best Actor in 2002. With all that being mentioned, let's dive right into some little-known information about Adrien Brody's romantic relationships.

Although Adrien Brody has, if truth be told, dated a variety of high profile celebrities during his career, he is additionally the sort to fall in love with those that are not well-known. The 'Pianist' actor dated Michelle Dupont, his private assistant, from 2003 to 2006, which marked his first-ever relationship with anyone who used to be now not well-known or well known in the leisure business.

12 He Attended The Oscars Alongside Michelle Dupont

While many people, including Adrien Brody's enthusiasts, did not suppose anything of his new courting, issues took a turn when he and Michelle Dupont attended the Academy Awards in combination. This was just a year after Brody had taken home the Oscar for "Best Actor", so having Dupont as his date was relatively the recent gossip at the time.

11 Leading Fans To Believe Dupont Was "The One"

Considering Adrien Brody and Michelle Dupont had been relationship for three years now, the media and fans of the 2 started considering that she might in fact be "the one" for Adrien. They looked implausible together and appeared to be a radiant couple on the red carpet, so it used to be best becoming for the two to get married. Despite everyone's top hopes, the two formally cut up again in 2006!

10 He's Reportedly Dating Harvey Weinstein's Ex-Wife

Flash ahead to the present day, it seems that Adrien Brody is able to to find love amidst a global pandemic. Although the rumours are just that, rumours, many retailers were speculating that Adrien Brody is now relationship Harvey Weinstein's ex-wife, Georgina Chapman. According to quite a lot of sources, the 2 have been noticed out and about a number of instances.

Related: Harvey Weinstein's Ex, Georgina Chapman, Linked To Adrien Brody

9 His First High Profile Relationship Was With Monet Mazur

Despite having dated various actresses, Adrien Brody's first primary relationship with a public figure dates back the entire option to 2001! The 28-year-old at the time, dated actress Monet Mazur, who has appeared in a lot of movies and tv shows. The two attended occasions, parties and purple carpets in combination, alternatively, things took a flip only some months into the relationship and in the end led the 2 to get a divorce.

8 Which Lasted A Year Before He Moved On With A Model

Although Adrien Brody simply had his first public breakup with every other celebrity, apparently he used to be not phased whatsoever. The actor controlled to move on moderately briefly, and with somebody who simply about somebody will have expected. It appears as though whilst you break up with an actress, you gotta transfer directly to a type, and that is precisely what Adrien did with Australian style, Sky Nellor.

7 He Was Engaged To Elsa Pataky

While courting a style might be each guy's dream, it appears as though Adrien Brody wasn't feeling it any further, and decided to depart Sky Nellor for Elsa Pataky! Adrien and Elsa dated for more or less two years beginning in 2008, and the couple went so far as getting engaged. This marked the primary time Brody had ever proposed to any individual he's dated, which is relatively a shocker making an allowance for how many times most Hollywood celebrities in finding themselves proposing.

6 And Even Bought Her A Castle For Her Birthday

Not simplest was once Adrien Brody engaged to Elsa Pataky, but he went so far as gifting her with a New York fortress! The actor purchased the estate back in 2007 and spent fairly some time renovating it earlier than gifting it to Pataky for her thirty first birthday. While this is slightly the extravagant gift, it was once one that can were too much to maintain, since the duo broke up just a few months later.

Related: 15 Surprising Facts About Actress, Elsa Pataky

5 His Longest Relationship Was With Lara Lieto

Adrien Brody had a handful of relationships beneath his belt at this point in his life, then again, maximum of his romantic endeavours lasted anyplace between a yr to 3 years, however no more than that. Despite having quick relationships, things took a turn when he and Russian type, Lara Lieto, dated for over 8 years! The two managed to date from 2010 to 2018, sooner than calling it quits.

4 He Kept His Relationship With January Jones Secret

Prior to committing to an eight-year courting with Lara Lieto, Adrien Brody dated actress January Jones, but did so on the down-low! This was one of the crucial actors extra secretive courting and one that in fact remained a secret. The two have been spotted out most effective now and again however were by no means showed to be courting. It was once printed that the 2 were seeing each different simplest when they had broken up in early 2010.

One of Adrien Brody's a success movies, 'The Jacket', which came out in 2005, starred actress Keira Knightley. The two had worked in combination on the project, and were given along moderately smartly, which ultimately led the media to assume they were courting. The rumours in regards to the two only grew larger and larger, main Adrien Brody to explode! The actor used to be "furious" with the rumours, claiming the 2 have been in individual relationships. Yikes!

Related: An Inside Look Into Keira Knightley & Joe Wright's Relationship

2 He's Had Over 8 Romances Throughout His Career

After courting a variety of a hit and well known girls throughout his profession, it seems that as though he is gotten numerous experience on the earth of relationship. The actor has controlled to spend years dating various actresses, each openly and in secret, and now has 8 relationships under his belt, that we know of. Although experiences declare he's currently seeing Georgina Chapman, we'll watch for them to substantiate that news.

1 But, He Has Never Gotten Married

Despite having a lot of success locking down possible partners, Adrien Brody remains one of the most biggest Hollywood bachelors. The megastar has controlled to this point various well-known stars or even got engaged, on the other hand, it looks as if success simply isn't in his corner. While we'd love for an Adrien Brody love story to appear on our newsfeeds, we aren't positive if that moment will ever actually come.

Next: Kaley Cuoco & Kevin Hart Unite For New Comedy

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGiYnaqZmrturtGom7JloqS6orrToppmqpWhrrW1zqeqoaGgqHqsscirmGajnp60qcDLnrBmnZyorm68wK2YpLFdn66vwcCrsGain6OytHs%3D