Chris Hemsworth's wife Elsa Pataky almost had an awkward run-in with her ex-lover, Adrien Brody at the 2024 Met Gala in New York City on Monday evening.

Chris, 40, and Elsa, 47, were almost half-way down the carpet doing interviews when the American actor, 51, made his grand arrival at the gala.

The exes, whose split was splashed over tabloids over a decade ago, were just metres away from each other as they posed for photos and chatted to reporters.

Chris, every bit the Hollywood heartthrob, was dressed to impress in a sleek cream suit that set off his athletic build, while Elsa shimmered alongside him in a golden gown and a regal floral headpiece.

Brody, meanwhile, wore a sharp black tuxedo with a silver winged brooch as he posed alongside girlfriend Georgina Chapman.

Before Elsa became Mrs Hemsworth, she was involved in a highly-publiclised romance with the Academy Award winner from 2006 to 2009.

The couple's love story was famously sealed when Brody went all out, buying a massive castle in New York for Elsa and refurbishing it as a grand gesture of his affection.

He revealed his romantic gesture to Elsa on her 31st birthday, a moment straight out of a fairy tale.

'I blindfolded her. Right at the castle there's a giant, beautiful church bell. And I said, 'When you hear the sound of the bell, you can open your eyes and you'll see your surprise.' And then I rang the bell,' he told HELLO! magazine at the time.

'When I saw the castle, I asked Adrien, "Is this ours?",' the Spanish actress added. 'He said, "Yes – welcome home".'

The magazine published a 35-page spread of their brand new home, complete with a cheesy photo shoot of the pair posing in a forklift outside the property.

The former couple were even rumoured to be engaged in 2008 - but their love story wasn't meant to be.

They called time on their romance in 2009, yet no official announcement was made from either party.

Just a year after her romance with Adrien ended, Elsa met Chris through their representatives. They married in December 2010.

The genetically blessed pair, who live in a $30million mega-mansion in Byron Bay, have three children, daughter India Rose, eight, and twin sons Sasha and Tristan, six.

Adrien ended up keeping and renovating the castle himself, and made a documentary about it named Stone Barn Castle in 2015.