The reserve of the Madrid club has a big sound in the world. Its coach - and at the same time a former player - is the legendary Raúl Gonzalez, who with Real won the Champions League three times, celebrated winning the Spanish title six times and added countless individual awards.

In a friendly duel, MFK Vyskov will play the reserves of world giant Real Madrid, The Castilla as part of the training camp in Spain.

Although Vyškov and Uganda Cranes stars Aziz Kayondo and Fahad Bayo will not play against the A-team, the third league reserve of the legendary club does not detract from the significance of the match.

Bayo and Kayondo, along with the team, have been in Madrid since Saturday, and from Sunday, they have been training at the premises of their friendly club CD Leganés.

According to the club, "the trainees thus had the opportunity to get used to the local conditions and go through the much-needed acclimatization."

The reserve of the Madrid club has a big sound in the world. Its coach - and at the same time a former player - is the legendary Raúl Gonzalez, who with Real won the Champions League three times, celebrated winning the Spanish title six times and added countless individual awards.

The Castilla club has produced stars and legendary icons, including Iker Casillas, Esteban Cambiasso, Alvaro Arbeloa, and Vicente del Bosque.

It has produced the younger generation, including the likes of Martin Ödegaard, Nacho or Álvaro Morata and countless others.

This year, Theo Zidane, whose father is none other than the famous Zinedine Zidane, is among the currently playing for the team.

European Cup rules have only allowed Real B to peek into international competition once in their history.

Specifically, this happened during the 1980/81 season, when Castilla crushed England's West Ham 3:1 at home but lost the rematch 1:5 after extra time.

A rich past, a high reputation and an emphasis on nurturing young talents make the Madrid B team a very high-quality team.