Abstract

No abstract available.

Index Terms

A rapid Braille transliteration technique for certain IBM machine

Social and professional topics

Professional topics

Computing profession

Assistive technologies

User characteristics

People with disabilities

Recommendations

Machine transliteration survey

Machine transliteration is the process of automatically transforming the script of a word from a source language to a target language, while preserving pronunciation. The development of algorithms specifically for machine transliteration began over a ...

Punjabi machine transliteration

ACL-44: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Transliteration is to transcribe a word written in a script with approximate phonetic equivalence in another language. It is useful for machine translation, cross-lingual information retrieval, multilingual text and speech processing. Punjabi ...

A speech enabled Indian language text to braille transliteration system

ICTD'09: Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Information and communication technologies and development

In this paper we present a speech enabled bidirectional automatic Indian language text to Braille transliteration system. The system allows bridging the communication gap between a visually impaired and a sighted person. The present system can be ...

Information & Contributors

Information

Published In

71 pages

ISSN:0001-0782

EISSN:1557-7317

DOI:10.1145/363744

Editor:

C. C. Gotlieb

Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada

Issue’s Table of Contents

Copyright © 1965 ACM.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from [email protected]

Publisher

Association for Computing Machinery

New York, NY, United States

Publication History

Published: 01 February 1965

Published in CACM Volume 8, Issue 2

Permissions

Request permissions for this article.

Check for updates

Qualifiers

Article

Contributors

Other Metrics

Bibliometrics & Citations

Bibliometrics

Article Metrics

0

Total Citations

532

Total Downloads

Downloads (Last 12 months)18

Downloads (Last 6 weeks)2

Other Metrics

Citations

View Options

View options

PDF

View or Download as a PDF file.

PDF

eReader

View online with eReader.

eReader

Get Access

Login options

Check if you have access through your login credentials or your institution to get full access on this article.

Sign in

Full Access

Media

Figures

Other

Tables

Share

Share

Share this Publication link

Copied!

Copying failed.

Share on social media

Affiliations

Walter J. Weller

Northwestern Univ., Evanston, IL

Virginia C. Klema

Northwestern Univ., Evanston, IL

Request permissions Authors Info & Affiliations