A Review of “Fifty Years of Public Life” by Daniel C. Roper

Reviews of the Day: 1941–42

Selected Insights from “Fifty Years of Public Life”

This Author’s Thoughts and Perceptions

Reviews of the Day: 1941–42

As was noted above, this book was released in December 1941 just as the United States of America entered World War II. There were very few reviews, most likely because of the events of late 1941—Pearl Harbor, and early 1942.

​

Given that, here are the few for your consideration:

“Daniel C. Roper has written a book that is important and entertaining … with a wealth of source material. … Of historical importance is the rather detailed story of Col. Edward M. House and his vast secret influence in shaping national events during the two administrations of Woodrow Wilson. …

​

“With regard to Mrs. Roosevelt he writes, ‘She is perhaps the most remarkable woman who ever occupied the White House, a student of social conditions and trends, with exceptional capacity in educational leadership.’ ”

Gladys Wood Daniel, “Daniel Roper Reminisces,”

​The Washington D.C. Sunday Star, 1942

Selected Insights from “Fifty Years of Public Life”

- A Different Perspective on John D. Rockefeller Sr.—affordability of kerosene.

“In 1877, or when I was ten, we bought our first kerosene lamp. My parents regarded it as dangerous, and they carefully warned me against having too much to do with it. … At the time we paid twenty-five cents a gallon for kerosene. I have always felt a little more kindly towards John D. Rockefeller [Sr.] because his activities brought fuel oil down to about one fourth the price it was when I was a boy.”

- A View on South Carolina at the End of the Civil War​

- On Harmonizing Different Perspectives in Human Nature

“Interpretation of truth, or the righteousness of either side of a question depended upon the sources of information and an open-minded willingness to examine different views.”

– Daniel Roper’s Perspective on the post-Civil War Negro as a Role Model in his Life

“I had always been encouraged by the unshakable philosophy of the Negro and stirred by the charm of his music. If at any point the Negro had been dropped from my life, I would have been poorer. My association with him, seeing his noble adjustment to a humble role, had helped me to undertake my hardest tasks.

​

“If in some respects I had failed, it was doubtless due in part to my forgetting his philosophy and hopeful attitude.”

- Daniel Roper’s Perspective on the Usage of Calumny in Politics

“The answer [using calumny against a political office holder to win an election] struck me with the vileness of perverting the truth in a democracy. Maybe such tactics were suitable to the old world and its intrigues and political machinations, but a democracy needed to be founded on truth, and any effort to deceive the people was inimical to our form of government, whether in national campaigns or in group or individual dealings.”

This Author's Thoughts and Perceptions

Upon the announcement that Daniel C. Roper had finished his manuscript for his “Fifty Years of Public Life,” one press article summarized Mr. Roper’s life of public services as follows:

- A Sincere and Thoughtful Autobiography

This autobiography brings across the openness, discipline, and integrity of Daniel C. Roper. Because of this, it was easy for me to internalize one principle: In my beliefs, always keep an open mind and an open heart to the perspectives of others. ​

Yet, because of Roper’s lack of an on-hands experience at the top of a business concern (vs. a government institution) he, through no fault of his own, just doesn’t come across as able to understand those who ran a business in a legitimate, open-minded manner. There were so many ways that business at that time tried to help through individuals like Gerard Swope and Owen D. Young of General Electric, Thomas J. Watson Sr. of IBM, George F. Johnson of Endicott-Johnson Corporation and others. Again, this was not the purpose of the book, but the lack of this information—even in the smallest degree—seems to betray a lack of knowledge about their efforts.

​

Mr. Roper thoroughly convinced me of his sincerity and integrity (some of which I hope I have) and yet, because he hadn’t worn the mantle of an employer meeting employee payrolls and filling the government’s coffers, he didn’t quite expose this side of the story … but, again, that was not the purpose of the book.

I get it.

- We Forgive Thoughtful Mistakes

In an autobiography, I like to see an author discuss the mistakes that they made and what they learned from them. Because of the lack of these in the book, it seemed that Mr. Roper was successful at everything he did and tried. When a well-known figure writes an autobiography doesn’t a little discourse on their mistakes help humanize them and help a reader relate to their experiences?

Roper does come across wonderfully—and very believable, in this book … but Pulitzer prize winning material is more about revealing the whole man and his struggles, his failures--and his failed wishes as well as his victories. Andrew Carnegie does a wonderful job of introspection in his "Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie;" Samuel Morison accomplishes the same in his Pulitzer Prize winning biography on Christopher Columbus, "Admiral of the Ocean Sea."

A biographer—even in an autobiography, should reveal individual weaknesses—cause, effect and outcome, and let the reader learn from them.

This is still a strong read about a political man of honesty and integrity.

Could use a few more Daniel C. Roper’s today.

Cheers,

​

- Peter E.​