Senator Walsh, Daniel C. Roper and Miss Perkins Complete List of Appointments SILENT ON BANK AFFAIRS Business Developments Will Not Be Dealt With in Inaugural Address, It Is Believed

By James A. Hagerty

Special to The New York Times

Special Dispatch to the New York Times

Hyde Park, Feb. 28 - The completion of his Cabinet was announced today by President-elect Roosevelt when he named Senator Thomas J. Walsh of Montana as Attorney General, Daniel C. Roper of Washington as Secretary of Commerce and Frances Perkins, head of the State Labor Department, as Secretary of Labor.

These announcements, made without comment, filled the list of appointments without change from the unofficial list published last week.

The other members of the Cabinet, whose selection Mr. Roosevelt had previously announced, are Senator Cordell Hull of Tennessee, Secretary of State; William H. Woodin of New York, Secretary of the Treasury; former Governor George H. Dern of Utah, Secretary of War; Senator Claude A. Swanson of Virginia, Secretary of the Navy; James A. Farley of New York, Postmaster General; Henry A. Wallace of Iowa, Secretary of Agriculture; and Harold Ickes of Chicago, Secretary of the Interior.

As has been pointed out, three members of the incoming Cabinet, Secretaries Woodin, Wallace, and Ickes, are Republicans. Miss Perkins will be the first woman to sit in the Cabinet. The other six members who will advise the new President in one of the most difficult situations an incoming President has encountered since Abraham Lincoln are Democrats. Of these the selection of Mr. Dern and Mr. Farley, like that of Mr. Woodin and Miss Perkins, is regarded as largely personal.

Walsh's Acceptance Gratifying

Senator Walsh was one of Mr. Roosevelt's first Cabinet selections, and his acceptance of the invitation, which was in doubt for a time, gave the President-elect great satisfaction.

The Montana Senator was an effective supporter of Mr. Roosevelt for the Presidential nomination and was permanent chairman of the national convention at Chicago.

Mr. Roper's selection is attributed to the influence of Senator-elect William G. McAdoo of California, whom he supported against former Governor Alfred E. Smith for nomination for President in 1924. The selection of Miss Perkins was opposed by leaders of organized labor, who backed Daniel J. Tobin for the place.

Mr. Roosevelt, who is facing a busy three days before his inauguration, will leave Hyde Park for New York city tomorrow afternoon about 2:15, and will leave for Washington Thursday afternoon about 4 o'clock.

He worked until 1:30 this morning on his inaugural speech, but does not expect to have it ready for release for newspaper publication until a few hours before its delivery on Saturday at the capital.

Watches Banking Situation

Mr. Roosevelt is giving close attention to the banking situation and is in receipt of complete information on its developments. No statement from him on this matter is expected in advance of his inauguration and it is doubtful that he will refer to it, except perhaps in general terms, in his inaugural address.

It has been Mr. Roosevelt's belief since his election that he should refrain from public statements on business conditions in the country at least until after his inauguration, and then seek to obtain results by action rather than by words.

There is reason to believe that he will follow this policy as President, and will present his reconstruction program in full only when Congress will have assembled in special session and will be ready to take action on his recommendations.

Mr. Roosevelt denied a published report that Mayor James A. Curley of Boston, one of his early supporters, had been selected for Ambassador to Italy.

None of the diplomatic appointments have been determined, he said, when asked about the reported Curley selection. "I have not had a chance to talk to Senator Hull about them."

Confers With Moley and Howe

On his last night at his home at Hyde Park, before becoming President, Mr. Roosevelt conferred with two advisers, Professor Raymond Moley of Columbia University and Louis McHenry Howe, his long-time aide, who is slated to head the White House secretariat.

Mr. Howe appeared at the Roosevelt home at Krum Elbow wearing a new gray suit and a new gray tie.

"A symphony in gray," was Mr. Roosevelt's gleeful comment as he presented Mr. Howe to the newspaper correspondents and added that Marvin H. McIntyre, another prospective White House secretary, who appeared yesterday in a new blue suit, was not the only one of his staff who would begin his duties well dressed.

Basil O'Connor, Mr. Roosevelt's former law partner, will come up from New York tomorrow and drive back with the President-elect. On his arrival in New York Mr. Roosevelt expects to see former Governor Dern and Mr. Woodin, and possibly others of the Cabinet will accompany the President-elect to Washington.

Cabinet Sworn in at White House

Justice Cardozo Administers Oath to All Members at Unique Ceremony Completes Regime in Day President, Family and Few Friends Witness Swearing in of Heads of New Executive Branch

Special to The New York Times

Washington, March 4 - The White House was the scene tonight of a ceremony without precedent in the history of the nation. It was the swearing in of the nine men and one woman who comprise the Cabinet of President Roosevelt.

Associate Justice Benjamin Nathan Cardozo of the Supreme Court, an old New York friend of President Roosevelt, administered the oaths of office at the request of the President.

As the President described it, the ceremony was "a little family party" with Justice Cardozo the honor guest in charge. It put full and official command of the executive branch of the government before the day was over.

Never before has a Cabinet been sworn in at the same time and in the same place and by the same official administering the oaths. Never before was the White House the scene of the swearing in of the Cabinet.

The ceremony was held in the library on the second floor of the White House and was witnessed by President and Mrs. Roosevelt, the families of the Cabinet officers and a few friends of the President.

The swearing in had been set for 6 P. M., but it was 6:30 o'clock before Secretary Hull, ranking member of the Cabinet, stepped forward to subscribe to the oath of office.

The President was seated at a big flat-topped desk in the rear or the room facing Pennsylvania Avenue. At his left stood the gray-haired jurist, who was the Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals during three of the four years Mr. Roosevelt was Governor of New York.

The tall, slender Tennessean who succeeded Mr. Stimson as head of the Cabinet stood with raised hand as Justice Cardozo read the oath to support the Constitution of the United States. As the judge finished he replied, "I do."

William H. Woodin, Secretary of the Treasury, came next and then in order and according to rank Secretary of War George H. Dern, Attorney General Homer S. Cummings, Postmaster General James A. Farley, Secretary of the Navy Claude A. Swanson, Secretary of the Interior Harold C. Ickes, Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace, Secretary of Commerce Daniel C. Roper and Miss Frances Perkins, who, as Secretary of Labor, is the nation's first woman Cabinet officer.

There was no speech making - only the "I do" of the new officials as each subscribed to the oath.

The President, seated at his desk, smiled and said it was a good show. To each member of the Cabinet he extended a hearty handshake and a brief espresso of good wishes as he handed each the commission, which he had signed.

When it was over the President, speaking to his Cabinet, all of them grouped around him, expressed his appreciation of the prompt ratification of their nominations by the Senate.

"This is a strictly family party," the President said, "and I am glad all members of the Cabinet are present. I am glad all of you were confirmed without opposition. Incidentally, this is the inauguration of another new custom."

Despite the long siege of his inauguration, which kept him out of doors from just after noon until after 6 o'clock, President Roosevelt appeared not the least fatigued. He looked happy as a school boy in the recess hour.

On the first floor of the White House at the time, where the guests invited to tea were milling about, the crowd was so great that it was almost as difficult to penetrate as were the crowds which lined Pennsylvania Avenue to view the parade.

Back to the top of this page.

Back to today's page.

Go to another day.