Asya is a highly educated person who has obtained multiple degrees including an MBA, in Healthcare Administration, Bachelor’s in Science, and Associates in Arts. She intended to become a nurse while she was studying but found that life took her on the path of entrepreneurship with the goal in mind to help people. While living in Chicago, Asya started a cleaning company, and a personal Assistant company with a goal to hire those in need of employment facing homelessness, and home aids who support the elderly in their homes. She provided jobs to the community in need for over five years.

Then in 2021, Asya made the move to California because she felt called to serve the community there. She always felt a passion for wanting to help others because of her upbringing. She became a director of social services for a long-term care facility, and then switched to a position at a residential care facility as an administrator. She realized that she wanted to help an even bigger population, and then found Alta California Regional Center (ACRC).

In August 2023, Asya began as a Service Coordinator at ACRC. She was interested in working at the regional center because of the diversity of clients served and the opportunity to advocate for them. Asya is a mother to her daughter who was born deaf, so Asya has learned throughout the years of the importance of actively listening and advocating. Asya’s experience as a parent to a deaf child led her to become very involved with the deaf and hard of hearing community. Now, Aysa serves a deaf and hard of hearing caseload and loves helping clients and communicating through ASL.

Asya enjoys working at ACRC because she can give back to the community and she enjoys how helpful the staff are. When she worked in private sector jobs, she felt disconnected from her peers as it was difficult navigating the space as an African American woman. In social work, Asya has found her home and is proud of the work she is doing.

Separate for work, Asya is an author of a fiction novel, Heaven’s Angel, which she first published in 2018, the book follows the life of the main character, Angel, who seeks to clear her name of her mother’s death.

Everything Asya does is to help others and to continuously grow and improve herself. Her mission in life is to motivate others and help them succeed. Asya is an amazing member of the team, and frequently participates in outreaches to further engage with the community. Her life experience, engagement in work and at community events, and accomplishing her own personal goals has molded Asya into an outstanding member of society.