HONORING THE MEMORY OF PERRY B. DURYEA, JR., FORMER SPEAKER OF THE NEW YORK STATE ASSEMBLY -- (Extensions of Remarks - January 21, 2004)

SPEECH OF

HON. TIMOTHY H. BISHOP

OF NEW YORK

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 2004

Mr. BISHOP of New York. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Perry B. Duryea, Jr., the former Speaker of the New York State Assembly and a lifelong resident of New York's First Congressional District, who tragically lost his life last week after having sustained injuries from an auto accident near his Montauk home. Mr. Duryea was an outstanding public servant, successful businessman, and World War II veteran who dutifully served the people of Long Island and the State of New York with distinction for more than four decades.

Perry Duryea began what would become a legendary state political career in his hometown of Montauk, New York, having served as a member of the Montauk Public Board of Education and as president of the Long Island State Park Commission. He was first elected to represent the First Assembly District of the New York State Legislature in 1960, and remained a member of the body until 1978. During his time in the legislature, Mr. Duryea held the post of Minority Leader for 6 years and Speaker of the Assembly for 4 years. Although he was a leader of the Republican party's conservative wing, Mr. Duryea was known for his pragmatic bipartisanship, as he forged strong relationships with members from across the aisle and often supported legislative measures that were unpopular within his own party. Among his most noteworthy achievements was legislation that he initiated and passed to expand the state parks and the state university system. He also championed construction of the Long Island Expressway and the Sunrise Highway extension, and worked hard to promote environmental protection measures. Those who knew Perry Duryea remember him as an extraordinary leader who elevated the status of the New York legislature.

A prominent businessman within his Montauk community, Mr. Duryea also devoted much of his time to various community and civic endeavors which improved the lives of Long Island residents. Born and raised in Montauk New York, Perry Duryea took over the family wholesale seafood business, Perry Duryea & Son, after completing his service as a plane commander with the United States Naval Transport Service during World War II. After leaving politics following an unsuccessful bid for the governorship in 1978, Mr. Duryea returned to running his business and volunteering his time with numerous public and civic organizations, including Long Island Commercial Bank, where he served as Chairman of the Board.

In recognition of his many contributions and achievements, Mr. Duryea received numerous honors, including the distinction of "Man of the Year" by the Montauk Chamber of Commerce, and the naming of a state office building after him. Mr. Duryea is survived by his wife, Marie Therese Duryea, and two children-Lynne Duryea and Perry "Chip" Duryea III.

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and my other distinguished colleagues to join me in honoring the memory of Perry B. Duryea, Jr. Throughout his exemplary career in public service, Mr. Duryea enhanced the quality of life for residents of Long Island and the State of New York. The spirit of bipartisanship with which he conducted his public life garnered him the respect of his peers and served to inspire future generations of community leaders. Mr. Duryea's leadership and strength of character are qualities each of us should aspire to embrace as we carry out our duties in this distinguished

body.b

END