ALBANY, Jan. 7—The occasional butt of Perry B. Duryea's frosty hauteur when the Republicans ran the Assembly, Stanley Steingut says he sees no need to wield autocratic authority as Speaker now that the Democrats are in charge.

“I don't think tnat tuna of power is needed for leadership he said the other day.

As a man whose parsimony with public promises is new legendary, even by the standards of his cautious fellov, Brooklyn clubhouse politicians Mr. Steingut arrived at the eve of his accession to the peak of power in the Assembly committed to a package of reforms to curb the Speaker's dominance.

Tonight, the Democrats trudged through slushy streets to a pre‐session caucus in the DeWitt Clinton Hotel and by acclamation, with only one dissent, designated Mr. Steingut as Speaker of the Assembly.

Even Mr. Steingut's pledged changes would leave the Speaker overwhelmingly in command, needing, perhaps, to consult his senior colleagues trifle more than was required of Mr. Duryea. And, whatever diminution Mr. Steingutaccepts in assigned power, his whole lifetime has prepared him for an accurate assessment of what is needed to make things political happen.

A Political Background

Stanley Steingut grew up in politics. His grandfather, Simon, was unofficial “locality mayor” of his Brooklyn neighborhood. His father, Irwin, was Assembly Speaker in 1935.

In late afternoon today, even before the Democrats voted, a portrait of Irwin Steingut was propped up in the Speaker's office, ready to be mounted on the wall.

As a young man, Stanley Steingut swam with Franklin D. Roosevelt in the pool at the Governor's Mansion. As he grew older, Mr. Steingut was nearly silent as far as newsmen were concerned (”I have no comment and that's off the record,” is his best‐known bon mot among suffering interviewers), but he was effective as Brooklyn county chairman until he became leader of the Assembly's minority Democrats.

Because he was the victim of a feud whose origins are lost in the arcane mists of Brooklyn politics, Mr. Steingut was thwarted in a bid for the Speakership 10 years ago, when May‘or Robert F. Wagner Jr.'s Democrats and Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller's Republicans joined to elect Anthony J. Trayia to the job.

In Albany, Mr. Steingut's reputation for keeping his troops content far exceeds his reputed skills as a debater. In fact, according to some who have suffered through his rhetorical convolutions, Mr. Steingut is close to a legislative Mr. Malaprop.

‘ “We are being buried by an avalanche of creeping paralysis” he once told puzzled Assemblymen.

Or: “We'll keep this on the backroom burner.’

Or: “If this bill passes, it will derail the ship of state.”

Face to face, Mr. Steingut is not so much fumble‐tongued as wary. “What,” he seems to be saying to himself when questioned, “did they mean by that?” His‐heavy elelids narrow under questioning and as a chain‐smoker of filter‐tip cigarettes, lie awards himself pondering paused by meticulously lighting up. His most eloquent comment frequently is a broad shrug.

But among his fellow politicians, Mr. Steingut is regarded as a thorough professional.

In Assembly debates, Mr. Steingut's rhetorical lightning would flash and then he and John E. Kingston, the Republican majority leader, would pick lup their telephones and joke quietly. “A lot of these guys are accomplished at orchestrated outrage,” a close watcher says “Stanley's problem is that he's been through it so much h can't keep a straight face.”

Mr. Steingut rules the Madi son Democratic club in the Eas Flatbush section, where non Democrats run mostly for the thrill of seeing their names or the ballot. With the Madisor club as his base, Mr, Steingu ran the borough Democratic or ganization from 1962 unti 1969, when a friend, Meade H Espositio, inherited the jot upon Mr. Steingut's selection a: minority leader of the Assem. bly.

Upon election as Speaker: Mr. Steingut has promised to quit all of his occasionally controversial business activities, inherited mostly from his father. He and Mr. Esposito have been partners in an insurance company that has done some business with nursing homes run by the Bernard Bergman syndicate, now under investigation.

But Mr. Steingut has promised to give full time to the Speaker's job—and it is quite job, the way the New York State Legislature is set up.

The speaker gets $21,000 on top of the standard $23,500 Assembly salary, an expense account whose size he determines, a chauffeured car and a handsome suite of offices off the Assembly in the Capitol.

More important, no one on the Assembly staff (550‐yearround employes last year along with 900‐plus more for the legislative session))is hired or dismissed unless the Speaker signs the papers. The Speaker divides the budget (some $13‐million), giving roughly one‐third to the minority. He appoints the committee chairmen and the floor leaders. He runs the sessions, he runs the show.

A More Relaxed Rule

In past years, since they were also chairmen of the Rules Committee, Speakers also got to control all legislation introduced in the final weeks. Mr. Steingut has pledged to forgo that sort of rigidity, leaving committee chairmen in charge of the flow until the final gavel thumps. On the other hand, he picks the chairmen and there are no traditions of seniority or whatever to determine who has a claim to what.

As Mr. Steingut tells it, ‘the common theory that he aspired to be Speaker ever since his father.held the job is untrue. He did not even aspire to be an Assemblyman, he says. But when his father died sudden! in September 1952, “They had to pick a candidate while we were still sitting shiva. They chose me. At the time, I told my wife, ‘I don't think I'll stay more than 10 years.’ “

After 13 years, Mr. STeingut was supposed to be chosen Speaker by the Democrats delivered to Albany by the Lyndon B. Johnson landslide. “He went in fighting Marquis de Queensbury and it wound up street brawl,” one fellow Brooklyn politician said after the Wagner‐Rockefell combine beat him. Although Mr. Steingut brushes the suggestion aside now, he appeared to be shattered by the blow.

After 13 years, Mr. Steingut ground for a time, Mr. Steingut came back as minority leader, a position in which he was able to do many favors —budgetary, political, legislative —for many of the Democrats who, now a majority, caucused last night to choose their speaker.

Mr. Steingut insists he will be able to work well with Governor Carey, a fellow Brooklyn Democrat, although most politi7ians say the two do not like each other much.

“No, no,” Mr. Steingut insist?d, snapping a match to ignite mother filter‐tip. “We worked rery closely on saving the Brooklyn Navy Yard.

“And I suggested to the 3overnor that he bring Hughie, Air man on ways and means, in m the revenue‐sharing fight.”