This should be an interesting story to investigate.

married June 13, 1878 in Hightstown, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: I G [Isaac Groot] Duryee and Lydia Buddington.

Bride’s parents: Edward T Combs and Elizabeth Hutchinson.

Albert Duryea and Mary Frances Smith

married November 23, 1878 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Peter A Duryea and Elvira VanBarclom.

Bride’s parents: David Smith and Lydia Day.

William A Duryee and Bella A Adair

married November 12, 1879 in Perth Amboy, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: H[enry] B Duryee and Mary Baker.

Bride’s parents: John Adair and Phebe A Williamson.

Eugene Duryea and Catharine Higgins

married October 17, 1880 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryea and Jane Elis Batty.

Bride’s parents: John Higgins and Margaret Kennedy.

William Henry Duryee and Charlotte Elizabeth Meakin

married January 4, 1882 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William C Duryee and Jane Wykoff.

Bride’s parents: Joseph Meakin and Maria Lipsey.

Edmund A Duryea and Delia Spinning

married May 14, 1884 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Abram Duryea and Sarah J VanDuyne.

Bride’s parents: Charles Spinning and Harriet Munson.

Rodman Duryea and Blanche Kyte

married June 20, 1885 in Stanhope, Byram, Sussex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Abram Duryea and Melvina Gee.

Bride’s parents: George C Kyte and Martha Decker.

Jacob Duryee and Jessie Monarch

married May 2, 1886 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Duryee and Sarah Morse.

Bride’s parents: William Monarch and Emma L Greed.

Charles Frederick Duryea and Elizabeth Combs

married February 10, 1887 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Richard A Duryea and E F Wood [Elizabeth Ford Wood].

Bride’s parents: Stephen B Combs and Elizabeth Cunningham.

John Bird Duryee and Laura Louise Brooks married

May 4, 1887 in Belleville, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Sackett L Duryee and Julia Beyer Dean.

Bride’s parents: Spencer H C Brooks and Phebe M Howe.

Philip Duryee and Mary Amelia Brown

married November 23, 1887 in Town of Union, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Abram Wilson Duryee and Caroline Cowenhoven.

Bride’s parents: James Nathan Brown and Charlotte Amelia Gardner.

Joseph William Duryea and Josephine Lewis

married January 4, 1888 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Garret W Duryea and Eliza A Blauvelt.

Bride’s parents: Erastus H Lewis and Mary G Freshour.

William D Duryea and Sarah Elizabeth Seaman

married June 27, 1888 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Albert Z Duryea and Mary M Pearce.

Bride’s parents: Benjamin Seaman and Sarah Kelly.

James S Duryee and Ellen Hendrix (widow Williamson)

married April 23, 1892 in Camden City, Camden County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Norustinore? Duryee and Daily.

Bride’s parents: John Hendrix and Eblin?.

Benjamin Frank Duryee and Ila J Stines

married November 16, 1892 in New Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryee and Cornelia Elizabeth Smith.

Bride’s parents: Jacob Stines and Mary Richards.

John Duryea Jr and Anna Belle Bogert

married June 22, 1893 in Wyckoff, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryea and Eliza U VanZaun.

Bride’s parents: James N Bogert and Nancie Ward.

Albert Duryea and Lucy Etta Conklin

married October 1, 1893 in Ramsey, Hohokus Township, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: James Edward Duryea and Henrietta Carlough.

Bride’s parents: Wesley Conklin and Mary Etta Youmans.

Henry Duryee and Abbie Anna Totten

married November 28, 1894 in Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Alexander Duryee and Elizabeth Vreeland.

Bride’s parents: Abram Totten and Helen Harturch.

Jacob Duryee and Agnes Taylor (widow Wilson)

married April 2, 1895 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Duryee and Sarah Morse.

Bride’s parents: David Taylor and Charlotte Bott.

Christopher Duryee and Carrie Blackwell Dey

married May 16, 1895 in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John V Duryee and Mary H VanPelt.

Bride’s parents: Augustus W Dey and Mary Bergen.

William Duryee and Harriet Amelia Peine

married June 26, 1895 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George Duryee and Mary E Mathews.

Bride’s parents: Gustave L Peine and Elizabeth Greer.

Calton Bennett Duryea and Fannie Jane Morton

married March 25, 1896 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Sanford B Duryea and Helen Leeder.

Bride’s parents: Henry Morton and Catherine McGahn.

Albert Tallman F Duryee and Minnie Alice Nickerson

married November 27, 1896 in Arlington, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William Duryee and Anna Johnson.

Brides’ parents: not ascertainable and Alice Nickerson.

George Wesley Duryee and Grace Wallraven Lawrence

married February 23, 1897 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George Duryee and Mary Esther Matthews.

Bride’s parents: Benjamin L Lawrence and Mary Helen Applegate.

Charles Edgar Duryea and Mary Guerin DeGroot

married August 31, 1897 in Morristown, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryea and Eliza VanSaun.

Bride’s parents: Elias DeGroot and Ella R Coveney.

Joseph Alonzo Duryee and Georgie Soden

married November 22, 1897 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Joseph Duryee and Alice Cleveland.

Bride’s parents: George Soden and Rose Bird.

Van Nest Duryee and Hattie Scudder

married April 23, 1898 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Henry W Duryee and Mary Gertrude [Abeel].

Bride’s parents: John H Scudder and Leza King.

Abram Duryee and Margaret Powless Clarke

married June 28, 1898 in Hackensack, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John H Duryee and Cornelia E Smith.

Bride’s parents: John P Clarke and Matilda Powless.

Walter Stillman Duryee and Mae Finch

married November 20, 1899 in Ramsey, Hohokus Township, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Martin R Duryee and Emma V Stillman.

Bride’s parents: John Finch and Elizabeth Byard.

William James Duryee and Mary Schlenker

married December 27, 1899 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Joseph Duryee and Allice Hutton [Cleveland].

Bride’s parents: Jacob Schlenker and Anna Mary Keefer.

Hewlet Fredrick Duryea and Stella Louisa Hauser

married June 7, 1900 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Sanford Duryea and Helen Liden [EllenLeeder].

Bride’s parents: Charles L Hauser and Mary Staiger.

John Henry Duryea and Ellen VanNess or Ackerman

married September 1, 1900 in Ridgewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Albert J Duryea and Anna DeClark.

Bride’s parents: Jacob H DeBaun and Eliz C Ackerman.

Peter Stanford Duryee and Pauline Julia Clephane

married November 8, 1900 in Englewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Augustus Duryee and Anna Graves Ruggles.

Bride’s parents: James O Clephane and Pauline M Harrison.

John Lawrence Duryee and Julia Hartshome Janeway

married November 15, 1900 in New Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Luther Duryee and Amy J Hall.

Bride’s parents: William R Janeway and Frances S Dayton.

married March 6, 1901 in Dover, New Jersey. (County not determined.)

Groom’s parents- Chancy (Chauncy) Duryee and EmmaWheelock.

Bride’s parents- John Henry Bandholtz and Elizabeth Whitely.

Clarence Duryee and Annie Hoff McClaren

married October 23, 1901 in Somerville, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Eugene Duryee and Ella G Smith.

Bride’s parents- Hugh McClaren and Elizabeth Hoff.

Walter E Duryea and Henryetta Snyder

married October 21, 1901 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John H Duryea and Marion Person.

Bride’s parents- Henry Snyder and Eliza Jane Van Winkle.

Charles E Duryea and Minnie Ellen Gant

married July 27, 1902 in Port Monmouth, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Daniel Duryea and Sarah VenderBeck.

Bride’s parents- Stephen Gant and Anna Irons.

Ernest M Duryee and Margaret Isabella Glaze (former wife of Talcott)

married April 15, 1902 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry W Duryee and Mary G Abeel.

Bride’s parents- Charles A Glaze and Deborah Irving.

Raymond Pearce Duryea and Mabel Louisa Dobbins

married June 17, 1903 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert Z Duryea and Mary M Pearce.

Bride’s parents- Marcus E Dobbins and Rachel A Sanford.

John Duryea and Edna Benendin Cuyln [Cunyon?]

married December 17, 1904 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: James Duryea and Rose Carr.

Bride’s parents: Edward B Cuyln and Marguerite Benendin.

Albert B Duryea to Virginia S Stryker

married May 6, 1905 in Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents: George W Duryea and Barbara Saviade.

Bride's parents: Josiah Stryker and M VanDright.

James Russell Duryea and Martha C Vreeland

married November 14, 1906 in Hackensack, New Barbadoes, Bergen County.

Groom’s parents: James R Duryea and Ella Weeks.

Bride’s parents: William N Vreeland and Martha Bolton.

Harry Paul Duryea and Lillian Evelyn Crane

married October 19, 1907 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Abram H Duryea and Helen F Gingrich.

Bride’s parents: William H Crane and Lena Webel.

George V Duryea and Minnie B Buchanan

married April 17, 1907 in New Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John V Duryea and Mary VanPelt.

Bride’s parents: Lewis Buchanan and Eurana Fauss.

Fredrick Charles Duryea and Sarah Maria Gorsline [widow Golden]

married September 29, 1907 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Richard Duryea and Elisabeth Ford [surname Wood].

Bride’s parents: Jacob Gorsline and Isabella Ray.

Albert Baldwin Duryea and Elizabeth Morris Comly

married May 15, 1908 in Trenton, Mercer County.

Groom’s parents: George Winfield Duryea and Barbara Ann Savadge.

Bride’s parents: Enos Morris and Mary Lear.

Milton Duryea and Leila Christie

married December 18, 1908 in Belleville, Essex County.

Groom’s parents: Rodman Duryea and Blanch Kyte.

Bride’s parents: Richard Christie and Emely Chichester.

Paul G Duryea and Susie Beulah Robbins

married January 22, 1908 in Trenton, Mercer County.

Groom’s parents: Albert B Duryea and Maggie Lear Heavener.

Bride’s parents: William Robbins and Anna Bruere.

Raymond Osborn Duryea and Clara K Klaus

married July 24, 1908 in Englewood, Bergen County.

Groom’s parents: Moses H Duryea and Louise Osborn.

Bride’s parents: Paul Klaus and Marguerite Schlecter.

Frederick R Duryea and Marie Johnson

married December 5, 1909 in Jersey City, Hudson County.

Groom’s parents: Joseph Duryea and Emma Poole.

Bride’s parents: Hermann Johnson and Jennie Andersen.

Walter Raymond Duryea and Emma Frances Seibert

married June 8, 1909 in Orange, Essex County.

Groom’s parents: Abraham H Duryea and Nellie F Gingrich.

Bride’s parents: George C Seibert and Alice Arth.

Harry C Duryea and Elizabeth M Ferrie

married September 24, 1910 in Dover, Morris County.

Groom’s parents: Henry C Duryea and Adella Seaman.

Bride’s parents: Nelson Ferrie and Mary Mulligan.

Robert Perrin Duryea and Ida Elizabeth Denner

married June 20, 1910 in Rahway, Union County.

Groom’s parents: William H Duryea and Bertha Perrin.

Bride’s parents: William Henry Denner and Christiana Hall.

William F Duryea and Adeline J Dunham

married February 26, 1910 in Hackensack, Bergen County.

Groom’s parents: Abraham Duryea and Elizabeth Halzell.

Bride’s parents: John Dunham and Eliza Reynolds.

William [Dewitt?] Duryea and Tressa [Theresa?] Hulse

married April 26, 1910 in Paterson, Passaic County.

Groom’s parents: William [or John?] R Duryea and Amelia Holley.

Bride’s parents: Paul Hulse and A Goodhile.

Clarence Nicoll Durrie and Louise Cleudenning [?]Smith

married October 12, 1911 in Elizabeth, Union County.

Groom’s parents: William A Durrie and Stella E Nicoll.

Bride’s parents: Frank McDougal Smith and Emily Mills Thompson.

Jacob H Duryea and Lillian Sodars [?]

married January 7, 1912 in Paterson, Passaic County.

Groom's parents: Jacob Duryea and Margaret Lake.

Bride's parents: Ryke Sodars [?] and E Checkman [?].

First husband: Albert J McInness.

James Duryea and Ida Hosier

married April 9, 1913 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Henry Duryea and Margaret EllenLake.

Bride’s parents: Harvey Hosier and Emily Van Ness.

Lester Duryea and Marie Voss

married November 5, 1913 in Jersey City, Hudson County.

Groom’s parents: Henry Duryea and Jennie Craft.

Bride’s parents: Edward Voss and Emma Jenken.

Ralph Duryea and Charlotte Barry

married August 20, 1913 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Benjamin Duryea and Elizabeth Lent.

Bride’s parents: James Barry and Hannah Harley.

Harry C Duryea and Alva Thelma Codington

married April 2, 1914 in East Orange, Essex County.

Groom’s parents: William C Duryea and Charlotte E Meakin.

Bride’s parents: Charles H Codington and Martha J Cummings.

Oscar Duryea and Elizabeth M Carter [Bedford]

married December 7, 1914 in Madison, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Levi Duryea and Sarah Odell.

Bride’s parents: David Bedford and Electa M Hopping.

Edwin D Duryea and Emma Wilson married July 1, 1915

in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Daniel Duryea and Helen Welton.

Bride’s parents: William Wilson and Isabell Maguire.

Dudley B Duryea and Laura D Renwick

married April 14, 1917 in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Edward Duryea and Mary Blackwell.

Bride’s parents: Thomas A Renwick and Susan Stebins.

Stanley L Duryee and Elsie L Waitt

married June 17, 1917 in Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William H Duryee and Anna Stratton.

Bride’s parents: Samuel Waitt and Amy Herbert.

Frank William Duryea and Lelia Mandora VanDuyne

married November 14, 1917 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William H Duryea and Charlotte Meakin.

Bride’s parents: Silas VanDuyne and Eva Winans.

(Thank you HM for supplying Lelia's middle name.)

Harold Lawson Duryea and Rita R Dunfee married January 1, 1918

in Englishtown, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryea and Minerva Bedle.

Bride’s parents: Alonzo Dunfee and Hattie Lasby.

Raymond Duryea and Minnie DeYoung

married October 1, 1919 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Henry Duryea and Margaret E Lake.

Bride’s parents: Cornelius DeYoung [deJonge] and Minnie[Wilhelmina] Koert.

Julian L [Leverich] Duryee and Emily M Harris

married November 23, 1919 in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Julian L Duryee and Mary E Brooks.

Bride’s parents: Anthony E Harris and Amelia Mehnken.

Russell Sage Duryee and Gertrude Ellen Brady

married February 17, 1920 in Irvington, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Charles Duryea and Alice Lavalet.

Bride’s parents: Bernard Brady and Catherine Fitzpatrick.

Ruluff Duryea and Edna Lewis

married October 10, 1920 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George Duryea and Maud Burley.

Bride’s parents: Herbert Lewis and Susan Raynor.

Chester LeRoy Duryee and Edythe Mae Thompson

married December 24, 1920 in Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Benjamin Frank Duryee and Ila J Stine.

Bride’s parents: John A Thompson and Ella [---].

William Edwin Duryea and Sophie Johanna Mundhenk

married April 2, 1921 in Arlington, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Joseph William Duryea and Josephine Lewis.

Bride’s parents: Henry Charles William Mundhenk and Elizabeth Waldheim.

William Albert Duryee and Harriet Inez Kleiberg

married December 18, 1921 in North Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William H Duryee and Anna E Stratton.

Bride’s parents: Hans M Kleiberg and Harriet I Richardson.

John Judson Duryea and Mildred Ackerman

married October 21, 1922 in Ramsey, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Duryea and Anna Belle Bogert.

Bride’s parents: John Ackerman and Mary Goetschins.

Edward Judson Drake and Mamie Alberta Eggertsen

married April 30, 1924 in Metuchen, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Edward J Drake and Lavenia Youmans.

Bride’s parents: Eggert Eggertsen and Gertrude Johnson.

[Allied family Drake]

Harold E Duryea and Mary Lucy Gresak?

married July 26, 1924 in Phillipsburg, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Charles Duryea and Mary DeGroot.

Bride’s parents: Alexander Gresak and Elizabet Sairckich.

Lester C Duryea and Norah E Morris

married June 4, 1924 in Freehold, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Peter Duryea and Catharine M Carpenter.

Bride’s parents: William F Morris and Mary L Cuningham.

Harry Duree and Mabel Hubbard

married October 17, 1925 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: David M Duree and Sarah Atkinson.

Bride’s parents: James Alexander Hubbard and Sarah Smith.

Alvin E Duryea and Helen A Smith

married September 12, 1926 in Little Falls, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: [John V] Duryea and Mary H VanPelt.

Bride’s parents: J Howard Smith and Mary Stick.

Herbert H Duryee and Jennie E Brown

married March 27, 1926 in New Providence, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Charles Duryee and Alice Lavalet.

Bride’s parents: Thompson Brown and Caroline H Meeker.

George A Duryea and Addie Mae Dixon

married February 26, 1927 in New Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Peter S Duryea and Catherine M Carpenter.

Bride’s parents: Isaac Dixon and Grace Edna Vliet.

Ralph F Duryea and Margaret R Worth

married July 16, 1927 in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Benjamin L Duryea and Elizabeth C Lentz.

Bride’s parents: Edward Worth and Laura Higgins.

[Note: Ralph was previously married to Charlotte Barry on August 20, 1913.]

George Cowenhoven Duryee and Emilie Funke

married October 12, 1927 in Ridgefield, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George Duryee and Alice Hollyer.

Bride’s parents: Emil Funke and Babette Ritzhaupt.

Wallace H Duryee and Minna Everett Jerolamon married April 2, 1928

in Asbury Park, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William H Duryee and Annie Stratton.

Bride’s parents: Willard H Jerolamon and Charlotte Potter.

Howard Sherwood Duryea and Irene C Eckerson

married July 14, 1929 in Upper Saddle River, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Isaac V S Duryea and Angela Sherwood.

Bride’s parents: Wallace Eckerson and Annie Messenger.

Robert Duryea and Lucille Thornley

married May 7, 1929 in Hawthorne, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Walter E Duryea and Henrietta Vandelinde.

Bride’s parents: James Thornley and Kate Orgers (Odell?)

Edward W Duryee and Florence May Skelding

married August 3, 1929 in Freehold, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Edward W Duryee and Euphemia Denyse.

Bride’s parents: George L Skelding and Sarah Ann Webb.

Franklin P Duryea and E Adele Slingerland

married August 30, 1930 in Culvers Lake, Frankford Township, Sussex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George W Duryea and Lulu (Louise)Hayden.

Bride’s parents: Louis Slingerland and Cora A Smith.

James Edward Duryea and Priscilla E Larlham

married June 1, 1930 in East Rutherford, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Charles R Duryea and Martha Vreeland.

Bride’s parents: William Larlham and Della Ryerson.

John Matthews Duryee and Daisy Helen Brindley

married September 20, 1930 in East Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William G Duryee and Harriet Peine.

Bride’s parents: H M Brindley and Daisy Dean McDowell.

Russel L Duryea and Sarah Mildred Ader

married August 8, 1930 in Parsippany, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Charles E Duryea and Mary DeGroot.

Bride’s parents: Henry Elija Ader and Eva Rachel Stiff.

Edward Sharpe Duryee and Dorothy Cutter Prall

married December 12, 1931 in Woodbridge, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Duryee and Julia H Janeway.

Bride’s parents- William H Prall and Edith Grace Hasbrook.

Charles Earl Duryea and Pearl Kirby

married February 14, 1931 in Clifton, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William Edward Duryea and Phoebe JaneCanfield.

Bride’s parents- Charles Kirby and Lottie Heater.

George Duryea and Virginia Anderson

married December 31, 1931 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Amos Duryea and Hanna Garrison.

Bride’s parents- Frank Anderson and Charity Jackson.

Matthew P Duryea and Agnes K Hallin Kelly (former spouse Joseph F Kelly)

married 1931 June 20 in Alpine, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Matthew Duryea and Lillian H Harris.

Bride’s parents- John L Hallin and Jessica McFeeley.

William N Duryea and Evelyn Shepard

married May 12, 1931 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph A Duryea and Georgia Soden.

Bride’s parents- Harry Shepard and Nina Rosengren.

married August 29, 1931 in Plainfield, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Eugene Duryee and Ella Smith.

Bride’s parents- William Lunger and Anna Collins.

William Newton Duryea and Helen Agnes Henderson

married March 14, 1932 in West New York, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph A Duryea and Georgia Snoden.

Bride’s parents- Edward Henderson and Caroline Frances.

Douglass W Duryea and Margaret M Harman

married November 8, 1932 in Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George W Duryea and Melissa Rogers.

Bride’s parents- John Harman and Anna Oscar.

William N Duryea and Helen Henderson

married April 14, 1932 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph Duryea and Georgia Snowden.

Bride’s parents- Edward Henderson and Caroline Bacon.

Joseph C Duryea and Edna Mae Phykitt

married December 10, 1933 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph Duryea and Georgia Soden.

Bride’s parents- George Phykitt and Elizabeth Engelstader.

Albert Henry Duryea and Josephine Olnas

married September 29, 1933 in Belford, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert J Duryea and Kate Conroy.

Bride’s parents- Steve Olnas and Josepine Donbrosky.

William B Duryea and Anita Z Ogrod

married January 5, 1934 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert Duryea and Lucie Conklin.

Bride’s parents- Bazili Ogrod and Lucia Kusiak.

James J Duryea and Helen Abheiden

married September 21, 1935 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James J Duryea and Mary Seeger.

Bride’s parents- Albert Abheiden and Frieda Matthias.

Fred Carpenter Duryea and Elsie Florence Lentsch

married April 21, 1935 in Fairview, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry Duryea and Adele Seaman.

Bride’s parents- Charles Lentsch and Freda Cuhn.

William Janeway Duryee and Margaret Estella Driscoll

married December 26, 1936 in Short Hills, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Duryee and Julia Janeway.

Bride’s parents- William Driscoll and Estella Jennings.

John Edward Duryea and Margaret Elizabeth Aumack

married July 4, 1936 in Eatontown, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert Duryea and Catherine Conroy.

Bride’s parents- Edward Aumack and Mary Vaughan.

George Washington Duryea Jr and Julia Louise Austin

married June 19, 1937 in South Plainfield, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George W Duryea and Melissa M Rogers.

Bride’s parents- Floyd L Austin and Daisy Staton.

Eugene Clarke Duryee and Barbara Graham Marsh

married April 16, 1938 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Abram Duryee and Margaret P Clarke.

Bride’s parents- Thomas Marsh and Barbara Graham.

Peter Edmond Duryea and Matilda Martina Schem

married February 15, 1938 in Hackensack, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles E Duryea and Rosalie Abramson.

Bride’s parents- Albert C Schem and Matilda Lange.

married September 16, 1939 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Dr George Duryee and Mary E Matthews.

Bride’s parents- Leo H Wolfram and Ida J Bennett.

George William Duryea and Helen Frances Beach

married June 10, 1939 in Highland Park, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George Duryea and Minnie Buchanan.

Bride’s parents- George Beach and Mary Dolan.

married January 14, 1939 in Washington Boro, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Bride’s parents- Marshall Burdge and Ruth Pyffer.

John M Duryee and Dorothy S Hall

married April 22, 1939 in Chatham, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Samuel Duryee and Merle Hedge.

Bride’s parents- Harry Hall and Carrie Sage.

married December 9, 1939 in Ridgewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Sylvester Duryea and Anna Bailey.

Bride’s parents- John Scheel and Alma Wissmann.

Norman Earle Duryea and Viola Emma Peck

married January 25, 1941 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Harold Duryea and Rita Dunfee.

Bride’s parents- Frank Peck and Teresa Engler.

Alonzo Duryea and Anna Stasslinger? (former wife of Joseph Mesle?)

married October 25, 1941 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Duryea and [Emma] Peterson.

Bride’s parents- George Stasslinger? and [Female] Weil.

married 1941 January 4 in Washington, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Bride’s parents- Michel Kochis and Elizabeth Ebgok.

married July 1, 1941 in Butler, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles S Duryea and Katherine W Gates.

Brides’ parents- James White and Clara M Kampfe.

David George Duryea and Paula Woods Manners

married 1942 October 9 in Fort Lee, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- David Gerald Duryea and Olive D Bradford.

Bride’s parents- John G Wood and Gertrude Barrett.

Clarence Duryea and Edna Tomlinson

married 21 January, 1943 in Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- George Duryea and Clara Strong.

Bride's parents- Horace Tomlinson and Edith Mosley. George Washington Duryea and Dorothy Balliet (former wife of John C Bornman)

married 22 April, 1943 in South Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- George W Duryea and Melissa Rogers.

Bride's parents- Harry Balliet and Mabel Geiger. Edward Duryee and Beatrice Mischiara

married May 14, 1943 in South Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- Frank D Duryee and Ira J Stein.

Bride's parents- Gunner John Mischiara and Mary Foote.

David William Duryea and Carolyn Victoria Clark

married June 23, 1945 in Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles S Duryea and Katherine Welsh Gates.

Bride’s parents- Alvah Clark and Adella Fell.

married June 30, 1945 in Changewater, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and IdaHosier.

Bride’s parents- William Swift and Aldona Czarnonski.

Frank Duryea and Jane Aldona Swift

married June 30, 1945 in Changewater, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Bride’s parents- William Swift and Aldona Czarnonski.

Russell Duryee and Helen Hollerbach

married September 8, 1945 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- Russell Duryee and Getrude Ellen Brady.

Bride's parents- Harry Hollerback and Magdaline Strusel.

married September 3, 1946 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Raymond Duryea and Minnie DeYoung.

Bride’s parents- Ralph S Crosman and Elsie Tichenar.

married 1946 May 25 in Changewater, Warren County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Bride’s parents- Harry B Snyder and Elsie Sechrist.

married 1946 February 9 in Atlantic City, Atlantic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Robert Duryea and Florence Eglof.

Brides’ parents- Frank Balestrieri and Mary Rivella.

Kenneth Arthur Duryee and Isabel Brown Perrine

married April 13, 1946 in Cranbury, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Arthur L Duryee and Gertrude Tarbox.

Bride’s parents- Spencer W Perrine and Minnie Brown.

George Duryea and Lillian Hilda Dalrymple

married June 1, 1947 in Baptistown, Hunterdon County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Bride’s parents- Francis C Dalrymple and Mable Parks.

John Albert Duryea and Jeanette Marie Morgenroth

married September 21, 1947 in Hawthorne, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Walter Duryea and Henrietta Snyder.

Bride’s parents- George Morgenroth and Jennie Huff.

Kent R Duryea and Geraldine Regan

married April 14, 1947 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert Duryea and Ida Meyer.

Bride’s parents- Gerald Duryea and Kathleen McDonald.

Wilbur Duryea and Jeannette F Randolph

married April 12, 1947 in Piscataway, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Edgar Whitson Duryea and Edith Dickman.

Bride’s parents- Earle Fitz Randolph and Myrta Larkin Dunn.

Wilbur Duryea and Jeannette F Randolph

married April 12, 1947 in Piscataway, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Edgar Whitson Duryea and Edith Dickman.

Bride’s parents- Earle Fitz Randolph and Myrta Larkin Dunn.

married September 11, 1948 in Dumont, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Judson Duryea and Mildred Ackerman.

Bride’s parents- Soren Teien and Frances Pelzer.

Thomas Melvin Duryee and Margaret Hoffman

married September 18, 1948 in Carteret, Middlesex, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Russell Duryee and Gertrude Brady.

Bride’s parents- John Hoffman and Susan Kosch.

Henry Burkley and Charlotte Duryea

married August 16, 1878 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Jacob Burkley and Ellen.

Bride’s parents: Thomas Duryea and Emily Halick.

Harrie Tucker Hull and Irene Charlotte Duryee

married September 25, 1878 in Morristown, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Aurelius B Hull and Sarah N Tucker.

Bride’s parents: Jacob Duryee and Hannah Odell.

“Both parents dead. Adopted daughter of David and Mary E Gillespie.”

John B Voorhees Jr and Annie A Duryea

married May 29, 1879 in Blawenburgh, Montgomery, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John B Voorhees and Catherine Baker.

Bride’s parents: Alex D Duryea and Elizabeth Vreeland.

James R Mack and Alice R Crotty [widow Duryea]

married October 14, 1879 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Elisha Mack and Margaret Forsyth.

Bride’s parents: Richard Crotty and Elizabeth Davis.

Mr D Andrew Wagner and Anna Duryea [widow Miller]

married May 8, 1880 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Joseph Harvey and Mary Hall.

Bride’s parents: John Duryea and Rebeca Redding.

F Austin Waite and Mary F Duryee

married July 13, 1880 in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Franklin Waite and Irene Marks.

Bride’s parents: Henry B Duryee and Mary Baker.

Cornelius Demarest Demott and Sarah Duryea

married January 11, 1881 in Hackensack, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Henry Demott and Maria Cole.

Bride’s parents: Abram Duryea and Melvina Gee.

Wilberforce Collard and Hettie Duryea

married January 12, 1881 in Lower Montville, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: James W Collard and Martha M VanDuyne.

Bride’s parents: Abram Duryea and Melvina Gee.

Charles Louis VanDuyne and Anna Maria Duryea

married July 4, 1881 in Lower Montville, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Henry VanDuyne and Mary A Pawtner[?].

Bride’s parents: Albert Duryea and Mary M Pearce.

George Fraser and Ida Josephine Duryea

married July 31, 1881 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: George Fraser and Potter.

Bride’s parents: Edwin [Abram] Duryea and Malvina Gee.

John Frederick Butterworth and Charlotte Rankin Duryea

married November 30, 1881 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Henry H Butterworth and Helen Smith.

Bride’s parents: Peter S Duryea and Susan Rankin.

Charles E Demarest and Martha J Duryea

married June 28, 1882 in Washington Township, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Peter J Demarest and Margaret Christie.

Bride’s parents: Benjamin J Duryea and Jane C Williams.

Charles McBride and Julia Duryea married January 8, 1883

in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- ?evie McBride and Ann Baterworth.

Bride’s parents- Thomas Duryea and Emily Hallock.

Peter Romain and Lucretia Daily (widow of Noah Wetmore Duryee)

married March 4, 1885 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Ralph B Romain and Lettie Rutan.

Bride’s parents: James Daily and Eliza Kesley.

Note: also married February 12, 1890.

Douglas Gubner and Aurelia Duryea

married December 15, 1886 in Plainfield, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Adolph Gubner and Antonia Leyer.

Bride’s parents: Abner Duryea and Amelia James.

George B Smith and Grace Durrie

married February 11, 1886 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John B Smith and Cornelia E Slingoland?

Bride’s parents: [William Augustus Durrie] and Emma A Alling.

George Simmons Coe and Mary Duryee [widow Bigelow]

married November 5, 1887 in Englewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Adam S Coe and Ann Pease.

Bride’s parents: Peter Duryee and Mary Atwood.

Ernest C Taylor and Ella A Duryee

married January 4, 1888 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Isaac L Taylor and Elizabeth Edmund.

Bride’s parents: William Duryee and Kate Ederson.

Archer Gifford and Evelyn Amanda Duryee

married April 24, 1889 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Bride’s parents: Henry W Duryee and Mary Abeel.

Peter Romaine and Lucretia Daily, widow [Noah Wetmore] Duryee

married February 12, 1890 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Ralph Romaine and Lottie Rutan.

Bride’s parents: James Daily and Elizabeth Keasland.

Note: Previously married March 4, 1885.

Ira Carhart and Phoebe Duryea

married March 18, 1890 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Edwin H Carhart and Sarah E Wade.

Bride’s parents: Henry C Duryea and Mary E Lyons.

William D Brown and Cornelia Duryea

married January 27, 1891 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Nelson Brown and Mina.

Bride’s parents: Hudson Duryea and Cornelia Youngs.

Harvey C Russell and Jeanette Rich Duryee

married September 10, 1891 in Camden City, Camden County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Winfield S Russell and Catherine S Follerall.

Bride’s parents: Abraham R Duryee and Amilda Roselle.

John J Vanderbeck and Nellie Duryee

married November 25, 1891 in Wyckoff, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Richard Vanderbeck and Eliza Vanness.

Bride’s parents: John Duryee and Eliza VanSaun.

George W Hoffman and Zuletta May Duryea married August 15, 1893

in Haledon, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Hoffman and Mary A Walsh.

Bride’s parents: John Henry Duryea and Meriam Person.

Robert MacKinley and Elizabeth Duryea

married April 3, 1894 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Hugh MacKinley and Carolina Pickering.

Bride’s parents: Howard Duryea and Kate Burk.

Herman T Plass and Margaret L Duryeas(?)

married August 21(?), 1895 in Sea Isle City, Cape May County, New Jersey.

Groom’s father: Jacob Plass.

Bride’s father: Jacob Duryeas(?)

James Sweeney and Marietta Duryea

married July 3, 1895 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Cornelius Sweeney and Ellen ONeill.

Brides’ parents: John B Duryea and Ann M Brooks.

Joseph Henry Kenna and Carie Duryea

married November 6, 1895 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Patrick J Kenna and Jane McGuirst.

Brides’ parents: John H Duryea and Mary A Pearson.

Jeremiah Russell and Margaret Garrabrant, widow Drury,

married February 11, 1896 in Rutherford, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Peter Russell and Rachel Howland.

Bride’s parents: Daniel Garrabrant and Louisa Hand.

Edward W Eckerson and Kitty Duryea married March 14, 1898

in Wyckoff, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Eckerson and Charity Vreeland.

Bride’s parents: John Duryea and Eliza A VanSaun.

Karl Edward Walter Butz and Maria Elizabeth Duryea

married November 29, 1899 in Park Ridge, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Siegfried Butz and Katarine Prinz.

Bride’s parents: Daniel P Duryea and [Margaret] Blauvelt.

Charles VanDyke Gulick and Emma Frances Duryea married August 19, 1899

in Blawenburg, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: VanDyke Bergen Gulick and Julia Downing.

Bride’s parents: John Duryea and Mary Hutchinson VanPelt.

Theodore Wyckoff Welles and Mary Sophia Duryea

married April 24, 1900 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Reverend Ransford Welles DD and Joanna Hardenbergh.

Bride’s parents: Reverend John H Duryea DD and Elizabeth Thompson.

Arthur D Price and Mildred Duryea

married January 18, 1900 in Budd Lake, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: C[harles] W Price and Sarah Duryea.

Bride’s parents: Frederick M Duryea and Eva Rimington.

Jacob Van Buskirk Voorhis and Catherine Ella Duryee

married June 6, 1900 in Cherry Hill, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Nicholas R Voorhis and Eliza Van Buskirk.

Bride’s parents: John H Duryee and Cornelia E Smith.

married December 23, 1901 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Jeff Barney and Katie Barkenbush.

Bride’s parents- Jacob Henry Duryea and Margaret EllenLake.

Tunis R Spear and Mary Anna Duryea

married April 3, 1901 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Ralph Spear and Ellen E Persen.

Bride’s parents- Jacob Henry Duryea and Margaret E Lake.

Robert W Collins and Mabelle M Schuyler (former wife of Duryea)

married January 18, 1903 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph J Collins and Jane S Pearson.

Bride’s parents- George P Schuyler and Althia C Bush.

Charles E Lever and Barbara A Duryea

married April 4, 1904 in Camden, Camden County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- John C Lever and Egbert.

Bride's parents- William J Duryea and Hayman. Edward Stanton Davis and Grace Henrine Duryee

married February 28, 1905 in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- Edward S Davis, Sr and Jane Scofield.

Bride's parents- Abraham R Duryee and Henrine LaPaugh. Thomas Olsen and Eve Duryea

married August 8, 1905 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- Ole Thomsen Olsen and Sarah Thomsen.

Bride's parents- George Duryea and Sarah Miller. William Gasbeck Van Buren and Anna M Duryea

married June 8, 1907 in Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- John S VanBuren and Rachel A Schoenmaker.

Bride's parents- Albert Duryea and Mary M Pearce.

Widow of van Duyne.

Albert E Hole and Mrs Jennie E Banta (first husband was Frank Duryea/Durie)

married July 11, 1908 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents- Edward Hole and Martha Lee.

Bride's parents- Thomas G Banta and Margaret Zolman.

Edward B Titus and Anna Duryea

married January 20, 1908 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William Titus and Rebecca Barber.

Bride’s parents- Theodor Duryea and Lucy Stout.

Willis E Barnes and Reta O Duryea

married January 20, 1909 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- W. E. Barnes and M. D. Brown.

Bride’s parents- John R Duryea and Amelia Olive [Holley].

Gorge Charles VanDeveer and Elizabeth C Duryea

married December 1, 1909 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s father- William VanDeveer; mother- Cathrine Chaill?

Bride’s parents- Percy E Duryea and ElizabethSchmermond.

Henry Post and Julia Duryea

married May 18, 1909 in North Bergen, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom's parents: Cornelius Post and Eunice Sturges.

Bride's parents: Thomas Duryea and Emma Hallick.

Prior husband: McAuliffe.

Joseph Coryea and Jessie Merritt (widow of Duryea)

married November 27, 1912 in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John Coryea and Ella Simmons.

Bride’s parents: John Merritt and Adaline Storms.

John R King and Anna L Duryea

married 1912 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John R King and Sarah Hazleton.

Bride’s parents: Benjamin L Duryea and Elizabeth Leute.

Stanley L West and Elsie C Duryea married January 14, 1912

in Middletown Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Frank West and Bertha Woolley.

Bride’s parents: William H Duryea and Anna Stratton.

Ford Newman Garrabrant and Martha Duryea married October 15, 1913

in Caldwell, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Aaron Garrabrant and Florence Bush.

Bride’s parents: Rodmand Duryea and Blanche Kyte.

John Coleman and Elizabeth Duryea (widow?)

married October 17, 1915 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John D Coleman and Martha Raymond.

Bride’s parents- Charles Roberty ? and Mary Fitgibbons.

Charles King and Annie Dury

married May 18, 1916 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles King and Catherine Sweeney.

Bride’s parents- Charles Dury and Margaret Cleary.

Ferdinand Heinis and Mary Dury

married June 14, 1916 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Ferdinand Heinis and Teresa Reed.

Bride’s parents- Leonard Dury and Mary Hohner.

Frank A Vreeland and Mildred Duryea

married April 8, 1917 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert R Vreeland and Anna Wilson.

Bride’s parents- Grant Duryea and Nellie Byrnes.

Edwin Taylor Ward and Ramona Brooks Duryee

married November 10, 1917 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George M Ward and Antoinette H Taylor.

Bride’s parents- John B Duryee and Laura Brooks.

Ernest Paul Lange and Theresa M Dury

married June 12, 1918 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Emil Lange and Catherine Trautman.

Bride’s parents- Leonard Dury and Mary Hoherer.

C Clifford MacDougall and Phoebe Duryea

married August 21, 1920 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles MacDougall and Pattie Owen Pike.

Bride’s parents- Percy Duryea and Celeste Schmermond.

Charles T Duffield and Elizabeth L Duryea

married October 2, 1920 in Martinsville, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George Duffield and Jane Walker.

Bride’s parents- Theodore Duryea and Lucy Stout.

Raymond H Bloomfield and Elizabeth Duryea

married January 1, 1920 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry C Bloomfield and Laura M Hoffman.

Bride’s parents- Joseph William Duryea and Josephine Lewis.

Bjarbe Ostberg and Jessie McAdams (widow of Duryea)

married October 9, 1921 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Johann Ostberq and Durthea Schofere.

Bride’s parents- William McAdams and Mary Foster.

married June 7, 1921 in Upper Montclair, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Frank Emerson Bliss and Jessie ElizabethParks.

Bride’s parents- Louis T Duryea and Harriet LeSage.

John R Edwards and Edna D Duryea

married April 8, 1924 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Edwards and Harriet D Allen.

Bride’s parents- George N Duryea and Louise Sammis.

James Joseph McGrath and Muriel Anna Duryea

married January 7, 1925 in East Rutherford, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James McGrath and Mary Mooney.

Bride’s parents- John Duryea and Edna Cunyon.

Harold F Leazer and Mildred Duryea (widow of Frank Vreeland)

married June 24, 1925 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John E Leazer and Fanny Derks.

Bride’s parents- Grant Duryea and Nellie Byrnes.

married November 21, 1925 in Englewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George E Hardy and Myrtle Whitfield.

Bride’s parents- Peter S Duryee and Pauline Clephane.

married September 2, 1926 in Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry Schauer and Mary D Schlenker.

Bride’s parents- Albert T Duryea and Minnie Nickerson.

Herbert H Duryee and Jennie E Brown (widow of Duryee)

married March 27, 1926 in New Providence, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles Duryee and Alice Lavalet.

Bride’s parents- Thompson Brown and Caroline H Meeker.

George E Gauteaume and Beatrice C Duryea (widow of Harry Eyre)

married June 28, 1926 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert E Gauteaume and Andrinette Tanovich.

Bride’s parents- Benjamin Duryea and Nelly Erwin.

Albert Whitney Rhodes and Margaret Ruggles Duryee

married November 26, 1927 in Englewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Fred F Rhodes and Alida K Barnes.

Bride’s parents- Peter S Duryee and Pauline C Clephane.

James Edward Simpson and Henel Elenor Duryea (widow of Earley)

married December 18, 1927 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William Henry Simpson and Hattie Sills.

Bride’s parents- John Richard Duryea and Amelia Holley.

William Paul Smith and Ruth L Duryea

married June 30, 1928 in New Providence, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William Paul Smith and Alice Jane Boniface.

Bride’s parents- Harry P Duryea and Lillian Evelyn Crane.

Charles Edward Decker and Minnie DeYoung (widow of Raymond Duryea)

married September 1, 1928 in Hawthorne, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles Decker and Mabel Cook.

Bride’s parents- Cornelius DeYoung and Minnie Koert.

Edgar John Farewell and Ruth Livingstone Duryea

married October 8, 1928 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Farewell and Catherine Miller.

Bride’s parents- Percy E Duryea and Elizabeth Schmermond.

John Douglass Henderson and Helen Elizabeth Duryee

married August 11, 1928 in Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Henderson and Annie MacKenzie.

Bride’s parents- Clarence Duryee and Anna McClaren.

Alpheus Theodore delaMare and Mary Duryee

married April 27, 1929 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Alpheus delaMare and May Bachman.

Bride’s parents- William Grant Duryee and Harriet Peine.

David A Rothstein and Dorothy Duryee

married July 17, 1929 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Morris Rothstein and Lerner.

Bride’s parents- Charles C Duryee and Campbell.

Elmer B Hendrickson and Mildred Louise Duryea

married June 29, 1929 in Lakehurst, Ocean County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Arthur Hendrickson and Anna Barkalow.

Bride’s parents- Clifford G Duryea and Margaret L Moore.

married October 23, 1930 in South Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William H Smith and Julia Stines.

Bridge’s parents- Jacob Stine and Mary Richards.

married May 3, 1931 in Highland Park, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph Kaelin and Bertha Stuble?

Bride’s parents- George Van Duryea and Minnie BlanchBuchanan.

Irving Henry Huber and Phyllis Ackerman DuRie

married August 15, 1931 in Dumont, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry N Huber and Mabel Crosby Bickell.

Bride’s parents- Wilbur B DuRie and Christine Ackerman.

Stanley Arthur Spier and Helen May (Mary) Duryea

married November 7, 1931 in New Providence, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles Spier and Louise Streib.

Bride’s parents- Harry Paul Duryea and Lillian Evelyn Crane.

Edmund Hoos and Myrtle B Duryea

married September 10, 1932 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry Hoos and Margaret L Maurer.

Bride’s parents- Percy E Duryea and Elizabeth CSchmermond.

Frank A Hamel and Gladys L Duryea

married September 17, 1933 in Hackensack, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Frank Hamel and Rose Imfield.

Bride’s parents- John Duryea and Edna Cunyon.

Rudolph Kahrs and Anne Duryea (former wife of John King and Unknown Young)

married December 29, 1933 in Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Dietrich Kahrs and Mathilde Reatz.

Bride’s parents- Benjamin Duryea and Elizabeth Leute.

Spencer H Thompson and Dorothy M Duryee

married September 23, 1933 in Bloomfield, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William H Thompson and Ida Florence McPherson.

Bride’s parents- Arthur Charles Duryee and Mary Ellen Depose.

Milton Frank Edwards and Yvonne Dury

married June 16, 1935 in Hillsdale, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Samuel Edwards and Daisy Herman.

Bride’s parents- Elie Drury and Andrea Simon.

married April 6, 1935 in Hillsdale, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Clarence VanBeck Gifford and MayEckerson Mence.

Bride’s parents- Ira Durie and Anna Savena Campbell.

Rudolf Conrad Reese and Alice Robbins Duryea

married May 25, 1935 in Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- William Reese and Dorothy Hagermann.

Bride’s parents- Paul G Duryea and Susie B Robbins.

Benjamin Berns and Dorothy M Dury married

January 30, 1936 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Abraham Berns and Golda L Walinsky.

Bride’s parents: Edward G Drury and Emma B Graf.

Herbert Frank Freund and Sarah Gertrude Duryee married

December 12, 1936 in North Bergen, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: Henry Freund and Anna ?

Bride’s parents: George Duryee and Alice Hollyer.

Albert Ackerman and Lillian M Duryea married

April 14, 1937 in Prospect Park, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: William Ackerman and Anna Deurloo.

Bride’s parents: Jacob Henry Duryea and Margaret EllenLake.

Thomas McKeon and Charlotte Barry (divorced? from Thomas (or Ralph F?) Duryea) married

September 25, 1937 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents: John McKeon and Nellie McLaughlin.

Bride’s parents: James Barry and Hannah Hurley.

Kenneth Fox and Frances Elinor Durgy married October 11, 1938 in Mountain View, Passaic County.

Groom’s father- John Fox. Groom’s mother- Mary Laurel.

Bride’s father- Dwight Durgy. Bride’s mother- Jennice Mallinson.

Atchley Howell and Margaret Duryea

married September 24, 1938 in Washington Borough, Warren County.

Groom’s father- O Judd Howell. Groom’s mother- Bertha Atchley.

Bride’s father- James Duryea. Bride’s mother- Ida Hoiser.

James McFarlane and Madeline Louise Durie

married August 14, 1938 in Bogota, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Andrew McFarlane and Sarah Faulds.

Bride’s parents- John Durie and Marguerite Jacob.

John Herman Zeltner and Edna Marion Duryea

married May 1, 1938 in River Edge, Bergen County.

Groom’s parents- Herman Zeltner and Justine Rohrig.

Bride’s parents- John Duryea and Edna B Cunyon.

Lester Daniel Gardner and Emma Louise Duryea

married November 29, 1939 in Changewater, Hunterdon County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Edward Gardner and Lulu Petty.

Bride’s parents- James L Duryea and Ida Hosier.

Donald Berdine Craig and Maria Nannette Duryea

married December 19, 1940 in Somerville, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Robert Craig and Cornelia L Berdine.

Bride’s parents- Augustus Duryea and A Nannette Rouxel.

Edmund Dunham Cook and Alice Robbins Duryea (former wife of Rudolf Conrad Reese)

married January 11, 1940 in Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Edmund Dunham Cook and Margaret Parsons.

Bride’s parents- Paul G Duryea and Susie Robbins.

Clarence Stewart Slater and Bertha Perrin Duryea

married August 1, 1940 in Atlantic City, Atlantic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Clarence Slater and Sallie Smith.

Bride’s parents- Robert Perrin Duryea and Florence May Eglof.

Leonard Doran and Marion Van Brunt Duryea

married November 8, 1941 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry Doran and Lillian Perry.

Bride’s parents- Louis Duryea and Florence Seebeck.

Jack Wilmore Turner and Grace Duryee

married February 7, 1942 in Chatham, Morris County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- George P Turner and Vivien Wilmore.

Bride’s parents- Samuel B Duryee and Merle Hedge.

Edward Dobson and Marie [Doris?] Duryea

married May 9, 1942 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Edward Dobson Mary Brady.

Bride’s parents- Ralph Duryea and Charlotte Barry.

Raymond Joseph Feehan and Dorothy Duryee

married November 29, 1942 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- James Feehan and Elizabeth Arnheiter.

Bride’s parents- Russell Duryee and Gertrude Brady.

Robert Dawes and Doris Virginia Duryea

married April 4, 1942 in West Orange, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Dawes and Laura Jenny Tine.

Bride’s parents- Harold L Duryea and Rita R Dunfee.

Joseph Clifford Skillman and Julia Louise Austin (former wife of George Washington Duryea)

married October 24, 1942 in South Plainfield, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Joseph A Skillman and Ella May Staats.

Bride’s parents- Floyd L Austin and Daisy Frances Staton.

John H Gillett and Maude M Duryea

married August 21, 1943 in Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Chauncey Gillette and Jennie Fielder.

Bride’s parents- George W Duryea and Melissa Rogers.

married May 7, 1944 in Red Bank, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- C J Freeman and Sallie Johnson.

Bride’s parents- Albert Duryea and Kate Conroy.

William Francis Umstaedter and Elizabeth Ann Duryea

married August 12, 1944 in Millburn, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Harry Umstaedter and Catherine White.

Bride’s parents- Frank Duryea and Lelia VanDuyne.

Aubrey B Howland and Selma Helen ONeil (widow of Carl Duryee)

married November 3, 1945 in Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Irving H Howland and Minnie Hance.

Bride’s parents- Arthur W ONeil and Olia Miller.

Robert John Cosgrove and Florence Mae Duryea

married May 25, 1946 in Ridgewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John Joseph Cosgrove and Eva Marie Freiman.

Bride’s parents- Peter E Duryea and Matilda Mae Schem.

John Francis White and Vivian Geraldine Duryea (divorced from William Watkins)

married April 2, 1946 in Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- John White and Marion Coyne.

Bride’s parents- Charles Duryea and Mary Cuff.

David Allan Comstock and Lillian Margaret Duryee

married September 7, 1947 in Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Floyd B Comstock and Esther Jacoby.

Bride’s parents- William A Duryee and Harriet Inez Kleiberg.

See also Consent.

married June 7, 1947 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Louis Stickney and Marion Haussey.

Bride’s parents- Albert Duryea and Amelia Unitess.

William A Wilson and Janet M Duryee

married November 15, 1947 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Amos A Wilson and Beulah Edwards.

Bride’s parents- Chester Duryee and Edith Thompson.

Henry F Vogler and Marion Duryea

married October 2, 1948 in Newark, Essex County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Alfred Vogler and Alma Berger.

Bride’s parents- Gustav [Richard H] Duryea and Mae Gackeler.

Henry Matthew vanderVeer and Alice Rebecca Duryea

married November 27, 1948 in Somerville, Somerset County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Henry M vanderVeer and Katherine H Henn.

Bride’s parents- Augustus Duryea and Nannette Rouxel.

Charles Van Acker and Dorothy Duryee

married December 11, 1948 in Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Charles Van Acker and Augusta Dielman.

Bride’s parents- Russell Duryee and Gertrude Brady.

Angelo Albert Imperatore and Katherine L Duryea or Elker

married November 26, 1948 in Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.

Groom’s parents- Albert Imperatore and Theresa Scallitizzi.

Bride’s parents- Harold E Duryea or Fred Elker and Anna Mae Hopper.

See also consent.