Monta Ellis Biography

Monta Ellis is a professional basketball player in the National Basketball Association for the Indiana Pacers as a point guard. Prior to making it all the way to the NBA, Ellis began playing basketball competitively in high school where he led his team to success. Monta would regularly score higher than 40 points in a single game, and on one day he set his career high with 72 points in a single game. His production on the court was so great that he was even named the High School Player of the Year and was selected by USA Today as an All-American in his senior year of 2005. Ellis then decided to declare for the NBA Draft where he was selected by the Golden State Warriors as the 40th overall selection. He has since gone on to pay for the Milwaukee Bucks and currently with the Mavericks where he earned the NBA Most Improved Player Award early in his career.

Book Monta Ellis for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Monta Ellis for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Monta Ellis. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Monta Ellis, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Monta Ellis's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Monta Ellis, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Monta Ellis for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Monta Ellis for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Monta Ellis for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Monta Ellis’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Monta Ellis for your Virtual Meeting