Monta Ellis never had trouble putting the ball in the hoop.

Ellis, who started his career with the Golden State Warriors, played 12 seasons in the NBA. And for most of those 12 seasons, Ellis was one of several quality scorers in the league.

During his second season, Ellis made his name known. He was an important player on the “We Believe” Warriors, averaging 16.5 points per game and winning the 2007 Most Improved Player award.

He ranked fourth on Golden State in scoring that season and was one of seven players who averaged double figures in scoring.

Ellis was one of the league’s best young players as well. According to NBA.com stats, he ranked second in points per game among sophomores, right behind Oklahoma City Thunder point guard Chris Paul.

After his sophomore season, Ellis continued to build on his success. The 2009-10 season was Ellis’ fifth season — and it was arguably his best. He averaged a career-high 25.5 points per game and dished 5.3 assists.

That season, Ellis ranked sixth in the league for points per game, with players like Kevin Durant, LeBron James and the late Kobe Bryant ahead of him.

Ellis’ tenure with the Warriors ended during the 2011-12 season. He was traded to the Milwaukee Bucks, and he continued his high scoring. In 21 games during the 2011-12 season, Ellis scored 17.6 points per game. The following season, he scored 19.2 points per game and led the Bucks in scoring.

Ellis played his last four seasons for the Dallas Mavericks and Indiana Pacers. He got an opportunity to flash his scoring prowess in the first round of the 2015 playoffs.

It was his last season with Dallas, and he scored a playoff career-high 26.0 points per game in the Mavericks’ first round loss to the Houston Rockets.

A sound scorer, Ellis finished his career averaging less than double figures in scoring only twice — his first and last seasons.

The league has always been filled with hoopers like Ellis, players who can score in bunches. Ellis finished his career with 14,858 points, and over half of those came with the Warriors. He never made an All-Star team, but he was still an exciting player to watch during the late 2000s and early 2010s.