Ex-Warriors Star Monta Ellis Gives Advice To Draymond Green After Indefinite Suspension

Former Golden State Warriors star Monta Ellis dealt with some issues during his NBA career and he now has some advice for Draymond Green. Draymond has been suspended indefinitely by the NBA and Ellis was recently asked about the situation. "I don't know too much about that situation," Ellis said.

Stephen Curry and the failed trade to the Milwaukee Bucks

In March 2012, the Milwaukee Bucks and the Golden State Warriors engaged in a trade that changed the course of history for each franchise. The Warriors sent beloved guard Monta Ellis, Ekpe Udoh, and Kwame Brown to the Bucks in exchange for center Andrew Bogut and Stephen Jackson.

Warriors Fans Booed Joe Lacob For 5 Straight Minutes For Trading Monta Ellis And Deciding To Build The Team Around The Injury-Prone Stephen Curry: "Warriors Fans Owe An Apology To Their Best Player Of All Time"

The Golden State Warriors are currently the best team in the world. They recently won their fourth NBA Championship in the last eight seasons and look set to win at least one more ring before their current core retires.

Monta Ellis Said Only Kobe Bryant Was Better Than Him In 2010: "I'm Going To Say LeBron James 3. Number 2, I Would Have To Say Me. Number 1, I'd Say Kobe Bryant."

View the original article to see embedded media. Making it to the very top of the NBA requires incredible confidence in yourself as a player, and even just making it to the league means you have to be one of the best 400 players in the world at any given time.

Stephen Curry Reveals He Was Almost Traded To The Milwaukee Bucks Alongside Monta Ellis

View the original article to see embedded media. Stephen Curry is arguably the greatest Golden State Warriors player of all time after collecting many individual and collective awards.

Opinion: Full Circle? The Warriors Should Sign This Free Agent

The Golden State Warriors are the best team in the NBA to start the season, and I think that they should bring back Monta Ellis who played with Steph Curry years ago.

Opinion: Reunion? The Warriors Should Sign This Free Agent

The Golden State Warriors are the best team in the NBA to start the season, and I think that they should bring back Monta Ellis who played with Steph Curry years ago.

Opinion: The Golden State Warriors Should Sign This Free Agent

The Golden State Warriors are the best team in the NBA to start the season, and I think that they should bring back Monta Ellis who played with Steph Curry years ago.

Opinion: The Warriors Should Sign This Free Agent

The Golden State Warriors are the best team in the NBA to start the season, and I think that they should bring back Monta Ellis who played with Steph Curry years ago.

How Is It Possible? This Former Golden State Warriors Star Hasn't Played In Four Years But Is Being Paid More Money By This Team Than Jordan Poole Is Being Paid By The Warriors

The Indiana Pacers have not had Monta Ellis play for them since the 2016-17 season. Yet, they will still be paying him this season. When they waived

How? Former Golden State Warriors Star Hasn't Played In Four Seaons But Is Being Paid More Money By This Team Than Jordan Poole Will Make

The Indiana Pacers have not had Monta Ellis play for them since the 2016-17 season. Yet, they will still be paying him this season. When they waived

How? This Former Golden State Warriors Star Hasn't Played In Four Seaons But Is Being Paid More Money By This Team Than Jordan Poole Will Make

The Indiana Pacers have not had Monta Ellis play for them since the 2016-17 season. Yet, they will still be paying him this season. When they waived

How? This Former Golden State Warriors Star Hasn't Played In Four Years But Is Being Paid More Money By This Team Than Jordan Poole Will Make This Season

The Indiana Pacers have not had Monta Ellis play for them since the 2016-17 season. Yet, they will still be paying him this season. When they waived

How? Monta Ellis Is Being Paid More Money By This Team Than Jordan Poole Will Make This Season From The Golden State Warriors

The Indiana Pacers have not had Monta Ellis play for them since the 2016-17 season. Yet, they will still be paying him this season. When they waived

What? This Former Golden State Warriors Star Who Hasn't Played In Four Years Will Make More Money Than Over 100 NBA Players Next Season

Monta Ellis is still being paid by the Indiana Pacers. The former NBA star has not played in the NBA since the 2017-18 NBA season, but when the Pacers

NBA Rumors: Los Angeles Lakers Could Acquire Monta Ellis To Fill A Roster Spot

The Los Angeles Lakers are almost set for the 2021-22 NBA season. The franchise had a strong offseason and added help around their already established duo of LeBron James and Anthony Davis.

Reunion with Frank Vogel? Lakers interested in Monta Ellis

After working out with the Houston Rockets and Dallas Mavericks, Monta Ellis has received another interest from a contender in the Western Conference. Los Angeles Lakers have reached out to Ellis‘ business manager Derrius Nelson of Dagger Basketball Agency, who quickly arranged a conference call with his client Monday.

Steph Curry's Former Co-Star On The Golden State Warriors Reportedly Worked Out For The Houston Rockets After Working Out For The Dallas Mavericks

Former NBA star Monta Ellis has had a busy week after not playing in the NBA for over three years. The 35 year old last played for the Indiana Pacers in 2017, and according to Alykhan Bijani and Kelly Iko of The Athletic he recently worked out for the Houston Rockets this week. The Tweet from Bijani can be seen in a post that is embedded below.

Rockets work out Gerald Green, Monta Ellis

Ellis, who has been out of the league since 2017, also worked out for the Mavericks this week.

Mavericks work out veterans Isaiah Thomas, Lance Stephenson, Monta Ellis

A handful of veteran NBA guards worked out for the Mavericks on Thursday.

Full Circle: Monta Ellis trains with Joe Abunassar for NBA comeback

A year before Impact Basketball was born, Joe Abunassar took a trip to Jackson, Mississippi, to see the city’s top high school prospect. Abunassar was one of the first few people who saw and nurtured Monta Ellis’ basketball gifts.

Monta Ellis to conduct private workout with 3 NBA teams in Las Vegas

Former NBA star Monta Ellis is set to camp out in Joe Abunassar’s Impact Basketball this week as he ramps up his training in his latest comeback bid. The

Monta Ellis Wants To Play In The NBA Again: “I Just Want A Shot. I Ain’t Asking For A Contract To Get $5 Million, $10 Million, Or Even $1 Million. All I’m Asking Is Give Me A Look."

A former Golden State Warriors star is aiming for an NBA return this upcoming season. We've seen veterans returning to the league in the past couple of

Monta Ellis finally speaks on infamous moped accident

Monta Ellis’ moped accident was one of the more notorious injuries in recent NBA history, and now he is providing his side of the story over a decade later.