It’s that time of year when snuggling up next to a warm fire with a good book sounds like a great idea. Knowing that, we’ve come up with six books to read in Whistler when it’s cold out.

Best Book to Read in Whistler This Very Week

The Illegal, by Lawrence Hill

The Illegal is the story of a young marathon runner, Keita Ali, who escapes an oppressive government and is forced into hiding. What reason, you may ask, is there to read this particular book in Whistler this week? Well, award-winning author Lawrence Hill is headlining the 2015 Whistler Writers Festival from Oct. 15-18. It’s the 14th annual writers festival, which celebrates Canadian and international authors, both emerging and established writers, with readings, workshops and seminars and just a lot of creative fun. And this year… the chance to meet Lawrence Hill.

Best Book to Read in Front of a Roaring Whistler Fire

The Mountain Story, by Lori Lansens

You can’t resist a title like that when you’re in Whistler. This book is set in a mountain overlooking Palm Springs and is the story about five days, four hikers, three survivors and the unforgiving wilderness. Ultimately it’s a story about the sacrifices we make for love. A fitting story in front of a Whistler fireplace, no? We’d suggest the Firerock Lounge, with a whiskey in hand.

Best Book to Read before You Go Skiing

Ski and Snowboard Guide to Whistler Blackcomb: Advanced-Expert, by Brian Finestone and Kevin Hodder

This is a true insiders scoop to the mountains and this book is a staple in many Whistler homes. It shows you where you’ve been, where you plan to go next, and where you dream of going after that.

Best Book to Read on the Gondola

The Joy of Bears by Sylvia Dolson

We guarantee you won’t be reading anything on the gondola, you’ll be too busy looking around you. The view never gets old. It is always inspiring. In that vain, check out The Joy of Bears by the executive director of the local Get Bear Smart Society. The book is designed to be uplifting and make you feel happy. And, if you’re on the gondola in the summertime, you may just get a first-hand account of The Joy of Bears.

Best Book to Read at Scandinave Spa

Secret Garden: An Inky Treasure Hunt & Coloring Book by Johanna Basford

There is a no speaking policy at Scandinave Spa — “by embracing silence one finds inner stillness leading to complete relaxation.” So, while you’re working on that complete relaxation, you may want to consider bringing a book to the spa and these days there’s a new form of relaxing within the a pages of… an adult colouring book. This is the latest trend for stressed out adults who want to unplug and find a quiet zen. While admittedly it will be very difficult to colour while indulging in the Scandinave’s cold plunges, and saunas and hot tubs, there will be some time in between to let your inner artist emerge.

Best Book to Bring Home from Whistler

Chefs Choice, Pique Newsmagazine.

Local newspaper Pique Newsmagazine is compiling a Chefs Choice book featuring recipes from some of Whistler’s best chefs. This is based on its weekly column: Chef’s Choice. The cookbook will be out this fall with amazing local recipes. So, what better way than this to bring a little taste of Whistler home with you?

Enjoy your reading time…