John Grisham’s 2016 novel, The Whistler, is one of his most gripping tales to date.

Lacy Holt and her partner Hugo work for the bord of judicial conduct, a job that sees them mainly dealing with slight infractions and the occasional judge drunk on the job. But when Greg Myers arrives on the scene claiming he’s there on behalf of a whistle blower who has proof that a well-respected Judge is working for an organized crime syndicate, their world is thrown upside down. As they start investigating and find out the Judge is accused of pushing through legislation so a casino can be built on Indian ground, and making a fortune skimming profits off the top with her crooked friends they wonder just what they’ve gotten in to.

The further they dig they find out that everyone who ever opposed the casino has ended up dead, and they begin to realize they may well have just put themselves in the cross hairs of a dangerous killer.

Just how far will these people go to keep their secrets buried and the money rolling in? Who is behind the secret off shore businesses that seem to control everything? How has the judge funded several properties worth millions on the golf course next to the casino if she isn’t up to her neck in it? And how can they get the proof she’s worked hard to keep hidden of exactly what she’s done.

The more they investigate the more danger they find themselves in. And just why don’t the FBI seem to want to help them get to the truth?

As they speak to the Indian tribe, they find more and more secrets bubbling underneath an under-current of threats and intimidation.

Every page leaves you wondering just what’s coming next, wondering how many more people will die or disappear before the truth comes out? You get pulled along with them as time is running out and everything is on the line, their jobs, their lives and the lives of everyone who’s even remotely involved.

Grisham is at his finest in his latest thriller keeping you wondering right until the end who will win and who will be another tragedy left in the desert.