The Dragon Whistler (Secrets of the Soul Treasures)

The Dragon Whistler

The Secrets of the Soul Treasures

Kimberly J. Smith

Montage Books

COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2015 by Kimberly J. Smith

All rights reserved.

This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of brief quotations in a book review.

ISBN 978-1-329-50953-5

Montage Books

Texas

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, businesses, places, events and incidents are either the products of the author’s imagination or used in a fictitious manner. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, or actual events is purely coincidental.

DEDICATION

For Steven, Harrison and Ben,

who make every day musical.

And for Mom,

who taught me so much more than the notes.

CHAPTER 1

The music was everything and everything was the music. The lilting, hypnotic tune consumed Willow, freezing the world as if someone had pushed the pause button on reality. Notes poured out of the tiny whistle, hovering in the air around her like magical bubbles that floated up into the cornflower blue Colorado sky only to be popped by sharp rays of morning sunlight. She’d never felt a peace like this before, so serene and clear and focused—

And then the dragon blasted through the mountainside and everything became chaos.

Broadmoor Crest Park was a good five miles across the valley from Cheyenne Mountain, but the view from its plateau was spectacular, so Willow had a clear view of the massive explosion of rock and rubble as the enormous silver dragon escaped the mountain. It was all she could do to tear away her gaze to share shock with her cousin Ben. Both he and the unfamiliar teenage girl seemed just as stunned by the dragon’s appearance as Willow, if the way their mouths hung open was any indication. Willow studied the girl’s face, but she’d never seen her before. Her clothing was odd, like a costume, and her appearance was just as mysterious as the dragon’s, even if not quite as dramatic. She had yelled at them as she ran up, though. Now that Willow thought about it, the girl had been yelling at Willow. Yelling at her to stop.

Stop what? She’d only been playing that whistle she and Ben had found in the old hotel near summer camp. What was so bad about that?

The dragon’s bellow drove everything else from Willow’s mind, the roar bending the air from foothills to park where the three of them stood in the dewy grass transfixed with horror, terror and, if Willow was honest about it, kind of a thrill, actually.

Two months short of her thirteenth birthday, Willow was too old to believe dragons existed outside of storybooks, movies or video games. But there was no doubt that a real, live, honest-to-goodness dragon flew over the valley below them, turning in graceful, terrifying circles.

Her brain zapped and sparked like a live wire, trying to reject what her eyes took in. One bellowing roar later and she surrendered to the truth.

It was there. It was real.

A DRAGON!

Willow wasn’t sure if she actually screamed the words because, seriously, she couldn’t even breathe and oxygen in your lungs was essential to screaming. Unfortunately, her lungs felt packed with some kind of thick icy substance, like maybe that oozing stuff inside those blue ice pack things. It sure didn’t feel like summer anymore, although the morning was a warm one for Colorado.

The dragon moved its wings forward, then back toward its long, spiky tail, propelling itself through the air like a missile. That’s really not how I expected a dragon to fly, Willow thought. The movements reminded her of swimming more than flying. Except, of course, that the thing was flying. Except, of course, that the thing wasn’t supposed to exist in the first place.

The air vibrated with another bellow. Willow clutched the thin, bone-white whistle hanging from the silk cord around her neck. Noooooo! This can’t be happening, it just can’t! the stranger moaned. She looked like she was probably in high school, maybe a little older. The girl buried her fingers in her long, dark hair like she might yank handfuls from her scalp, totally freaking out. She whirled on Willow. This is your fault!

Willow’s stomach turned to water. Me? Wh— what’d I do?

The girl’s expression shifted to grim determination. Her light brown skin flushed with angry red splotches. She glared at Willow with dark brown eyes, nothing but pupils. Instead of answering Willow’s question, she grabbed her arm and shook her. You did this. And you have to fix it.

Get your hands off me! Willow squawked, but the girl grabbed the whistle out of her hands. Something was going on with the black markings on its underside — glyphs Ben had called them. Whatever they were called, they now glowed a harsh, volcanic red. Where did you get this? the girl demanded.

Leave Willow alone! Ben spat, pulling at the girl’s other arm. Willow had to admit, she was impressed. In the short time she’d spent with her cousin, she’d never heard him raise his voice before. Not like this, at least.

The girl turned her piercing gaze on Ben and he shrank back. So much for his protective side. You have no idea what you’re talking about. Her gaze returned to the whistle in Willow’s hand, eyes closing in defeat like those glowing red glyphs confirmed her worst fears.

Then her eyes snapped open, flashing with anger. She spun Willow around, pointing her at the dragon soaring over the valley. That dragon is awake because you woke her. Which means Willow here is the only one who can put her back to sleep. Heaving a deep sigh, the girl backpedalled, dialing it down from fury to plain old seething anger.

With a hint of regret, she said, Congratulations, Willow. You’re a Dragon Whistler.

CHAPTER 2

One week before a real, live dragon exploded out of Cheyenne Mountain and forever changed her life, not to mention the world, Willow pushed her back against the brick wall of the Shop N’ Sell a few blocks from her house, hiding from the shop’s owner, Mr. Botana.

She peeked around the corner of the building as Mr. Botana tossed a tattered cardboard box into the enormous metal dumpster. The old guy did this a few times a week: tossed unsold items from his pawnshop to make space for new items that had a better chance of selling. Willow grinned, hearing the box thump to the bottom of the dumpster. She’d arrived at exactly the right time to rescue the treasures from the landfill.

Willow had discovered a few gems among his trash in the past, like the leather-bound book of Grimm’s fairy tales, and that set of vinyl albums by some old rock group named Led Zeppelin—not that she had a turntable to play them on, but her cousin Marcus told her vinyl was making a comeback, so she’d kept them. And what about that beat up, blue California license plate from 1974? How could Botana have tossed that one? It was practically an antique! Leftovers from other people’s lives fascinated Willow. Who knew what amazing journeys had led those items to Mr. Botana’s place? Willow loved imagining their stories.

Willow’s mom didn’t understand. She called it poking through the trash but in Willow’s opinion the woman had no vision. No taste for adventure, either. The only spontaneous thing Amanda McLain had ever done in her life was marrying Willow’s dad after dating him for under a month. Look where that got her: a quick trip to life as a single mom.

At least when Willow’s dad left them he only moved across town. Not like the father of her bestie and treasure-hunting partner Emma. Her dad had moved to California. And now Emma was spending the summer away from her friends. At least Willow didn’t have to do that.

She pulled open the side door of the dumpster but the box was too low for her to reach, so she was going to have to climb in. Not her favorite part, but sometimes necessary. She grabbed onto the dumpster’s top edge, careful of where she put her fingers, avoiding any sharp, rusted metal. She swung herself through the opening and landed in a puddle of sludge, catching herself before she slipped and fell. How annoying. What was this slimy, nasty stuff, anyway? It stunk. Great, and now it was smeared all over the sides of her new black Chucks.

Mom would not be happy.

Willow pulled the box toward her, disappointed to find only a few sets of ripped-up sheets and some old tattered blankets.

Great. Just … great, she muttered.

Her cell phone rang in her back pocket, her mom’s ring. Ever since she’d had an allergic reaction to a bee sting when she was seven, Willow’s mom wouldn’t let her out of the house without a cell phone and an EpiPen. The phone, so her mom could track her down if she was kidnapped or got lost, the EpiPen to save herself in case of anaphylactic shock.

Bees were most definitely not on Willow’s list of happy things. And unfortunately, they tended to hang around dumpsters. Just one more reason Mom hated her treasure hunting. But it was an occupational risk Willow was willing to take.

She adjusted the sports bag strapped across her back and tried to use her fingertips to remove her cell phone from the back pocket of her jeans. As careful as she was, she still ended up smearing a dark and oily patch on the hem of her red jersey. Dang it! The Bulls shirt was one of her favorites—a classic Michael Jordan, #23. Hopefully that nasty goop would come out in the wash. She flipped her long, strawberry-blonde ponytail to her opposite shoulder, and delicately held the phone to her ear with a grimace. Hi, Mom, she said like she had no idea why her mother would be calling.

Why are you not home? The chiding voice on the other end of the line demanded. It’s nearly 12:20! Your father will be here to pick you and Ben up for camp in forty minutes and you haven’t even eaten lunch. And when are you planning to get your practicing done?

Willow closed her eyes and sighed. Sorry, Mom. Lost track of time.

I have told you a million times, that excuse is not going to fly anymore, young lady. Five minutes. If you’re not washed up and at the table in five minutes … She dangled the threat.

On my way. Willow crammed the phone back into her pocket, smearing even more goop. Climbing up on the box of sheets, she was able to reach the opening in the dumpster. Her mom was serious this time, she could tell. She’d find some consequence for Willow if she didn’t make it home in the allotted five minutes, no doubt.

Willow dropped to the ground, and sprinted out of the alley. She jogged down the cracked, uneven sidewalk, veering around the tall prickly weeds sprouting up through the concrete. Willow had made the ten-block run in two minutes before, but it was right before lunch and Willow’s energy tank was low. Running in sludgy Chucks was brewing a nasty blister, too, which wasn’t helping.

She should have been more careful about the time, especially after last night’s meltdown. Even after they’d made up, Mom had still tucked her with the I spent the last twelve years of my life putting up with attitude from your father and I refuse to put up with it from you speech. Yes, Willow had inherited her smart mouth from her dad but why was a little attitude such a big deal? It sure wasn’t a reason to blow up the whole family. Seemed like when you said for better or for worse that meant you realized you were going to have to put up with a few things about the other person that might drive you nuts. Nobody was perfect, right?

If she went too far one day would Mom kick her out, too?

Music Camp was the first thing her mom and dad had agreed on in years. Dad was so proud she’d made first chair in Honor Orchestra and thought music was her calling, just like making movies was for him. Willow wasn’t so sure. Music Camp seemed like a waste of time since she was going to quit violin anyway. At least, she was going to as soon as she worked up the courage to tell her parents.

And then there was the whole Ben thing. Making him going to camp too just made the whole thing worse.

Willow’s Chucks pounded the sidewalk. She ran faster, her knees feeling every jolt.

Willow still hadn’t told her mom how she really felt about her uncle and cousins moving in with them. She barely knew them! And as if having two unfamiliar boys and their dad in the house wasn’t awful enough, now she had to spend a whole week at camp with one of them. It didn’t even seem like Ben wanted to go, but it was hard to tell because he was so darn quiet. Mom thought that since he played the drums he should go to Music Camp, too. He played the kettledrums. Who played the kettledrums in the sixth grade? He didn’t even seem that into the drums anyway. All he ever did was read his stupid fantasy books. Elves and warlocks and dragons. Ugh.

Such ugly thoughts made Willow feel horrible, but she couldn’t help it. Especially considering why her mom’s brother and his kids had to move in with them. But Willow didn’t want to end up babysitting her cousin, someone she barely knew, all week long. At home, she could avoid him pretty well, but she had a feeling it wouldn’t be that easy at camp.

Poor Ben. She really did feel sorry for him, what with Aunt Sarah dying and all. Hard to believe that was only a month ago. Getting over something like that would take, what? Forever? As much as her mom drove her mad, Willow couldn’t imagine life without her.

Uncle Josh was willing to rent the rooms and they could use the money right now. Plus, Uncle Josh could help out with Great Aunt Matilda, so the nurse only had to come half days. Willow knew home nurses cost a lot, but there was no way her mom could watch after Great Aunt Matilda and keep up with her job without some help.

Willow raced through the neighborhood, picking up speed the last block despite the painful blister on her right heel. When she reached the front steps of her house, she collapsed onto the grass, sucking air as she stared up at the blue sky.

Her house was so suburbia, but she loved it. Flanked by four tall pines, it felt cozy and warm. Sure it was smallish, but it had a second floor and a big front porch tucked beneath the roofline. A carpet of lush grass covered the front slope of lawn and a series of barberry bushes grew at the far edges of the porch. Her family had lived in Denver for a bit when she was a baby, but this house in Colorado Springs was the only home Willow had truly ever known.

Willow counted to three, steeling herself before bursting through the front door. I’m home! she called, making a beeline for the stairs. She’d beat the clock, now she just had to get cleaned up before her mother saw her messy clothes. Willow was almost to the top step when her mother appeared at the bottom. Freeze! she hollered. Willow froze and turned. Her mom held a fistful of paint swatches. About the size of bookmarks, the strips of paper showed a variety of shades of paint colors. Willow’s mother freelanced for a bunch of companies, one of them a paint company. Naming paint colors was her latest assignment.

Jaw clenched, her mom’s lips disappeared into a straight line. What. Happened. It was a question, yet a statement. Willow was 100% certain it wouldn’t matter one bit how she answered.

She was so busted.

I … fell? Not her best attempt.

Into the sewer? Her mom’s words sizzled the air.

Not exactly ...

Her mom waited for Willow to go on. Your haircut looks great, Willow said, beaming a toothy smile. Her mom had had an appointment that morning, and it really did look good: bobbed at her chin with long bangs that flowed back from her forehead in luxurious blonde wisps. She’d begged Willow to go with her, but Willow refused to cut her hair until it got so long that she was sitting on it. Okay, all right? I climbed into the dumpster behind Mr. Botana’s place.

Willow! You promised me you wouldn’t go crawling into that germ-infested slime hole again!

I know, I know, but I missed Thursday because of all the camp shopping and packing and— Willow’s mouth snapped shut. Arguing was pointless. Her mother folded her tanned arms across her chest, a sure sign she was ticked off.

No. The glare grew more intense, which hardly seemed possible. No. No! NO! No more Mr. Botana’s dumpster. No more Mrs. Eldberg’s trash can. Or the Winstead’s trash can. Or the entire neighborhood’s trash can! Mom was headed for a full on freak out, and Willow knew only one thing would stop the madness—the thing that always worked, every single time, without fail.

Cue the waterworks.

Willow considered it a talent, her ability to cry on demand. Complete with real tears. Her nose even got all red and snotty, the key to making the performance truly convincing. Given how mad her mom was today, Willow threw in a few hitching sobs for good measure.

In seconds her mom was apologizing. I’m sorry, sweetie. Sometimes I forget how much like your father you are. Willow slunk down the steps into her outstretched arms, trying not to smile. With a squeeze, her mom released her, whipping the dishtowel from her shoulder to dab at Willow’s face. Look … the tears helped clean you up, she cooed.

Willow allowed a timid smile, just enough to smooth things over. They did?

Yes, see? Everything is fine. I’m sorry for yelling.

I forgive you. And don’t worry. Dad will understand.

Her mom’s eyes turned cold and Willow felt the sinking rush of an epic fail.

Crimson crept up her mother’s neck and across her cheeks like in one of those old cartoons on Boomerang.

Stellar, Willow. A+ job.

Shower, young lady. NOW.

Young lady. That was never good.

I didn’t mean I was going to tell him, Willow protested.

Oh no, of course not. Her sarcasm popped like ice water on a hot frying pan. Get moving. Ben is already packed and ready to go. Your dad will be here in thirty-five minutes. You haven’t practiced and you still have to eat. What kind of mother sends her daughter off to camp without food in her belly?

Willow couldn’t let the opportunity pass. A great one? she said, summoning a hopeful smile to her face.

No sucking up allowed, her mother shot back, but Willow could tell she was fighting back a smile. And make sure you packed your EpiPens.

Yes ma’am. Willow pounded up the stairs. She didn’t understand why she had to practice today. She was going to Music Camp — she’d be practicing there all the time!

The room Ben shared with Marcus was at the top of the staircase, making it impossible to avoid him. He sprawled across his bed reading that ratty old book just like he did every day since he’d moved in. Willow could tell by the expression on his pale, freckled face that he’d overheard their entire conversation. The look in his eyes said he thought Willow was a horrible person who didn’t deserve to have a nice mother who cared about her whereabouts—a mom she didn’t appreciate, when his mom was gone for good.

Guilt squeezed Willow’s heart; a lump clogging up her throat, and the sick feeling in her gut had nothing to do with being late for lunch.

Her mom must have taken Ben with her to the salon because he had new hair. The cut was super short on the sides but long on top, flopping a bit over his hazel eyes. Sadly, it made him look even younger than his baby face already did. It was amazing the two of them were the same age. Ben had turned thirteen already and Willow would finally be an official teenager next month, but Ben looked two years younger than her. She towered over him by about a good inch and a half, and that had to drive him nuts.

You’re ready? she asked, kneeling to untie the laces on her Chucks. They stunk something awful. A trip through the wash would most definitely be required before they’d be wearable again. Good thing she had a few back-up pairs. She pulled off the offending sneakers and tossed them into the hallway laundry chute. They clunked against the metal sides all the way to the basement. Willow imagined them landing squarely in the laundry basket but the plastic clatter that echoed up the chute told her they’d bounced out and tipped the basket over in the process. Another fail. She was on a roll this morning.

Willow! her mom yelled. I told you not to do that!

Sorry, Mom! she hollered down the stairs before turning back to Ben.

He stuck a finger in his book to mark his place. Have any luck this morning?

Guilt stabbed her in the gut again. She didn’t ask Ben to go along because, well, she didn’t think he could keep up and besides, it didn’t seem like something he’d want to do anyway.

Um, not really. Willow looked down at the mess on her shorts and jersey. It looks more productive than it was.

Uncomfortable pause.

Yeah, well … guess I better go get cleaned up. Willow forced a smile.

Right, Ben nodded, eyeing the black smear on her hip.

Okay then, Willow said, turning away.

Okay, said Ben, returning to his book.

Lunch suddenly sounded awful. She slipped into the bathroom and shut the door. As she waited for the shower to heat up, she tried to convince herself it was a good thing that Ben was going to camp with her.

She tried … and failed.

Miserably.

CHAPTER 3

Ben Cosgrove knew his cousin Willow wished he wasn’t going to camp with her. He wasn’t exactly thrilled about it, either. He wasn’t thrilled about anything life had served up lately. Losing his mom, moving to Colorado Springs from Texas, all of it made his head pound and his stomach ache. And now he was supposed to go away to camp for a week with someone who didn’t really like him. What was Dad thinking?

After the funeral, he had sat Ben down and told him that, in time, things would get better. Ben kept waiting for the getting better part to start, because it sure seemed like things had only gotten