The film poster for the 2008 film Maradona by Kusturica.I was lucky enough this past Saturday night to see the 2008 film Maradona by Kusturica (it is currently unavailable in the United States). It was the same night that, 30 minutes into the El Clasico matchup with Real Madrid—what was essentially the La Liga championship match—Barcelona’s Argentine striker Lionel Messi catapulted his way into the penalty box, chested an incoming cross in such a way that turned his defender completely around, and then slap-kicked the ball so it bounded past the helpless goalkeeper. An unshaven, gray-haired man in a brown polyester suit standing nearby where I was watching in a bar in Jackson Heights, Queens, shook his head and muttered, “Mejor que Maradona.” Messi sprinted toward the corner flag in delirious joy, then turned around and with a jaw-dropping grin opened his arms wide to embrace his onrushing teammates. We’d seen that smile earlier in the week, when he’d scored four goals as a one-man wrecking crew to knock Arsenal out of the Champions League (Manchester United, the last remaining English team, would fall the following day). Almost 25 years earlier, Diego Armando Maradona had himself famously beaten England, at the 1986 World Cup. At this summer’s edition of the cup, Maradona will be the coach of the Argentine team, of which Messi is the star attraction. These days, you can hardly name the one without the other. Maradona by Kusturica, as its title suggests, is a portrait of the great Argentine soccer star, and arguably the best soccer player ever, by the accomplished Serbian film director Emir Kusturica. With exuberance and awe, Kusturica paints Maradona as Pancho Villa in soccer shorts, a bull with feet as light as a ballerina’s. “I was sure of one thing, Kusturica says in voice over, “if he hadn’t been a footballer, he would’ve become a revolutionary.” Maradona is embraced by Hugo Chavez, entertained at the home of Fidel Castro, serenaded by the musician Manu Chao. Songs are written about Maradona, religions based on him. A Church of Maradona revival meeting in an Argentine town square is attended by more than a thousand people. Among other rituals, the meeting consists of a dozen faithful stepping to the altar to touch a soccer ball for its healing powers, and a dance revue made up of five women who begin in Maradona uniforms and end in far less.

Kusturica begins the film with Maradona’s most lasting act, his defeat of England at the World Cup, only a few years after the two nations went to war over the Falkland Islands. Maradona’s second goal of the game is called “the Goal of the Century,” and it’s replayed a number of times throughout the film. In a series of moves from one end of the pitch to the other, Maradona jukes more than half of England’s players until he slides the ball past the last line of the English defense and into the goal. But it’s Maradona’s first goal of that game that has had the greatest resonance around the world, his infamous “Hand of God” goal. A loose ball arcs its way toward the England goal. Maradona leaps in the air at the same time as the England keeper but manages to get to the ball first, with help from his left fist, which he uses to punch the ball over the keeper’s head. Maradona’s hand is near enough to his own head that the referee can’t see the sleight-of-hand, and the goal sets Argentina on its course to victory. The win was for an entire nation, Maradona says, and its devious fashion made it even more brilliant. “It was as if I’d stolen an Englishman’s wallet,” Maradona says. “It felt like getting away with a prank!”

According to Kusturica, Maradona created a world “where, apparently, only in football matches could the small nations triumph effectively over the larger powers and take sweet revenge.” But it wasn’t without personal consequences.

In the World Cup four years later, Maradona’s Argentina defeated Italy in the semifinals. The front office of the Italian league, where Maradona spent the best years of his professional career as a striker for Napoli, was unimpressed. “That’s when everything that happened, happened,” Maradona says. The following year he was sentenced to a 15-month ban from Italian soccer for testing positive for cocaine. “They got me out on doping,” he says. “Then they got [Argentine striker and teammate Claudio] Caniggia on doping. In Italian football, with the exception of Maradona and Caniggia, nobody even took an aspirin.”

To Maradona, all power in the West is corrupt. The victory over Italy was a strike against that power. “That was the biggest blow in history for” the Italians, he says. “Because [Antonio] Matarrese, another Mafioso, the president of the Italian league, had already arranged the finals Germany and Italy.” Maradona calls Joao Havelenge, the former president of FIFA, the international governing body of soccer, a “Mafioso” too. Former president George W. Bush is “a cold-blooded murderer.” When Prince Charles invited Maradona to Buckingham Palace, Maradona refused. “I would never shake his hand,” he says. “Not with all that blood on it.” At one point Kusturica shows a suited Maradona two-fistedly flipping the bird to an entire stadium. It’s reminiscent of the late Jim Marshall’s famous photo of another mouthpiece for those caught under the shoes of the upper class, Johnny Cash, as he furiously gives the finger to the world on the other side of the lens.

Kusturica’s film ends in 2007, a year before Maradona became coach of the Argentine national team. After he took over, he proceeded to lose four of his first six matches and ran the ninth-ranked team in the world into the unheard of position of needing to win their last two qualifying matches to ensure a place in this summer’s World Cup. When the team scored its winning goal in the 92nd minute of the first of those games, against Peru, in monsoon conditions in Buenos Aires, Maradona sprinted into a thirty-foot belly flop across the rain-soaked grass. After they won their last match, he told the press in an impassioned tirade that “they could suck it and carry on sucking it.” He told those who had doubted him to eat their words. FIFA banned him from international football for two months. For Maradona, the game of soccer is political, social, and, beyond all else, personal. But it’s never just a game of soccer.

Perhaps one day Maradona by Kusturica will become available in the United States. If we were to ask Maradona why it’s not yet, he’d probably sniff conspiracy at its root. For now, we’ll have to make due with the Maradona-Messi Argentine show this summer. Last week, Maradona said that Messi is currently “playing a kick-about with Jesus.” When the two of them get together for the World Cup in South Africa, who knows what else they’ll be able to accomplish.

Manu Chao serenades Diego Maradona in Maradona by Kusturica.