Serbian director Emir Kusturica, once a revered name on the arthouse European scene, is back in the helmer’s chair with On the Milky Road. His return to fiction feature filmmaking comes after a few years spent directing documentaries (Maradona by Kusturica), doing some acting and contributing to omnibus films (Words with God – with his short Our Life nominally serving as inspiration for this one, executive-produced by Guillermo Arriaga).

While his recent works have done little to sustain this, it’s still surprisingly difficult in the world of 2016 to readjust perceptions of Kusturica after his rapturous, wildly energetic early successes. And that constitutes further burden on his latest film – a highly self-indulgent, magical realist fairy tale of profoundly uneven quality.

Spanning fifteen years and harking back to the days of the civil war, On The Milky Road is the story of Kosta, a milkman who braves the path along the...

From Bongarts/Getty Images. Everyone knows about Maradona’s infamous “hand of God” goal against England in the 1986 World Cup quarterfinals. It’s become a big part of the Maradona legend—a shining example of the wicked genius and huge cojones that went hand-in-hand, so to speak, with his sublime skills. Not only did he fool the refs and foil the Brits, he had the audacity, and the tongue-in-cheek cleverness, to claim divine intervention. But God also made another appearance at the World Cup, I remember, just eight years later. It was 1994 and it happened in the Meadowlands, of all places. Bulgaria was tied 1-1 with Germany, also in a quarterfinal match, when in the 78th minute Yordan Letchkov scored on a diving header to knock the Germans out of the tournament. Afterwards, Hristo Stoitchkov, the stocky, Napoleon-like Bulgarian who had tied the score with a brilliant free kick three minutes earlier,...

The film poster for the 2008 film Maradona by Kusturica. I was lucky enough this past Saturday night to see the 2008 film Maradona by Kusturica (it is currently unavailable in the United States). It was the same night that, 30 minutes into the El Clasico matchup with Real Madrid—what was essentially the La Liga championship match—Barcelona’s Argentine striker Lionel Messi catapulted his way into the penalty box, chested an incoming cross in such a way that turned his defender completely around, and then slap-kicked the ball so it bounded past the helpless goalkeeper. An unshaven, gray-haired man in a brown polyester suit standing nearby where I was watching in a bar in Jackson Heights, Queens, shook his head and muttered, “Mejor que Maradona.” Messi sprinted toward the corner flag in delirious joy, then turned around and with a jaw-dropping grin opened his arms wide to embrace his onrushing teammates.

Diego Maradona has admitted that he would cut off his hand for the chance to see Julia Roberts, Reuters reports.

The Argentinian football legend made the revelation while promoting his documentary Maradona at the Cannes Film Festival.

"I would do anything to see [Roberts] coming along here, along the Croisette," he said.

"I'd like to be able to walk along behind her and I'd be . . .