Ringwood Secondary College is a co-educational public school that prides itself on producing academic excellence. Ringwood Secondary aims to create a safe, supportive learning environment for students where they can engage in a dynamic and varied curriculum. The College’s innovative approach to teaching and learning means that they appreciate the importance of having the latest in educational technology at their disposal.

DIB worked with Ringwood Secondary to replace their old projectors with new audiovisual equipment in 10 classrooms. This hopes to create a more efficient learning environment.

Installation process

Seven classrooms had a new Epson EB-980W projector installed, mounted using an existing ceiling bracket. With 3,800 lumens of brightness, this projector creates bright, vivid images that ensure readability of content even in the most unfavourable of lighting conditions. The projector also comes with a wide range of features that make them user-friendly, including easy set up and image adjustment options for sharp and clear images.

In terms of connectivity, the projector features an array of wireless options (including networking connectivity and tablet or smartphone connection using Epson’s iProjection app), as well as more local connectivity (including HDMI and USB connectivity).

In the remaining three classrooms, an Epson EB-695Wi interactive projector was installed. This projector can be used to provide a more engaging, hands-on lesson, allowing students to interact with the display using either their fingers or with the pens that come with the projector. The projector simple and hassle free to use, requiring no driver installations or manual calibration to do before use.

For audio reinforcement, DIB installed an Epson SP02 30W speaker system. With two 15W speakers, this ensures that sound from the projector is easily carried around the space. Additionally, a 3.5mm audio socket was fitted so that users can connect and play audio directly from their iPod/MP3 device to the speakers without having to turn the projector on.

DIB fitted various wall plates for different connectivity options, including a VGA/HDMI plate as well as a USB wall plate made for interactive display.

In all of the rooms, the existing JED control panel was re-located and re-programmed to suit the new system, ensuring simplified, hassle-free operation of the projector system.