Founded in 1954, Ringwood Secondary College is an academic school that endeavours to develop the individual to his/her potential. Students who do not live in the neighbourhood may need to make a separate application for admission. Parental support and involvement are strong across the Music Association, PCTA, Ladies Auxiliary, Heritage Group and Council. Uniform is compulsory. The college is easily accessible by a comprehensive public transport network and Year 7 students and parents participate in an active transition program.

Facilities: Gymnasium, library, tennis courts, ovals, hall, specialist classrooms, outdoor performance areas, VCE area, Engineering and Automotive centre and performing arts wing.

Curriculum: Years 7 to 10 core subjects include LOTE (French and Indonesian) and Music, which are both taught to Year 12. VCE, VET and VCAL courses are all offered. As a Registered Training Organisation, additional offerings include CISCO and ICT Certificates 1-4. Recognition of student achievement is regularly acknowledged and current and former students are inducted annually into the Science Hall of Excellence, Sports Hall of Fame, Arts Hall of Achievement or Heritage Hall. Students are engaged in using mobile learning devices including laptops and iPads for learning across all year-levels. Integrated and global projects form an integral part of the Year 9 Challen9e program.

Sport: A strong tradition of participation and excellence in athletics, swimming and cross-country flourishes. All team sports enjoy success and in recent years many have achieved success at State level.

Extra-curricular activities: Choices include 16 bands and ensembles, singing groups, orchestra, junior and senior musical productions, aerobics, global and Victorian Performing Arts tours, drama, debating, Tournament of Minds, bike tour, year-level trips, overseas tours, fee-paying and exchange students (sister schools in France, Thailand and England), debutante ball, peer support, homework clubs and tutor groups, community service and artist/musician/scientist-in-residence programs. Student leadership resides in junior and senior Student Representative Council, ambassadors, year-level leaders and prefects with portfolios. Student voice is nurtured through programs such as cybersafety and Model United Nations.

Student welfare programs: A caring, proactive discipline and student welfare policy operates, with full-time youth worker, a college nurse and counsellor. The pastoral program includes year-level welfare days, integration programs, a comprehensive transition program, mentoring, specific goal-focused programs, managed individual pathways and tracking of student transitions.