My name is Rosina Fotia and I am proud to have been selected as the new Principal of Ringwood Secondary College. It is an honour and privilege to be joining this amazing community and I would like to acknowledge the outstanding work and commitment of my predecessors, Michael Phillips as well as Maria Allison for her working in the acting role over the past 8 months. I am looking forward to immersing myself in the community and getting to know the school, its staff and most importantly, its students.

My theme for this term is “seek first to understand”. I have begun to visit classes, facilitated a whole staff meeting and met with key teams within the College including Ringwood Training. I am impressed by the collegiality shown amongst staff, their trust in one another and their willingness to share their perspective. Students have been very welcoming, wanting to have a chat and share with me what they love about their school…all very insightful.

I asked staff to tell me, in 21 words, about Ringwood Secondary College. Some sample responses include:

Ringwood Secondary College is…

“A holistic community whose tradition of working together to support learning, wellbeing and engagement, inspires trust, respect and reaching one’s potential.”

“A dynamic, inclusive community and environment where every staff member and student and parent have the opportunity to succeed.”

“A collective space that promotes, endorses and enacts respectful agency which nurtures the social and emotional wellbeing and academic potential of students.”

Preparations for the College production of “Urinetown” are well underway. Production camp is now complete and provided an amazing opportunity for students, staff and parents to work collaboratively on what promises to be a very energetic, powerful and professional show.

I have had two meeting with Will Fowles, Member for Burwood who will be running in the Ringwood electorate in the upcoming state election. He officiated in the “sod turning” for the $14 million STEM centre and was receptive to the College vision for an upgrade to sporting facilities.

Over coming weeks, I hope to further develop connections with stakeholders and continue to identify strategies and areas of focus as we work together towards realising the vision of Ringwood Secondary College being a system leader in this state.

Safe Sporting and Play Behaviour.

After a recent incident in the yard where a young person was injured, it is important that we understand that in order to prevent harm or injury, rough play must come with ground rules. Whilst rough play develops strength, movement and social skills, it can also be dangerous. Ringwood Secondary College does not support or condone rough play at any time. Families are encouraged to share and discuss this expectation with their children so that our community continues to be a safe and nurturing environment for all.

Stay well

Rosina Fotia