From staff reports

A. Carl Helmholz, 88, a nuclear physicist and physics professor who grew up in Rochester and worked on the creation of the atomic bomb during World War II, died at his home Oct. 29 in Lafayette, Calif.

As a graduate student at the University of California, Berkeley, in 1937, Helmholz worked with Ernest O. Lawrence, the Nobel laureate who invented the cyclotron.

Helmholz's brother, retired Mayo Clinic pulmonary specialist Dr. Fred Helmholz of Rochester, said that after graduation, Lawrence asked his brother to stay on and work at the lab and help with the secret Manhattan Project that was developing the atomic bomb.

"They did work on one element of the atom bomb," Fred Helmholz said. "He said very little about that work."

The eldest Helmholz brother, Lindsay Helmholz, also worked on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos, N.M., Fred Helmholz said.

When asked about the three brothers' success in the fields of medicine and physics, Fred Helmholz answered, "We had good parents." Their father, Dr. Henry F. Helmholz Sr., was instrumental in the early foundation of pediatric medicine at Mayo Clinic in Rochester.

While Carl Helmholz did work with Nobel winners in California, he also worked with some in Rochester, his brother said.

While attending Harvard University in the 1930s, he developed diabetes. To learn more about treating it, he worked with Dr. Russell Wilder, who studied metabolic diseases in Rochester. That led him to work in Dr. Edward Kendall's lab, his brother said. Kendall won the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1950 with Dr. Philip S. Hench for their work with cortisone.

Fred Helmholz said that time studying diabetes must have helped his brother because he lived to be almost 90 years old, "which is phenomenal for someone with childhood diabetes."

Helmholz also worked with Luis Alvarez, a Rochester neighbor who won a Nobel Prize in physics for his invention of the hydrogen bubble chamber. Alvarez reportedly recommended UC Berkeley to Helmholz as a graduate school.

In addition to Alverez's urging, another factor in his decision to study at UC Berkeley was a desire to be near Elizabeth Jane Little, who attended Stanford University. Helmholz and Little, who is from Winona, were married in the summer of 1938.

Helmholz joined the Manhattan Project in 1942, using the magnets of the 37-inch cyclotron and the larger 184-inch cyclotron to separate uranium, which eventually was used in experiments that led to the building of an atomic bomb. Upon receiving his doctorate, Helmholz started teaching in the UC Berkeley physics department. He was appointed assistant professor in 1943 and full professor in 1951. He was chairman of the UC Berkeley physics department from 1955 to 1962. He retired in 1980.

In addition to his brother, Helmholz is survived by his wife, four children, two grandchildren and a sister. He was preceded in death by a brother and two grandchildren.