ROCHESTER -- A memorial service for August Carl Helmholz will be at 2 p.m. Nov. 23 in the Great Hall of the University of California-Berkeley Faculty Club.

Mr. Helmholz, 88, of Lafayette, Calif., formerly of Rochester, a nuclear physicist and professor emeritus of physics at UC-Berkeley, died Oct. 29, 2003, at his home following a six-month illness.

Born May 24, 1915, in Evanston, Ill., he moved to Rochester with his family as an infant and attended Shattuck Military Academy in Faribault. In 1932, with the intention of becoming a doctor, he entered Harvard University, where he excelled in athletics and was a member the tennis team, which won many tournaments. After becoming ill with diabetes after his sophomore year, he returned to Rochester and spent much of his junior year at the University of Minnesota before returning to Harvard, where in 1936 he graduated magna cum laude with a bachelor's degree. He studied at Cambridge University in England for a year and in 1937 began his career in physics at the University of California-Berkeley. In the summer of 1938 he married Elizabeth Jane Little.

Upon receiving his Ph.D., he taught in the UC-Berkeley physics department, was appointed assistant professor in 1943 and full professor in 1951, and from 1955 to 1962 was chairman of the physics department. He worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II, continued nuclear studies with various successors of the cyclotron at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory until his retirement in 1980, and helped establish the distinguished visitor lecture program at the university, which continues today. He was an active member of the campus community and served on many campus committee. He served on the boards of Boise Cascade, Conwed Corp., Laird Norton Co. and Laird Norton Trust Co.

Survivors include his wife; two daughters, Charlotte "Chalan" Colby of Los Altos Hills, Calif., and Edith Roth of Orinda, Calif.; two sons, George of Covelo, Calif., and Fred of Seattle; two grandchildren; a brother, Dr. Fred of Rochester; and a sister, Margaret Burchell of St. Paul. He was preceded in death by two grandchildren and a brother.

Memorials are suggested to the A. Carl Helmholz Scholarship/Fellowship (No. 41680, Department of Physics, 366 LeConte Hall, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300.