Press release from Oldenburg Academy

(Oldenburg, Ind.) - Oldenburg Academy of the Immaculate Conception is pleased to announce that it has been named a Four Star School by the Indiana Department of Education (IDOE) for the 2010-2011 school year. This is the second consecutive year that Oldenburg Academy has received this outstanding recognition.

“It is an honor to serve in the capacity of Principal for a school with such an honor,” said Mrs. Bettina Rose. “On a daily basis I see students, teachers, and parents who are fully dedicated to the mission of the Academy, and I am amazed at the amount of pride each group has for OA. It takes everyone to earn this type of recognition by the state… congratulations OA!”

The IDOE released the list of 2010-2011 Four Star Schools on December 21, 2011. According to their website, “Out of 1,780 public schools, 162 earned this distinction. Eleven of 238 non-public schools also received the honor this year.” This is the second year that non-public schools have been eligible to receive the award.

The IDOE released the following statement with the list of 2010-2011 Four Star Schools. “Today serves as an opportunity to recognize the great work of educators throughout Indiana,” Superintendent of Public Instruction Dr. Tony Bennett said. “These schools encourage a culture of high expectations for their students. The students and educators who meet these expectations on a daily basis should be extremely proud of this honor.”

To be considered a Four Star School, a school’s combined English 10 and Algebra 1 End of Course Assessment, or English/Language Arts and Math ISTEP+, passing percentages must fall into the top 25th percentile when compared to schools statewide. A school must also have made Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) under the federal No Child Left Behind Act to qualify.

IDOE reviewed data for non-public schools and included the top non-public schools as honorees. Public schools and non-public schools had separate cut scores and were compared only to like schools. This means public schools were only compared to other public schools, and non-public schools were only compared to other non-public schools. The calculations were completely independent of one another.

2010-2011 Academic Year Four Star Schools Award Cut Scores

1. Combined passing percent for End of Course Assessments (ECAs) in English and math must meet a minimum cut score. The public school cut score is 171.1. The non-public cut score is 194.4.

2. Percent passing both English and math ECAs must meet a cut score. The public school cut score is 77.575. The non-public school cut score is 95.8