Larry Miller is a stand-up comic, actor, author, scriptwriter and frequent TV talk-show guest. So it’s not exactly surprising to hear the 56-year-old New York native talk glowingly about the entertainment industry.

“Look, you either love show business or you don’t,” said Miller. “I can raise my hand like in third grade and say, `I do. I love it.”‘

Miller will share his fondness for showbiz Saturday night at the James Armstrong Theatre, when he presents “Cocktails With Larry Miller: Little League, Adultery and Other Bad Ideas.” The one-man show kicks off the Torrance Cultural Arts Foundation’s 2010-2011 season.

“We’re really excited to bring Larry in – this is going to be hysterically funny,” said Christian Wolf, executive director of the Torrance Cultural Arts Center. “I think it will fit very well into our season, which is themed `A World of Entertainment.”‘

The multitalented Miller, who has appeared in a combined 100-plus TV shows and films, describes “Cocktails” as quite the concoction.

“I’ve been in many plays, movies and TV shows as an actor. I’ve written many scripts and I love stand-up,” he said. “So if you add all of those up and put them in a blender – which is a horrible thought, quite frankly – but if you did, I think you might get this.”

Saturday’s performance will be the Southern California premiere of “Cocktails,” so Miller still had some elements to iron out in the weeks leading up to the show.

“A lot of this stuff, I’m still memorizing, I’m still writing,” he admitted. “For stand-up on `Late Show with David Letterman’ or `The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,’ I’m writing up until an hour before, and I work on those things for months.”

Following his performance in Torrance, Miller will take “Cocktails” on the road, with dates scheduled in Illinois, Texas and Ohio.

“I love being on the road,” he said. “I get to see more of the country than I guess anybody.

“Now I have something that I’m working on that hopefully I’ll be doing for the rest of my life – as far as I know, another 300 years,” he said. “I’m a writer and an actor but, first and foremost, I’m a comic. It’s the alpha and omega to me, and I love live performing.”

That’s not to say he has to be on stage to share his talents.

Miller has a weekly podcast, “This Week with Larry Miller,” available for free on iTunes. And he “clogs” three times a week on his website, www.larrymillerhumor.com. He named his online stories clogs, he said, because they are half-comedy, half-blogs.

“There are certain things that I like to write that don’t fit stand-up, a script or an essay, but they’re perfect for my website,” he said. “Some terrible things happen on the Internet, but what a fantastic explosion it’s been for people as far as storytelling.”

Regardless of how he delivers the message, if it’s entertaining, Miller will find a way to get the point across.

“This is all the same thing,” he said. “These are all forms that are just wonderful to me, and I can’t believe that some people aren’t grabbing them with both hands.”

Stephanie Forshee is a freelance writer based in Los Angeles.

Cocktails With Larry Miller: Little League, Adultery and Other Bad Ideas

When: 8 p.m. Saturday

Where: James Armstrong Theatre, Torrance Cultural Arts Center, 3330 Civic Center Drive.

Tickets: $50, includes champagne reception after the show.