The AVG Ultimate

The History of AVG Technologies

AVG Ultimate founder is Tomas Hofer and Gary Kovacs is the CEO. According to statistics, consumer’s use of AVG devices surpasses over 200 million. AVG has locations in Israel, Canada, North America, Brazil, and Europe.

Their main office is located in the Netherlands.

This computer security business was first created in the Czech Republic. AVG stands for Anti-Virus-Guard.

The main goal of AVG is to provide security for its client’s electronic devices such as cell phones and computers.

What Does AVG Ultimate Do?

Nowadays it’s vitally important to guard your personal information against Identity Theft.

The AVG Ultimate is an antivirus guard that guarantees the best security for your electronic devices.

The AVG Ultimate AntiVirus Pro can be used to protect your cell phone against hackers and malware and the AVG Cleaner Pro is a performance supporter.

Features The AVG Ultimate Offers:

Hacker Protection

Email Protection

Payments Protection

Software Updater

Webcam Protection

Device Lock

Automatic Maintenance

Ransomware Protection

Smart Photo Cleaner

App Lock

Startup Optimizer

Data Safe

Anti-Theft

Browse & Disk Cleaner

Battery Profiles

Antivirus Protection

Banking and Online Shopping Protection

AVG Ultimate safeguards against internet scams and spam, thus making it impossible to reveal your credit card information to identity thieves.

Now you can shop, conduct online banking, and browse with confidence knowing that your personal information is safe.

Antivirus Protection

Your PC is fully protected. AVG Ultimate presently offers fresh Webcam and Ransomware Protection features to safeguard your confidential information — and your personal life.

By using AVG Ultimate identity thieves have no access to your private information by imploring webcam and ransomware surveillance, they can’t look inside your residence and view your most private pictures.

PC Protection

Our best defense?

It upgrades your safety measures significantly, by utilizing state of the art Artificial Intelligence and actual-time searches to prevent any malware from coming your way.

We guarantee to keep your DVD and USB drives safe.

When it comes to internet security we have an excellent worldwide reputation.

We’ve been awarded many rewards since 1991, and more than 25 in the last two years.

By going above and beyond the competition, you can rest assured that your family’s personal information is fully secure.

You can place AVG Internet Security on all of the computers inside your home with just one subscription.

We offer one month of complete internet security for free.

References

AVG. (n.d.). AVG Ultimate [Web log post]

Retrieved from https://www.avg.com/en-ww/ultimate

SuccessStory. (n.d.) AVG Technologies [Web log post].