PRESS RELEASE

AMSTERDAM, Dec. 1, 2011 /PRNewswire/ -- AVG Technologies (AVG), a leading provider of Internet and mobile security, today announced its acquisition of the business of Bsecure Technologies, Inc. (Bsecure), a leading provider of proprietary, cloud-based technology in the Internet filtering industry since 2001, and the most endorsed software provider for family online safety. The acquisition will further strengthen AVG's leadership in protecting families online through Bsecure's top-rated parental control products. Terms of the transaction, which has already closed, were not publicly disclosed.

J.R. Smith, AVG Technologies' Chief Executive Officer, said, "The acquisition of Bsecure reinforces our company's long-standing dedication and leadership in protecting families online. The expansion of online access and use of cloud computing across mobile and PC platforms has created increasing demand from our consumers for offerings that protect both them and their families, while making the cloud experience more user-friendly and manageable. The combination of AVG's brand, product distribution and business model with Bsecure's existing offerings and cloud-based platform expertise will enable us to sustain bringing innovative products to market and continue delivering peace of mind to our customers."

AVG noted that Bsecure's portfolio complements AVG's existing offerings, and that Bsecure has been a key AVG partner in offering top-rated parental control products. Both companies share a like-minded vision of creating a platform that aims to deliver the most reliable and comprehensive Internet protection software and technology available, and this strategic alignment significantly strengthens AVG's offering and all-round protection technologies for its customers.

David Haadsma, CEO, Bsecure Technologies, Inc. noted, "We look forward to seamlessly integrating our operations and knowledge under AVG Technologies. This acquisition highlights the value that we have successfully created at Bsecure. We will leverage our technology and products to provide value added offerings to AVG customers while protecting them against rapidly expanding threats."

ABOUT AVG TECHNOLOGIES

www.avg.com

AVG is a global security software maker protecting more than 100 million active users in 170 countries from the ever-growing incidence of Web threats, viruses, spam, cyber-scams and hackers on the Internet. AVG has nearly two decades of experience in combating cybercrime and advanced laboratories for detecting, pre-empting and combating Web-borne threats from around the world. Its free, downloadable software allows novice users to have basic anti-virus protection and then easily upgrade to greater levels of safety and defense when they are ready. AVG has a strong reseller network consisting of resellers, partners and distributors globally including; CNET, Ingram Micro, and Wal-Mart.