AVG Family Graph is built by Location Labs, the AVG business unit focused on serving the mobile operator market. Location Labs by AVG is the US family locator market leader, with mobile operator customers including AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless. In the US market, where over two-thirds of consumer lines are on family plans, evidence suggests that wireless accounts moving from 1 line to 4 lines have 75% lower churn. For markets where pre-paid penetration is high and family plan adoption is low, AVG Family Graph will become the mobile operator’s view into connections within families, creating a de facto family plan.

By partnering with AVG to offer Family Graph to customers, mobile operators outside the US can now apply this model to make single line subscribers behave more like a family account, potentially increasing customer lifetimes as much as 400%, as the US market has shown.

“Operators worldwide want greater family plan adoption. Working with every Tier 1 mobile operator in the US, we’ve seen the success of this strategy,” said Tasso Roumeliotis, Founder & CEO of Location Labs by AVG. “By launching our operator- branded family safety product, operators can create customer engagement and loyalty among the coveted family segment and remain competitive in a market expected to reach $275 billion USD in South America, alone, by 2020.”

“AVG Family Graph further demonstrates our commitment to protecting devices, data, and people. We’re expanding beyond the US to bring people protection to the global market,” said Todd Simpson, Chief Strategy Officer, AVG Technologies. “With quick time to market, Family Graph gives a vital tool to mobile operators who recognize the value of onboarding and keeping entire families as customers.”

In conjunction with the launch of Family Graph, Tasso Roumeliotis, Founder & CEO of Location Labs by AVG, will deliver the keynote at Futurecom on Tuesday, October 27, sharing in-depth analysis of the future of mobile safety innovation, how operators can attract and retain their most valuable subscribers, and why partnerships with cutting- edge Silicon Valley companies are vital.

AVG Family Graph is available immediately for mobile operators. The iOS and Android apps are designed for co-branding and can be quickly brought to market. For mobile operators who want more information about AVG Family Graph, email familygraph@avg.com. For more information on Tasso Roumeliotis’s Futurecom keynote, visit http://agenda.futurecom.com.br/en/27.

About AVG Technologies (NYSE: AVG)

AVG is the online security company providing leading software and services to secure devices, data and people. AVG’s award-winning technology is delivered to over 200 million monthly active users worldwide. AVG’s Consumer portfolio includes internet security, performance optimization, location services, data controls and insights, personal privacy and identity protection for mobile devices and desktops. The AVG Business portfolio - delivered by managed service providers, VARs and resellers - offers IT administration, control and reporting, integrated security and mobile device management that simplifies protection for businesses.

All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. www.avg.com

Media Contacts in Brazil:

Camila Sanches

Tel: 055-11-33883059

Email: camila_sanches@tramaweb.com.br

Lizandra Cardelino:

Tel: 055-11-33883056

Email: lizandra@tramaweb.com.br

Media Contact in North America:

Deanna Contreras

Tel: 415-608-9627

Email: Deanna.Contreras@avg.com

Press information: http://now.avg.com

SAO PAULO, BRAZIL—October 27, 2015—AVG® Technologies N.V. (NYSE: AVG), the online security companyTM for more than 200 million monthly active users, today announced the availability of AVG Family Graph for mobile operators. AVG Family Graph helps mobile operators attract and retain valuable family plan subscribers by creating the family social graph, a view into intra-family connections. For subscribers, the product offers the ability to locate family members’ phones regardless of their mobile operator.