AMSTERDAM, June 16, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- AVG® Technologies N.V. (NYSE: AVG), the online security company™ for more than 200 million monthly active users, announced today the establishment of its global Center of Excellence for mobile in Tel Aviv, Israel. The new office comprises a 3,200 square meter facility, supporting more than 120 employees working across state-of-the-art mobile innovation, emerging mobile threats research, and Internet of Things technology development.

"Israel has emerged as a hotbed for mobile innovation, resulting in unparalleled opportunities to partner with innovative start-ups and develop cutting-edge mobile technologies. AVG's rapidly growing mobile customer base makes this a critical time to build robust, future-proof offerings, supporting the multiple mobile platforms and services that are so popular today," said Harel Tayeb, AVG Israel Country Manager. "The historical success of our investments in this market have laid a strong foundation for the development of our signature AVG Zen platform, growing our global mobile user base, and delivering on our mobile monetization strategy."

The development of AVG's most popular mobile product, AVG AntiVirus for Android™, was driven by the acquisition of Israeli start-up, DroidSecurity, and quickly became the first mobile security product to enter the 100-500 million downloads category on the Google® Play™ store. With over 100 million mobile users worldwide today, and growing, AVG is focused on enhancing and innovating on its mobile portfolio through a dedicated program of industry partnerships, top talent recruitment and discerning investment.

On the back of the new office opening, AVG commenced a roadshow on Monday, June 15, in which fifteen innovative Israeli start-ups were invited to meet with AVG's global senior management team, including Todd Simpson, AVG's Chief Strategy Officer, and Judith Bitterli, AVG's Chief Marketing Officer, to discuss and debate Israel's hottest innovations in the mobile market.

AVG's Country Manager, Harel Tayeb, will lead the program of mobile momentum for Israel. An entrepreneur himself, who has founded and run several mobile-oriented start-ups in this market, Tayeb also previously served as Vice-President of Conduit's Mobile Business Unit, and headed up its spin-off, Como, prior to becoming a start-ups advisor.

About AVG Technologies (NYSE: AVG)

AVG is the online security company providing leading software and services to secure devices, data and people. AVG's award-winning technology is delivered to over 200 million monthly active users worldwide. AVG's Consumer portfolio includes internet security, performance optimization, and personal privacy and identity protection for mobile devices and desktops. The AVG Business portfolio - delivered by managed service providers, VARs and resellers - offers IT administration, control and reporting, integrated security, and mobile device management that simplify and protect businesses.

All trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

www.avg.com

Press information: http://now.avg.com

Keep in touch with AVG

Twitter

Facebook

LinkedIn

AVG Blogs

YouTube

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120306/SF65434LOGO

SOURCE AVG Technologies

Related Links