Finnish winter landscapes - plains, trees, boulders.

Port of Helsinki, foreign ships in port.

City of Helsinki.

By train approaches the platform.

Flags of the USSR and Finland.

Solemn meeting of the Prime Minister of the USSR AN Kosygin, who arrived in Helsinki on a friendly visit; Atmosphere U. Kekkonen President of Finland, Prime Minister Martti Miettunen.

The ceremony of the meeting: the anthem, bypassing the guard of honor.

Passing car with flags accompanied by an honorary escort.

Report on the streets of Helsinki.

Building on the street Hakaniemi, where the autumn of 1917 he lived VI Lenin.

AN Kosygin lays flowers at the memorial plaque on the building.

Photos VI Lenin in the historic apartment-museum, a decree on recognition of the independence of Finland.

AN Kosygin, lays a wreath at the tomb of the outstanding statesman of Finland Paasikivi.

Tombstone.

Presidential Palace.

The conversation between the AN Kosygin and U.Kekkonenom; in conversation involved: the Soviet side - Minister of Foreign Trade of the USSR NS Patolichev, Chairman State Committee of the USSR Council of Ministers for Foreign Economic Relations SA Jumps, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR Zemskov, Soviet Ambassador to Finland Stepanov, etc .;

Finnish side - Deputy Prime Minister of Economy and for the Office of Karjalainen, Foreign Minister Korhonen, Minister Alisnoff, Finnish Ambassador to the USSR Hallam et al.

Building.

Dinner given in honor of W. Kekkonen AN Kosygin: U. Kekkonen and AN Kosygin pass, greet guests, cameramen shoot.

Transport in the city bus station.

Tower power lines.

Exterior and interior of Loviisa nuclear power plant being built on a joint project with the participation of Soviet experts, research institutes and factories.

Speak Finnish engineer Ecco Makkonen, a Soviet engineer Vasily Sokolov, Finnish engineer Happy Kuuskunen.

NPP units.

AN Kosygin, U. Kekkonen visiting the nuclear power plant.

Workers at the controls, TVs on the remote.

Cameramen.

Commissioning of the first unit power plant - AN Kosygin, U. Kekkonen et al.

At the controls.

Rally in honor of the launch; there are people.

Speaker Mikhail Miettunen.

Applaud AN Kosygin, U. Kekkonen and others.