With a virtual office in Finland, your business will benefit from the presence of a high-profile office at a fraction of the cost of a traditional office. Our company has a vast experience in company formation services and virtual office services. You can solicit the support of our company formation agents in Finland and discover the services we can offer.

Quick Facts Activities to be carrieded out in virtual offices in Finland Business activities that can be performed mainly remotely

Is it necessary to hire a secretary in a virtual office?

It is not necessary. You can use the secretary’s services to answer your calls in the local language.

Does virtual office cuts out commute? (Yes/No)

Yes

Do virtual offices in Finland also include the expenses of owning an office like traditional ones? All the costs are included in your package. Advantages of a virtual office in Finland

– work remotely,

– cost-effective,

– prestigious business address etc.

How can you depict a professional image of your business by using a virtual office in Finland?

– having your company registered at a well-known business district address leaves a professional impression on clients and partners,

– you can work from anywhere in the world, but still have meetings in a professional environment

Basic steps for having a virtual office

– contact our team and ask for an offer,

– choose the proper package,

– use your virtual office in just a few days

Is a virtual office less expensive than a traditional office? (Yes/No)

Yes

Is it required to have a virtual office for business registration? (Yes/No)

Yes, if you don't have your own business address for registration.

How long does it take to have a virtual office? 1-2 days Are virtual offices more cost-friendly than traditional offices? (Yes/No)

Yes

Does a virtual office allow for business expansion? (Yes/No)

Yes

Are virtual offices 24/7 operational? (Yes/No)

It depends on your package.

What is the general period of virtual office renting contracts?

12 months

Can you select virtual office package as per the need of your business? (yes/no) Yes

The Virtual Office package provided by CompanyFormationFinland.com contains:

1. Prestigious business address in Helsinki for a credible and risk-free base for corresponding with clients;

2. Registered office necessary for establishing a Finnish company;

3. Mail collection and forwarding – Mail is collected, packages are signed for and sent to you according to your instructions either by mail, fax, or email;

4. Incoming and outgoing faxes – Use our local fax number; we’ll collect and send faxes to you, wherever you are;

5. A local phone number in Helsinki;

6. Voice mailbox – All of your voice messages will be forwarded to you by email.

Additional services offered:

1. Dedicated fax service with your own private and dedicated number;

2. Call redirecting – Specialized technology enables call redirection to your primary number;

3. Collection of bank statements;

4. Extra usage of the meeting room.

You can also read the following infographic for a better understanding of the virtual office packages you can buy in Finland:

Table of Contents

A virtual assistant for you

You can benefit from the services of a virtual assistant designated for your business. He/she can take care of daily tasks in the firm, according to those already established by you. Thus, he/she will be in charge of phone calls, emails, bank statement collection, preparing and scheduling meetings, and many others. A virtual assistant can be part of your virtual office package in Finland, but for more information, you can contact our specialists. Also, if you want to start a company in Finland, you can benefit from complete services because our local agents can take care of the formalities.

Digital services for your company

Our virtual office packages in Finland are suitable for those looking for flexibility in business, as well as cutting-edge technology. Thus, our digital services can include only phone systems for your meetings, online digital storage, and video conferencing for remote entrepreneurs, for instance. Even if you can already access the classic services of copying, scanning, faxing, call redirecting, etc., it is good to consider digital services for the business you want to develop in Finland. You can find out all the details from our local agents when you want to buy a virtual office package in Finland.

Would you like to start a business in Finland as a foreigner and need virtual office services? Please get in touch with our local representatives at any time.

A professional image for your business in Finland

If you want to start a business in Finland you can also choose a virtual office package. This is a great choice for foreigners looking for a professional business image in this country before contacting potential clients. Here is why a virtual office package in Finland is beneficial for you:

The business can be registered in one of the most prolific cities in Finland, with easy access to top commercial and financial centers.

A professional business image is recommended in front of clients and collaborators, which is why our services can be optimal for you.

Working remotely for your business is quite easy today. You can still enjoy a professional environment for your meetings.

You can benefit from secretarial services that can involve document translation and phone calls in the local language.

A virtual office package is convenient in terms of expenses compared to a traditional office.

Moreover, you can receive all letters to your e-mail address as soon as we take and sort them for you.

You don’t need to rent office space anymore. We can prepare dedicated meeting rooms whenever you need.

If you are convinced of the advantages offered by a virtual office package in Finland, we advise you to contact us and find out how you can get a complete package. We can also help you with the formalities for company formation in Finland.

Having a contact point for companies in Finland

If you do not want to open a traditional office in Finland, you can opt for the virtual office package. You can thus have a registered local address and thus get in touch with potential clients. Also, with a virtual office package in Finland, you can more easily get in touch with any type of business, whether local or international, that has a presence in this country.

You can also find out some data about the Finnish economy, if you decide on doing business in this country and need to know some information:

The real GDP in Finland in 2022 registered a growth of around 2.1%, due to public and private consumption.

The unemployment rate stood at 6.8% in the same year.

The common government debt is predicted to reach around 2.6% of GDP in 2023 and continue at this level in 2024 as well.