In a statement for the periodical "Ydin” President Kekkonen noted that détente cannot continue unhindered unless disarmament negotiations make significant progress. The President also stressed the close connection between détente and the new international economic order.

The government proposed to Parliament that Finland join the Latin American Development Bank as a non-regional member with a capital stock of 22 Mmk. Parliament approved the proposal 31.5. after voting. The votes were divided 116-33: the communists voted against. The promotion of Finnish exports was given as the reason for joining.

The American Citybank N.A. opened its representative office in Helsinki as a first American bank in Finland.

In his speech at the opening ceremony of the 1977 regular session of Parliament President Kekkonen said that Finland shall do her best to make the Belgrade follow-up meeting successful. He said also that Finland will continue her foreign policy line and that nobody has succeeded and shall not succeed in attempts to hit a wedge to this policy, neither from abroad nor from home. Speaker Veikko Helle said in his speech that the most important task for the session is to create conditions for a majority government. A majority government can also best secure the country’s foreign policy interests.

In an interview for the evening paper Ilta-Sanomat Foreign Minister Korhonen explained the Cabinet's attitude to the dissident question. Korhonen noted that this matter does not concern Finland. Of the Finnish press' bearing on the Soviet dissidents he said that in the Finnish system, it's not possible for the government to take responsibility for what the press writes. Korhonen hoped, however, that Cabinet's opinion would be taken into account.

The Foreign Ministry commented on the claims which the Norwegian paper "Aftenposten” had published the previous day concerning the discussions during President Kekkonen's visit to Norway in September 1976. — According to "Aftenposten” there had been discussions on the defence of Norway and its relations to its allies. Further the paper claimed that President Kekkonen had criticized Norway for allowing German troops to arrive to its territory (the German troops were at NATO's military manoeuvres in Norway in I976 for the first time after the Second World War and there were plans for more German troop manoeuvres in 1978). The Finnish Foreign Ministry stated that there had been discussions on matters of interest to both countries and that it was natural that the security policy in Northern Europe was one of the items. Because of the confidential nature of the discussions, the Foreign Ministry said, the contents of discussions had not been publicized

The Nordic Cooperation Ministers approved a cooperation plan on improving the safety of nuclear energy, in Helsinki.

Foreign Minister Keijo Korhonen began an official visit to Japan, the first visit of a Finnish Foreign Minister to this country. Negotiations covered trade between Finland and Japan, and the deficit on the Finnish side. 15.12. Prime Minister Sorsa opened the first Finnish-Japanish economic seminar. The Finnish trade delegation on its journey to Japan and South-Korea also took part to this seminar. Japanese Prime Minister Fukuda said that there were possibilities to increase trade between Finland and Japan.

Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei Kosygin arrived in Finland on a 5-day friendship visit, during which he inaugurated in Loviisa the first Finnish nuclear power plant, made in cooperation with the USSR, and the Soviet Culture and Science Centre in Helsinki. The Loviisa plant shall have its II phase in function in 1979. There are two nuclear power plants being built in Olkiluoto: TVO 1 (ready in 1979) and TVO 2 (ready in 1981). These two are purchased from Sweden.

— Prime Minister Kosygin and President Kekkonen discussed economic questions between the two countries and current international problems. The joint communiqué stated that the Finnish policy of neutrality basing on the Paasikivi-Kekkonen line and the FCMA-Treaty, will guarantee the unshaken development of the relations between the two countries.

The Nordic Council's 25th anniversary plenary session began in Helsinki. During the opening day session, in the presence of President Kekkonen, questions concerning Nordic security were under lively debate. Prime Minister Miettunen, however, noted that this type of questions do not belong to the Council's agenda. The Nordic Investment Bank, emigration and Nordsatplan (the common Nordic radio and television satellite plan) were on the agenda. The session approved about 30 recommendations. (The recommendations do not bind the governments as do the decisions of the Nordic Ministerial Council).

The chief of the political department of the PLO Faruk Kaddumi arrived to Finland as a guest of the SDP, the SKP and the Centre Party. He also met President Kekkonen.

Reuter reported that Finland will triple her troops in Lapland and claimed that Finnish-Soviet relations have deteriorated. The Foreign Ministry and the Defence Ministry denied the claims. There were preparations for some changes in the organization of the national defence, but not as large as Reuter had reported. 1.12. The Ministry of Defence declared about the changes: a battalion of light infantry will be changed into a brigade of light infantry, and a battery of anti-aircraft defence will be moved from Tampere to Oulu, and some smaller changes will take place in troops in Southern- Finland. The previous re-organization took place in 1966. The reasons for changes included smaller age- groups, the increased second term of exercises and the politico-military reasons for changing the Lappish battalion to a brigade of different arms.

The Paasikivi Society decided to give its support to President Kekkonen, who is an honorary member of the Society, and organized a campaign for him. President Kekkonen later spoke only in campaign meetings organized by the Society or the parties backing him.

Taking the floor for Finland at the meeting of the preparatory committee of the Special Session, Ambassador Jaakko Blomberg reminded the committee of two principles: 1) "as an essential element of détente, arms control and disarmament is imperative for the security of nations”, 2) "disarmament is imperative for the realization of the goals of the new international economic orders”. — Finland took part in the meeting as an observer.

President Kekkonen paid his 4th official state visit to USSR. During the visit a Long-term Programme for the Development and Intensification of Economic, Commercial, Industrial, and Scientific and Technical Co-operation between Finland and the USSR until 1990 was signed (see the article by Kari Möttölä). The communiqué concerning the visit, according to President Kekkonen, gives a credible picture in that the relations between the two countries are good, as are the prospects for the future. Both parties considered that regular personal contacts have become an expression of the high level of trust and mutual understanding prevailing between two countries and one of the most efficient forms of political cooperation. Views were exchanged on topical international problems. In the communiqué Finland's endeavour to apply a policy of neutrality for the benefit of international peace and security and for the maintenance of friendly relations with all countries was mentioned.

President Kekkonen visited the USSR and signed (18.5.) the long term Finnish-Soviet economic cooperation programme with General Secretary LI. Brezhnev (see the article by Kari Möttölä). President Kekkonen and Prime Minister Aleksei Kosygin signed an agreement on the participation of Finnish enterprises in the construction of the Kostamus ore-concentration complex in the USSR near the Finnish border. Finn-Stroi (a condominium of Finnish construction enterprises) and the Soviet Prommashimport signed a contract of 3 billion mk concerning building of nearly 200 buildings in Kostamus. Up to the autumn 1982 there shall be ready a mining combine, residences for 9 000 people and public buildings. Directly it creates about 5000 jobs, and indirectly almost 20000.

Members of the Coalition Party in Parliament warned their colleague Kullervo Rainio, who had publicly taken the side of Ahti M. Salonen, the presidential candidate of the Constitutional Party of Finland. The next day Rainio left the Coalition Party and later joined the Constitutionalists.

Rautaruukki (a state-owned steel firm) and the Soviet Tjazhpromexport concluded an agreement on cooperation in steel industry in third countries.

The second meeting of the Finnish-Mexican economic commission in Helsinki agreed that Finland shall continue the agreement on an export credit of 40 Mmk with Mexico.

Swedish Prime Minister Thorbjörn Fälldin arrived to Finland for two days. In negotiations with Prime Minister Sorsa they agreed that the flow of Finnish emigration to Sweden should be restrained. 18.7. In an interview for the Swedish news agency TT, Prime Minister Sorsa stated that emigration between Finland and Sweden should be balanced and, if this fails, other acceptable means should be found to limit emigration from Finland. — 20.7. Prime Minister Sorsa made accurate his previous interview by stressing that no restrictive measures are being prepared. According to Sorsa no government can, however, endlessly watch its best labour force emigrate.

Kajaani Company and Datasaab-Valmet Company received two loans (8 and 2.5 Mmk) from the Nordic Investment Bank for planned Finnish-Swedish cooperation in the field of the electronics industry.

The joint commission on trade and technical-economic cooperation between the governments of Finland and Cuba concluded its meeting in Havana.

The first trade agreement between Finland and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was negotiated in Hanoi. It contains the principles covering trade between the countries and a list of the goods the countries want to exchange. Finland hopes to export to Vietnam machinery products and paper. Vietnam wants to export metals, gum and canned goods to Finland. The trade between countries has so far been very limited:

in 1976 Finnish exports to Vietnam totalled 4 Mmk and there were no Vietnamese exports to Finland.

Chairman of the West German SDP Willy Brandt arrived in Finland as a guest of chairman of the SDP Sorsa. President Kekkonen invited Chairman Brandt to lunch.

The abolition of customs between Finland and the EEC came to force. The abolition concerns the industrial products. Part of the goods were left on so-called retardation lists, and their customs duties will be removed gradually until the year 1985. The lists include Finland's paper and the EEC's textile and metal products. At the same time the removal of customs duties in trade between Finland and certain socialist countries, in the framework of the KEVSOS-agreement, which was negotiated parallel to the free-trade agreement with EEC in 1973, cme into force. Finland's retardation lists are identical with the lists with EEC, while the socialist countries' lists give priority to the metal industry.

The Norwegian periodical "Ny Tid” claimed that a Norwegian Jack Helle in 1948—54 recruited Finns to spy on the Soviet Union for the benefit of Norway. Helle worked at the Norwegian Embassy in Helsinki. 27.7. In the same paper a former Officer of the Norwegian army said he had visited Finland and trained Finns to work as agents in the Soviet Union. According to the officer the then attaché of the Norwegian Embassy in Helsinki recruited the agents. 29.7. The Chief of Supo (Security police) Arvo Pentti confirmed the information about spying. Supo knew about the matter already in 1951. Three Finnish citizens were sentenced in 1952 and 1970 for this action. The two former officers of the Norwegian army were later prosecuted.

Finnish-Soviet youth friendship festival began in Lahti. President Kekkonen and Soviet Head of State L. Brezhnev sent their greetings to the main occasion on 14.8. The participants of the festival presented an appeal to the youth of Europe to promote détente, peace, security and cooperation.

In an interview for the Norwegian paper "Adresseavisen” President Kekkonen noted that he didn't see any cause for difficulties between Finland and Norway. He supposed that a recent Finnish-Norwegian seminar could have cleared some misunderstandings.

Convention on the recognition of divorces and legal separations.

At their meeting in Stavanger, Norway, the Nordic Ministers of Culture and Education discussed Nordic radio and TV cooperation. 25.10. In a report to the Nordic Ministerial Council, the Ministry of Finance noted, that the Nordic radio and TV satellite will be timely at the earliest at the beginning of 1980's.

— 3.11. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry reported that Nordsat should be carried out only when technical and juridical programme- political and financial possibilities exist. — 12.12. The Ministry of Communications reported that the satellite broadcasts will cover areas also outside Finland. The foreign- relations implications of this problem should be solved first.

Wärtsilä Co. made an offer concerning 4 U.S. cost-guard cutters. The offer did not lead to an order.

— Wärtsilä has also notified its willingness to sell ships to the US for use in the great lakes. The then U S Ambassador in Finland Mark Austad had been active in the matter and the matter has been discussed in Congress. No decisions on the matter were made in 1977.

President Kekkonen visited the GDR. The host for the visit was Head of State and Party Leader Erich Honecker. President Kekkonen stressed equality in relations to both German states (Finland had recognized them at the same time in 1972). Finnish Foreign Minister Väyrynen met his colleague Oskar Fischer and stated that Finland might have new possibilities for exports in the sector of building. President Kekkonen stated that he was satisfied with the political and economic results of the visit. He said that he will visit the FRG in 1978. In an interview President Kekkonen denied the view that in the joint communiqué the GDR had defined Finland's policy of neutrality in a new way. The formulations may be different, said President Kekkonen, but substantially no changes had taken place.

According to official statistics, Finland's trade with the EEC during the 70s has doubled, but its share of total trade has decreased markedly. In the beginning of the 70s, the EEC's share was 43 % of imports and 45.5 % of exports, in 1976 the corresponding figures were 34.75 and 38.1 %. Trade with the EEC has continuously showed a deficit for Finland. During the same period the volume of Finland's trade with the EFTA countries has increased 2.6 - fold, and with the CMEA-countries trade has almost quadrupled.

The Ministry for Foreign Affairs declared that the Finnish contingent on Cyprus will be withdrawn by October 1977 after 13 years. The reason was, said major-general Aimo Pajunen, that the limited resources shall be directed in a better way: now Finland has better possibilities to send a contingent where it is needed more than in Cyprus. — There is a Finnish contingent on Sinai. —3.10. Foreign Minister Väyrynen considered it possible that a UN peace-keeping force of 4 000 men with a Finnish contribution will be sent to Namibia.

President Kekkonen attended the christening ceremony of Princess Victoria of Sweden.

In an interview for Danish newspapers, President Kekkonen — referring to "Expressen's” recent writing — said that he has maybe sat on his post for too long, but he has always respected democracy. About Denmark's membership in the EEC he noted, that it hasn't harmed Nordic cooperation. President Kekkonen also stressed, that a formal treaty should be made on a Nordic nuclear-free zone.

President Kekkonen took part in the 500th anniversary celebration of Uppsala University. He received an honorary degree of Doctor of Law. On 1.10 President Kekkonen inaugurated the Suomi (Finland) -building in Stockholm. In an interview for the Swedish Radio, the President said that Swedish business could build light industry in Finland.

Economic cooperation between Finland and Sweden was discussed in Stockholm between governmental delegations. The topics discussed included possibilities for cooperation in the field of electronics and joint activities in third countries.

The CSCE follow-up meeting was opened in Belgrade. Ambassador Jaakko Iloniemi took the floor for Finland on 5.10. In the view of the Finnish government the main task of the conference is to secure the continuity of the CSCE process. He also said that European detente has extended its beneficial influence to the outside world in providing a fund of confidence essential in order to allow those states who have the best possibilities and thus the greatest responsibilities on the world scene to work together for peaceful solutions. Progress has not been uniform in all fields comprised by the decisions undertaken by our political leaders, he said and continued that while we recognize this as a fact, we should remember that the initial positions of the participating states have also been very different and diversified. Parallel and simultaneous progress has not been, and may not even be, a realistic thing to expect. Of the various items to be discussed he emphasized disarmament and the environment.

President Kekkonen started his election campaign in Hämeenlinna, where he discussed parliamentarianism and the president's powers. 27.11. President Kekkonen spoke at an occasion organized by the Paasikivi Society about the war guilt question, which was one of the critical issues in Finnish-Soviet relations after the war.

- In Pori 31.11, President Kekkonen said that the president represents continuity in Finnish foreign policy. He argued against the accusation that he had wanted to concentrate to himself the handling of the important relations with the USSR and thus secure his "irreplaceability”. He said that the cooperation between Finland and the USSR is so extensive that the President can't take care of the entire network of relations.

- 11.12. In Vaasa President Kekkonen spoke about the significance of good relations between Finland and the USSR for the security of Nordic countries. Sweden's neutrality and the restrictions set by Norway and Denmark to their NATO-membership are, according to President Kekkonen, very important to Finland. He said that the failure of NORDEK did not undermine the grounds for Nordic cooperation.

- 12.12. In Tampere president Kekkonen spoke about Finland's role in the CSCE and the situation in Europe.

- 17.12. In Korpilampi President Kekkonen discussed Finnish foreign policy in general.

- 18.12. In Helsinki President Kekkonen spoke about the workers' movement in Finland and its support of the FCMA Treaty.

- 27.12. In Mikkeli at an electoral occasion organized by the Centre Party Kekkonen said that the party should ensure the continuity of the Finnish foreign policy.

Polish Minister of Finance Henryk Kisiel visited Finland.

Hungarian Minister of Health Emil Schultheisz visited Finland.

Finland introduced a draft resolution on non-proliferation in the UN General Assembly's Political Committee. The Finnish draft stressed the central role of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and asked for all the countries to join the treaty or at least accept equivalent safeguards on nuclear activities. It also emphasized international cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy and especially the interests of developing countries. as well as the importance of nuclear disarmament for non-proliferation efforts. The draft stressed the responsibility of the countries selling nuclear energy. — 21.11. The draft, amended after consultations, was adopted by the Committee. — 12.12. The UN General Assembly adopted the resolution by a vote of 111:2:16.

Ambassador Ilkka Pastinen, in the UN debate on Namibia, promised Finland's readiness to help promote the transition to majority rule in Namibia and to give aid to independent Namibia.

Finland gave an official statement in the UN on the situation in South Africa. The Finnish government expressed deep concern over the recent decision of South Africa to abolish the last possibilities of the African people to express their views on the inhuman apartheid policy in the country and strive peacefully towards the equality of races. As a member state of the UN South Africa, according the statement, bears deep responsibility of its actions. Consequently the international community has the right to demand that the government of South Africa withdraw its decision.

In a Gallup survey, 85%of those interviewed thought that the foreign policy of Finland was well conducted, 7 % thought it was badly conducted and 8% had no opinion. The Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance between Finland and the USSR was regarded as a positive thing by 80% of those interviewed. In another Gallup survey, over 90 % of Finns considered Finland a very or rather secure place to live in, although, on the other hand, more than half saw the world developing towards more insecure times.

Speaking on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the October Revolution in Helsinki President Kekkonen emphasized Lenin's role in recognizing Finnish independence and observed that Finnish-Soviet economic relations are of great importance in helping Finland in her economic difficulties.

In Pori, President Kekkonen said that the president represents continuity in Finnish foreign policy. He argued against the accusation that he had wanted to concentrate to himself the handling of the important relations with the USSR and thus secure his "irreplaceability”. He said that the cooperation between Finland and the USSR is so extensive that the President can't take care of the entire network of relations.

The Foreign Ministry announced that Finland aims at doubling her assistance to developing countries in the next five years.

a) Multilateral cooperation

In 1977 Finland was a member o the Councils of UNDP, UNICEF, FAO, the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board and the UNIDO Industrial Council. Finland also was an observer in ECOSOC, and was elected a member of ECOSOC. Multilateral aid, totalling 81 Mmk, was appropriated as follows: UNDP 21.5 Mmk, social development programmes 5.6 Mmk, international institutions for financing development 37 Mmk, food programmes 11 Mmk and humanitarian aid 5.4 Mmk.

b) Bilateral Cooperation

Bilateral aid, which totalled 112 Mmk was allocated as follows: development credits 28 %, agriculture, fishing and forestry 26 %, industry and economic infrastructure 25 %, health, education and social development 14 %, administration and services 14 % and others 3 %. The main recipients were: Tanzania 33 %, Zambia 21 % and Mozambique 11%.

Foreign Minister Väyrynen presented in Parliament the report of the government on the long-term economic cooperation programme between Finland and the USSR. Väyrynen expected special efforts from Finnish business circles in the implementation of the programme. The lack of competitiveness of the Finnish economy must not become an obstacle to the development of our exports, he said, and continued that the results are not guaranteed by the programme, but that they depend on how Finland can utilize the possibilities opened up by the programme. In the following debate, most parliamentarians took a positive stand toward the matter and emphasized its importance.

The Ministry of Defence and the English Hawker-Siddeley signed an agreement concerning 50 primary training planes. The cost is 960 Mmk and the planes shall be delivered by 1980. They shall compensate the earlier French Fouga Magister planes. The deal contains a series of counter- purchases made by England from Finland. There was lively debate in Finnish Parliament about the deal, and part of the left was against it.

Agreement between Finland and Mongolia on scientific and technical cooperation.