EastCham Finland

Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK)

Publication on 26 March 2024 at 8 a.m.

EastCham Finland is setting up an office in Kyiv in cooperation with the Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK). The office will help Finnish companies to participate in rebuilding projects and access the Ukrainian market. On 1 April, Olena Kutsai will start as Head of the Office.

As of this spring, Finnish business will have permanent representation in Kyiv. The role of the Kyiv office established by EastCham and EK is important, as local and expert support facilitates Finnish companies’ market access and establishment in Ukraine.

The office’s task is to provide companies with information about the Ukrainian market and operating environment. It helps with finding local partners and provides information on funding and rebuilding projects in Ukraine. The office will also play an important role in the dialogue with the Ukrainian Government.

Appointed Head of the Kyiv office, Olena Kutsai has excellent knowledge of the Ukrainian business, business environment and public procurement and funding channels. Olena Kutsai has previously worked before in the office of the Business Ombudsman Council of Ukraine, where she has supported the private business sector in Ukraine in particular.

– Finnish companies have a lot of competence and technology that already meets Ukraine’s needs well. It is important to raise awareness of Finnish competence in Ukraine and to get references for the companies from the market. The office provides companies with valuable local knowledge and helps companies to navigate the business environment in Ukraine, which is new to many. We will build an extensive service and partner network to support Finnish companies, says Jaana Rekolainen, CEO of EastCham Finland.

Opening the office is important in order to get Finnish companies involved in the rebuilding of Ukraine, says Jyri Häkämies, CEO of the Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK).

– Due to the Russian war of invasion, the urgent need for repairs to critical infrastructure alone amounts to several tens of billions of euros. In total, it is estimated that nearly USD 500 billion will be needed for the rebuilding process. Ukrainians are now expecting Finnish companies to actively contribute to the repair of electricity and telecommunications networks, water and waste management, hospitals, schools, nurseries and homes. This is a prerequisite for maintaining the basic functions of the Ukrainian society and for the country’s defensive front to hold.

Rather than simply rebuilding, the aim is to help Ukraine to become a modern, digital and environmentally sustainable economy and society whilst paving the way for the country’s future EU membership. There has been interest in Finnish expertise in areas such as technical design and construction, telecommunications connections, energy systems, health technology, education and civil protection.

The establishment of the Kyiv office is supported by TT-Säätiö. The operations are closely linked to the work of the Team Finland network and cooperation with other Nordic operators. EK promotes cooperation between the office and its Ukrainian sister organisations.

There are currently 20–30 Finnish companies operating in Ukraine. Before the start of the war of invasion, Finland’s goods exports to Ukraine were at around EUR 200 million. In 2023, the export of goods amounted to more than EUR 160 million, representing an increase of almost 10 percent compared to the previous year. The national plan published by the Finnish Government last December provides companies with financing tools to help them participate more actively in the rebuilding.

Further information and interview requests:

Jaana Rekolainen, CEO, EastCham Finland, tel. +358 40 045 7743, [email protected]

Petri Vuorio, Director, Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK), tel. +358 50 323 2979, [email protected]

EastCham Finland

EastCham Finland is an international Chamber of Commerce that supports Finnish companies in the markets of Ukraine, Central Asia and the South Caucasus. Through its office in Kyiv, EastCham helps its member companies to get involved in rebuilding projects and access the Ukrainian market.

Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK)

Since the beginning, EK has actively supported the planning of Finland’s national rebuilding programme in Ukraine. Together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, EK runs a rebuilding forum for Ukraine that brings together Finnish companies, authorities and funders.

Read more: