Quick facts for kids

Goober and the Ghost Chasers

Title card logo from Goober and the Ghost Chasers

Genre Mystery Directed by Charles A. Nichols Voices of Paul Winchell

Jerry Dexter

Jo Ann Harris

Ronnie Schell Theme music composer Hoyt Curtin Composer(s) Hoyt Curtin Country of origin United States

Australia Original language(s) English No. of seasons 1 No. of episodes 16 Production Executive producer(s) William Hanna

Joseph Barbera Running time 30 minutes Production company(s) Hanna-Barbera Productions Distributor Claster Television Productions

(1977-1978)

Warner Bros. Television Distribution (currently) Release Original network ABC Original release September 8 ( ) – December 22, 1973 (1973-12-22) Chronology Related shows Fred Flintstone and Friends

Partridge Family 2200 A.D.

Goober and the Ghost Chasers is Australian-American animated television series produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions, animated by Eric Porter Studios in Australia and broadcast on ABC from September 8, 1973, to August 30, 1975. A total of 16 half-hour episodes of Goober and the Ghost Chasers were produced. The show's episodes were later serialized as part of the syndicated weekday series Fred Flintstone and Friends in 1977–78. On cable, it was shown as part of USA Cartoon Express and on Boomerang starting in 2000.

Like many animated television programs created by Hanna-Barbera in the 1970s, the show contained a laugh track created by the studio. Cartoon Network and Boomerang airings of the show have the track muted.

Plot

Similar to Hanna-Barbera's successful Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!, Goober and the Ghost Chasers also features a group of teenagers (Ted, Gilly and Tina) solving spooky mysteries with their Afghan Hound-like dog Goober. Writing for Ghost Chasers Magazine, the group uses their equipment from the Apparition Kit (like the Specter Detector, the Poltergeist Powder, etc.) when it comes to determining whether the ghost is real or not. The major differences were that the ghosts they eventually find are real and would help in defeating the fake ghosts. Some of those people behind the mask of some fake ghosts are not criminals. Goober had the power to become invisible (but could not control it) and his closest human companion is reckless instead of cowardly. Also unlike Scooby-Doo, Goober can speak more clearly, but speaks only to "break the fourth wall" with a comment aimed at the viewers; otherwise, he merely barks.

In eight of the first 11 episodes, the Partridge Kids (from The Partridge Family) were regular members of the cast, with their live-action counterparts voicing the parts. They disappear after the eleventh episode and did not appear when other guest stars appeared.

Episodes

Each of the following episodes was directed by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, and written by Tom Dagenais, Warren S. Murray, and Dick Robbins.

Nº Title Air date 1 "Assignment: The Ahab Apparition" September 8, 1973 ( )

The Partridge Kids are vacationing at Peaceful Cove, but it's anything but peaceful. The ghost of Captain Ahab and Moby Dick are haunting the old mansion on the cliff and it's up to Goober and the kids to interview them for their magazine.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

2 "Brush Up Your Shakespeare" September 15, 1973 ( )

The Partridge Kids are supposed to play a concert but their performance is canceled when Macbeth's ghost begins haunting the hall.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

3 "The Galloping Ghost" September 22, 1973 ( )

Goober and the kids investigate Wilt Chamberlain's ranch after a report of a "Galloping Ghost" to get a story for their latest article for Ghost Chasers magazine.

4 "The Singing Ghost" September 29, 1973 ( )

Frankenstein's Monster the Third tricks Danny and the Partridge Kids into visiting his castle to discuss a singing engagement. Once there, they realize the only thing he wants is Danny's voice for his own.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

5 "The Ghost Ship" October 6, 1973 ( )

Goober and the gang are aboard an old pirate ship called the Sea Witch for publicity pictures. The Sea Witch is soon set adrift by the salty spirits led by Captain Dunk. They also encounter Dunk's nicer twin brother, Dink.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

6 "Mummy Knows Best" October 13, 1973 ( )

The Partridge Kids, Goober, and the gang decide to spend their vacation in Kahrobi, land of the Arabian Nights and ghosts. There, they encounter King Rashan's brother Prince Tasheel, who states that the Ghost of King Osiris (King Rashan's ancestor) and his Mummies are haunting the city when King Rashan wants to modernize the city.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

7 "The Haunted Wax Museum" October 20, 1973 ( )

With a day off between concerts, the Partridge Kids decide to visit an old wax museum owned by Willy Waxman. The museum is a hangout for ghosts who have possessed wax mannequins.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

8 "Aloha Ghost" October 27, 1973 ( )

Goober and the gang travel to Hawaii to do a story on a reported ghost sighting on a plantation where Michael Gray works.

Michael Gray.

9 "The Wicked Witch Dog" November 3, 1973 ( )

A supernatural canine called the Wicked Witch Dog is haunting the lighthouse of MacBurn's Point in Scotland.

Guest-starring the Partridge Kids.

10 "Venice Anyone?" November 10, 1973 ( )

Goober and the gang travel to Venice to investigate a report of a haunted gondola run by the ghost of an Italian nobleman named Don Giovanni, who wants to prevent Carlo from marrying Julia (from a rival family).

11 "Go West Young Ghost, Go West" November 17, 1973 ( )

At an amusement park, the haunted house is a little too haunted for the Partridge Kids, Goober and the gang when they find it haunted by the Ghost of Ichabod Ipswich.

Final appearance of the Partridge Kids.

12 "A Hard Day's Knight" November 24, 1973 ( )

The Ghost of Don Miguel (a Spanish knight) haunts a space center, which is about to launch the first manned rocket to Mars.

13 "Is Sherlock Holme?" December 1, 1973 ( )

Goober and the gang travel to England to solve a mystery. They are assisted by a relative of the famous detective Sherlock Holmes.

14 "That Snow Ghost" December 8, 1973 ( )

Goober and the gang are hired by a ski resort to investigate a reported Snow Ghost.

15 "Inca Dinka Doo" December 15, 1973 ( )

The ghost of an ancient Incan chief haunts an old Incan city and forest while the Ghost Chasers are looking for it.

16 "Old McDonald Had a Ghost – EI EI EEYOW" December 22, 1973 ( )

Goober and the kids check out a report from George McDonald of a farm that is haunted by the Ghost of Old McDonald and a living scarecrow.

Cast

Jerry Dexter – Ted

Jo Ann Harris – Tina

Ronnie Schell – Gilly

Paul Winchell – Goober

Additional voices

Danny Bonaduce – Danny Partridge

Suzanne Crough – Tracy Partridge

Susan Dey – Laurie Partridge

Brian Forster – Chris Partridge

Wilt Chamberlain – Himself

Michael Gray – Himself

Merchandising

In 1974, King Seeley released a metal lunchbox and thermos featuring Goober, which shared space with another Hanna-Barbera series, Inch High, Private Eye.

Goober was featured in a magic trading card set that was offered free inside Wonder Bread packages in 1974.

See also