Accessibility

All buses, trains and trams have ramps to help people who need them to board.

There are priority seats and allocated spaces on-board with signs on them for people who:

use wheelchairs and other mobility aids

have assistance dogs

may have difficulties standing safely

are pregnant

are with children in prams.

While any passenger can use an empty priority seat or space, you must move if someone else needs it more than you do. Remember that not all disabilities or mobility issues are easy to see.

As a courtesy, passengers should offer their seat to any passenger who looks like they could use a seat.

Access and disability - Adelaide Metro

Getting around with a disability

After midnight buses

After midnight buses run on Saturday nights between midnight and 6:00 am Sunday morning in some locations.

Bikes and large items

Transport drivers can't help you onto vehicles or lift items for you, and they may stop you from boarding if you have anything with you that is dangerous, unhygienic or too big to fit on board.

You can't take bikes on buses or trams.

You can take your bike on trains. You can secure your bike in an empty wheelchair space during your trip, but you must move it if someone using a mobility aid needs the area.

Bikes, prams, luggage and large items - Adelaide Metro

Fares and tickets

Adelaide Metro fares are the same on buses, trains and trams and remain the same no matter the distance travelled. You can pay with a rechargeable metroCARD, Adelaide Metro tap and pay ticket by using your credit/debit card or smart device, or the free Adelaide Metro Buy & Go app. You can use metroCARD on all buses, trains and trams. You can use tap and pay and Buy & Go on buses and trams, with transfers to trains departing Adelaide Railway Station.

Adelaide Metro fares and tickets - Adelaide Metro

Concession fares

Check if you're eligible for concession travel

Free city trams and circle buses

Adelaide Metro offers some free public transport services within the city centre and to North Adelaide.

On demand buses

On-demand buses, offering door-to-door public transport services are available in some areas.

Park and ride

At Park 'n' Ride car parks you can leave your car and transfer to an Adelaide Metro public transport service to complete the journey.

Secure bike cages, bike lockers and disability parking bays are also available at many locations.

Real time passenger information

Real time arrival information for buses, trains and trams, timetables and a journey planner are available online through the Adelaide Metro website or one of the recommended public transport apps. Adelaide public transport information is also integrated into Google Maps.

Visiting Adelaide

Use the Adelaide Metro bus, tram and train network to get around.

Visiting Adelaide - Adelaide Metro

How to get to and from Adelaide airport

Adelaide airport is 8 kilometres from the centre of the city and is easily accessed by car, bus and taxi.

The Adelaide Airport bus travels between Adelaide airport and the city. There are other services to Glenelg, West Lakes Centre, and Marion Centre Interchanges.

Download the free Adelaide Metro Buy & Go app for a range of ticket options, or pay on board using Adelaide Metro tap and pay.

Related information

Contact

Call Adelaide Metro InfoLine

Phone: 1300 311 108

Lines are open 7:00 am to 8:00 pm every day

National Relay Service:

Voice relay: 1300 555 727

TTY: 133 677

SMS relay: 0423 677 767

Visit Adelaide Railway Station InfoCentre