Edited by Fabrizio Gallanti

Text by Chris Wiley

Abstraction to freedom

That Hermann Glöckner and his remarkable artistic output are not better known is due less to art historical oversight than to the caprice of history itself. Born in the ill-fated Dresden in 1889, his life in and around the city was marred by the upheavals of both World Wars, and the rule of two despotic regimes that proved hostile to his practice.

“Vertical displacement of ten rectangles, staggered in depth”, 1973.

Recently, however, Glöckner’s work has been gaining broad international attention after its inclusion in the Los Angeles County Museum of Art’s sprawling 2009 exhibition Art of Two Germanys and, most recently, in the 2010 Gwangju Biennale, South Korea, which was entitled 10,000 Lives. Originally trained as a textile designer, Glöckner gravitated towards drawing and painting in his teens while attending night classes at the Kunstgewerbeschule Dresden. During this early stage of his artistic development, Glöckner was strongly influenced by the work of the French Impressionists, and after the war by Russian constructivism.

Many of these initial abstract works were paired-down elaborations on forms found in his previous, semi-representational paintings – the rhomboid shape of a rooftop seen from above, say, or the equilateral triangle formed by its gable. After a yearlong stint at Dresden Academy of Fine Arts, where his style found little acceptance, Glöckner continued his artistic experiments on his own, which earned him a number of exhibitions of his work around Germany and a place as a member of the newly reformed Dresdner Sezession in 1932. It was during this period that Glöckner began working on what he called his Tafelwerk (panel work), a series of painted cardboard panels that he would produce by folding the cardboard, reflattening it, and then painting in the geometric sections created by his folds in bold, uniformly applied paint.

“Vertical displacement of seven glass tubes”, 1972.

These works, which Glöckner, out of fear of being misunderstood, produced largely in secret, showing them only to his wife, Frieda, and a small circle of confidants, led to his development of a later series of what he called Faltungen (Convolutions) which saw him applying an identical technique to paper, which he began in 1935 and continued until late in his life. These works, which fuse a Dadaist affinity for chance, the hard-edged industrial aesthetics of the Constructivists, and the meditative qualities of Japanese origami, laid the methodological and aesthetic groundwork for much of Glöckner’s later practice, particularly his sculptural works. Unfortunately, just as Glöckner was beginning to hit his artistic stride, the Nazis were rising to power in Germany.

In the wake of the 1937 Entartete Kunst (Degenerate Art) exhibition in Munich, Glöckner was forced to continue his practice away from public view, as the regime prevented him from both selling and exhibiting his work. As a result, Glöckner was forced to make his living doing graffito work around Dresden – much of it with the help of his wife – while continuing his practice in isolation. To add insult to injury the work he labored over behind closed doors as Hitler’s war machine lay waste to Europe is now completely lost to history: his entire production between 1937 to 1945, save for one lone painting, was destroyed along with his house during the allied bombing of Dresden in February of 1945. After the war, Glöckner continued to produce large volumes of works on paper, expanding his repertoire to include collage and numerous printing techniques.

“Symmetrical composition”, 1977.

However, towards the end of the 1960s, Glöckner began to focus most intently on the production of small-scale sculptural works, which expanded the formal concerns of his previous practice into three dimensions. While a number of these works are produced using industrial materials such as steel and plastic, the majority of them are cobbled together out of the cast off materials of the culture around him: bits of string, pieces of scrap wood, a collection of match boxes, and other detritus.

Like his Faltungen, these materials are often twisted, folded, or contorted – as is the case with the tin water pitcher that he cut open and splayed in half – or have been used as modular units that make up larger compositions – as is the case with the collection of nine empty boxes for cardiac medicine (presumably the artist’s own) that he has arranged to make what resembles a disjointed pharmaceutical Rubik’s Cube. These sculptures, which make up a large share of Glöckner’s late work, are small enough that a wide selection of them can easily be displayed on a plinth the size of a large dining table, where they resemble nothing more readily than a collection of models arrayed in an architect’s office.

“Spatial fracturing of a rectangle”, 1935.

That this is the case is not a coincidence: many of Glöckner’s late sculptures were actually maquettes, which were designed to be reproduced later on a much larger scale, with more durable materials. That they were not is the final tragedy in Glöckner’s difficult artistic career. Under the official GDR ban on abstract art, which began less than ten years after the Nazis had been overthrown, Glöckner was yet again forced to practice his art in relative secrecy, biding his time until the window of artistic freedom in Germany was yet again opened. However, this was something that Glöckner was never destined to see, as he died in 1987, only two years before the fall of the Berlin Wall. As a result, these late works, which remain forever trapped in their inchoate state, stand as a testament to the persistence of human creativity in the face of oppression and censorship, as well as to Glöckner’s tremendous, little-recognized artistic achievements.

—

Chris Wiley (USA, 1981) art critic and curator. He lives in New York. He has collaborated as Associate Curator to the 8th Gwangju Biennale, Republic of Korea. He writes for magazines such as “Kaleidoscope”, “Art Press” and “Cabinet”.

www.chriswiley.net

A selection of sculptural studies by Glöckner was one of the most exciting moments of the last Gwangju Biennale, “10,000 Lives”, curated by Massimiliano Gioni and dedicated to the unavoidable presence of images

in contemporary life.

For informations about the 8th Gwangju Biennale “10,000 Lives”

www.10000lives.org

Abitare © All rights reserved