Mabel Normand (born November 9/10, 1892?, Staten Island?, New York, U.S.—died February 23, 1930, Monrovia, California) was an American film actress who was one of the greatest comedians of the silent era. Known for her gaiety and spontaneous spirit, Normand appeared in hundreds of films (and directed several of them) and rose to such heights of popularity that she briefly rivaled Mary Pickford as “America’s sweetheart.”

(Read Lillian Gish’s 1929 Britannica essay on silent film.)

Britannica Quiz

Pop Culture Quiz

Much of Normand’s early life is obscure, including whatever scant schooling she may have received. About the age of 15 she became an artist’s model for, among others, James Montgomery Flagg and Charles Dana Gibson. In 1910, despite her lack of acting experience, she succeeded in getting a job as an extra at the Biograph motion picture studio in New York City. She then worked for the Vitagraph studio until late 1911, when she returned to Biograph. During this period she played both comic and dramatic roles, sometimes under the studio-assigned name of Muriel Fortescue.

While at Biograph, Normand met director Mack Sennett, who would become one of the most important people in her life, both personally and professionally. In 1912 she left Biograph with Sennett to join his new Keystone Film Company in California. There, she pioneered a new type of comic character: a pretty girl who could take a pratfall. Until Normand, most comics—both male and female—were funny looking as well as funny and used such physical features as cross-eyes, ungainly size, or a homely face to make audiences laugh. Normand charmed audiences with her petite, impish beauty but also participated fully in the rough, slam-bang physical comedy that was Sennett’s trademark. While working on a Sennett film about 1913 she is said to have succumbed to impulse and thrown a custard pie at Ben Turpin, thus creating what soon became a classic film comedy bit.

Normand was the unquestioned female star of the Keystone company when Charlie Chaplin joined it late in 1913, and he learned much basic filmcraft from her. They appeared in 11 films together, mostly one- and two-reelers. She directed him in Mabel at the Wheel (1914), and they later codirected several films, including Mabel’s Busy Day and Mabel’s Married Life (both 1914). Their most famous pairing is perhaps the great Tillie’s Punctured Romance (1914), the first feature-length comedy, in which they were joined by Marie Dressler. Normand also starred with Roscoe “Fatty” Arbuckle in a successful series of comedies.

The success of Tillie’s Punctured Romance encouraged Normand’s desire to move beyond the usual Sennett slapstick shorts, and in 1916 Sennett organized the Mabel Normand Feature Film Company for her. The firm produced the comedy-drama Mickey, but Sennett delayed the picture’s release until 1918, when it proved enormously successful. Normand, however, having broken her engagement to Sennett and frustrated by the delays on Mickey, left Keystone in 1917 to join the new Goldwyn Film Company, where she made such movies as Joan of Plattsburg (1918), The Venus Model (1918), Sis Hopkins (1919), and Upstairs (1919). In 1920 Goldwyn released her from her contract—she had become increasingly unreliable because of her cocaine and alcohol abuse—and she rejoined Sennett to make Molly O’ (1921).