Mabel Normand (1882-1930) was an iconic actress and director of Hollywood’s silent film era. She popularized the pie in the face. She mentored Charlie Chaplin. . And she became one of the first women in history to have her name on a film production company.

For Further Reading:

Mabel Normand - Turner Classic Movies

Eyes on the pies: how Mabel Normand, Chaplin’s mentor, changed cinema | Silent film | The Guardian

Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, and Mabel Normand: why silent movies had more female directors.

This bonus episode is brought to you by Nurtec ODT (Rimegepant) 75 milligrams. Orally Disintegrating Tablets.

This month, we’re talking about comediennes — women throughout history who have made us laugh. They transgressed societal norms through comedy and often spoke out against injustice using their sharp wit.

History classes can get a bad rap, and sometimes for good reason. When we were students, we couldn’t help wondering... where were all the ladies at? Why were so many incredible stories missing from the typical curriculum? Enter, Womanica. On this Wonder Media Network podcast we explore the lives of inspiring women in history you may not know about, but definitely should.

Every weekday, listeners explore the trials, tragedies, and triumphs of groundbreaking women throughout history who have dramatically shaped the world around us. In each 5 minute episode, we’ll dive into the story behind one woman listeners may or may not know–but definitely should. These diverse women from across space and time are grouped into easily accessible and engaging monthly themes like Educators, Villains, Indigenous Storytellers, Activists, and many more. Womanica is hosted by WMN co-founder and award-winning journalist Jenny Kaplan. The bite-sized episodes pack painstakingly researched content into fun, entertaining, and addictive daily adventures.

Womanica was created by Liz Kaplan and Jenny Kaplan, executive produced by Jenny Kaplan, and produced by Grace Lynch, Maddy Foley, Brittany Martinez, Edie Allard, Lindsey Kratochwill, Adesuwa Agbonile, Carmen Borca-Carrillo, Taylor Williamson, Sara Schleede, Paloma Moreno Jimenez, and Abbey Delk. Special thanks to Shira Atkins.

Original theme music composed by Miles Moran.

Follow Wonder Media Network:

Website

Instagram

Twitter