Gauhati University is a public state university established in 1948 by Gauhati University Act 1947 (Assam Act, XVI of 1947) of the Government of Assam. The university is approved by the University Grants Commission (UGC). NAAC has accredited the university with an ‘A’ grade. Currently, there are 359 colleges affiliated to the varsity. The varsity got 47th position in NIRF University Rankings 2020. However, in NIRF 2021 Ranking, Gauhati University has been ranked 67th in the overall category. In the university category, it has been ranked 45 in the NIRF ranking 2021 whereas in the year NIRF ranking 2020 it was ranked 47 in the same category.

The campus of Gauhati University is spread over an area of 650 acres and the university has 344 faculty members. Gauhati University provides postgraduate diploma, postgraduate and integrated courses.

A few of the courses offered by the university are M.A., M.Sc., M.B.A., M.Com. P.G.D etc. The university accepts marks obtained in the last qualifying marks for admission in PG courses other than M.B.A. Candidates with more than 75 percentile in CAT/MAT/XAT and various other national level management examinations are exempted from the entrance exam. The final selection of candidates in the PG courses is done based on UG degree and entrance score. For M.B.A. admission, entrance score and performance in a personal interview and group discussion is the selection criteria.

Gauhati University has collaboration with a number of foreign institutes and universities. It offers various national level scholarships (UGC) to its students. For the placements of students, the varsity has a placement cell. Gauhati University campus consists of all the necessary facilities and infrastructure required for academic and non-academic curriculum.

The university is located at Gopinath Bordoloi Nagar, Jalukbari, Gauhati University Guwahati, Assam. The nearest airport to Gauhati University is Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport. It is situated 10.8 km from the campus. The varsity is located 8.0 km away from the nearest railway station - Kamakhya Junction Railway Station. With a distance of 10.2 km, Gauhati University Guwahati Bus Stop is closest to the university.

Regular exam updates, QnA, Predictors, College Applications & E-books now on your Mobile