JAT Holdings, Sri Lanka’s trusted leader of wood coatings, proudly presents its gender balanced leadership, inclusive of three ladies of distinction who have been appointed to its high powered Board of Directors. With the visionary aim to enhance the quality of management decisions, the diverse representation of the Board will bring about a variety of perspectives, ideas, expertise, and problem solving further positioning JAT Holdings as a game-changer in the corporate world.

With this specific prescience as its mission, Dr. Siva Selliah, Chairman, JAT, and Aelian Gunawardene, Managing Director, JAT unanimously determined the tremendous advantage of acknowledging the enormous aptitude in females of power. Moreover, in granting them the platform, authority, and freedom of creativity to utilize each individual’s expertise, this verdict would further pave the way for women of equal stature to gain the distinction they deserve. By bringing a wealth of diversity, not only in providing gender equality, panache and cutting edge proficiency to the Board, Priyanthi Peris, Joyce Gunawardene, and Anika Williamson eloquently herald a vision of the compelling influential role, which modern women will play in the future of the Sri Lankan business model.

Priyanthi Pieris, Attorney- at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, encompasses nearly 40 years of expertise in corporate/Securities Law. Currently serving on the Boards of LOLC Finance, Associated Electrical Corporation, and MTN Corporate Consultants, Pieris also brings in a wealth of experience gained as the Legal Adviser for the Ministry of Finance from 2002 to 2004 and as the Legal consultant to the Colombo Stock Exchange from 2004 to 2011.

Joyce Gunawardene currently serves as an Executive Director to Brush Master. With over 15 years of experience in Advertising and Promotion, Gunawardene was appointed to the Board of Directors of JAT Holdings in 2015. She holds a Bachelors Degree in Psychology from the University of NSW Australia.

Anika Williamson currently serves as an Executive Director to JAT Global and was appointed to the Board of JAT in 2020. She has over eight years of experience working in the finance, import, export, and banking industries. In the year 2020, Williamson was ap- pointed as the Finance Director of JAT Property Group. She held a Double Degree in Ac- counting and Entrepreneurship from Curtin University, Australia, and was a prestigious Pro Vice-Chancellors Chapter.

The appointment of a well- balanced, diversified Board of Directors will enable a larger pool of ideas, perspectives, and expertise, allowing the organization to explore more convenient and efficient methods of obtaining overall organizational goals. Therefore,it is a forgone conclusion that JAT Holdings will continue to carve even more innovations onto the rock-solid fabric of their business model.

Since its incorporation in 1993, JAT Holdings has grown in financial strength, corporate reputation and brand recognition reaching many milestones in its journey of becoming the leader in wood coatings in Sri Lanka. The company’s mission is to stay committed to building long-term relationships based on integrity, performance, value and exceeding customer satisfaction. They also continue to meet the changing needs of their clients with their highest quality and innovative solutions delivered by the most qualified people. In 2015, JAT Holdings was named as one of the Top Strongest Conglomerate Brands in the country through diversification. Furthermore, the company was recognised as a leading industrial trading company and was awarded the title of the Largest Distributor of Sayerlack in the world.