Home / International Journal of Social Economics, Volume 47, Number 11

Authors: Mohamed Aslam, Ahamed Lebbe 1 ; Sivarajasingham, Selliah 2 ;

Source: International Journal of Social Economics, Volume 47, Number 11, 2020, pp. 1381-1402(22)

Publisher: Emerald Group Publishing Limited

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-03-2020-0157

Abstract

References

Citations

Supplementary Data

Purpose

The purpose of this study aims to investigate the nature of the relationship between workers' remittances and financial development (FD) in Sri Lanka for the period from 1975 to 2017.

Design/methodology/approach

This study used both the exploratory data analysis and inferential data analysis (IDA) techniques to test the objective of this study. The IDA technique consisted of the augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) and Phillips–Perron unit root tests, the autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds cointegration technique, the Granger causality test and impulse response function analysis.

Findings

The unit root test results show that the variables are in mixed order. The empirical results of cointegration confirm that workers' remittances have a beneficial long-run relationship with FD in Sri Lanka. The Granger causality test result indicates that there is a bidirectional relationship between workers' remittances and FD. The impulse response analysis indicates that a positive shock to workers' remittance has an immediate significant positive impact on the FD of up to 10 years.

Practical implications

The analytical techniques used in this study explain how workers' remittances induce FD in Sri Lanka.

Originality/value

This study fills an important gap in the academic literature by using newly developed ARDL bounds cointegration techniques in Sri Lanka, by using impulse response function analysis, and by studying the dynamic relationship between workers' remittances and FD using time series data.

No Reference information available - sign in for access.

No Citation information available - sign in for access.

No Supplementary Data.

No Article Media

No Metrics

Keywords: ARDL bounds test; Financial development; Granger causality; Impulse response function; Workers' remittances

Document Type: Research Article

Affiliations: 1: Department of Divisional Planning, Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs Sri Lanka, Colombo, Sri Lanka 2: Department of Economics and Statistics, Faculty of Arts, University of Peradeniya, Kandy, Sri Lanka

Publication date: 06 October 2020

Share Content

Access Key

Free content

Partial Free content

New content

Open access content

Partial Open access content

Subscribed content

Partial Subscribed content

Free trial content