Sarah Silverman is one of the lamest hacks working in comedy today. During the noughties (a time when every talentless twat in the entertainment industry seemed to flourish) this mediocre dick rose up the ranks and seemed to be everywhere during the whole godforsaken decade. It was quite strange that someone so unfunny and so uncharismatic was given numerous writing jobs, her own TV Show, various movie roles, appearances in music videos, and even lauded for her “controversial” stand-up. Seeing all the praise during the last fifteen years or so (including Rolling Stone calling her “the funniest woman alive”) you just knew something was corrupt about the whole thing. I mean it’s as plain as Silverman’s face that she’s not amusing in the slightest, and when I say she’s not funny I mean not funny for a man, not funny for a woman, and not funny for someone alive or dead… fuck Rolling Stone and their prejudice compartmentalisation.

Looking like a rake covered in glue, that’s been dragged through a Barbershop floor, and with a voice that doesn’t match her exterior like a lumberjack who’s been inhaling helium, it’s anybody’s guess how the public have endured this whiny, shrill, so-called stand-up comedian for such a long time. Aside from her crappy TV work, she’s pretty much ruined every film she’s in; she was annoying in “School Of Rock”, in a shittier film like “A Million Ways To Die In The West” she was the shittiest, and even as an animated character her voice and self-absorbed personality leaked into “Wreck-It Ralph” and rendered it unwatchable. If you enjoy watching Silverman’s films, you can witness this clod playing amazingly varied roles such as the nagging-bitch girlfriend, the nagging-bitch wife, or the bitchy whore with an unattractive vagina. Maybe Sarah Silverman should recognise the roles she’s offered, and take a good hard look at how people even within the entertainment business perceive her. But forget this numpty’s annoying personality and her battered look, it’s her proclivity for prejudice that’s the most abhorrent aspect of Sarah Silverman the comedian.

For those of you who haven’t heard her comedy before, this is one of her so-called satirical songs from her show-slash-film “Jesus Is Magic”…

“I love you more than bears love honey,

I love you more than Jews love money,

I love you more than Asians are good at math.

I love you even if it’s not hip,

I love you more than black guys don’t tip,

I love you like Puerto Ricans need baths.”

Now this “joke” on the surface looks equally prejudice but when you take into account that Silverman is Jewish, she’s basically masking her prejudice within a gag that also appears to “mock her own race”, but compare her comment regarding Puerto Ricans to her comment about Jews and ask yourself who comes out worse in this scenario? It’s within these kinds of distractions that Sarah has thrived, and it renders the imbecilic masses in a confused state; they hear prejudice within a hint of self-loathing and everybody ignores the blatant bigotry.

Her crappy comedy can be seen as somewhat sarcastic and slightly satirical, but the more you hear Sarah’s routines and sketches, the more you realise that this is just the tip of the prejudice iceberg. I guess for her fans, the fact that Silverman isn’t discriminating when it comes to her discrimination, makes her illiberal act somehow liberal.

So going through a list of prejudice, she seems to gave ticked every box. She’s “joked” about homosexual people…

“Whether you’re gay, bisexual, it doesn’t matter because at the end of the day, they’re both gross.”

She’s joked about the disabled and she routinely uses the word “retard”. Then when asked about it she said she has…

“a great love for retarded adults”

For fans of hatred she sometimes packages her prejudice together, she once said on her TV Show…

“I don’t mean gay like homosexual… I mean gay like retarded”

But the one demographic she keeps pestering and referencing is black people. To some, her racism against African-Americans could be seen as ironic, her line…

“Everybody blames the Jews for killing Christ, and the Jews try to pass it off on the Romans. I’m one of the few people who believes it was the blacks”

…can be seen as a comment about racism itself, but she also said this…

“I always think I should get on it if I want to have kids. Because once you hit thirty it can be difficult to conceive, it can be dangerous. The best time to conceive is when you’re a black teenager”

…and this…

“I learned that elderly black women are wise beyond their years… but younger black women are prostitutes”

Then, on the topic of slavery, she played a game of “one-upmanship” on her show and pitted the atrocity against the Holocaust. She said…

“Oh, I’m so sorry you guys get to have like amazing dance moves and singing voices while we got… oh yeah… murder showers”

There was also the time she appeared in blackface, although many defend this unpleasantness as “irony” too. In fact more often than not, her fans use the ever popular excuse of “satire” to glaze over her continual use of obvious racism.

Irony and satire seems to be a popular cover these days especially for white, able-bodied, heterosexuals, and under its protection these people can conveniently be openly prejudice to minorities and nobody seems to bat an eyelid. It’s great that only this section of society feels the need to mock others whilst whining about their right to be offensive, and yet they thrive in a business where their own ethnicity, sexual orientation, and religion never seems to be the target. These white racists masquerading as satirists don’t just stop with Sarah Silverman, there’s also the super-shitty Natasha Leggero and the sly wanker Sacha Baron Cohen. It seems that these wannabe Lenny Bruce’s with their fake-ironic pretence are on the rise within mainstream comedy.

The one thing to say in defence of people like Sacha Baron Cohen, is the fact that any time he says something racist he’s in obvious character (the fact that his entire repertoire is prejudice is another matter altogether) but when it comes to people like Silverman and Leggero, they’re quite obviously themselves; they perform stand-up looking, speaking, and acting like the same person we see in public. Silverman in an interview for instance is the same as she is on stage or on screen, so at what point is this hateful tit’s routine “satire”, “parody”, or “irony”? It seems that when a comedian isn’t funny, they resort to hatred to bolster their lack of talent. Silverman with her forgettable face and mediocre comedic skills has to stand out somehow, so saying something like “chink” on a talk show makes you remember her whilst you simultaneously ignore her complete lack of wit. For someone who wet the bed until age 16, it’s quite ironic that her hateful jokes have never made anyone piss themselves with laughter… for Silverman’s fans that sentence is an example of real irony.

Sarah Silverman strangely took offence when she was called “old” at a roast a while back, despite her dishing out disses like they were going out of style. And speaking of “out-of-style”, you can routinely catch this wrinkled, 44-year-old twat dressed like a $10 hooker from the early noughties as she drags her mouldy frame across various red carpets looking like a pin-up for the Prosopagnosic community. It’s pretty weird that although she looks like the offspring of Mr. Ed and the Wicked Witch Of The West, Silverman somehow made Maxim’s “Hot 100” list. It was probably the year that the list was compiled by a blind, white, lesbian, Jewish, retard… and if you think that joke is offensive, blame Sarah Silverman and her reinvention of “satire”.