In recognition of his dedication and contribution to the Electoral Justice, the Regional Electoral Court of the State of Tocantins (TRE-TO) held a ceremony on Thursday (July 11th) to award the Electoral Merit Medal to the family of Justice José Maria das Neves.

The medal, awarded by the College of Regional Electoral Chiefs of Justice, represents recognition of the work and dedication of Neves throughout his professional career. This tribute reflects the respect and admiration of all those who had the privilege of working alongside him.

"The awarding of this medal is a way of keeping alive the memory of an exemplary man, whose actions were always guided by ethics and the defense of justice. Justice José Maria das Neves leaves a legacy that will surely continue to inspire future generations," said Justice Helvécio de Brito Maia Neto, vice-President of the TRE-TO and regional electoral Ombudsman, who conducted the proceedings.

Ceremony

One of the sons of the honoree, Justice Paulo César Alves das Neves, of the Court of Justice of the State of Goiás (TJGO), received the "Maria Warrior" Electoral Merit Medal, thanking all the family and friends for their presence and the TRE-TO for the tribute.

"This tribute is of great importance to all of us, especially because it celebrates a person who left a legacy of work and dedication to the Electoral Justice system," he said.

Justice Marco Villas Boas and Lawyer Marcelo Neves also highlighted the legacy of the magistrate. For Justice Marco, the performance of Justice José Maria das Neves was irreproachable, "an example of dedication and commitment to the Electoral Justice, leaving a legacy of excellence and contributions during his administrations, especially in acting against excessive campaign spending," he added.

Justice José Maria das Neves, who died on October 22nd, 2019, was a prominent figure on the legal scene in the State of Tocantins and nationwide. He served as President of the TRE-TO in the 1989-1990, 1997-1998 and 2003-2005 administrations. In 1990-1992, 1996-1997 and 2001-2003, he headed the Regional Electoral General Internal Affairs of Justice (CRE-TO) as Ombudsman.

Present authorities

The table of honor was made up of the vice-President and regional electoral Ombudsman, Justice Helvécio de Brito Maia Neto, who represented the President, Justice João Rigo Guimarães; Justice Ângela Issa Haonat; Judge Edssandra Barbosa da Silva Lourenço; Judge Silvana Maria Parfieniuk; Judge Rodrigo de Meneses dos Santos; electoral Prosecutor Rodrigo Mark Freitas; Justice Marco Villas Boas, General Director of the Superior School of the Judges of the State of Tocantins, who represented the President of the Court of Justice of the State of Tocantins (TJTO), Justice Etelvina Maria Sampaio Felipe; the Public Prosecutor, Adriano César Pereira das Neves (the son of the honoree), who represented the General Attorney of the State of Tocantins, Luciano Cesar Casaroti; the Justice of the Court of Justice of the State of Goiás (TJGO), Paulo César Alves das Neves (the son of the honoree); and the President of the Brazilian Bar Association - Tocantins Section (BAR-TO), Gedeon Pitaluga Júnior, who gave up his seat at the table of honor to Lawyer Marcelo Neves, also the son of the honoree, who represented the entity.