Obituary

Godinho, Maria das Neves

God called Maria das Neves Godinho peacefully on February 13, 2022, at the age of 92. She is reunited with her predeceased husband Jose Coelho Godinho and daughter Luisa Godinho, Cherished by her dear children, Susana Augusto, Marilia Dias, Rosa Defrias and sons-in-law Francis Augusto, Helio Dias and Joseph Defrias and Fernando Gomes . Proud grandmother to Jennie Miguel, Jason Augusto, Meggie Belissimo, Jonathan Augusto, Terry Dias, Dorothy Gonzalez, Josie Magnone, Sarah Morgado, Gary Espinola, Tyler Defrias, Kiana Defrias, Jake Defrias and 15 great-grandchildren. She will be held dear in the hearts of her family, relatives, and many friends.

Maria had a passion for art, music, and dancing. She will be remembered for her great sense of humour, kindness, and the love she freely shared with her entire family and friends. The family would like to thank the great nurses, doctors and PSWs at the Maple Grove Community Centre who cared with passion for Maria’s well keeping over the last 5 years. Everyone’s kind words of encouragement and care has been greatly appreciated beyond words.

Due to the current pandemic restrictions and direction from the Bereavement Authority of Ontario, effective January 5, 2022 all funerals and visitations will be by reservation/appointment only to limit the number of people in attendance and to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The maximum capacity may not exceed 30 people inside the funeral home for visitation/service, this includes family members. Due to the capacity limit, the family kindly requests that anyone making a reservation/appointment to please select/attend only one group slot, this will allow others an equal opportunity to reserve and attend.

*Beginning February 17, guests are no longer required to make a reservation in advance to attend a funeral or visitation. If you are planning to attend St. Anthony's Church for the funeral Mass, you may simply show up as you regularly would.

The family wishes to sincerely thank you for your support, your thoughtfulness at such a difficult time is most appreciated.

Please use this button to sign up to attend the visitation. Please know that you are able to assist others by signing up those who may less proficient on a computer. You will need their full name and phone number. Please also feel free to call the funeral home at 416-603-1444 if you would like some assistance. Thank you.

In order to accommodate those that are unable to attend the services in person, you may use the zoom live stream link below to join the visitation virtually.