Stefan Zweig, who’s back in the news thanks to Wes Anderson, wrote his first play, “Thersites,” in his mid-twenties, about a minor character from the “Iliad.” Homer called the character “Thersites of measureless speech,” who said openly to the mighty “whatsoever he deemed would raise a laugh among the Argives.” At the assembly to gather an army for the Trojan War, Thersites insulted Agamemnon and mocked the planned attack. Odysseus responded by beating Thersites with his sceptre, and comedians have been making—and getting into—trouble ever since. The classic comedies series that begins today at Museum of the Moving Image includes one film that makes trouble its subject: Ernst Lubitsch’s 1932 romance “Trouble in Paradise,” which I watched again recently, and which strikes me, belatedly, as another peculiar influence on “The Grand Budapest Hotel.”

It’s an erotic crime comedy, which starts in Venice, where the thief Gaston (Herbert Marshall) and the pickpocket Lily (Miriam Hopkins)—meeting and seducing under false, aristocratic identities—discover each other’s talents and pair up, for love and plunder. Then, when they have established themselves in Paris, Gaston spies a wealthy, widowed, and beautiful businesswoman, Madame Colet (Kay Francis), whom he prepares to fleece—and to romance, which causes trouble at home and threatens to blow his cover.

In composing the character of Gaston, Lubitsch catches a fascinating angle: as a sophisticated thief, Gaston has a rapid and discerning eye for quality and value. He can tell gem from paste, and antique from imitation, at a rapid glance—but his discriminating taste goes even further. He himself is an exquisite, virtually undetectable imitation of an aristocrat: he speaks many languages; his manners are taut, refined, and impeccable (“I believe in doing things correctly,” he tells his prey); he puts himself together with perfect taste, and he has equally fine judgment regarding the fashions of others (his seduction of Madame Colet involves her subtly adjusting the shade of her lipstick and eye shadow).

In short, Gaston seems like a forerunner of the fastidious and cultivated concierge of the Grand Budapest Hotel, Gustave H. (played by Ralph Fiennes). Like Gustave, Gaston is also a supremely skillful executive (he insinuates himself into Madame Colet’s home and business as her secretary and de facto manager), an intrepid tactician, and an imperious administrator. There’s no need to press the connection too far—but Lubitsch’s film is from 1932, the year in which the main events in “The Grand Budapest Hotel” are set.

Anderson’s films are sometimes treated as unserious, lacking in what’s solemnly intoned as the “social,” the “human,” or even “reality,” because they’re stylized and funny. The greater the command that Anderson exercises, the more precise his inventions and efficient his direction, the more vehement the criticism seems to become—even as Anderson’s films have taken on matters of great public concern, whether changing ideas of morality in the face of religious opposition (as in “Moonrise Kingdom”) or, in “The Grand Budapest Hotel,” the fragility of the refugee, the nature of resistance to tyranny, and the rescue of a cultural and personal heritage from its wreckage.

It’s worth considering why artists find comic settings for intimate and political crises. On Sunday at 2 P.M., Moving Image will present Charlie Chaplin’s “Modern Times,” which is one of the cinema’s key works concerning the Depression and its attendant political troubles. It came out in 1936, when the movies themselves were, in effect, a source of news, and Chaplin’s film had the power of a refracted documentary view of places and lives often hidden offscreen. Afterwards, the museum will show Frank Tashlin’s “Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?,” from 1957, a sendup of the world of advertising, television, and celebrity that, in its cartoon-like exaggeration (Tashlin got his start as a director with “Looney Tunes”), gets to the peculiar essence of those phenomena—the liberating power of mass media beneath the riotous frivolity. (Writing in The New Yorker at the time of its release, John McCarten called the film “a mash of stale jokes, bad acting, and dull drama,” as well as “mucilaginous nonsense.”)

The comic refractions of these movies, as delightful as they are, wouldn’t have been necessary, and wouldn’t have endured, if it had been easy to take a radical look at political crisis in Hollywood movies, or if it had been possible to film sexual liberation in an era that resisted it. Similarly, under the guise of a creampuff legend, Anderson is saying serious and difficult things—he isn’t merely presenting extremes of experience and emotion in a highly aestheticized form, he’s depicting the art of living in its essential moral aspect. The astonished Chaplinesque laugh has a Voltairean fury; the Tashlinesque guffaw has an obscene, boundary-breaking vigor; and the ironic Andersonian chuckle marks an abiding warmth, a deep sense of virtue, loyalty, temerity, and courage.

All three directors, being up-to-the-minute modernists, have worked within the currents of major artistic traditions. All three of these troublemakers have managed to get some, too. That’s part of the tradition.