Thersites (or "Sites" for short) is the adoptive brother of Shrika and the adoptive son of Kierkegaard. He serves as a member of the Seaslight Order.

Biography[]

Sometime ago, the Hallowed Kierkegaard took in Shrika and Thersites as orphans. It is unknown what Sites's role in Kierkegaard's plan is though. When the Protagonist and Aria attempt to gain access to both the Order's temple and the cave, Thersites isn't willing to help them due to his distrustfulness of outsiders. When many of Argene's residents and members of the Order all mysteriously disappear as a result of Kierkegaard's actions, leaving Shrika, Thersites, and a few of the townsfolks who do not have the Flos-Indulgentia. When the Protagonist and Aria suggest working together, Shrika agrees, but Sites turns it down due to him preferring to work alone, taking advantage of the missing townsfolk to dig up dirt on the Order. Shrika chooses not to go after him as she did not want to waste time doubting the situation.

During Shrika's character story, Sites continues to work under the Order, but like the rest of the members (excluding Shrika), he does not know about his adoptive father's true colors and the real purpose of the Flos-Indulgentia. At one point, he discovers the truth of the Holy Mother (actually an automaton from Lost Gaia) and, believing the Order is a corruptive faction, as well as being driven by Kierkegaard and the Flos-Indulgentia's disappearance, created the Sect of the Antimother to bring the Order to ruins and tries to convince Shrika to leave the Order and have a normal life. Thersites' motivation lies in the fact that he had watched Shrika be manipulated by Kierkegaard and the Order for a significant portion of their lives, turned into their perfect "Seraph Child". He disagrees with the fact that Shrika believes that you need the teachings to become a good person, and instead is convinced that all of humanity is flawed and evil, even with such principles. The teachings have brought nothing but pain for Thersites, forcing him to helplessly watch as his sister was swept up by the Order, convincing her that the religion was the cure to all the pain she had experienced. Shrika, who does not see an issue with these teachings, refuses to join him. Thersites is willing to fight Shrika over this, and is quickly defeated by her. Afterwards, Sites sees his own actions as being wrong, and tells Shrika to kill him so he can atone, not seeing any other way out of it. She spares his life, thanks him for watching over her, and imprisons him for what Shrika perceives as his "sins". Thersites is not seen again in game after this, nor does Shrika mention him in the epilogue. The player is given no opportunity to agree with Thersites during his and Shrika's conflict.

Personality[]

Thersites is rude and a bit resentful towards outsiders, but nevertheless attempts to stay loyal to the Order, despite explicitly and vocally not believing in the teachings. Growing up, he quickly earned the reputation of being a "Delinquent Priest", stated by Shrika that he used to refused to write apology letters for his bad behavior when asked. When Thersites learns of who the Order's Holy Mother really is, his characteristics become increasingly antagonistic and, no longer willing to work with the Order due to him deeming it a rogue organization, tries to take it down in hopes of getting Shrika to leave it. Thersites cares deeply for his sister, putting her wellbeing above all else, willing to go to extreme lengths to make sure she can live a better life than the one she is currently living. When spoken to in Argene, Thersites repeats the same line each time, asking the Protagonist not to bother Shrika, due to not wanting to put more stress on her.

Appearance[]

Thersites is a lean, pale man with long brown hair and amber eyes. He wears dark robes, a stark contrast from the white of every other priest. Sites carries a standard sword on his hip, instead of the Dogma the rest of the priests use.

Gallery[]

Trivia[]