Ryan Lavery arrived in Pine Valley in 1998 as a con man seeking riches.

After being hired at WRCW, Ryan began a scheme involving kickback funds. Station manager Liza Colby discovered this and threatened jail time unless Ryan married Gillian Andrassy, who was about to wed Liza’s nephew Scott Chandler…

Children: Children: Emma McDermott (with Annie McDermott), Spike Lavery (with Kendall Hart)

Mother: Gail Lavery (deceased)

Father: Patrick Lavery (deceased)

Siblings: Braden Lavery (deceased), Jonathan Lavery, Erin Lavery (deceased)

Significant Romantic Relationships: Gillian Andrassy (1st and 2nd wife/deceased), Greenlee du Pres (3rd wife/divorced), Hayley Vaughan Santos, Mia Saunders, Kendall Hart, Annie McDermott

All My Children to Air Epic Dance Marathon

All My Children is planning an unusual storyline: over the course of 10 episodes, the show will depict a dance marathon.

Coming Soon on All My Children: Erica Kane Goes Cougar!

On All My Children, Erica Kane is about to fall for Ryan Lavery. What do you think of this coupling, fans?

All My Children Writer Previews 2009

Want a look ahead on All My Children? Who better to provide one than the show’s head writer?

All My Children Sneak Peek: Ryan Confronts Kendall

On All My Children later today, Ryan sweet-talks his way into Kendall’s room. But he won’t like what he finds. “Ryan had a flash of mem…

All My Children Story Lines Often Focus on Sick Kids

Right now on All My Children, Zach and Kendall are worried sick over their little one, Ian (born dangerously premature). But Soap Opera …

You want to tell me what the hell you were trying to pull out t…

Ryan Lavery: You want to tell me what the hell you were trying to pull out there? Kendall Hart Cambias: Did you see Babe? Did you just…

I just wanted to make sure we were on the same page. (mutteri…

Ryan: I just wanted to make sure we were on the same page. Greenlee: (muttering) Forget the page, we’re not even in the same library.

No way. A kiss on the boo-boo and that makes it all better? How…

Kendall Hart Cambias: No way. A kiss on the boo-boo and that makes it all better? How the hell could she be so patronizing? Ryan Lavery:…

Did you lie to Kendall about loving me? I’ve never loved anyo…

Greenlee Smythe Lavery: Did you lie to Kendall about loving me? Ryan Lavery: I’ve never loved anyone the way that I love you.