Ryan Lavery is quite the ladies’ man, but with a new fiancée and an ex-wife coming back to town, even he is sure to have his hands full. Let’s take a look at his conquests over the years.

1998: To avoid going to prison for his illegal financial dealings, Ryan makes a deal with Liza to tie the knot with Gillian. Before long, real feelings develop between the newlyweds.

1999: After catching Gillian in bed with David Hayward (she was seeking comfort because Ryan couldn’t show his true feelings for her), Ryan is thrown into jail on rape charges. The true culprit turns out to be his brother Braden. Ryan’s first act after being released is to divorce Gillian.

1999: After growing close with Hayley, Ryan develops feelings for her and they kiss. However, Hayley’s true love is Mateo.

1999: Ryan begins sleeping with Greenlee, who is genuinely smitten with him. He, however, is just in it for the sex.

2000: Ryan and Gillian renew their romance, but separate again when she can’t bring herself to divorce Jake. When they become lovers again, Gillian gets pregnant, but is unsure if the father is Ryan or Jake. She miscarries, and Jake divorces her.

February 2001: Ryan and Gillian are remarried.

June 2001: Gillian is mistaken for Anna and shot. She dies when Ryan removes her from life support.

August 2001: Ryan seeks comfort in Liza’s arms.

October 2001: Liza learns she is pregnant, and the baby may be Ryan’s. After confiding in Mia how alone he feels, Ryan and Mia sleep together. She falls in love with him.

November 2001: Liza miscarries when she falls down a flight of stairs. Ryan insists on a paternity test, which proves he was the father.

April 2002: After a long period of flirtation and sexual tension, Kendall and Ryan make love.

June 2002: Ryan and Kendall get engaged.

July 2002: Ryan discovers Kendall seducing Aidan — she was trying to prove her innocence in an arson charge — and leaves town.

October 2003: Ryan returns, and Kendall admits she still loves him. Ryan realizes he still has feelings for her.

November 2003: Kendall and Ryan make love on the Fusion rooftop, but Kendall later claims it was a mistake.

November 2003: Greenlee decides to pursue Ryan in an effort to save Fusion.

December 2003: Ryan and Kendall decide to work on their relationship. They are together until New Year’s Eve, when Kendall turns to Aidan.

January 2004: Greenlee and Ryan share a passionate kiss, but Ryan stops it from escalating.

January 2004: Ryan is back in bed with Kendall, and admits under oath that he loves her. They get engaged for a second time.

February 2004: Greenlee demands that Ryan admit he has feelings for her. He concedes he has feelings for both her and Kendall, but plans to stay with Kendall. Ryan cuts Greenlee off when she sabotages Kendall’s trial defense. Kendall accuses Ryan of being in cahoots with Greenlee, so he walks out on her. Kendall returns his engagement ring.

February 2004: Ryan rescues Greenlee from a mine shaft.

March 2004: Ryan and Greenlee decide to leave town together. They also decide their relationship must remain platonic, because sex would ruin things.

April 2004: Greenlee and Ryan return to Pine Valley the night Bianca “loses” Miranda. Ryan consoles Kendall, and they decide they can have a future together.

April 2004: When Kendall demands that Ryan choose between her and his friendship with Greenlee, Ryan walks away from Kendall because she still doesn’t completely trust him.

May 2004: Despite Kendall’s attempt to stop them, Ryan and Greenlee wed platonically so Greenlee can have Fusion.

June 2004: Ryan tells Greenlee he wants to be with Kendall. They decide to end their marriage, even though Greenlee secretly has fallen in love with him. Unaware of Ryan’s feelings, Kendall sets him up to find her in bed with his brother Jonathan, who has just arrived in town. Ryan returns to Greenlee, who comforts him.

August 2004: Ryan falls in love with Greenlee, and their marriage becomes real.

May 2005: Ryan gets a vasectomy to ensure he can never have children — despite Greenlee’s desire to start a family.

July 2005: Ryan fakes his death when he learns Greenlee impregnated herself with his sperm. While he is gone, Greenlee suffers a miscarriage, which pushes him to return to Pine Valley.

November 2005: Ryan’s marriage to Greenlee ends when she leaves town after finding out that Kendall is pregnant with Ryan’s child.

May 2006: Ryan realizes he loves Kendall, but refuses to interfere in her happiness with Zach.

July 2006: Ryan meets Annie, whom he takes into his home in order to protect her and her daughter Emma from her pedophile husband.

January 2007: Throughout the Satin Slayer crisis, Ryan and Annie share a growing attraction and genuine feelings. Ryan discovers that he is Emma’s father, thanks to an anonymous sperm donation years ago.

March 2007: Ryan proposes to Annie, who takes a lot of time to think about it, because she fears Ryan only wants to marry her because of Emma. Eventually, she accepts.