Explore Guyana

Guyana - The Natural Heaven On Earth!

Guyana, officially known as the Co-operative Republic of Guyana is a Caribbean country in South America. Guyana is a very strong nation politically, culturally as well as historically and is blessed by nature!

Guyana gained independence from the British rule in 1966 and officially became a republic within the Commonwealth in 1970. Each year 26 May is celebrated as Independence Day in Guyana.

Georgetown, the capital & largest city of Guyana is home to the secretariat headquarters of Caribbean Community (CARICOM), an organization focused to promote co-operation and economic integration among its member Caribbean nations.

Guyana is one of four founding member of CARICOM and is a full member of CARICOM. Guyana has been designated as More Developed Country by CARICOM.

Guyana is also a member of the Union of South American Nations joining it in 2008 as a founding member.

Other things to do in Guyana

Students can relax and rejuvenate themselves by going for site seeing and paragliding. Students can visit Radha- Krishna Mandir, Providence Masjid and St. George Cathedral Church. Students can enjoy and have a fun time in the City Mall. They can also explore different places like Guyana National Museum, Pomegranate garden, Non- alignment Monument etc. They can indulge in various activities like Biking, Mountaineering, horse- riding and untamed adventures.After all, Guyana has got countless experiences for you to enjoy!

Apart from getting quality medical education with modern technology and education infrastructure, library full of medical treasure, fully-equipped campus, safe & furnished hostel facilities, laboratories including anatomy lab, computer lab, biotechnology lab, cafeteria and good food, Students life at Lincoln American University is blessed with the delightful experience of living in Guyana, diverse culture, and indulgence in extracurricular activities & group trips for relaxation from the stress of studies which makes journey of becoming a doctor an enjoyable experience and imbibe memories that they cherish for the rest of their life, personally, socially as well as professionally!