The 20th anniversary edition of L. Ron Hubbard's science fiction classic "Battlefield Earth" is a visually stunning, impeccably packaged hardcover volume that commemorates the novel's two decades as an international bestseller. It's evident that Galaxy Press has put a lot of hard work into making this shelf-bending edition as spectacular as possible; from the brilliant cover design to the stylistic layout, this is a must-have for science fiction fans, as well as serious book collectors.

In the year 3000, Earth has been conquered by nine-foot-tall, gas-breathing alien invaders called Psychlos. The few surviving humans are treated as nothing more than pack animals worked to death mining the Earth of all its resources. But a small band of rebel humans, led by Jonnie Goodboy Tyler, vow to fight back against impossible odds and reclaim their planet.

In the book's introduction, Hubbard states: "When I started out to write this novel, I wanted to write pure science fiction. Science is for people. And so is science fiction." If "Battlefield Earth"'s phenomenal worldwide popularity is any indication -- almost 7 million copies sold in 26 different languages -- it's safe to say that he succeeded. Considering the quality of the story ("Battlefield Earth" was voted as one of the top three English-language novels of the 20th century in a nationwide Modern Library reader's poll) and the tender loving care that went into the production, this 20th anniversary edition is more than pure science fiction. It's pure literary gold. "Paul Goat Allen - Barnes & Noble"

"In the year 3000, Earth has been conquered by nine-foot-tall, gas-breathing alien invaders called Psychlos. The few surviving humans are treated as nothing more than pack animals worked to death mining the Earth of all its resources. But a small band of rebel humans, led by Jonnie Goodboy Tyler, vow to fight back against impossible odds and reclaim their planet.

"In the book's introduction, Hubbard states: "When I started out to write this novel, I wanted to write pure science fiction. Science is for people. And so is science fiction." If "Battlefield Earth"'s phenomenal worldwide popularity is any indication almost 7 million copies sold in 26 different languages -- it's safe to say that he succeeded. Considering the quality of the story ("Battlefield Earth" was voted as one of the top three English-language novels of the 20th century in a nationwide Modern Library reader's poll) and the tender loving care that went into the production, this 20th anniversary edition is more than pure science fiction. It's pure literary gold." Paul Goat Allen - Barnes & Noble"

"In the year 3000, Earth has been conquered by nine-foot-tall, gas-breathing alien invaders called Psychlos. The few surviving humans are treated as nothing more than pack animals worked to death mining the Earth of all its resources. But a small band of rebel humans, led by Jonnie Goodboy Tyler, vow to fight back against impossible odds and reclaim their planet.

"In the book's introduction, Hubbard states: "When I started out to write this novel, I wanted to write pure science fiction. Science is for people. And so is science fiction." If Battlefield Earth's phenomenal worldwide popularity is any indication -- almost 7 million copies sold in 26 different languages -- it's safe to say that he succeeded. Considering the quality of the story (Battlefield Earth was voted as one of the top three English-language novels of the 20th century in a nationwide Modern Library reader's poll) and the tender loving care that went into the production, this 20th anniversary edition is more than pure science fiction. It's pure literary gold." --Paul Goat Allen - Barnes & Noble