Here is my companies approach to Rim and Invert labels in Civil 3D. It can be modified in any way to get the desired results or labels. Our field crews simply shoot the center rim of each structure weather it is a Manhole or Catch Basin. The shot is coded as CB (for Catch Basin) or MH, SMH, STMH, ect. (for manholes). A note is also collected for each shot that contains pipe directions, pipe sizes/types and measured inverts for each. A note might look something like this:

N 12″cmp 3.25′ SE 18″cmp 4.52′

That’s it for the field.

The next steps are all done in the office.

In order to use this information to label inverts you need to set a few things up in your Civil 3D Template. You will first need to set up some user defined properties as in the below image. You will need to create some for each pipe as well as one for importing survey notes. I choose to limit myself to 6 pipes per structure. More can always be added later.

Next you will need to set up a few point label expressions (one for each pipe) as in the below image.

Once you have these two things created you can set up a point label style to use with Manholes, Catch Basins, ect. See below image.

After you have this you are ready to import your field points. Points are exported from our collectors in a .csv or .txt file in the following format. Point Number, Northing, Easting, Elevation, Description, Note. They are imported into Civil 3d using a custom point file format that includes point notes (see image below).

After I have the points and notes in my drawing I simply have to look at the properties of each point associated with a MH or CB and enter in the information my field crew put in the point notes. The infromation is entered into the point properties screen (see below picture). These properties will be visible for every point in your drawing once you complete the steps listed above. After this is done the point label is created and inverts are calculated.

This process doesn’t save a ton of steps but it eliminates any math errors and leaves you with a clean drawing that contains all of the field information used to calculate the inverts and create the labels. I believe it could be automated even further but it would require having our field crews fill in a few extra comment fields in the collector.

In the below picture you can see the end result is a point label and symbol that has the notes, inverts, and pipe information all embedded into your drawing. I wouldn’t be surprised if I missed a few steps or if this seems a bit complicated. I have never written a how-to before so I apologize in advance! But hopefully it is enough to give you an idea of what Civil 3D is capable of if you take the time to set up a good template.