(ran GB edition)

An important thing about Dennis Quaid is that, in real life, Meg Ryan fancies him. But in the public imagination she fancies Tom Hanks. And Billy Crystal. And Kevin Kline.

In the fantasy world of Hollywood movies, Ryan _ Quaid's wife in real life _ fancies men who are softer and soppier than Quaid; men who look like they would never take drugs, or get into a fight, or drive like a maniac or let off steam by loading a pistol and firing it into the air.

In our collective subconscious, Ryan _ the perfect romantic heroine, blond but not dumb, a bit dizzy but ultimately sensible _ must fall in love with a wimp. It is, apparently, what we want to see.

So, if you try to imagine what it must be like to be Dennis Quaid, a crucial thing is this: in a spooky, cosmic sense, we, the film-going public, do not want to see him with lovely, shiny Meg. The three films in which he played alongside her _ Innerspace, DOA and Flesh and Bone _ were not big hits.

And when he starred with the lovely, shiny Julia Roberts in Something To Talk About, the movie was a rare flop in the middle of an otherwise purple patch for Roberts.

So Quaid, an undeniably attractive man, lives and works in a culture which, in some strange way, is reluctant to find him attractive. He has never been the leading man in a hit movie. It must, one imagines, drive him nuts.

In reality, though, women are mad for him. Women have told me he's the sexiest man they've ever seen on screen. In films, he has an edgy, dangerous, slightly manic presence and a washboard stomach.

In sex scenes, he loses his mania and becomes sinewy and pliant. He kisses gently. For years, he had a female fan club that arranged screenings of The Big Easy and watched it, obsessively, over and over.

Viewed in the flesh, he looks like he is _ a blue-collar type from Texas, cruising into a slightly weathered middle age. He exudes a sort of cowboy rakishness. He looks and talks like a guy sitting on a bar stool looking into the bottom of his glass. He's polite, and breezy, but not intense or effusive. His hair is receding a bit, but elegantly. Close up, you can see the hollows and crags on his face from years of drink and drugs. He's not analytical; he clearly does not feel the need to explain or examine himself.

Quaid no longer drinks, just as he no longer takes drugs or even smokes cigarettes. For two years, between 1990 and 1992, he did not work, spending the time drying out, on the insistence of Ryan, who had just become a major Hollywood player. It was a watershed in the lives not just of Quaid and Ryan but of Ryan's whole family.

Ryan's family have been openly cynical about Quaid. Her stepfather, Pat Jordan, once told a newspaper, "The only thing Dennis can do is act, but somehow he doesn't respect his career. He sees it as not manly enough, so he does all these macho things to compensate." Then he said something revealing: "Meg loves that childishness in him. It puts her in complete control of the relationship."

When Quaid and Ryan met in 1987, on Innerspace, he was much more famous than her. He was 34; she was 25. It was his 16th film and her fourth. They were both involved with other people. She fell in love with him immediately. Of this moment, she has said, "He wasn't what I was expecting in life . . . you know, this wild guy from Texas. I kept thinking to myself, 'No, not him, please, not him.' "

When they started dating, she experienced his fans rushing past her to get to him. He was on the verge of hugeness. Then they changed places; it was Ryan who became the huge star. The verge was as close as Quaid ever got.

He has just made a big career move, possibly his most radical: he just filmed Saviour, with Yugoslavian director Peter Antonijivic, in which he plays a brutal mercenary fighting on the side of the Serbs in Bosnia. It's not a Quaid I've seen before. He hardly smiles, for a start. Quaid describes the character as "a walking corpse."

Saviour is a good, Eastern bloc-looking film, with a good deal of unflashy violence. People are clubbed to death with a mallet in mid-shot; you hardly hear the blows. Quaid's companion kicks a pregnant woman in the stomach. At one point Quaid guns down about a dozen Muslims at prayer in a mosque; he shoots them in the back. A crop-haired sniper, he squats behind a tree and shoots a kid off the side of a bridge.

The film cost $6 million, probably less than Ryan will pocket for being impish next to Tom Hanks in their forthcoming project, You've Got Mail.

Quaid grew up in Houston, where his father Buddy, a drinker, was an electrician and, Quaid has said, "a frustrated actor." His brother is actor Randy Quaid. Dennis dropped out of college and became a clown, performing for children at an entertainment park. ("They kick you and hit you and spit at you and throw their Cokes at you.") He did some stand-up comedy.

In his first good role, in Breaking Away (1979), Quaid was a resentful working-class guy who had been a star quarterback at high school but knew he'd never make the big time. Almost a decade later, Peter Yates, the director, said, "I sensed almost instantly that Dennis was going to be very big, but it's taken much longer than I thought."

During this limbo, Quaid had a part in The Long Riders, a western, and in a silly comedy called Gorp (of which one critic wrote, "It makes Meatballs look like Hamlet.") After this he was in Caveman, with Ringo Starr.

In 1983 he had a break: Philip Kaufman cast him in The Right Stuff, in which he was believably cocky as astronaut Gordon Cooper. But it didn't do much for his immediate prospects; later the same year, Quaid was the grinning, prankish Mike Brody in Jaws 3-D, which he called "the worst experience of my life." Two films later, in Enemy Mine, he was an astronaut cast adrift on an alien planet peopled by scaly humanoids.

Does Quaid have any regrets?

"You're going to say, "I wish I could have done more of this, less of that,' but what happened on the day, in the movies, that's who I was at the time," he says. "So I've reconciled myself to that. But there's always something you could have done, something more."

He'd been drinking and smoking and taking drugs from an early age; first pot, then cocaine. Talking about these things, he becomes momentarily animated. Smoking cigarettes, he says, was the hardest thing to give up. "For me," he says, "I have to do something, and I have to do it well. I have to make a commitment to something. Like three packs a day."

Quaid's drug use built to a climax in 1989, the year he made Great Balls of Fire, which was supposed to make him into a big star. This was also the year when Ryan made When Harry Met Sally, which, unexpectedly, did make her a big star.

In November, around the time it was becoming clear that When Harry Met Sally would be a huge hit and Great Balls of Fire would be a disappointment, Quaid and Ryan invited her mother and stepfather to Montana for Thanksgiving. This was when the family rift happened.

Ryan stopped all contact with her mother. Quaid and Ryan postponed their wedding. Quaid put his career on hold. He dried out and stopped taking drugs. Ryan went into therapy and made her first film with Hanks, Joe Versus the Volcano.

Quaid played a lot of golf. He got his handicap down to three. "That's when I didn't work for a couple of years," he says with a twinkle in his eye.

Since then, Quaid has made eight films, mostly forgettable, apart from his role as Doc Holliday to Kevin Costner's Wyatt Earp in the film Wyatt Earp. Quaid lost 40 pounds for the role. He is actually better than the bland, slightly soppy Costner, but he couldn't have played the lead. He lacks the necessary blandness and soppiness. Unlike Costner, Cruise, Hanks or even Brad Pitt, he cannot make you believe in his innocence.

Is a new era beckoning for Quaid? Very possibly. Saviour will change some people's minds about him. It's not a blockbuster substitute or a quirky thriller, but a European-looking art film, even though it was funded by Oliver Stone's production company.

In this film, Quaid comes close to being evil, rather than just slick and menacing. Later this year, he'll play an aging quarterback "playing with pain" in Oliver Stone's forthcoming film.

"Well, for me, I'm glad, in a way, that the sort of superstar thing never really happened to me, because it seems to be a pain in the ass as far as living your life goes," Quaid says. "Sort of isolating. You can't go out. You can't go out in the world. We can go out."

People don't flock around you?

"No. I had that for about 15 minutes one time, about 10 years ago. I really hated it. When I was doing Jerry Lee Lewis. I really hated it. It was just too much attention."

Do you think you moved away from it?

"Yeah."

How do you think one does that?

"Well, I asked God to take it away from me, and he did. You know, and, um, I've just never been interested in being a movie star."