Dennis Quaid has never had a plan concerning his career. The only thing resembling one was the day he left his Texas home, headed west, and ended up in Hollywood, hoping to break into the business. Did it matter to him if someday he would play a detective in "The Big Easy" or Doc Holliday in "Wyatt Earp" or Jerry Lee Lewis in "Great Balls of Fire?"

"No, I just wanted a job at the beginning of my career," says the boyish-faced actor. "And that's what I want now; I want a good job. When I read a script, that's the first time I get to be an audience member, the first time I experience a piece of material. My criteria is the story, then who's making it and who are the other actors."

But Quaid's never been beyond dreaming about this or that role. An early hero of his was astronaut Gordon Cooper, the man Quaid eventually played in the film "The Right Stuff."

"I grew up in Houston, which is Space City," he says. "And Gordo was my favorite astronaut as a kid. Back then everybody knew the names of the astronauts; they can't name one today. Well, maybe Sally Ride. But I'd read the book 'The Right Stuff' and I said if they ever make a movie I'd love to play Gordo Cooper. And then when actually it happened, it was kind of the equivalent of what happened with this film."

He's talking about "The Rookie," the based-on-fact film in which he stars as Jim Morris, a onetime promising pitcher who never made it into the big leagues because of a shoulder injury, and who, a decade later, after prodding from the high school baseball team he coaches, goes after another shot with the majors.

"I saw Jim's story on a television news magazine a few years ago as I was channel surfing," recalls Quaid. "And it stopped me, put a big smile on my face. And then the script came to me a little over a year ago and I wanted to do it immediately."

Quaid, who says he loves baseball, football, basketball and golf, has played a number of sports figures before - in "Everybody's All-American," "Any Given Sunday" and "Tough Enough" - but again, it wasn't part of any plan.

"Maybe it's because I'm in my 40s and I'm still in shape, so they probably think of me before someone else," he guesses. "But there's a lot of drama in sport, which lends itself well to films. I find it interesting that with athletes, at the time that you supposedly get in the prime of your life, your career is over. So it's like a compressed life in a way."

And he does admit that at times in the past he'd considered becoming an athlete.

"In fact, I still have dreams of being on the seniors PGA tour," he says. "I'm working on that. I'm a five handicap right now.

"I've just gotta find that magic move and I'll be all right," he adds, laughing. "And learn to putt."

Quaid was actually on the mound at a major league park once.

"I threw out the first pitch at a Mets game when 'Frequency' opened," he says. "I got out there and thought, 'Whoa, that looks a lot farther than ...' but I got the ball over the plate. And the more you keep working at it, the distance seems to get shorter. But man, that first time, you're looking down a long tunnel."

Working on a baseball film has proven to be a lot safer than on a football film for Quaid. He vividly recalls an incident in 1988 on the set of "Everybody's All-American." Former New England Patriots safety Tim Fox had been hired for some authenticity, and was supposed to tackle Quaid in one scene.

"We were trying to re-create this one hit," recalls Quaid. "I'd been taking so many hits on that film, and this was the last one I had to take. We were trying to re-create this moment where Roger Staubach was trying to run out of bounds with the ball, and he got missiled, and his helmet went flying. On the first take we did it and the director said, 'Oh, that wasn't really good, let's do it again.' So Tim put his helmet right in my collarbone and just snapped it. I kept working that night and didn't know it was broken until later."

Did Quaid avoid injuries on "The Rookie"?

"Yeah, I actually did," he says happily. "It's one of the first films. Wait, no, I didn't. I was walking back to my trailer in about 110-degree heat. I must have been a little delirious and I walked right into the mirror of a school bus, and had to have five stitches put in my head."

He laughs at that thought and adds, "I get hurt on every film."

Up next for Quaid is "Far From Heaven," the new film from Todd Haynes ("Velvet Goldmine") which is scheduled for a fall release.

"It's in 1957, with Julianne Moore and myself," he says. "We have the perfect family and the perfect house, and I have the perfect job. She brings me dinner when I'm working late at the office one night and catches me with another guy. It's sort of a twist on the old Doug Sirk movies, sort of bordering on melodrama, but it's not melodrama. It's a complete 180 degrees from 'The Rookie.' "

"The Rookie" opens nationally on March 29.