From a press release:

Formerly managed and produced by the late, great Joey Ramone, The Independents have performed almost nonstop, touring with bands such as the Ramones, Misfits, Voodoo Glow Skulls, Cheap Trick, and The Queers, just to name a few. The recipe is one part Ramones, one part punk, one part ska, and a whole lot of Elvis.

They’ll bring that concoction to Irish Wolf Pub in downtown Scranton on Thursday, Aug. 10 with local punk rockers Heart Out, The Queeftones, and more acts to be announced.

Doors at the Irish Wolf Pub (503 Linden St., Scranton) open at 5 p.m. Tickets are $12 in advance or $15 the day of the show. For more information, see the Facebook event page.

Formed in early 1992 by Evil Presly and Willy B in South Carolina, The Independents was born out of the frustration of music being stereotyped and just plain boring. Willy B and Evil both loved all types of music, from Conway Twitty to Iron Maiden, the Ramones to Etta James, and The Specials to The Ohio Players. Both loved horror and sci-fi movies and wanted to find some way to include it in their music. Evil started writing lyrics that told horror tales while Willy B kept the guitar in one hand and gave the entire world the finger with the other. Their only goal is playing the music they want, when, where, and how they want.

After a few years, the guys had gathered a good following from coast to coast through rough demos. It was during this time that Evil met and befriended the bass player for the legendary Ramones, CJ Ramone. CJ got The Independents on a few opening dates of the Ramones’ “Acid Eaters Tour.” While driving to their first show with The Independents, Joey Ramone listened to some of The Independents’ demos given to him by CJ. He really dug what he heard and, upon arrival at the venue, demanded that CJ introduce him to the band. After the tour, Joey made an offer the guys could not refuse. He told them he wanted to manage the band, which he did from 1995 until his passing in 2001.

The Independents have done numerous North American and European tours. They have toured as main support for such bands as the Ramones, Misfits, Rancid, Cheap Trick, Mighty Mighty Bosstones, Less Than Jake, and Blondie to headlining their own tours. The Independents have also played many festivals, including the Warped Tour, South by Southwest, CMJ, and the Punk & Disorderly Festival in Berlin. They have also played at countless sci-fi/horror conventions and tattoo conventions. These ghouls, who put the “fun” back in funeral, have been known to tour up to 10 months a year with their unique, highly energetic, party-esque, horror-influenced music. Their hard touring schedule only leaves them wanting to destroy more.

The Independents released their first album, “In for the Kill,” in 1995 on the indie label Rock Duster Records. It was followed by the “Stalker” EP and 10-inch picture disc on Elevator Music in 1997. Their self-titled EP was released on Hellcat/Epitaph label in 1998. “The Unholy Living Dead” EP, produced by legendary producer Daniel Rey and Joey Ramone, was released in 1999. The Independents released “Back from the Grave” in 2001, which was also produced by the diabolical duo Daniel Rey and Joey Ramone on Suki Records shortly before Joey’s untimely passing. The limited edition “Back from the Grave” picture disc was released by Jump Up Records in 2002. “Live from Murder Beach,” The Independents’ first live album, was released in 2003. Fast Music released the “Full Moon Arise” EP in 2004. The Independents’ bestselling record to date, “Eternal Bond,” was released in 2006, followed by “The Early Years Demos 1993-1997” in 2007. “Do It Again” was released in October 2008, and “Ho Ho Ho, What a Party,” the Christmas EP, came out in 2013.