A decade ago, Banda MS decided to become independent after ending its contract with Ferca Producciones, the company that managed the group distributed by Universal Music. The conditions to continue working directly with the transnational company did not convince Sergio Lizárraga, the Mexican band’s musical director, so he decided to venture out and create his own company.

It was then that Lizos Music was born as an independent label with offices in Mexico (Mazatlán) and the United States (San Diego) that over time would become an inspiration and example for others. Currently, a large number of solo artists and groups of the genre are managed on their own terms.

Launching his own label has had a positive outcome. Banda MS became the highest-grossing band in Mexico, having sold out some of the most important venues in the country. On the Billboard charts, it has 34 entries on Hot Latin Songs, including 10 in the top 10; 16 entries on Top Latin Albums; and 45 on Regional Mexican Airplay chart, the same as the iconic Banda El Recodo, which has an 80-year career.

The successful solo release of Edén Muñoz (formerly the frontman of Calibre 50) was also one of the company’s achievements, as well as the development of new artists such as Los 2 de la S and Plan de Escape.

Lizárraga, the CEO of Lizos Music, spoke with Billboard Español about the company’s milestones, major accomplishments and challenges, and what’s to come.

How did you decide to create Lizos Music?

The truth is that it was not something planned, it was the circumstances that personally made me think about launching a record label. I remember that Universal put us under very harsh conditions as if we were a band that was just starting out and we had already come a long way, and that motivated me to start my own label.

What were the expectations when you started?

The expectations were very high, very optimistic. We developed the company as we went along. We did not know many things, but all the doubts were dispelled along the way. One thing leads to another, and you discover more and more things, more tools — and people join us to help the project grow. There is no doubt that everything starts by taking the first step.

Since Lizos’ success, do you feel that regional artists have followed your example?

It was an example of life, that it is possible to be independent both musically and as a company. Before it was unthinkable to do an independent project in regional Mexican music. Generally all the artists of the genre had to have someone to do the technical and administrative part and we broke with that.

At the record label level we also proved that it was possible. I don’t want to sound pretentious but I believe in teamwork — and there were key people for that. I am a producer, and people with knowledge of the digital world joined me. And in effect, we were an example for many record labels that were born later on.

At any time did you think about giving up?

We never thought of throwing in the towel, because we did very well in every way — economically, musically. We had the independence of being able to record the songs we wanted, the day we wanted, and to give it the promotion we wanted. So that part makes the artist have control of its content, when to release it, when to leave it or when to remove it.

What have been your main challenges and how did you overcome them?

There have been many challenges since the formation of the company. First, to compete with bands that were already established and with a long trajectory. Then, to find something that made us different — and we achieved it with romantic songs. The public liked that kind of lyrics, and to this day it is something that distinguishes us.

What do you consider to have been the greatest achievements?

One was definitely the launching of Edén Muñoz as a solo artist after his departure from Calibre 50. With his first song “Chale,” it was a success; his career was shaped over the course of two years. We are also proud of what has happened with Los 2 de la S — we started from scratch and they have advanced steadily in their career. We are now working with developing artists, such as Plan de Escape.

Does being independent have limitations?

We made an alliance with Sony Music for Snoop Dogg’s track [“Qué Maldición” from 2020] with the intention of reaching other territories and learning how the major labels do things, as well as knowing if we are doing things right. In the end, the result was very positive, and we realized that we are not far from how they work internationally. So it was a good decision.

How do you see Lizos Music a decade after its creation?

Nothing is easy, but at the moment I see a solid company in every sense: solid departments with people who already have roots in the company at the marketing level, at the distribution level. We are getting better and better positioned, we are doing very well without saturating ourselves with many artists — in order to give time to each one, especially to those who are in development.

What are the plans for the future with the company?

Definitely the plan is that there is no plan. We must continue to make our artists great, we must continue with the idea of continuing to grow. In order not to fall, we have to keep on climbing, as the saying goes.