About Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Silicon Graphics, Inc. is the leading manufacturer of high-performance visual computing systems. The Company delivers interactive three-dimensional graphics, digital media and multiprocessing supercomputing technologies to technical, scientific and creative professionals. Its subsidiary, MIPS Technologies, Inc., designs and licenses the industry's leading RISC processor technology for the computer systems and embedded control markets. Silicon Graphics has offices worldwide and headquarters in Mountain View, California.

Terms and Conditions of Use and Disclaimer

Copyright 1995 Silicon Graphics, Inc. -- All Rights Reserved.

This Silicon Graphics Developer Forum '95 CD Set is intended for use by Silicon Graphics ("SG") registered developers and IDO customers.

You may cite or refer to the information in the Developer Forum '95 CD Set in books, online services, or other media, but except as provided below, you may not reproduce or distribute such information in whole or in part without the prior written permission of SG. To request such permission, send email to devprogram@sgi.com, including your name, address and a description of the purpose of your intended distribution and the information you would like to distribute.

You may print, reproduce and use the information in, and retrieve files containing software or images from, the Developer Forum '95 CD Set for non-commercial, personal, or educational purposes only, provided that you (i) do not modify such information, and (ii) include any copyright notice originally included with such information and this notice in all such copies.

The information and data included in the Developer Forum '95 CD Set have been compiled by SG from a variety of sources, and are subject to change without notice from SG. SG makes no warranties or representations whatsoever regarding the quality, content, completeness, or adequacy of such information and data.

Proper Use

Our trademarks are adjectives (brand names) modifying nouns (the generic product type). Please follow these guidelines in using our trademarks: