Silicon Graphics, Inc. (SGI; Mountain View, CA) has launched the Vanguards of Visual Computing Program, a pan-industry forum of scientific and creative leaders dedicated to advancing their respective industries through visual-computing technology. Over the next few years, this group of visualization pioneers will explore how desktop visual computing maximizes human creativity and insight.

The Vanguard Program brings together individuals who have used visualization technology to advance their specific fields of research, science or art. The first group of Vanguards selected by SGI includes:

Marvin Minsky, professor, mathematician, artificial intelligence developer, founder of the MIT Media Lab

Tom Ray, evolutionary biologist, developer of the artificial life Tierra Project, fellow at the Santa Fe Complexity Institute

Tom Van Sant, artist, educator, founder of Eyes on Earth and the GeoSphere project

Rob Legato, filmmaker, special effects artist, Academy Award winner for Titanic special effects

Kai Krauss, artist, developer of Kai's Power Tools, founder of MetaCreations

Katrin Eismann, photoimager/artist/author of Web Design Studio Secrets and PhotoShop Studio Secrets, 2nd edition

Dirck Halstead, photographer, photojournalist, digital artist, Washington correspondent for Time Magazine

William Jepsen, director of computing, UCLA Urban Studies Program, developer of the Urban LA project

Pedro Meyer, photographer, photojournalist, digital artist, author of One Photograph to Remember and Truths and Fictions

Silicon Graphics expects to add more than a dozen new Vanguards to the program in 1999. During their tenure, the Vanguards will explore the impact that visual computing systems will have on each of their respective industries.

"The Vanguards represent some of the best minds of the current computer revolution," says Rick Belluzzo, chairman and CEO, Silicon Graphics. "These visual computing leaders are the users of the technologies we develop and they inspire future applications and new technologies. Working with these visionaries, we look forward to opening new horizons in visualization."

The Vanguards Program, part of an overall initiative to bring visual computing to the mainstream, is a continuation of the momentum Silicon Graphics began nearly 20 years ago. "Silicon Graphics has always been about visual computing," says Tom Furlong, senior VP and general manager, Workstation Division, Silicon Graphics. "With the Vanguards Program, we are creating a forum to study the impact these systems will have on industry, science, and the arts."

Visual computing is vital to many diverse industries including science, engineering, government, education, architecture and entertainment. Graphics design and processing, along with the generation and testing of 3-D models, enable mission-critical applications in each of these fields.

Organizations that leverage this technology increase creativity and productivity, compete more effectively and realize greater profits. Once relegated to university laboratories and R&D centers, the advent of faster and less expensive computers has made visual computing power much more accessible.

For more information, call 650-960-1980.