Silicon Graphics

(NYSE: SGI ) today announced that NASA has chosen SGI(R) Altix(R) as the

foundation of Project Columbia, an extensive collaboration with SGI and Intel

Corporation that is expected to fuel scientific breakthroughs in space

exploration, global warming research, and aerospace engineering. With Project

Columbia, NASA plans to integrate a total of twenty 512-processor SGI(R)

Altix(R) systems with a 500-terabyte SGI(R) InfiniteStorage solution to create

the Space Exploration Simulator, which will be among the world’s largest

Linux(R) OS-based supercomputers. Powered by a total of 10,240 Intel(R)

Itanium(R) 2 processors, the Space Exploration Simulator will equip NASA

scientists with one of the most sophisticated and capable supercomputers in

history.

“For over 20 years NASA and SGI have worked very closely and very

successfully to deliver a series of technological firsts,” said G. Scott

Hubbard, NASA Ames Director. “Project Columbia will build on the knowledge we

gained from this close relationship to underpin the most ambitious missions in

NASA’s history. As we set our sights to the Vision for Space Exploration, we

look forward to making the journey with SGI and Intel.”

“Now more than ever, NASA’s efforts are crucial to understanding our place

in the universe and our destiny on this planet,” said Bob Bishop, chairman and

CEO of SGI. “We are truly honored to have Altix chosen as the compute platform

for NASA’s next big step forward.”

“The exploration of the universe remains one of man’s greatest

challenges,” said Intel Chief Executive Officer Craig Barrett. “The ‘Project

Columbia’ supercomputer designed by NASA, SGI and Intel will enable the

world’s brightest designers and scientists to look a little deeper and reach a

little farther in their understanding of, and achievements in, space.”

By boosting its computing capacity ten-fold through Project Columbia, the

NASA Advanced Supercomputing Facility (NAS) will be able to more effectively

handle such critical projects as simulating future space missions, projecting

the impact of human activity on weather patterns, and designing safe and

efficient space exploration vehicles and aircraft. The present collaboration

builds upon the highly successful 8-year partnership that last year developed

the world’s first 512-processor Linux server — based on standard, “off-the-

shelf” microprocessor and open source technology — the SGI Altix at NASA Ames

Research Center named ‘Kalpana’ after Columbia astronaut and Ames alumna

Kalpana Chawla.

Housed at Ames Research Center in the heart of California’s Silicon

Valley, the Space Exploration Simulator will rely heavily on the open

standards-based Altix system’s unique globally addressable memory

architecture, which allows complex data sets to be driven entirely out of

memory, enabling productivity breakthroughs that conventional commodity

clusters or proprietary UNIX(R) servers can’t achieve.

“As NASA pushes the boundaries of space exploration through the solar

system and beyond, simulation will play a role of increasing importance,” said

Addison Snell, research director, High-Performance Computing, IDC. “NASA

scientists using the computer system from SGI with Intel processors will

expand our understanding of the complexities of manned and unmanned space

exploration. The installation of the Space Exploration Simulator is a

significant achievement for NASA, SGI, and Intel, and beyond that, it is a

major step forward for the United States.”

SGI has already delivered the first three of the new Altix systems to NASA

Ames, with the entire 10,240 Itanium 2 processor-based supercomputing array to

be completed over the next several months. In response to a May task force

recommendation by Office of Science and Technology Policy, NASA will make a

portion of the Space Exploration Simulator broadly available to ensure that

the entire U.S. science and engineering community has access to the nation’s

most advanced supercomputer architectures.

The Altix architecture also will provide easy installation and

administration of the Space Exploration Simulator. “Aside from introducing new

supercomputing capabilities and performance levels,” added John Parks, Deputy

Chief of the NASA Advanced Supercomputing (NAS) Division, “we expect the

Space Exploration Simulator to initiate a new era in high-performance

computing — one in which operating a 10,000 processor-supercomputer may be as

straightforward as managing twenty workstations.”

The SGI Altix family leverages the built-in SGI(R) NUMAlink(TM)

interconnect fabric, which allows global addressing of all memory in the

system and delivers data across nodes up to 200 times faster than conventional

interconnects. Altix systems feature a fully supported, LBS (Linux Standard

Based) 64-bit Linux operating system and advanced development environment

specifically optimized for technical applications. SGI Altix has consistently

set records for sheer performance — including breaking the 1 terabyte/second

barrier on the STREAMS Triad benchmark, an industry standard measurement of

memory bandwidth — and for its ability to efficiently run manufacturing,

engineering and scientific applications across hundreds of processors in a

Linux operating environment.

NASA and SGI are also working to expand the Altix system architecture to

support globally addressable memory across 2,048 processors in a single

system. Such an effort will enable NASA to push the envelope of scientific

discovery because a supercomputer with a single pool of shared memory will run

many scientific applications significantly faster than a cluster of small

systems whose memory is fragmented and distributed across an interconnect

fabric.

Users accessing the new system will need to share current and historic

data, and are expected to generate new data at a rate of multiple terabytes

per day. In order to keep the system’s massive compute capacity efficiently

utilized, it will draw data from a 500 Terabyte SGI InfiniteStorage storage

area network (SAN) and leverage a further 800 terabytes of existing data

managed by SGI’s InfiniteStorage data lifecycle management solution — Data

Migration Facility (DMF). To get the best possible performance and utilization

out of the SAN, SGI InfiniteStorage shared filesystem, CXFS(TM) will provide

all applications on the SAN instant access to all data without the cost,

complexity and wait time of traditional data sharing methods. To store data

that needs to be retained over longer periods of time, the disk-based SAN will

be augmented with the DMF-based data lifecycle management environment which

delivers faster performance than archive alternatives, but which costs

significantly less than disk.

In addition to Intel Itanium 2 processors, the Project Columbia systems

features storage technology from Brocade Communications and Engenio

Information Technologies, Inc., memory technology from Dataram Corporation and

Micron Technology, Inc. and interconnect technology from Voltaire.

Availability

SGI(R) Altix(R) 3000 systems are available today in shared memory

configurations of 4 to 1,024 Itanium 2 processors, with many deployed systems

of 256 and 512 processors. SGI InfiniteStorage solutions enables customers to

address their data-intensive enterprise needs while providing scalable

capacity, management and performance in a cost-effective architecture.

This news release contains forward-looking statements regarding SGI

technologies and third-party technologies that are subject to risks and

uncertainties. These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to

differ materially from those described in such statements. The viewer is

cautioned not to rely unduly on these forward-looking statements, which are

not a guarantee of future or current performance. Such risks and uncertainties

include long-term program commitments, the performance of third parties, the

sustained performance of current and future products, financing risks, the

ability to integrate and support a complex technology solution involving

multiple providers and users, the possibility that the order will be modified

or cancelled by the customer, the possibility that the timing of the

deliveries may be affected by component availability and other risks detailed

from time to time in the company’s most recent SEC reports, including its

reports on From 10-K and Form 10-Q.

SILICON GRAPHICS | The Source of Innovation and Discovery(TM)

SGI, also known as Silicon Graphics, Inc., is the world’s leader in high-

performance computing, visualization and storage. SGI’s vision is to provide

technology that enables the most significant scientific and creative

breakthroughs of the 21st century. Whether it’s sharing images to aid in brain

surgery, finding oil more efficiently, studying global climate or enabling the

transition from analog to digital broadcasting, SGI is dedicated to addressing

the next class of challenges for scientific, engineering and creative users.

With offices worldwide, the company is headquartered in Mountain View, Calif.,

and can be found on the Web at http://www.sgi.com .

NOTE: Silicon Graphics, SGI, Altix, XFS, the SGI logo and the SGI cube are

registered trademarks and NUMAlink, CXFS and The Source of Innovation and

Discovery

are trademarks of Silicon Graphics, Inc., in the United States and/or other

countries worldwide. Intel and Itanium are registered trademarks of Intel

Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. UNIX

is a

registered trademark of The Open Group in the U.S. and other countries. Linux is

a

registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in several countries. All other

trademarks

mentioned herein are the property of their respective owners.

MEDIA CONTACT

Ginny Babbitt ginnyb@sgi.com 650-933-4519

SGI PR HOTLINE

650-933-7777

SGI PR FACSIMILE

650-933-0283