One of his first tasks was to revise the Union’s Lisbon Strategy to boost competitiveness and innovation.

One of the key players in Barroso’s team in the drive for improving competitiveness was German Commission vice-president Günter Verheugen. Verheugen had made a bold switch from his familiar ground of foreign policy where he had been a success as enlargement commissioner after being Germany’s minister for European affairs. He took on a new challenge at the suggestion of his then party chief, the German chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Schröder wanted his compatriot to become a super-commissioner with powers across a wide range of economic policy areas but met resistance in Brussels from those who feared that such a figure would spend his time preventing the Commission getting tough with Berlin and interfering with effective policymaking in fields like internal market and competition.

Verheugen’s initial performance was impressive. Despite not having the title of super-commissioner, his political skills and authority allowed him to outfox commissioners with competing agendas, notably Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas and Employment and Social Affairs Commissioner Vladimír Špidla, where their proposals risked adding to EU businesses’ burden. Dimas was forced to rethink a raft of thematic strategies including pesticides and soil.

Verheugen also led the Commission’s position on the REACH regulation on chemicals safety with its huge consequences for the competitiveness of the EU’s chemicals industry. The German vice-president also took charge of the better regulation initiative, a project which had the support of member states, but had lacked the necessary political impetus within the Commission.

Although this agenda failed to satisfy those who thought that every Commission president should rival Jacques Delors for ambitious schemes to advance European integration, Barroso and his team were set to focus on the unglamorous but useful task of reducing unnecessary administrative burdens for businesses. But since then Barroso’s focus has seemed to shift. Frustrated by being politically hamstrung while the referendum campaign was ongoing in France, Barroso found new confidence during the UK Presidency, working closely with Blair on ideas to end the budget deadlock and identify new policy priorities which were taken up at the Hampton Court summit including energy and immigration. He was also convinced by the concept of focusing on delivering on key policies like internal market and ensuring competitiveness on the energy market as a way of building support for a new round of institutional reforms. Obstacles to progress in key areas such energy and justice and home affairs would serve to strengthen the case for further treaty changes to make getting deals easier.

This approach evolved into the citizens’ agenda for Europe with a focus on delivery instead of institutional navel-gazing and pledges of tough action to break up energy giants’ dominance of the market and a new drive to complete the single market.

Barroso lapped up the backing he won for his approach from EU leaders at the two summits in March and June this year as proof that his course was the right one. But in the last few weeks tackling climate change has emerged, as Barroso put it in a recent speech, “at the top of the European Union’s list of priorities”. His aides say that this was no sudden adjustment to the way the political wind was blowing, given the importance afforded the issue by the leaders of the UK, Germany, France and the Netherlands. Barroso had been convinced of the economic arguments set out by Nicholas Stern, former World Bank chief economist, some time before the final report was published.

But it is hard to dispel the feeling that Barroso has had a few too many “top priorities” since coming to office and that he has moved from focusing on competitiveness to pursing a populist agenda such as cutting roaming charges. He used Blair’s U-turn on the need for a common energy policy to make that the centrepiece of his term of office but that was replaced when the majority political view about the threats from climate change shifted towards those favouring urgent and effective action to prevent the problem getting out of hand. Stern makes a very powerful economic case for the need to act and, in so doing, undermines the argument that the costs of making changes to our levels of energy consumption and efficiency are too great. That was, after all, his brief. But where does this concern about climate change leave the competitiveness agenda?

This ebbing and flowing in political priorities is also reflected in the political confidence of members of his team. Where once Dimas was conspicuous for his low profile, he is now coming out and calling for hard law to force carmakers to produce less polluting vehicles – a direct assault on the better regulation agenda with its focus on careful impact assessments and Verheugen’s carefully crafted consultation body for the car industry CARS21. Maybe Dimas feels emboldened to take advantage of Verheugen’s weakened position in the wake of his attacks on obstructive and arrogant senior officials who were blocking attempts to cut red tape. In any case, it begs questions about Barroso’s much-vaunted “presidential” control of the Commission team.