7/20/2023 11:45:00 AM

MIAMI GARDENS, Fla. (July 20, 2023) – St. Thomas University (STU) Director of Athletics, Billy Rychel, would like to announce the hiring of Joey Scott as the new Head Track and Field Coach for both the men's and women's program. Scott becomes the third coach in program history.

"Joey Scott is a big name in the sport of track and field, especially in South Florida", stated AD Rychel. "We are excited to see the growth in the program as he moves into the head coaching role. Our student athletes will be coached by the best, enhancing their student-athlete experience at St. Thomas."

Scott has been on the staff since the beginning of the program, helping coach the hurdlers and sprinters. Scott has an extensive coaching career having been on coaching staffs for numerous countries represented at the last four Olympics. Having coached the British Virgin Islands at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, then coaching with the Cayman Islands for the 2012 London Olympics and the 2016 Rio Olympics, and most recently coaching with Haiti for the 2022 Tokyo Olympics.

"I am very excited to be named the Head Track and Field Coach at St. Thomas University. I believe with hard work and dedication this program will be unstoppable", said Scott. "I would like to extend a huge thanks to President Armstrong and Athletic Director Bill Rychel for trusting me with the future of this team. I am also blessed to be coaching alongside our Head Cross Country Coach, Ryan Meizoso, as well as assistant sprint coach Greg Barns."

Scott has also coached at a combined 16 indoor and outdoor World Championships, three Commonwealth Games, three Central American and Caribbean (CAC) Championships, two North American, Central American and Caribbean (NACAC) Championships and two Pan American Games.

On the individual side, Scott has produced Olympic and World Championship qualifiers such as:

British Virgin Island 2008 indoor 60-meter bronze medalist and three-time Olympian Tahesia Harrigan-Scott

Nigeria National record holder and World Junior Champion in the 110-hurdles, 2016 Olympian Antwon Hicks

Cayman Islands National record holder in the 110-hurdles and three-time Olympian, Ronald Forbes

two-time Olympian and semi-finalist, Jeff Julmis

Liberia National record holder in the 100-hurdles and 2022 Tokyo Olympian, Ebony Morrison

Liberia National record holder in 110-hurdles Olympian Wellington Zaza

Just a few among a long list

Scott is not just limited to the sport of track and field. He is also considered one of the best Strength and Conditioning/Speed coaches for several NFL, NBA, and MLB players from all over the country. Scott is currently the Strength and Conditioning coach for former WBC Heavyweight Champions of the World, Deontay "Bronze Bomber" Wilder. Under Scott's tutelage, Wilder went on to become the longest reigning heavyweight champion in the history of boxing. Defending his title with a remarkable number of 10 times equaling Muhammad Ali for the most title defenses in the heavyweight division.

Scott is the founder of Olympic Developmental group, TRU FIT Athletics. He has hosted speed and technical camps not only nationally but internationally as well. Scott created a grass root program for inner city youth by teaching the fundamentals to those who need positive direction in sports. TRU FIT Athletics helped 138 youth athletes obtain full scholarships to major D1 Colleges.

As a collegiate athlete, Scott attended Barton County Community College and the attended the University of Oklahoma following graduation. Scott contributed in helping Barton County win its first National Championship titles, winning two indoor titles and two outdoor titles. While competing at Oklahoma, Scott was named team captain and earned All-American honors in both the 110 and 400 hurdles as well as in the 4x400 relay. Scott placed third in the 60-meter hurdles at the Big 12 Indoor Championships and had three top-four finishes in the Big 12 Outdoor Championships.

On the professional scene, Scott was invited to compete in numerous European competitions. He qualified for the 2003 and 2004 World and Olympic trials. Scott also ranked top 50 in the world in both the 110-meter hurdles and 400-meter hurdles. During Scotts, six years on the international circuit, he was privileged to be represented by Mercedes Benz and Adidas.

Scott is a Fort Worth, Texas native and graduated Barton County in 1999 with an associate degree in child development and sport administration. At Oklahoma, Scott graduated in 2001 with a bachelor's degree in communications and criminal justice.

-STU-