WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) — New All Blacks head coach Scott Robertson has chosen Scott Barrett as his first captain, to lead a 32-man squad he named Monday in tests against England and Fiji.

The All Blacks will play England at Dunedin on July 6 and Auckland on July 13 and Fiji at San Diego on July 20.

After the departure on incumbent Sam Cane for Japan, the choice of captain was between Barrett who led the Crusaders Super Rugby team which Robertson coached and World Rugby Player of the Year Ardie Savea.

Robertson preferred Barrett, although the 30-year-old lock has the worst disciplinary record of any All Black. He is the only All Black to be sent off twice in test matches.

“I have a long-standing relationship with Scott,” Robertson said. “He’s tactically astute, he leads from the front and he’s got the respect of the players and the coaches. He’ll be a great leader in the black jersey.”

Savea has been named a vice-captain along with Jordie Barrett and Beauden, the third Barrett brother, who also is a member of the squad.

Robertson has named five new caps: prop Pasilio Tosi, hooker George Bell, backrower Wallace Sititi, scrumhalf Cortez Ratima and center Billy Proctor.

Of those, Tosi is probably the major surprise in the squad. He started the Super Rugby season with the Hurricanes as an understudy to All Blacks tighthead Tyrel Lomax and became a starter when Lomax was injured.

Robertson joked All Blacks forward coach James Ryan had “fallen in love pretty quickly” with Tosi for his scrummaging and ball-carrying abilities.

“He’s just an incredible athlete,” Robertson said. “He took his opportunity when Tyrel was out. He took that opportunity week in and week out.

“He can start, he can come off the bench and he’s a big man and that’s what football’s about. He’s a great kid and he’s going to do a great job in the black jersey.”

There were two particularly difficult areas for Robertson and his fellow selectors: lock for the scarcity of candidates and loose forward for the large range of potential All Blacks.

Robertson has chosen only three locks, Scott Barrett, incumbent Tupou Vaa’i and Patrick Tuipulotu who led the Blues to the Super Rugby title last weekend while struggling with a knee injury.

“If he can play with a knee like that and with the other ankle strapped and carry on, he’s mentally tough,” Robertson said. “We named him in the squad after a great performance.”

Uncapped Blues lock Sam Darry has been named as locking cover.

Robertson has recalled Chiefs captain Luke Jacobson and named uncapped Chiefs backrower Wallace Sititi among six backrowers. He has left out Hurricanes Peter Lakai and Brayden Iose who were pushing hard for selection.

“It was the position that we spent the longest time on,” Robertson said. “My big thing for loose forwards is for them to be great on both sides of the ball, mentally tough and physically tough and that’s why we’ve selected the players we have.”

___

New Zealand squad: Props: Ethan de Groot, Tyrel Lomax, Fletcher Newell, Ofa Tu’ungafasi, Pasilio Tosi, Tamaiti Williams. Hookers: Asafo Aumua, George Bell, Codie Taylor. Locks: Scott Barrett, Patrick Tuipulotu, Tupou Vaa’i. Loose forwards: Ethan Blackadder, Samipeni Finau, Luke Jacobson, Dalton Papali’i, Ardie Savea, Wallace Sititi. Scrumhalf: Finlay Christie, T.J. Perenara, Cortez Ratima. Flyhalf: Beauden Barrett, Damian McKenzie. Midfielders: Jordie Barrett, Rieko Ioane, Anton Lienert-Brown, Billy Proctor. Outside backs: Caleb Clarke, Emoni Narawa, Stephen Perofeta, Sevu Reece, Mark Tele’a.

___