Gerald John Maxwell, 86, passed away on Aug. 4, 2018 after a two-week battle with an infection in his foot. He spent the last two days of his life at the Providence Hospice Care Center. The family gives everyone their greatest gratitude at the hospice center.

Gerald was born in Fort Frances, Ontario, Canada to Harold and Lydia Maxwell. Jerry (as he went by) met his wife Arvella at a roller rink in 1950. They were married on May 5, 1953 and were together 64 years.

Jerry joined the Air Force shortly after high school and was stationed on Okinawa Island, Japan. He was a maintenance mechanic while in the service and was always at the top of his training classes. After discharge Jerry discovered he lost his tolerance for cold weather working as a switchman for the railroad in International Falls, Minn. The family soon moved out west and settled on Whidbey Island. He worked construction and for the Boeing Company, retiring from Boeing in 1994.

He was a member of St. Hubert Catholic Church and an active fourth degree member of the Knights of Columbus. Jerry loved to tend his garden and fruit trees as well as work in his home woodshop. He was an avid outdoorsman and loved to hunt and fish. From shooting partridge with his grandfather in Minnesota to fishing salmon and halibut with friends and family in the sound.

Jerry is survived by his daughter, Renee’ Bilyeu and husband Russ; grandchildren, Rebecca Bilyeu, Brandon Bilyeu and wife Kim Mahi, Bradley Bilyeu and wife Crystal; and great grandson, Axel Bilyeu. He was preceded in death by his wife, Arvella, and son, John A. Maxwell.

A funeral mass will be held at 10:30 a.m. on Saturday, Sept. 22, at St. Hubert Catholic Church in Langley, with Rev. Richard Spicer as celebrant. All are welcome to the funeral mass as well as the reception in the church hall immediately following. Rite of Committal at Bayview Cemetery will follow the reception.

The family suggests memorials in Gerald’s name be made to Providence Hospice Care Center – Colby Campus, 1321 Colby Ave., A wing, 8th Floor Everett, WA 98201 or Enso House, 6339 Wahl Road, Freeland, WA 98249.

Funeral arrangements were entrusted to Wallin Funeral Home.