When Gerald Maxwell was a little boy, he wanted to be a bus driver.

The Gadsden native's dreams became much bigger as a teenager working at the Reich Hotel.

It was there he listened to some of the patrons' conversations and decided he wanted to be a lawyer.

It was perhaps the influence of his grandmother that gave him the strength to accomplish his goals.

“We walked around like little soldiers,” Maxwell said, recalling the days of his youth in public housing at Colley Homes. “She was very strong, with an emphasis on discipline.”

Maxwell was in the last graduating class from Carver High School in 1971.

He went to the local junior college, then to Tennessee State University in Nashville, where he obtained a bachelor of science degree. He worked for his master's degree at the University of Pittsburgh, where Henry Kissinger was one of his professors.

Maxwell worked for the state of Tennessee for several years as the supervisor of the retirement fund while also serving in the Army Reserve for 32 years.

One of his biggest accomplishments in the reserve was completion of the Sergeants Major Academy in El Paso, Texas.

“You can't go to a school higher than that,” he said.

Maxwell later worked at Miles College in Birmingham as a controller and earned his law degree while he worked there.

His Army Reserve unit was activated in 2003.

It was after he returned from deployment that he came back to Gadsden.

“I always wanted to come back here,” Maxwell said.

He looked for an office and a place to live. A friend recommended a house on Tuscaloosa Avenue, where he lives and has his law office.

Maxwell also owns Celebration Station, a bar and grill next to his office and home.

He loves to cook, but his friend, Patrick Turner, is the cook at the grill. The specialty is ribs.

Maxwell also rents out the location for community meetings and events.

His cousin did a lot of the exterior and interior stucco work on his businesses.

“It has done a lot to help the looks of the neighborhood,” he said.

The city of Gadsden completed a neighborhood improvement project in that area, planting crepe myrtles and making other improvements.

It's not the buildings or the businesses, though, that make Maxwell the happiest.

“I love people,” he said. “I am a ‘people' kind of person, and I love to mentor kids when I get a chance.”

Maxwell sees through his law practice some of the mistakes kids are making and wants to make a difference in their lives.

“Some youngsters don't want to go to school. Some don't want to work,” he said. “It starts with family.”

Maxwell grew up as a member at Friendship Missionary Baptist Church and went back there when he returned to Gadsden.

He usually asks the people he encounters where they go to church.

“It has influenced me,” he said. “Without a spiritual life, nothing else can work. You have to have an appreciation of what God can do for you.”

Since returning to Gadsden, Maxwell has worked to make a difference in his community.

He serves on the Planning Commission, which handles zoning changes; serves as the co-chairman of the Central Carver Reunion Commission; and is the legal counsel for the local chapter of the NAACP.

He also is involved in the first Saturday Neighbor Day event.

Maxwell believes in giving back to his community by doing activities to promote the good in his community.

“I try to keep life simple,” he said. “I'm just a little country boy from Gadsden, Alabama.”