Advanced features include the Australian-invented Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS). LandCruiser 200 also has the world's first Crawl Control (on petrol models), multi-terrain anti-skid brakes and up to 10 airbags. Toyota Australia's senior executive director sales and marketing, David Buttner, said LandCruiser had evolved over almost 50 years from a basic four-wheel drive utility vehicle into an upmarket SUV. "Everything Toyota has learnt in half a century of building four-wheel drives has gone into the design, development and manufacturing of the new Land-Cruiser 200," Mr Buttner said. "It has retained the capability of the original LandCruiser, and added the comfort and convenience of a luxury sedan. "New LandCruiser is more than a step forward; it's a giant leap ahead in technology, performance, specification and value."

LandCruiser 200 is available in three grades - GXL, VX and Sahara - with two engine choices, both of them V8s.

The new 4.5-litre twin-turbo, multi-valve direct-injection V8 diesel lifts power to 195kW and produces a massive 650Nm of torque. This is 30 percent extra power and more than 50 percent additional torque than the previous six-cylinder turbo-diesel engine. Fuel consumption has been improved by 6.3 per cent and is just 10.3 litres/100km based on the official ADR 81/01 combined cycle. For the Euro IV-compliant petrol V8 engine, now with variable valve timing (inlet), power is up 18 percent while fuel use is down almost 10 percent. The updated petrol V8 is matched to a five-speed automatic transmission while the diesel engine is mated to a new six-speed automatic transmission. Both have sequential shift that allows the driver to select gears manually. The transmissions have artificial intelligence control, which allows their computers to select the appropriate gear ratio by estimating road conditions and predicting the driver's intention.

New LandCruiser 200 will tow up to 3500kg and the towbar is now integrated into the chassis for maximum strength. Engineers developed an all new chassis structure that offers superior strength and rigidity by maintaining a separate frame and body. Torsional strength has been increased by 40 percent and bending strength by 20 percent. New LandCruiser 200 incorporates styling changes that add to its adventurous, rugged image. It is 60mm longer and 30mm wider, contributing to greater interior space without sacrificing off-road maneuverability. LandCruiser's coefficient of drag has been significantly improved from 0.39 in 100 Series to 0.35 in new 200 Series. The interior is all about space, comfort, security and safety for the driver and up to seven passengers. With the adoption of shorter format V8 engines, the bonnet length has been reduced for improved visibility. The front pillars have been pushed forward to increase interior length by 130mm. The front seats adjust over 240mm longitudinally and the second row also adjusts 105mm, which means more legroom in the third row.

For security against theft, all models have an engine immobiliser. Land-Cruiser VX and Sahara also have an alarm. A newly developed transfer case employs a Torsen limited-slip centre differential with a dial actuated locking function. LandCruiser engineers designed all new suspension hardware for dramatically increased wheel articulation. KDSS enables new LandCruiser 200 to enjoy two previously contradictory benefits - longer wheel articulation for the most challenging off-road driving and the roll control needed for confident on-road driving. KDSS is optional on GXL turbo-diesel and standard on the other five models.

LandCruiser's chassis now employs high mount double-wishbone suspension at the front with a hollow stabiliser bar and coil springs, replacing the torsion-bar set-up of the previous model. At the rear, the reliable and trusted four-link with lateral rod, coil-spring system is further refined, delivering a longer suspension stroke for improved performance and better handling, ride comfort and stability. The Crawl Control system on petrol models aids driving in extreme off-road situations, such as over rocks, sand or steep hills. It automatically controls the engine and brakes to maintain very low speeds - in forward or reverse - with minimal spinning or locking of the wheels. Multi-terrain ABS reads the available road grip to provide the correct brake strategy on dirt, gravel, sand and bitumen. All models have Hill-Start Assist Control, which minimises vehicle roll-back when starting on steep hills or climbing slippery surfaces. Turbo-diesel models also feature Downhill Assist Control, which controls speed on steep descents. New LandCruiser features Vehicle Stability Control and active Traction Control across the range and up to 10 airbags - the most in any Toyota vehicle.

Recommended retail prices for the LandCruiser 200 range start at $69,990.

Model range

The new LandCruiser 200 range has six models, with the choice of two engines and three model grades. The two engines are 4.7-litre petrol V8 equipped with VVT-i and 4.5-litre twin-turbo direct-injection diesel. The petrol engine is matched to a five-speed automatic transmission and the diesel engine to a six-speed automatic transmission. The model grades are GXL, VX and Sahara. All are highly specified. All LandCruiser 200 models have automatic transmission, full-time 4WD, 17-inch alloy wheels including spare wheel, factory climate-controlled air conditioning with pollen filter, dual front SRS airbags, front side airbags, full-length three-row side curtain-shield airbags, second-row seat outboard seatbelt pretensioners, multi-terrain ABS (with EBD and Brake Assist), Vehicle Stability Control, Active Traction Control, Hill-start Assist Control, Smart Entry and Smart Start, second-row seatbelt anchorage height adjusters, third-row seatbelt automatic locking retractors, key reminder warning, in-glass radio antenna and rear spoiler.

In addition, LandCruiser 200 GXL has Crawl Control (petrol model only), Downhill Assist Control (diesel model only), a sub fuel tank, power windows, a six-speaker audio system and dual-zone front air conditioning. GXL petrol has KDSS suspension, while GXL diesel has the option of KDSS suspension. VX grade has the additional features over GXL grade of driver and front passenger knee airbags, second-row seat side airbags, privacy glass, front fog lamps, matt metallic-look side steps, remote power windows and moonroof, door courtesy lamps, small overhead console, multi-information display (trip computer), Optitron combination meter, leather seat trim, leather-bound steering wheel and gearshift lever, power-adjustable front seats, 40:20:40 split-fold second-row seat (in lieu of 60:40 split) with twin cupholders in the centre armrest, front seat-back pockets, rear map lamps, alarm system and woodgrain interior dashboard trim.

VX petrol has the additional features of a sub fuel tank and Crawl Control, while VX diesel has the additional feature of Downhill Assist Control. VX has KDSS suspension on petrol and diesel. Top-of-the-range Sahara has the additional features over VX grade of Back Guide Monitor (reversing camera), satellite DVD navigation with six CD/DVD/MP3 changer and nine-speaker audio, four-zone climate-controlled air conditioning, cool box, electric tilt and telescopic steering column, electric folding exterior mirrors, headlamp cleaning system, wood and leather gear shift lever and steering wheel which also has audio controls and electro-chromatic interior mirror. Sahara has KDSS suspension on petrol and diesel. The Sahara petrol model also has a sub fuel tank and Crawl Control, while Sahara diesel has Downhill Assist Control. The Standard Van model has been discontinued, replaced by LandCruiser 70 Workmate Wagon and new Prado Standard grade.

More technology and features

Toyota Australia has added substantially more technology, features and value to new LandCruiser 200. The biggest seller in the range will be the 195kW, 650Nm twin turbo-diesel GXL, with a new six-speed automatic transmission and fuel use of just 10.3 litres/100km. Compared with the outgoing model it gains $6,390 of specification, yet the price has risen less than $4,550 from the previous model to $79,990 RRP. In addition to the new powertrain, turbo-diesel GXL gains the technology of a Torsen® centre differential, Hill-start Assist Control, Downhill Assist Control, Smart Entry and Smart Start. Safety improvements include Vehicle Stability Control, Traction Control, Multi-Terrain ABS and front side and three-row curtain airbags. Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS) is a $2,500 RRP option on turbo-diesel GXL and standard on all other grades. VX adds more features, more safety and more comfort than the GXL grade, including KDSS, leather seats plus knee and rear side airbags. VX turbo-diesel will retail for $10,000 more than GXL at $89,990 RRP.

Sahara is the ultimate four-wheel drive experience with extra equipment including satellite navigation, four-zone climate-control air conditioning, steering wheel controls, reverse camera and a cool box. The price for Sahara turbo-diesel is $104,990 RRP. The maximum price difference from petrol to turbo-diesel in LandCruiser 100 Series used to be almost $13,000. Now with LandCruiser 200 Series it is $10,000. All petrol models have Crawl Control instead of Downhill Assist Control. Petrol models have the improved VVT-i engine mated to a five-speed auto transmission, and KDSS as standard equipment. Other specification upgrades in the petrol range moving from GXL to VX and Sahara are virtually identical to the turbo-diesel range. LandCruiser 200 Series owners will benefit from a fixed-price service plan offering Toyota Genuine services at a competitive price.

Toyota Service Advantage for Land-Cruiser 200 covers up to six standard scheduled services during the warranty period. Each of these services costs $180 during the first three years or 60,000km, whichever comes first.

The total cost of $1,080 in the first three years represents significant value and peace of mind compared with using independent service centres.

LandCruiser 200 prices (all RRP)

Petrol Turbo-diesel

GXL $69,990 $79,990

VX $79,990 $89,990

Sahara $94,990 $104,990

Two new V8 engines

Toyota LandCruiser 200 has two new V8 engines for go-anywhere performance. The two engines are a 4.5-litre twin-turbo high-pressure direct-injection (common-rail) diesel with 650Nm of torque and a 4.7-litre quad-cam multi-valve petrol with intelligent variable inlet valve timing. Both are matched to automatic transmissions only, with artificial intelligence shift control and a sequential shift feature. LandCruiser's new 4461cc twin-turbo V8 diesel engine has 220Nm more torque and 45kW more power than the 4.2-litre inline turbocharged direct-injection straight six it replaces. The new 1VD-FTV engine delivers 195kW of power at 3400rpm and 650Nm of torque from 1600 to 2600rpm. It is matched to a new six-speed automatic transmission. The 4664cc petrol engine has the additional new features of Toyota's Acoustic Control Induction System (ACIS) for improved performance across the revolution range and air injection to reduce emissions. The re-engineered Toyota 2UZ-FE engine delivers 32kW more power than the engine it supersedes. It has 202kW of power at 5400rpm and 410Nm of torque at 3400rpm, and is matched to a five-speed transmission.

VVT-i for petrol engine

LandCruiser's quad-cam V8 petrol engine has a range of new features to improve power and fuel economy and reduce emissions. The 4.7-litre 2UZ-FE has the added features of intelligent variable inlet valve timing (VVT-i), Acoustic Control Induction System (ACIS) and air injection. Toyota developed VVT-i to optimise driveability and fuel efficiency. It is now standard equipment on all Toyota motor vehicles with petrol engines sold in Australia. VVT-i gives the LandCruiser 2UZ-FE engine a combination of driveability, performance, fuel efficiency and low emissions. It provides continual variations of the intake and overlap to provide optimum valve engine characteristics for the full range of driving conditions. Inlet camshaft timing is varied according to engine revolutions, throttle position, inlet camshaft angle, engine coolant temperature and intake air volume. LandCruiser's VVT-i system can vary inlet valve timing (and hence valve overlap) over a range of 40 degrees, relative to crankshaft angle.

Maximum valve overlap (the period when both exhaust and inlet valves are open) for the 2UZ-FE engine is 28 degrees for maximum power, and minimum overlap is minus 12 degrees for optimum economy. Toyota's electronically controlled ACIS varies the effective length of the inlet runners to make maximum use of the inlet pulsation effect for increased breathing efficiency. Based on information on engine revolutions and throttle position, it creates a long manifold effect to boost torque in the low-to-medium engine speed range and a short manifold effect to boost power at high rpm. LandCruiser 200 Series' new twin-turbo V8 diesel engine was designed for performance, economy, low emissions and durability. It has the highest torque of any Toyota badged motor vehicle ever sold in Australia and is Toyota's first twin turbo diesel.

The twin turbo LandCruiser 200 engine is based on the single turbo LandCruiser 70 Series engine launched in Australia in March 2007. The turbocharged and intercooled Quad Cam 32-valve Toyota 1VD-FTV engine uses electronic high-pressure (common-rail) D-4D direct injection. The two turbochargers have variable nozzle vanes to ensure high engine output, low fuel consumption and low emissions. The two compact, lightweight, low inertia RHV4 turbochargers provide high response and high output. The 1VD-FTV engine also has an air-to-air intercooler and dual electronic throttle valves. The intercooler is mounted directly to the engine to save space under the bonnet. The cylinder block for the Land-Cruiser diesel is cast from nodular graphite iron for low weight and a compact size while resisting the high cylinder pressures of a turbocharged diesel design. The 4461cc engine has a 90-degree V angle, undersquare (long stroke) bore and stroke dimensions of 86.0 by 96.0mm to maximise torque and a compression ratio of 16.8:1.

New transmissions

LandCruiser 200's two new engines are matched to specific automatic transmissions, both with artificial intelligence and sequential shift. Both engine/transmission combinations combine the benefits of electronic throttle and electronic transmission control to optimise driveability, acceleration feel, shift quality and fuel economy. Both transmissions have gated shift levers. LandCruiser 200's V8 twin-turbo diesel is matched to the new Toyota six-speed AB60F transmission. It has ratios of: first, 3.333; second, 1.960; third, 1.353; fourth, 1.000; fifth, 0.728; sixth, 0.588 and reverse, 3.061; and is matched to a 3.909:1 final drive ratio. LandCruiser 200's new electric-motor activated full-time four-wheel drive transfer has ratios of 1.000 (high range) and 2.618 (low range).

Toyota engineers used triple planetary gears and state-of-the-art hydraulic technology to produce a lightweight, compact transmission with high torque capacity and smooth shift feel - coupled with high levels of driveability and fuel efficiency, and low noise. Refining the transmission electronics, hydraulic servo units and clutch control has ensured a high-quality shift feel. Special features of the new Toyota AB60F transmission include torque-converter lock-up on fifth and sixth gears for increased fuel economy and a flex lock-up system to expand the lock-up actuation range and further increase economy. The AB60F transmission also has a deceleration downshift control to maximise the continuation of fuel cut and increase economy. The five-speed Toyota A750F transmission in LandCruiser petrol models has the added features of flex lock-up and Toyota artificial intelligence (AI Shift). It has ratios of first, 3.520; second, 2.042; third, 1.400; fourth, 1.000; fifth, 0.716 and reverse, 3.224. It is matched to a 4.110:1 final drive ratio.

Chassis and electronic aids

The 200 Series has new suspension hardware and a range of advanced Driver Assist Technology (DAT) electronic driving aids to optimise on and off-road driving performance. It has all new double-wishbone, coil-spring front suspension with increased wheel articulation and improved rear suspension. In addition, LandCruiser has the breakthrough feature of the Australian-invented Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS) standard on all models except the GXL turbo-diesel, where it is available as an option. KDSS provides maximum wheel articulation off road and a comfortable 'flat' ride on road. LandCruiser 200's brake package is all new, with 340mm by 32mm ventilated front discs with four-piston fixed calipers and 345mm by 18mm ventilated rear discs with single-piston floating calipers. The brake control system features newly developed Toyota All Terrain ABS, which literally reads the road to establish the ideal brake slip ratio curve for the traction conditions. All Terrain ABS includes Electronic Brakeforce Distribution (EBD) and Brake Assist (BA). All six LandCruiser 200 models have as standard equipment the electronic DAT package of All Terrain ABS, Active Traction Control (A-TRC), Vehicle Stability Control (VSC) and Hill-start Assist Control (HAC). LandCruiser 200 petrol has the additional feature of Toyota's breakthrough Crawl Control. LandCruiser 200 diesel has the additional feature of Downhill Assist Control.

New suspension

LandCruiser 200 has all new front suspension for improved wheel articulation, handling, ride comfort and steering feel.

The new independent double wishbone front suspension has coil springs in place of torsion bar springs, to increase suspension stroke and stability, and reduce harshness. Wheel stroke has been increased by 15 percent for enhanced off-road performance. The suspension lower arm has been significantly reinforced. Toyota has also redesigned LandCruiser 200's coil spring rear suspension to improve handling, ride comfort and off-road performance. The long wheel stroke of the 100 Series' rear suspension has been maintained. LandCruiser's proven rear suspension layout is a solid rear axle, with four links and a lateral Panhard rod. The improved design includes repositioned control arms to improve handling performance. The repositioned control arms in conjunction with new suspension bushing characteristics improve ride comfort and handling stability. The rear axle has been completely redesigned with a bilaterally symmetrical structure to optimise reliability and increase rear track while reducing weight.

Kinetic Dynamic Suspension system

Toyota LandCruiser 200 is available with Kinetic Dynamic Suspension (KDSS) which gives new LandCruiser two previously contradictory benefits: long wheel articulation for challenging off-road driving and the high roll rigidity required for on-road roll control. It improves both off-road capability and on-road driving comfort and confidence. The system has the added benefits of improving active safety and environmental performance, as it requires no power source. KDSS comes as standard on all LandCruiser 200 models except GXL turbo-diesel. Toyota purchased the rights to use KDSS from Kinetic Suspension Technology in Western Australia and designed a system to suit LandCruiser. KDSS in new LandCruiser 200 acts by adjusting front and rear stabiliser resistance based on the movement of hydraulic cylinders installed on both the front and rear stabiliser bars and connected by a pair of hydraulic lines. A link mechanism is used to suppress the range of vertical movement of the stabiliser bars to ensure ground clearance. When vehicle roll occurs, the hydraulic pressure in the front and rear cylinders collide and the cylinders do not stroke. This causes the stabiliser bars to twist - as they do in conventional suspension - to suppress further roll.

The action of the stabiliser bars ensures excellent turning performance and smooth steering feel. However, when the wheels on one side of the vehicle are raised, the cylinders installed on the front and rear stroke in opposite directions. The effect is similar to loosening the stabiliser bars, allowing full suspension stroke. KDSS therefore provides flat ride comfort on road, good stability and improved ground contact for the tyres off-road. Crawl control is a first for Toyota LandCruiser 200 petrol models have a breakthrough control system for rugged off-road conditions. Toyota Crawl Control is a feet-off control system to take the vehicle over rugged rocky terrain, moguls, rubble, snow, mud, gravel and sand. It only operates in L4 (low-range) and at speeds below 10km/h. The system uses the vehicle's existing hardware, including electronic throttle, wheel speed sensors, G-sensor and ABS actuator. A speed-selector dial on the centre console provides the choice of three speeds.

The system automatically maintains a low uniform vehicle speed uphill and downhill by controlling both engine output and brake hydraulic pressure, allowing the driver to concentrate fully on steering the vehicle. It increases vehicle stability in extreme 4WD conditions by minimising wheel spin and tyre lock-up. The system has the added benefit of reducing potential damage to the vehicle, by smoothly controlling vehicle speed over rugged terrain. It reduces load on the drivetrain by smoothly controlling engine output and brake application. The system can only be engaged under these conditions: transfer gear position switch in L4; shift lever in any position except P or N; vehicle stopped; foot brake on; parking brake off; doors closed; VSC system in normal setting; second gear start system switched off; Crawl Control switch on.

A CRAWL indicator in the instrument panel/multi-information display lets the driver know the system has been activated and the SLIP indicator will blink. The system will deactivate if any one of the following conditions occurs: Crawl Control switch pushed; transfer shifted to H4 (high range); gear lever shifted to N or P; speed exceeds 10km/h; brake pedal pressed hard; parking brake activated; any door opened; VSC system detects abnormal conditions; transmission oil temperature increases to warning level; second-gear start switch is pushed. When the system is deactivated, a warning buzzer sounds and the CRAWL indicator will change from lit to blinking. Once Crawl Control is completely finished, the indicator light will turn off. On VX and Sahara, the multi-information display will message that Crawl Control has finished operation.