Over these last few weeks, there has been a lot of talk over how the use of Microsoft Excel contributed to the underreporting of 16,000 coronavirus cases in England. Was it a simple mistake or the wrong tool for the job?

Fact: over a million companies use Excel worldwide. Making it universally popular since its introduction in 1987 and now has over 200 million monthly users of Microsoft 365.

Great but, why do we use Excel?

The answer –it is most people’s go-to place to start working on data, to make sense of it, produce "meaningful" information and it is on your screen as part of your daily productivity tools. Also, Excel makes it easy for people to manipulate, document, organise and analyse data through using its many functions. But often this ease of access and usage are the biggest stumbling blocks in creating a methodical and structured approach.

Surely, Excel is the right tool to use?

Often when a business process is being carried out users struggle to find an easy way to GET, PROCESS and SEND on relevant data. They create models in Excel to automate aspects of their work that they do not believe can be done in their existing Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) or other existing technology solutions. Herein lies the problem…

Individuals have their own unique way of working in Excel, often learnt on the job or from their predecessor. Spreadsheets are passed amongst teams and through departments with little or no consistent methodology.

Time being of the essence in most cases, businesses have not thought about whether Excel is the right tool for a particular process.

So, what is the solution? Maybe it's time for the Stick or Carrot approach…

Stick Approach = Ban Excel!

Yes, ban the use of Excel within your organisation. Good Luck with this approach!

Although this may prove controversial with employees it would be the right thing to do for specific processes – essentially ones that are business critical and need to follow specific governance, risk and compliance metrics. However, from our experience there are often Excel models lurking in the ecosystem somewhere being used for a specific nuance or change in process.

Carrot Approach

The Carrot approach involves working Excel usage systematically, creating "method in the madness" and then replacing if appropriate. What do we mean by this?

1. SHOW AND TELL: ask the users of Excel to come forward with their best and often hidden models to showcase to the rest of the organisation as a learning exercise. During this exercise it's important that you can demonstrate a faster, more efficient way of running the same workload. If you can do this the organisation are more likely to be open with respect to all their other models!

2. Second, create a REGISTER of use cases or components that can easily be copied and reused in a repository.

3. Then OPTIMISE, CONSOLIDATE and MODULARISE the approach. By doing this you can create a bullet proof methodology - where new templates are required, teams refer to a repository to ensure there is no duplication.

Once the organisation knows they have a go to place to get the most bullet proof methodology for creating new Excel models you will see a reduction in one off Excel usage.

This approach allows the business to reduce their dependency on ad hoc Excel models and use the opportunity to identify other software/technologies that would be more appropriate. Always remembering that Excel has its own boundaries.

Finally, that conundrum when an employee leaves or moves into another role, there is no disruption to the business as central templates are being used under a consistent, modular, bullet proof methodology.

What do you think - is Excel Dead or is it evolving?