In October 1916, the French government agreed with Armenian political elites to establish a Légion of Armenian volunteers in British Cyprus to fight the common Ottoman enemy. Despite British, French, and even Armenian rejections of such a Légion during different times throughout 1915 and early 1916, all sides overcame earlier concerns. Understanding how they managed to overcome these concerns will allow for this little-known episode in the history of the Great War in the eastern Mediterranean to contribute to the knowledge on (1) the complex French and British wartime stances towards this region, driven by imperialism and humanitarianism; (2) the ability of local elites to draw concessions from the Allies; (3) the important role played by local British and French colonial and military officers; and (4) broader historiographical debates on the responses to the Armenian Genocide. This article explores the origins of how the Entente co-opted Armenians in their eastern Mediterranean campaigns, but also made them into pawns in the French and British reinvention of their imperial rivalry in this region in order to achieve their post-war imperialist agendas.

Scrutinizing and questioning contentious and failed policy decisions should result in discussing ‘ifs, buts, and maybes’, particularly when there are policy alternatives. This article scrutinizes and questions the British decision to reject Armenian proposals to form a legion of Armenian volunteers in 1914 and 1915, especially since in late 1916 the French, with British approval, established an Armenian legion (until 1919 called the Legion d'Orient); and because the first proposals for a legion were connected to British considerations, also overlooked, to land a force at Alexandretta. Nothing of substance has been published on the initial proposals to form an Armenian legion, and on its connection to the Armenian genocide and the proposed British landing at Alexandretta. By focusing on why the British rejected the proposal to form an Armenian legion and the implications, if any, for the Armenian genocide and the Allied discussions on where to attack the Ottoman empire during the first four months of 1915, this article offers important new insights into why the British and French failed to do anything to prevent the Armenian genocide, and got it wrong with their decision to land forces at Gallipoli in April 1915 instead of at Alexandretta. Imperialism lies at the heart of the explanation.

If a layman wants to educate himself/herself on the topic of “Turks helping or rescuing Armenians during the Genocide” and attempts a “Google Search” on the subject, the search will yield almost 2.5 million results. Of course the number is illusive since there are enormous amount of repetitions. However, one can still get a fair amount of information about the subject. The interesting thing here is that the major percentage of entries is Armenian in origin. However, if the same person attempts a search by typing “Ottoman Official resistance to Genocide” the results count drop to 60.000, which is replete with entries that have no relevance to the subject. Here again, the percentage of Armenian entries is not negligible… I will deal more with this discrepancy in my conclusion. To what can we attribute the paucity of entries to this last category? To tackle such an issue as this presentation attempts has its limitations. The limitation stems from the fact that almost a hundred years after the Armenian Genocide, literature regarding Ottoman official resistance to the mass killings is, at best, scarce. In a memorandum it released in 2001 the Zorian Institute underlines this difficulty: As the leaders of the Ottoman Turkish government in 1915 were rounding up the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire for mass deportation and slaughter, a number of Turks risked their own lives to help Armenians escape certain death. There is no way to know today how many such individual acts of courage and humanity occurred in those tragic times. Our sources of information are largely anecdotal: family histories transmitted orally, autobiographies and personal memoirs, and the oral testimonies of survivors. These acts of heroism and kindness stand in stark contrast to the cruelest savagery displayed by the perpetrators of the Armenian Genocide. Their importance is great, for several reasons. First, they are additional evidence of the Armenian Genocide. Secondly, they illustrate that, while there was indeed genocide, not all Turks supported it. Thirdly, these stories serve to reassure us of the human potential for courage and virtue.

In this article, I provide a reassessment of what is referred to as the second phase of the Armenian genocide, emphasizing the role of an Armenian-led humanitarian network in saving thousands of lives. The scholarship (and the popular discourse) on humanitarian efforts during the Genocide focuses on western missionaries and consuls, who emerge as selfless heroes protecting and saving hundreds of thousands of helpless Armenians. Armenian agency is neglected. Here, I argue that it was the Ottoman Armenians who drove this humanitarian resistance waged in the Ottoman Empire. Western humanitarianism provided tremendous material and moral support, yet it was the Armenians themselves who led the resistance effort and shouldered the larger share of the burden, distributing humanitarian aid and funds to deportees huddled in church and school courtyards and, ultimately, in concentration camps – despite the dangers involved. This Armenian-led humanitarian resistance network comprised of church committees, influential Armenian dignitaries, doctors, and nurses, as well as missionaries and local Muslims and Christians helped anchor and support thousands in Aleppo in 1915-1916, and saved the lives of thousands of others elsewhere in Syria.