Maps of KROONSTAD

Maphill is a collection of map images. This physical map of KROONSTAD is one of them. Click on the Detailed button under the image to switch to a more detailed map.

See KROONSTAD from a different angle.

Each map style has its advantages. No map type is the best. The best is that Maphill lets you look at KROONSTAD from many different perspectives.

This physical map is nice. But there is good chance you will like other map styles even more. Select another style in the above table.

What to do when you like this map?

If you like this KROONSTAD, Free State, South Africa map, please don't keep it to yourself. Give your friends a chance to see how the world converted to images looks like.

Share this map.

Use the buttons for Facebook, Twitter or Google+ to share this KROONSTAD, Free State, South Africa map. Maphill is the largest web map gallery. However, the number of maps is certainly not the only reason to visit Maphill.

Get free map of KROONSTAD.

You can embed, print or download the map just like any other image. All KROONSTAD maps are available in a JPEG image format. Enrich your website with hiqh quality map graphics. Use the Free map button above the image.

Is there anything more than this map?

Sure, there is. It has been said that Maphill maps are worth a thousand words. No doubt about it. But you can experience much more when you visit KROONSTAD.

Be inspired.

Each part of Free State has a lot to offer and to see. It is not possible to capture all the beauty in the map. You have to come and see it for yourself.

Discounts for hotel bookings.

If any of Maphill's maps inspire you to come to KROONSTAD, we would like to offer you access to wide selection of hotels at low prices and with great customer service. Compare hotel prices in KROONSTAD and save money.

Thanks to our partnership with Booking.com you can take advantage of up to 50% discounts for hotel bookings in many locations within KROONSTAD.

KROONSTAD hotels

See the full list of destinations in KROONSTAD, browse destinations in Free State, South Africa, Africa or choose from the below listed cities.

Hotels in KROONSTAD »

Hotels in Free State »

Hotels in South Africa »

Hotels in Africa »

Hotels in popular destinations in KROONSTAD

Kroonstad hotels »

Edenville hotels »

Harmonie hotels »

Learn more about the map styles

Each map type offers different information and each map style is designed for a different purpose. Read about the styles and map projection used in the above map (Physical Map of KROONSTAD).

Physical map

Physical map illustrates the mountains, lowlands, oceans, lakes and rivers and other physical landscape features of KROONSTAD. Differences in land elevations relative to the sea level are represented by color.

Green color represents lower elevations, orange or brown indicate higher elevations, shades of grey are used for the highest mountain ranges in the world. Underwater topography is represented by blues. Darker blues are used for the deepest water, lighter shades of blue represent shallower water such as the continental shelf.

Geographic map projection

A map projection is a way how to transform points on a Earth to points on a map. This map of KROONSTAD uses Plate Carree projection. The Plate Carree projection is a simple cylindrical projection originated in the ancient times. It has straight and equally spaced meridians and parallels that meet at right angles.

All projections from a sphere to a plane are distorted. The drawback of the Plate Carree projection is that it doesn't make an attempt to compensate for these distortions. For the general view of KROONSTAD, this is not a significant problem. The detailed maps use the Mercator projection which preserves the shape of small areas better.

Technology

We unlock the value hidden in the geographic data. Thanks to automating the complex process of turning data into map graphics, we are able to create maps in higher quality, faster and cheaper than was possible before.

Forever free

We created Maphill to make the web a more beautiful place. Without you having to pay for it. Maphill maps are and will always be available for free.

Real Earth data

Do you think the maps are too beautiful not to be painted? No, this is not art. All 2D maps of KROONSTAD are created based on real Earth data. This is how the world looks like.

Easy to use

This map is available in a common image format. You can copy, print or embed the map very easily. Just like any other image.

Different perspectives

The value of Maphill lies in the possibility to look at the same area from several perspectives. Maphill presents the map of KROONSTAD in a wide variety of map types and styles.

Vector quality

We build each map individually with regard to the characteristics of the map area and the chosen graphic style. Maps are assembled and kept in a high resolution vector format throughout the entire process of their creation.

Experience of discovering

Maphill maps will never be as detailed as Google maps or as precise as designed by professional cartographers. Our goal is different. We want to redefine the experience of discovering the world through the maps.

Fast anywhere

Maps are served from a large number of servers spread all over the world. Globally distributed map delivery network ensures low latency and fast loading times, no matter where on Earth you happen to be.

Spread the beauty

Embed the above physical map of KROONSTAD into your website. Enrich your blog with quality map graphics. Make the web a more beautiful place.