What if this was the last drop? The billboard depicts a dripping tap next to this gripping question. What if the town of Kroonstad had indeed only one last drop left?

It makes one think. Gone are the days of watering my garden. I dread the thought of my roses dying.

However, this is no time to worry about flowers. Our community is in dire straits. We do not have water and every time I pass the Vals River, the level of the dam is lower and lower.

The University of South Africa’s (Unisa) Prof. Eric Nealer once told Kroonnuus that through his studies on water and water saving methods in municipalities, he had discovered that the youth of today did not realise where water really came from. When asked, the youngsters answered: “From a tap.”

This took me back to my primary school days. I can still see the textbook-diagram of the sea, a mountain, a cloud pouring down rain and the depiction of how evaporation works.

Here in Kroonstad, I’m a one-woman show in the news office of the local weekly newspaper, Kroonnuus. I love my town.

All geared up with my camera, I head to the township, Maokeng, on Saturday 15 May to take pictures of bottled water being handed out by Operation Hydrate, an organisation run mainly by Muslims. It’s a rainy day, bringing promises of heavenly water. Municipal taps ran dry several days ago. It’s before 8am and even so, people have been patiently lining up with just about anything that can hold water. It’s distributed in small shares from a tanker sent by the Department of Water and Sanitation. At first I think Operation Hydrate simply organised the tanker, but soon after an Interlink vehicle arrives with water from the Drakensberg mountains. All wearing t-shirts bearing the Operation Hydrate logo, I never knew so many Muslims were actually living in my town. Mohammed from the tyre shop speaks Afrikaans fluently.

[pullquote]What if this was the last drop?[/pullquote]He tells me a story of how an old Ngunu (the Sesotho word for grandma) walked miles with a five-litre bottle in search of fresh water the previous day. It broke his heart, he says, and insists that water be delivered to her home.

In Phomolong, a poverty-stricken suburb in Maokeng, shouts for water in Sesotho ring out: “Metsi! Metsi!”

I ask Mohammed if I could load my “Volksblad Ferrari” – a Ford Bantam bakkie and my official vehicle - with water to distribute at the orphanage and shelter for homeless people.

“Yes, please,” he answers. “But pass by the tyre place and load boxes of bottled water there.” Bayihaa, Mohammed’s daughter comes along.

Bayihaa and I deliver water – the gift of life - to every person at the shelter. The manner in which she hands out the water, using only her right hand, and giving blessings in a language I will never understand, touches my heart. “The right hand may not know what the left hand is doing,” she tells me. I recall the very same words from the Bible.

My birthday is in May. I have saved to buy something - a gift from myself to myself. This money has been spent on a pressure pump, as well as many expensive tap fittings to get me off the water grid. I have a borehole and that makes you “rich’’ in our town.

Without much knowledge about plumbing, my gardener and I fitted everything to perfection and I am proud. Together, we fill containers with much-needed water for use by him, my house worker and her family. She cannot take more than five litres of water onto the taxi she uses for transport – they charge extra when you carry containers larger than that. Some areas in the township have had no water supply at all for over seven days.

On my way back to work, I see a house where the sprinklers ran non-stop. I thought of the struggling members of the community, waiting with containers and hoping to get only a little bit of water. “Was the 40mm of rain we got not enough to water the garden?” I wondered.

At this point in time, we all have to boil whatever water we still get from our taps. It smells horrible. It won’t be too long before there is none left.

Let’s pray for rain. I remain positive. I hope that positivity is contagious. The jewels in Kroonstad’s crown are our people. We have to join hands to overcome the water crisis. Wherever I go, I encourage residents to save water. A brick is too large for the toilet cistern. I have to find a rock in the dry river. Yes, a rock with which to help save the last drop, to extend its life. Not a rock for us to throw at one another in these scary, waterless times.

Written by Kroonstad resident Tharine Hurter, Editor of Kroonnuus (central local newspaper of Media24)