You've got a few options if you want to exchange currency in Kroonstad. Whether you’re thinking of visiting South Africa or you’re already there, we’ll take you through the best ways to get travel money in Kroonstad.

You might decide to pop into a physical currency exchange store in Kroonstad - but many customers will find it more convenient to pick up a low cost travel card instead, for on the go payments, cash withdrawals and easy to convert currencies with great exchange rates.

Always check with the person at the till which currencies they will accept for travel money purchases. Most in-person currency exchanges will buy and sell major currencies, like New Zealand Dollars.

If you’d rather have peace of mind when travelling, consider ordering a Wise travel card. You can spend using the card or Google / Apple Pay; plus Wise’s exchange rates and fees can be a lot cheaper than getting your travel money from a currency exchange shop.

Depending on your needs and preferences, you may want to choose between banks, currency exchange shops and online platforms to exchange currency conveniently in Kroonstad. It’s worth noting that to keep customers safe, and to comply with the law, it’s common for exchange services to ask for ID when you buy foreign currency. Get ready by having your photo ID, such as a passport or driving license, with you when you arrange your exchange.

If you’re planning on exchanging currency with a bank, you’ll need to double check the travel money and exchange options available. Many banks only offer exchange to customers who already have an account - plus you might have to order online in advance, particularly if you’re looking for a more exotic currency. If your local bank offers currency exchange to people who aren’t customers, bear in mind that you’ll need to take an ID document along with you to collect your cash.

Beware of ATM rates

If an ATM in a foreign country asks if you'd prefer to pay in your home currency, say no. If you agree, the ATM will manage the currency conversion for you - and that ATM will not give you as good a rate as the one your bank or card network offers. Pay at ATMs and with merchants using the local currency wherever you are, to avoid this.

Check the mid-market rate

Not sure what a good rate looks like? Check the mid-market rate for your specific currency. The mid-market rate is the one used on global markets, and when banks buy and sell currencies. However, it's not usually passed on to customers. Instead extra fees are added - a markup, margin, or spread. Compare the rate you're being offered to the mid-market rate for your currency - which you can get from Google - to see this.

Before you pick the right Kroonstad currency exchange option for your needs, do a little shopping around. Compare the available options, looking at the costs involved, how safe they are, and what customers say about them.

When considering costs make sure you check both the exchange rate and the fees charged. It's common for services to state there's no commission, when the costs have simply been added into the exchange rate being used.

Double check safety by picking a reputable and licensed provider. If you're exchanging money at a major bank you can rest assured it's licensed. If you're using physical currency exchange stores it's worth asking how they're regulated - and with online providers you can usually find everything you need in a footnote on the website, including licensing details.

Finally, ask around for personal recommendations from friends and family in Kroonstad, and use online resources like Google reviews and Trustpilot to make sure previous customers are positive about any service you might pick.

Exchange rates can be confusing. It can often seem like every bank, exchange store or online service has their own rate - and choosing can feel daunting.

The key to getting the best currency exchange rate in Kroonstad is to understand the mid-market exchange rate for your currency pair. The mid-market rate is the rate used when trading on global markets - the one banks and currency exchanges get when they buy or sell currencies themselves. However, providers usually don't pass on this rate to customers - they'll add a percentage markup or margin, which is a fee, to the rate offered to retail customers buying or selling relatively small amounts of currencies.

You can take the mid-market rate for your currency as a good benchmark when measuring up your options for currency exchange in Kroonstad. Find the mid-market rate on Google, and then look for a provider which offers this or as close as possible to it.

Another good bet is to pick a travel money card from a service like Wise which offers currency exchange which uses live mid-market rates, with the fees split out for clarity and transparency.

Exchange rates change a lot, based on the demand in global markets. That means that there's no best time for currency exchange, but tracking the market can certainly help you spot a good deal when one becomes available.

Keep an eye on the mid-market rate for your currency, using any of our handy tools, and watch how it's changing over time. It's also possible to set up rate alerts online which can help you learn when a rate hits the level you're looking for. If you're planning on converting cash - or if you have a travel money card - you can lock in the rate by buying your foreign currency at that point.

No matter how good a deal you think you're getting, be sure you're picking a safe and reputable provider for your exchange. If it sounds too good to be true it probably is.

There are a few different ways you might want to currency in Kroonstad. You could head to a bank, choose a physical currency exchange service, or go for an online option.

There are also some great travel money cards from providers like Wise which allow you to order a card online or in an app, top up remotely, and spend or make withdrawals overseas easily. Travel money cards are secure and often offer better exchange rates and lower overall costs compared to switching currency at the airport or in a physical location in your destination.

Use this guide to figure out which currency exchange in Kroonstad might be best for you, and don't forget to also take a look at travel money cards to see if popping one in your wallet can help you save.