Sister Act (1992) Review

Movie Review by Debbie Winkler

Starring: Whoopi Goldberg, Maggie Smith, Kathy Najimy, Wendy Makkena, Harvey Keitel

Director: Emile Ardolino

Series: Sister Act Movie #2

Release Date: 29 May 1992

Language: English

Length: 100 minutes

Movie Rating: PG

View Format: TV

My Rating: 3.5/5 stars

Synopsis:

Deloris Van Cartier (Whoopi Goldberg) is a Reno lounge singer whose life is going nowhere fast. She just saw her married lover, Vince LaRocca (Harvey Keitel), a mob boss, kill a man and is in fear for her life. Deloris didn’t want to cooperate with the police, but she wanted to live. However, after finding out where the police were planning on stashing her, Deloris wished that she was dead. How on earth was she supposed to pass herself off as a nun in a convent? Still, Deloris was determined to give it her best shot and became Sister Mary Clarence.

Deloris/Sister Mary Clarence hadn’t been in the convent for a day before she was already causing problems and being called before Mother Superior (Maggie Smith). Mother Superior didn’t know what to do with Sister Mary Clarence, but the perfect solution presented itself when she saw how Sister Mary Clarence reacted to the atrocious choir performance on Sunday. She promptly informed Sister Mary Clarence that she would be in charge of the choir and felt that that would keep her out of mischief. However, before too long, Sister Mary Clarence had the whole choir rocking and rolling as she took traditional religious songs and rocked them up and rock songs and made them religious. Unfortunately, Mary Clarence’s many good works could not go unnoticed for long and she soon found the mob hot on her trail…

Review:

Sister Act is a funny, entertaining movie that just makes you laugh. The role of Deloris/Sister Mary Clarence was tailor made for Whoopi Goldberg and you can just tell that she is having a wonderful time. The supporting cast, led by Maggie Smith (Mother Superior), Kathy Najimy (Sister Mary Patrick), Wendy Makkena (Sister Mary Robert) and Mary Wickes (Sister Mary Lazarus) was also superb and each actress brought her own unique charm into her role. While I wouldn’t say that this movie is the most creative, best acted or has a great plot, it is just flat out entertaining. I enjoy watching this film when I need a pick me up or a good laugh after a bad day. If you are looking for a fast, fun, hilarious movie that you can watch with the whole family – and sing along with, too! – this is a great choice!

Content:

This movie contains some mild language, stylized mob violence (mostly looking very unrealistic & pretty mild), and death. Some viewers may be offended at the light-hearted look at Catholic nuns, but I thought that it made these women, who work really hard to support the communities they are in, in a positive light and trying to do some good in the world. Don’t take the religious discussions too seriously – just sit back and let yourself be entertained! Recommended for viewers ages 7 and up.