HOBOKEN -- After three decades of owning the vacant lot that once housed an apartment building where Frank Sinatra was born, Frank Palmisano said he and his family are ready to sell.

"What are we doing with it?" said Palmisano, who co-owns the lot at 415 Monroe Street with his sister-in-law. "We've got it 33 years. We're paying taxes on it."

Palmisano said he purchased the property from the city with his brother after a fire in 1967 that killed six people, four of them children. The fire prompted the city to condemn the property and demolish the four-story, 8-unit building where Sinatra was born 100 years ago Saturday, on Dec. 12, 1915.

Palmisano, an 82-year-old retired Hoboken police officer who lives a few doors away from on the lot, said he didn't want his daughter and other family members to have to wait until he passes away to enjoy the proceeds of the sale. His wife, Antoinette, died several years ago.

Hoboken's reverence for its most famous native son is evident in the local tributes to him: scenic Sinatra Drive along the Hudson River opposite Manhattan; the waterfront Sinatra Park, with equally spectacular views; the Beaux-Arts Frank Sinatra Post Office; a year-long exhibit at the Hoboken Historical Museum celebrating the centennial of his birth; and an annual birthday party at city hall, to name a few.

But the vacant lot and the area around it has a forlorn look that doesn't sit right with the singer's vaunted status or the city's other monuments to him.

A plaque embedded in the sidewalk that commemorates the birth of "Francis Albert Sinatra" there is dirty and scratched. And a Sinatra shrine of sorts adjacent to the lot, on property also owned by Palmisano, has been closed for nearly a decade. The awning still bears its name, From Here to Eternity, a reference to the 1953 film that garnered Sinatra an Oscar for best supporting actor.

Palmisano said the family uses the lot for parking.

There was a poignant contrast on Saturday night, when 250 guests danced to a big band and Sinatra tribute singers at a 100th birthday gala at Stevens Institute of Technology that served as a fundraiser for the museum. While baby-boomers danced in sequined dresses and dinner jackets at Stevens, a single slice of birthday cake served on a paper plate sat on the scuffed plaque on Monroe Street, a humble offering left by a devoted fan.

So word that the lot might be for sale, with whatever sprucing up that might entail, was met by smiles and nods of approval from fans attending the dedication of a permanent Sinatra plaque at the historical museum on Saturday, when its director, Bob Foster, said he had heard that the family had finally decided to sell -- plans Palmisano later confirmed in a phone interview.

As the Sinatra family prospered -- his mother, Dolly, a ward leader in politics, and his father, Marty, rising through the ranks of the fire department -- they moved up in Hoboken's neighborhood hierarchy. The family left the Monroe Street flat for a place on Garden Street when Frank was 14, then on to Park Street after that. Later, after his success, Sinatra bought his folks a stately home on Hudson Street.

The historical museum's website offers a map of Sinatra-related sites and a self-guided walking tour.

Many of the wooden cold water flats like the one Sinatra grew up in are no longer standing, so the absence of his birthplace, however regrettable for fans, should come as no surprise, said Melissa Abernathy, a spokeswoman for the museum.

And, Abernathy added, "The fact that the home is no longer is of a piece with the family's moving up and out."

Palmisano declined to say how much he was asking for the property, or how much he had paid for it, and said his daughter was handling the sale. She did not respond to a request for an interview.

What Palmisano did talk about was the fire that destroyed the Sinatra birthplace and so many lives.

"I look out my window, and I see the four kids with their head out the window crying, and I said, 'What the hell are they crying for?,'" said Palmisano, adding that smoke and flames were not yet visible.