Hoboken, New Jersey. Home of the “Cake Boss,” disputed birthplace of baseball, and hometown of ol’ blue eyes (Frank Sinatra).

Here, you don’t “want to be a part of it—New York, New York.” Here, you want to be conveniently near it. A two-square-mile sliver along Jersey’s booming “Gold Coast,” Hoboken is Manhattan’s mirror—mere waves across the Hudson River, offering perhaps the world’s best view of the Big Apple skyline.

Young professionals, active families and well-heeled New York City transplants (nearly 15,000 new residents since 2000, a 28% increase) are flocking to this vibrant city—an accessible transportation hub with magnificent brownstones, quality schools, gyms, shops, parks, restaurants, bars, and cars. Did I mention cars? Even Hoboken’s frustrating lack of street space inspires the most imaginative double parking on earth (it’s practically an art form). About 53,000 citizens amicably drive, Uber, stroll, jog, bike, paddleboard, shop, commute, and dwell in the township’s tight spaces (and waterfront parks), just like New York.

A housing renaissance is booming in this part of Hudson County, fueled by Hoboken and neighboring Jersey City, which post 9/11, lured (via huge tax credits) high-profile corporations like Ernst & Young and Goldman Sachs; luxury developments; and high-net-worth property buyers. Hoboken’s ideal location (it’s closer to Midtown and Wall Street than Brooklyn) and cultural options make it an attractive alternative to Manhattan’s exorbitant home prices.

“People who’ve been priced out of Manhattan and Brooklyn are coming over and [discovering how much more value they get] on this side of the river,” says Harout Dermenjian, a North Jersey developer and agent representing Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Hudson River Properties. “The town has the feel of a neighborhood with the attitude of a city.”

Hoboken, a Native American moniker mixed with Dutch influence, was founded in the 17th century and later developed by Colonel John Stevens as a resort. No wonder people are converging to this waterfront gem. Even fictional Bugs Bunny and Hurricane Sandy paid visits, unwelcome as she was.

Today, Hoboken is famous for Sinatra (the world's greatest crooner); Carlo's Bakery (of Cake Boss fame) whose popular confections prove irresistible for sweet toothers who negotiate long lines; and allegedly baseball's first official game which was played on Elysian Fields here in 1846, predating Cooperstown, N.Y.

Hoboken’s famous residents include New York Giants quarterback Eli Manning, New Jersey Senator Bob Menendez, filmmaker John Sayles, and The Today Show’s Natalie Morales—who likely enjoy the small-town ambiance and big city convenience at their doorstep.

Despite limited inventory, Hoboken home values have skyrocketed with 2016 single-family sales averaging $2.1 million (for 37 homes, 14 of which topped $2 million). Comparatively, 2012 tallied 37 single-family homes sold, none for more than $2 million, according to Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Hudson River Properties.

This trend makes Hoboken’s 707 Park Avenue especially unique. Just hitting the market and tucked within a cozy brownstone block, the über modern $3.895 million townhouse is a game-changer—unlike anything Hoboken has ever imagined. Co-developed by Dermenjian (who is also the listing agent) and celebrity interior designer Robert Jenny, the meticulous five-bedroom, four-bathroom home delivers luxurious Tribeca-style design features at a Hoboken price (Dermenjian suggested the townhouse might cost $12 million if it was in Manhattan). The elegant home is the showcase property for the two proprietors, whose partnership launched with smaller Jersey City projects.

“707 Park is unique because it’s the only home in town like it,” says Dermenjian. “The front façade resembles the classic, timeless look seen along Hoboken's streets and the rear façade is a sleek, modern wall of glass [one terrace expertly adorned in wood]—a perfect merger of styles.”

The standout five-level townhouse is a contemporary work of art. Its front façade is crafted of white stone (a teaser of something special inside), yet it still blends with neighboring brick brownstones. Interiors are highlighted by soaring glass walls, white oak floors, 19-foot-high ceilings, custom wall accents and light fixtures, a stylish Scavolini kitchen (with Miele & Sub-Zero appliances), enough closet space for dueling divas, a kid-centric floor, and enviable views of Manhattan’s skyline (most spectacularly from the master bathroom soaking tub). Each bathroom features a unique shower wall tile treatment. The bottom floor, which could serve as a media room, is finished in traditional Hoboken red brick. Outdoor space includes a rooftop terrace and a backyard.

“We chose the Scavolini kitchen because it didn't resemble a typical kitchen when you looked at it,” says Dermenjian. “It looks more like art. The lattice wall, the recessed outlets, trimless recessed lights, and all the glass are just some of the custom elements that added to [the townhouse’s uniqueness].”

In a rare move, Dermenjian and Jenny sacrificed square-footage for aesthetics—recessing precious floor space to allow more ceiling height. But don’t fret, there’s still plenty of room for a large well-to-do family—and possibly even an exotic pet giraffe.

"Working with clients you limit the capability to show your true talent because you're building the final product to suit their taste,” says Dermenjian. “And sometimes that taste is completely the opposite of yours—like a vegan chef cooking steak. So when we acquired 707 Park, we saw the opportunity for Rob [Jenny] to showcase his capability and raise the bar. I think we accomplished that with flying colors.”

Hoboken hasn’t been this popular and cool since Bugs Bunny escorted a penguin to the South Pole only to discover the lost bird was Hoboken born and raised—eliciting the 14,000-mile off-course rabbit to utter, “Hoboken? Oooh, I'm dyin’…!”

But that’s fiction. Today, Frank Sinatra’s hometown is the real deal—and the biggest deal of all is sleek 707 Park Avenue. As ol' blue eyes sang, start spreading the news.