The term “Survival of the Fittest” was coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864.

The biggest misconception that people hold around this concept is that “fittest” means strongest or fastest… that one species survives because it is faster or stronger than another.

Biologists will tell you that in any given ecosystem, it is the species with the widest range of responses that survives. For the human species, this translates into… flexibility. Flexibility in your response or approach to a challenge.

This means that for you to survive adversity and challenges, you don’t have to be the biggest firm in town. You just have to adopt and adapt.

When things have gotten tough for me in business or my life in general, I often find myself putting my head down and plowing through – just doubling my energy and effort to get things back to where I want them to be. Can you relate?

Prefer to listen? Click Here.

And while there’s nothing wrong with good old hard work and persistence, the solution to a challenge is often found in increasing one’s openness to new ways of thinking and acting – including looking to others for their perspective.

I have a friend who likes to say, “You can’t see the picture when you’re in the frame.” We are often too close to the challenge… so we need the outside perspective from someone who knows us well to point out that there is a different way to look at the challenge.

And YOU don’t just want to SURVIVE – Right? You want to THRIVE. And that takes flexibility.

Think of a challenge you are currently facing in your business or other aspect of your life. How might this challenge be solved by you becoming more flexible in your approach, including seeking out the perspective from a colleague or other trusted source?

Seriously – give this some thought. Where might you apply a little more flexibility or reach out to someone else for some assistance?

If you liked this message, please… don’t keep it a secret. Forward it to a friend or colleague. And don’t forget ALL our resources – many of them free – are waiting for you at www.ReferralCoach.com/Resources

Virtual Referral Training is Here

Are you ready to grow your business … and change your life?

You can learn and implement our proven process while working from home or not seeing clients and prospects face to face.