The Los Angeles Film Critics Association has named The Zone of Interest as its choice for the best picture of the year.

Oppenheimer is the runner-up in the voting, which took place Sunday.

The critics association named Anatomy of a Fall and The Zone of Interest star Sandra Hüller and Poor Things actress Emma Stone as the lead performances of the year. Rachel McAdams and Da’Vine Joy Randolph received the best supporting performances prizes for Are You There, God? It’s Me Margaret and The Holdovers, respectively.

Last year, the organization voted on two films for its top award of the year: Everything Everywhere All at Once and Tár. The former went on to win best picture at the 95th Academy Awards in March. This year’s winners will be feted at the organization’s annual banquet on Jan. 13, 2024.

The association previously announced that Agnieszka Holland will be honored at the in-person celebration with this year’s Career Achievement Award. The Polish director and three-time Oscar nominee has been targeted in attacks by Poland’s right-wing government for her film Green Border, which details the horrific conditions faced by migrants who are attempting to cross into Poland from Belarus.

Ahead of this year’s L.A. Film Critics Awards, Martin Scorsese’s Killers of the Flower Moon took home the award for best film at the New York Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review awards.

Most years, the organization’s choice for best picture garners an Oscar nomination for the night’s top prize. For the second year in a row, the L.A. Film Critics Association Awards will feature gender-neutral acting categories.

A full list of winners follows.

Best Picture: The Zone of Interest

Runner-Up: Oppenheimer

Best Director: Jonathan Glazer, The Zone of Interest

Runner-Up: Yorgos Lanthimos, Poor Things

Leading Performances: Sandra Hüller, Anatomy of a Fall and The Zone of Interest and Emma Stone, Poor Things

Runners-Up: Andrew Scott, All of Us Strangers, and Jeffrey Wright, American Fiction

Supporting Performances: Rachel McAdams, Are You There, God? It’s Me Margaret and Da’Vine Joy Randolph, The Holdovers

Runners-Up: Lily Gladstone, Killers of the Flower Moon and Ryan Gosling, Barbie

Best Screenplay: Andrew Haigh, All of Us Strangers

Runner-Up: Samy Burch, May December

Best Cinematography: Robbie Ryan, Poor Things

Runner-Up: Rodrigo Prieto, Killers of the Flower Moon and Barbie

Best Editing: Laurent Sénéchal, Anatomy of a Fall

Runner-Up: Jonathan Alberts, All of Us Strangers

Best Production Design: Winner: Sarah Greenwood, Barbie

Runner-Up: Shona Heath and James Price, Poor Things

Best Music/Score: Mica Levi, The Zone of Interest

Runner-Up: Mark Ronson and Andrew Wyatt, Barbie

Best Film Not in the English Language: Anatomy of a Fall

Runner-Up: Totem

Best Documentary/Nonfiction Film: Menus-Plaisirs — Les Troisgros

Runner-Up: The Eternal Memory

Best Animation: The Boy and the Heron

Runner-Up: Robot Dreams

New Generation Award: Celine Song, Past Lives

Douglas Edwards Experimental Film Prize: Wang Bing’s Youth (Spring)

Career Achievement Award: Agnieszka Holland

The organization was founded in 1975 and consists of critics working in Los Angeles at print and electronic media organizations like daily and weekly newspapers, magazines and online general-interest publications. The annual awards celebrate people in front of and behind the camera.