Thursday, March 14th, 2024, the 35th Annual GLAAD Media Awards took place at The Beverly Hilton in Los Angeles, California. Hosted by the hilarious and inspiring Wayne Brady, it was an unforgettable night filled with surprise guests, impactful speeches, and spectacular performances.

“It’s my honor to stand here before you as a newly minted out and proud member of the LGBTQIA family!” Brady said in his opening remarks. “Recently, I came out as publicly as Queer, identifying as Pansexual! I know some of y’all are like “I knew it! Give me my five dollars Bitch!”” he joked.

He went on to say, “Until the World sees us all in the same light, we’ll have each other’s backs. Thank you GLAAD for creating this beautifully fierce army of love!”

After kicking off the night with her very first award show performance, Kate Hudson thanked the community for always being so supportive of her. “The LGBTQ community has been such a source of love.”

Next, 2022 Stephen F. Kolzak award winner Michaela Jaé announced the winner for Limited or Anthology Series to be Fellow Travelers. The series’ creator Ron Nyswaner graciously accepted the award alongside the rest of the cast, and reminded LGBTQ youth to “find your queer uncles and aunts and brothers and sisters and we will love you until you can love yourself.”

Who is more fit to announce the winner for Outstanding Reality Competition Series than the queens of reality television, Meredith Marks and Heather Dubrow? Both the parents of LGBTQ children, the two used the opportunity as a call to action. “Anti-LGBTQ legislation and violence is on the rise, especially in Utah, where I do my thing. So we’ve been working closely with the GLAAD Media Institute to learn how to tell the stories of our own families,” said Marks.

Dubrow then shared, “As the mother of three queer kids, I want to build a world where they can grow up happy, healthy, confident, and safe from attack. So school administrators and politicians, stand up for LGBTQ youth! And if you’re the parent of an LGBTQ kid: Love them, protect them and support them!”

They then announced the winner to be Ru Paul’s Drag Race! Michelle Visage, Mistress Isabelle Brooks, Salina EsTitties, and Luxx Noir accepted the award on behalf of the team.

Niecy Nash-Betts brought the entire room to tears in her acceptance speech for The Stephen F. Kolsack Award. “I am a witness that dreams do indeed come true.” She spoke about her experience discovering she was queer and how grateful she is to have found her soul mate Jessica Betts. “I was always an ally, but now I’m a card carrying member!”

World’s coolest couple, Chrishell Stause and G FLIP then took the stage to announce the winner of Outstanding Drama Series. Stause, who stars on the Netflix series Selling Sunset, explained why she is the perfect person to announce this category. “I’m no stranger to drama. I mean I even came out on the show! That was pretty dramatic.”

And the winner is… Yellowjackets!

Later in the night Sherry Cola and Dylan Mulvaney took the stage to announce the offstage winners and special recognition honorees. This included David Archuleta being named Outstanding Breakthrough Music Artist, Bottoms winning Outstanding Film – Wide Release, Outstanding Magazine Overall Coverage went to Out, and Outstanding Children’s Programming was Ada Twist: Scientist, just to name a few. Special recognition was given to Drag Latina, on LGBTQ streamer Revry; Hulu’s Relighting Candles; Yes I Am: The Ric Weiland Story; and Plus Life Media, a game-changing HIV media platform. For a full list of winners, see here.

Next, Anyone But You’s Alexandra Shipp and Sydney Sweeney took the stage. “I loved seeing my reality as a queer woman reflected on the screen,” said about her role in the romantic comedy. “And we both love making people laugh. Because that’s what opens up hearts and minds,” Sweeney reminded the audience.

They then revealed the winner of Outstanding Comedy Series to be Ted Lasso!

Actress Trace Lysette gave a moving speech about being trans when accepting the award for Outstanding Film – Limited Release for the film she starred in Monica.

As we approached the end of the night, things did not slow down! Green Day’s Billie Joe Armstrong brought the crowd to their feet when announcing the winner of Outstanding Music Artist. “Today, MAGA extremists are coming for members of the queer community and we are here to stand up for them, and so is GLAAD. So let’s get ready, get loud, and get out and vote this fall! Let the next generation hear you!”

He then announced the winner to be the incredible Reneé Rapp!

She gave a moving speech, complimenting fellow nominee and one of her idols Victoria Monét. “I love my identity and I feel lucky that we have spaces and organizations like GLAAD that recognize us for our talent and of course how hot we all are!” she said in her speech.

She then took the opportunity to use her platform to call for a permanent and immediate ceasefire in Gaza.

Lastly, what was perhaps the most iconic moment of the night Paolo Presta and Chilli Pepper presented the Vanguard Award to the one and only Oprah Winfrey. She gave a moving speech, which wrapped up the very special night.

The 35th Annual GLAAD Media Awards will be available to stream on Hulu starting March 29th.