CALL FOR ENTRIES! UNIQUE CHANCE TO SUBMIT YOUR FILM OR MUSIC VIDEO TO THE FAVORITE FILM AND MUSIC VIDEO FESTIVAL FOR NEW CREATORS

LOS ANGELES MOVIE AND MUSIC VIDEO AWARDS!

Are you a filmmaker or music video creator dreaming of making it big in Hollywood? Look no further! Los Angeles Movie and Music Video Awards is a one-of-a-kind online festival where more than 5000 creators from 105 countries have already placed their trust.

Los Angeles Movie & Music Video Awards is part of the Best Film Awards - IMDb Qualifying Film Festival. Last year, we celebrated directors and musicians who were shortlisted for prestigious nominations. Previous winners of our festival include renowned creators such as Kareen Mallon (Canada), Iván Mauricio Razza (Argentina), Joshua Echevarria (United States) and many other. Creators from over 50 countries have already won awards at our festival. This attests to the trustworthiness of our festival and why it's the perfect platform for your work.

How many viewers will see my creation, you ask? While local venues might have limited capacity, imagine your film or music video being viewed by 1,000 to 10,000 people simultaneously during our online screenings. Our festival can reach a wider audience, and that's why we believe your creation can connect with hundreds of thousands of viewers and producers. Yours could be the next success story thanks to our festival.

The festival is particularly interested in projects that offer unique storytelling, innovative visual styles, and compelling narratives in both film and music video formats. Celebrating diversity, Los Angeles Movie and Music Video Awards is open to creative projects that showcase unique perspectives and push the boundaries of artistic expression.

We ourselves are creators, producers, and entrepreneurs. We understand the struggles of gaining recognition for your work. That's why we've devised a unique project, involving jurors from around the world, to create a new opportunity to showcase your creations to a global audience. Our mission is to recognize talent, passion, and to honor the best projects in both film and music video categories.

Our festival offers a wider reach and more effectiveness for creators than traditional live screening festivals, as online screenings can be accessed by anyone in the world, not limited to one city.

SUBMIT YOUR FILM OR MUSIC VIDEO NOW AND BE A PART OF OUR JOURNEY TO CELEBRATE THE ART OF CINEMA AND MUSIC WHILE SUPPORTING TALENT!