Congratulations to the 2024 Preservation Design Award Winners!

Keep an eye out on this page for the announcement of the President’s and Trustee’s Awards for Excellence.

The California Preservation Awards are a statewide hallmark. This year, our volunteer Awards Jury selected fifteen projects which showcasing the best in historic preservation.

Craftsmanship/Preservation Technology

Marin County Civic Center Roof Replacement, San Rafael

Cultural Heritage, Intangible Assets

Japanese Heritage Shoya House, San Marino

Sacramento African American Experience Project, Sacramento

Cultural Resource Studies, Reports

Rubel Castle Preservation Plan, Glendora

Preservation or Restoration

Bailey House (Case Study House #21), Los Angeles

The Huntington Rose Garden Tea Room, San Marino

The Koblick House, Silverlake

Mission San Gabriel, San Gabriel

Venice Auditorium Ceiling Repair, Los Angeles

Rehabilitation

Amy’s Kitchen, Petaluma

The Cheech Marin Center for Chicano Art and Culture, Riverside

Culver Studios, Culver City

Landmark West Oakland Victorian, Oakland

The Overland, Redlands

West LA VA Campus Building 207, Los Angeles

2024 President’s Award Recipients

Leslie Heumann

Los Angeles | Lifetime Achievement Award

Leslie Heumann is recognized for her significant contributions to historic preservation, environmental compliance, and cultural resources management over the span of her career.

Leslie Heumann has made a significant impact in providing critical guidance to local governments that served as the foundation for the preservation programs they have to this day. Her work has left an indelible mark on the preservation landscape, underscoring the enduring legacy of Leslie’s career and service to communities in California.

Brenda Levin, FAIA

Los Angeles | Lifetime Achievement Award

Brenda Levin, FAIA is recognized for her career in architecture with meticulous restoration, innovative adaptive reuse, and creative new construction that demonstrates the feasibility of preservation.

Meticulous, innovative, creative, and possessing a unique sensibility toward placemaking—perfectly captures the essence of this well-deserved nomination of Brenda Levin, FAIA. The Board of Trustees commends Brenda for a lifetime of work that showcases the feasibility of preservation and paves a new path for the revitalization of Downtown Los Angeles—one that embraces its monuments rather than erases them.

Preservation Action Council San Jose

San Jose | Advocacy Award

This President’s Award for Advocacy is celebrating PAC San Jose’s outstanding efforts to safeguard the historic 1958 San Jose City Hall from demolition.

PAC San Jose’s exemplary leadership in preserving this iconic civic landmark, which was once under the ownership of the City of San Jose and is now held by the County of Santa Clara. Your organization’s thoughtful and timely decision to commission a feasibility analysis with leading adaptive reuse experts played a pivotal role in persuading the Santa Clara Board of Supervisors that “adaptive reuse— not demolition— should be the preferred path forward.” This remarkable outcome stands as a testament to their commitment and dedication to preserving our cultural heritage.

Save Our Heritage Organisation

San Diego | Advocacy Award

Save Our Heritage Organisation has consistently demonstrated exceptional leadership in safeguarding San Diego’s rich cultural heritage for over four decades through advocacy and education.

The Board of Trustees commends SOHO for its outstanding efforts in preserving numerous significant buildings and structures throughout San Diego. Their remarkable track record, highlighted by iconic landmarks such as the Hotel del Coronado, Balboa Park’s Cabrillo Bridge, California Quadrangle, and Plaza de Panama, underscores the statewide importance of their contributions.

Thank you to our Jury for the 2024 Preservation Design Awards!

Design Awards Co-Chair

Cathy Garrett, Principal, PGAdesign. Cathy is president of the PGAdesign Landscape Architects a landscape studio based in Oakland celebrating more than 40 years in business. During her career, she has worked on projects that include Frederick Law Olmsted’s Central Park and Prospect Park in New York City, as well as projects in France, Italy, England, Canada and her native Australia. Award winning projects in California include the Lopez Adobe in San Fernando and the Lovelace Garden in Montecito, also Casa Amesti in Monterey, the Allied Arts Guild in Menlo Park and the Leland Stanford Mansion in Sacramento. She has made presentations at annual conferences for the American Institute of Architects, California Council for the Promotion of History, California State Parks, and California Preservation Foundation. Cathy has been welcomed as visiting critic for the University of California, Berkeley schools of Architecture, Landscape Architecture, and Planning, Cornell University, and the University of New South Wales in Australia. From 2017 to 2019, she served as the Consulting Campus Landscape Architect for UC Berkeley. Cathy was a founding co-chair of the Northern California HALS (Historic American Landscape Survey) Group. She is a past-president of the California Preservation Foundation and until 2018 served on the Historic State Capitol Commission.

Design Awards Co-Chair

Bill Schaeffer, Partner, Cello & Maudru Construction and CPF Vice President of Development. Bill Schaeffer is a partner at Cello & Maudru Construction Company. Based in Napa, Cello & Maudru specializes in winery, estate home, & hospitality construction building projects throughout the Bay Area. With the firm since 1996, he has been lucky enough to work on a few notable historic buildings, most recently the Buena Vista Winery Cellar & Caves (CPF 2013 Preservation Technology Award) & the adaptive reuse of the Mackintosh House in Sonoma for Scribe Winery. With a focus on history, architecture, and historic preservation, he received a bachelor of science in Environmental Design from UC Davis in 1993. Bill served on the board of Napa County Landmarks from 2002 to 2007.

2024 Design Awards Jury

Ann Harrer has significant experience assessing and repairing existing building materials—particularly concrete building and structural elements—with a specialty in the conservation and preservation of architecturally significant and heritage concrete structures. In addition to her concrete building experience, she has broad expertise in the assessment and repair of brick masonry, terra cotta, cast stone, and wood. Her work includes investigations, analyses, repair design development, and construction observations for structural and nonstructural elements in the built environment.

Ms. Harrer has authored multiple papers and articles and has presented on topics related to the assessment, conservation, and repair of concrete structures and other building materials. She is a past president of the American Concrete Institute, Southern California chapter. She is also the 2019 recipient of the American Concrete Institute Young Member Award for Professional Achievement.

Susan Lassell is a historic preservation planner based in Sacramento who has spent the past 30 years in environmental regulatory compliance. She works at the consulting firm ICF — whose L.A. office is right across the street from the Biltmore! — where she leads a West Coast team of more than 45 architectural historians, preservation planners, and archaeologists. Susan couldn’t be prouder of the work this team performs on cultural resources technical studies, engagement with the preservation community and Native American tribes, and shepherding environmental reviews that give the public an opportunity to influence decision-making about the balance between future development and the protection and enhancement of our shared cultural heritage.

As a Principal at TEF Design, Maryam Rostami‘s practice is rooted in her innate compassion for the well-being of others. Her distinct ability to distill disparate elements of a project into a cohesive vision and process embedded in the unique values of her clients has been essential to successful outcomes and to client partnerships that endure over time. A strong designer and committed advocate for her clients, she brings leadership and enthusiasm for design to her assignments, regardless of scale or scope, balanced by keen management skills and respect for client budgets and schedules. An outspoken agent for equity, she has also been instrumental to integrating actionable measures to advance TEF’s Justice, Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (JEDI) goals and to cultivating a practice culture that prioritizes health and balance.

Maryam’s passion for the development of young people fuels her leadership in education design. Her exploration of a “trauma informed” architecture that supports healing has been particularly relevant to TEF’s academic clients. Her academic projects include work on the Kresge College Renewal project as well as Employee Housing Master Planning at UC Santa Cruz, the Diego Rivera Theater at City College of San Francisco, Providence High School in Southern California, and Live Oak School, The Dahlia School, and The New School in San Francisco. Maryam’s portfolio also encompasses workplace, retail and multifamily housing, most notably the transformation of Pier 17 into flexible office and event spaces for the Swiss Consulate/Swissnex, as well as a number of affordable housing developments throughout the Bay Area.

Maryam earned her Bachelor of Architecture and Plan II Honors degree from the University of Texas at Austin. She currently serves on the Board of Directors for FACT/SF Dance Company and is a member of the AIA and the National Organization of Minority Architects.

Louisa Van Leer founded her eponymous practice in 2015. Her LA based firm is currently engaged

in pushing the edges of single-family residential design and exploring new typologies for multi-unit

housing and density. Her firm also specializes in sensitive rehabilitations and additions to historic

architecture including early and midcentury modern work by Rudolph Schindler.

Her firm has received many awards and honors, including first place in the Subdivision Category of

the 2021 “Low Rise: Housing Ideas for Los Angeles” design competition with her concept titled

“Green Alley Housing,” the 2019 LA Conservancy and California Preservation Foundation, earning

the special Trustees Award for Excellence.

Louisa received her MFA from California Institute of the Arts (CalArts), with a Fellowship from the

Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture, and her B’Arch and BFA from Rhode Island School of

Design (RISD). She holds her architecture licensure in California. She served for over a decade on

the Board of the Highland Park Heritage Trust and is a past board President. She lives with her

family in the historic neighborhood of Highland Park in Northeast LA

Kelly Wong is a Principal Planner at the City & County of San Francisco Planning Department where she currently manages the Code Enforcement Team where she works collaboratively with other City agencies to help property owners and their consultants (e.g. architects, engineers, contractors) bring properties back into compliance with the Planning Code. She also serves as the building materials technical expert on the Preservation Team. Before joining the Planning Department, she worked at the Getty Conservation Institute (GCI) in Los Angeles to work on the Earthen Architecture Initiative, Seismic Retrofitting Project (SRP), which focuses on the seismic upgrade of earthen structures in Peru using advanced technologies coupled with traditional materials and methodologies. Kelly facilitated the production of “model” construction documents for use by the Peruvian Ministry of Culture. Prior to the GCI, Kelly was a Preservation Project Manager at The Presidio Trust (a federal agency) in San Francisco where she led the preservation efforts and seismic rehabilitation of the Officers’ Club, one of the oldest buildings in San Francisco. She began her career at a private architecture firm in San Francisco dedicated to the rehabilitation and conservation of public historic buildings and sites. She has worked on projects including archaeological sites in the US and abroad including Taiwan, Hong Kong, Italy, Bulgaria, Turkey, Peru, Tunisia, and Northern Sudan. Kelly received her undergraduate degree in architecture from UC Berkeley and her master’s in historic preservation with a concentration in architectural conservation from the University of Pennsylvania.