Martin T. Sherman (born 28 November, 1966) is an American actor, voice actor, voice director, writer and director who provided voices for the US dub of Thomas & Friends from 2009-2015.

He started acting around the age of 9 at a local Jewish community centre in Florida. He also provides voices for several video games. Two of his better known roles are Pac-Man in the video game Pac-Man World 3 and Ryan from DreamWeb.

Voices

US

Thomas (2009 - 2015)

Henry (declined)

Percy (2009 - 2015)

Diesel (2013 - 2015)

The Bird Watcher (Henry's Good Deeds)

Some Children (Time for a Story, Pop Goes Thomas and Toby and Bash)

Some Sodor United Soccer Players (Pingy Pongy Pick Up)

The Tree Specialist (Day of the Diesels only)

Songs

Series 18

I Do Like to be Beside the Seaside (performed)

Miscellaneous

It's Great to be an Engine (performed)

Surprises (performed)

Sounds (performed)

Sir Topham Hatt (performed)

Really Useful Engine (performed)

Let's Have a Race (performed)

Thomas' Anthem (performed)

Departure from the Series

In 2014, it was announced that Sherman would leave his roles on Thomas & Friends due to contractual disagreements with the production team. He announced his departure via The SiF Blog in July. In the post, he claimed to be feeling exploited and complained about the low wage the series was paying him. He also apologised to any fans who might be affected by his departure.

Later that month, in an interview with The Guardian, he stated that HiT Entertainment contacted his agent and had threatened to take legal action against Sherman, if the blog post was not removed. Sherman said he felt bullied and silenced and was reportedly seeking legal advice regarding the blogpost. The blog post was later removed. In the same Guardian interview, HiT Entertainment refused to comment on the contracts it has with its talent and wished Martin Sherman the best in his future professional endeavours.[1]

After his Departure

Joseph May took over the US voice of Thomas starting with The Adventure Begins, Christopher Ragland took over the US voice of Percy in Sodor's Legend of the Lost Treasure and Kerry Shale began voicing Diesel in the US as well as continuing to voice him in the UK dub starting with the nineteenth series.

During an interview in December 2020, he apologised again to the fans for putting them in the middle of the situation, along with apologising to David Menkin for asking him to not accept the offer to voice Thomas, in order to show support towards Sherman. However, Sherman stated he regretted this decision and thought that Menkin would have done very well with voicing Thomas.[2]

Filmography

Film

Green Street Hooligans (2005)

Spirit of the Forest (2008)

Thomas & Friends: Hero of the Rails (2009)

Leap Year (2010)

Thomas & Friends: Misty Island Rescue (2010)

Captain America: The First Avenger (2011)

Thomas & Friends: Day of the Diesels (2011)

Thomas & Friends: Blue Mountain Mystery (2012)

Thomas & Friends: King of the Railway (2013)

Burton and Taylor (2013)

Thomas & Friends: Tale of the Brave (2014)

Television

Adventures on Orsum Island (2008)

Thomas & Friends (2009-2015)

Doctor Who (2015)

Games

DreamWeb

Simon the Sorcerer II: The Lion, the Wizard, and the Wardrobe

Conflict: Desert Storm II - Back to Baghdad

Driv3r

Second Sight

Pac-Man World 3

Timesplitters: Future Perfect

Juiced

Sniper Elite

Kameo: Elements of Power

Perfect Dark Zero

The Witcher

Haze

So Blonde

Crysis Warhead

IL-2 Sturmovik: Birds of Prey

Driver: San Francisco

Deponia

Xenoblade Chronicles 3

Trivia

In an interview with Sodor Island Fansite, he explained that he played Thomas based of himself at age fifteen and he played Percy as the little brother he never had.[3]

In the same interview with Sodor Island Fansite, he said he had auditioned for the US voice of Henry, However, he was declined in favour of Kerry Shale.[3]

Sherman was also a performer in the 2011 North American tour of the live show Thomas Saves the Day, playing the role of Stephen Hatt.

In a 2020 interview, when he was asked about the criticism of the series for its writing during the thirteenth to sixteenth series from longtime fans (especially criticism directed toward former head writer, Sharon Miller), Sherman responded saying;

“ I think you need to understand that writing for a show like Thomas with long standing adult fans and children coming in is very difficult. There is the constant push to change, to keep up with the times and to remain the same. Sharon did her best to walk that razor’s edge. But, personally, I avoid reading comments because I don’t want to be thinking about that when I am trying to work. I rely on people directing me like Ian, Sharon and Greg to synthesize the fan’s feedback into the show."[2] ”

Sherman's favourite Thomas & Friends project was Day of the Diesels. He said in the 2020 interview that it gave him the chance to explore some complicated emotions between Thomas and Percy.[2]

In the same interview from 2020, he stated after one year in doing the show, he pitched the concept of Thomas globetrotting. Although HiT Entertainment turned down the idea at the time, it would form the basis for Big World! Big Adventures! under Mattel four years after Sherman's departure.[2]

Sherman worked as a voice actor on David Mitton's unfinished "Adventures on Orsum Island" series.

The Strasburg Railroad still used Sherman's voice samples for their Thomas rides, even after his departure, until the CGI era was supplanted by All Engines Go.

Gallery

References