Ron Silver, the controversial stage and screen actor who re-cast himself as one of George W Bush's few Hollywood supporters, died yesterday at the age of 62. A longtime smoker, Silver had been battling cancer of the oesophagus for nearly two years.

Silver was a noted stage performer who won the Tony award for his performance as a shark-like Hollywood producer in David Mamet's Speed-the-Plow in 1988. In later years, however, his theatre work was often overshadowed by both his recurring role in TV's The West Wing and by his Damascene conversion from liberal activist to neocon cheerleader in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks on New York.

A one-time registered Democrat, Silver would later refer to himself as "a 9/11 Republican". In 2004 he was booked as a guest speaker at the Republican national convention and narrated the film Fahrenhype 9/11 – a rebuttal to Michael Moore's award-winning Fahrenheit 9/11. Silver was no fan of the tub-thumping, liberal film-maker, describing Moore as "a charlatan in a clown suit".

Born on 2 July 1946 in New York City, Silver made his film debut in the 1976 ensemble comedy Tunnel Vision. Other notable screen credits include Silkwood and Ali, and he won rave reviews for his performance as lawyer Alan Dershowitz in the Oscar-winning drama Reversal of Fortune.

Silver's political shift occurred during his long-running stint on The West Wing, where he played Bruno Gianelli, the campaign adviser to the left-leaning President Jed Bartlett. "Often when I walked on to the set of The West Wing some of my colleagues would greet me with a chanting of 'Ron, Ron, the neocon'," he would later recall. "It was all done in fun, but it had an edge."

Silver reportedly died in his sleep in the early hours of Sunday morning. "He was a talented actor, a scholar and a great believer in participatory democracy," said Robin Bronk, executive director of the Creative Coalition, the political advocacy organisation that Silver co-founded in the late 1980s. "He was an activist who became a great artist and his contributions will never be forgotten."