The Spoetzl Brewery is now open on Saturdays! Named after brewmaster Kosmos Spoetzl, the K. Spoetzl Brewery was founded in Shiner, Texas (population 2,069), in 1909, brewing beer with old-world traditions and recipes for the many German and Czech settlers in the state. Since then, the brewery has grown to be one of the leading independent craft brewers in the country. Every drop of the award-winning beer is still brewed right where it all started 109 years ago.

To celebrate the first Saturday of brewery tours, the Spoetzl Brewery put on a wonderful community event. There were complimentary tours, accompanied by beer tastings, food trucks, and music. It was PACKED! Everyone in Shiner, TX must have been at the event.

We did a tour as soon as we arrived. I believe they were abbreviating the tours because of the large groups on their debut Saturday – it was about 15 minutes. We still got a good history of the brewery and got to see the machinery for all the important processes. It reminded me of touring NASA, where there’s a long hallway and on one side, there’s a wall of windows opening up to their warehouse below on the other.

After the tour, we did some beer tasting! We were able to taste four of their beers. The samples were a pretty good size, I thought! I was very impressed. I did have to chug one while quickly running to cover during a quick mid-day thunderstorm, but other than that, we really just took our time enjoying the beer! My favorites were the peach and sea salt and lime. They were SO GOOD.

Below is a screenshot of the brewery’s new tour times – including Saturdays! They also have a gift shop that is filled with Shiner paraphernalia.

Here’s what Brian and I did and we had a WONDERFUL day. I suggest you:

Roadtrip it from Austin to Shiner. Take a tour, get some swag, drink some beer. They have some covered tables, so hang out a while!

Drive from Shiner to Lockhart and stop for some BBQ on your way home. We stopped at Black’s and were not disappointed.

Thanks for letting me know about this awesome, fun event, Shiner! Brian and I had a wonderful time. Based on the turnout, I can tell people are super excited about Shiner Saturday tours!

Follow and pin us on Pinterest!