DC Films’ Joker is, thus far, living up to the hype. The relatively well-reviewed (69% fresh and 7.3/10 average score on Rotten Tomatoes) and much-discussed supervillain origin story earned $13.3 million via Thursday previews. Those showings started as early as 4:00 pm, which meant I was able to check out the trailers (that Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker D23 teaser plays like gangbusters in IMAX) after my 1:10 pm showing of War (better than Saaho) before I picked up the kids from school.

For the record, my 4pm IMAX showing, which I (with permission) snuck into just for the trailers was nearly empty, so I don’t think starting the preview showings so early made much of a difference. Anyway, a $13.3 million Thursday preview haul is, sans inflation, just above the $11 million launch of Wonder Woman in June of 2017. More importantly, the $13.3 million launch is higher than the $10 million preview figure for Venom, which means Joker has the new record for an October preview gross.

It’s also larger than the $9.5 million Thursday gross earned by (the R-rated) Logan back in March of 2017. Both superhero flicks earned $80 million-plus weekend grosses, so that’s good news for the supervillain flick. The film could be more frontloaded than those two more conventional superhero/anti-hero flicks. Come what may, it’s a slow-burn character study with little in the way of conventional action or crowd-pleasing elements.

I don’t think Joker is very extreme or transgressive, and frankly some of the reaction, especially the pearl clutching, seems to suggest another case where pundits are shocked… SHOCKED by any non-action movie that contains any amount of R-rated violence. Think, offhand, Pulp Fiction, Payback, Fight Club, Hannibal or Nurse Beatty. If the film gets a low CinemaScore grade, it may be, like we see for horror movies, both from folks who found it distasteful and from folks who didn’t think it was extreme enough.

But that’s speculation, as (for what it’s worth) the film has a 93% “Yay!” rating from 2,300 verified Rotten Tomatoes users. Those polls can of course be skewed in one direction or another (I adored Alita, but the 93% user score is about as indicative of the general public as was that 51% user score for The Last Jedi), but opening weekend will be driven by marketing and pre-release interest more so than whether folks liked the movie. Anyway, if it plays this weekend like Venom (12.5% of its weekend on Thursday) or Logan (10.7%), then it’ll earn between $106 million and $124 million this weekend. Either of those figures would be spectacular.

Fair or not, if it plays this weekend like Suicide Squad (15.3% of a $133 million opening via a $20.4 million Thursday), Batman v Superman (16.6% of its $166 million launch via a $27.7 million Thursday) or Justice League (13.9% of a $93 million debut via a $13.5 million Thursday), then the opening weekend will fall in the range of and $80 million and $96 million. Both would be, objectively speaking, terrific for a $60 million, R-rated, adult-skewing and action-lite drama. Heck, even a run like The Dark Knight Rises or a Twilight sequel (over/under 20%) still gives Todd Phillips’ Joker a $66 million debut weekend. Considering the production budget, there aren’t a lot of doomsday scenarios here.

Yes, it could fall as brutally as, say, Watchmen, Green Lantern or Batman v Superman. But, again, this is a $60 million, R-rated character study, not a $150-$250 million franchise-friendly superhero spectacular. So, presuming Joker gets anywhere near the projected $155 million global opening weekend, even legs like Dawn of Justice ($873.6 million worldwide from a $422.5 million global launch) still gives it a $320 million global total, or about on par with a Conjuring movie. Would that be disappointing in terms of hype and anticipation? I suppose so, but it would still be over five times the film’s production budget. But for now, let’s see just how wild Joker turns out to be this weekend.