Despite mixed reviews and security concerns, Joker made a record-breaking $93.5 million in its opening weekend in the U.S., handily beating projections as well as Venom’s previous record of $80.25 million. Its global gross was $234 million, with big openings in South Korea, Japan, Brazil, and more.

The film, directed by Todd Phillips on a reported $55 million budget, was predicted to gross lower than other superhero movies mainly because of its R-rating and dark tone, modeled after gritty ’70s and ’80s-era films like Taxi Driver. Joker has also been beset by concerns that it might incite violence with its depiction of a loner driven to criminal ends. The film, starring Joaquin Phoenix in the lead, reimagines the villain’s origin story, painting him as a mentally unstable man who becomes an unhinged gunman after being abused by society. There have also been rumors that the 2012 Aurora shooter James Holmes was inspired by the Joker, a rumor that has since been debunked but still caused concern going into this past opening weekend.

In the lead-up to the release, studio Warner Bros. preempted more drama by disinviting press to the blockbuster’s Los Angeles premiere. “A lot has been said about Joker,“ a studio spokesperson told Variety, “and we just feel it’s time for people to see the film.”

In a cover story with Vanity Fair, Phoenix said that just because the film is dark and potentially controversial doesn’t mean it’s not worth making. “I was going through [the script] and I realized, I said, ‘Well, why would we make something, like, where you sympathize or empathize with this villain?’ It’s like, because that’s what we have to do,” he said. “It’s so easy for us to—we want the simple answers, we want to vilify people. It allows us to feel good if we can identify that as evil. ‘Well, I’m not racist ’cause I don’t have a Confederate flag or go with this protest.’ It allows us to feel that way, but that’s not healthy because we’re not really examining our inherent racism that most white people have, certainly. Or whatever it may be. Whatever issues you may have. It’s too easy for us and I felt like, yeah, we should explore this villain. This malevolent person.”

More Great Stories from Vanity Fair

— Apple learns from one of Netflix’s biggest mistakes

— What the real-life inspiration for Hustlers thinks of J. Lo’s performance

— Remembering Shawshank Redemption, 25 years after its debut

— A sprinkle of Meghan magic in Cape Town

— Impeachment fervor is causing a ruckus at Fox News

— From the Archive: The drama behind Rebel Without a Cause and a young star’s death

Looking for more? Sign up for our daily Hollywood newsletter and never miss a story.

From Prince’s Private Archive to Elton John’s Autobiography, These Books Take You Inside The Minds of Musical Greats

1 / 10

box office

“We’re in Uncharted Territory”: Joker’s Controversy Predicted to Only Help It at the Box Office

After weeks of debate, the R-rated comic book adaptation is projected to make $155 million worldwide this weekend—and could set a U.S. record.

clown prince of crime

How Joker Handled Its Press-Less Hollywood Premiere

No red-carpet interviews? No problem.

all in the family

Joker: Let’s Talk About His Mom, Shall We?

In the super-villain origin story, Arthur Fleck isn’t the only one who gets a surprising, fleshed-out past.

Movies

Reintroducing Humphrey Bogart: The Untold Stories of a Hollywood Icon’s Volatile Private Life

The Casablanca star’s career was shaped by his relationships with women, from his distant mother to the love of his life, Lauren Bacall. Those stories come to the forefront in a new documentary, Bogart: Life Comes in Flashes.

Hollywood

How Real Tornados Tormented the Making of Twisters

Lee Isaac Chung, director of the Twister sequel, wanted to shoot in Oklahoma during storm season: “I was very naive.”

Hollywood

Dan Stevens Is Down to Get Weird

More than a decade after leaving Downton Abbey, the Cuckoo star reflects on what he’s learned—and passed on to costar Hunter Schafer: “I think it was refreshing and delightful for her to realize that not every job needs to be like Euphoria.”

Television

House of the Dragon’s Ewan Mitchell Is Channeling Tony Soprano and Robert De Niro

Mitchell, who plays the one-eyed Prince Aemond, drops by Still Watching to chat about his character’s motivations and surprising vulnerability.

Movies

Liza Minnelli Is Writing a Memoir Because She’s “Mad as Hell”

In a statement to People, Minnelli expressed disappointment with other representations of her life and revealed that she’s releasing a memoir set to hit stands in spring of 2026: “It’s my own damn story.”

Style

Radhika Jones on Jenna Ortega’s Rise to Stardom

The VF editor in chief charts the September cover star’s trajectory from nine-year-old working actor to global name—and now a producer on Wednesday.

Award Season

Natasha Lyonne, Elizabeth Olsen, and Carrie Coon Hold Nothing Back in the Wrenching His Three Daughters

The three stars exclusively share the trailer for their widely acclaimed Netflix drama, and go deep on their vulnerable powerhouse performances: “I let go so completely.”