Eleanor of Alburquerque

Lost Kingdoms – Kingdom of Aragon

House of Jiménez The Kingdom of Aragon began its life in 1035 when it was established as an independent Kingdom. Its first King was Ramiro I of Aragon, an illegitimate son of Sancho III of Pamplona. Ramiro’s first wife was Ermesinda of Bigorre, who was thus the first Queen of Aragon. They went on to have five [read more]

Lost Kingdoms – Kingdom of Sardinia

The Kingdom of Sardinia began its life in 1324 when King James II of Aragon claimed the territories as the Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica. The Kingdom remained separate from the Crown of Aragon. House of Barcelona James II was married four times but as his first marriage to Isabella of Castile had been annulled, [read more]

Queens Regent – Eleanor of Aragon

A regent is “a person appointed to administer a state because the monarch is a minor, is absent or is incapacitated.” Eleanor of Aragon was born on 1 February 1402 as the daughter of Ferdinand I of Aragon and Eleanor of Alburquerque. She lost her father at the age of 14, and he was succeeded by her brother Alfonso [read more]

Burial Places of the Queens of Spain

Anna of Austria – El Escorial (San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain) Barbara of Portugal – Convent of the Salesas Reales (Madrid, Spain) Beatrice of Portugal – Monastery of Sancti Spiritus (Toro, Spain) Berengaria of Barcelona – Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela (Galicia, Spain) Berenguela of Castile – Abbey of Santa Maria la Real de Huelgas (Burgos, Spain) Blanche of Bourbon – Monasterio de San Francisco de Jerez [read more]

To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.

Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen.