Fresh from having been to Portugal, the sublime Charlene Soraira overcame nerves to perform a sterling set at Thousand Island. I’ve been an admirer of Soraia’s work for quite a long while, debut album Moonchild was fantastic and the long overdue sophomore Love Is The Law was a work of art. Now living in Exmouth, Devon this was one support slot not to be missed. Charlene is a lovely human being and she has a wonderful personality.

This impeccable performance compromised of 7 succulent songs all of which will feature on the next record. Having witnessed these tracks live has me relishing the prospect of having the 3rd LP within my hands (when album 3 will drop, your guess is good as mine).

7.45pm came and a solo Charlene graced the stage armed with her weapon of choice. “Hello humans, you are there. I was gonna come out and say hi Wembley but I thought that was being a bit rude. I’m Charlene and I’m going to play for you before Soham comes out. I’m going to play some songs before this lovely gentleman comes out” Soraia humourously said before getting stuck into Where’s My Tribe. I have a strong feeling that this could be the name of LP 3 and it all falls down to a hashtag Soraia made on Twitter back in March. Back to the song in question, Where’s My Tribe was an exquisite track which had been written to perfection. Charlene’s crisp vocals were delicately sweet and those lyrics were ever so entrancing “Where’s My Tribe/ Lost all hope and I/ Fear I won’t survive/ If I stay here tonight”. This tantalising treat was smothered in plenty of folk goodness and Charlene has not changed in the slightest. “I was going to come out here and say be prepared to get all your rotting veg to throw at me. Coz I have not played a gig in like nearly a year. I did actually write a set list but I can’t even see it because I wrote it with a beautiful BIC Biro and not with a Sharpie. So lessons to be learnt” Charlene wittingly said before getting stuck into Temptation. I found this terrific tune incredibly sleek and at the same time plenty of chilled out vibes radiated from the performance. Soraia’s angelic warbling had my hairs on the back of my neck stand on edge whilst there was a tinge of darkness to those story telling lyrics “You have a wife/ You have a child/ How could I/ Resist Temptation”. After plenty of applause it was time for a bit of Beautiful People. I found this exquisite cut to be rather relaxing. Charlene’s succulently sweet vocals were literally a breath of fresh air, whilst those luscious lyrics left me utterly enthralled. Infused to the ending you had the phenomenal Now You Are With Her. I have plenty of praise for this whimsical number, Soraia’s candy coated vocal tones were incredibly soothing and those top notch lyrics were so beautiful albeit tinges of sadness “It’s you I turn to/ When the world gets me down/ Who will I run to/ When you ain’t around”. Basically it painted a picture of best friends who drift apart because the guy has other priorities as he has a new partner.

“This is always the fun part when you put new stings on your guitar and you’re like oh no is it going to snap. All these songs are new, so I’m still like Oh My God what am I doing with this but I’m going to play the newer ones that are slightly more interesting for my hands” Charlene Soraia mentioned before embarking onto Tragic Youth. I have nothing but praise for this sumptuous song. The lyrics were top notch and those wondrous vocal tones sent shivers up my spine. Following on was the final newie of the night and this being Saboteur Tigeur. “It’s about that inner saboteur that we all have. You know that inner one, not the outer one. Not the one that your next door neighbour has, that’s obviously a much nicer tiger” Soraia mentioned to the intimate audience before launching into this phenomenal number. Delivered at a fast pace, Saboteur Tigeur was an insanely catchy number aided by Charlene’s breathtaking vocals “No more time/ No more space/ I can’t always tell if you’re lying/ We both lost faith/ No more crying lover/ No more wasting our time/ Making mistakes/ Au Revoir/ Saboteur Tigeur”.

“I need to stop starting sentences with So Um. Coz you know there are some people who are like. Yeah So Like, maybe I should start doing that, until I do a gig with someone called So Like. Coz knowing my life that’s actually what happens. all of these songs, I’ve got a new album coming out at some point. I think, I’m not sure. Somethings sometime change, like change happens I’ve accepted that now. For this new album I basically did loads of demos for it and the head of my label went ahead and mastered it as it was. It’s just literally me and a guitar in front of a microphone in my old house” Soraia said before rounding up the set with Likely To Kill. Now this was an incredible tune played at a steady pace. The lyrics paint the story of a broken relationship. The girl who loves the guy has had enough of all the arguments “I love you, but I can’t fight you anymore” and “If we stay in this together I’ll be more likely to kill you”. I first witnessed this live 4 years ago at The Islington where Charlene was supporting Lapland, just looking back in my iTunes library I was shocked to see this didn’t make the cut. It didn’t appear on the deluxe edition which you could only purchase in Europe!!!. Here’s to hoping the likes of Forgiven, Giants and Animal do receive the studio treatment one day.

SET LIST

Where’s My Tribe

Temptation

Beautiful People

Now You Are With Her

Tragic Youth

Saboteur Tiguer

Likely To Kill

OVERALL: Charlene Soraia is a mega talented singer/ songwriter who I well and truly adore. The songs she has under her belt are pure perfection and her delicious vocal tones were incredibly dreamy. I fell in love with her the moment the moment she supported Alice Gold at The Lexington in 2011.

The songs performed this evening were ever so exquisite and at the same time I was left speechless whilst hearing them performed live. Charlene hasn’t changed in the slightest, it’s been three years since the Love Is The Law LP and these tunes stick with the same formula. Whilst I enjoyed the band whom accompanied Soraia during the Moonchild era, there is nothing better than witnessing a solo set.