Please Note: I have included some video segments from my 2015 interview with Charlene throughout this interview.

Charlene Lite is a yoga instructor, singer, songwriter, life coach and so much more! In fact, Charlene is a fearless lady, who, for her 40th Birthday, spent 40 days performing 40 fearless acts that took her outside her comfort zone. She documents her journey on her podcast, The Fearless Lady.

I met Charlene in 2015 while exploring the various fitness classes at NYSC (New York Sports Club). My friends & I signed up for her Saturday yoga class. From the minute Charlene started class, I knew this was going to be a class I would continue to take. As time went on, I would sometimes take Charlene’s Yoga Unplugged class where Charlene would sing an original song during shavasana. Her songs often made me think about my life while sending me into a relaxing state of mind.

Charlene began every class with a personal story about her life. She found a way to connect each anecdote to that class’ flow. Sometimes Charlene would tell us a life lesson she learned. Other times, she would tell us a dream she had that led her to pondering one of life’s mysterious questions.

Before the pandemic, Charlene moved from New York back to her home state of California. The time at home has been extremely motivating. It has inspired and empowered Charlene to take her career to another level. She has created an online coaching business that focuses on helping you find and follow your true voice so you can fearlessly step into the truth of who you are and say yes to an enlightened life! A virtual 6-week Group Coaching Program is set to begin next month (July 2020). There’s so much more on the way that she is excited to offer!

Charlene has loved this time “away” from her old normal life. She has been able to connect with her NYC yoga community by offering classes via Instagram Live and Zoom. It’s been incredible to feel the love even though she is 3000 miles away! Charlene says “It’s been soul-nourishing to have this time to reflect, take long walks and have no where to be. I can’t remember when I didn’t have a class to run to so I’m relishing this time off.”

Charlene has kept her fitness juices flowing during quarantine. She created a new morning ritual. She wakes up before sunrise, goes up to her rooftop, meditates, journals and then comes back to her apartment to take a warm bath. This new routine leaves Charlene feeling amazing! It has completely changed her. She loves starting her day with intention and clarity while witnessing the sunrise!

She has also taken classes from all her favorite teachers in NYC. She has explored classes from instructors on YouTube, Instagram Live and Zoom. She has tried dance classes, moon-circles, meditation, and sound baths, to name a few. Charlene says, “This is a wonderful time to explore fitness content online. For instance, I discovered Chloe Ting, who offers a ton of free fitness videos, including my favorite 10-minute ab workouts which I love, because who wants to do more than 10-minutes of abs!”

Additionally, Charlene has attended virtual meet-ups, women’s circles, manifestation workshops, and connected with more of her friends who live far away.

Charlene gives some great tips to remain active while we wait for gyms/fitness studios to re-open.

Charlene offers free yoga videos on her YouTube channel (YouTube.com/mellomydog) as well as donation-based classes via Zoom.

She suggests focusing on mental health too. Charlene says, “There’s so much out there to stay physically fit, but we need to apply that same passion to stay mentally fit.” Charlene recommends listening to podcasts that focus on mindfulness, watching sunsets, listening to relaxing music before you go to bed, taking epson salt baths, and creating a no phone policy at least an hour before bedtime and at least an hour after you wake up. She also encourages exploring guided meditations on YouTube and Spotify. Deep, long breaths before you make decisions, hands to heart to feel your own inhale/exhale…

As gyms/fitness studios re-open, Charlene will continue to offer her classes online. The first thing Charlene wants to do when we are no longer sheltering in place is go to her favorite restaurant and eat!!!

For more on Charlene visit http://www.charlenelite.com and follow her on Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube!

More on Charlene:

Originally from Los Angeles; a valley-girl, for sure, Charlene moved to New York City in late 2005 to pursue her BIG dream of becoming a successful recording artist. She spent years doing the hustle — gigging, recording, working odd jobs like becoming a bartender, (She actually went to bartending school!), temping, coat-check, you name it…anything she could do to pay the rent…and all of which didn’t make her happy.

One day, as she was sitting in an office cubicle doing unfulfilling work and counting the hours until she could leave…Charlene had an epiphany: “I can stay at this job while “waiting” for my life to begin or I can DO something that makes me happier and more fulfilled every-damn-day!” From that point on, Charlene read everything she could on the subject of Self-Improvement.

Charlene understood if she wanted to change her life, she had to change her thoughts about her life. And with the guidance of many books (She can give you a list), workshops and lectures…At age thirty-five, she took another leap of faith…Charlene quit her full-time job in July of 2011, signed up for Yoga Teacher Training and hit the ground running.

She taught full-time all over the city: Equinox, New York Sports Club, Crunch, NBC. She included live acoustic music in her classes, adding “Yoga Unplugged” to the schedule at Crunch as well as monthly themed-workshops throughout the city. She is also a coach on How to Live a Life You Love.

Charlene completed a documentary film about her transformational journey called, The Dream Diaries. Charlene is a singer/songerwriter whose music can be found on iTunes.