Nashville, TN (May 12, 2023) – Singer- songwriter Cody Belew arrives with his stirring new single, “Charlene,” and an equally thought-provoking visual, both out now via Visionary Media Group. A timely music statement, “Charlene” finds Cody speaking to the dichotomy of being a gay Christian man in the South as he questions the state of politics and religion in America. Harkening a new era for the rising star, “Charlene” is a rousing declaration of faith and pride that weaves elements of gospel, country, and pop into Belew’s compelling storytelling.

“Charlene” was inspired by an encounter that Cody had several years ago with a fellow Christian, who refused to accept his sexuality. But the song itself offers a broader message, explains Belew. “‘Charlene’ represents an entire population of Christians who wield religion as a weapon to condemn ‘the others.’ They have lost their way from Jesus’ message, which is to love everybody.” That hypocrisy plays out in the song’s powerful video, which made its broadcast premiere on CMT, CMT Music and Paramount Times Square’s Billboard. Directed by Tim Cofield, whose credits include visuals for Dolly Parton, Garth Brooks, and Sheryl Crow, viewers watch the character of Charlene (played by Andi Tillman) become increasingly disgusted with the inclusive world around her.

Go behind the scenes of “Charlene” HERE

Read Cody’s Op-Ed in The Tennessean HERE

Born and raised as a Southern Baptist in Beebe, Arkansas, Belew’s earliest memories revolve around the church, but his relationship with God wasn’t always easy. “A preacher told me in a sermon that homosexuality was an abomination. So imagine that complex thought for a young boy…your very makeup is damned to hell.” Eventually, Belew had his own reckoning with God and found a sense of purpose and pride.

Years later, Belew had another life-altering encounter. This time, it was with an associate named Charlene. “She matter-of-factly told me that I would not get into Heaven because of my sexuality. She dismissed my faith. It was her way or no way. And so I gave up and left her to sit in her judgment.” On fire, Belew immediately put pen to paper. “I wrote ‘Charlene’ to remind all the Charlenes of the world that I am a child of God and a brother to Jesus.” Today, the song has taken on a new sense of poignancy. “I had no way of knowing that, in the short years to come, this would play out on a national stage – all in Jesus’ name. I’m using ‘Charlene’ as a mirror. Are you living like Christ or are you living like the modern Evangelical Christian?” Belew adds, “‘Charlene’ is not a battle cry. It is an altar call.”

“Charlene” arrives on the heels of a particularly triumphant year for Belew. Assembling a mix of candid originals and well-loved classics by artists who inspired him, Cody released his self-titled debut EP in early 2022. The lead single, “Rodeo,” premiered in Times Square and quickly found regular rotation on CMT. His take on the Dolly Parton classic “Here You Come Again” was a welcome reinvention, with Robert Oermann from Music Row Magazine saying “He completely reinterprets this 1977 Dolly hit, transforming it from a bouncy ditty into a cry of romantic anguish. His only accompaniment is a pianist, but his dramatic performance is so gripping that it needs nothing else.” Last year also had Belew reimagining the Brooks & Dunn classic “Neon Moon” with GRAMMY® Award-winning producer Dave Audé. The disco-tinged cover, which recently hit the one million streams mark on Spotify, continues to top a variety of popular playlists.

Belew kicked off 2023 as a member of CMT’s coveted “Listen Up” program, which counts Kacey Musgraves, Kelsea Ballerini, Thomas Rhett, and Maren Morris among its alums. A long-time Nashville resident, Cody recently completed a yearlong, sold-out residency at the city’s famed Lipstick Lounge and is playing a slew of upcoming shows for a fan base he’s built with his impassioned vocals, deft songwriting, and undeniable stage presence. Belew is currently working on his full-length debut, in which he’ll traverse between his deep-seated love of Southern music and his obligation to activism.

About Cody Belew:

Cody’s love of the South is in his blood. Reflecting on his upbringing in rural Beebe, Arkansas, what sticks with him most is the one-room church where he learned to sing when he was just a toddler. It’s these soulful roots that are reflected in his music, which combines authentic storytelling with powerful vocals that take listeners to the heart of his experience. Blending raw emotion with Southern stomp, Cody offers a unique point of view on faith and love – both of which he approaches with fearless honesty.

Press features include CMT, American Songwriter and WWD

TikTok | Instagram | Twitter | YouTube | Facebook | Website

Download high-res assets HERE.

About Visionary Media Group:

Visionary Media Group is a homegrown Nashville-based company whose mission is to illuminate purpose-driven stories through the power of Music, Media & Technology. Visionary’s unique blend of talent, technology and impact, endeavor to Empower Artistry, Enhance Content, Engage Community, and Amplify Storytelling. We invite you to join us in our new and exciting journey to empower artists and fans to reimagine authentic connections, re-tell their inspiring stories, and rekindle a shared sense of purpose.

Instagram | Twitter | Facebook | Website

Press inquiries:

Bianca Bianconi | 42West