1. Bengaluru Metro

The Bangalore Metro, commonly known as the Bengaluru Metro or Namma Metro, is a high-speed rail system including at-grade, elevated, and underground stations. The Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) recently stated that commuters in the city may now enjoy metro services till late since the Bangalore metro schedules on both the Purple and Green lines have been extended. In addition, on October 9, 2023, the Purple Line from Whitefield (Kadugodi) to Challaghatta will be operational.

BMRCL, a joint venture of the Karnataka government and the Government of India, manages the Bengaluru metro operations. The Namma metro began service in October 2011. The project is notable for being the first metro transport system in Southern India to include underground services. It would also be the first inter-state metro project in South India, linking Bangalore and Hosur in Tamil Nadu.

I) Inauguration Date:

The Bangalore Metro (Namma Metro) began its service on October 20, 2011.

ii) System Type:

Namma Metro is a Rapid Transit System with a combination of at-grade, elevated, and underground stations.

iii) Operator:

The system is controlled and maintained by the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL).

iv) Working Stations:

As of the provided information, there are 51 working metro stations.

v) Train Length:

Trains on the Bangalore Metro consist of 6 coaches.

vi) Bangalore Metro Timings:

The metro services typically run from 5:30 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

vii) Current Metro Lines:

There are two operational metro lines: Purple Line and Green Line.

2. Namma Metro key facts

The following are some key facts regarding the Bangalore Metro or Bengaluru Metro.

3. Bangalore Namma Metro: Timeline

Here is the Bangalore metro timetable, as well as the projected dates for the forthcoming Namma metro:

4. Bangalore Metro Route Map

Bangalore metro map presently has 66 operating stations and various lines. A few metro lines are being built, and more are being planned.

The Bangalore metro map with operating metro lines and metro station names is shown below. The Purple and Green lines are currently fully functioning.

5. Bangalore Metro Timings

The Bangalore Metro begins operations at 5:00 a.m. and the final metro departs at 10:35 p.m. Services begin at 6:00 a.m. and conclude at 10:35 p.m. on common holidays such as the second and fourth Saturdays. On Sunday, however, the first metro arrives at 7:00 a.m. and runs until 11:00 p.m.

5.1) Bangalore Metro Charges (fares)

The fare structure is divided into three(3) categories:

Token (Ticket): Tokens can be purchased for as little as Rs. 10 and as much as Rs. 50. This ticket type is ideal for one-way trips on the Bangalore metro.

Group Tickets: A Group of at least 25 persons traveling together can purchase group tickets. However, everyone in the group should be going to the same place. A 10% reduction on the token fare is available.

Smart Card: A smart card is a card that can be recharged based on usage. These cards cost Rs 50 and may be filled with up to Rs 3000. A metro passenger receives 5% off any amount over the token value.

6. Bangalore Metro-Purple Line

In October 2011, the purple line opened, linking Baiyyappanahalli in the east to the Mysore Road terminal station in the southwest. The route is 18.1 km long and contains 17 stops. Its 4.8 km length is underground in regions such as MG Road, Majestic, and others. This route was expanded from Mysore Road to Kengeri in August 2021. The authority has now extended the purple line by two kilometers till October 9, 2023, when it will terminate at Challaghatta.

7. Bangalore Metro Green Line

The Bangalore Namma Metro Green line, which runs from Nagasandra in the northwest to Anjanapura in the southwest, opened in March 2014. The overall distance between these two locations is 30 km, with 30 stops in between. The Green Line is elevated for four kilometers and has three underground stops. The most recent addition was completed in January 2021, and it is presently being expanded another 33.5 km to Madavara and Silk Institute in the south.

8. Bangalore Metro Yellow Line

The Namma Metro Yellow Line is almost finished. It is scheduled to be operational in April 2024.

The Yellow Line Namma Metro’s Highlights

The Yellow Line is an elevated metro track from R.V. Road to Bommasandra and has 16 stops, with the R.V. Road station acting as the city-side terminal.

• The Yellow Line will include three interchange stations: Silk Board, RV Road, and Jayadeva, allowing commuters to switch between the Yellow, Pink, Green, and Purple lines.

• Once operational, it is estimated to carry over 2.5 lakh people.

The Namma Metro Yellow Line will alleviate traffic congestion in the Electronics City and Silk Board districts.

9. Stations on the Namma Metro Yellow Line

10. Namma Metro Lines Under Construction

Also, Read Our Latest Blog Posts:

The New Evolution of Telangana Secretariat and The Tallest Ambedkar Statue: Symbol of Equality and Justice

A Wonderful Drive Trip On Outer Ring Road, Hyderabad

Brief Info of Regional Ring Road, Hyderabad

Exploring Hyderabad’s Mobility Valley: The Hub of Innovation and Connectivity

Do You Know 13 Myths About HMDA Master Plan?

Why Must Visit 15 Places in Hyderabad?

Do You Know-BEST 10 PLACES TO VISIT IN WARANGAL

Gold vs Real Estate: Which Is The Better & Smart Investment?

Which House Facing Direction is Better to Live?