At present, two line of Namma Metro are operational – Purple and Green. Four other metro lines are under construction and will be start commercial operations in a few months. The Namma Metro app now facilitates it customers to book tickets using Namma Metro app. The tickets can be downloaded as QR codes.

Bengaluru: Namma Metro which means ‘Our Metro’ in Kannada, is making commute easier for city residents on several key stretches. At present, only Phase 1 of the metro network is operational, and Phase 2 is under construction. Meanwhile, plans are being chalked out for the Phase 3. The Namma Metro, also called Bengaluru Metro or Bangalore Metro, network spans 42.3 km at present, and consists of 51 stations. Over 5 lakh commuters use the metro facility daily.

The Namma Metro is being owned and managed by the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL). The BMRCL was constituted under partnership by the Government of Karnataka and the Government of India. Namma Metro trains operate at a frequency of 5–15 minutes at speeds of under 80km/h. The trains operate on ground, elevated sections and tunnels. Most Namma Metro trains have 6 coaches.

Namma Metro: Route Map

Namma Metro: Timings and fare

Timings: Namma Metro operates daily at an interval of 4-5 minutes between each train. The metro operations start at 5 am and ends at 11 pm from Monday to Friday. On second and fourth Saturdays and public holidays, the metro service start at 6 am and end at 10:30 pm. On Sundays, the metro operates from 7 am to 11 pm.

Fare: The minimum fare for using the Namma Metro is Rs 10 and the maximum fare is around Rs 45. The fare is different for different routes and the distance travelled.

List of Bengaluru Metro Lines

At present, two line of Namma Metro are operational – Purple and Green. Four other metro lines are under construction and will be start commercial operations in a few months.

1. Purple Line: This was the Namma Metro line to get operational under Phase 1. It links Challaghatta in the southwest to Whitefield (Kadugodi) to the east. Purple Line of Bengaluru Metro has 37 stations and 4 interchange stations. It was also the first underground metro station in Bangalore.

2. Green Line: After Purple Line, Green Line of Namma Metro was opened for public. The line links Nagasandra in the northwest to Silk Institute in the south. It has 29 stations and spans 31 kms.

3. Yellow Line: The Yellow Line of Namma Metro is yet to start operations. It will link Rashtreeya Vidyalaya Road to Bommasadra and will span over 18 km. The metro corridor will have 16 stations and will also be connect to Hosur later.

4. Blue Line: This Namma Metro line will link Kasturi Nagar to Bengaluru’s Kempegowda International Airport (KIA). This line will span 58.19 km and will feature 30 stations.

5. Pink Line: The Pink line will link Nagawara to Gottigerre in southern Bangalore. It will have a total of 18 stations.

6. Orange Line: This Namma Metro line will be constructed under Phase 3. It will connect two lines – Phase 2A and Phase 3A at a single station. The Orange Line will be an elevated corridor and will feature 22 stations. It will span 31 kilometres along the Outer Ring Road (ORR) from JP Nagar to Hebbal. This metro line will also have an interchange station with the Blue Line at Hebbal. Initial deadline to start the operations is between 2028-29.

How to book ticket using Namma Metro app?

The Namma Metro app now facilitates it customers to book tickets using Namma Metro app. The tickets can be downloaded as QR codes. The app is currently available for Android users only. The app also has details of all Bangalore metro stations. Not just metro, commuters can use this app to book autos and taxis to and from metro stations.