The inauguration of the much-awaited Namma Metro was finally completed on October 20, 2011. The first section of the Bangalore metro, was opened by Urban Development Minister Kamal Nath on October 20. The 6·7 km elevated 'Reach 1' from Byappanahalli to Mahatma Gandhi Road forms the eastern section of the 18·1 km east-west line, serving six stations.

The Metro rail chugged into the IT hub of Bangalore Thursday, promising the beginning of the end of the city's traffic woes and becoming a reality almost 30 years after the idea was mooted. Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (BMRCL) expects an estimated 30,000 people to hop on the Reach 1 journey between Byappanahalli and M.G. Road every day.

The Bangalore Metro seems to be literally and metaphorically bringing together the citizens of the country's Garden City.

Media reports talk of the Bangalore Metro evoking an unprecedented response of smiles and waves on its inaugural run from children on playgrounds, policemen on duty and homemakers hanging clothes on terraces, with the passengers chanting 'Bharat Mata ki Jai', 'Jai Karnataka' and 'Jai Namma Metro', all reminiscent of the first flush of patriotism in the early decades after Independence. According to Metro officials, over 1 crore commuters have used the Metro services in the past three days. Witnessing an overwhelming response on the first couple of days, the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) has decided to run trains till 11.30 pm.

The dictionary may define a metro as an underground railway a la the Paris subway, but the one in Bangalore literally reaches for the sky while passing over lush green stretches. The Bangalore Metro has been described as world-class, with the first train being run by driver Sowjanya, almost as if to make the point that what a man can do, a woman can do much better.

The next stage will include a 4·9 km underground section through the city centre from MG Road to the main station, adding four more stops. From here the line will return to viaduct for the 6·5 km Reach 2, which will serve five intermediate stations before terminating at Mysore Road on the western side of the city.

BMRC is also developing a 24 km north-south route from Yeshwanthpur to RV Road, with 21 stations. This line will have a 3 km underground section with three stations in the city centre, including an interchange with the east-west line at the railway station.

Longer-term plans include a northern extension from Yeshwanthpur to Hesargatta Cross in the northwest and a southern extension from RV Road to Puttenhalli Cross. This would add another 66·9 route-km, with all four radial routes extended further into the surrounding suburbs.

Interior of the Train

Source : tsr.net.co- Pic by Anusha V Iyer

FARES

The fares for travel by Namma Metro Reach 1, between Byappanahalli and M.G. Road that has six stations, have been finalised.

Commuters will have to pay a minimum of Rs. 10 and a maximum of Rs. 15 for their journey on the stretch. Also the Namma Metro Travel Cards can be purchased online.

According to the Board Sub Committee of Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (BMRCL), which finalised the fares, the commute from Byappanahalli to Swami Vivekananda Road is Rs. 10, to Indiranagar Rs. 12, to Ulsoor Rs. 12, to Trinity Circle Rs. 14 and M.G. Road Rs. 15.

In the return direction, the fares from M.G. Road will be Rs. 10 to Trinity Circle, Rs. 12 to Ulsoor, Rs. 12 to Indiranagar, Rs. 14 to Swami Vivekananda Road and Rs. 15 to Byappanahalli.

While the minimum fare, for a distance of 1 km, is Rs. 10, the maximum fare that is between Byappanahalli and M.G. Road for a distance of 6.7 km, is Rs. 15.

The committee has recommended introduction of stored value tickets, group tickets and integrated metro-bus tickets as well.

Smart cards

Except for group tickets, which will be in the form of paper ticket and Contactless Smart Tokens for single journey, tickets for multiple journeys have to be bought in the form of Contactless Smart Cards (CSC).

CSCs offer discounted fares for passengers and come in two kinds — Varshik to perform multiple journeys between any station, and Sanchar for fixed number of trips between two particular stations. Passengers can buy the CSC at Rs. 50 and can load either Varshik or Sanchar or both on it. For Varshik, a passenger can load maximum of Rs. 1,500 in multiples of Rs. 50; the CSC will be valid for one year from the date of last “add value”. Apart from metro stations, values can be added through ATMs, net banking and mobile banking of State Bank of India; Bangalore Metro website and scratch cards through SMS.

Namma Metro Travel Cards can be purchased online. Every card has a unique 11 digit number engraved on the rear face of card. You can now choose your own premium number. The charges for premium numbers are dependent upon the choice made for last 3 or 4 numbers, 5 or 6 numbers and 7 numbers. It is Rs. 50, Rs. 100 and Rs. 150 respectively.

Advantage of buying Online : The owners of these premium number cards enjoy privilege over others having normal number cards. You can give request to block these cards online whenever the card is lost or stolen.

The user has to register on this site and furnish required details. The selected card after making online payment will be despatched at the address furnished through post within 7 working days.

The Route

Discounted fares

Varshik is designed to be cheaper than token cards. For example, you can travel at a discounted Rs. 8.50 between Byappanahalli and S.V. Road and for Rs. 12.75 between Byappanahalli and M.G. Road.

Sanchar is more useful for regular commutes between two specific stations for work as they are by 5 to 10 per cent cheaper than Varshik tickets.

Fare zones

Fare zones are classified by distance. For F1 Zone (0 to 2 km), a 10-trip Sanchar will cost Rs. 80, 40-trip Rs. 316, 50-trip Rs. 395 and 100-trip Rs. 765.

For F2 zone (2 to 4 km), the discounted fares are Rs. 95, Rs. 375, Rs. 470 and Rs. 920. For distance ranging between 4 and 6 km (F3), the Sanchar fares are Rs. 115, Rs. 440, Rs. 550 and Rs. 1,070.

For F4 zone (6 to 7 km), that is between Byappanahalli and M.G. Road, the Sanchar fares are Rs. 120 for 10 trips, Rs. 470 for 40 trips, Rs. 590 for 50 trips and Rs. 1,150 for 100 trips.

Group tickets will be issued to a minimum 10 passengers travelling together between the same set of stations and are 10 per cent cheaper than token tickets.

Feeder Buses

Even as the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation (BMRCL) is racing against time to get Namma Metro ready for its formal inauguration on April 4, the BMTC has begun plying feeder buses on a few routes along Reach 1 stretch between MG Road and Byappanahalli. The BMTC, which has entered into an arrangement with the BMRCL to run the feeder bus services from the six ReachOne stations to nearby areas, is charging its usual fares for the new services too.

Ten mini buses are running on select feeder routes for now. All efforts have been made to provide the Metro feeder bus services a unique branding. The buses coated in silver hue, have a pink band in the middle.

In all, 26 feeder routes have been identified to run from the six ReachOne stations. The BMTC has planned to deploy 64 buses on these routes and 10 of these will be mini buses. The mini buses currently on the feeder routes have been fabricated at the BMTC’s Indiranagar depot. Fabrication work is on for the remaining 54 big buses but they will run only after Metro becomes operational.

Five feeder routes each have been identified along Byappanahalli, Indiranagar, Halasuru and MG Road, while four each have been identified along Trinity Circle and Swami Vivekananda stations. The feeder buses will run at a frequency of 10 minutes which will be later increased to five minutes based on demand. The minimum ticket fare will be Rs 5.

Integrated daily pass

The BMTC and BMRCL have also rolled out the common pass — Metro Bus Transit (MBT) — which will be distributed in feeder buses services and BMTC depots and pass counters. The MBT is of two types — Saral and Saraag. While Saral MBT would cost Rs110 and the commuter can travel in air-conditioned buses as well as the Metro, the Saraag MBT is priced at `70 and will enable commuter to travel in ordinary BMTC buses and the Metro.