Namma Metro is the second largest operational metro rail in India. It has a length of 73.5 kilometers. East to West, it lies 43.9 kilometers from Whitefield to Challaghatta Terminal. In the North-South direction, this operates 30.32 kilometers between Nagasandra and Silk Route. It has a total of 66 stations all across the city, comprising underground, grade, and elevated stations. You will be pleased to know that it is India's first Metro rail project commissioned with 750V DC Third Rail Traction on Standard Gauge. There is one more fun information for you. Did you know it is one of those few metro services in the world that harvests and reuses rainwater?

Profitability of Namma Metro:

It’s a list of all the reasons why the Bangalore metro is profitable:

It emits less carbon, so it's eco-friendly.

You can avoid long traffic and reach your destination within minutes.

This air-conditioned vehicle is perfect for having a comfortable journey.

It saves you a lot of time.

It helps with this city’s unreliable public transport system.

Most Metro stations also provide excellent parking facilities for the passengers.

Sometimes, this also offers a cheap option for sightseeing.

It is one of the safest commutes for women to travel.

Timings:

According to the latest data for 2023, the Bangalore Metro is open Monday through Friday from 5 AM to 11 PM. On the second and fourth Saturdays and public holidays, the service runs from 6 AM to 10:30 PM. On Sundays, the metro runs from 7 AM to 11 PM. During peak hours, each train has 8- 10 minute time intervals. The timings may change due to different reasons. To get the latest information, please click on https://english.bmrc.co.in/#/.

Connectivity range of Bangalore Metro:

Sixty-six stations seem a lot to remember for the first timers. So, each part is divided into particular color-coded lines. For now, there are only 2 operational lines. However, soon, there will be a few more lines for the passengers' convenience. The lines are:

Purple Line: The East-West Line Spreads from Whitefield to Challaghatta Terminal. It has the first underground metro station in the city.

Green Line: The North-South line. Spreads from Nagasandra and Silk Route. The estimated time of travel is 60 minutes.

Yellow Line: This line will link Rashtreeya Vidyalaya Road to Bommasadra. It will cover a distance of over 18 km.

Blue Line: This will be the first Bangalore airport metro linking Kasturi Nagar to the airport.

Ticket Price:

Namma Metro is one of the most affordable transportation services services in Bangalore. While the world is struggling with inflation, a Bangalore metro ticket only starts at Rs. 10! The ticket price for Purple Line is between Rs.50-80. The Green Line is generally priced between Rs.10-60.

Conclusion:

Bangalore is undoubtedly one of the busiest cities in the world. To keep up with the pace, you need the best transport vehicle. From connectivity range to price range, this Bangalore metro ticks all the boxes of being the best. So now you may choose the Bangalore Metro to roam around the city.