The Young and the Restless spoilers document Nate Hastings’ (Sean Dominic) career is progressing, as he’s a doctor at Genoa City Memorial Hospital and offers his skills voluntarily at the New Hope clinic. Personally, he’s just begun dating Amanda Sinclair (Mishael Morgan).

As longtime Y&R fans recall and newer viewers have learned by watching classic episodes, Olivia Barber Winters (Tonya Lee Williams) is Nate’s mom. She’s been with the charitable group Doctors Without Borders for many years and was last seen in GC in 2012.

A serious illness, or another life-threatening situation would allow for Nate and Olivia to be reunited. Either character could be written into dire straits, or a less serious issue could be created in order to enable this projected comeback.

Young And The Restless Spoilers – Olivia Barber Winters Backstory Detail Refresher

Williams was cast on Y&R in 1990. She and Victoria Rowell (Drucilla Winters) joined the show that year as two sisters who were initially interested in the same man, Nathan Hastings (as originally played by Nathan Purdee). He was a reformed organized crime figure and eventual agent at Paul Williams (Doug Davidson) detective agency.

Olivia and Nathan married and had a child, Nate. Nathan eventually went off track, cheated on Liv, became fully estranged from his family, and later kidnapped Nate. Nathan (as then played by Adam Lazzare-White) was in the process of returning their son to Olivia when he was struck and killed by a car in 1996.

A recently shown repeat episode was from 1997, when Olivia married Malcolm Winters (Shemar Moore). Nate (as then played by child actor Bryant Jones) was a feature character in that memorable show.

Young And The Restless Spoilers – Amanda Sinclair Or Elena Dawson?

Nate was interested in Abby Newman (Melissa Ordway) in the recent past. They dated for awhile, but Abby decided that Nate wasn’t Mr. Right. She’s with Chance Chancellor (Donny Boaz) now.

It appeared as though Y&R was establishing a triangle between Nate, his cousin, Devon Hamilton (Bryton James), and Elena Dawson (Brytni Sarpy). That didn’t happen, but may prove to have been plot building material for future use, depending upon what happens with Amanda, who currently is also drawn to Billy Abbott (Jason Thompson).

Young And The Restless Spoilers – Legacy Character Always Welcome

Olivia was a major character, starting in the 1990’s. Her importance in Y&R’s history is already sealed. So, Williams’ return to the cast is hoped for in order to further Olivia’s legacy.

While the referenced personal health crisis for either Olivia, or Nate would facilitate such a return, a casual drop-in could also happen at any time. Here’s hoping that some scenario plays out so that Williams can rejoin the cast and then stay indefinitely.