Will Ferrell is set to star in his first Christmas movie since Elf, which came out a whopping 19 years ago.

You can watch the trailer for the musical film below:

The film, which also stars Ryan Reynolds, is set to be released in cinemas on 11 November and on Apple TV+ in the US on 18 November.

Ferrell will play the Ghost of Christmas Present in the film, which will be a musical adaptation of the classic Charles Dickens novel, A Christmas Carol - however it will be told from the ghosts' perspective, rather than that of Scrooge.

Describing it as "a modern musical rendition of Charles Dickens's classic holiday story A Christmas Carol," Apple explain: "Each Christmas Eve, the Ghost of Christmas Present (Will Ferrell) selects one dark soul to be reformed by a visit from three spirits.

"But this season, he picked the wrong Scrooge. Clint Briggs (Ryan Reynolds) turns the tables on his ghostly host until Present finds himself reexamining his own past, present and future.

"For the first time, A Christmas Carol is told from the perspective of the ghosts in this hilarious musical twist on the classic Dickens tale."

Reynolds will play the movie's Scrooge character - Clint Briggs - meanwhile other stars also include Octavia Spencer, Patrick Page, Sunita Mani, Joe Tippet and P J Byrne.

Meanwhile, the festive movie is directed and written by Sean Anders and John Morris, with songs by Oscar winners Benj Pasek and Justin Paul (known for La La Land).

Chloe Arnold - known for her work on The Late Late Show with James Corden - will be behind the dance sequences and choreography.

Speaking about the movie, Anders said: “I’m excited about the idea that when people hear Will Ferrell, Ryan Reynolds, Christmas comedy, they’re going to have an idea of what that is. And I don’t think they’re going to expect how we’re going to hit them with the dance.”

It's the first time Ferrell will have starred in a festive movie since Elf, which was released almost 20 years ago - way back in 2003.

In the popular Christmas movie - which also starred Zooey Deschanel who played Jovie - Ferrell starred as Buddy, an elf who makes the long journey from the North Pole to New York City to find his birth father.

We can't wait to have Ferrell back on our festive screens!