A graduate of USC who also trained at the famous Groundlings comedy group, Will Ferrell first rose to fame in the '90s on Saturday Night Live, creating memorable characters such as the Spartan Cheerleaders (with Cheri Oteri) and the Butabi brothers (with Chris Kattan), as well doing impressions of actual people, including George W. Bush, James Lipton and Alex Trebek. The sketch featuring the Butabi brothers became so popular that the duo went on to earn their own movie, A Night at the Roxbury, which Ferrell co-wrote with Kattan and Steve Koren.

While working on SNL, Ferrell also appeared in Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery and its sequel, Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, along with roles in Dick, Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, and Superstar, which starred fellow SNL castmate Molly Shannon.

In 2001, Ferrell delivered a memorable performance as the eccentric villain Mugatu in Zoolander, starring Ben Stiller. Two years later, he starred in Old School, stealing scenes left and right as Frank the Tank and helping to further elevate the era of the "Frat Pack" – a group of comedy actors that initially included Ferrell, Vince Vaughn, Owen Wilson, Luke Wilson, and Stiller, and later included Jack Black, Steve Carell, Paul Rudd, and John C. Reilly.

Following Old School, Ferrell delivered several more hits, including Elf, Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy, Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby, and Step Brothers. It was during this time that he also co-founded Funny Or Die with Adam McKay, showcasing comedy shorts voted on by viewers, and eventually growing into a viral comedy hitmaker. During those years, Ferrell also routinely made unforgettable cameos in films, including as Chazz Reinhold in Wedding Crashers and as Big Earl in Starsky and Hutch.

Behind the scenes, Ferrell has been a prolific producer for close to two decades, working on series like Eastbound & Down and Dead to Me and films like Barb and Star Go to Vista Del Mar, Booksmart, The Menu and this year’s Theater Camp and May December.