While the romantic lives of her most well-known characters seemed to thrive, Anna Torv kept hers hidden from the limelight. After starring in "Mindhunter" with Lauren Glazier as her love interest, fans wanted the romance to be realized in real life.

Advertisement

Australian actress Anna Torv has made a name for herself in the acting industry, delivering riveting performances on popular shows. Shortly after graduating from the National Institute of Dramatic Art in 2001 in her home country, she started landing roles in numerous TV series.

Torv is best known for starring as the "tough nut to crack" FBI agent Olivia Dunham in the sci-fi mystery show "Fringe." It aired from 2008 to 2013. She also received acclaim for her performance in Netflix's "Mindhunter" as Dr. Wendy Carr from 2017 to 2019.

Advertisement

Recently, she joined the cast of "The Last of Us," including lead stars Pedro Pascal and Bella Ramsey, opening the show as the calm-headed survivor Tess. The former two of Torv's characters appeared to have impenetrable emotional walls until they softened in the presence of loved ones.

While her secret romance with Mark Valley (who played John Scott) in "Fringe" did see the outside world, her love with Lauren Glazier (who played Kay) in "Mindhunter," much to the disappointment of the show's fans, unfortunately, couldn't.

Anna Torv poses at the 5th AACTA International Awards at Avalon Hollywood on January 29, 2016, in Los Angeles, California | Source: Getty Images

Anna Torv Used to Be Married to Her "Fringe" Co-star Mark Valley

Torv and Valley had dated for several months in 2008 before tying the knot that December. They kept their relationship and wedding under wraps until it was revealed and confirmed about two months after marrying.

Advertisement

However, Torv and Valley's union didn't last long; they separated quietly and were divorced by the end of 2009. It's unclear how their romantic lives panned out afterward, but after Valley left "Fringe," he moved on to the action series, "Human Target."

In addition to acting, producing, writing, and directing, Valley has also lent his voice to animated characters, such as Clark Kent (a.k.a. Superman) in "Batman: The Dark Night Returns - Parts 1 & 2."

Anna Torv and Mark Valley are pictured as they arrive at the premiere of Paramount's "Star Trek" on April 30, 2009, at Grauman's Chinese Theatre, Hollywood, California. | Source: Getty Images

Fans Wanted Anna Torv to Get Together with Her Co-star Lauren Glazier

During an interview in August 2019, Glazier spoke about how she and Torv prepared for their on-screen chemistry in "Mindhunter." The pair took about a week-long camping trip, driving across the country from Los Angeles to Pittsburgh, where they spent time bonding.

Advertisement

Citing a clip of the interview, one fan said it "screamed GAY RIGHTS." With this information in mind, another commented on their performance, saying Torv and Glazier "weren't acting" on the show; it was "just how they were."

The hype over their bond continued in the following years, with fans nostalgically remembering their pre-filming preparation. Glazier also shared throwback photos from the trip in November 2020 and a platonic love tribute to Torv earlier that year.

Advertisement

Unfortunately, the TV couple could only remain just that, as Glazier was already married to Trish Summerville, a costume designer known for "The Hunger Games: Catching Fire" and "Red Sparrow." Speaking about her relationship with Glazier, though, Torv gushed:

"It was so great. From a personal point of view, Lauren Glazier who plays Kay has become one of my best friends, and I just adore her."

Anna Torv poses at the premiere of Magnolia Pictures' "Lucky" at Linwood Dunn Theater on September 26, 2017, in Los Angeles, California. | Source: Getty Images

Anna Torv Prefers to Keep Her Love Life Secret

Chatting with The Sydney Morning Herald in July 2021, Torv opened up about why she preferred not to have social media accounts. While she understood the purpose of the online platforms, she also acknowledged the lack of boundaries within them.

She added that an "element of respect" came with guarding her personal life and often found herself surprised when she saw other actors being so open with their lives. Torv only went as far as speaking with the press about the shows in which she starred.