Mark Valley was Anna Torv's husband for a year. The actress, who is extremely quiet and protective about her private life, exchanged vows with Valley in a secret ceremony, and after a year, the couple called it quits.

Advertisement

Torv is a talented actress who has starred in several movies and series. Despite her popularity, Torv likes her privacy and doesn't even have a social media account. According to Torv, keeping off social media helps prevent people from invading her space.

Though Torv isn't against people who are on social media, she believes that inviting the public to her personal space wouldn't be conducive to her acting career. Torv said she only talks to the press when promoting the shows she's worked on.

Ann Torn and Mark Valley at the Graunman Chinese Theatre on April 30, 2009, in Hollywood | Source: Getty Images

Despite being cautious about people accessing her private life, her fans know some information about Mark Valley, who was Anna Torv's spouse.

Mark Valley's Acting Debut Came When He Attended the United States Military Academy

Advertisement

Valley was born in Ogdensburg, New York, on December 24, 1964. He graduated from West Point in 1987 with a degree in mathematics. After graduating, Valley spent most of his five-year army tour of duty in Berlin, Germany.

Valley's acting career came when he was a senior at West Point. He recalled giving a speech to his fellow trainees, and while addressing them, he forgot a part of his speech and had to improvise—something his audience never noticed.

Mark Valley at Moscone Center on April 3, 2011, in San Francisco, California. | Source: Getty Images

After the duo was married, Valley had a press conference to talk about his new wife and still referenced Torv as a fellow actor.

When he returned to his room, he was impressed with his performance; through that experience, his career took a different turn. Over the last 30 years, Valley has played several roles in different movies and series. He played a shady ex-FBI agent on the 2008 sci-fi drama series "Fringe," alongside his ex-wife.

Advertisement

He also played Brad Chase in the 2008 drama series "Boston Legal, " where he starred alongside James Spader and William Shatner. Valley also made a lasting impression as Eddie Arlette in the drama series "Keen Eddie," in which he starred alongside Sophie Hunter, Benedict Cumberbatch's wife.

Mark Valley and actress Anna Torv at The Roosevelt Hotel on May 8, 2009, in Hollywood, California. | Source: Getty Images

Valley's notable performance in the series opened more acting opportunities for him. He later joined "CSI" and the "Body of Proof" drama series as a regular cast.

Marc Valley and Anna Torv Were Together for Just a Year

Before the world discovered that Mark Valley was Anna Torv's husband, the two were co-stars in the drama series "Fringe," playing secret lovers. Valley played FBI agent John Scott while Torv played special agent Olivia Dunham.

Advertisement

In 2009, Torv's rep surprised her fans when she confirmed to the press that the actress and Valley were officially married. Based on reports, tthe pair secretly tied the knot in a private ceremony in December 2008, within days of Valley's 45th birthday.

Mark Valley arrives at the Fox Winter 2010 All-Star Party held at Villa Sorisso on January 11, 2010, in Pasadena, California. | Source: Getty Images

Before their wedding, the pair had secretly dated for several months, and none of their cast members or crew knew they were an item.

After the duo was married, Valley had a press conference to talk about his new wife and still referenced Torv as a fellow actor. Speaking to reporters, he said:

"I think Anna is just a fantastic actor, and I really like working with her. She's my favorite on the show, to be honest with you."

After a year of being together, the pair quietly went their separate ways and finalized their divorce. Since Torv and Valley's separated, she has maintained a private life, and nothing is known about her love life.