New York, Paris, London – the 7th of September 2021: Smart, the leading independent adtech platform, today announced its integration with Oracle Contextual Intelligence (formerly Grapeshot). The solution providing real-time content review and pre-bid classification is now fully available within Smart’s platform, to help allow advertisers, agencies and publishers to ensure inventory quality and avoid unsafe content across industry-standard brand safety categories.

In a context where the quality of the advertising environment is crucial to brands, Smart and Oracle collaborate to provide the tools to help ensure that digital advertisements are displayed on brand-suitable contextual content that fully matches advertisers’ communication strategies.

This integration is a logical addition to Smart’s existing rigorous brand safety and inventory quality solutions. Based on adaptive machine learning, Oracle’s technology evaluates the full context of the page and creates brand safety segments that can be activated by both media buyers and sellers, directly within Smart’s advertising platform. This pre-bid exclusion of negative content and terms helps ensure the distribution of ad campaigns in positive environments and enhances brand protection.

The brand safety packages – including categories such as Crime, Drugs, Hate Speech or Obscenity – are available natively to publishers in Smart’s adserver and SSP platform. Publishers can activate them directly from the UI for their direct campaigns and programmatic deals, and can be targeted by buyers in Auction packages or via Smart Buyer for Connect. Both benefit from a market leading and industry trusted brand safety solution for all their programmatic deals and direct campaigns.

“Ensuring the quality of our ad inventory – from eradicating malicious threats and fighting fraud, to protecting brand-safety – is part of Smart’s commitment to a better advertising landscape,” explains Jean-Christophe Peube, SVP, Analytics & Customer Experience at Smart. “We’re very happy to collaborate with Oracle, a trusted partner with brand safety tools that are widely recognized in the market and perfectly complement our offerings – including Smart’s proprietary semantic contextual targeting solution – and help us to increase ad performance and protect advertisers.”

“Implementing a strong brand safety strategy is imperative in today’s digital landscape, and advertisers are increasingly turning to advanced context technology to help provide this peace of mind” said Chris Stark, senior director, product management, Oracle Advertising. “We’re thrilled to work with Smart to provide advertisers with the insight they need around their ad campaigns to help ensure their brands are protected and their resources are well invested.”

“Ensuring ads are seen in safe and suitable environments is key to all the advertisers we are working with,” explains Andrew Buckman, CEO at Sublime – who has been using the solution offered by Oracle Advertising and Smart. “In addition to Smart’s proprietary tools that guarantee the relevance between message and context, the integration with Oracle Contextual Intelligence allows us to offer maximum brand safety to our clients. Our first campaign results are already validating the quality of the solution while helping protect and grow brand equity.”

Smart began working with Oracle Contextual Intelligence in March 2021.

About Oracle

Oracle offers suites of integrated applications plus secure, autonomous infrastructure in the Oracle Cloud. For more information about Oracle (NYSE: ORCL), please visit us at oracle.com.

Trademarks: Oracle, Java, and MySQL are registered trademarks of Oracle Corporation.

About Smart

Smart is the leading independent adtech platform built to serve the interests of both buyers and publishers. Smart’s fully transparent platform and shared-interest business approach enables brands and premium publishers to get their fair share of ad value at every opportunity, on their terms. Brands can achieve greater efficiency through their advertising spend, and publishers can act with certainty and have the control they need to provide the right blend of transaction models, channels, formats, and audience data to deliver true value path optimization to brands.

Smart works directly with hundreds of buyers and more than 1,000 publishers worldwide including Meredith, Insider, The Guardian, Cafe Media, Groupe Marie Claire, Le Figaro, Altice, and PlutoTV to deliver display, video, native, and rich-media ads to over 50,000 sites and apps. The company operates 12 offices worldwide and leads the charge in building a transparent ecosystem based on quality.