“James is like the harbor pilot of breakfast. He has the knowledge to direct you to the best breakfast spots in Columbus.” – Joe Bradley (Big Bass Brothers), 610 WTVN

I just recently relocated my family to the Philadelphia suburbs from my hometown of Columbus, OH, and I am extremely excited about exploring Philly and all of its surrounding areas for some awesome breakfast and brunch grub!!

I have been married for nearly 17 years to my amazing wife Laurie, and we have a 10 year old son who keeps us both very busy with movies, Legos, and anything outdoors! Besides the blog, I most recently wrote a local foods column for LiveCbus.com, an online publication that focuses on Columbus’ best people, places, and products. I have had the privilege of being a guest host on 610 WTVN’s Big Bass Brothers restaurant review radio show. I’ve judged food competitions for the Columbus Food Truck Festival, Hilliard’s Solebrate Festival, the Ohio Poultry Association, and the 2015 Ohio Hog Farmer’s Rib-Off Competition at the Ohio State Fair. I’ve also filmed TV segments featuring local restaurants for Columbus’ WCMH NBC-4 morning news show with NBC anchors. In addition, I was nominated by (614) Magazine as “Best local blogger” in their 2014, 2015 and 2016 ColumBEST polls, and have been featured in articles by CityScene Magazine, The Columbus Dispatch, DelawareO.com and most recently, PhillyGrub.

If you would like to leave a comment on any of my posts, please feel free to do so…in fact, I encourage as much interaction and feedback as possible!! If you have a suggestion on a local restaurant you’d like me to review, please feel free to leave me a note.

If you’d like to contact me regarding special engagements, appearances, cooking/tasting events, interviews or more, please drop me a note at thebreakfastgrubguy@gmail.com.

If you’d like to connect with me on social media, check out the “Contact” tab for all of my info!

Thanks again for checking me out, and come back frequently.

Now, on to the grub!!!