Page/Link:

Page URL: HTML link: Citations:

MLA style: "The Ukrainian cultural landscape in Canada and Brazil: a century of change and divergence.." The Free Library. 2015 Canadian Ethnic Studies Association 29 Aug. 2024 https://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Ukrainian+cultural+landscape+in+Canada+and+Brazil%3a+a+century+of...-a0443283644

Chicago style: The Free Library. S.v. The Ukrainian cultural landscape in Canada and Brazil: a century of change and divergence.." Retrieved Aug 29 2024 from https://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Ukrainian+cultural+landscape+in+Canada+and+Brazil%3a+a+century+of...-a0443283644

APA style: The Ukrainian cultural landscape in Canada and Brazil: a century of change and divergence.. (n.d.) >The Free Library. (2014). Retrieved Aug 29 2024 from https://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Ukrainian+cultural+landscape+in+Canada+and+Brazil%3a+a+century+of...-a0443283644

Abstract

Between 1891 and 1914 thousands of Ukrainian peasants left their ancestral homeland in Western Ukraine to seek land on the agricultural frontiers of Western Canada and southern Brazil. Often these emigrants who left for radically different frontiers originated from the same districts and villages; some even came from the same families. The new landscapes created in Canada and Brazil by these Ukrainian pioneers reflected environmental differences between the Old World and the New. The Ukrainian landscape in Brazil showed the most immediate response to environmental change, but the isolation of the Brazilian communities meant that evidence of traditional folkways and aspects of material culture survived far longer in Ukrainian Brazilian areas than in Ukrainian Canadian communities. At the same time as these landscapes in the Ukrainian diaspora were evolving, the landscapes of the hearth area were also experiencing change. This paper is thus an attempt to consider the role of time, environmental change, and culture in three areas that are geographically widely separated, but retain certain cultural commonalities in radically different physical and political environments.

Resume

De 1891 a 1914 des milliers de paysans ukrainiens ont quitte leur patrie ancestrale en Ukraine de l'Ouest pour des terres aux frontieres agricoles de l'Ouest canadien et du Bresil du sud. Ces emigrants qui partaient pour des contrees radicalement dissemblables, provenaient souvent des memes districts et villages, si ce n'est des memes families. La maniere dont ces pionniers ukrainiens ont reamenage ces territoires, refletait les differences environnementales du vieux et du nouveau monde. Au Bresil, ils se sont immediatement adaptes au changement geographique, mais l'isolement de leurs communautes a permis aux formes de vie traditionnelles populaires et aux caracteres culturels architecturaux de leurs villages de survivre beaucoup plus longtemps que chez les Canadiens ukrainiens. Parallelement aux transformations des paysages de la diaspora ukrainienne, d'autres mutations se faisaient aussi dans son foyer ancestral. Cet article tente done de considerer le role du temps, du changement environnemental et de la culture dans les trois regions qui retiennent certains points culturels communs malgre leur grand eloignement geographique aux unes et aux autres et des terrains physiques et politiques radicalement differents.

INTRODUCTION

In the closing years of the nineteenth century, peasants from the Austrian-governed western Ukrainian provinces of Galicia and Bukovyna began a migration to the agricultural frontiers of the New World. By the time the outbreak of war in Europe halted this emigration in 1914, there were over 170,000 Ukrainians in Canada, mostly in the Prairie West, and at least 30,000 and perhaps as many as 43,000 had settled in the southern provinces of Brazil: Parana, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul (fig. 1). They were able to take with them few possessions, only those that could be crammed into a trunk and hauled across the ocean: clothes, tools, seeds, and, perhaps, a handful of soil and a religious or cultural symbol. Their cultural baggage was more extensive. They transferred their religion, language, folkways, agricultural technology, architecture, and other elements of their culture to the lands they settled.

The long-standing interest of geographers, social historians, and anthropologists in the process of transferring material culture to new lands by migrating peoples is reflected in the literature devoted to the issue. Many studies, for example, Jordan (1985), Upton (1986), Jordan and Kaups (1989), and Noble (1992), consider the transfer of Old World folk architecture to the North American settlement frontier. Migration of an ethnic group to different settlement frontiers is not unusual: Welsh emigrants settled contemporaneously in Patagonia, Ohio, and Alberta, as did Italians in Brazil and Argentina. Germans settled in Canada and Brazil, and Mennonites pioneered in Canada, the United States, Mexico, Belize, and Paraguay at roughly the same time. Surprisingly, with the exceptions of Luebke (1990) and Loewen (1993), there are few studies of contemporaneous cultural transfer from a single hearth to frontiers radically different in their climatic, environmental, and social characteristics, and those that attempt to evaluate change both in the cultural core and in colonised areas on the periphery are rare.

This paper analyses the forces bearing upon the trans-oceanic transfer of Ukrainian culture from the Old World hearth to the New World periphery using the cultural landscapes of Ukrainian-settled areas in Western Canada and southern Brazil as an index of cultural change. There is an extensive literature in English devoted to Ukrainian agricultural settlement and material culture in the Americas, but it is mostly concerned with the Ukrainian landscape in Western Canada. Lehr (1974, 1975, 1980, 1982a, 1988), Hohol' (1985) and Nahachewsky (1985) have offered detailed descriptions of Ukrainian Canadian vernacular architecture. The material culture associated with Ukrainian pioneer agriculture was described by Ewanchuk (1976, 1988) and analyzed by Melnycky (1988). More recently, Fodchuk (2006) provided a very detailed account of the material culture associated with Ukrainian settlement in east-central Alberta. Lehr (1982b) gave a general account of the Ukrainian landscape on the prairies, but Darlington (1991) considered the Ukrainian cultural landscape in Manitoba in more detail. As part of a sweeping interpretation of ethnic landscapes on the prairies, Swyripa (2010) also examined how various peoples, including Ukrainians, placed their cultural imprint on the land. Although Albanski and Lehr's (2012) study of Ukrainian and Polish cemeteries in rural Manitoba was thematically and geographically more limited, they argue that cemeteries are effective indicators of cultural change, which can still be applied to other areas of Western Canada occupied by Ukrainian and Polish settlers.

Unfortunately, the literature dealing with Ukrainian settlement and material culture in Brazil is limited (Hrymych et al. 2011). A concise account of the settlement of the Prudentopolis area is given in Portuguese by Zaroski (2001), but despite the recent publication of a trilingual English-language volume devoted to the Ukrainian experience in Brazil, material is still very sparse in any language. Boruszenko (1978), Cipko (1986), and Lehr et al. (1997) outlined the course of Ukrainian agricultural settlement and institutional development. Greater detail is provided by Cipko and Lehr (2011) and Bondarenko (2011), while Morski's (2000) translations of pioneer accounts from Ukrainian-language Brazilian sources let the immigrants recount their personal experiences. A rare exception is a recent profusely illustrated study of Polish and Ukrainian architecture in Parana, which builds a strong case for the survival of Slavic elements in the rural landscapes of certain regions of the state (Larocca Junior et al. 2008).

Many ethnic groups settled in southern Brazil, and they all encountered the same administrative framework and, often, very similar physical conditions. Accounts of the experiences of German settlers in Parana, Sao Paulo, and Santa Caterina, for example, provide information on the environmental problems faced by settlers of all ethnicities (Ilg 1978; Bergmann 1994; Wagner 1995; Ludwig 1997). With the exception of Cardoso and Westphalen's (1981) Atlas historico do Parana, much of the literature in Portuguese dealing with settlement tends to be descriptive and to lack geographical analysis.

CULTURE AND LANDSCAPE

Places are created by people whose cultures determine the appearance of those places, thus the landscapes of places function as the visible memory of the cultures that spawned them. As a society evolves and its culture changes through adaptation to technological innovation, environmental shifts, and economic developments, its landscape will reflect those changes, responding to socio-economic forces that change societies over generations. Cultural landscapes, furthermore, are relatively immune to the transient fashions of mass culture because they generally respond slowly to social changes. On the other hand, when landscapes experience significant alteration caused by deep cultural shifts, changes may become embedded, etched deeply into the ground, and endure for centuries. Even today, the political decisions of Roman road builders and the technological abilities of Iron-Age farmers are visible in many Western European landscapes, seen, for example, where Roman roads still determine some of Europe's modern road networks and ancient field patterns remain visible in the pasturelands of Britain's highland regions (Bowen 1963, 14-50).

Not all forms of material culture become semi-permanent features of the landscape. For example, land tenure systems, communications, and fortifications are more deeply etched into the landscape than most domestic and religious architecture or the material cultural artifacts of peasant architecture. The material of construction also plays a role. Stone or brick buildings generally outlast wood or adobe structures, while some elements of culture such as crop types and land-use practices tend to be ephemeral elements, changing with the seasons and responding quickly to shifts in market prices.

Culture may be viewed as the flow of information. Cultures associated with specific ethnicities can thus be viewed as the coalescence of social values, economic systems, technological abilities, and the physical environment. A change in any of these can be expected to affect the culture in a way that may be expressed in a material fashion. Cultural landscapes thus reflect how, and to what degree, information flows into and penetrates cultural regions and determines social and attitudinal change within them (Hannerz 1992, 217-267). This interpretation draws from a variety of approaches taken by geographers to the study of overseas European colonial cultures. Since environment, economics, and social structures all affect the flow of ideas and information into frontier communities and shape new cultural forms, meta-narratives and overarching explanations are suspect (Lyotard 1984, 1-3). This study, though focussed on one facet of the cultural complex, has wider implications. It confronts, albeit indirectly, what Wallerstein (1991) termed the emergence of the global system, as new trans-national, even global, flows of images, objects, people, and ideas, transcended political borders and cultural boundaries and began to shape the new global ecumene during the period of mass migration at the close of the nineteenth century.

The paper first presents the background to the emigration movement that swept through Western Ukraine around the turn of the century, before reviewing elements of the migration and settlement process that bore upon the process of cultural transfer to the frontiers of Canada and Brazil. The reconstruction of Ukrainian cultural landscapes in the New World is seen as a process responsive to local, national, and trans-national factors. To illustrate this, the cultural landscapes of the hearth area and the settlement frontiers at the turn of the century are described. The forces acting for change within these landscapes are identified. These landscapes--one hundred years later--are then analysed to assess the impact of migration and social change. This latter analysis is based on field reconnaissance undertaken in Western Ukraine in 1998, 2005, 2006, and 2008, in Brazil in 1995 and 2009, and in Western Canada from 1971 to 2012.

FROM UKRAINE INTO THE DIASPORA: THREE RURAL LANDSCAPES

Emigrants from Western Ukraine to the frontier lands of the Americas around the beginning of the twentieth century left a peasant economy. It was, however, a time of transition. Elementary education had been made available to most, if not all, of the peasantry; railway construction was opening up the region and exposing it to wider regional and global markets while simultaneously facilitating the penetration of manufactured goods from Austria and beyond (Himka 1990; Hryniuk 1991). Enlightenment movements were urging social reform and providing access to information through reading halls and co-operatives. Political and national awareness was on the rise as the social-democratic ideals and the patriotic themes of Ukrainian writers found ready audiences among the increasingly literate younger generation. But for most who lived on the land, there were stronger links to the seemingly changeless routines of the agricultural round of peasant life than there were to the undercurrents of modernity that were beginning to flow into the region. The peasants' capital lay in their land, and most were unable or unwilling to venture into the service trades or commerce, the greater part of which lay in the hands of Jews.

Whether on the cusp of modernisation, as Hryniuk (1991, 212-214) argues, or mired in a sea of poverty as Soviet and other historians have claimed, there is no doubt that in the last decades of the nineteenth century the region was facing an agricultural crisis. Most farms, especially those in Bukovyna, were small, fragmented, and inefficient. The inheritance laws of the region promised further fragmentation of peasant holdings and a decrease in farm size, which, when combined with a number of social and religious irritants, made for a gloomy outlook for the next generation.

Clear migration patterns had emerged by the mid-1880s as peasants sought off-farm work outside the region to supplement the meagre returns from their holdings. These migrations evolved from seasonal excursions to Bessarabia and Prussia to longer sojourns on the eastern seaboard of the United States. Emigration to the agricultural frontiers of the New World was a logical progression of this trend. In the early 1890s Ukrainian peasants began to emigrate to both Canada and Brazil, whose governments were aggressively recruiting immigrants to settle on the agricultural margins and to provide a pool of cheap labour for their emerging resource industries.

Both Canada and Brazil offered free or cheap land to European immigrants. Canada promised a free homestead of 64.2 hectares (160 acres) to all bona fide agricultural settlers. Brazil offered approximately 25 hectares for a nominal price. Both countries promoted themselves by advertising campaigns waged on their behalf by emigration and steamship agents operating in Western Ukraine, as well as in the ports of departure for the Americas. Bombarded with conflicting claims and advice and caught up in the "emigration fever," most peasants simply followed relatives, friends, and fellow villagers who had left earlier, creating a chain migration which channelled emigrants from specific villages into the same settlement areas in Canada and Brazil (Lehr and Morski 1999; Lehr et al. 1997; Lehr 2011).

THE LANDSCAPE OF THE HEARTH ON THE EVE OF EMIGRATION

Western Ukraine, at the close of the nineteenth century, was a land of regional diversity. The administrative divisions of Galicia and Bukovyna encompassed many distinctive regional sub-groups of the Ukrainian people, each with its own cultural and landscape identities. At the turn of the century many Ukrainians described themselves by regional rather than national terms--as hutsuly from the Carpathians, boyky from the western plains and Carpathian foothills, lemky from the north-west foothills, halychany from the central plains, bukovyntsi from Bukovyna, and so on. Each of these regions was associated with a particular topography, architectural style, and folkways (Joukowski 1935; Kuzela 1978).

Despite considerable regional variation, it is possible to isolate some common characteristics of the cultural landscape of Western Ukraine. Houses in all three regions were generally south-facing, single-storey, two- or three-roomed rectangular dwellings with hipped, hipped-gable, or gable roofs. Thatched roofs were the norm, though in forested areas wooden shingles were commonly used. Within the house social space followed a traditional pattern. The small room on the west side of the house contained the indoor oven (pich). This room, mala khata, had multiple functions. It was the place for eating, sleeping, and socialising. The eastern room, velyka khata, was generally used for more formal occasions and as the sleeping place for the adults. Houses were typically built of wood, the construction type reflecting the availability and cost of building material. In Transcarpathia's forests, houses and barns were constructed of large timbers placed horizontally and notched or dovetailed at the corners. Where wood was a scarcer commodity--in the Galician lowlands--the peasants used the same technique and also employed post-and-fill construction, occasionally even vertical timbering. To compensate for the use of less satisfactory logs, buildings were mud-plastered inside and out and coated with a white lime-wash, which, in turn, was frequently coloured blue along the lower parts of the wall and colourfully decorated along the top of the facade.

Every house had a large indoor clay oven invariably placed towards the centre of the house in the western-most room, thus dictating a central chimney location. In some regions eyebrow vents in the front of the roof were a prominent feature. Houses generally had one door placed either in the centre of the facade in three-roomed houses or slightly to the west of centre in two-roomed dwellings. Floors were either hard packed earth or sawn planking.

In most Western Ukrainian farmsteads an array of ancillary buildings could be found--stables, barns, and so forth--that were constructed in the same fashion as the house. A general storage shed (komora) and outdoor oven were generally present. In the hill country of Hutsul shchyna, farm buildings were still frequently organised so as to form a square around a central yard and linked together by a high stockade wall in order to provide a refuge for stock (hrazhda). In other parts of Western Ukraine, buildings were similarly placed so as to form a central yard, although there was no attempt to replicate the fort-like appearance of the hrazhda; yards and gardens were enclosed only with the distinctive wattle fence.

Village settlement was the norm in Western Ukraine. Villages were not tightly clustered. Most houses had a garden, some of which were fairly large; hence the Ukrainian village appeared more as a loose clustering of small-holdings than the compact assemblage of buildings that might be associated with rural service censes in Western Europe. In the more mountainous areas villages were constrained by topography, straggling along valley floors. In this rugged physical landscape of narrow valleys winding among hills covered with deciduous forests, various nationalities often shared the same villages. Most houses were built of horizontal logs without the complete whitewashed clay-plastered exterior that was more or less ubiquitous in the lowlands of Galicia and Bukovyna. Houses and ancillary buildings had more steeply-pitched shingled roofs than houses in the lowlands, which were more likely to have thatched roofs.

The lowlands and plateaus of Galicia and Bukovyna ranged from areas of low, rolling hills to extensive glacial till plains with scattered deciduous woods. More densely settled than Transcarpathia, they were ethnically more homogenous, but were still culturally diverse. In both areas scattered ethnic German colonies were found. Almost every village had a few Jewish families engaged in store-keeping and the petty trades. In the northern and western parts of eastern Galicia, Roman-Catholic Polish peasants lived among the Uniate Ukrainian peasantry. Ethnic lines between Poles and Ukrainians were often blurred, and ethnicity was defined by religion as much as by language and folkways. Northern Bukovyna had a somewhat similar cultural landscape and social mosaic with German colonies and Romanian villages scattered through the Ukrainian area. Not surprisingly, Ukrainian vernacular architecture there reflected Romanian influences (Domanyts'kyi 1910; Onykienko 1956; Himka 1990).

The most imposing building in the Ukrainian village was the church. Design differed by region, although liturgical demands imposed underlying uniformity. Older churches, especially in the more inaccessible mountainous regions, clearly reflected regional styles. By the late 1880s, railways were pushing into rural areas, enabling modern influences and industrial materials to penetrate even into formerly isolated areas. Traditional styles of church design were changing with a general tendency toward incorporation of Kyivan influences and modification of some of the more extreme regional characteristics (Rotoff et al. 1990).

NEW ENVIRONMENTS

The movement from Ukraine to the settlement frontiers of Canada and Brazil took Ukrainian migrants into new physical environments. Like many other immigrants, Ukrainians were awed by the vastness of the Canadian West. They avoided the treeless prairies and sought out the wooded environments of the aspen-parkland; sometimes they by-passed better lands in favour of locations where the vegetation and topography resembled that of their homeland region. The continental climate was more extreme than they expected, with summer temperatures reaching 40[degrees]C, but sinking to -40[degrees]C or lower in the depths of winter. Winters were far longer than anything they had hitherto experienced. First frosts arrived in mid-September, and the danger of frost was ever-present until late May. The annual precipitation in the parkland belt was about 490 mm, mostly convection rainfall in the summer months, not significantly different from the rainfall regime of Western Ukraine.

The vegetation of Western Canada's parkland and the southern fringe of the boreal forest is similar to that of Western Ukraine (Scott 1995, 121-153). Deciduous tree species abound in both areas, and pioneers found many types of flora, such as the high bush cranberry, with which they were familiar from the old country. Fauna, apart from black bears and timber wolves, did not appear to be unusual or dangerous. Indeed the greatest obstacle was mosquitoes which, although they nearly drove the settlers to distraction, did not carry malaria or other debilitating diseases (Lehr 1996).

The move to Brazil, on the other hand, took immigrants into an unfamiliar world. Although the rugged topography of the interior of Parana and northern Santa Catarina was somewhat reminiscent of the Carpathian foothills and highlands, there was little else that appeared familiar. Seasons were reversed, and the night sky was strange. Summers were enervating when temperatures ranged up to 43 [degrees]C with high humidity. Winters, while cooler, were wet. Rainfall was seasonal and intensive (1414.9 mm per year at Curitiba) and of longer duration than in Western Ukraine. During the rainy season rivers were swollen and travel difficult, if not impossible (Morski 2000).

The fauna and flora encountered in Brazil were also new to all European immigrants (Ilg 1978, 22). Red tropical soils supported dense jungle-like vegetation or forests of huge pine trees (Araucaria augustifolia), whose girth astounded the pioneers (Bigg-Wither 1878). Upwards of two metres in diameter, these lofty pines were almost impossible to fell with an axe and, once felled, were difficult to split into useable timber (Morski 1995). Various species of bamboo were hard to tackle with the Ukrainian axe that simply bounced off springy canes. Settlers feared venomous snakes, constrictors, and ocelots. More serious, though less visible, were mosquitoes carrying malaria and yellow fever, two diseases which decimated the settlers in the early years (Bat'kivshchyna 1894a, 1894b; Olesk'iv 1895, 10-11).

In the Canadian West the North West Mounted Police monitored newly-settled areas and ensured that the Aboriginal peoples remained on the reserves allocated to them, thus reducing the contact between them and incoming settlers. By and large the Aboriginal peoples were friendly, sometimes offering food and advice to destitute arrivals. In Brazil, relations between the aboriginal peoples and incoming settlers were mixed. Some groups saw settlers as invaders, taking their traditional hunting areas and scaring away game. On occasion settlers were ambushed, as at Costa Cavalho, in Santa Catarina State, where a memorial plaque records that 15 Ukrainian settlers were killed there in 1899.

THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN THE NEW WORLD

Settlement in the Americas, whether in Canada or Brazil, was governed by an administrative framework and system of land survey imposed by the host government. Immigrant society was immediately affected by the land tenure system in each country. In Canada, the Dominion Lands Act placed families on individual 160 acre homesteads, ensuring dispersed settlement and keeping population densities low (fig. 2). Ukrainian settlements developed as a series of extensive, low density, but geographically cohesive, blocs (Lehr and Katz 1994, 70-87; Lehr and Katz 1995, 413-429).

In Brazil, the government allocated land for settlement in nucleated coldnias, mostly line-villages (linhas), which were widely scattered and often separated by tens of kilometres of difficult terrain. Settlements there thus constituted an archipelago of villages that were sometimes intermixed with the settlements of other European immigrant groups. Ukrainian settlements in Brazil were thus linear with their morphology resembling that of the hearth area in some respects (fig. 3).

Chain migration had important ramifications for cultural transfer since it led to the clustering of immigrants by region of origin. Thus, in both countries the majority of immigrants in specific areas originated from the same village, and those that did not, came from villages from within the same district of Western Ukraine. Thus clustering based on district of origin was common on both frontiers (Lehr 1985, 207-219; Lehr and Morski 1999). Regional folkways, traditions, and building styles were thus transferred to the Americas.

The nature of the emigration campaigns in Western Ukraine affected the regional character of migration. Although Germans from Bukovyna were settling in Parana in the late 1880s (Ilg 1978, 62), very few Ukrainians immigrated to Brazil from there before 1914, and there was almost no immigration of hutsuly. Canada drew more widely with the result that the ethnic geography of Western Ukraine was quickly replicated in microcosm on the prairie parklands of Western Canada.

In Brazil, Ukrainian colonies were not only physically isolated from each other but were socially, physically, and economically removed from the surrounding Luso-Brazilian culture and those of other immigrant groups. Brazilian society and economy acted against the easy penetration of modernity. Its closed, hierarchal, and elitist society, weak central institutions, absence of power outside the landed oligarchy, lack of voluntary organizations or political clubs, and absence of comprehensive universities delayed the evolution of a meritocracy (Levine 1997, 85-87). The technological and scientific revolution associated with industrialisation and urbanization did not take place in Brazil because of its position of dependency in the international market, the weakness of the internal market, and the availability of cheap labour (Costa 1985, 1952-01). Industrialization was hampered by lack of liquid capital, an adequate system of currency, credits, and banking, of skilled workers and technicians, and of a satisfactory transportation network (Burns 1990, 355-356). Canada knew no equivalent of the Contestado, a borderland claimed by Parana and Santa Catarina, where anarchist movements flourished between 1912-16. Brazil's frontiers of settlement in Parana and Santa Catarina were remote and poorly linked to the central economy (Ilg 1978, 36). For the most part the settlers were more likely to have contact with Syrian merchants and local indigenous people (caboclos), whose agriculture was subsistence-level, than with Luso-Brazilians (Baltzar 1995; Lesser 1999, 48-54). Opportunity for cultural borrowing was limited by infrequent cultural contact. Evidence suggests that caboclos appropriated Ukrainian technologies more than the settlers borrowed from them (Ilg 1978, 38). Although there were opportunities to "work out" on railway construction or with American-owned lumber companies and be exposed to Luso-Brazilian, or at least non-Ukrainian, culture, they were fewer than in Canada. Labour was more abundant and cheaper in Brazil. Absence of well-developed agricultural sectors or a vigorous railway construction sector limited openings for off-farm employment (Burns 1990, 356). In 1914 Brazil had only 16,000 miles of railways, mostly in the coffee producing states of Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janiero. Parana had less than 500 miles of railways (Funda^ao Nacional de Material Escolar 1967, 54). At the same time, Canada had over 45,800 miles of railways, including two transcontinental lines which linked the western interior with the Great Lakes, Atlantic, and Pacific ports (Urquhart and Buckley 1965, 532; Mackintosh 1934, 44-57).

The politics of religion also affected development on the two frontiers. In Canada, the French Roman-Catholic hierarchy hoped to bring Ukrainian Greek Catholics into their fold and so resisted importation of Greek Catholic clergy, leaving them spiritually leaderless until 1912, comparatively late in the settlement era (Yuzyk 1982, 143-172; Martynowych 1991, 181-293). Virtually all Ukrainian immigrants in Brazil before 1914 came from districts in eastern Galicia, where the Catholic Church was dominant (Ilarion 1986, 69-75). The effects were profound. In Brazil, religious hegemony helped to further isolate the Ukrainian community from already weak external acculturative influences. For example, education in the Ukrainian settlements was dominated by the Uniate Church, which, as often as not, provided the initiative for the establishment of schools. Basilian priests and sisters of the Uniate service order Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate staffed the schools in many colonies. Hannerz (1987, 545-559) argued that education itself is a cultural process and that the growth of formal education in remote underdeveloped areas is a facet of the penetration of the world system. Certainly the provision of education in the Brazilian colonies by the Uniate Church and the staffing of state schools by members of religious orders placed the church in a position where it was able to monitor, and largely control, the process of cultural change in the Ukrainian colonies in Brazil. Furthermore, since medical care in the countryside was, for decades, provided by the Sisters, the Church was the single most important institution affecting everyday life in the Ukrainian community. Ukrainian society in Brazil had no equivalent of the German-Brazilian settlers' Hilfverein (self-reliance leagues) or the Ukrainian Canadians' fraternal organizations (Ilg 1978, 39-41).

The respective influence of the Ukrainian churches is shown in the naming of places in Ukrainian-settled areas in Canada and Brazil. In Canada, Ukrainians named only a small number of settlements but those they did name have transferred toponyms, e.g., Boian, Halicz, Jaroslaw, Komarno, Senkiw, Terebowla, Ukraina, and Zbaraz, or secular names such as Myrnam, Sirko, Seech, Zelena, Zhoda, and Zoria (Rudnyc'kyj 1970). In Brazil Ukrainian clergy played little or no part in naming places, so most places in Ukrainian areas have Roman Catholic religious or Luso-Brazilian secular names. Nova Galicia, locally called Nova Halychyna, and Upa (a post-WWII settlement whose name commemorated the Ukrainian Insurgent Army [UPA]), are the only settlements in Parana with secular Ukrainian names (Nahachewsky 2011).

Ukrainian settlers in Canada pioneered on an agricultural frontier where the rule of law was well established, where producers were well connected to global markets by rail, where immigrants had access to banking institutions for credit, where education provided by the state was mandatory for all and higher education was accessible even to the children of immigrants, where the immigrant community, after some initial hostility, was courted by national political parties, and where egalitarian ideals were espoused. Furthermore, the late arrival of Ukrainian clergy, then competition among Roman Catholic, Uniate, Russian Orthodox, and Ukrainian Orthodox clergy, spawned community divisions leading to social dysfunction that rendered Ukrainian settlements open to penetration by Canadian institutions (Lehr 2011, 140-153). Orthodox and Uniate settlers squabbled, questioned the others' loyalty to the Ukrainian cause, fought over church properties, and even refused to patronize businesses owned by their rivals. Even within the Uniate Church there was dissension. In the first decades of settlement a weakened and divided Uniate Church competed for the religious loyalty of the Ukrainian population with Russian Orthodox, Independent Ukrainian Orthodox, French and Polish Roman Catholics, British Methodists, Presbyterians, and Baptists (Lehr 2002). In the absence of strong religious leadership, a wide spectrum of secular organizations flourished, further dividing the community along ideological lines.

Schools were organized and teachers were hired by locally-elected school boards, but overall responsibility for curricula and administration lay with provincial and territorial governments who saw education as the key to assimilation of the "foreign" immigrants. Until a cadre of Ukrainian teachers reasonably fluent in English was trained, school teacher positions were filled by young Anglophones mostly bent on the "Canadianization" of their Ukrainian charges through propagation of the English language and Protestant values. Medical services were lacking. In many Ukrainian settlements, Methodists or Presbyterians used hospitals as bridgeheads to proselytise immigrants and inculcate the values of English Canada (Friesen 1991, 345-7; Martynowych 1991, 214-233; Olender 1984, 1988; Krawchuk 1991, 216-17; McGowen 1991).

Trade can provide an effective vehicle to expose a frontier community to the values and attitudes of those that surround it. For the first two or three decades in most Ukrainian Canadian rural communities, immigrant Jewish storekeepers from Eastern Europe dominated commerce. The Jewish store became the window to the Canadian world for most immigrant women and for men who chose not to "work out" beyond their community. By the early 1920s, a new national awareness, exemplified in the slogan sviy do svoho, basically meaning "patronize your own people," encouraged the formation of Ukrainian co-operatives and the entry of Ukrainians into the business world. As Jewish business declined, the conduit between the colony and mainstream Canada expanded. Neophyte Ukrainian storekeepers adopted Canadian business practices and gained prestige from their degree of integration with mainstream society (Lehr 2011, 84-105).

The proliferation of railways in Western Canada before 1914 was an economic advantage for otherwise inaccessible districts, but just as they hauled out agricultural products, they brought in the manufactured goods and the attitudes and ideologies of mainstream Anglo Canadian life. The Ukrainian Canadian community was thus penetrated relatively easily, and so, from their early years, they were open to the forces of modernity.

CULTURAL LANDSCAPES IN THE DIASPORA

Movement to the frontier necessitated the immediate provision of temporary shelter and a return to the simpler forms of shelter used in the homeland only on a seasonal basis in some highland areas. Accounts of the pioneers' first days in Brazil recount the erection of simple tent-like temporary shelters made of palm leaves and bamboo which were sufficient to deflect the sub-tropical rains (Morski 2000). Similar shelters, made from pine or poplar, were built in Canada for summer shelter, but the severe cold of the Canadian winter demanded more substantial shelters. Dugout shelters, patterned after the seasonal mountain shelters of the hutsul shepherds (burdei or zemlianky), were commonly used. A pit about a metre in depth was excavated, over which a tent-like wooden framework was erected (Nahachewsky 1985; Lehr 2011). This was filled in with other materials such as branches, before the entire structure was covered with a layer of sod. Many settlers spent their first winter in such dwellings; some were occupied for two or three years until more permanent shelter could be erected.

In both Canada and Brazil the first real houses built by Ukrainians were patterned after those in the homeland (figs. 4 and 5). For the most part they lacked the finer points of decoration, and some were crudely constructed from poorly trimmed timbers. In Canada there was an immediate impact on construction methods occasioned by the quality of timber found in various locales occupied by Ukrainians (Lehr 1980, 183-196). In Alberta, for example, Ukrainians generally settled in well-wooded areas. Whether poplar or pine, the woodlands were mostly mature and timbers of substantial girth were readily available; hence, building with horizontal corner-notched logs was virtually universal. In other parts of the parkland belt, Ukrainians occupied land where forest growth was largely immature, recovering from fire damage; here they turned to post-and-fill. Where no mature timber was available, stockade walling was used. Settlers of other ethnic origins located adjacent to Ukrainian colonies employed these methods of log building, but there is no evidence to support the belief that Ukrainian settlers borrowed from them. All these construction methods were used in Western Ukraine where access to, or the price of, building timbers determined the building methodology adopted (Samoilovych 1972, 11-15).

Ukrainian building techniques in Brazil also reflected homeland experience. Most pioneers built from wood. The size of the most common species of timber made construction with logs the preferred methodology. The prevalence of large trees reduced the need to resort to post-and-fill or vertical timbering, but the great girth of the larger pines ruled out their employment in traditional corner-notched building; hence, slabs of sawn timber were used instead. Nevertheless, a good proportion of pioneer houses were built in the traditional fashion, using slab timbers, rather than the small diameter logs employed in Ukraine and Canada, but oriented to the north in response to hemispheric shift and the position of the sun. The humid climate argued against the long-term survival of wooden dwellings unless built from certain hardwoods, so relatively few buildings from the pioneer era survive. The archival record of the Ukrainian-Brazilian newspaper Pracia suggests that second-generation dwellings built in the 1920s and 1930s incorporated design changes to adapt to the Brazilian climate. For example, the indoor pich was unnecessary and impractical in sub-tropical areas. Year-round temperatures argued against cooking indoors so the pich was placed adjacent to the house, typically remaining attached to the structure, modifying the profile of the building by moving the chimney location but retaining the essential character of the dwelling (fig. 6). Similarly, plastering the interior and exterior of the dwelling, commonly undertaken in Ukraine to cover the imperfections in logs, for insulation, and for aesthetic reasons, became redundant in Brazil. Second-generation houses constructed of high quality sawn timbers were seldom plastered, but instead were painted on the exterior. Some houses incorporated a second doorway to the facade, giving direct outdoor access from each room (fig. 7; Larocca Junior et al. 2008). Whether this was a response to the warmer climate, a cultural borrowing, or a spontaneous modification copied throughout the region is uncertain.

Construction and some design elements were adapted to the Brazilian environment, but the aesthetic qualities of the Ukrainian vernacular were largely unaffected. Second-generation houses, constructed with more care than the initial hastily-constructed dwellings, retained the front to side wall ratios seen in Ukraine. Roof styles and the placement of doors and windows remained mostly unchanged and, significantly, the arrangement of space within the house generally followed the traditional segmentation of space using a two- or three-room plan. The tradition of decorating the eaves with elaborately carved "gingerbread" endured for decades and is still a hallmark of Ukrainian dwellings in the Brazilian countryside (Larocca Junior et al. 2008). Icons graced the easternmost interior wall, as in Ukraine and Canada.

Ukrainian traditional designs proved to be well adapted to the Western Canadian environment and were transferred to Canada with little alteration. The pich, which radiated heat slowly, was well-suited to the extreme cold of the Canadian prairie winter. As in Ukraine, cooking in summer was done in an outdoor oven, sometimes free standing, but often housed in an ancillary building. When the early earthen floors in houses were replaced with sawn-timber floors, the great weight of the pich put a great strain on the joists, so it was replaced by a smaller cast iron stove. This had no visible effect on the house exterior as the modern stove stood in the same position as the old and was vented through the same chimney.

Second-generation houses, which began to be built in the 1920s, incorporated Canadian tastes in design and are best described as ethnic hybrids, merging the traditional with the modern (Lehr 1975). Retaining the southward orientation and the general arrangement of social space, these buildings often added a three-quarter second storey and moved to the simple gable roof. Traditional decor was partially retained, with blue or green a preferred colour choice for the trim with the wood-siding painted white or cream, resembling the lime-washed exterior of the traditional dwelling (Lehr 1974, 1980).

THE RELIGIOUS LANDSCAPE IN THE DIASPORA

In both Canada and Brazil, Ukrainians settlers began to build churches within a few years of their arrival. Early churches were small, designed only to house the small congregations found on the emerging frontier communities. Their builders worked from memory, using local timber to replicate the styles of their homeland villages (figs. 8, 9). In the 1930s, the settlers began to build more elaborate and larger churches using brick and stone, in place of the ubiquitous timber formerly employed, and embraced the Byzantine dome style. At this time local designers began to emerge. In Canada, for example, the Basilian priest Philip Ruh designed and built churches across the prairies. Using a variety of materials ranging from logs to reinforced concrete, he mixed traditional Ukrainian and Western European design features to create a striking "prairie cathedral" style (fig. 10; Romaniuk 1984). In Brazil, similar trends were evident. Some quite opulent churches were built, even in communities with limited resources, as in Parana (fig. 11). Despite some stylistic variations, Ukrainian churches in the diaspora almost always retained the Ukrainian banya, the onion-shaped dome (which in the diaspora became an icon of ethnicity), the separate bell tower, and the tripartite division of space within the church. For the most part, Ukrainian churches in the diaspora show remarkable uniformity; differences from the homeland are revealed not in variations in design or incorporation of local traits, but by their settings and the surrounding vegetation.

Nevertheless, there are now marked differences among the religious landscapes in the homeland, in Brazil, and in Canada. In Western Ukraine almost all Uniate churches are found in Galicia and almost all Orthodox in Bukovyna. During the almost fifty years of communist administration in Ukraine, church attendance was discouraged. Many churches were abandoned and no new churches were built. Surprisingly, virtually every village still retains a church and many new churches are being built. Most of these are brick, massive, and in the Kyivan style. In Brazil, most churches are Uniate and, in the rural areas, often conform to the basilica style favoured by the Roman Catholic Church (fig. 12). The few immigrants who came from Bukovyna after 1945 went mostly to the urban centres, hence Orthodox churches are not a significant presence in the rural landscape of Parana or Santa Caterina. In Canada, the varied regional origins of the pioneer generation may be seen in some surviving examples of vernacular church designs transferred to the New World without any significant change in design or decor. Both Orthodox and Uniate churches are commonly found in the same settlements, a legacy of early and continuing religious factionalism.

AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY

At the close of the nineteenth century the Czech ethnographer and photographer Frantisek Rehof travelled through eastern Galicia capturing images of Ukrainian village and agrarian life. He photographed a society still largely immune to the inrush of modernity, an economy where craft industries prevailed, and a relatively static agricultural technology which encouraged the perpetuation of established practises, and landscapes shaped by peasant culture and attitudes (Hryniuk and Picknicki 1995). It was a society beginning to be penetrated by goods manufactured outside the region, some of which were beginning to alter the look of the village as they replaced traditional materials in the construction of buildings. For example, the fire hazard was beginning to be reduced by the replacement of straw thatch with corrugated iron on roofs (Bilachevsky 1911, 24). Nevertheless, agricultural technology remained essentially pre-industrial. Much harvesting and threshing was still done by hand. Hay was dried and stacked in the fields using traditional techniques, and stacked in farmyards under an oborih, a distinctive apparatus that permitted a thatched roof to be raised or lowered on four corner poles as the stack's height varied (fig. 13).

Although there were reports that some emigrants to South America took with them their wagons in "knocked down" form, the direct shipment of agricultural implements or farm equipment was unusual among Brazilian emigrants and unknown among emigrants to Canada. Most emigrants took only the ironware of scythes, sickles, axes, and other hand tools (Ewanchuk 1988, 59-64; Melnycky 1988, 37-44). There were significant differences in the survival of old country technologies in the New World. Environmental differences determined this. Settlers in Canada were able to grow most crops grown in Ukraine. Wheat, barley, rye, hemp, and beans all flourished, as did a range of vegetables, including cabbage, onions, peas, potatoes, beets, and cucumbers. Tobacco and frost-prone orchard crops fared poorly, but mushrooms, a Ukrainian favourite, were abundant. Indigenous cranberries, Saskatoon berries, chokecherries, and pincherries replaced the cultigens of the homeland.

For the first few years after settlement in Canada, most settlers continued to practise "old country" agriculture, using hand tools to cultivate small areas until such time as they could afford to mechanize and had cleared sufficient land to make it worthwhile to do so. Thus, some agricultural practices were transferred from Ukraine, though few endured for more than a decade. Improvements to Western Canada's communication network and easy access to manufactured products led to rapid agricultural change. Hemp, for example, grown for its fibre and seed-oil in Ukraine, ceased to be planted when inexpensive denim cottons and cheap processed cooking-oils became readily available. Rye declined in importance as settlers switched to wheat bread, while the area devoted to oats increased in direct relationship to the replacement of oxen with horses, only to decline when gasoline-powered tractors were introduced in the 1920s. Generally, Ukrainian settlers eagerly adopted North American farming methods. They were exposed to them through contact with earlier-established settlers of other ethnicities from whom they secured seasonal employment as labourers or as members of threshing gangs. Even before mechanization, Ukrainians adopted North American harnesses for their teams and abandoned their straight-shafted axe in favour of the superior curved-shaft North American type. Some pioneers built wagons patterned after the style of their homeland, but North American designs, such as the Adams wagon with a broad flat bed, soon demonstrated their superiority, and were rapidly adopted by Ukrainian immigrants (Ewanchuk 1989).

In Canada Ukrainian settlers quickly adopted the mechanized farming practices of their already established neighbours with whom they came into frequent contact through "working out" to generate capital. They were encouraged by the presence of implement dealerships in even the more remote colonies and by the relatively high price of contract labour. They were encouraged to mechanize by provincial Agricultural Representatives, whose mission was to foster the adoption of scientific farming methods. The railway companies, too, promoted modern farming by running competitions between districts and offering prizes to the most progressive areas. In the Ukrainian-language press, farmers were encouraged to be progressive, to adopt new methods, and to emulate their successful Canadian neighbours (Kanadiis'kyi ranok 11 Dec. 1923, 29 Aug. 1930; Ukrains'kyi holos 14 Aug. 1914, 8 Sept. 1928, 24 April 1929).

For example, techniques and technologies of haying still practised in Western Ukraine (such as the oborih, see fig. 13), were quickly rendered obsolete in Canada by the introduction of ox- or horse-drawn swathers and balers. By the early 1920s Canadian methods were vigorously promoted by provincial agricultural institutions. Traditional agricultural practices survived only in the less prosperous areas and had largely disappeared by the 1930s. Modernity in the form of agricultural technology precipitated change in the rural landscape. Wide-turning circles required for team-drawn machines forced relocation of farm ancillary buildings, as well as construction of new buildings able to accommodate large machines.

In Brazil the agricultural economies of the southern provinces, where Ukrainians settled, remained backward, tied only tenuously to wider national and global markets. The rugged topography of Parana and Santa Catarina and weak links to global markets for agricultural products retarded the development of rail and road communications. Whereas thousands of miles of track in Western Canada placed almost all settlers within a few miles of a rail shipment point by 1914, in Parana there was only one railway that linked the region to the coast. Most Ukrainian communities were, and remain, a hundred kilometres or more from the nearest railway. Poor roads, under-capitalization of agriculture, weak federal initiatives in agricultural development, and the absence of major industrial centres to drive the market for local agricultural products exacerbated the situation. Even today, relatively few farms in Brazil's Ukrainian colonies are mechanized and a high proportion of Ukrainians still engage in subsistence farming (Cipko and Lehr 2011, 190-191). Some crops grown in Ukraine, such as corn, beans, rye, buckwheat, barley, peas, millet, cucumbers, and pumpkins, grew well in southern Brazil, especially on newly fire-cleared land. On the other hand, hemp could not be grown, wheat was difficult to protect from birds, and settlers lacked seed for growing orchard crops. New Brazilian crops were adopted, e.g., mandioca, bananas and oranges (Svoboda 29 Dec. 1898). The major problem was lack of markets. This encouraged self-sufficiency, reduced contact with the wider Brazilian community, and retarded agricultural and economic progress. The local Indian and caboclo population copied Ukrainians in planting rye and potatoes. Many learned Ukrainian, which became the lingua franca in the isolated communities of Parana, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul.

The rugged topography of Ukrainian-settled areas of southern Brazil continues to impede mechanization. Conversely, the Ukrainian design of the horse-drawn wagon was ideal for the rugged hill-country of southern Brazil, so the design changed little. It was even appropriated by Luso-Brazilian farmers, who preferred it to their two-wheeled cart. As in Western Ukraine, wagon design remained essentially unchanged. In a poorly capitalised and non-mechanised agricultural economy, traditional methods and techniques endured. Even today, horses provide the motive power on most farms in Ukrainian districts (fig. 14; Cipko and Lehr 2011).

MODERNIZATION AND MODERNITY

Apart from a few brief years of independence after the end of the First World War, Western Ukraine remained under Polish rule until 1939 when the Soviet Union absorbed the region. Occupied by German forces from 1941 to 1944, Soviet rule was firmly re-established by 1946 (Magocsi 1983, 214). Under Soviet administration, the landscape of Western Ukraine experienced significant changes brought about by the imposition of collectivization and the modernization of the housing stock. The Soviet collective farm (kolhosp), often established outside an existing village, was used to symbolize modernity. In some cases villagers relocated to be closer to their work. Collectivization was not in place for a sufficiently long period for it to have a lasting effect on the settlement geography of Western Ukraine. Nucleated settlement is still the norm, though in the Carpathian foothills and highlands, the settlement pattern is affected by the topography and tends to be linear and more dispersed. Villages straggle along the valley sides, lacking obvious cohesion, much as they did at the end of the nineteenth century.

More obvious are the effects of Soviet standardized housing on the cultural landscape. Whereas traditional vernacular forms changed little and still prevailed until the post-war era, Soviet attempts to upgrade housing using standard patterns had a major effect on the look of the land. Mostly built in the agriculturally more prosperous areas, Soviet housing in Western Ukrainian villages retained few of the vernacular features that pre-1945 and privately built houses generally retained (Danyliuk 1991, 101-108; Kosmina 1980, 106-186). Among local people and visitors alike, there is a tendency to equate the authentic folk tradition with obsolete building technologies--thatched roofs, for example--and to be oblivious to some of the less obvious but deeper characteristics of the vernacular tradition, such as building proportions, the arrangement of space, door and window placement, and building ornamentation and decor--design elements which are determined by the social dynamics of space within the house--which still survive in many more recently constructed buildings (fig. 15).

The more flamboyant and atavistic features of nineteenth century folk architecture are now seldom seen except in museum settings such as at the L'viv Museum of Folk Architecture and Life, where excellent examples of vernacular architecture and some spectacular wooden church architecture are preserved.

Nevertheless, in most parts of Galicia and Bukovyna, cultural landscapes, although changed considerably since the end of the last century, retain distinctive regional characters imbued by the presence of architecture, retaining elements of the Ukrainian vernacular tradition and the persistence of traditional agricultural practices not yet obliterated by the surge toward mechanisation and modernity. This is especially true of the Carpathian and sub-Carpathian areas where Soviet influence was resisted most vigorously, where topography makes mechanisation more difficult, and the less sophisticated agricultural economy remains less well integrated into the national and regional economy. In the mountains and foothills some of the housing stock predates the First World War; many of the more recent buildings follow, or incorporate, elements of the regional vernacular tradition.

Modernity also changed the look of the cultural landscape of Ukrainian rural communities in the diaspora, but it did so at different rates. In Canada the railways penetrated into virtually every Ukrainian settlement, linking them with global markets and facilitating imports of prefabricated buildings and milled lumber for construction of frame pattern-book houses. Expansion of the Canadian postal, telegraph, and telephone services exposed even the most isolated communities to the ideas and tastes of the outside world and brought in the mail-order catalogue and the consumer values that it promulgated.

Steam-powered tractors speeded land clearance even before the First World War. The introduction of caterpillar tractors and bulldozers in the 1940s accelerated the process. Expanded acreages boosted the economies of even the poorer and remote areas. Rural electrification in the late 1940s also expanded agricultural options (Lehr 2011, 81-83). Higher farm incomes were invested in new equipment, buildings, and houses, none of which were connected to the Ukrainian vernacular tradition. Government incentives to modernise and rationalize agriculture from the 1960s increased farm consolidation and quickened rural depopulation. Less prosperous farms, many with dwellings dating from the pioneer era, were the first to be abandoned. If not ripped apart for their lumber, they survived only as storage sheds until, in turn, that function was usurped. In the 1970s and 1980s pioneer-era houses were often viewed as an embarrassing reminder of the lowly social status held by Ukrainians in the early decades of this century. Rural depopulation and shifts in the ethnic character of areas pioneered by Ukrainians exacerbated the rate of landscape change. Today few pioneer houses survive and even fewer are occupied. A 1976 survey of Ukrainian vernacular architecture in the Stuartburn district of southeastern Manitoba identified forty-eight Ukrainian folk houses, some of which were occupied. Today fewer than ten survive, most of these only as abandoned shells (fig. 16). Marks of Ukrainian heritage are now confined to group symbols displayed in community buildings such as the Ukrainian National Homes, the sacred grounds of church and cemetery, the artificial environment of the heritage museum or modern-day church buildings where the ethnic symbolism is muted (Zuk 1984,16-26; 1996). Today, apart from these elements, there is little in the landscapes of Ukrainian-settled areas to indicate the ethnic heritage of those who pioneered the land.

The present-day cultural landscapes of Ukrainian-settled areas in Brazil retain more evidence of a Ukrainian presence. Strangely, and despite the strong role of the church, the cultural symbols associated with religion are not more evident than in Canada. In fact, religious hegemony in Brazil reduced the number of churches built there. Otherwise, Ukrainian material culture has endured longer in Brazil. A poorer economy has meant that a higher proportion of the housing stock in rural areas has been built by the homeowner, rather than by a contract builder working from architect-drawn plans--a situation that closely parallels the situation prevailing in rural areas in Western Ukraine. Spatially and culturally inured from Western European and North American hegemony, builders were inclined to follow the fashion of the region and to preserve the traditional ordering of social space within the house. Thus, despite modifications to allow for the Brazilian climate, recently erected houses are more likely to retain Ukrainian elements in their layout, design, and decor. Paradoxically, both extreme poverty and even modest wealth both erode the continuity of vernacular building traditions--the former because shelter is so basic, the latter because of an eagerness to demonstrate economic progress by acceptance of modern extra-regional Luso-Brazilian designs.

CONCLUSION

The transfer of culture from the Old World to the New was a complex process. It is difficult, if not impossible, to determine an overarching causality which explains the formation of the Ukrainian cultural landscape in the diaspora. A simple core-periphery model of cultural transference does not fully fit the Ukrainian experience. At the time of migration the cultural core (Western Ukraine) was on Europe's economic periphery. One hundred years later the relationship has changed. Ukrainian communities in Western Canada remain on the cultural periphery, but, in relative terms, constitute an economic core. Brazilian communities remain on the cultural and economic periphery. This model is further complicated by the political and economic isolation of the overseas communities from the cultural hearth between 1941 and 1991, when communications between core and periphery were severely restricted.

The current divergence of Ukrainian landscapes in Canada and Brazil is best explained by variations in the ways by which information and ideas flowed into the communities in the diaspora. Exposure to modernity in Canada occurred earlier and with greater intensity than in Brazil. Canadian institutions were active partners in the settlement process and helped to construct frontier society. In so doing they introduced Anglo-Canadian attitudes, ideas, values, tastes, and fashions, and promulgated a view that modernity was synonymous with prosperity, enlightenment, and the Canadian way. The seemingly simple act of replacing a traditional house-type with one without any trace of the vernacular style in its design or decoration became an overt affirmation of an immigrant's commitment to the new way, acceptance of the values of modernity and progress, and signalled the intention to be a loyal Canadian. Canadians evaluated the merit of immigrants by the rapidity with which they cast off traditional clothing and dressed "like Canadians." Similarly, their built environment became a metaphor for wider cultural appropriation. Within the Ukrainian community, retention of the traditional, whether in everyday dress or the domestic landscape, came to be seen as a mark of economic failure, rather than as a cultural icon celebrating national origins. Today, in rural areas first settled by Ukrainians, there is a formal landscape of constructed memory: a landscape of churches, cemeteries, public memorials, and the preserved past that symbolizes and celebrates the Ukrainian presence. Underlying this landscape is one of abandonment, replacement, and traces. Economic and agricultural progress and incorporation into the global ecumene, have obscured the unconscious impress of ethnicity on the land.

The situation in Brazil differed from that in Canada in three important aspects. First, the channels of information into the Ukrainian settlements were far more limited; second, information was filtered through the Church; and third, Brazilian national institutions were relatively immature and never successfully approached the questions of Brazilian identity or of national integration. Within the Brazilian settlements the economy remained agricultural and undercapitalised. Cultural memory, the collective memory of the group, remained strong, reinforced by the hegemony of the Uniate church which derived its motive force from the repetition of culturally specific practices associated with its role as a guardian of national identity. Thus, although modified somewhat by its adaptation to a new physical environment, in the cultural landscape, the Ukrainian vernacular remained largely immune to the pressures acting upon it in Canada.

During the time that immigrant Ukrainians were creating new landscapes in the New World, the landscapes of the homeland were also evolving. Change was slow because the region remained on the economic periphery and, from 1945 until 1991, was a part of the Soviet Union, screened from non-Slavic influences by its position behind the "Iron Curtain." But there was change. The economic and cultural landscapes of Western Ukraine at the end of the century were vastly different from those at the time of emigration. Yet for those in the diaspora, denied access to their cultural wellspring, the "real" Ukrainian landscape became locked in ancestral memory. Modernised Ukrainian landscapes, whether in Ukraine, Canada, or Brazil, were deemed inauthentic.

New environments usually elicited an immediate response from pioneers struggling to carve out a livelihood in a new land. For them adaptability was the key to survival. The ways in which the Ukrainian cultural landscape changed subsequently was a measure of the way that each immigrant community was reconstituted within the context of its relationships with local and national culture and institutions. Exposure to, and appropriation of, new cultural forms was determined by the nature of the host society, its level of economic development and political objectives, the immigrant community's social and institutional hegemony, and its geographical position within the global ecumene.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Albanski, L., and J. Lehr. 2012. Identity, Integration, and Assimilation Recorded in Manitoba's Polish and Ukrainian Cemeteries. Great Plains Research 22.1: 3-14.

Arsenych, P. I., et al. 1987. Hutsul'shchyna, istoryko-etnohrafichne doslidzhennia. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka. Bat'kivshchyna [Fatherland], 1894a. April, no. 7. -. 1894b. May, no. 9.

Baltzar, P. 1995. Personal communication. Prudentopolis, Parana. April.

Bergmann, G. J. 1994. Auslandsdeutsche in Paraguay, Brasilien, Argentinien. Bad Munstereifel, Germany: Westkreuz.

Bigg-Wither, T. P. 1878. Pioneering in South Brazil: Three Years of Forest and Prairie Life in the Province of John C. Lehr and Serge Cipko Parana. London: J. Murray.

Bilachevsky, N. 1911. The Peasant Art of Little Russia. In Peasant Art in Austria and Hungary, ed. C. Holme, 15-31. London: Studio.

Bilash, R. B. 1989. Ukrainian Peel Ovens in Western Canada. Material History Bulletin 29 (spring): 45-54.

Bondarenko, M. 2011. Ukraintsi Brazylii: mynule i suchasnist'. In Ukraintsi Brazylii/Os Ucranianos do Brasil/Ukrainians in Brazil, ed. Maryna Hrymych, Andriy Nahachewsky, Serge Cipko, and Olga Nadia Kalko, 51-61. Kyiv: Duliby

Boruszenko, O. 1978. Ukrainians Abroad: In Brazil. In Ukraine: A Concise Encyclopaedia I, 1194-1204. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Bowen, H. C. 1963. Ancient Fields. London: British Association for the Advancement of Science.

Burns, E. B. 1990. A History of Brazil. New York: Columbia University Press.

Cardoso, Jayme Antonio, and Cecilia Maria Westphalen. 1981. Atlas historico do Parana. Curitiba: Industria Grafica Projeto.

Cipko, S. 1986. The Legacy of the "Brazilian Fever": The Ukrainian Colonization of Parana. Journal of Ukrainian Studies 11.2: 19-32.

--, and J. Lehr. 2011. From the Prairies to Parana: An Alberta Development Project in the Municipio de Prudentopolis, Brazil. In Ukraintsi Brazylii/Os Ucranianos do Brasil/Ukrainians in Brazil, ed. Maryna Hrymych, Andriy Nahachewsky, Serge Cipko, and Olga Nadia Kalko, 188-195. Kyiv: Duliby.

Costa, E. V. 1985. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Czumer, W. 1981. Recollections about the Life of the First Ukrainian Settlers in Canada. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

Danyliuk, A. 1991. Ukrains'ka khata. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka.

Darlington, J. W. 1991. The Ukrainian Impress on the Canadian West. In Canada's Ukrainians: Negotiating an Identity, ed. L. Luciuk and S. Hryniuk, 53-80. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Deneka, V. 1988. Ukrainian Church Architecture of Canada: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow. In Millennium of Christianity in Ukraine 988-1988, ed. O. W. Gerus and A. Baran, 275-292. Winnipeg: Ukrainian Academy of Arts and Sciences in Canada.

Domanyts'kyi, V. 1910. Pro Bukovynu ta zhyttia bukovyns'kykh ukraintsiv. Kyiv: Persha Kyivs'ka Spilka.

Ewanchuk, M. 1976. Spruce, Swamp, and Stone. Winnipeg: By the author.

--. 1988. Settling In: Tools and Farming Techniques of the Early Ukrainian Pioneers. In Continuity and Change: The Cultural Life of Alberta's First Ukrainians, ed. M. R. Lupul, 59-64. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

--. 1989. Personal communication. Feb.

Fodchuk, R. 1989. Building the Little House on the Prairies: Ukrainian Technology, Canadian Resources. Material History Bulletin 29 (spring): 89-98.

--. 2006. Zhorna: Material Culture of the Ukrainian Pioneers. Calgary: University of Calgary Press.

Friesen, G. 1991. The Prairies: A History. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Fundacao Nacional de Material Escolar. 1967. Atlas historico e geografico brasiliero. Rio de Janiero, n.p.

Glassie, H. 1968. Pattern in the Material Folk Culture of the Eastern United States. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Hannerz, U. 1987. The World in Creolisation. Africa 57.4: 545-559.

--. 1989. Notes on the Global Ecumene. Public Culture 1.2: 66-75.

--. 1992. Cultural Complexity: Studies in the Social Organization of Meaning. New York: Columbia University Press.

Himka, J. P. 1990. Galicia and Bukovyna, A Research Handbook about Western Ukraine, Late 19th-20th Centuries. Edmonton: Alberta Culture.

Hohol', D. 1985. The Grekul House: A Land Use and Structural History. Occasional Paper 14. Edmonton: Alberta Culture, Historic Sites Service.

Hrymych, M., A. Nahachewsky, S. Cipko, and O. Kalko, eds. 2011. Ukraintsi Brazylii/Os Ucranianos do Brasil/Ukrainians in Brazil. Kyiv: Duliby.

Hryniuk, S. 1991. Peasants with Promise: Ukrainians in Southeastern Galicia, 1880-1900. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

--, and J. Picknicki. 1995. The Land They Left Behind: Canada's Ukrainians in the Homeland. Winnipeg: Watson Dwyer.

Hunter, R. 1982. Ukrainian Canadian Folk Architecture: The Churches of Father Philip Ruh. Society for the Study of Architecture in Canada, Selected Papers 5: 24-29.

Ilarion, Metropolitan [Ivan Ohienko). 1986. The Ukrainian Church: Outlines of History of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Trans. O. Ferbey. Winnipeg: Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada.

Ilg, Karl. 1978. Das Deutschtum in Brasilien. Wien: Schutzverein Osterr. Landsmannschaft.

Iurchenko, P. H. 1970. Dereviana arkhitektura Ukrainy. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka.

Jordan, T. G. 1985. American Log Buildings: An Old World Heritage. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

--, and M. Kaups. 1989. The American Backwoods Frontier: An Ethnic and Ecological Interpretation. Baltimore-London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Joukowski, J. 1935. Hutsul'shchyna. Biuleten' istorii i kul'tury. Warsaw, n.p.

Kaye, V. J. 1964. Early Ukrainian Settlements in Canada, 1895-1900. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Kanadiis'kyi ranok. 11 Dec., 1923, 29 Aug., 1930.

Kosmina, T. 1980. Sil'ske zhytlo: podillia kinets' XIX-XX st. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka.

Krawchuk, A. 1991. Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Francophone Missionaries among Ukrainian Catholics. In Canada's Ukrainians: Negotiating an Identity, ed. L. Luciuk and S. Hryniuk, 206-217. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Kuzela, Z. 1978. Folk Architecture. In Ukraine: A Concise Encyclopaedia I, 303-6. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Larocca Junior, J., P. L. Larocca, and C. de Almeida Lima. 2008. Casa Eslavo-Paranaese: Arquitectura de Madeira dos Colones Poloneses e Ucranianos do Sul do Parana. Ponta Grossa, Parana: Larocca Associados S/S Ltda.

Lehr, J. 1974. Ukrainian Houses in Alberta. Alberta Historical Review 21.4: 9-15.

--. 1975. Changing Ukrainian House Styles. Alberta History 23.1: 25-29.

--. 1980. The Log Buildings of Ukrainian Settlers in Western Canada. Prairie Forum 5.2: 183-196.

--. 1982a. Colour Preferences and Building Decoration among Ukrainians in Western Canada. Prairie Forum 6.2: 203-206.

--. 1982b. The Landscape of Ukrainian Settlement in Western Canada. Great Plains Quarterly 2.2: 94-105.

--. 1985. Kinship and Society in the Ukrainian Pioneer Settlement of the Canadian West. Canadian Geographer 29.3: 207-219.

--. 1988. The cultural importance of vernacular architecture. In Continuity and Change: The Cultural Life of Alberta's First Ukrainians, ed. Manoly R. Lupul, 87-99. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukranian Studies.

--. 1989. The Ukrainian Sacred Landscape: A Metaphor of Survival and Acculturation. Material History Bulletin 29 (spring): 3-11.

--. 1992. Ukrainians in Western Canada. In To Build in a New Land: Ethnic Landscapes in North America, ed. Allen G. Noble, 309-330. Baltimore-London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

--. 1996. One Family's Frontier: Life History and the Process of Ukrainian Settlement in the Stuartburn District of Southeastern Manitoba. Canadian Geographer 40.103: 98-106.

--. 2002. The Geographical Background to Church Union in Canada. Prairie Forum 27.2: 199-208.

--. 2003. Shattered Fragments: Community Formation on the Ukrainian Frontier of Settlement, Stuartburn, Manitoba, 1896-1921. Prairie Forum 28.2: 219-234.

--. 2011. Community and Frontier: A Ukrainian Settlement in the Canadian Parkland. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.

--, S. Hryniuk, and J. Picnicki. 1997. A Tale of Two Frontiers: Ukrainian Settlement in Canada and Brazil 1891-1914. In The Estevan Papers, ed. R. Widdis, A. Paul, and B. Thraves, 130-147. Regina Geographical Studies No. 6. Regina: University of Regina.

--, and Y. Katz. 1994. Ethnicity, Institutions, and the Cultural Landscapes of the Canadian Prairie West. Canadian Ethnic Studies 26.2: 70-87.

--, and J. P. Morski. 1999. Family matters and global concerns: the origins of the Ukrainian pioneer diaspora, 1891-1914. Journal of Historial Geography 25.3: 349-366.

--. 1995. Crown, Corporation, and Church: The Role of Institutions in the Stability of Pioneer Settlements in the Canadian West, 1870-1914. Journal of Historical Geography 21.4: 413-429.

Lesser, J. 1999. Immigrants, Minorities, and the Struggle for Ethnicity in Brazil. Durham-London: Duke University Press.

Levine, R. 1997. Brazilian Legacies. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.

Loewen, R. 1993. Family, Church, and Market. Urbana-Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Ludwig, Sabine. 1997. In Blumenau und Pomerode: bei Deutschen im Suden Brasiliens. Wurzburg, Germany: Bergstadtverlag.

Luebke, F. 1990. Germans in the New World. Urbana-Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Lyotard, J. F. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Trans. G. Bonningham and B. Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

--, and D. McDowell. 2011. Trailblazers: The Lives and Times of Michael and Muriel (Smith) Ewanchuk. Winnipeg: Carpathia.

--, and J. P. Morski. 1999. Family Matters and Global Concerns: The Origins of the Ukrainian Pioneer Diaspora, 1891-1914. Journal of Historical Geography 25.3: 349-366.

Mackintosh, W. A. 1934. Prairie Settlement, The Geographical Setting. In Canadian Frontiers of Settlement, I, ed. W. A. Mackintosh and W. L. G. Joerg. Toronto: Macmillan.

Magocsi, P. R. 1983. Galicia: A Historical Survey and Bibliographic Guide. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Martynowych, O. 1991. Ukrainians in Canada: The Formative Period, 1891-1924. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

McGowen, M. G. 1991. "A Portion for the Vanquished": Roman Catholics and the Ukrainian Catholic Church. In Canada's Ukrainians: Negotiating an Identity, ed. L. Luciuk and S. Hryniuk, 218-237. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Melnycky, P. 1988. Mashyna: Ukrainians and Agricultural Technology in Alberta to 1930. In Continuity and Change: The Cultural Life of Alberta's First Ukrainians, ed. M. R. Lupul, 100-112. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

Morski, J. 1995. Personal communication. Prudentopolis, Parana, Brazil. April 16.

--. 2000. Under the Southern Cross: A Collection of Accounts and Reminiscences about Ukrainian Immigration in Brazil, 1891-1914. Winnipeg: Watson Dwyer.

Nahachewsky, A. 1985. Ukrainian Dug-out Dwellings in East Central Alberta. Occasional Paper No. 11. Edmonton: Alberta Culture, Historic Sites Service.

--. 2011. Personal communication. July 12.

Noble, A. G., ed. 1992. To Build in a New Land: Ethnic Landscapes in North America. Baltimore-London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Olender, V. 1984. The Reaction of the Canadian Presbyterian Church towards Ukrainian Immigrants (1900-1925): Rural Home Missions as Agencies of Assimilation. Ph.D. diss., University of St. Michael's College, Toronto School of Theology.

--. 1988. The Cultural Implications of Protestant Missions. In Continuity and Change: The Cultural Life of Alberta's First Ukrainians, ed. M. R. Lupul, 221-232. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies.

Oles'kiv, J. 1895. Pro vil'ni zemli. L'viv: Prosvita.

Onykienko, V. 1956. Bukovyna, istorychno-heohrafichnyi narys. L'viv: n.p.

Pensak, M. N. 1983. 80 Anos da Paroquia Sagrada Familia Iracema, S.C. 1903-1983. Iracema, Santa Catarina: n.p.

Piddubnyi, H. 1928. Bukovyna, i mynule i suchasne. Kharkiv: Derzhavne Vydavnytstvo Ukrainy.

Ponomariov, A., et al. 1994. Ukrains'ka mynuvshyna. Kyiv: Lybid'.

Romaniuk, G., ed. 1984. Reverend Philip Ruh, OMI: Missionary and Architect. Cook's Creek, MB: n.p.

Rotoff, B., R. Yereniuk, and S. Hryniuk, eds. 1990. Monuments to Faith: Ukrainian Churches in Manitoba. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.

Royick, Alexander. 1968. Ukrainian Settlements in Alberta. Canadian Slavonic Papers 10.3: 278-297.

Rudnyc'kyj, J. B. 1970. Manitoba, Mosaic of Place Names. Winnipeg: Canadian Institute of Onomastic Sciences.

Ryden, K. C. 1993. Mapping the Invisible Landscape. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.

Samoilovych, V. P. 1961. Narodna tvorchist' v arkhitekturi sils'koho zhytla. Kyiv: Derzhavne Vydavnytsvo Literatury z Budivnytstva.

--. 1972. Ukrains'ke narodne zhytlo. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka.

Scott, G. A. J. 1995. Canada's Vegetation: A World Perspective. Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press.

Svoboda. 29 Dec., 1898.

Swyripa, F. 2010. Storied Landscapes: Ethno-Religious Identity on the Canadian Prairies. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.

Ukrainsk'kyi holos. 14 Aug., 1914, 8 Sept., 1928, 24 April, 1929.

Upton, D., ed. 1986. America's Architectural Roots: Ethnic Groups that Built America. Washington: Preservation Press.

Urquhart, M. C., and K. A. H. Buckley, eds. 1965. Historical Statistics of Canada. Toronto: Macmillan.

Wagner, Reinhardt W. 1995. Deutsche als Ersatz fur Sklaven: Arbeitsmigranten aus Deutschland in der brasilianischen Provinz Sao Paulo, 1847-1914. Frankfurt am Main: Vervuert Verlag.

Wallerstein, I. 1991. Report on an Intellectual Project: The Fernand Braudel Center, 1971-91. Binghampton: Fernand Brandel Centre, State University of New York.

Yuzyk, P. 1982. Religious Life. In A Heritage in Transition: Essays in the History of Ukrainians in Canada, ed. M. R. Lupul, 143-172. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Zaroski, N. G. 2001. A utilizacao do tempo pelos imigrantes ucranianos de Prudentopolis 1940-1960. Curitiba: Universidade Federal do Parana.

Zuk, R. 1984. Architectural Significance and Culture. Canadian Ethnic Studies 16.3: 16-26.

--. 1996. Tradition und Gegenwart: Ukrainische Kirchen in Nordamerika und Museumsprojekte in der Ukraine. Munich: n.p.

JOHN C. LEHR is a Senior Scholar in the Department of Geography at the University of Winnipeg. His research has focused on Ukrainian agricultural settlement in Western Canada and Brazil. He is a former president of the Canadian Ethnic Studies Association and the author of Community and Frontier: A Ukrainian Settlement in the Canadian Parkland (University of Manitoba Press, 2011).

SERGE CIPKO is co-ordinator of the Ukrainian Diaspora Studies Initiative at the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre, Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, University of Alberta. He is author of Ukrainians in Argentina, 1897-1950: The Making of a Community (Edmonton and Toronto: CIUS Press, 2011) and St. Josaphat Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral, Edmonton: A History (1902-2002) (Edmonton: St. Josaphat Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral, 2009) and co-author (with Glenna Roberts) of One Way Ticket: The Soviet Return to the Homeland Campaign, 1955-1960 (Manotick, ON: Penumbra Press, 2008).