Andrew Bynum Biography

Andrew Bynum is an NBA center that at times has been regarded as one of the best big men in the league. Bynum was an All-Star in 2012 and won two championships with the Los Angeles Lakers. His best season was most definitely 2012, when he averaged 18.7 points and 11.8 rebounds a game on the way to second team All-NBA honors. Knee injuries have unfortunately sidetracked Bynum’s career since. He was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers as part of a three team deal that landed Dwight Howard in Los Angeles. Bynum missed his entire season with the Sixers, but played for the Cleveland Cavaliers and Indiana Pacers in 2013-14. The Lakers took Bynum out of high school with the tenth pick in the 2005 NBA Draft. In his rookie season, he was the youngest player to ever play in an NBA game. He was a 2005 McDonald’s All-American.

Book Andrew Bynum for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Andrew Bynum for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Andrew Bynum. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Andrew Bynum, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Andrew Bynum's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Andrew Bynum, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Andrew Bynum for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Andrew Bynum for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Andrew Bynum for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Andrew Bynum’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Andrew Bynum for your Virtual Meeting