The Lakers will pick up Andrew Bynum's option for next season. (Getty Images)

Duh.

Lakers GM Mitch Kupchak told reporters during a press conference on Wednesday that the team will pick up its team option on All-Star center Andrew Bynum, keeping him in Los Angeles for the 2012-13 season. The option will pay Bynum $16.1 million next season. He made $14.9 million in 2011-12.

The move is a no-brainer given Bynum's size, skill, development and age. The contract decision was publicly forecast as early as March, when Kupchak told the Los Angeles Times of the team's plans to pick up the option.

"He's the starting center on the West All-Star team. Why wouldn't we do everything we could to keep him here?" he said at the time. "We're ecstatic to have him on the team."

Bynum, 24, just completed his seventh NBA season, all with the Lakers. He posted regular season averages of 18.7 points, 11.8 rebounds and 1.9 blocks in 35.2 minutes per game. In the 2012 postseason, he averaged 16.7 points, 11.1 rebounds and 3.1 blocks per game. The Lakers were eliminated by the Oklahoma City Thunder in five games in a Western Conference semifinals series this week.

At some point in the near future, the Lakers and Bynum's camp will explore the possibility of a contract extension. Following the Game 5 loss to the Thunder on Monday, Bynum was apparently indifferent about the possibility of a long-term future with the Lakers.

"I'm not sure," he said during a televised postgame interview. "It really doesn't matter to me. I'll play anywhere. I think for the most part I had a pretty decent season and then an OK postseason. Obviously this last game was the worst game I've probably played. It sucks, obviously, we're going fishing. My focus is next year and coming back stronger, adding things to my game."

He later expresed a desire to remain with the team during a follow-up question.

"I definitely want to stay," he said. "You kind of asked an open-ended question. Obviously things are going to be different come next year. I'm going to be ready."