What is Andrew Bynum's Net Worth?

Andrew Bynum is an American professional basketball player who has a net worth of $35 million. Andrew Bynum earned his fortune thanks to a long and successful career in the NBA, mostly as a Los Angeles Laker, where he was an All-Star and NBA champion.

Early Life

Andrew Bynum was born on October 27, 1987, in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey. After his parents split when he was just one year old, Andrew and his older brother, Corey, would visit their father in North Carolina in the summers. Andrew attended several high schools but eventually settled in at St. Joseph High School for his junior and senior years. He participated in the McDonald's All-American game in 2005 and was named a McDonald's All American and third-team "Parade" All-American. Andrew Bynum ultimately decided to defer entrance to the University of Connecticut and entered the NBA Draft instead.

NBA Career

In the 2005 NBA Draft, Andrew Bynum was selected by the Los Angeles Lakers with the 10th overall pick. He became the youngest player ever drafted and youngest player to play in the NBA at just 17 years of age. Bynum had a solid rookie year campaign, but he would only improve over the course of the next four seasons.

The Lakers won the 2009 Finals against the Orlando Magic with Bynum averaging just 19 minutes per game, and the 2010 Finals against the Oklahoma City Thunder despite a third consecutive season in which he was bothered by a knee injury. He postponed surgery until after the season, but his recovery took longer than expected. Bynum returned to play late in 2010 but was ejected in the final game of the four-game sweep by Dallas Mavericks in the NBA Finals for a flagrant foul. His actions were condemned by sports media, and Bynum was suspended the first four games of the next season and fined $25,000.

Andrew Bynum responded in 2012 by making the NBA All-Star team and being named to the All-NBA Second Team. But in August of 2012, Bynum was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers in a four-team deal that sent Dwight Howard from the Magic to the Lakers and Andre Iguodala from the 76ers to the Denver Nuggets. Andrew Bynum would have to have season-ending arthroscopic surgery on both knees ending his 76ers tenure without playing a game.

In 2013, Andrew Bynum signed with the Cleveland Cavaliers where he mostly struggled, and he was suspended indefinitely for conduct detrimental to the team. In January of 2014, the Cavaliers traded Bynum and future draft picks to the Chicago Bulls for Luol Deng. Andrew Bynum signed with the Indiana Pacers in 2014 where he appeared in only two games before swelling and soreness in his right knee forced him to miss the rest of the season.

Contracts & Earnings

In October of 2008, Andrew Bynum signed a rookie scale extension with the Los Angeles Lakers for four-years, $57.2 million and a salary of $14.3 million. His contract with the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2013 was a two-year incentive-laden deal worth upwards of $24.8 million. Bynum signed a one-year contract worth $1 million for the 2014 season with the Indiana Pacers.

Andrew Bynum's career NBA earnings come in at more than $70 million.