Despite being a two-time NBA champion and All-Star who played for the Los Angeles Lakers, the second most successful team in National Basketball Association history, Andrew Bynum will be best remembered for his maturity and drive. to push themselves to play the game at the highest level.

The 7-foot-tall, 285-pound heavyweight center position player, who was the youngest NBA player to be drafted straight out of high school, was selected by the Lakers with the 10th overall pick in the 2005 NBA Draft Read on to find out more about his debut and his league results.

Andrew Bynum Bio

Andrew Bynum was born to Ernest Bynum and JanetMcCoy on October 27, 1987 in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey. After his parents divorced when he was just one year old, Bynum was raised by his mother, although he spent the summer visiting his father who moved and lived in North Carolina.

Due to his height, growing up, Bynum was destined for a career in sports. He attended West Windsor Plainsboro High School North in Plainsboro, New Jersey for half of his junior year before transferring to Solebury School in Solebury, Pennsylvania. He completed his freshman and sophomore education here before joining St. Joseph’s High School, Metuchen, New Jersey, where he completed his junior and senior years. It was also during his time at St. Joseph that Bynum became a dominant high school basketball player.

Andrew Bynum averaged 16.0 points, 13.0 rebounds and 6.0 blocks per game. In his senior year, he averaged 22.4 points, 16.8 rebounds, and 5.3 blocks per game. His performances earned him a spot in the 2005 McDonald’s All-American game where he recorded 9 points and 5 rebounds. After graduating from high school, Bynum became one of college basketball’s most prominent players. Many big-name schools struggled to get him to play for their curriculum, but Bynum chose to attend the University of Connecticut. His decision to attend Connecticut was quickly reversed, as the 17-year-old high school graduate decided to declare himself eligible for the 2005 NBA draft, following projections that he would be a high-ranking pick. .

The Los Angeles Lakers were the team that opted to take a chance with Andrew Bynum picking him with the 10th overall pick in the 2005 NBA Draft, making him the youngest player ever to be selected in the an NBA team. He then became the youngest player to play in an NBA game when he played in the Lakers’ inaugural game against the Denver Nuggets. During his rookie season, Bynum averaged 1.6 points, 1.7 rebounds and 0.5 blocks in 46 games. Bynum was able to improve his performance considerably over the next few years: 7.8 points and 5.9 rebounds per game in 82 games in his second year, then 13.1 points and 10.2 rebounds per game in 35 games in his third year.

Despite some knee issues, Bynum was able to help his team win back-to-back NBA championships in 2008-09 and 2009-10. He stayed with the Lakers for another two years before being traded to the Philadelphia 76ers. Unfortunately, Bynum didn’t get a chance to play a single game for the 76ers as problems kept developing with his knees. In July 2013, he signed for the Cleveland Cavaliers and managed to appear in 24 games before being traded. In February 2014, he joined the Indiana Pacers but only managed to play two games before his knee problems resurfaced. Since then, he has not played professional basketball.

What happened to him, where is he now?

Andrew Bynum was never heard from again. It was announced that he was parting ways with the Indiana Pacers franchise in May 2014. However, in August 2018, multiple reports stated that the NBA second team member 2012 was looking to make a comeback to the NBA. It was reported that Bynum had hired an agent and was planning training sessions with different teams ahead of training camps for the 2018-19 season.

Bynum, who turned 31 in October 2018, is not too much However, what will worry teams likely to seek to showcase his talent within his franchise are lingering knee injuries, first and foremost.