Michael & Susan Dell Foundation

The Michael & Susan Dell Foundation (www.dell.org) is dedicated to transforming the lives of children living in urban poverty around the world. With offices in Austin, TX, New Delhi, India, and Cape Town, South Africa, the Dell Foundation funds programs that foster high-quality public education and childhood health and improve the economic stability of the families we serve. To date, the foundation has committed over $2.3 billion to global children’s issues and community initiatives to accelerate opportunity for families. The foundation is expanding its work into Israel.

Current Opportunity: Solutions Architect – Austin, Texas

The Solutions Architect partners with our global program teams across the US, India, and South Africa to enable the effective use of technology in achieving our social impact goals. This role engages with our program staff and their partner organizations in envisioning and implementing well-considered scalable and sustainable technical solutions that will accelerate outcomes for our beneficiaries. Expertise in both business processes and technology will be crucial in ensuring that the technology investments deliver maximum value. This role requires that the person is based in Austin, TX.

Key responsibilities for this role:

Collaborate with program staff and partner organizations to understand business problems and program objectives, to advise on possible innovative technology solutions, and deliver a go-forward plan to make the solution a reality.

Oversee the planning, execution, and delivery of approved technology projects. This includes providing technical leadership for end-to-end delivery of the product from business requirements gathering, design, architecture, resource management and implementation.

Proactively evaluate potential technical risks and provide risk mitigation strategies.

Assess technology strategy, plans, and solutions for prospective projects, providing guidance and feedback on areas that need to be strengthened for extensibility and scalability while achieving core outcomes.

Evaluate and build a trusted network of partners who can bring in deep expertise across various technology domains.

Serve as the primary liaison between our program team and technical partners/vendors, driving stakeholder management by bridging relationships between technical and non-technical project members. Distill complex technical information into clear business language.

Staying informed of technological trends and identifying emerging technologies that align with MSDF’s mission, advocating for their adoption and ensuring they are leveraged effectively to maximize the social impact.

The ideal candidate will have:

Technical Product and program management skills to tackle complex ambiguous problems and lead external teams to deliver effective scalable solutions and results.

Ability to evaluate various technology strategies and architectures to meet short and long-term business objectives.

Technology Expertise – must have solid working knowledge of a breadth of technologies including, but not limited to, web application development, database & reporting Analytics, cloud technologies, security, artificial intelligence and UI/UX principles.

Solid understanding of development frameworks, agile methodologies, CI/CD best practices, version control and quality assurance practices and tools.

Ability to quickly learn new business domains and identify opportunities where technology can drive positive impact at scale.

Strong Project Management and analytical skills.

Communication (spoken and written) skills to work effectively with and influence technical and non-technical partners at various levels in management.

Technical Qualifications required to execute this role:

B.S or M.S in Computer Science, Engineering, or related field

10+ years as technical lead, solution architect, technical consultant, or technical product manager

Experience delivering AI capability to solve specific use cases will be a plus.

The typical amount of travel required to perform this role successfully: 8 weeks per year.

About the Michael & Susan Dell Foundation

We are a diverse team with unique perspectives. We are united in our mission, our purpose, and our culture. We are driven by our ambition to identify, build, and enhance opportunities for the people we serve, and we are unwavering in our commitment to trust and uplift one another. The foundation is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, genetics, disability, age, or veteran status. We are committed to building a team and workplace that is enhanced by the breadth, depth, diversity, and capabilities of our teammates.