The Queen Nazli of Egypt Art Deco Diamond Tiara belonged, as the name suggests, to Queen Nazli, second wife of Fuad I, King of Egypt. The dazzling diamond confection was created for a celebration – but became tarnished by a history of malaise and murder.

Read More

Wedding bells for Iman Pahlavi, granddaughter of the last Shah of Iran, as her dashing beau proposes

More than 60 years after her grandfather the last Shah of Iran married for the third time, Iman Pahlavi is preparing to wed

It was originally commissioned as part of a considerable acquisition from Van Cleef and Arpels in 1938 by the Royal Family of Egypt in preparation the wedding of the Egyptian Princess Fawzia to Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the future Shah of Iran. It features 720 white diamonds totalling 274 carats, and sits high atop the wearer to showcase a focal art deco spray motif with adjacent swirls. The tiara was worn by Queen Nazli, the mother of the bride.

Born in 1894, Nazli was first married for a brief period to her cousin but later wed King Fuad after he spotted her at the opera and was captivated by her beauty. Allegedly her stifled palace life eased after the birth of their son Farouk and four daughters: Fawzia, Faiza, Faika, and Fathia.

Read More

Who was Lady Renwick, the Iranian-born socialite who charmed British royals and politicians?

A woman highly respected for her diplomacy and cultural endeavours, Lady Renwick leaves a lasting legacy

Some time after the death of the King in 1936, Queen Nazli went to America for a kidney operation, accompanied by Princess Fathia, and decided not to return to her homeland. Nazli converted to Christianity and Fathia married a diplomat, Riad Ghali. Back in Egypt, her only son, King Farouk I, became the penultimate monarch of Egypt. He fiercely objected to his mother and sister’s behaviour and promptly terminated their royal titles and $5,000 a month income.

Purportedly making disastrous financial decisions on their behalf, Fathia’s husband Ghali ushered his new family into ruin. Any Egyptian assets had been lost in the 1952 coup, leaving the queen no choice but to sell The Queen Nazli of Egypt Art Deco Diamond Tiara deco and other treasured jewellery at Sotheby’s in 1975. The magnificent tiara sold for just $127,500, not enough to sustain their life in California.

The following year President Sedat of Egypt offered both royal women a dignified safe passage to return home but in December that year Ghali murdered his estranged wife by multiple gun shots to the head. His suicide attempt failed and he was jailed in the US. Nazli was forced into bankruptcy and died in May 1978. A necklace from Nazli’s collection resurfaced at auction in 2015, but the tiara’s whereabouts remain unknown.