A preface to the new music video from Papa Roach and Carrie Underwood reads:

Suicide is a topic that hides in the shadows.

Together, we can Talk away the dark.

The collaboration, for Papa Roach’s recent hit song “Leave A Light On (Talk Away the Dark),” finds Underwood teaming up with Papa Roach front man Jacoby Shaddix to help spread the profile and further the discussion regarding suicide prevention and mental health awareness.

Here’s their collaborative music video:

Per a news release, this team-up was recorded in Nashville and was carried out alongside partner organization(s) the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP), who will receive royalties generated from both artists from the song, in perpetuity. The release will also raise awareness for the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the United States and Canada.

Said Shaddix: “We were humbled that Carrie was open to our mission, and hearing the power of Carrie’s voice in that recording session we were blown away. Not only is her vocal ability unequaled, but the impact of her voice brings a new meaning to our cause and will help people all over the globe. It’s an honor to have a ‘Rock Star’ bring life to this track with us.”

Added Underwood: “I’m such a huge fan of Jacoby and Papa Roach and was honored to be invited to record ‘Leave A Light On’ with them. It’s a beautiful song and the message behind it and the band’s mission to shine a light on suicide prevention and mental health awareness has never been more important.”

The original version of “Leave A Light On” was featured on Papa Roach’s 2022 album Ego Trip, and has scored the band another hit on alternative/rock radio. Decades removed from the band’s breakthrough amid the “nu-metal” crush of the early 2000s, Shaddix and his colleagues continue being a viable and popular band on the hard-rock scene.

The band performed the song each night on tour last year with Shinedown and Spiritbox, and it has since become a favorite among Papa Roach fans — and Underwood, who lent her talents to the moving and powerful collaboration shared this week.