A few weeks ago, I discussed something completely hypothetical: the best films never released.

Now, I’m going to write a spinoff of sorts, with the best albums never released.

Just as with the unreleased films, these all-star collaborative albums have never even been discussed, but I am giving reviews of them as if they had been released:

“New World Order”

This is as monumental an album as there is. “New World Order” is an immediate classic, and we have never seen anything quite like it.

The brilliant lyricism and fierce intensity packed by U2, OneRepublic, Lupe Fiasco, Kendrick Lamar and John Legend translate well on beats from producer Kanye West. The latter has proven to be a very innovative artist on albums such as “Graduation” and “808s and Heartbreak,” and this is something that stands on its own. U2 re-establishes itself as the greatest band of all time; OneRepublic provides its best work to date; Lupe Fiasco and Lamar prove why they are standouts in their genre; and Legend’s vocals are equally stunning.

This is one of the most important albums of our time, and even more fantastic is that all proceeds from the album sales and tour will go toward various charities. Grade: A+

“Hold the Applause”

“Hold the Applause” is an album of epic proportions. It’s as if “Achtung Baby” and “My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy” were fused together. The most popular artists out there right now (U2, Coldplay, OneRepublic, Imagine Dragons, John Legend, Jhene Aiko, Alicia Keys, Trey Songz, Jeremih, Miguel, Drake, Eminem, Jay Z, Kanye West, Andre 3000, Nas) hop onto one album, and on paper, it sounds like an overstuffed “All of the Lights,” but these artists work seamlessly together and take advantage of the huge opportunity. They each have different backgrounds and styles, and everything blends together well because everyone just wants to make great music, even if it’s not defined by genre.

The album nails and drives home its concept of the pros and cons of fame. “Hold the Applause” shows the highs and the lows of celebrity, with bravado and finesse to spare. Grade: A+

“The World is Ours”

Get prepared to listen to some high-end lyricism from “The World is Ours,” featuring the best MCs out there: Eminem, Lupe Fiasco and Kendrick Lamar. Each of the three brings something different to the table, making them the perfect trio. Eminem is arguably the greatest, and if there are any worries he may have fallen off, they are immediately erased here as he goes as hard as he went back in his prime. Lupe Fiasco moves away from his conflicts with Atlantic Records and makes the same type of music he made back during his “Food & Liquor” and “The Cool” days, and Lamar continues his reign. Arguably the best hip-hop album of all time. Grade: A+

“Once in a Lifetime”

There are a few things that are definitively American, including apple pie and “The Wizard of Oz.” “Once in a Lifetime” belongs in this category. It’s a classic collaboration among Frank Sinatra, Bing Crosby, Nat King Cole, Tony Bennett, Dean Martin and Perry Como. All of the performers are on top of their games and sing some perfect songs together. Literally every track on this album is an instant hit. One of the, if not the, best albums of all time. Grade: A+

Let me hear your feedback on the list of these unreleased albums, as well as the earlier movies list. Would you like to hear “New World Order,” “Hold the Applause,” “The World is Ours” or “Once in a Lifetime”? Go ahead and make track lists, album covers or your own reviews. Or maybe decide to make your own list.