Displays all media that you have taken out of service, usually because of an excessive number of errors. After you associate a media with the retired media set, Backup Exec does not select it for backup jobs. The media is still available for restore operations, if it has not been damaged. Retired Media protects media from being used (overwritten).

If Backup Exec cannot recognize data on a tape, then it moves the tape to Retired Media. If you want to reuse the tape, erase or label the tape. These operations write a new header to the tape that Backup Exec can recognize. After the tape is erased or labeled, Backup Exec moves it to the Scratch Media set.

You can delete the media that is in Retired Media to remove it from Backup Exec. You may want to delete media if you have a lot of off-site media that you do not want to recycle. You can also delete media if you throw away the media.

See Erasing tape or disk cartridge media.

See Retiring damaged tape media.

Displays all tape media that you associate with this media set. If you use the backup job defaults that are set when you install Backup Exec, the media set Keep Data for 4 Weeks is the default media set for all backup jobs that you send to tape storage. This media set protects data from being overwritten for four weeks and allows the media to be appended to for six days.

You can edit and rename Keep Data for 4 Weeks after installation. Therefore, it may not continue to appear in the Media view or in the backup job defaults as Keep Data for 4 Weeks.

Displays all tape media that you associate with this media set.

When you associate media with this media set, data is not overwritten unless you perform any of the following actions on the media:

Erase

Label

Format

Associate the media with the scratch media set

You can append data to this media for an infinite period (until the media is full).

You can edit and rename Keep Data Infinitely - Do Not Allow Overwrite after installation. Therefore, it may not continue to appear in the Media view or in the backup job defaults as Keep Data Infinitely - Do Not Allow Overwrite.