I've been sticking my nose into so many things that I've become famous for everything else.

Original Japanese Verison

With a title that literally translates to Japan Sinks, you'd be hardly surprised that the film eventually delivers on this title. The first of many adaptations of Sakyo Komatsu's original works, Submersion of Japan stands above most disaster movies by approaching an honestly terrifying situation with calm intelligence and asking many difficult questions along the way.

Racked by earthquakes and volcanoes, Japan is slowly sinking into the sea. A race against time and tide begins as the scientists work together to salvage some fraction of the disappearing Japan.

Following an unsuccessful deal with Daiei, the film rights for the novel were…

An earnest and seemingly thoroughly researched (I mean I wouldn't know if it wasn't, but this sure emphasizes the prefix of "infotainment") Japanese disaster film adapted from an acclaimed novel, focusing "Shin Godzilla"-like on government planning after we spend a lot of time watching scientists explore deep-sea trenches, calculate data in labs and then explain in conference rooms the inevitability of Japan sinking back into the ocean from earthquakes and tsunamis. Kind of a relief that it never cuts to blue-collar families or heroic movie stars. We have enough movies in this genre for all that. There is one romantic subplot but it occupies minor space only. There's suspense to the cloud of doom hanging over the story - are…

Doom and gloom as the Japanese islands start to sink and the Japanese government start to prepare for the inevitable end. I read some reviews that complained that the movie was overlong and too talky but as the movie focused on the preparations of what was to come and less on human drama I found it quite refreshing instead of boring. And with excellent special effects, a great cast and a thrilling score the two and a half hours just rushed by. One of the finest disaster dramas ever made. The long scene where Tokyo is leveled by a giant earthquake is one of the finest pieces of cinematic destruction that I have ever seen. Period.

Someone really needs to…

Toho’s visual effects master class SUBMERSION OF JAPAN stands as a great achievement for both the method of Tokusatsu and for the genre of disaster films.

As the title might infer, the plot concerns a geographical phenomena that will spell disaster for the nation of Japan. The film follows various characters, from scientists, to the Prime Minister, and a submarine pilot, and details how they and the side characters handle and deal with the situation at each stage of the disaster. We are taken through the discovery, the actual disasters themselves, and the methods by which our characters try to survive or cope with what is happening.

What I think really sets SUBMERSION OF JAPAN apart from other, perhaps more…

Watched the new Tidal Wave reconstruction by Toby21. This is one of those Americanizations that gets written off as a "butchering," but I was surprised to see the key plot beats in Submersion of Japan stayed more-or-less intact despite the removal of an hour of footage. This does wonders for the pacing, of course, but at the cost of the original's steady building of dread. The new scenes with Lorne Greene are perfunctory; he doesn't even show up until more than halfway through the movie. Seems he was cast mostly with the marketing campaign in mind, as he had appeared in two other major disaster films previously and the trailers suggested (without outright saying it) that the U.S. rather than…

Before writing this review I read a couple other reviews on here, and I have to say I’m in the middle on this one. I don’t think it’s just a long boring movie, but I also don’t think it’s a masterpiece. I definitely think it can be a little too “talky” at times, but that may just be me being annoyed at having to read so many subtitles. Submersion of Japan is the second longest Toho SFX film at nearly 2 1/2 hours. I was pretty engaged throughout most of the movie, but I can see how some people might get bored with it. Now I haven’t seen any of Toho’s other disaster films, but I have to say this…

My DVD cut off before the end of the film but from reading a few summaries, I think I got most of it. At least enough. It is all bad news for Japan. And Japanese movies. And Shohei Ohtani. But fortunately, this is a work of fiction and most experts say that Japan will not sink any time soon. Even if they did make a 2006 film called Japan Sinks.

The science of tectonic plates and the formation of the continents and mountains is fascinating and it isn't over. The earth is still moving and if we are around in another million years we will see changes. In this film though the tectonic plates are moving quickly around Japan causing…