Earlier today, an official website and Twitter account opened their doors to announce that Sakyo Komatsu’s Japan Sinks (Nihon Chinbotsu) novels will receive an anime adaptation. The first visual and staffers for the project, as well as details on its distribution were revealed. We break the details down below.

Key Visual

The image features two characters running through the rubble of Tokyo, which is warped and distorted.

Staff

Masaaki Yuasa (Devilman Crybaby, Ping Pong) will direct the project at Science Saru, with Naoya Wada providing character designs.

Original Work: Sakyo Komatsu

Series Director: Pyeon-Gang Ho

Screenplay: Toshio Yoshitaka

Music: Kensuke Ushio

Color Design: Ken Hashimoto

Director of Photography: Toshikazu Kuno

Sound Director: Eriko Kimura

Editor: Kiyoshi Hirose

Distribution

Netflix will distribute the series worldwide as a Netflix Original in 2020.

Japan Sinks is a 1973 novel by Sakyo Komatsu. The title won the the 27th Mystery Writers of Japan Award and the Seiun Award in its debut year, and has since been cited as an important lens into the cultural context of 1970s Japan.

Source: Animate Times

Masaaki Yuasa to Direct “Japan Sinks” Anime; Netflix to Stream Worldwide in 2020 – Samantha Ferreira

We Need Your Help!

We’re dedicated to paying our contributors and staff members fairly for their work—but we can’t do it alone.

You can become a patron for as little as $1 a month, and every single penny goes to the people and services that keep Anime Feminist running. Please help us pay more people to make great content!

John Leigh, a showrunner for Anime Matsuri—the second largest anime convention in North America—is digging up his own accusations by attempting to silence a vlogger who talked about them. It’s a bad look at any time, but especially during the #MeToo era. It’s also an unusual choice considering this scandal was all but forgotten.

Like this:

Like Loading...

There’s a nasty stereotype that anime fans and Nazis are closely related, as indicated by the number of virulent alt-right trolls with anime avatars you’ll find in any Twitter cesspool.

Like this:

Like Loading...