Loading...

Japan Sinks: A Novel

by Sakyo Komatsu

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions1267222,749 (3.21)2

"A chillingly realistic work of science fiction." ― The New York Times. After dropping anchor for the night near a small island to the south of Japan, a crew of fishermen awaken to find that the island has vanished without a trace. An investigating scientist theorizes that the tiny island has succumbed to the same force that divided the Japanese archipelago from the mainland ― and that the disastrous shifting of a fault in the Japan Trench has placed the entire country in danger of being swallowed by the sea. Based on rigorous scientific speculation, Japan Sinks recounts a completely credible series of geological events. The story unfolds from multiple points of view, offering fascinating perspectives on the catastrophe's political, social, and psychological effects. Winner of the Mystery Writers of Japan Award and the Seiun Award, this prescient 1973 science-fiction novel foreshadowed the consequences of the 1995 Osaka-Kobe earthquake and the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami.… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 2 mentions

▾Member reviews

Showing 5 of 5

Showing 5 of 5

▾Other authors

» Add other authors (7 possible)

▾Series and work relationships

Belongs to Publisher Series

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Epigraph Quotations Disambiguation notice Publisher's editors Blurbers Original language Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English (1)

Japan Sinks

▾Book descriptions

"A chillingly realistic work of science fiction." ― The New York Times. After dropping anchor for the night near a small island to the south of Japan, a crew of fishermen awaken to find that the island has vanished without a trace. An investigating scientist theorizes that the tiny island has succumbed to the same force that divided the Japanese archipelago from the mainland ― and that the disastrous shifting of a fault in the Japan Trench has placed the entire country in danger of being swallowed by the sea. Based on rigorous scientific speculation, Japan Sinks recounts a completely credible series of geological events. The story unfolds from multiple points of view, offering fascinating perspectives on the catastrophe's political, social, and psychological effects. Winner of the Mystery Writers of Japan Award and the Seiun Award, this prescient 1973 science-fiction novel foreshadowed the consequences of the 1995 Osaka-Kobe earthquake and the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami.

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Book description

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Popular covers

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.21)

0.511.52 42.5 13 133.5 14 44.5 15 2

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.