Who is Pau Gasol?

Pau Gasol is a former professional basketball player in the NBA and the Spanish National Team, president of the Gasol Foundation, member of the International Olympic Committee, and president of Gasol16 Ventures, a vehicle through which he is an investor and advisor in projects related to sports and wellness.

What are his conferences like?

Pau Gasol's conferences inspire the audience through unique experiences. He offers valuable lessons on leadership, resilience, and the importance of social impact. His narrative blends his sports career with his philanthropic commitment, leaving a lasting impression.

What is his trajectory?

He began his sports career at FC Barcelona. In 2001, he became the second Spaniard to play in the NBA and the first to win the ‘Rookie of the Year’ award with the Memphis Grizzlies. He has been an NBA champion twice and a six-time All-Star. He helped the Spanish national team win a world championship and was a three-time Olympic medalist.

Pau has worked closely with major sports entities and has become an ambassador for the NBA, the Los Angeles Lakers, FIBA, and FC Barcelona. He has been a reference for many European players aspiring to compete in the world's best basketball league. This legacy has earned him several recognitions that are only within reach of the best players in history. On one hand, the Los Angeles Lakers retired his jersey with the number 16 in March 2023, making him the first international player to receive such an honor. In early April, he was elected a member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Class of 2023.

As a former player of a team sport, Pau Gasol conveys in his conferences a message of leadership and motivation focused on the keys to working as a team and the importance of mental strength. Off the field, he is a great champion of social causes. He was educated on the principles of healthy living and even began studying medicine, which he felt a vocation for. In 2013, he created the Gasol Foundation with his brother Marc, whose mission is to reduce childhood obesity rates. This entity focuses its efforts on promoting healthy living habits among children and youth through its programs in Spain and the United States. In 2022, he presented the National Strategic Plan for the reduction of childhood obesity alongside the Government of Spain.

Gasol has served as Ambassador of the Spanish Committee of UNICEF since 2003. Currently, he is a Global Champion for nutrition and the end of childhood obesity for UNICEF.

His philanthropic work has earned him several recognitions, such as the Princess of Asturias Award for Sports or the Special Recognition Award of the NAOS Strategy. Moreover, his commitment to the community and women's sports has made him deserving of the Bob Lanier Community Service Award, as well as the Kobe & Gigi Bryant Advocacy Award, respectively.

Through Gasol16 Ventures, Pau groups his business activity related to investment and advisory in projects related to sports, health and wellness, Spanish entrepreneurship, and private equity.

Selection of conferences:

Leadership in Sports and Business

Discover the keys to success both on the court and in the professional environment. Through a series of parallels and personal anecdotes, Pau Gasol will explore the similarities between sports and business and will convey very useful lessons and tools on how to maintain team motivation and discipline, lead effectively, and enhance the individual performance of each team member.

The Secret of Exceptional Teams

Pau Gasol will draw from the practical lessons of the various sports and professional teams he has been part of and stood out in. In this talk, the NBA legend will delve into the characteristics that make teams work: cohesion, commitment to a common goal, ego management, clear objectives... With concrete examples, Pau Gasol will guide you to a deep understanding of what makes a team function exceptionally.

Mental Strength and Performance

In this conference, Pau Gasol talks about the importance of emotional well-being, having the right tools to overcome what is beyond your control, and facing failure and success, changes, and difficulties that stand in the way of your goals more successfully. Discover how to cultivate the mental strength necessary to achieve peak performance in any area of your life.