Maxwell Ogden@ MaxwellOgdenCorrespondent III

Pau Gasol vs. Marc Gasol: Comparing the Brothers' First 4 NBA Seasons

0 of 12

It's been a long four years since the Los Angeles Lakers acquired Pau Gasol from the Memphis Grizzlies in what was once considered the most lopsided trade in recent history. Well, before Chris Paul went to the Los Angeles Clippers.

Four years later, however, it's clear that the Memphis Grizzlies weren't too dumb after all. Considering only one player from the infamous Gasol swap made the All-Star team in 2012, they actually look pretty damn smart.

That's because it was Marc, not Pau, who was invited to Orlando.

It's far too early to debate who the better player is, as Marc's four years of experience pale in comparison to Pau's 11.

What can be done, however, is compare the first four years of each Gasol's career.

Year 1: King Pau

1 of 12

In the first year of Pau's illustrious career, 2001's third overall draft choice outplayed both players taken before him and every player taken after him, winning the Rookie of the Year award behind a surprisingly dominant 17.6 points, 8.9 rebounds and 2.1 blocks per game.

What may have been most impressive about Gasol's game wasn't a statistic, though—it was his poise.

Despite being traded on draft day and walking into Memphis as the face of a new franchise, Gasol was never fazed.

Not bad for a 20-year-old from Spain.

Year 1: Making His Marc

2 of 12

Unlike brother Pau, who was a Top-5 draft pick, Marc Gasol didn't hear his name come off of the board until the 18th pick...of the second round.

Despite facing expectations of failure, Marc actually outdid his Rookie of the Year brother by shooting a franchise-record 53 percent from the field—breaking Pau's original record.

That impressive mark was accompanied by 11.9 points, 7.4 rebounds and 1.1 blocks per game.

Year 1: Older Brother Knows Best

3 of 12

While Marc broke Pau's shooting record, Pau took home the hardware.

At the end of the day, that's what truly matters when both play for teams who aren't winning.

Year 1 goes to Pau.

Year 2: Pau-Erful Improvements

4 of 12

Pau continued to amaze in Year 2, posting averages of 19.0 points a night to go with 8.8 rebounds, 2.8 assists and 1.8 blocks.

He also played in all 82 games, avoiding injury.

Unfortunately, Pau was unable to take the Grizzlies to the playoffs.

Despite an improvement of five wins from the year prior, the Grizzlies finished a dismal 28-54.

Year 2: Major Strides

5 of 12

In Year 2 of Marc Gasol's career, the improvements were astonishing.

After setting the franchise record for shooting percentage as a rookie, he shattered his own mark by shooting 58.1 percent.

He upped the rest of his numbers across the board, as well, with 14.6 points, 9.3 rebounds, 2.4 assists, 1.6 blocks and 1.0 steals.

His play was a major reason that the Grizzlies went from 24-58 in 2009 to 40-42 in 2010.

While that wasn't good enough to make the playoffs, it was a marginal improvement that was heavily on Gasol's broad shoulders.

Year 2: Don't Forget About Me

6 of 12

While Pau Gasol's statistics looked better, it was younger brother Marc who not only improved as an individual, but improved his team as well.

With improvements across the board, including better rebounding numbers than Pau, Marc takes home the gold for Year 2.

Year 3: Making the Jump

7 of 12

Pau Gasol did the unthinkable in his third year, leading the Grizzlies to their first playoff berth in franchise history.

While the result was a disappointing 4-0 series loss to the San Antonio Spurs, Pau was the unquestioned leader of that Grizzlies team.

His individual averages saw a slight decline to 17.7 points, 7.7 rebounds and 1.7 blocks, but his overall impact saw a major improvement.

He will forever live as the first player to lead the Grizzlies to a playoff berth.

Year 3: Winning or Losing?

8 of 12

So how the hell could Marc Gasol top that?

Brother Pau took the Grizzlies to their first-ever playoff appearance and helped Huby Brown win Coach of the Year.

So how does Marc top it?

How's winning the franchise's first-ever playoff series?

The younger Gasol saw a major decline in individual production, scoring only 11.7 points and grabbing 7.0 rebounds. What he did improve, however, were his assist and block numbers.

His passing, defensive prowess and ability to step up with Zach Randolph out was invaluable.

Gasol will forever live in glory as one of the driving forces in the Grizzlies' first-ever playoff series victory.

Year 4: Pau's Turmoil

9 of 12

As great as Pau Gasol played in his fourth season, the fact that he missed 26 games due to an injury sure cut the celebration short.

Nevertheless, it's worth noting that Gasol improved his ability to score efficiently, going from 48 percent in Year 3 to 51 percent in Year 4.

He also set a personal record by shooting 77 percent from the line.

Unfortunately, his injury hurt his season drastically.

Year 4: Marc Makes History

10 of 12

Year 4: An All-Star Is Born

11 of 12

With an All-Star bid and his team competing for consecutive playoff appearances, there's no question about this one.

All that's left to do is pray for good health and consistency.

4-Year Review: Out with the Old, in with the New

12 of 12

With three victories for Marc and just one for Pau, Marc Gasol has pulled off the upset and won the early battle of the Gasols!

To be able to continue those victories, however, Marc still has a long way to go.

More specifically, he has two championship rings to go...

X