About the artist

Bruce Herman (American, b. 1953) is a painter, writer, and speaker.

Herman’s art has been shown in more than 150 exhibitions — nationally in many US cities, including New York, Boston, Washington, Chicago, Los Angeles, and Houston — and internationally in England, Japan, Hong Kong, Italy, Canada, and Israel. His artwork is featured in many public and private art collections including the Vatican Museum of Modern Religious Art in Rome; The Cincinnati Museum of Fine Arts print collection; The Grunewald Print Collection of the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; DeCordova Museum in Boston; the Cape Ann Museum; and in many colleges and universities throughout the United States and Canada.

Herman taught at Gordon College for nearly four decades, and is the founding chair of the Art Department there. He held the Lothlórien Distinguished Chair in Fine Arts for more than fifteen years, and continues to curate exhibitions and manage the College art collection there.

Herman completed both BFA and MFA degrees at Boston University College of Fine Arts under American artists Philip Guston, James Weeks, David Aronson, Reed Kay, and Arthur Polonsky. He was named Boston University College of Fine Arts Distinguished Alumnus of the Year 2006.

Herman’s art may be found in dozens of journals, popular magazines, newspapers, and online art features. He and co-author Walter Hansen wrote the book Through Your Eyes, 2013, Grand Rapids, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, a thirty-year retrospective of Herman’s art as seen through the eyes of his most dedicated collector.

Bibliography

Ordinary Saints - Malcolm Guite, Bruce Herman, J.A.C. Redford. OSP 2018

Through Your Eyes: The Art of Bruce Herman - G. Walter Hansen, Bruce Herman. Eerdman Books, Grand Rapids, 2013

QU4RTETS - Makoto Fujimura, Bruce Herman, Christopher Theofanidis, Jeremy Begbie. Fujimura Institute, Princeton, NJ, 2012

A Broken Beauty - Theodore Prescott, Ed., Eerdman Books, Grand Rapids, 2006

•••

RELATED CONTENT

A Video Portrait of the Artist

My Process – An Essay by Bruce Herman