As one of the best-known survivors of the Titanic, Mobile, Alabama, native Archibald Gracie, IV, has been featured as a character in many of the dramatizations of the Titanic sinking. He was played by James Dyrenforth in A Night to Remember and by Bernard Fox in the 1997 film Titanic. A member of the Scottish-American Gracie family of New York, he was a direct descent of Archibald Gracie, who built Gracie Mansion in 1799, the current official resident of the mayor of New York City.

Gracie was only about five years old when his father died during the Civil War. He was such an avid historian, he became especially fascinated with the Battle of Chickamauga, at which his father served. He spent seven years writing a book, "The Truth About Chickamauga." In 1912, following the publication of his book, Gracie decided he needed to relax, and took a trip to Europe. Leaving his wife and daughter at home, he traveled to Europe on the Oceanic. He returned to the United States aboard the Titanic as a first class passenger.

During his return trip, on April 14, Gracie decided he needed some physical exercise after all of the time he had spent researching and writing his book. He spent some time on the squash courts and in the ship's swimming pool. He then attended church services, had an early lunch, and spent the rest of the day reading and socializing.

Sunday night, after dinner, Gracie and his table companions Clinch Smith and Edward Kent, enjoyed coffee as they listened to the Titanic's band in the Palm Room. After circulating and socializing for a while, Gracie retired early to his cabin, C-51, to be ready to continue his exercise regimen on the squash courts the following morning.

At about 11:45 pm ship's time, Gracie was jarred awake by a jolt. He sat up, realized that the ship's engines were no longer moving, and quickly dressed. Reaching the Boat Deck, he realized that the ship was listing slightly; he returned to his cabin to put on his life-jacket and on the way back found the women he had been chaperoning (in those days it was customary for men to chaperone unescorted women on theship.) He escorted them up to the boat deck and made sure they entered lifeboats. He then retrieved blankets for the women in the boats.

As the ship began sinking, Gracie worked tirelessly to help second officer Charles Lightoller fill the remaining lifeboats with women and children, then assisted in freeing the four collapsible boats lashed to the ship. Gracie actually went down with the Titanic, but managed to grab hold of the same overturned lifeboat as wireless operator Jack Phillips, and survived until rescue boats came the following morning. His friend Clinch Smith disappeared; his remains were never found.

As the night wore on, the exhausted, freezing, and soaking wet men aboard the overturned Collapsible "B" found it almost impossible to remain on the slick keel. Gracie later wrote that over half the men who had originally reached the collapsible were claimed by exhaustion or cold and slipped off the upturned keel during the night.

Just after 3:30 am the survivors heard the sound of a cannon being fired, and as dawn broke around 4 am the Carpathia came into sight. The men on B were now desperately trying to stay afloat. The Carpathia was four miles away, picking up survivors from the other lifeboats. About 400 yards away, Boats 4, 10, 12 and D were strung together in a line. Lightoller used his officer's whistle to get their attention. Boats 4 and 12 cast off at once and rowed over. Boat 4 arrived first and started transferring the survivors from the foundering collapsible. Gracie was so tired that he was unable to make the jump himself and was pulled into lifeboat No. 12.

Gracie returned to New York aboard the Carpathia and immediately started on a book about his experiences aboard the Titanic and Collapsible "B." His is one of the most detailed accounts of the events of the evening and is still a valuable resource for Titanic researchers and historians. The book has gone through numerous printings and is currently available under the title Titanic: A Survivor's Story.

Gracie never recovered from the ordeal. Although he survived the sinking, he did not survive the year. His health was severely affected by the hypothermia and physical injuries he suffered, and he died of complications of diabetes on December 4, 1912, less than eight months after the sinking. He was buried at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx; many of his fellow survivors, as well as family members of victims, attended his funeral. He was the third survivor of Titanic to die, being preceded in death by Maria Nackid on July 30, 1912 and Eugenie Baclini on August 30, 1912.

For more information about Alabama's Archibald Gracie IV, visit the following sites: