Arun Nayar is a British and Indian businessman and entrepreneur. He has worked for Software Paradigms International as a Vice President and Global Head of Resources.

In addition, Arun conducts workshops relating to staff training, learning, and development activities worldwide. Before that, he used to work in Mumbai, where he even worked in the textile industry.

Arun Nayar Is Married Thrice!

Arun Nayar seems single at the moment and enjoying his life with his friends and family. Similarly, Hunter Urban is also enjoying his single life. However, he has been in a marital relationship with three different women in the past time.

His first marriage was with Valentina Pedroni, an Italian model. They got married in 1997 after six years of a long relationship. Their first meeting was in 1991 in St Moritz. But after eight years, they separated and got divorced in 2002.

Nayar's Second and Third Failed Marriages

Six years later, Arun started his romantic relationship with his second wife, Elizabeth Hurley, an English model, and actress. The couple made their first public appearance together at the Christian Dior fashion show in Paris.

In 2007, the lovebirds exchanged their marriage vows in England Castle. They then travelled to Jodhpur for a Hindu wedding ceremony, where he spent approximately $2.5 million.

Since their marriage, the husband-wife duo lived in Cotswold, London, with their son, Damian Hurley(Elizabeth's son from her previous husband, Steve Bing). But Elizabeth filed for divorce from Naya in April 2011, which was finalized in June 2011.

Then after that, Nayar was connected as a sweetheart with Shane Warne, an Australian cricketer, in 2010. Similarly, he also dated Liz Hurley for a short time. Again, the businessman found his love with Kim Johnson, a model and personal trainer. The duo met in September 2011 at a jewelry launch and got hitched on July 30, 2016.

But unfortunately, this marriage also ended in separation like his previous marriages. However, the ex-partner kept the reason behind their split and date of divorce under the wraps. She confirmed this news in August 2017 to the Daily Mail.

How Much Net Worth Does Arun Nayar Have?

Arun Nayar has earned a huge amount of money from his professional career as an entrepreneur. As of 2021, he holds a net worth of $200 Million. It also includes properties in Germany, France, and the United Kingdom's capital.

Moreover, the Indian man who has 170 cm in height also had a software company, Direction Software Solutions, from where he gathered a huge amount of wealth.

Furthermore, Nayar is gaining heft money as the Vice President and Global Head Resources at Software Paradigms International. Aside from that, he reportedly sold his wedding images with Elizabeth to Hello! magazine for $2 million.

Inside The Early Life of Arun Nayar

Arun Nayar was born in December 1964 in Burmantofts, Leeds, United Kingdom. His divorced parents; mother, Gunnar Nayar, and his father, Vinod Nayar (an author, instructor, motivational speaker, army officer (retired), and strategist), raised him.

Moreover, he has a brother, Nikhil Nayar. Nayar is of Indian-German descent and has dual British-Indian citizenship.

He went to Millfield Boarding School in England when he was 16 years old. He then got a Bachelor of Science in Physics from Oxford University. After that, he attended Imperial College and earned a Master's degree in Physics.

Visit Marrieceleb For More Entertaining Biographies & Articles!!!

ncG1vNJzZmilkae%2FqrHDnJylnZJjsLC5jpqprqZdo666rdE%3D

Share!