Store Locator

Eyemart Express provides quality custom eyewear at hundreds of stores and partners* with optometrists who perform professional eye exams across the U.S. With our user-friendly store locator, you can quickly find an Eyemart Express near you. Visit one of our stores, and our experts will help you find frames that suit your prescription and personality before crafting your new glasses on the same day.

Locate a Professional Optometrist Near You

We've partnered with optometrists and optical experts across the country to ensure that you have a professional available when you visit our vision center near you. An eye doctor at or next door to our store will perform an eye exam to assess your vision and determine the right prescription.

Whether you're looking for a prescription update or getting glasses for the first time, our eye exams are necessary to protect your sight so you can experience every moment with clear vision.

Convenient, Hassle-Free Eyewear

Eyemart Express provides stylish eyewear at a suitable price point. When you visit an optical center near you, an eyewear expert will take the time to understand your needs and help you find the perfect frames from thousands of options. Our extensive selection features frames from trusted brands with classic and new designs to suit your preferences.

The process of getting new glasses at any of our locations is quick and efficient. We craft your glasses right on the spot in our state-of-the-art lab, ensuring you get your eyewear in no time. To provide outstanding and personalized service, our experts take a hands-on approach at every stage, from the initial check-in until you get your new glasses.

Find an Eyemart Express Near You

With our locations throughout numerous states, you can find an Eyemart Express near you using our store locator. Once you've found one of our convenient locations:

Call ahead: Use the location's contact information to call ahead and check the doctor's availability.

Schedule an eye exam: Book an eye appointment to examine your eye health and vision before getting new glasses.

Bring a prescription: Bring your current prescription so the doctor can determine whether it works for you or needs an update.

We offer same-day walk-in appointments, so you are welcome to stop by if you come across any of our stores.

Get Started

Ready to see better with stylish, high-quality eyewear? Enter your city, state or ZIP code in our store locator and find an Eyemart Express near you today!