DALLAS, Sept. 13, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Eyemart Express, a nationally recognized Top 10 optical retailer, has launched an exclusive online shopping experience for its existing customers with a valid prescription.

Having listened to consumers' frustrations and fears of buying glasses online, the company has answered with a unique solution that delivers accurate, high-quality eyewear through the ultimate customer experience – all online.

For its customers, the Eyemart Express online store recommends lens and frame combinations based on their purchase history, facial measurements and current prescription.

An advanced algorithm then produces a curated selection of frames sure to fit, in line with their personal style and taste, and ideal for their prescription and lens type. If a customer does choose an option outside the algorithm's recommendations, they are redirected to their local store where an expanded selection of frames is available, and likely as perfect a fit, but lacked algorithm confidence.

"We own speed and convenience in the brick and mortar channel, now we want to bring that customer experience online," said Doug Barnes, Eyemart Express CEO. "Our online solution is offered to customers who have previously purchased prescription eyewear in one of our stores. With their prescription information on file, we can then recommend affordable, high quality eyewear with less risk than they'd get buying glasses without an optical professional immediately involved. The online experience is simply a handoff from the positive experience our customers have in store."

Online orders are made in the Eyemart Express central lab in Farmers Branch, Texas, and typically delivered in 7–10 business days. Eyemart Express is the only retailer boasting a lens lab in every store, making most of the company's glasses in under 30 minutes.

About Eyemart Express

Eyemart Express opened its first location in Appleton, Wis., in 1990. Today, the company operates in 35 states with 175 stores, and plans to add 16 more in 2017, by operating under its motto of Right Glasses. Right Price. Right Now: a unique mix of value, style and express service. Eyemart Express ranks among the Top 10 largest optical retailers in the country, and its family of brands include Vision4Less, VisionMart Express, and Eyewear Express.

View original content:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/eyemart-express-launches-exclusive-online-shopping-300519187.html

SOURCE Eyemart Express