Hi everyone.

I put a drywall in my backyard to move a drain pipe out of the walkway. I did this a couple of weeks ago amd have been waiting for a heavy rainfall.

Weill, heavy rainfall came today. My dry well filled up pretty quick. It’s a standard 28x24.

the question I have is do I need another drywell or do I just put a pop up cap? The drywell is about 25”from the house and the grade is about 1 1/2” - 2” from the house.

thank you very much.

Attachments

image.jpg

First, read this GJ post My French Drain and Dry Well Project

Second, you are much too close to your house. I have a tiny backyard and mine is a far from the house as I could get it.

Third, What you are calling the "well" is just a catch basin. The well includes all of the permeable area around it. IIRC, the hole with all of the gravel is 8' in diameter and 4' deep.

Fourth, most dry wells will over flow at sometime, so you need to be able to send that overflow somewhere. We had torrential downpour the other day. The dry well DID over flow, but there is a pipe that goes straight up to daylight from the center of the catch basin (fourth picture). When the rain stopped I had a 6" deep puddle over that whole back corner. I could have left it and with the hot weather we are having it would have been gone in a couple of days. We have more rain forecasted for tonight and tomorrow so I started a siphon to the street. Dry this AM.

First, read this GJ post My French Drain and Dry Well Project

Second, you are much too close to your house. I have a tiny backyard and mine is a far from the house as I could get it.

Third, What you are calling the "well" is just a catch basin. The well includes all of the permeable area around it. IIRC, the hole with all of the gravel is 8' in diameter and 4' deep.

Fourth, most dry wells will over flow at sometime, so you need to be able to send that overflow somewhere. We had torrential downpour the other day. The dry well DID over flow, but there is a pipe that goes straight up to daylight from the center of the catch basin (fourth picture). When the rain stopped I had a 6" deep puddle over that whole back corner. I could have left it and with the hot weather we are having it would have been gone in a couple of days. We have more rain forecasted for tonight and tomorrow so I started a siphon to the street. Dry this AM.

Hi.

Nice job on yours.

The well is 25’ away from the foundation. I read up on this and the general recommendation is 10-12’, that does seems close.

The hole I dug is a little over 5’ deep and 5’ wide. I put landscape fabric and filled it with gravel before and after the well went in. About 6” of soil on top for grass.

Nice to hear it overflows from the top. I’m hoping for that too.

cheers.