What is a Dry Well?

A dry well is a covered hole that has been filled with gravel or other similar material. It will serve as the end point of your drainage system. This well will be where water is directed and then filtered through the gravel and drains deep into the soil.

The dry well serves to receive water from a drainage system and to disperse the water into the ground below. These are necessary when you can't direct your water into a storm drain or you prefer not to drain your water into a water garden or pond. This is a way to filter your runoff water into the soil deep below your yard's surface.

What is a French Drain?

A french drain is an underground drainage system that uses a perforated pipe to help direct surface water away from your home. This type of system works by using gravity to pull the water through the piping, which is surrounded by gravel or other similar material. The water goes into the pipe and then disperses out of the sides of it into the surrounding area.

The French drain is typically installed as a trench in your yard and can be used to drain water away from your home, prevent flooding, divert water from wet areas of your lawn, or simply provide drainage.

Choosing Between a Dry Well and French Drain

When it comes to choosing between a dry well and a french drain, it ultimately depends on your specific needs. Dry wells are ideal for smaller spaces that don't require much drainage, but they do require some drainage system to direct the water to them. They can also be used in areas where there aren't any storm drains or water gardens available to direct the water runoff from your gutters, existing french drains, and other drainage systems.

French drains, on the other hand, can handle heavier flows of water and diversion from larger areas. This type of system is perfect for homes with large yards or that are prone to flooding. French drains can also be used in combination with dry wells if there are no storm drains or water gardens to direct the runoff to.

French Drain Installation Services in South Hills

Ultimately, the decision between a dry well and a french drain comes down to your particular needs and preferences. In some cases, your yard will require a combination of a dry well and a french drain for peak performance and protection. At J Birds Landscaping, we can handle your french drain installation for your South Hills home from start to finish. Contact us today to learn more!