COUNCIL BLUFFS — The halls of Lewis & Clark Elementary School in Council Bluffs, Iowa, are a little more decorative thanks to a recent art donation.

Past Council Bluffs residents Robert and Patti Mathiasen donated a 23-year-old family-owned painting to the school on Dec. 15. The painting by Iowa artist Dennis Leonard depicts explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark meeting with Native American leaders at the now famous Lewis and Clark monument located in Council Bluffs.

“All my family is from (Council Bluffs),” Robert said. “We have a real appreciation of the history of Lewis and Clark and the important history of Lewis and Clark to the city.”

Robert’s parents came to own the painting after his mother first fell in love with a smaller print version of the piece in 1993. At the time, Robert’s sister, Janet Stone, was a member of the Lewis and Clark Monument Restoration Committee.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

The committee had commissioned Leonard to paint a picture of the new monument and they had smaller prints made for sale to the public. His mother was so impressed with the painting that she requested Leonard to do an original larger one for her, Robert said. The painting sat above the fireplace in his parent’s home until his mother passed away in 2014.

After he inherited the painting, he decided he wanted to donate it in honor of his family’s long history with Council Bluffs.

“We really felt like the painting belonged in Council Bluffs,” Robert said. “We thought long and hard on where would be a good place and Lewis and Clark school seemed like the natural choice.”

He contacted the school and principal Tracy Mathews accepted the donation. Mathews said the painting will hang in the school's main hallway.

Robert’s parents first moved to the city in 1950. Emmett, a former Creighton University basketball player, was a physician and surgeon in Council Bluffs for almost 50 years. His mother, Arlene, was a practicing nurse but after having Robert and his four siblings she chose to stay home to raise a family. But, she remained active in the community, especially with St. Albert Schools and St. Peter’s Catholic Church, Robert said.

“They loved Council Bluffs,” he added. “They never ever thought about moving away even after my dad retired. They always felt like Council Bluffs was a special place.”

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.