Newly appointed film commissioner Jackie Jackson says she aims to be a “champion of the creative industries”.

“Though I may not have envisioned myself in this exact role, my career journey, along with my passion for the creative industries naturally led me to embrace this opportunity. I truly believe that my background aligns well with the goals and responsibilities of this role. Being the film commissioner is a thrilling chance to shape the creative landscape of Jamaica. I get to facilitate the magic of Jamaican storytelling, while also boosting our local economy and cultural identity,” Jackson told ,.

Central to Jackson’s mandate is the promotion of exports and investments within the film, animation and music sectors. Her vision extends beyond mere economic growth. “I am wholeheartedly committed to not only supporting but also actively driving the implementation of the Jamaica Screen Development Initiative. In doing so, I will assume the critical responsibility of overseeing the $1-billion film fund, a transformative financial resource for our Jamaican film-makers that was unveiled in Parliament earlier this year,” said Jackson.

For her first 90 days in office, Jackson is intent on charting a compelling roadmap, at the core of which lies a commitment to fostering a proactive and collaborative environment within the local film industry. “It’s important for the Jamaica Film Commission to truly focus on cultivating a proactive and collaborative environment within our local film industry. To safeguard ourselves, we will need to prioritise open lines of communication between stakeholders and industry professionals. Additionally, we will need to emphasise the development of clear and equitable labour practices, while ensuring that we are compliant with local laws and international standards,” she shared.

Appointed in early August, Jackson has worked in media and entertainment for more than 15 years.

She began working at Television Jamaica in 2008 as a producer. Over the years, she has contributed to the RJRGLEANER Communications Group, Geejam Media, BET’s 106 & Park, Comedy Central’s The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore, Revolt TV, Story Culture, ISH and Back Roads Entertainment.

She established ideatethat, an interactive multimedia ideation creative agency, in 2020. Through this venture, she has collaborated with numerous local and international clients, providing strategy consulting and multimedia production services. Her creative pursuits have expanded into producing an original Jamaican TV show, titled Psychology of ….

She holds a Bachelor of Arts in media and communication, with a specialisation in television from the Caribbean School of Media and Communication (CARIMAC), UWI, Mona campus, where she serves as an adjunct lecturer for film producing. She also has a Master of Arts in media arts from Long Island University in New York, with a concentration in multimedia creation, media management and specialising in film, video and television production.