How can a relatively small family film like "A Little Princess," without Disney animation or big stars, survive in a summer marketplace surrounded not only by potential blockbusters like "Batman Forever" and "Die Hard With a Vengeance" but also by such children's films as "Pocahontas" and "Casper"?

"I'm petrified," said Mark Johnson, the film's producer, who has every reason to be.

The movie, based on the classic novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett, author of "The Secret Garden," is, essentially, a fairy tale about a spirited young girl's determination to change her life when she's left penniless and alone at a New York girls school after her beloved father goes off to war. Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that the film "achieves something irresistible: a bright, beautiful and enchantingly childlike vision."

Whether the strong critical response can translate into commercial success is uncertain. The movie opened modestly over the weekend in New York, Los Angeles and Toronto. Several executives at rival studios say that Warners may have made a mistake in opening the movie now, before school is out, instead of in August, well after the openings of "Pocahontas" and "Casper."

But Mr. Johnson said that the three-month summer season, in which moviegoing reaches a peak, provides little leeway for an artful children's film. "I can't find the perfect time to open our film," Mr. Johnson said. "Each weekend there's a big film."

For Mr. Johnson, a former longtime producing partner of the director Barry Levinson, "A Little Princess" has a certain personal resonance. The book was brought to him seven years ago by Amy Ephron, a writer, at a time when Mr. Johnson and his wife, Lezlie, who founded and runs a foster-care agency in Santa Monica, Calif., had decided to adopt the child for whom they had been providing a foster home. "I felt this bond, this wonderful bond with my daughter, and this movie is actually about that same bond," said Mr. Johnson, who is 49.

At first, the film was set up at Disney, where executives sought to turn it into a musical. When that idea foundered, the project wound up at Warner Brothers, where it was directed by Alfonso Cuaron, a Mexican film maker.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.