MediaCorp DJ Glenn Ong, who is known for his outspoken nature, has spilled the beans on why his marriage to television presenter Jamie Yeo broke down.

Last month, Ong, 38, announced on his radio show that he had separated from the ESPN Star Sports television presenter after five years of marriage.

Both have new loves in their lives. Ong is dating fellow MediaCorp DJ Jean Danker, while Yeo is dating 34-year-old Thorsten Nolte, an Englishman who is the chief executive officer of a digital communications agency.

Asked about his relationship with Danker, Ong compared her to Yeo and said the marriage failed because they were incompatible.

'When it came to Jamie, one of the reasons it broke down was that we didn't share the same values at all,' he told Life! in a telephone interview.

'I didn't feel like I was becoming a better person.'

Ong, 38, said Danker is different because she is 'very respectful in that sense'.

'She's a bit more traditional, she prefers guys to ask her out and woo her, which I did.''

Referring to his first wife, MediaCorp DJ Kate Reyes and Yeo, he added: 'For Kate and Jamie, it's like they fell into my lap, I didn't have to do anything, it just happened.'

He and Reyes were married from 2000 to 2003.

Ong said of Danker: 'I love it that she's traditional. I know a lot of people think I'm some kind of playboy, sleeping with half of Singapore, but that's not me.'

Danker, 31, said she and Ong had their first date just before Valentine's Day. 'From the day we both realised that, wow, this is interesting because I never quite saw him in that fashion and it felt like there could be something more.'

The couple have known each other for 15 years.

'I've always looked up to him, in terms of him being such a nice gentleman. He always cared about people. He is innately a good person.'

Asked about Yeo's new squeeze, Ong said: 'Good luck, dude.'

They have not met, he said. 'He seems like a nice guy. If anything, a Caucasian guy would suit her a bit more.

'As much as she looks Chinese, she's more Western than anything else. When I was with her, things such as Chinese New Year, she was never into things like that.

'I'm just this local boy. In a way, I felt like part of my tradition and culture was being a bit compromised. For her, she's an ang moh trapped in a Chinese body.'

Still he wishes both of them well.

'Hopefully, this guy will be good for her and she'll be good for him.'

When contacted, Yeo, 31, declined to comment, saying she 'does not want to air dirty linen in public'.

'He can say what he wants,' she said via SMS. 'I wish him only happiness and am glad he's found his soulmate.'

On Ong and Danker, Yeo says: 'My only comment would be that they're both dear friends of mine and I'm truly happy for them. She's a great girl and he's very blessed to have her.'

Danker said she and Yeo have yet to meet since she and Ong got together, but 'it's such a small industry, we're definitely going to bump into each other soon and have hellos and hugs'.

She also said her friends and family are happy that she is with Ong. One of them is her former boyfriend, Don Richmond, a musician and also a former MediaCorp DJ.

When contacted, Nolte, who arrived in Singapore in 2007, declined to speak about his relationship with Yeo, except to say that 'she's great, she's an amazing girl'.

They met at British hard-dance group The Prodigy's gig at Fort Canning Park early last month.