Radio DJ Glenn Ong and his television host wife Jamie Yeo have separated. He announced this on his morning radio show on MediaCorp's Class 95FM yesterday morning but did not give details.

There had been rumours for the past few weeks that their marriage was on the rocks and they were spotted at a recent event arriving and sitting separately.

The couple married in 2004. It is Yeo's first marriage and Ong's second. He was married to Kate Reyes, also a MediaCorp DJ, from 2000 to 2003 and had also then announced their break-up on air.

Yeo, 31, is currently a presenter on ESPN Star Sports and was a former radio DJ and actress with MediaCorp.

Neither of them was available for comments. Calls and messages to both went unanswered.

Early on his radio programme yesterday, Ong, 38, mentioned that he had an important announcement to make at 8.30am.

At 8.31am, he said he and Yeo 'have parted ways', then promptly played the song Stronger by Kanye West.

He did not elaborate and there was no further mention of the separation for the rest of the show, save for a comment from him that he was receiving a lot of SMSes about it.

A spokesman for MediaCorp Radio says: 'Glenn Ong and Jamie Yeo have officially filed for separation and have been living apart for a while. Their marriage broke down simply due to the couple having grown apart in recent years because of their careers and individual differences.

'The decision was a mutual one and thus the parting was amicable. They remain good friends, are still talking and continue to have the utmost respect for each other. This is naturally a difficult time for the couple and they have requested to be left alone unequivocally.'

Radio listener Lina Husin, 29, was shocked to hear the announcement.

She says: 'They seemed to be quite a loving couple and he was always talking about her on air, calling her 'my baby'.'

Yeo is a celebrity blogger on the Straits Times Online Media Portal (Stomp).

But in a recent entry dated Jan 29 on her personal blog, she wrote: 'I was glad to be done with 2008 honestly. The year was great work-wise but not so on a personal level. I'm only finally admitting this because the year's done and dusted, and I know 2009 will be liberating, to say the least.'