Glenn was to have officially announced it on Class 95 this morning. -AsiaOne

Fri, Feb 13, 2009

AsiaOne

STOMP star blogger Jamie Yeo, 32, and her husband, radio deejay Glenn Ong, 38, have announced that they are getting a divorce.

Glenn, who hosts a morning radio programme on Class 95, had announced on-air this morning that he and Jamie "were no longer together".

A spokesperson from MediaCorp confirmed that the couple are undergoing divorce proceedings, but declined to comment on the reasons for the split.

The couple have no children, but they own a dog, a Jack Russell terrier named Fudgie.

Second divorce

This will be the second divorce for Glenn, who married Kate Reyes, a deejay from the same station in 2000. They divorced in 2003.

Jamie was widely-rumoured to be the cause of the split, which she has denied. According to a report in Wanbao, the couple first started dating in 2001.

After Glenn's divorce, he and Jamie were married in Dec 2004 at the New Creation Church.

The couple, who are known to embrace publicity, have often been spotted at media events together, openly displaying their affection for each other.

A shock

The news came as a shock to many.

One of them was Jamie's ex-colleague, Robin Leong.

Robin, who was briefly linked to Jamie in the past, expressed his surprise at the news.

He said he always thought they were "very loving". He also said he still kept in touch with Jamie, "once in a while".

if you look at a fuck face like Glenn Ong, you would wonder what is Jamie doing with a loser like him in the first place. Anyway, a person who divorces TWO times must be a bit nutty in the head.

Last time hor....... fuck face kor kor got many zeros in his bank, got condo, got car, earning sooo much more than rookie DJ Jamie hor....... now kenna milk dry liao so it's time to say bye bye lor...... whaddaya expect ? After all Jamie is the typical singkie gal and she got the f*cking Womens Charter on her side :(

I don't watch Mediacorp TV but one of my regular customers said he behaved very inappropriately with an angmoh on TV during some singing competition..

Your customer dun know what he's toking about...... that angmo is the flying dutchman Glenn's partner on the radio show....... nothing going on between them but on the other hand....... Jamie's behaviour with that cute angmo ....... i'd better not say too much.

All Singkie guys should learn from this episode....... Glenn became a green beret and somemore gonna kenna screwed by the Womens Charter........

F*CK the WOMENS CHARTER !!!