Sussex County, Delaware — Sussex County Courthouse in Georgetown, Delaware … Wikipedia

Sussex county cricket teams — have been traced back to the 17th century but the county s involvement in cricket goes back much further than that. Sussex, jointly with Kent, is the birthplace of the sport. It is widely believed that cricket was invented by children living on… … Wikipedia

Sussex Pond Pudding — is a traditional English pudding believed to originate from the South East county of Sussex. Made of a suet pastry which encases a whole lemon, with butter and sugar, it is boiled or steamed for several hours.This rich and heavy dessert has gone… … Wikipedia

Sussex Carol — is a Christmas carol popular in Britain. Also known as On Christmas Night True Christians Sing and On Christmas Night All Christians Sing , its words were first published by an Irish bishop, Luke Wadding, in a work called Small Garland of Pious… … Wikipedia

Sussex — County of Sussex redirects here. For other uses, see Sussex County (disambiguation). This refers to the historic county in England. For other uses either see Sussex (disambiguation) or, for the administrative counties that Sussex is divided into … Wikipedia

Sussex Skyhawks — Independent baseball team name = Sussex Skyhawks founded = 2006 city = Augusta, New Jersey cap current league = Can Am League currentname = Sussex Skyhawks (2006 present) nicknames = The Hawks colors = Sky Blue, Black, White, Silver ballpark =… … Wikipedia

Sussex County Cricket Club in 2005 — Match detailsussex v Loughborough UCCE (9 11 April) Match drawn The first day of this match, which was played at Hove, saw Loughborough dismissed for 237. Sussex then reached 15 for no loss at close. Sussex batted through the second day, adding… … Wikipedia

Sussex County Cricket Club — Infobox cricket team county = Sussex County Cricket Club oneday = Sussex Sharks coach = Mark Robinson captain = Chris Adams overseas = Mushtaq Ahmed founded = 1836 ground = Hove capacity = fcdebutvs = MCC fcdebutyr = 1839 fcdebutvenue = Lord s… … Wikipedia

Sussex County Farm and Horse Show — The Sussex County Farm and Horse Show is a ten day agricultural fair that is held at the Sussex County Fairgrounds in Augusta, New Jersey every August. It has also been known as the New Jersey State Fair since 1999 and attracts approximately… … Wikipedia