War movies have been around since the dawn of cinema, from the silent-era days to the present, with cinema’s technological advances that help to recreate some of the most realistic — and important — stories of battle audiences have ever seen.

Here we feature fifteen of the most important war movies in cinematic history and touch on the impact the films made on audiences and the history of cinema. And we offer the screenplays for you to read — Enjoy!

Scripts from this Article

Schindler’s List

Apocalypse Now

Saving Private Ryan

Full Metal Jacket

The Thin Red Line

Lawrence of Arabia

Black Hawk Down

The Hurt Locker

Letters from Iwo Jima

The Deer Hunter

Hacksaw Ridge

1. Schindler’s List (1993)

In German-occupied Poland during World War II, industrialist Oskar Schindler gradually becomes concerned for his Jewish workforce after witnessing their persecution by the Nazis.

Schindler’s List is a powerful and emotionally stirring film that depicts the horrors of the Holocaust and the people it affected. Its portrayal of the complexities of human nature in times of war and its message of hope and redemption is cathartic. Steven Spielberg’s direction won the Oscar and the film won Best Picture.

Read More: Close Encounters with Greatness: Steven Spielberg’s Lifetime of Achievements

Download the script!

2. Apocalypse Now (1979)

During the Vietnam War, Captain Willard is sent on a dangerous mission into Cambodia to assassinate a renegade colonel who has set himself up as a god among a local tribe.

Apocalypse Now is a groundbreaking war movie that explores the psychological effects of war and the absurdity of military conflict. The film is known for its stunning cinematography, iconic scenes and memorable performances from the likes of Marlon Brando, Martin Sheen, Laurence Fishburne and Dennis Hopper. Co-written by George Lucas and directed by Francis Ford Coppola, the film was nominated for multiple Oscars and is notable for going well beyond its initial budget and production schedule, nearly driving Coppola mad.

Download the script!

Read More: 5 Plot Point Breakdown: Apocalypse Now (1979)

3. Saving Private Ryan (1998)

Following the Normandy Landings, a group of U.S. soldiers goes behind enemy lines to retrieve a paratrooper whose brothers have been killed in action.

Saving Private Ryan is a gritty and realistic portrayal of the chaos and brutality of war. Its intense and visceral battle scenes and poignant exploration of the human cost of war were eye-opening for most. No other war movie before it showcased the realism and horror of the battlefield. Director Steven Spielberg won his second Best Director Oscar.

Read More: 5 Plot Point Breakdown: Saving Private Ryan (1998)

Download the script!

4. Full Metal Jacket (1987)

A pragmatic U.S. Marine observes the dehumanizing effects the Vietnam War has on his fellow recruits from their brutal boot camp training to the bloody street fighting in Hue.

Full Metal Jacket is a scathing critique of war and military culture, offering an uncompromising depiction of the dehumanizing effects of war on both soldiers and civilians. Stanley Kubrick’s film was part boot camp film and part Vietnam War film. The first half is the most memorable of the two, where we see the psychological effects of boot camp drive a soldier to shoot his drill instructor before turning his weapon on himself.

Read More: 94 Films Stanley Kubrick Absolutely Loved

Download the script!

5. Platoon (1986)

A young recruit in Vietnam faces a moral crisis when confronted with the horrors of war and the duality of man.

Platoon is a raw and powerful film that portrays the Vietnam War as a brutal and senseless conflict, known for its unflinching portrayal of the psychological and physical toll soldiers and civilians experience during the war. Director and screenwriter Oliver Stone won Best Screenplay, Best Director and Best Picture. The film was based on his own experiences as a soldier in Vietnam.

Download the script!

6. The Thin Red Line (1998)

Adaptation of James Jones’ autobiographical 1962 novel, focusing on the conflict at Guadalcanal during the Second World War.

The Thin Red Line is a meditative and poetic exploration of the nature of war and humanity’s relationship with the natural world. The film has breathtaking cinematography, philosophical themes and a brilliant ensemble cast. The film is far different from its other war movie peers, primarily due to the style of reclusive director and screenwriter Terrance Malick.

Read More: 5 Plot Point Breakdown: The Thin Red Line (1998)

Download the script!

7. Dunkirk (2017)

Allied soldiers from Belgium, the British Empire, and France are surrounded by the German Army and evacuated during a fierce battle in World War II.

Dunkirk is a tense and gripping film depicting the heroism and sacrifice of ordinary people during wartime conflicts. It is most known for its innovative storytelling techniques, intense action sequences, and emotional resonance. Director and screenwriter Christopher Nolan created some of the most visually-stunning war action sequences to date. It was nominated for multiple Academy Awards.

Download the script!

8. Lawrence of Arabia (1962)

The story of T.E. Lawrence, the English officer who successfully united and led the diverse, often warring, Arab tribes during World War I in order to fight the Turks.

Lawrence of Arabia is an epic film that celebrates the triumph of the human spirit over adversity. The film showcases breathtaking landscapes, memorable characters, and groundbreaking use of cinematography and sound. David Lean took home his second Best Director Oscar, and the film won Best Picture.

Read More: 5 Plot Point Breakdown: Lawrence of Arabia (1962)

Download the script!

9. Black Hawk Down (2001)

123 elite U.S. soldiers drop into Somalia to capture two top lieutenants of a renegade warlord and find themselves in a desperate battle with a large force of heavily-armed Somalis.

Black Hawk Down is a visceral and intense film depicting the brutal reality of modern warfare through gritty and realistic portrayals of combat. It is also an examination of the politics and ethics of military intervention. It is perhaps one of the greatest modern war movies to date. Director Ridley Scott was nominated for Best Director. The film also has one of the best casts of then-undiscovered actors turned stars like Eric Bana, Tom Hardy and Orlando Bloom.

Download the script!

10. The Hurt Locker (2008)

During the Iraq War, a Sergeant recently assigned to an army bomb squad is put at odds with his squad mates due to his maverick way of handling his work.

The Hurt Locker is a tense and suspenseful film that explores the psychological toll of war on soldiers — especially those that deal with disarming IEDs. It’s known for its realistic portrayal of the dangers and challenges faced by bomb disposal units and its nuanced and complex characters. The film famously beat out James Cameron’s Avatar for Best Picture and Best Director. The winner of those two awards? Cameron’s ex-wife, Kathryn Bigelow.

Download the script!

11. Fury (2014)

A grizzled tank commander makes tough decisions as he and his crew fight their way across Germany in April, 1945.

Fury is a gripping film that portrays the horrors and chaos of the final days of World War II through intense and realistic tank battle scenes, and its exploration of the bonds between soldiers within those tanks. Drastically underrated and uncelebrated during its time, it has since earned many accolades from fans of war movies.

Read More: Fury: A Valiant Ride That’s Short of Greatness

Download the script!

12. 1917 (2019)

Two young British soldiers during the First World War are given an impossible mission: deliver a message deep in enemy territory that will stop 1,600 men, and one of the soldier’s brothers, from walking straight into a deadly trap.

1917 is a visually stunning and immersive film that offers a gripping and intense portrayal of war through its innovative and technically impressive “one-shot” approach, as well as its exploration of the themes of sacrifice, heroism, and the human cost of war. It was nominated for multiple Oscars but was also included in Quentin Tarantino’s list of overrated films.

Download the script!

13. Letters from Iwo Jima (2006)

The story of the battle of Iwo Jima between the United States and Imperial Japan during World War II, as told from the perspective of the Japanese who fought it.

Letters from Iwo Jima is a powerful and poignant film that offers a unique perspective on the Pacific Theater of World War II. It offers an empathetic portrayal of Japanese soldiers and its exploration of the themes of honor, duty, and the human cost of war. Directed by Clint Eastwood, it is actually a counterpart to his film Flags of Our Fathers, which told the story from the Allied Forces side. It was nominated for multiple Academy Awards, including Best Director and Best Picture (with Steven Spielberg named as a nominee as one of its producers).

Download the script!

14. The Deer Hunter (1978)

An in-depth examination of the ways in which the U.S. Vietnam War impacts and disrupts the lives of people in a small industrial town in Pennsylvania.

The Deer Hunter is a haunting and powerful film that offers a devastating and unflinching portrayal of the human cost of war. It explores themes of friendship, trauma, and the effects of war on soldiers and their families both in Vietnam, and back home in Pennsylvania. The film won Best Picture and Best Director (Michael Cimino) Oscars and Best Supporting Actor for Christopher Walken.

Download the script!

15. Hacksaw Ridge (2016)

The true story of a conscientious objector, Desmond Doss, who becomes a hero during World War II by saving the lives of his fellow soldiers without firing a single shot.

Hacksaw Ridge is a gripping and emotional film that offers a unique perspective on the heroism of war, told through the eyes of a pacifist that refuses to fight — but will do all he can as a medic. The film showcases the powerful portrayal of Desmond Doss, who was awarded the Medal of Honor for his bravery and selflessness. Its exploration of the themes of faith, courage, and the value of human life makes it stand apart from other war movies. Mel Gibson’s Oscar-nominated direction is often praised for its visceral and intense depiction of the battlefield.

Download the script!

Read More: The Top 10 Best War Films

Ken Miyamoto has worked in the film industry for nearly two decades, most notably as a studio liaison for Sony Studios and then as a script reader and story analyst for Sony Pictures.