The Secondary Education program at ACU trains you in the art and science of teaching while providing critical coursework to deepen your knowledge and understanding of the field of education. Three key attributes of the program will prepare you for a successful career in education. First, the program emphasizes the integration of educational principles across the teaching profession. You will learn that teaching is not compartmentalized but is a rich combination of research-based theories and hands-on practical experience. Second, the program emphasizes practicality. Through the lens of extensive experience, faculty provide you with timely and valuable glimpses into today’s classrooms. The final and most valuable attribute of the program is the emphasis on mentoring. Because of the small size of the university, you will be able to develop a strong mentoring relationship with your instructors. This mentoring begins in the classroom, and continues through student teaching, and beyond.

Professional Licensure/Certification

The Bachelor of Science in Elementary Education may lead to Educator Certification in Arizona. All students who satisfactorily complete the Elementary Education certificate program at Arizona Christian University will receive an Institutional Recommendation (IR) from the university. A program “audit” will be conducted upon completion of the last program requirement to ensure a 3.0 GPA in required program coursework (including transfer coursework), a 2.5 GPA overall, tuition/fees paid in full, and materials checked out from the library have been returned. The IR will be uploaded to the Arizona Department of Education. It is good for one year and cannot be reissued. The IR saves you time and money when you are applying for your teaching certificate.

Additionally, certificated graduates receive an Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI) teaching certificate that qualifies them to teach in Christian schools in 180 U.S. and around the world.

States vary in their certification requirements. ACU has made reasonable, good faith efforts to determine if its certified education programs meet the applicable education requirement for professional licensure or certification in all fifty states and several U.S. territories.