ACU is an accredited, private, non-profit, Christian university in Phoenix offering numerous bachelor’s degrees including a recently added Psychology major and programs of study such as Criminal Justice, Healthcare Policy, Nonprofit Management, Coaching and Early Childhood Education. All students graduate with a minor in Biblical studies.

With a notable student-to-faculty ratio of 13:1, ACU’s distinguished professors are committed to developing the complete person through the integration of faith, learning, and Christian leadership. ACU competes as a member of the NAIA, with athletic opportunities including baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, soccer, softball, tennis, volleyball and spirit squad. Students have multiple opportunities for campus involvement including mission trips, Urban Outreach, Fellowship of Christian Athletes, chorale, worship bands, and study abroad options.

Arizona Christian University provides a biblically-integrated, liberal arts education equipping graduates to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in all aspects of life, as leaders of influence and excellence.Arizona Christian University exists to educate and equip followers of Christ to transform culture with the truth.

Arizona Christian University is the only accredited, evangelical Christian university or college in Arizona where all trustees, administrators, faculty, staff and students declare that they are followers of Jesus Christ.We embrace the size of our student body, because it creates an environment full of opportunities to connect. After your first semester, you’ll likely know someone in every class and your professors will know your name. On top of this naturally-formed community, our leadership teams strive to help students engage through campus activities and community groups.

If you’re going to live off campus while attending ACU, there are many ways for you to get involved. You are invited to join the Student Leadership Council and help lead the campus through student and spiritual life activities. You may also choose to get involved by asking a staff or faculty member to mentor you or join a commuter small group available throughout the week. Watch for commuter lunches and quick connects as another way to meet with other students who are living off campus.

ACU seeks to develop a campus that is connected and unified in spirit and in truth, is vibrant and full of life, and provides a variety of opportunities to serve and connect with each other. The ACU Student Leadership Council’s mission is to develop leaders through providing opportunities to serve Arizona Christian University and our community. SLC seeks to connect with and unify the students, faculty, & staff through providing creative events, programs, ministry, and outreach opportunities.

Intramural sports at ACU is where the fun happens. Every Tue. And Thur. night there is a sport of the month that students are playing from dodgeball to basketball. There are also special weekend tournaments throughout the year to keep everyone involved. If you are curious about fun on campus, check out the gym.

Involvement in academic societies and student organizations is a wonderful way to grow in relationships with fellow students, in knowledge of your major area and future plans, and a fun way to interact with staff and faculty sponsor. Academic societies relate directly with a major or career aspiration. Another way to meet like-minded students is to join or start a club or organization. Organizations and clubs can be started by any student or group of students seeking to make an impact students and build community. If you are interested in joining a society or club, please contact the student life office.

Founded in 1960 as Southwestern Conservative Baptist Bible College, Arizona Christian University is a regionally accredited, private, non-profit Christian liberal arts university in Phoenix, Arizona.The university traces its roots to Ida Clouse, a Christian missionary and registered nurse who left the Midwest in 1917 and moved to Arizona under the Homestead Act where she opened the Clouse Ranch, which soon became a popular Christian retreat center. Upon her death in 1959, Clouse left 35 acres of her ranch to the Arizona Baptist Convention for the creation of a Christian college.

Since its founding in 1960, the university has undergone a number of name changes, including Southwestern College, until its name was finally changed to Arizona Christian University in January 2011 in recognition of its growth from a small Bible college to a Christian liberal arts university. Previously, the university was affiliated with the Conservative Baptist Convention until the university made the decision in 2009 to transition to a non-denominational Christian liberal arts university.

In 1965, Dr. Wallace Woods, the first College President (1965-1975), wrote: “We want to be current in our thinking and up-to-date in our methods. We want to be relevant to the changing needs of people. Nevertheless, there are foundations upon which we stand as a Bible college, and we fix our anchor in the authority of the scriptures. By God’s grace we want to be flexible in the application of Biblical principles to the training of students for effective service in their respective careers and yet hold steadfastly to the Statement of Faith which has characterized the College since its founding."