Established in 1960, the Arizona Christian University is a non-profit private multidisciplinary higher education institution located in the suburban setting of the medium city of Glendale (population range of 250,000-499,999 inhabitants), Arizona. Officially accredited by the Higher Learning Commission, Arizona Christian University (ACU) is a very small-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 1,000-1,999 students) coeducational US higher education institution formally affiliated with the Christian-Nondenominational religion. Arizona Christian University (ACU) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation) and bachelor's degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 64-year-old US higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. The acceptance rate range is 70-79% making this US higher education organization a moderately selective institution. International applicants are eligible to apply for enrollment. ACU also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has Arizona Christian University a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades.

Admission Rate

Arizona Christian University's acceptance rate range is 70-79% making this institution a moderately selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

Arizona Christian University has an enrollment range of 1,000-1,999 students making it a very small-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 50-99 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Arizona Christian University is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

Arizona Christian University is a non-profit higher education institution.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.

In particular, this institution offers some programs fully via distance education at the undergraduate level Source: IPDES.

Academic Counseling

This institution offers students academic guidance and support to assist them in their academic pursuits.

Career Services

This institution offers career counseling, career assessments, job and internship postings, career events, alumni networking or other career-related services to assist students transition successfully from academic life to professional life.