Arizona Christian University is a non-denominational Christian liberal arts college in Phoenix. Arizona Christian offers bachelor’s degrees in 15 academic majors and all degrees include a minor in Bible. Additionally, ACU features a CORE academic program integrating a Biblical worldview into scholarship. As a Christian university, ACU holds chapel services twice a week and its campus includes a 24/7 Student House of Prayer.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Private

Not for Profit

Undenominational

Coed

Need Blind

This school does not consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Suburb or town

0

100

76%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineFall Regular DecisionAugust 14

Rolling Admissions

The college has rolling admissions, which means applications are accepted any time throughout the year.

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

46%

Out-Of-State Students

46%

22%

Submitting ACT

13%

Submitting SAT

Average ACT Composite: 17

0

36

Average SAT Composite: 982

0

1600

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Bachelor's

Total Number of Students

1,053

Total Number of Undergrads

1,053

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

0

100

36%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

50%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

18:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$21,374

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$31,846

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$31,846

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$12,000

Books and Supplies

$1600

Aid & Grants

0

100

62%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

38%

Average Aid Per Year

$15,673

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

38%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$5,125

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$13,345

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

83%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$8,176

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$10,750

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$209

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

61%

39%

Student Organizations

10

Size of Town

Suburb or town

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

No

On Campus Women's Center

No

Housing

0

100

32%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

No

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Firestorm

School Colors

red and gold

Varsity Athletics Association

NAIA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Sooner Athletic Conference

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

No

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

Phoenix

Los Angeles

Tucson

Las Vegas

San Diego

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$34,900

What Students Are Saying

I feel safe on campus. Everyone is friendly and welcoming. It seems like a great experience from everyone I've spoke to about the school, including girls on the softball team!

Shae from Tucson, AZ

Arizona Christian University does a great job at building individual confidence. The ways the classes are set up allows for realistic practicing of with the career will ask of them. At ACU different personalities are accepted and used to establish a confidence needed to be passionate for any career. Through a community that allows for their classmates to feel free to be themselves and be passionate, great growth takes place.

Mariah from Phoenix, AZ

Arizona Christian University is a great college. The students are warm and welcoming, and the staff truly cares about your success academically and personally. It's a great place for fun and learning.

Kati from Surprise, AZ

it is a constantly growing and improving university that has captured the hearts of many as well as trained (and continues to train) many to be spiritually active and grow up well-balance spiritually, emotionally, and even sometimes physically.

Nicholas from Peroia, AZ

Similar Colleges

Stanford, CA

Tempe, AZ

Tucson, AZ

Glendale, AZ

Flagstaff, AZ

Azusa, CA

La Mirada, CA

Los Angeles, CA

Malibu, CA

San Diego, CA

Lakewood, CO

New York, NY

See All