Norwegian media reported “big film production” in Norway. English filmmaker Alex Garland talks about Ex Machina in terms of “low budget”.

I just watched Ex Machina on Blu-ray Disc. My first reaction was; This is Norway!

Knowing it is a British movie, I looked for signs this might be Scotland. No way! It is a Hollywood studio, maybe they could find a place like this in the Rockies? No way! Alaska? Canada? Way no way!

I had to wait and see. Just enjoy the film, and sharpen my eyes for the end credits, and there it was: Valldal! One of the narrow vallies ending in Storfjorden in Sunnmøre, not far from the famous fjord bottom Geiranger of the Norwegian cathastrophe movie Bølgen (The Wave).

Ex Machina is shot on location in this remarkable municipality of Norddal, and at sets at the just as remarkable Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England. Quite a few interior sequences, like the lab and the bedrooms, were set at Pinewood.

Norwegian landscapes are clearly distinguishable in the movies exterior shots. The helicopter ride at the beginning sets the standard. A vertical pan shot at Briksdalen in Jostedalsbreen National Park captures one of Norway’s definitely wildest sceneries.

Repeated ‘dives’ into gorges and mountain ranges outline the isolation and vastness of the scenery, adding dimension to the claustrophobic feel of the seclusion of Nathan’s estate, house and research facility.

Then the whole thing starts to become slightly unbelievable. Enter; the house. A high tech, futuristic designed, nature infested, rocks and river embedded, large house. Almost invisible. What kind of set is this?

Brace yourselves; This house, in the middle of the gorge, this house…

It’s location! Actually it is shot at two locations. The remarkable Juvet Landscape Hotel and a private residence not far from the hotel, both by architects Jensen & Skodvin.

So, this is not the future. This is now! Actually, staying at this hotel is not especially expensive compared to hotels in the UK and the USA. This is luxurious, but a room will cost about €168 (small room) to €335 (double), or about $188 to $375.

For further reading and picture galleries, I would suggest the architects and the location’s web sites:

Jensen & Skodvin on Facebook, Tumbler and Home Page.

Juvet Landscape Hotel on Facebook and Home Page.

The Norwegian location of Ex Machina also triggered quite a few articles and photo reportages in various publications online and on print: