noun - United States Lifesaving Association (USLA) is America's non-profit, professional association of beach lifeguards and open water rescuers. The United States Lifesaving Association works to reduce the incidence of death and injury in the aquatic environment through public education, national lifeguard standards, training programs, promotion of high levels of lifeguard readiness, and other means.

USLA provides the Lifeguard Agency Certification Program, Aquatic Agency Response Team program, www.usla.org website, and conducts the annual USLA National Lifeguard Championships. USLA is the USA’s Full Member to the International Life Saving Federation.

Origins

The USLA was originally known as the National Surf Lifesaving Association (or the Surf Lifesaving Association) and was co-founded by Dwight Crum and Robert Burnside.

History of Lifeguards

2014 World Open Water Swimming Performance of the Year

The United States Lifesaving Association national championship victory by the Monmouth County lifeguards is nominated for the 2014 World Open Water Swimming Performance of the Year.

"Lifeguards are the epitome of watermen and waterwomen. They protect beach-goers and make rescues in all kinds of conditions. While the lifesavers of Australia, Hawaii and California are celebrated heroes of the shoreline, it was the men and women of the Monmouth County Chapter in New Jersey who turned heads and changed mindsets on the beach in 2014. The lifeguards who work a number of beaches along the Jersey Shore defeated their California rivals for the first time in a generation. Under the leadership of captain Mike Tomaino, the Monmouth County Chapter lifeguards snapped the 27-year reign of California to capture the 2014 Nautica United States Lifesaving Association National Lifeguard Championships in Virginia Beach, Virginia. For breaking an unprecedented dynasty, for bringing ocean glory to the Jersey Shore, for training for a Miracle On Water, for believing in themselves in the intense, multi-disciplined ocean competition, the national team championship of the Monmouth County Lifeguards is a worthy nominee of the 2014 World Open Water Swimming Performance of the Year."

2014 World Open Water Swimming Performance of the Year Nominees

1. Beyond Avalon by Dan Henry, Dave Speier, William Miller, Steve Miller, Lee Grove, Dana Selles, Mark Zambon, Penny Nagel, Chris Gibson, Jon Rodley, Jonathan Hands, Nick Jeffery, Terry Hirt (U.S.A.)

2. Curaçao Channel Crossing by Niko Kluyver, André Nottelman, Erwin Ruijsink (Curaçao)

3. Cyprus Israel Swim by Udi Erell, Doron Amosi, Ben Enosh, Ori Sela, Oded Rahav, Luc Chetboun (Israel)

4. Diomede Islands Swim by Alexandr Brylin and Grigorii Prokopchuk (Russia)

5. English Channel Crossing by Cyril Baldock (Australia)

6. Great Lake Adventure by Vicki Keith, Abi Tripp, Nick Streicher, Michelle Sempowski, Natasha Dobson, Harley Bolton, Natalie Lambert, Jenna Lambert (Canada)

7. International Winter Swimming Festival Argentina by Matías Ola (Argentina)

8. Lake Ontario Crossing by Trinity Arsenault (Canada)

9. Madagascar Swim by Thane Guy Williams and Jonno Proudfoot (South Africa)

10. Manhattan Island Marathon Swim by Kristian Rutford (U.S.A.)

11. Mallorca 360° Circumnavigation Swim by Richard Krugel (South Africa)

12. Monterey Bay Crossing by Patti Bauernfeind (U.S.A.)

13. Prison Island Swims by Jacques Tuset (France)

14. Triple Crown of Open Water Swimming by Charlotte Samuels (U.S.A.)

15. U.S. Lifeguarding Champions by Monmouth County Lifeguards (U.S.A.)