The International Life Saving Federation (ILS) is the world authority for drowning prevention, lifesaving and lifesaving sport. ILS leads, supports and collaborates with national and international organisations engaged in drowning prevention, water safety, water rescue, lifesaving, lifeguarding and lifesaving sport.

Lifesaving sport was primarily intended to encourage lifesavers to develop, maintain and improve the essential physical and mental skills needed to save lives in the aquatic environment. Lifesaving competitions consist of a variety of events are held around the world to further develop and demonstrate lifesaving skills, fitness and motivation.

LIFESAVING WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS

Every two years the International Life Saving Federation organises the Lifesaving World Championships (LWC), showcasing excellence in lifesaving sports and rescue; attracting the most talented and skilled lifesaving athletes to compete for the title of World’s best. Following the official allocation of the Lifesaving World Championships (LWC) 2022 in Italy, the ILS Board announced this year is on home soil in the picturesque Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.

More information about the LWC 2024 can be found here.

Athletes wishing to to submit an Expression of Interest for the Australian Life Saving Team must do so no later than 11:59pm Thursday, 29th February 2024.

EUROPEAN CHAMPIONSHIPS

The ILS European Region organise the Lifesaving European Championships every two years. These Championships comprise both pool and surf/ocean events. The Championship is organised in the odd years between the Lifesaving World Championships.

European Records can be found on the on the DLRG website. The competition rules of the European Region in ILS are very similar to the ILS Competition rules except for the elements that are typically linked to Regional conditions.

MULTI-SPORT EVENTS

Lifesaving sport is included in several international multi-sport events such as:

THE WORLD GAMES

The International World Games Association (IWGA) organises the World Games every four years, one year after the Summer Olympic Games.

The World Games are often called the “Olympic” Games for the non-Olympic Sports and were first held in Santa Clara (USA) in 1981. The Games are a Multi-Sport Event where over 30 Sports are organised during a period of 14 Days. Lifesaving Sports (both pool and beach-surf) are on the programme since its second edition in London in 1985. The lifesaving competition lasts three days: two days in the pool and one day on the beach-surf. The ten best lifesaving teams in the World can participate in these top Games and the selection is made at the World Championships one year before holding the Games.

2021: Birmingham, Alabama (USA)

2017: Wroclaw (Poland)

2013: Cali (Colombia)

2009: Kaochiung (Chinese Taipei)

2005: Duisburg (Germany)

2001: Akita (Japan)

1997: Lahti (Finland)

1993: Den Haag (Netherlands)

1989: Kahrsruhe (Germany)

1985: London (United Kingdom)

1981: Santa Clara (USA)

MILITARY WORLD GAMES AND MILITARY WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS

The International Military Sports Council (CISM) organises the Military Lifesaving World Championships and the Military World Games.

WORLD MASTERS GAMES

The World Masters Games is an international multi-sport tournament for athletes of ages beyond young adulthood. The games are held every four years, and are sponsored by the International Masters Games Association (IMGA). Lifesaving will be on the programme of the 2021 World Masters Games that will be held in Kansai, Japan.