The United States Lifesaving Association (USLA) is sending a group of high-performing professional and junior lifeguards to the 2015 International Surf Rescue Challenge (ISRC). The national team and the youth team are each composed of eight males and eight females who will represent the U.S. in the international competition, Sept. 3-6 in Australia.

The 2015 International Surf Rescue Challenge will be held at Maroochydore Beach on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast. Participating countries include Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Korea, New Zealand, the USA and Japan.

“The members of the national and youth national teams are a select group of individuals who have demonstrated, at a very high level with consistent success, their unique skills against the best competition in the United States,” said National Teams Director, Skip Prosser. “The ISRC will be a tough challenge, and we are confident in our athletes and we are excited to see them perform at their peak.”

The national and youth national teams, competing in the bi-annual International Life Saving Federation (ILS) sanctioned event, were chosen by a USLA selection committee based on a variety of criteria, including: USLA membership, past performances at national events and endurance and versatility in the pool and on the beach.

“The USLA is proud to be the sole Full Member of the International Life Saving Federation and the sanctioning body for lifesaving sport in the USA, thus empowering us to select the U.S. Team,” said USLA President, B. Chris Brewster. “Lifesaving sport is recognized by the International Olympic Committee with the ILS being the global sanctioning body and we are thrilled to select the athletes that represent our country in Australia.”

The competition, which is held every two years, is a gathering of the world’s top lifesavers. It began in 1939 as the Trans-Tasman Series between Australia and New Zealand.

The national and youth national team rosters follow:

2015 U.S. National Team Roster

Men’s Team Women’s Team James Bray – Carpinteria, Calif. Christina Boring – San Clemente, Calif. Timothy Burdiak – Los Angeles Sandi Woodhead – Port Jefferson, N.Y. Kevin Fink – Long Beach, Calif. Annie Fittin – Sea Girt, N.J. Patrick Fink – Long Beach, Calif. Carter Graves – Coronado Beach, Calif. Pat Kilgallen – Rockaway, N.Y. Jennifer Noonan – Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Thomas O’Neill – Rockaway, N.Y. Eva Porter – Jacksonville, Fla. Rich Sprout- Costa Mesa, Calif. Hallie Petersohn – Port Orange, Fla. Garrett Thibodeau – Port Jefferson, N.Y. Lexi Santer – Wilmington, Del. Manager: Randy Eickhoff Coach: Dr. Mike Barrows

2015 U.S. Youth National Team Roster

Men’s Team Women’s Team Ben Coffey – Santa Cruz City, Calif. Sarah Brennan – Monmouth, N.J. Chasen Dubs – East Hampton, N.Y. Amanda Calabrese – East Hampton, N.Y. Hayden Hemmens – Newport Beach, Calif. Zoe Colomer – Los Angeles Oli Holt – Santa Cruz City, Calif. Natalie Gold – Los Angeles Hunter Pflueger – Honolulu, Hawaii Holly Maine – Los Angeles Benjamin Tran – Long Beach, Calif. Isabelle Pabon – Monmouth, N.J. Malcolm Wilkie – Hollywood, Fla. Bella Siering – Los Angeles Chris Wise – Destin, Fla. Shannon Snell – Pompano Beach, Fla. Manager: Gus Avila Coach: Casey Graham