Kurt Vonnegut will never die.

Oh, he’s dead, all right; Vonnegut, the author of 14 novels and numerous short stories, passed away in 2007. But like Billy Pilgrim — the protagonist of his masterpiece, “Slaughterhouse-Five” — the writer has come ” unstuck in time,” influencing culture from beyond the grave.

Take this summer’s book banning; the school board in Republic, Missouri, voted to remove “Slaughterhouse-Five” from its high school library for allegedly teaching principles contrary to the Bible. The move backfired, prompting protests and a surge in demand for the novel at the town’s public library. Volunteers at the non-profit Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library in the writer’s hometown of Indianapolis even offered a free copy of the book to every student at the school.

No, Kurt Vonnegut isn’t going to go away so easily. This year has also seen the opening of the Vonnegut Library, reissues of his books, and a pair of new biographies in celebration of what would have been his 89th birthday on November 11.

But why do people still care about Vonnegut’s writing? According to Charles J. Shields, author of “And So It Goes: Kurt Vonnegut: A Life,” one of the two biographies, his continued relevance springs from the universality of his message: ” His writings, which come from the center of the most violent century in human history, simply ask, ‘Why are we here?’”

For Vonnegut, that was always a loaded question. In “The Sirens of Titan” he wrote, ” A purpose of human life, no matter who is controlling it, is to love whoever is around to be loved.” But that love was often impeded by random obstacles. Vonnegut viewed man’s struggle as the attempt to find kindness in an uncaring universe — a world-view shaped by his life own life experiences.

Vonnegut was born into a wealthy German-American clan whose fortunes were drastically altered by the Great Depression. Unable to come to grips with the family’s reduced circumstances, his mother committed suicide on Mother’s Day, 1944.

Around the same time, a fresh-out-of-college Vonnegut went to fight in World War II. Captured during the Battle of the Bulge, he was held as a prisoner of war in Dresden where he witnessed the Allies’ firebombing of that historic city — an attack that killed between 25,000 and 35,000 people.

Although Vonnegut and his fellow POWs survived the bombing in an underground meat locker/prison, they spent the next several weeks collecting the remains of the dead while locals threw rocks at them.

” Both the Depression and the war taught Vonnegut that we are not nearly as in control of our destinies as our egos and the mythology of the ‘American Dream’ would have us believe,” says Gregory D. Sumner, author of the second new biography, “Unstuck in Time: A Journey Through Kurt Vonnegut’s Life and Novels.”

After the war, Vonnegut began a career writing melodramas for magazines, although he was personally drawn to science fiction. ” Vonnegut was convinced he couldn’t write about the issues facing Americans during the Cold War — hydrogen bombs, conformity, materialism — in conventional ways,” Shields says. ” But in science fiction, a writer can ask, ‘What if?’ and take a concept to the limit of credibility.”

In the 1960s, Vonnegut finally sat down to write about his experiences in World War II. But there was a problem. ” When he took shelter in the slaughterhouse, there was a city,” Shields explains. ” When he came up again, the city was gone. How could he write a war novel with no middle? The solution, he discovered, was time travel.”

In “Slaughterhouse-Five,” the main character finds himself bouncing uncontrollably through time, living his life out of sequence — including his stint as a POW during World War II and his time as an exhibit in an alien zoo.

Despite the sci-fi trappings, the book grappled with the very notion of war. Released in 1969 at the height of the Vietnam War, “Slaughterhouse-Five” resonated with the American public, reaching number one on the New York Times best-seller list.

” Young people in particular embraced its deglorification of war and experimental style,” Sumner says. ” But its universal themes transcend period or place. The book is very popular, for example, with solders and veterans of the current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.”

Again, why do people — young and old — still read Vonnegut?

” Because of his honesty, wit, and faith in people, despite their flaws and the tragedies of life,” Sumner replies. ” Because the seemingly ‘childish’ questions he asked, the apparently ‘simple’ style of expression he used, hold a profundity that the critics often missed.”

When released, some critics did, indeed, mistake “Slaughterhouse-Five’s” simple prose style for plain simpleness, but history sides with Vonnegut’s fans; the book is included in both Time magazine’s and Modern Library’s lists of the 100 best novels of the 20th century.

Not that Vonnegut would have been concerned about his legacy, mind you.

” I don’t console myself with the idea that my descendents and my books and all that will live on,” he told a Saturday Evening Post reporter in 1986. ” I honestly believe, though, that we are wrong to think that moments go away, never to be seen again. This moment and every moment last forever.”