Genre

Science fiction

Drama

Created by

Tim Haines and Adrian Hodges

Country of origin

United Kingdom

Original language

English

Series

5

Episodes

36

Running time

45 minutes

Production companies

Impossible Pictures

ITV Studios

ProSieben

Treasure Entertainment

M6 Films

Network

ITV (2007–2011)

Watch (2011)

Release

February 10th 2007 – June 28th 2011

Primeval is a British science-fiction television programme produced for ITV by Impossible Pictures. Primeval follows a team of scientists tasked with investigating the appearance of temporal anomalies across the United Kingdom through which prehistoric and futuristic creatures enter the present, while simultaneously trying to stop the end of the world. Primeval was created by Tim Haines, who previously created the Walking with... documentary series, and Adrian Hodges. It ran for five series, originally broadcast from 2007 to 2011.[1]

Clips from Primeval were featured on episodes of Harry Hill's TV Burp.

On TV Burp[]

"Episode 6.6"[]

Harry turns his attention to Primeval in this episode, broadcast two weeks after the programme's premiere. He asks have you ever wondered what a robbery in a joke factory would look like. The scene then cuts to a clip from the programme's second episode, where Captain Ryan and his soldiers are being menaced by Giant Spiders in the London Underground, a soldier tries to shoot them but the shot ends up being bounced across the room.

Harry introduces Primeval, and is menaced by a Dinosaur growl sound effect. He says Primeval is ITV's answer to Doctor Who, noting "It's taken two years, but they've done it." He explains its premise is creatures escaping from the past to the present via an Anomaly. He says it's very frightening and that the special effects in Primeval are fantastic, well most of the time. The scene cuts to Abby holding Rex where Harry shouts "IT'S A PUPPET!" (Rex is actually CGI). Harry then holds a puppet of Rex. When he asks Rex if he's alright, Rex spits in his eye, Harry calls him "Spit the Dinosaur".

"Episode 6.6"[]

In the next episode, Harry jokes about Primeval again. He announces that ITV is making a spin-off of Dancing on Ice, Diving with Crocs. The scene then cuts to that of a clip from the third episode of Primeval, in which a lifeguard dives right into the jaws of a Mosasaur and is devoured.

"Episode 6.7"[]

Harry jokes about Primeval once more, using a scene from the fourth episode in which a boy discovers a python in his toilet.

Unknown Episode 1[]

In an unknown episode, Harry says that budget cuts are affecting Primeval, showing a clip from a different programme in which a litter-picker comes out of a bush.

Unknown Episode 2[]

When Harry makes up a show, ITV's Meat Police. He says it's to rival BBC's Life on Mars, "Just like they did with Primeval and Doctor Who" he notes.

Trivia[]

Harry calling Rex a puppet is obviously a joke on how Abby holds him, as he is actually CGI.

The nickname of "Spit the Dinosaur" is technically incorrect, as Rex's species, the Coelurosauravus, is actually a type of reptile home to the Permian period, before the Mesozoic era in which Dinosaurs originate.

Also, the fact he referred to the Mosasaur as a "Croc" is also incorrect. Although the Mosasaur looks very similar to a Crocodile, they are unrelated.

It is currently unknown whether Harry has made jokes on Primeval Series 2 and 3. He didn't included clips from Series 4 in TV Burp as the first episode of Series 11 started on the same day as the last episode of Series 4.

Video[]

References[]

[]

Primeval at AllMovie

Primeval at Anomaly Research Centre

Primeval at epguides.com

Primeval at the Internet Movie Database (IMDb)