M6 Launched 1 March 1987 Owned by M6 Group Picture format 576i (SDTV)

1080i (HDTV) Audience share 11,3% (October 2011, Médiamétrie) Slogan La vie en mieux Country France Language French Headquarters Neuilly-sur-Seine Replaced TV6 (1986-1987) Sister channel(s) W9

Paris Première

Téva

TF6

M6 Music Hits

M6 Music Club

M6 Music Black

M6 Boutique & Co

Best Of Shopping

Girondins TV

Série Club Website www.m6.fr

M6, also known as Metropole television, is the most profitable private national French TV channel[1][2] and the third most watched television network in the French-speaking world.[3] M6 is the head channel of the M6 group media empire[4] that owns several TV channels, magazines, publications, movie production and media-related firms etc.

Other TV channels in the M6 portfolio include digital terrestrial channel W9, Paris Premiere, Teva, TF6 and digital cable channels M6 Music Hits, M6 Music Black, M6 Music Rock and Fun TV.

Contents

1 History

2 Current programs

2.1 News

2.2 Show and Reality Show

2.3 Series

3 Past programmes

4 See also

4.1 Note

5 References

6 External links

History

M6 launched on 1 March 1987 at 11:15 am CET taking the place of TV6.

M6's current on-air brand image suggests that it tailors its service to teenagers and young-adult demographics. Its current programs lineup include:

French TV Shows: Les Bleus, Scènes de Ménages, Vous les femmes

American TV Shows: Desperate Housewives ; NCIS (NCIS: enquêtes spéciales) ; NCIS: Los Angeles ; Lie to Me ; Prison Break ; Medium (Médium) ; My Name Is Earl (Earl) ; NUMB3RS ; Bones ; Scrubs ; The Unit (The Unit : commando d'élite) ; Stargate Atlantis ; Nip/Tuck ; Californication ; Kyle XY ; Everybody Hates Chris (Tout le monde déteste Chris) ; Supernatural and Smallville.

These American TV Shows were previously shown on M6: Charmed ; The 4400 (Les 4 400) ; Jericho ; The Dead Zone (Dead Zone) ; Stargate SG-1 ; Charmed ; Malcolm in the Middle (Malcolm) ; Friends ; Alias ; Sex and the City ; Veronica Mars ; Buffy the Vampire Slayer (Buffy contre les vampires) ; The X-Files (X-Files, aux frontières du réel) ; Ally McBeal ; Roswell ; Profiler ; The Pretender (Le Caméléon) ; The Sentinel ; Sliders (Sliders, les mondes parallèles) ; Hope & Faith (La Star de la famille) ; 8 Simple Rules (Touche pas à mes filles) ; My Wife and Kids (Ma famille d'abord) ; Still Standing (Une famille presque parfaite) ; Early Edition (Demain à la Une) ; Wildfire ; Once and Again (Deuxième chance) ; Relic Hunter (Sydney Fox, l'aventurière) ; Medical Investigation (NIH : alertes médicales) ; Tru Calling (Tru Calling : compte à rebours) ; Commander in Chief ; 1-800-Missing (Missing : disparus sans laisser de trace) ; Dark Skies (Dark Skies : l'impossible vérité) ; The Inside (The Inside : dans la tête des tueurs) ; Killer Instinct ; Vanished ; John Doe ; LAX ; Jake 2.0 ; Blind Justice ; Threshold (Threshold : premier contact) ; Summerland ; Beautiful People ; Young Americans ; Special Unit 2 ; The Evidence (The Evidence : les preuves du crime) ; South Beach ; L.A. Heat (Los Angeles Heat) ; Married… with Children (Mariés, deux enfants) ; The Cosby Show (Cosby Show) ; Who's the Boss? (Madame est servie) ; The Nanny (Une nounou d'enfer) ; Little House on the Prairie (La Petite Maison dans la prairie); The Simpsons (Les Simpson) and Bewitched (Ma sorcière bien-aimée).

American programs: High School Musical ; Camp Rock ; America's Got Talent (Incroyable Talent).

British TV shows: Primeval ; Secret Diary of a Call Girl (Journal intime d'une call girl).

These British TV Shows were previously shown on M6: Footballers' Wives (Femme$ de footballeurs) ; Queer as Folk ; Totally Frank ; Bugs ; and Hex (Hex : la malédiction).

These Canadian TV shows were shown on M6: Sue Thomas: F.B.Eye (Sue Thomas, l'œil du FBI) and Falcon Beach.

Investigative journalism shows, such as Capital, Zone interdite and Enquête Exclusive.

Long-lasting short programs, such as Turbo, CinéSix, and E=M6, as well as numerous music videos.

In 2001, M6 became the first national French television network to broadcast reality programming. Its first program of this genre was Loft Story, and was highly watched. The president of TF1 at the time, Étienne Mougeotte, promised that TF1 would never air any reality programming. However, several months later, TF1 signed a contract with Endemol to air such programming. Endemol is the same company that created Loft Story for M6.

M6 is one of the only television services in France to have science-fiction programming as part of its regular schedule. Most supernatural dramas were shown on Saturday nights in what M6 called "la Trilogie du Samedi" (The Saturday Trilogy)

Current programs

News

Le 12:45 (national edition) and 19:45 (national edition), afternoon and evening news.

Zone Interdite, France's most influential Newsmagazine[5]

66 Minutes weekly news magazine.

Capital, Economy-oriented newsmagazine.

Enquête Exclusive, Investigation magazine.

Show and Reality Show

X Factor

Nouvelle star, (French adaptation of Pop Idol) reality television

L'amour est dans le pré, French adaptation of Farmer Wants a Wife

D&CO , homestyle show.

E=M6, science magazine.

Top Chef, French adaptation of Top Chef

Belle toute nue, the French equivalent of Channel 4's How to Look Good Naked.

Turbo, motor magazine.

Chef, la recette, culinary magazine

Hit Machine, musical show.

M6 Kid, program for children.

Pekin Express, French adaptation of Dutch show "Peking Express".

Off Prime

Accès Privé, entertainment news magazine

Series

Desperate Housewives

Glee

Lie to Me

Bones

My Name Is Earl

NCIS

NCIS Los Angeles

Numb3rs

Supernatural

Scrubs

Sons of Anarchy

White Collar

Burn Notice

Past programmes

Super Nanny

Culture Pub, a TV advertisements analysing show

Graines de star, a talents contests show

Loft Story (French adaptation of Big Brother), M6 and the first French reality show

Les colocataires (Roommates)a show similar to Loft Story.

Morning Live, Morning show

Caméra Café, Comedy

Nouvelle Star (French adaptation of American Idol)

Êtes-vous plus fort qu'un élève de 10 ans ?, French adaptation of Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?

Rubí, Mexican telenovela, was a smash hit in France

Total Wipeout (French adaption of Wipeout)

See also

List of television stations in France

Note

1 Source: Médiamétrie

References