14th January 2018

Philip K. Dick, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? [illustrated by Chris Skinner] and A Scanner Darkly [illustrated by Andrew Archer], two volumes in one (London: The Folio Society, 2017).

Philip K. Dick, The Man in the High Castle, illustrated by Shotopop [Shan Jian] (London: The Folio Society, 2015).

I try and follow the path my friend Catherine Byron taught me, of always seeking something positive to review, even in a dull book. Sometimes it is difficult, though, and one of these two sumptuous, slipcased Folio Society books needs seriously criticising, not because it is a dull book, far from it. But it would be a considerable investment for any Philip K Dick fan to buy, and I cannot recommend the new Folio Society back-to-back edition of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and A Scanner Darkly (which my family kindly bought me for Christmas at my request). Folio Society books are well-made, with a price to match, but this one seriously mis-fires, and the problem is all about design and layout, as I shall explain. I shall have some very positive things to say, however, about the Society’s edition of The Man in the High Castle (which my wonderful, beloved and long-suffering family bought me for a retirement present when I left NTU two years ago).

In the back-to-back edition the presentation of both novels gets them off to a bad start. Do Androids Dream begins, in every edition I have seen, with a dedication to Dick’s friend and stepmother-in-law Maren Hackett (née Bergrud), ‘a brilliant woman’, in his biographer’s words, who ‘possessed great warmth and intelligence’ (Sutin,143, 146), but who had died the previous year, sadly, by her own hand:

To Maren Augusta Bergrud

August 10 1967

And still I dream he treads the lawn,

walking ghostly in the dew,

Pierced by my glad singing through.

Yeats

What the Folio Society has done is to split this, putting the epigraph from Yeats on a fresh leaf, indeed on the recto after the one with the dedication on. You have to turn a page to find it, and it is clearly quite separate from the dedication. The effect of this is to re-purpose a quotation made in honour of the author’s late friend, making it instead an epigraph for the whole book, which makes a nonsense of what Dick is doing. I can’t think of any reason they have done this, other than to waste a leaf and show how lavish their books are. It is a crass and insensitive mistake that spoils a fine dedication. These things matter.

Turn the book upside down (for its structural design enacts a homage to the old pulp style ‘back to back’ format) and an equally foolish mistake is immediately in evidence at the beginning of Scanner. Again, in every edition I have seen, the last page of the novel is followed by an ‘Author’s Note’ which begins, ‘This has been a novel about some people who were punished entirely too much for what they did. They wanted to have a good time, but they were like children playing in the street; they could see one after another of them being killed — run over, maimed, destroyed — but they continued to play anyway.’ The author then discusses what he means by this, talking about the damage drug culture has done and what causes drug-taking, and relatedly noting the fact that there is ‘no moral in this novel’. He concludes with a list of his damaged or deceased friends (which includes himself), to whom he tenderly dedicates the novel he has just written.

Note the past tense: ‘This has been a novel…’ So why would the Folio Society move this to the beginning, to be read before you read the novel. For this is exactly what they do. Apart from anything else, it makes it into a ‘spoiler’, giving away to the new reader much of the trajectory of the novel that they may not wish to know at this early stage. But more than that, the author has clearly conceived and written it as an afterword and not a foreword. It makes no sense to have moved it, other than to a bureaucratic mind that believes all dedications and author’s notes must go at the front of a book. Otherwise it is a nonsense.

My other objections are admittedly more subjective. The old pulps were known for their garish covers of bug-eyes monsters, etc. No-on could accuse the artists who illustrated this edition of garishness. The full-plate images for Scanner are some rather dull line drawings (some colouring of a dark royal blue is also used, especially on the frontispiece and front cover). The plates for Do Androids Dream, though brighter and more interesting, are really too close to the famous imagery of Blade Runner to offer anything particularly fresh. The cutaway artificial sheep inlaid on the front cover of Do Androids Dream is a very nice piece of work, but this is the only image in the edition that really stands out for me.

The Folio Society prides itselves on its illustrations, which are usually effective and exciting. To turn to the other book, their fine edition of The Man in the High Castle is illuminatingly illustrated by Shan Jian of Shotopop, whose biography says he is ‘strongly influenced by his home city of Shanghai; its skyscrapers and bungalows, contemporary concepts and traditional superstitions, communist ideology and flourishing subcultures. He has been inspired by Chinese Meticulous Art, Ukiyo-e, Bauhaus design, Durer, manga and anime’ (viii). This is an impressive range; and how marvellously it all feeds into his work. Jian’s images are perfectly attuned to the cultural crossovers, and the narrative and ontological uncertainties of High Castle, each image in some way adding depth and richness to the text. The illustrations for the back-to-back pair are by comparison merely dull or dully derivative.

It is also, I am afraid, a rather lumpish book, unnecessarily made an inch taller than High Castle, so that it feels like a great slab, made more ugly by its lime green spine and contrasting bright red slipcase. The spine has some oddities about the lettering, with a kind of triangular insert in the uprights of capitals E, I, P and R. It is evidently a design feature of the font, but without a magnifying glass it just looks like little accidental gaps in the print surface. The text seems sound, and as usual with this imprint the book is well laid out on good quality paper, with a binding that allows it to sit open comfortably, though I felt it was rather unnecessary and ugly to put the book title in capitals at the foot of every single page.

What a shame their edition is so marred by the flaws and mis-judgments I have described. I want to write positively in this blog about the books I read. But as well as being a writer I am an editor, and until recently I was a small publisher, and I know too well just how easily design and layout issues can ruin a book, undermining the reader’s confidence in their imaginative journey before it has begun, and conversely, how wonderfully a well-designed book can lead them into their new adventure. The back-to-back novels and the Folio Societys’s earlier edition of High Castle offer clear and contrasting examples of both effects.So to end on a positive note: it is a pleasure to recommend the latter. The Folio Society edition of The Man in the High Castle (see images below) is an inspiring and imaginative presentation of Dick’s Hugo-winning novel.

johnagoodridge@hotmail.com

More on PKD here:

https://www.academia.edu/11885380/The_Politics_of_Feeling_Reading_Emotion_in_Philip_K._Dick