SILICON GRAPHICS INC. just can't seem to win on Wall Street any more.

On Wednesday, after the stock market closed, the company reported earnings that exceeded most analysts' expectations. Yet in the two trading days that followed, Silicon Graphics shares fell as computer industry analysts lowered their estimates for fiscal 1997; at least two lowered their ratings on the stock.

Silicon Graphics shares closed at $22.25 Friday, on the New York Stock Exchange, down 25 cents, after losing $3.50 on Thursday in heavy trading. With its stock at less than half its 52-week high of $44.875, Silicon Graphics has seen its market capitalization trimmed by $3.7 billion even while sales and earnings have continued to grow.

But, analysts say, the company's growth is the problem. It is no longer running at the torrid pace that investors grew accustomed to, and management has continued to lower expectations.

''The belief used to be that S.G.I. could grow at 40 percent-plus indefinitely; I don't think anyone believes that anymore,'' said Kurt King, an analyst with Montgomery Securities, who lowered his rating on the stock from a buy to a hold. ''It looks to us like increased competition is putting pressure both on revenue growth and on profit margins.''

Silicon Graphics carved out a profitable niche with powerful work stations and servers that are used primarily to create three-dimensional computer models, of everything from underground oil reserves to airplane wings. From its roots in manufacturing and aerospace, Silicon Graphics expanded into film, and the company's fame grew with the use of its machines to create such memorable special effects as the killer robot in ''The Terminator'' and the dinosaurs in ''Jurassic Park.''

Silicon Graphics has long been seen as vulnerable to an onslaught from personal computers that use the Intel Corporation's Pentium processor and the Microsoft Corporation's Windows NT operating system, but Mr. King said such machines had so far had little impact.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.