January 11, 1999

MARKET PLACE

Analysts Hot on Silicon Graphics' Technology, Lukewarm on Stock

By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

fter three years of declining fortunes, Silicon Graphics Inc. is placing a big bet Monday as it introduces a line of work stations built around Intel chips and Microsoft software.

While analysts like the new machines, nearly all remain neutral on the shares of Silicon Graphics, saying that the company has yet to show that it can return to sustainable growth and profitability.

Chart

Declining Fortunes

Silicon Graphics hopes to reverse a three-year decline with new work stations built around Intel chips and Microsoft software.

Given Silicon Graphics' history of introducing brilliant new technology only to fumble on the delivery of products, it is perhaps not surprising that analysts are taking a wait-and-see attitude. For one, the new machines are already late. First promised for the second half of 1998, the line so far includes two models: the 320, available next month starting at $3,395, and the 540, expected to be shipped in the second quarter, starting at $5,995. The prices do not include monitors.

Some of the hesitation may also reflect the new direction being taken with the work stations, which are used for high-performance tasks from three-dimensional modeling to financial analysis to animation. Silicon Graphics executives have long asserted that no work station based on a conventional personal computer can equal the performance of the company's designs, which use the MIPS microprocessor and a variation of the Unix operating system. And the new machines based on Pentium 2 chip and Windows NT do not.

Their prices, however, start at about half that of Silicon Graphics' home-grown 02 series, and by including the company's own video and graphics circuitry, can outperform other PC-based work stations that must rely on add-on boards for these functions. "From the very beginning when we announced this, everyone of course asked, 'How are you going to differentiate?"' Richard Belluzzo, chairman and chief executive of Silicon Graphics, said in a telephone interview. "We were convinced we could take Microsoft and Intel technology, surround it with Silicon Graphics innovation, and play by PC rules."

To compete with lower-cost producers like the Dell Computer Corp., Silicon Graphics has also adopted a new business model for its Windows-Intel machines. Unlike its traditional products, which are assembled at the company's headquarters in Mountain View, Calif., the new line is completely assembled by Space Contractors Inc., a leading contract manufacturer. Space Contractors will build each machine to order. Silicon Graphics plans to sell the machines from its Web site (www.sgi.com) as well as through its direct-sales force and resellers.

"I'm pretty impressed with what I've seen," said Peter Ffoulkes, an analyst with Dataquest. "There's a lot of difference between what SGI is bringing to market and a vanilla Dell machine," he said, adding that because the machine has three-dimensional graphics and video, "there is the potential to deliver significant performance advantages when dealing with that kind of data."

Ffoulkes is an industry analyst, who reviews products rather than stocks. Nonetheless, the introduction of Silicon Graphics' NT machines is important for all technology investors, he contends.

"If technology doesn't make a difference, -- and if SGI can't make a difference, then who can? -- that has a lot of implications for investing in technology at all unless it's in Microsoft or Dell," he said.

Steven Milunovich, a managing director of Merrill Lynch, said that while he, too, admired the new machines, he questioned whether they would make a big difference in the company's fortunes. "They're late," he said, "and while they may be differentiated, the best technology doesn't always win in the market, in fact it often does not win."

Still, "this is the first good news since the new management arrived," he said, referring to Belluzzo, who joined the company from Hewlett-Packard a year ago, and other senior executives he has since recruited. Milunovich has a neutral rating on Silicon Graphics shares.

The stock closed Friday at $16.3125, up substantially from a 52-week low of $7.375 on Oct. 8, but still a fraction of the $45 it fetched in 1995. In the last five quarters, the company has lost $504 million. Silicon Graphics is expected to report its fiscal second-quarter results on Jan. 26; analysts surveyed by First Call expect a loss of 19 cents a share.

"They've got a lot riding on" the new machines, said Daniel Kunstler of J.P. Morgan.

"I'd like to think they've thought long and hard and come up with something that will give them an advantage," he went on, "but I'm a little unclear what that is. We have to be very attentive to execution; availability is going to be absolutely key." He rates Silicon Graphics a hold.

The lone buy recommendation among analysts at major securities firms comes from Doug Van Dorsten, who is with Hambrecht & Quist. He plays down the importance of the new machines, which he does not expect to add more than $30 million in annual sales to the company's $3 billion in revenue. Instead, he expects the new management to turn around the company's core business in high-end servers, which are still based on the MIPS processor, and to improve operating efficiency and profit margins.

Van Dorsten also notes that Silicon Graphics has substantial tangible assets -- including its ownership of the Wavefront and Alias software companies, and its 85 percent stake in its MIPS chip business, which went public last year -- that are not reflected in the stock price. Those assets are worth more than $7 a share, he said, and a projected profit of 75 cents a share in fiscal 2000 would suggest a stock price in the high teens. Improved margins could bring earnings a share to $1.05 to $1.10 in 2000.

"That gives you a share price in the low 20s," he said. "They've still got a long way to go, but I think they have a shot at it."

Related Sites

These sites are not part of The New York Times on the Web, and The Times has no control over their content or availability.