Silicon Graphics, Inc. (SGI) has filled up its tank of new products with Octane, a line of mid-range ($25 thousand and up) desktop 3D machines that feature a new high-bandwidth architecture. The lead in Octane is provided by a new multi-port crossbar switch that, according to an SGI release, "provides as much as ten times the bandwidth found in most traditional architectures today." Specifically, Octane is said to deliver a peak bandwidth of 1.6 GB/sec through each of its eight ports. Octane's floating-point performance is reportedly 70 percent higher than SGI's previous mid-range system, the Indigo IMPACT 10000. ONE SCOOP, OR TWO? The Octane will be available with single or dual R10000 microprocessors from SGI's subsidiary, MIPS. The dual-processor version permits separate jobs to be run simultaneously. Pricing for dual processor versions starts at $34 thousand. As in SGI's previous models in this class, Octane will be offered with several levels of graphics processors. The options are: OCTANE/SI, the base-level product; OCTANE/SSI, said to deliver twice the solid modeling performance of the SI; and OCTANE/MXI, described as a flagship product that "offers the highest levels of realism available in the desktop market." Additional options include a digital video board and a compression card. In its earlier years, SGI concentrated its architectural innovations primarily on its graphics system. Its desktop machines stuck to the shared-bus architecture that has been characteristic of workstations (and, for that matter, PCs) from the beginning. "GET OFF THE LINE, ADA, WE'RE TALKING" In an explanation of the Octane's new architecture, SGI compares this traditional design strategy to a multi-party phone system in which only one conversation can be carried on at a time. SGI has addressed this problem by adopting a solution described as "an eight-port non-blocking crossbar... that uses advanced packet switching technology to route messages directly from one part of the computer" to another. The paper also defined a non-blocking cross-bar, which "allows multiple streams of data to flow independently from one point to another; they will not interfere with or block one another." Thus, for desktop machines with only one or two processors, the Octane deploys a crossbar architecture similar to those used in some large-scale multiprocessor supercomputers. (One example is the Hitachi SR2201, now operating in installations up to two thousand processors, which uses a three-dimensional crossbar for large configurations.) This tactic is especially important for SGI, whose product line emphasizes special computing units, such as graphics processors or video compression units, based on dedicated hardware. Consequently, the parallel with large multiprocessor systems is appropriate. Even with only one CPU, a fully-equipped Octane is, in terms of internal communication requirements, very much like a multiprocessor system. These specialized supplementary processors access the crossbar switch through ports known as XIO slots, which also serve as bridges to I/O. On the O2, SGI's recent entry for the lower-end 3D market, communication between the CPU and specialized processors takes place through a high-bandwidth memory system known as UMA (for Unified Memory Architecture.) Octane seeks to provide even higher bandwidth by dedicating the crossbar entirely to communication between the specialized functions, one another, and the CPU. The CPU, also plugged into the crossbar, has it own communications link directly with the closely-coupled main memory. The CPU-memory combination is thus like an off-road mall. Shoppers can gossip and shop without dodging traffic on the interstate highway outside -- yet the highway is needed to deliver the merchandise they buy. Consequently the Octane can deliver exceptionally high bandwidth in all dimensions. THE WORKSTATION-PC WAR Last October, SGI introduced another innovative architecture, a modular strategy for its Origin2000 multiprocessor systems. New steps on this scale can lead to the stumbles that are often the price of innovation. Like the Origin2000, the Octane must prove itself in the hands of customers. Assuming that it meets this test, however, the Octane suggests an answer to another important question. It is often said that the boundaries separating PCs from workstations are blurring or even vanishing. The implication, often unsaid, is that PCs, with their high volume of production and low costs, will in time bring about the extinction of workstations. Don't hold your breath. A workstation vendor like SGI, producing for a relatively small, demanding clientele willing to pay higher prices for high performance, has the resources to develop and deliver new architectures like the Octane. In the PC market, with its narrow differentiation between vendors, universal reliance on standardized components, slim product margins, and parsimonious R&D funds, it is more difficult for one manufacturer to abandon the good old fashioned bus -- with all its limitations. Some PC makers might be able to break away from the pack and offer innovative architectures for their more exacting customers. This would, however, simply create a different sort of workstations, perhaps with Wintel technology rather than Unix and RISC microprocessors. This possibility is, however, hypothetical. The Octane is a real product, available for immediate shipment. As long as innovations take place at this rate in the workstation sector, reports of its imminent death will be premature. ---------------------------- Norris Parker Smith is a journalist who specializes in HPC and high bandwidth communications. Reader comments are welcome.