Silicon Graphics is the hottest computer company in Silicon Valley, but founder Jim Clark has a bigger vision:to make it a dominant player in consumer electronics. Will he succeed, or will SGI melt down, consumed by its own ambition?

- Silicon Graphics is the hottest computer company in Silicon Valley. - It owns the 3-D computing market, having sold $1 billion of workstations in 1993. - Its boxes helped make Jurassic Park the biggest grossing movie of all time. - And it has just launched Indy, a $5,000 computer that threatens to eat Apple's and Sun's lunch. - Founder Jim Clark has a bigger vision, however: to make SGI a dominant player in consumer electronics. - SGI will supply the server-to-set-top system for Time Warner's Orlando interactive test. - And its chip will power Nintendo's 1995 64-bit games boxes. - Will Clark succeed in turning SGI into a $10 billion business? Or will SGI melt down, consumed by its own ambition?

Four years ago, Jim Clark almost left Silicon Graphics.

When SGI's founder began telling his executives that the future lay in things like cable-TV boxes and digital game players, he got a rather icy reception. "I was kind of a lone voice," he says. "I was babbling about cable television - and into the wind for a lot of the time. The reaction I got was, 'Well we're not a consumer electronics company. Why do we care about cable-TV boxes? Who cares?' "

Clark, who is SGI's chairman, is sitting at his desk in a cozy upstairs corner office at SGI corporate headquarters; from his window he can view a few of the seventeen modern brick and glass buildings that comprise the company's sprawling Mountain View, California campus. He is wearing a light blue striped shirt unbuttoned at the neck, charcoal gray slacks, and black loafers. He is tall and thin, has a head of blond hair, and the brainy look of a college professor, which he once was, in a past life, before he became a Mercedes-driving multimillionaire.

When Clark says something he finds amusing, he throws his head back and laughs. He grins a lot. At 49, he has a surprisingly young, inquisitive, almost boyish face.

At the moment, though, he's neither laughing nor grinning. "Most people here couldn't see it," he says. "Three years ago, it was even said, 'You're nuts. If you want to do that, you maybe ought to do that on your own.' "

It wasn't the first time Clark's ideas had met with skepticism. It was the same kind of resistance he came up against in 1981, when he tried to interest IBM, DEC, and others in the original interactive 3-D graphics technology that had motivated him to form SGI.

"I think that Jim, to use that horribly overused word, is a visionary," says Robert Herwick, a technology analyst at Hambrecht & Quist. "He's probably the only one who really believed ten years ago that that technology would end up in the home."

Ironically, SGI became so successful making high-end graphics workstations that many executives at the company lost sight of Clark's broader vision. "I've come to conclude that at companies, as they get large, management simply cannot and will not look at new opportunities," he says.

For Clark, SGI is a 3-D interactive graphics company, not a box maker. In the beginning, SGI was going to make graphics terminals hooked up to mainframes; but Clark steered it into the workstation business when he realized early on that terminals were going the way of silent movies and record players. But whether it's terminals, stand-alone workstations, or television sets is really beside the point.

"SGI always came at it from the point of view of the graphics, that's what's important," says Denise Caruso, editorial director of Friday Holdings in New York.

"Jim Clark is always looking for every opportunity to offer higher quality visualization, whether over a cable in a home, in a 3-D game, or in the creation of multimedia," says Herwick. "They take a very broad view of the markets they serve."

The workstation business became a gold mine for SGI, whose earnings ballooned from $167 million in 1988 to just over a billion for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1993.

By the end of the '80s Clark was looking beyond high-end workstations, gazing into the future, setting his sights on entering the still nascent world of "convergence" that will fuse computers and television. His only ally was SGI chief scientist Mark Hannah, one of a small group of Stanford University students who started SGI with Clark in 1981. (Hannah helped develop the original architectures - the Geometry Engine ASICs - that handle most of the graphics processing in SGI's machine.)

"If not for Mark I think I probably wouldn't be here today," Clark says. "I had an interest that I felt was important for the company, and if the company did not share that feeling I was going to go someplace else."

He leans forward in his chair and says with intense conviction, " 'Cause I thought it was vital to what I perceived to be the right future for the company. With any given company, there are always several possible futures. I have to think I've done SGI a big service - pulling it by the hair into these new markets."

Digital Dinos

Jim Clark is arrogant, driven, cunning, and - as one industry analyst puts it - "very persuasive." He possesses a keen intellect, and is one of a new breed of '90s Silicon Valley entrepreneurs who refuse to let themselves be seduced by their own success.

Clark is not afraid to publicly dis a company like Apple, much as Steve Jobs once mocked IBM.

"Apple," Jim Clark will sigh, as if he were talking about a horse on its way to the glue factory. "They're not doing anything... Apple blew it."

Then, with a dismissive wave of his hand, and just the hint of a grin: "I think they're in serious trouble."

Earlier this year, Silicon Graphics placed an ad in Cinefex, a special- effects magazine. The ad depicted people in the foreground sitting at computer terminals while in the background a Tyrannosaurus rex rose out of scaffolding. The text read: "Helping build a better dinosaur."

These days, when most people think of Silicon Graphics, they think dinosaurs. The company's revolutionary workstations, as you might have heard (unless you've been vacationing on Mars), were used to create the mind-boggling dinos that scared the pants off millions and millions of moviegoers who saw Jurassic Park.

Those digital dinos symbolize SGI's preeminence as the platform for creating state-of-the-art 3-D special effects. But the entertainment business currently accounts for less than 10 percent of SGI's sales.

From the introduction of the first $80,000 SGI workstation in 1984 (with a computing speed of one third MIPS), engineers, architects, doctors, automobile designers, defense contractors, and scientists - not to mention animators - have embraced SGI's standard of 3-D visualization.

Until recently, Clark has been able to avoid head-to-head competition with HP, Sun, DEC, and others because those companies underestimated the importance of 3-D graphics. "HP and all the other workstation vendors kind of left the door open in one particular segment of the market," says Robert Weinberger, marketing manager for HP's workstation group. "SGI was smart enough to recognize that and rush through."

Executives at HP and Sun concede that Clark created a niche for his company, refining and improving on his proprietary technology, quietly finding a market among an elite group of accounts. Through the later half of the '80s and into the '90s, SGI engineers successfully created ever more powerful high-end boxes, while also introducing less and less expensive workstations, all of which network together easily and can run the same programs.

Surprisingly, only very recently have SGI's competitors started seriously chasing after SGI's market share. "I think they'll be up against competition like they've never seen before," says Mike Gero, a product manager at SoftImage Inc., whose products were developed for the SGI platform. "It seems like in the past six months to a year, other vendors have really looked to address this particular market."

"Visual computing has been a niche and SGI has flourished in that niche," says Bob Pearson, Sun's director of advanced desktop systems marketing. "But now it's becoming mainstream and the rules of a mainstream game are different than they are for a niche game. It's volume, price points, distribution. It's easier for Sun or HP to duplicate what SGI has done at higher volume and lower price points."

The entire workstation market is a $10 billion to $15 billion dollar business, of which SGI currently has about 8.6 percent, according to International Data Corp. (Sun is the major player, with 33 percent of the market.) But Clark wants to helm a $10 billion company by the end of the decade. He's known for years that SGI can't afford to live or die by the workstation.

"You can't afford to get too comfortable," says Mark Hannah. "Look what happened to IBM. Things change; the world changes. There's always a threat out there."

Or as Clark succinctly says, "I don't want to be the Cray computer of the '90s."

The Jim and Mario Show

A 3-D image of Mario the Plumber's head dominates a movie screen located at one end of the Peacock Room in San Francisco's ritzy Mark Hopkins hotel.

Mario is talking. An exaggerated Italian accent fills the room. "Jeeeemy," he says, "I may be a big star, but I don't let it go to my head."

"Mario, I'd like to be the first to welcome you to your new home at Silicon Graphics," says Clark in a bemused, fatherly way, as he stands at a podium to the right of the screen. "I think you're really going to have a nice, happy time here."

"Oh thank you so much Jeeemy," answers the animated version of Nintendo's leading man.

It's mid-August, and dozens of business reporters are sitting through this embarrassingly silly presentation, most of them diligently taking notes.

They have to come to be briefed on some surprising news from two companies that have, in very different ways, profoundly influenced the modern world. Nintendo, known for making billions of dollars selling the modern-day equivalent of the pinball machine, is joining forces with Silicon Graphics.

Today's announcement makes public another piece of a complex puzzle that Clark has been painstakingly assembling for the past two years. Until this year, Silicon Graphics wasn't exactly on the tip of everyone's tongue. Those aware of SGI viewed it as the company whose powerful workstations were used for mechanical engineering, computational chemistry, molecular modeling, and movie special-effects work.

Those computers - with intriguing, some say sexy, names like Indigo, Crimson, Onyx, and now Indy - don't even look like the competition. In place of the boring beige plastic boxes that house most CPUs, SGI has used a deep blue-violet for the original Indigo, teal for the Indigo2, reddish- orange for the Crimson - colors that seem to give off a luminous, almost magical glow as they sit on a desk.

Their latest model, Indy, even comes with a "gray granite" monitor that would fit into a trendy underground nightclub. "They come up with hip names and hip appearances," says Jim Morris, who is vice president and general manager at Industrial Light and Magic (ILM), George Lucas's special effects laboratory. "That makes people feel like they're with the current exciting product."

Yet it's not hype that SGI has been selling. The internal architecture of SGI's high-end boxes - the ones used by the likes of ILM and NASA - was a breakthrough when introduced in the early '80s, and advances in the architecture's design have kept them at the cutting edge.

Clark's machines were built with one overriding goal: to allow the 158,720 pixels that form a color image on a high-end monitor to re-form at least 30 times per second. Achieving that goal allowed for realistic 3-D visualization. His breakthrough was to build graphics processing into the machine's custom chips, or ASICs, allowing them to generate fast enough processing speeds to create 3-D interactive graphics.

And what are the key components that comprise an SGI high-end workstation? A MIPS chip (SGI purchased MIPS in 1992), SGI proprietary ASICs (the "Geometry Engine"), and SGI's Graphics Library (GL), some of which is built into the hardware.

The newer, less expensive boxes - Indy and lower end Indigo2 Extreme workstations - are cleverly designed so that some of the graphics processing can be done by the MIPS chip without the need for ASICs.

The company's flashy packaging makes sense for computers that are dominating Hollywood special-effects houses. (And Indy is fast becoming an important development platform for the next generation of video games.) In addition to Jurassic Park, SGI supercomputers were used to do the Terminator 2 special effects, in which the metallic archvillain transformed itself into various human forms and inanimate objects.

Other films that relied on SGI technology include The Abyss, Beauty and the Beast, Total Recall, In the Line of Fire, and Cliffhanger. It was SGI hardware that allowed Michael Jackson to morph himself into a black panther at the end of his "Black or White" video. Lucas plans to use SGI computers "to the nth degree" for the production of his Star Wars prequel trilogy, slated to begin within the next four years.

At ILM in Marin County, California, three temperature-controlled rooms bear silent witness to the importance of SGI in the contemporary worlds of film and television.

The rooms hold $15 million worth of networked SGI CPUs; that's nearly 100 computers. "Anybody that's doing effects now in the film business is using SGIs or is about to," says Morris. "In the entertainment business SGI machines are the digital production cornerstone."

In fact, Morris says, SGI computers have become a status symbol. "There's nothing cooler that you can say than, 'Yeah we've just ordered $4 million of SGI equipment.'"

All Hell Broke Loose

Silicon Graphics has been phenomenally successful. And even as it has dominated the 3-D workstation market, SGI has been widening its reach.

The company has taken a number of risks during the past two years. Last year it acquired MIPS Computer Systems Inc., which designs (but doesn't manufacture) the microprocessors used in SGI computers; MIPS chips are also used by such hardware manufacturers as AT&T Federal Systems Computer Division, Control Data Systems, NEC, Olivetti, Siemens, Nixdorf, and Sony Microsystems.

Although Wall Street initially questioned the wisdom of acquiring MIPS, the consensus these days is that it was a smart move, one that has given the company more control over its destiny. "From a long-term strategic point of view, it has given them total control over the MIPS architecture," says Hurwick, "and as a result, the MIPS architecture is being evolved in ways that are directly supportive of SGI's strategy."

In January of 1993 SGI also introduced a line of supercomputers that is already biting into a market once owned by such old-line supercomputer and mainframe manufacturers as Cray Research and IBM.

As it turns out, these shiny new SGI Power Challenge computers can double as super-fast multimedia servers to store and deliver on demand various digital media - movies, TV shows, games, and much more - to digital cable- converter boxes that will be making their appearance in some US homes beginning next year.

Additionally, this past summer the company unveiled Indy, which is less expensive, faster, and provides more for the money than anything currently available from competitors such as Apple. For example, Indy comes with a built-in camcorder for video conferencing.

Analysts, software developers, and SGI's competitors question this recent diversification. "They are juggling a hell of a lot of balls," says HP's Weinberger. "Too many balls for a company their size."

But such developments were dwarfed by a string of recent high profile events. 1993 was the year, says SGI president and CEO Jim McCracken, that "all hell broke loose."

It began last February, when President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore arrived at the company's Mountain View headquarters - with several hundred reporters in tow - to announce the administration's new technology policy. Commenting on SGI's management approach, Clinton said, "I think government ought to work like you do."

Two months later, in April, ILM and SGI announced they had teamed up to form the Joint Environment for Digital Imaging, or JEDI, with a goal of creating entirely digital movies. Other companies, such as James Cameron's Digital Domain and Kodak, are in the digital filmmaking business too. Still, Lucas has described the alliance as "the beginning of the revolution in the film business."

In June, it was announced that Time Warner had picked SGI to provide hardware and software for an experiment in interactive TV that the media giant will make in Orlando, Florida in April.

And then Jurassic Park was released.

By the late fall the company seemed to be in the news every week. On September 28, The Wall Street Journal reported that an interactive shopping channel to be tested as part of Time Warner's Orlando experiment (it will make use of SGI servers and cable-converter boxes) will "allow cable viewers to enter catalog 'stores,' to view merchandise in full-motion video, and to make purchases on demand."

SGI Targets America's Living Rooms

In the Peacock Room, Clark, McCracken, and a Nintendo executive explain that the two companies are joining forces to work on Project Reality. Together they will create the next generation of Nintendo 3-D video games. The 64-bit machines, built by Nintendo using SGI chips, are expected in 1995 and will sell for about $250.

After the presentation is over, reporters fire questions at the executives. Most focus on the new video-game player. When will it be finished? What about compatibility with older Nintendo products? That kind of thing.

No one bothers to ask why Clark is aligning Silicon Graphics with a video- game company. McCracken says simply, "We're not doing this because we want to get into the video-game business."

What then?

During the past ten years, Nintendo sold a hundred million video game players and three quarters of a billion video game cartridges. The company's products are, it claims, in 40 percent of all American homes. SGI would like to get into what McCracken calls "a vast new market."

Certainly there is much money to be made. SGI will get a royalty from every Nintendo player and piece of software resulting from the collaboration; Clark believes SGI will net hundreds of millions of dollars (more than the company's current annual profit) from the deal.

But there's more to this than bags of cash. Four years ago Clark saw the future; the future, he concluded, would belong to computer companies whose core technology becomes a standard in the consumer electronics market. (He was not alone. Companies ranging from Apple to HP have also been moving in that direction.)

Clark also understood that SGI had neither the marketing savvy nor the financial resources to compete with consumer electronic giants like Sony and Phillips.

Therein lies the shrewdness of the Time Warner and Nintendo deals, deals Clark boasts he deserves sole credit for both instigating and closing. Rather than battling it out in the relatively small PC market - some five million PCs were sold in the US during 1993 - Clark is going straight for the masses. If all goes as planned, Time Warner and Nintendo will place millions upon millions of Clark's computers into homes all over the world.

"It's like extending our product line down to $250," says Clark, "without having to be in that market ourselves."

As with the game players it's working on with Nintendo, SGI will provide the guts of the Time Warner set-top cable converter box, but they will be manufactured by Scientific Atlanta. While it might seem surprising that SGI, known for its stylish packaging, would let other companies box its hardware, it makes sense if you remember that Clark sees himself in the graphics business.

SGI's past experience in the rather esoteric graphic workstation market provides no assurance that it can design products simplistic enough for the average couch potato to grok.

"I'm not convinced that they can pull off the set-top box," says Friday Holdings' Caruso. "Part of what they're doing for that is the user interface. They don't know anything about user interface for consumers. Nobody in the computer business does. The fact that these people are kidding themselves into thinking they know how to do this is terrifying to me.

"It's not like you're walking into a proven market," Caruso continues, "where you know there are 50 million people who are just waking up every morning saying, 'I've got to have interactive TV today.' They don't know what it is. They don't know to want it."

HP's Weinberger thinks SGI's high-profile move into new areas could prove disastrous. "Now what does that say to one of their mechanical design customers, say a major automobile manufacturer, who sees all of this and starts saying to himself or herself, 'Oh, geez, sounds like that's their future, that's what they're betting on, that's where they're gonna put their investment.'

"Well, they're going to drop Silicon Graphics like a hot rock long before Silicon Graphics realizes one penny of revenue from the (new 64-bit game machine) - that's well off in the future," continues Weinberger. "And that's the challenge. Big worldwide Fortune 1000 companies want to make sure that the things they're buying today are mainstream strategies for that vendor. And the noise I hear from Silicon Graphics is, 'Gee it isn't. It's something we've been doing, but now we're doing something else."

All of which Clark seems to understand; none of which has deterred him. You don't have to talk to Clark for long to discover just how important he thinks these two deals are for SGI. They are, he says, his obsession. Clark believes that the very future of his company rests on his new partners' abilities to bring SGI technology successfully into America's living rooms.

"If SGI doesn't create more volume," he says quietly, "then it will die."

The Virtual Shopping Mall

"Interactive home shopping," says Mark Hannah. His brown eyes light up. A big smile appears on his face.

While the President of the United States talks about creating high-tech "information superhighways" that will revolutionize America, Hannah has a more pragmatic idea of how those superhighways will be used by most Americans - at least in the short run.

Hannah ticks off his fingers as he sits on a couch in his office in Building 2 on the SGI campus, counting: "Interactive home shopping, video on demand, and games."

"I think the biggest application of the superhighways will be entertainment," agrees Ed McCracken.

Conventional wisdom now has it that the money - the really, really big money - lies in successfully wedding computer technology and entertainment. As The New York Times reported in late September, it is now estimated that a $3.5 trillion business is "beckoning on the horizon."

Sure, some egghead kids may use the superhighway to "plug into an electronic library," as Vice President Al Gore put it while visiting SGI. But recent activity to stake claim to a piece of that superhighway, such as the recent $21 billion plus Bell Atlantic acquisition of Tele- Communications is about less lofty bits.

"It's just a lot easier leap to think that people will want to watch movies on demand," says Hannah. He rubs his neatly trimmed beard and adjusts oval- frame glasses.

"No real training involved there," chuckles the scientist. "Instead of going down to the video store, you select a movie on the screen. And so that seems to me like the path of least resistance to really establishing a large market for these technologies."

Volume, Volume, Volume

By 1989, Clark was imagining two possible scenarios for SGI. Basically, if the company didn't get its technology into consumer markets, it would eventually be relegated to the fringes, profits would shrink, and survival would be difficult.

On the other hand, what if he could make deals that would place SGI computer architecture and the company's MIPS chips in mass-marketed consumer items? This would create a demand in the tens of millions for those chips, a gigantic leap above current sales of half a million per year.

Clark would have volume, and volume, and well, let Clark himself explain it. "Why is volume important?" he asks rhetorically. "Because if you don't get volume, the guy who does get volume is going to end up setting the standard and, to a lesser and lesser degree, people will want to use your microprocessor."

He leans back in his chair. "Instead, they're going to want to use the one that has the most software on it," he says.

The repercussions of this scenario would be profound for SGI. The company could become a major player in the new digital media marketplace; it could grow into the very profitable company Clark envisions by the end of the century.

Of course there are those - certainly SGI's competitors - who think all of this is just a pipe dream. "The odds against SGI doing that are quite high," says Bob Pearson, director of advanced desktop systems marketing for Sun. Pearson worked at SGI from 1984 until 1988.

"The MIPS chip doesn't necessarily lend itself to very high-volume, low- cost production," he continues. "Most chips don't. It's very complicated to get a chip that now costs $400 down to, say, a $20 price point."

But if Clark has doubts about where he is taking SGI, he isn't showing them. "I feel there's a certain inevitability to everything that I talk about," he says.

"It's not as if I'm pointing the way in some grand visionary sense. I think it's inevitable. Okay, so I happen to see that it's going to happen better than somebody else, perhaps. I feel like I do. But it's going to happen whether I'm here or not. So why not help it happen a little quicker, and help the company make money out of it."

Now he's grinning: "And I wouldn't mind if I made a little in the process."

The End of the PC?

"This deal says we're coming up from underneath - squeeze play," says Clark.

The SGI-Nintendo press conference is over. Clark has left the stage and is now standing in the middle of an adjacent room where a half dozen of his computers are being used to demonstrate some of their amazing graphics capabilities.

At one workstation, a boy who looks about 12 is mesmerized by a 3-D flight simulator. In a rear corner of the room, a man whoops it up as he rides a virtual reality pterodactyl through simulated 3-D images of a prehistoric landscape.

Above the noise of jungle sounds and the hum of supercomputers, Clark is on a roll. "Eventually people will ask, 'Can I get my word processor and my spreadsheet and a few other applications on this other platform?' As soon as they can, they'll stop buying PCs. I don't know how long that will take. It may take five years, may take seven years.

"But the PC doesn't have an indefinite life," he continues. "Just like the Model T didn't. Or the Model A. They produced the Model A for eleven years. No change. Eleven years! And I view the PC as the Model A of computers. It's been a terrific product. Made some people a lot of wealth."

Through his wire-frame glasses, Clark's eyes gleam. And then, like someone who is simply stating the inevitable, he adds, "But it isn't forever."

The New Paradigm

"The first day I went to speak to Jim, he pointed to a picture of an airplane he had up on the wall," says Kurt Akeley, who was a Stanford University student at the time. "And Jim said, 'I'm going to make this move.'"

The year was 1979. Jim Clark, who had recently taken a job at Stanford as an assistant professor of computer science, had a plan to build a better mousetrap. He'd come up with what SGI president Ed McCracken now calls "a new paradigm."

While developers at other computer companies were "using the paradigm of the desktop," Clark imagined something else. Using his hands to draw a rectangle in the air, McCracken says, "Jim Clark's idea was that the screen would be a window into a three-dimensional, virtual reality world."

That was Jim Clark's vision. And his motivation?

"I was 35 and poor," he says frankly. And, he hastens to add, he had no interest in spending the rest of his life dealing with the politics of academia.

"I love the metric of business," says Clark. "It's money. It's real simple. You either make money or you don't. The metric of the university is politics. Does that person like you? Do all those people like you enough to say, 'Yeah, he's worthy'?"

Clark raises both arms and then, like Saturday Night Live's Wayne and Garth, makes bowing motions as he says, laughing, "We're not worthy, we're not worthy."

Born in 1944, Clark grew up in the small west Texas town of Plainview. He was good at math, "played around with ham radios," and even built one, but found school a bore. He dropped out of high school when he was a junior and in 1961 joined the Navy. It was there that he discovered his aptitude for technology. That inspired him to go back to school.

"I became excited by the challenge of understanding how things work, understanding the world," says Clark. "It struck me as fascinating, that you could actually write down some equations that would predict how the world was going to behave."

By the early '70s he had landed at the University of Utah to pursue a PhD in computer science. It was there that he studied with Ivan Sutherland, considered to be the father of interactive computer graphics.

When he reached Stanford, Clark knew he wanted to do more than just teach. With financing from the Defense Advance Research Projects Agency, Clark and a team of students in graduate programs at the university, including Mark Hannah and Kurt Akeley, spent three years working with a "maniacal" intensity on the ASICs they named the "Geometry Engine."

After a halfhearted attempt at selling this breakthrough technology to an established computer company, Clark raised $500,000 himself (he eventually secured $20 million in funding) and SGI was born.

"I concluded after talking to DEC and IBM and all these companies that they didn't understand how to use what we had in the first place, so they would surely screw it up," says Clark. "Since they didn't feel the passion for getting these kinds of graphics into computers, what was I going to do? Try to convince them for three years while I died?"