David Attenborough has described it as “one of the last great wilderness areas in the world”.

The Gran Chaco, known as Green Hell, is a hot, dense expanse of forest and lowland scrub stretching over northern Paraguay, Bolivia and Argentina.

It is one of the most inhospitable, impenetrable and mysterious places on Earth but also one of the richest natural havens for wildlife.

It is also home to the last remaining Ayoreo people who have lived without any contact from white outsiders for centuries.

Now it is the centre of a battle between scientists who want to record the richness of its plant and animal life and discover exotic new species and the indigenous people who have lived undisturbed in the forest for centuries and want to be left alone.

The Chaco, the size of Poland, is home to at least 3,400 plant species and hundreds of species of birds, mammals, reptiles and amphibians.

Rare jaguars and pumas roam in its thick semi-arid undergrowth as well as giant armadillos and anteaters. There are more than 400 fish species swimming in its streams including flesh-eating piranha. It is one of the last refuges for the flightless rhea bird.

At least 60 species of snake slither along the ground and poisonous frogs lurk in the branches of its trees.

Last month the Natural History Museum in London announced it was sending a team of zoologists and botanists to the Dry Chaco in Paraguay to record the rich biodiversity of the region before it is lost to cattle farming and logging.

But within days the expedition was suspended when supporters of the indigenous tribes said it would lead to “genocide” of the remaining uncontacted people who want to be left alone.

In 1950, 5,000 Ayoreo lived in the Chaco forest. There are thought to be only 150 now living in isolated groups. They are the only uncontacted people outside of the Amazon.

In an open letter from Iniciativa Amotocodie representing the tribal people, to the Natural History Museum, director Benno Glauser, said: “According to our data, the expedition you plan constitutes beyond any doubt an extremely high risk for the integrity, safety and legal rights of life and self-determination of the isolated Ayoreo, as well as the integrity and stability of their territories.

“There is too much risk. The people in the forest die frequently from catching white people’s diseases. They get infected by being too close. The white people leave their rubbish, their clothes, or other contaminated things. It’s very serious. It’s like genocide.”

The Ayoreo are nomadic and known for their aggression, living off fruit and honey or fish and wild boar. But any contact with outsiders brings western diseases, like tubercolosis, against which the tribe have no immunity.

Iniciativa Amotocodie continued: “If this expedition goes ahead we will not be able to understand why you prefer to lose human lives just because the English scientists want to study plants and animals.”

The scientists have thrown up their hands pleading innocence and deny they are being “irresponsible”.

The £300,000 expedition has been years in the planning and they say they will be sharing their knowledge with groups in Paraguay including the Natural History Museum in Asuncion.

Professor Richard Lane, director of science at the London museum, says: “We are going on this expedition to look at a remarkable part of South America, the Dry Chaco. We are trying to explore what occurs there and why. It’s an area that hasn’t been explored scientifically for 100 years.

“We will gain real knowledge about the area’s flora and fauna, which will form a baseline from which we can measure subsequent changes – whether man-made or natural.”

Professor Lane says the expedition will make “enormous efforts” to make sure there is no contact, either formal or accidental, with the uncontacted people.

“The most important long-term legacy of an expedition like this is the knowledge we gain of such an unusual habitat.

“The second legacy is having trained people. Our people go out there and learn about this part of the world, and then our Paraguayan partners will be trained in the scientific techniques and methods that we have here in London.”

An estimated one million hectares, or nearly 10% of virgin forest in northern Paraguay has been cleared in the last four years by ranchers and land speculators.Around 90% of the land where the Ayoreo still roam is owned by investors and ranchers who want to rear cattle and grow biofuels to feed the western economies.

Survival International, which fights for the rights of tribal people, says development and fundamentalist American missionaries have forced many Ayoreo out of the forest in the last 30 years.

The Ayoreo have been fighting a losing battle against invaders ever since Scottish Victorian missionary Wilfred Grubb visited the Chaco. He was attacked by snakes, jaguars, an alligator and poisonous spiders as he fought to set up a mission. But he suvived and introduced cattle and raised money for a meat-packing plant.

It was the beginning of the exploitation which would lead to today’s destruction.

The expedition was suspended in mid-November and discussions are still going on to find a way to let the scientists in before the wilderness is lost forever.

A Natural History Museum spokeswoman said: “The Ministry for the Environment of Paraguay, one of our partners on the joint Natural History Museum and Paraguayan expedition to the Dry Chaco region, has decided to undertake further consultation with the Ayoreo people.

“The Natural History Museum supports this approach to ensure the community is properly informed and consulted. There will be a suspension of activities while this takes place. We will continue to take advice on these matters from the Paraguayan authorities. We hope that the issues can be resolved soon.

“We believe that this expedition to scientifically record the richness and diversity of the animals and plants in this remote region is extremely important for the future management of this fragile habitat for all concerned.

“The Natural History Museum would only ever undertake field work within the laws and regulations of our partner countries.”

Both sides claim they have the best interests of the Chaco and its people at heart. But nobody will know who is right until the Ayoreo come face to face with the white researchers.

THE OTHER 'LOST TRIBES'

There are more than 100 uncontacted peoples around the world. They have chosen to have nothing to do with outsiders who often bring with them diseases.

But they are under increasing threat from loggers, cattle ranchers and colonists as their lands are exploited for resources.

Many uncontacted people live in the Amazon, but are also called "isolated" because some contact, often hostile, has been made.

Two years ago, I met Maribop, father of chief Almir of the Surui people, who had lived uncontacted for the first 40 years of his life in the Brazilian Amazon, hunting with his bow and arrow.

When asked which life he preferred, he didn't hesitate - life before the white settlers arrived. He was bemused by the destruction of the white civilisation.

An estimated 44 lost tribes live in Papua and West Papua on New Guinea and others live on Indonesian islands. There are 67 uncontacted peoples in Brazil.