Teruo Ishii is no stranger to the format of Love and Crime; that is having several short stories with a common theme making up the runtime of the film.

In Love and Crime Ishii tells four stories from real life (?) in which the common denominator is passionate crimes. The level of gore and torture is lower than what one have become accustomed to watching Ishii's torture series, but holds up really well anyway.

Just like someone pointed out, Love and Crime is one of those rare gems that actually display really great acting, accentuating the stories the film tell. Also noteworthy is that Ishii has somehow managed to gather the most beautiful women in Japan for the roles in…

Absolutely one of the most in poor taste, misogynistic, exploitative movies I've seen. Originally after the first segment I was going to follow that up with "but I loved it", however now I'm not so sure.

Love and Crime is a retelling of four famous cirmes in three different periods of Japanese history. With its retelling of the Sada Abe incident being maybe the most infamous BECAUSE IT ACTUALLY HAS HER IN THE GODDAMN MOVIE.

It sort of ascends to a level beyond bad taste, into a true level of sleaze and trash that actually makes me less critical of it. First segment was fun, and set a lighter tone for the movie. I was ready for a true crime…

How often do you get to describe a film as an exploitation anthology!

The things that stand out most to me is the phenomenal acting throughout. I have seen Yukie Kagawa, but she really shone as Sada Abe, making the polarizing real life murderer sympathetic, and keeping her womanly charms which seemed to entrance an entire nation.

The film is well shot, jumping from color and perspective changes pretty seamlessly. This being a pink film it also contains lots of rape, but it is downplayed well through the angles used, and the actors performances, this is one pink film where you could argue it shows the horrors of rape instead of glorifying or romanticizing it like some other pink films.…

Yet another history spanning anthology from Ishii, this time consisting of four vignettes about...You guessed it; Love and crime. Lovers committing crimes, or people being driven by love to commit crimes.

This is, in pretty much every aspect, the least remarkable anthology from Ishii I've seen so far. The writing, the cinematography, the acting, the sets, the overall story - All of it is almost aggressively mediocre.

Bonus half star because it features an interview with the real Sada Abe, nearing the end of her life at the time of that interview. It's insertion in the film very much feels like a gimmick (because it was a gimmick) but Abe shunned publicity after her release from prison, never granting an…

4 real-life murder cases committed by (mostly) women spread over 2 time periods (the Japanese title says 3 periods, but this is incorrect strangely enough).

For the amount of material covered the film surprisingly clocks in at just 90 minutes. Director Ishii puts the pedal to the metal and races through time and crime, jumping from the most recent case to the late 1800s. It is an omnibus of horror and terror and human desire, filmed in typical exploitation fashion with making it as violent as possible, and also highly sexualizing the female perpetrators and victims. The film does slow down a bit around half way through, awkwardly with the most well-known murder case. But that case has been made into…

Back to watching sleazy Japanese stuff from 40-60 years ago. Unfortunately, this wasn't really a high point.

Film started out pretty strong and has some undeniably great scenes, but quickly goes off the rails. I thought I was watching a movie about murderous women, but the biggest segment in the movie is about a man who rapes and murders women. And I'm not usually one to complain about sexism in my exploitation movies, but the main character asking the rhetorical question (slightly paraphrased): "Was he driven to his crimes by the evil nature of women?" about before-mentioned serial killer whose memo was taking advantage of the food insecurity in 1940s Japan, offering jobs and food to young women, then leading…