The Regent University Student to Faculty Ratio & Faculty Composition

What is the faculty composition at Regent ?

Check out the information on class structures and faculty to get a feel for the academic life at Regent .

Student to Faculty Ratio Here is Low

Regent University , with 47 students for every instructional faculty member, ranks among the lowest in comparison to the national average of 15 :1. This ratio indicates that the number of students split between the same faculty is much higher than normal, and could mean students will experience larger class sizes and fewer opportunities to connect with professors, especially in introductory courses.

Instructional Staff at the College

The following table shows all the employees the school considers instructional, and therefore, part of the above student-to-faculty ratio. These include both those employees designated as either "primarily instructional" or as "instructional combined with research/public service". It does not include employees that have been identified by Regent University as primarily performing research or public service.

TotalFull TimePart TimePercent Full TimeTotal of Instructional Employees1831335072.7%Total of Those With Faculty Status1831335072.7%Tenured Faculty7070-100.0%On Tenure Track4241197.6%Not on Tenure Track71224931.0%Without Faculty Status----Graduate Assistants----

How Seriously Does This School Take Hiring Full-Time Teachers? Very Seriously

Regent University's utilization of full-time teaching staff ranks among the highest in the nation, with 73.0% of instructors employed full time.

Reliance on Part-Time Teachers is Way Below Average

At Regent University , only 27.0% of the teaching staff are part-time non-faculty or non-tenure track faculty. This use of adjuncts is far below the national average of 51.4%, which could be indicative of Regent University's commitment to building a strong, long-term instructional team.

Colleges often use part-time professors and adjuncts to teach courses, rather than full-time faculty. This hiring practice is primarily a way to save money amid increasingly tight budgets. However, it is a controversial practice with strong views on either side. We encourage you to understand this topic more deeply, and how the colleges you are interested in approach faculty hiring. It's your education and your money on the line. Make sure you know what you are getting for it.

Additional Information

What is an Adjunct?

On this page, we refer to an adjunct teacher or a part-time teacher interchangeably, although each school may have a slightly different definition. In short, an adjunct professor can either work full-time or part-time during a school semester, but they have no contract or a contract that lasts only a short amount of time. To come up with the numbers for this page, we use the total number of part-time non-faculty and non-tenure track faculty to represent the count of adjuncts for the college or university.

Reliance on Graduate Assistants Unknown

We were not able to determine Regent University's reliance on graduate students.