CC BY-SA 3.0

Edited

Regent University

Regent University is a private, non denominational evangelical institution based on the coast of Virginia Beach, VA. It is a military-friendly university with a “selective” admissions process. Many students choose to study communications, biblical studies, or theological and ministerial studies. Regent offers study abroad and mission programs in places such as Russia, Paris, Uganda, and Ukraine.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Private

Not for Profit

Coed

Need Blind

This school does not consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Major city

0

100

41%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

Yes

ACT

Yes

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineFall Regular DecisionAugust 1

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

44%

Out-Of-State Students

65%

5%

Submitting ACT

17%

Submitting SAT

Average ACT Composite: 22

0

36

Average SAT Composite: 1109

0

1600

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Doctorate

Total Number of Students

10,330

Total Number of Undergrads

4,507

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

2-19 Students

60%

20-39 Students

34%

40-99 Students

5%

0

100

43%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

59%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

21:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$15,267

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$19,680

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$19,680

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$7,174

Books and Supplies

$1000

Aid & Grants

0

100

42%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

49%

Average Aid Per Year

$15,046

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

49%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$5,126

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$10,286

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

54%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$6,278

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$9,759

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$225

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

38%

62%

Student Organizations

61

Size of Town

Major city

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

No

On Campus Women's Center

No

Housing

0

100

15%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

No

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Regent Royals

School Colors

blue and green

Varsity Athletics Association

NCCAA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Not applicable

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

Yes

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

Norfolk

Washington

Richmond

Atlanta

New York

Employed

6 mos. after graduation

53%

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$45,600

What Students Are Saying

Regent University is an incredible university with a genuine faith filled atmosphere. The school's motto is Christian leadership to change the world. Come here to grow.

Austin

Two important factors in my choosing Regent were convenience and Christian atmosphere and my first semester here has been better than I imagined. The Christian atmosphere is great with friendly students and professors (and other staff!). Regent has been a setting for my growth in faith this past semester (through in/out of class discussions, friendships, and other experiences) and of course academic study.

David from Virginia Beach, VA

Regent University has a fantastic online degree program whereby non-traditional students can obtain a degree without ever having to set foot on campus. The online program is a US News and World Reports top 100 and provides challenging courses and coursework to all students. Additionally, Regent has lowered their tuition in order to make higher education more affordable for everyone.

Stephanie from Richmond, VA

Regent University has displayed professionalism throughout the application process and during my first year of school. The university not only teaches excellence, it practices it through it's staff and faculty. Regent sets a standard for others to follow.

Catherine from Virginia Beach, VA

Regent is a very engaging and rigorous school. The faculty are extremely accessible and helpful. I very much enjoy their programs construction and instruction.

Brenden from Vienna, VA

Similar Colleges

Newport News, VA

Fairfax, VA

Hampton, VA

Harrisonburg, VA

Lynchburg, VA

Norfolk, VA

Norfolk, VA

Radford, VA

Richmond, VA

Charlottesville, VA

Virginia Beach, VA

New York, NY

See All