AuthorHouse™

1663 Liberty Drive

Bloomington, IN 47403

www.authorhouse.com

Phone: 1-800-839-8640

© 2011 Willem Kooman. All rights reserved.

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted by any means without the written permission of the author.

First published by AuthorHouse 4/26/2011

ISBN: 978-1-4567-6090-8 (e)

ISBN: 978-1-4567-6092-2 (dj)

ISBN: 978-1-4567-6091-5 (sc)

Library of Congress Control Number: 2011906509

Printed in the United States of America

Any people depicted in stock imagery provided by Thinkstock are models,

and such images are being used for illustrative purposes only.

Certain stock imagery © Thinkstock.

Because of the dynamic nature of the Internet, any web addresses or links contained in this book may have changed since publication and may no longer be valid. The views expressed in this work are solely those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the publisher, and the publisher hereby disclaims any responsibility for them.

Unless otherwise indicated, Bible quotations are taken from The Life Application Study Bible, New International Version of the Bible, ©1991 by Zondervan

Unless otherwise indicated, quotations from the Quran are taken from Muhammad Zafrulla Khan’s translation, ©1997 by Olive Branch Press

to those who dare to question and seek the truth

and speak it boldly without fear

Contents

FOREWORD

CHAPTER ONE: A WORLD AT WAR

CHAPTER TWO: THE ROOTS OF ISLAM

CHAPTER THREE: POWER BEHIND THE SWORD OF ISLAM

CHAPTER FOUR: THE SWORD AND THE CROSS

CHAPTER FIVE: THE POWER OF ONE

CHAPTER SIX: CONTEMPORARY ISLAM

CHAPTER SEVEN: A CALL TO ACCOUNTABILITY

CHAPTER EIGHT: A CALL TO ACTION

CHAPTER NINE: A CALL TO DISCERNMENT AND ALERTNESS

CHAPTER TEN: ROADBLOCKS TO PROGRESS

CHAPTER ELEVEN: THE END OF THINGS

CHAPTER TWELVE: SHARIA FINANCE AND BEYOND

CHAPTER THIRTEEN: I SEE PICTURES

AUTHOR’S NOTE

FOOTNOTES

FOREWORD

INTRO:

When I first sat down to learn more about Islam, as I outlined in the first edition of Veiled Threat, I did so simply out of interest, as an attempt to better understand the worldwide religion. Little did I know that I would discover a religion whose roots sprung from a seedbed very different than the Judeo-Christian bedrock. Instead I became convinced this global faith is founded by Satanic evil that has enslaved one third of the world’s population and seeks to control the remaining masses under its powerful and never-ending agenda of pernicious hatred and depravity.

When I started writing I never expected to use such strong and clear language to describe a religion many often announce, from pulpits and platforms, houses of government and houses of prayer, as a religion of peace. It was only when I attended a recent conference in Ontario, Canada, when I heard the sort of strong language I now use spoken by a man with an inside look at the religion itself.

Sam Solomon confirmed what I discovered through the oftentimes gruelling and lonely hours of research I spent to explore the reality of Islam. The horrific footage I had seen of beheadings and atrocities captured on film by Muslims with loud shouts of Allah Akbar, along with the written accounts of Islamic leaders and teachers, and the spellbinding stories of Muslims who escaped or left Islam, became a breathing reality in the person of Sam Solomon.

Sam had to be flown into Burlington under a cloak of secrecy in order to attend the conference. Since his conversion to Christianity from Islam, a fatwa has been placed on his life – a lifelong death threat required by the laws of the Quran. Sam is a formidable authority on Islamic issues and has special expertise on Sharia law. Formerly an Imam and from a Middle Eastern country, he was raised to become an authority on everything pertaining to Islamic religious and political law. Though not a big man, he spoke with a booming voice. It was easy to imagine that voice travelling throughout the district of his Middle Eastern home, broadcast from a towering minaret in one of the mosques where he regularly preached.

Sam, however, did not appear at the conference as a defender of Islam. He recited chilling passages of the Quran in powerful crescendos of Arabic and then translated those passages into English. He spoke in great detail of what it was like to live under Islamic Sharia law. I was mesmerized as I listened to his vivid description of what life under Islam was really like. All of the dreadful things I had come to learn about the religion that had settled so powerfully in my mind now struck a deep chord in my heart.

When Sam explained that he believed the greatest power of the Anti-Christ to visit the earth was and will forever be Islam, you could have heard a pin drop in the room. Sam also made it clear that Islam cannot ever be defined as a religion in the Western sense of the word, neither can it be termed as a faith only, for Islam is an all encompassing system and includes all branches of religious, social, political, legislative, judicial, and most of all, military life. Sam explained that Islam is founded on two primary and unquestioned authorities: the Quran and Sunah, which are the teachings and practices of Islam. Furthermore, what many Westerners do not understand is the centrality of the Mosque in Islam. The Mosque is considered by the West as a place of worship much like a church or temple. It is certainly a place where worship and prayer takes place. But most of all it is the centre of everything else Muslim. Mosques are the epicenter of Muslim theology and the overseers of principles of Jihad. If a fatwa or death sentence is ordered it is issued from a Mosque.

Sam also emphasized how important it is for the West to understand the principle of Takiyya, which I learned about in my research and discuss in Veiled Threat. Takiyya permits Muslims to pretend to blend in with Western values until they can achieve and enforce a domination of Muslim values upon the culture in which they posture. It allows for the suspension of nearly all Islamic religious requirements when deemed necessary, and uses the language of Western beliefs and values so that Muslims appear in agreement with belief systems contrary to their own, even as they infiltrate it in order to ultimately dominate the belief system.

Sam illustrated just how at war Muslim values are with Western ideals of freedom of religion and freedom speech, when he invited a friend to the stage. His friend had difficulty walking and had to be led to the podium by the hand. The man bravely stood before us. The right side of his face was brutally scarred, almost beyond recognition. The eye above the vicious scars had been gouged out by his Muslim neighbors. Once his friends, when they learned he had converted to Christianity and became a follower of Christ, they inflicted the violence. In a furious act of justice, the neighbors attacked him with a broken Coke bottle and forever left grotesque marks in his flesh – a sign of his commitment and belief in a God of mercy and the very real cost of abandoning another.

I will never forget the image of this man as he spoke matter-of-factly in soft Arabic, without a hint of hate or anger in his words. In the moment I admit I did not share his sentiment. The words at the end of Psalm 139 that often make me uncomfortable suddenly made perfect sense as the poured out into my soul with quiet rage:

If only you would slay the wicked O God! Do I not hate those who hate you O Lord, and abhor those who rise up against you?I have nothing but hatred for them; I count them my enemies. Search me O God and know my heart, test me and know my anxious thoughts. See if there is any offensive way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

And yet the gospel of Jesus Christ makes me aware that these evildoers are still human beings firmly held in Satan’s powerful grasp. The gospel of John tells us that, "God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through Him" (3:17). However, we cannot stop with this part of the scripture. For, the remaining verses complete the paradox and help us understand the unbelievable gift God offers mankind through His Son Jesus Christ, which can be just as easily accepted as it can be refused:

Whoever believes in Him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because he has not believed in the name of God’s one and only Son. This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but men loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil. Everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that his deeds will be exposed. But whoever lives by the truth comes into the light, so that it may be seen plainly that what he has done has been done through God (18-21).

I believe I cannot, in my own wisdom, fully hold the two-sided sword of eternal truth in my hand, the truth that God will both utterly save and utterly destroy. Once we accept God’s plan of unconditional forgiveness we fully recognize that it was nothing we deserved or earned. So in the fog of spiritual warfare those people who stand on both sides – those on the side of God’s mercy and others on the side of judgment – fail to recognize the finality of the salvation story. Every human being, Muslims included, needs and can receive salvation. But Jesus and Islam will never be reconciled to each other: you are either with Christ or with Allah, you cannot side with both. Failing to understand that very basic concept will lead to many failed attempts at reaching out and reconciling with Muslims.

As I listened to Sam a deeper realization settled upon me as he highlighted that Muslim values cannot be reconciled to Western values, especially to the Christian faith. What became so frightening to me, and frustrating, was to realize how committed we are in the West to do these very things: go out of our way to convince ourselves that Islam is a religion of peace and that it can live comfortably at home alongside or within free and open democratic societies.

As a result of attending the conference in Ontario, and because of recent current events that have come to my attention at home and abroad, I found it necessary to write two additional chapters to include in the second edition of this book. The threat of Islam remains veiled, perhaps more than ever, in our oversensitive and politically correct culture.

And so it is with a few more words, extended research, and the inclusion of a few more personal experiences since I first published Veiled Threat, that I mean to once again sound the alarm and emphasize that if anything, the threat to our way of life is greater now than it was before.

- WK

Palm Springs, 2009

CHAPTER ONE: A WORLD AT WAR

The Believers fight in Allah’s cause, they slay and are slain, kill and are killed

– Quran 9:111

WAKING TO EVIL

Recounting her own paradigm shift and the shift in the way her children viewed the world after the terrorist attacks in New York City, Nancy Gibbs, senior editor of Time wrote:

We all have our favorite ways of measuring our kids. A pencil mark on the kitchen door. The pants that get suddenly too short. The favorite book they can finally read for themselves. But September 11 introduced a new system of measurement into our house: a yardstick marked off in innocence and discovery and recognition, of what the world contained.

I discovered this where moms discover everything that matters in their children’s lives: in the car. My daughters were in the backseat, one who had just turned four three days before the attacks, and her big six-almost-seven-year-old sister. The radio was on, even the giddy music stations were confused, do we escape into a more peaceful time, shanananana doo-wop, or interrupt with the latest update from downtown: the most recent body count; a funeral for a fireman; a message from the mayor. And the just-turned-four-year-old little sister listened to the news reports and shook her head, and waxed indignant, and said, they should have been more careful. They should have watched where they were going, the men driving the airplanes. They shouldn’t have hit the buildings. They should have been more careful.

And her big sister corrected her, as big sisters do, and in the process showed me the yardstick. They were watching where they were going, she said. They wanted to hit the buildings. It wasn’t an accident. ¹

Gibbs continues, describing a moment in her children’s lives that marked her as a parent, what she describes as an inevitable moment when children discover a world not designed just to delight them; a world that has twists and caves and wounds laced through it, where evil has room to grow. Gibbs concludes that 11 September tore down so many of the comfortable structures we’ve lived in for so long but also gave parents new tools to explain the heroism of soldiers and the stern sorrow of war and the price people through history have paid to achieve peace. ²

Gibbs describes how her daughters awakened to the reality of evil in the world, and that though it can go unnoticed, evil ultimately rears its terrible head. When it does it reveals a world at war: a fight of values, between good and evil forces in a world where courage and despair are possibilities.

Somehow many people are forgetful or choose not to accept the reality of such a world. Like the four year old daughter