Hi, I'm Andrew Kooman and I write things down. On the page, for the stage and for the screen.

I'm the playwright and screenwriter of the human trafficking thriller She Has A Name, the historical drama We Are the Body, and producer of the series DreamandBreath of Life. An official author with the Skit Guys, I make people laugh in church through content regularly produced across North America.

Why subscribe?

When you subscribe you’ll get access to my newsletter Things I Wrote Down as well as this website, where I feature original content: articles, short stories, analysis and things in between.

Along with my companion podcast Things I Said Out Loud, I’ll talk about creativity, geek out about writing and share original content.

What do I write about?

Each week I share an original article on Thursday. On weekends I drop link roundups of things I find around the web and a poem.

Paid subscribers get exclusive readings, first-looks at original work and access to the whole archive.

Themes of my work include art, faith, justice and how those things collide. I'm especially interested in how creative people use their art and talents to make real world impact.

As creators and believers of any type, we have a huge inheritance from people that came before us and I want to be part of cultivating community here, and building that inheritance into the future. If that resonates with you, you'll find like minds and connection here.

If you follow me on social, you’ll know that I sometimes give a window into #dadlife, overshare about my love for trees and am always looking for the perfect cup of coffee.

What kind of content you can expect here

Original fiction, poetry and articles you won’t find anywhere else.

A companion podcast where I’ll geek out about writing called Things I Said Out Loud.

Details about the new adventure my talented brothers Matthew and Daniel Kooman and I are on as we build our new streaming platform UnveilTV.

Articles on how creative people use their art, faith and talents to make real world impact.

You’ll also get an inside look at upcoming work and you can join a meaningful conversation about art, faith and life.

Why go paid?

If you enjoy the content, consider going paid. It’s a way to support an independent author and help my work get in front of others. For the the cost of having a coffee you’ll get exclusive content you won’t find anywhere else.

As a paid subscriber, you’ll get access to all the content on the site including exclusive access to new work, original stories (including all audio). You’ll also get exclusive access to a bundle of great films on UnveilTV.

Founding members get all the above perks, as well as your choice of Popcorn Helmet or She Has A Name print editions.

Thanks for the follow

As a writer it means the world to have an audience. I’m grateful for the time you’re giving to read what I’ve written down and follow this journey. I look forward to connecting with you through words.

If you enjoy what you’re reading, please do share it with a friend!

Share Things I Wrote Down

I’m glad we’ve connected,