Chelsea Clinton and Marc Mezvinsky reportedly met in 1993 at a Democratic political retreat and later married in 2010 on the Hudson River.

Clinton has kept busy, writing a book with her mother, Hillary Clinton, called , and appearing in the four-part Hillary docu-series premiering Friday on Hulu.

Chelsea now shares three children with Mezvinsky.

It’s the cardinal rule of a first date: Don’t talk politics. But Chelsea Clinton can’t be bothered with adhering to antiquated guidelines. That’s simply not her style. In 1993, she met her now-husband Marc Mezvinsky at a Democratic retreat in Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, back when they were both students.

Like Clinton, 40, Mezvinsky, 41, comes from a political family whose roots run deep in the political circles of Philadelphia. A Wall Street hedge fund alum, Mezvinsky now works for TPG as the private equity firm’s managing director and business unit partner in the TPG Tech Adjacencies fund.

Meanwhile, Clinton most recently teamed up with her mother, Hillary Clinton, on a collection of mini biographies in The Book of Gutsy Women. She also appears in her mother’s revealing four-part documentary series, , during which the former First Lady opens up about the 2016 presidential campaign and her personal life. Yes, she addresses President Bill Clinton's Monica Lewinsky affair.

“I didn’t want anything to do with him,” Hillary says in the docu-series trailer referring to her husband. “Chelsea put herself between us and held both our hands.”

Of course, now the roles have changed considering the Clintons' only child has a family of her own. Here, we revisit how she met the love of her life.

Chelsea Clinton and Marc Mezvinsky both come from political families.

We’re pretty sure you’re familiar the Clinton dynasty: Bill Clinton was President for two terms from 1993 to 2001, with Hillary Clinton holding the New York senator seat from 2001 to 2009 before taking the Secretary of State job in the Obama administration from 2009 until 2013.

As for Marc, his father, Ed Mezvinsky, is a former Iowa congressman of two terms, and his mother, Marjorie Margolies, was a former Pennsylvania congresswoman and NBC correspondent.

They first met as teenagers at a retreat in Hilton Head, South Carolina, in 1993.

According to Bustle, the two met on a Democratic political retreat (known as Renaissance Weekends) in Hilton Head, South Carolina. Though rumors percolated about a budding romance, nothing crystalized.

The two remained friends for years. They both attended Stanford University as undergrads and Oxford for their graduate studies. It’s at Oxford where she met her first serious boyfriend, Ian Klaus, a relationship that would get the front-page treatment for four years until its demise in 2005.

They didn’t start dating until they reunited in New York City in 2005.

After Clinton’s breakup, she and Mezvinsky reunited in New York City and wasted no time getting cozy. “Their bond is apparent; friends say at parties and other events, the couple are cuddly and affectionate,” The New York Times reported in 2007. After four years of dating, the two announced over Thanksgiving that they were engaged.

According to another Times article, the couple sent their friends and family a joint mass email with the happy news, “We’re sorry for the mass e-mail,” it began, “but we wanted to wish everyone a belated Happy Thanksgiving! We also wanted to share that we are engaged! We didn’t get married this past summer despite the stories to the contrary, but we are looking toward next summer and hope you all will be there to celebrate with us. Happy Holidays! Chelsea & Marc.”

In 2010, they got married on the Hudson River.

In an interfaith ceremony—he’s Jewish, she’s Methodist—they said “I do” in front of friends, family, and some very high-profile diplomats and politicians. Guests included Secretary of State Madeline Albright, former Democratic National Committee Chair Terry McAuliffe, and President Barack Obama.

Barbra Streisand, Steven Spielberg, and even Oprah also rounded out the guest list. In all, CBS News reported that some 500 well-wishers were in attendance. And as for the dress? Chelsea went with classic Vera Wang. The wedding took place at Astor Courts overlooking the Hudson River in Rhinebeck, New York.

They have three children together.

Their first child, Charlotte, was born in 2014; their next, Aidan, was born in June 2016; and their most recent, Jasper, was born in July of 2019. The former First Daughter announced the news on Twitter, writing, “This morning we welcomed our son, Jasper Clinton Mezvinsky. We are overflowing with love and gratitude and can’t wait to introduce him to his big sister and brother.”

Minutes later, Hillary and Bill posted their own responses. “Sharing some happy news this morning! Bill and I are so thrilled,” Hillary wrote. “Hillary and I are overjoyed and grateful to meet our new grandson, Jasper!” Bill followed.

.