Background

Award-winning director Ronald William Howard is a revered American television and film actor. He is known worldwide for his performances in American comedies, “The Andy Griffith Show” and “Happy Days.” At just 18 months old he made his first film appearance and has never failed to impress his audience since. Coming from a theatrical family, he didn’t need much training to hone his acting skills as his parents were actors. At the age of two, he was cast in his first stage play called “The Seven Year Itch.” He was cast to play Billy Rhinelander in the 1959 film “The Journey.” With his serious performance, he managed to secure the role of Stewart in the first season of the sitcom “Dennis the Menace.” Around the same time, he was cast in “Playhouse 90.” His performance caught the attention of Sheldon Leonard, producer of “The Andy Griffith Show.” He was later hired for the role of Opie Griffith. He has made several appearances in popular films such as “The Courtship of Eddie’s Father,” “American Graffiti” and “The Shootist.” Following in his father’s footsteps, Ron decided to play an important role behind the camera as a director and producer.

Some of his more astute skills as a director have been seen in Hollywood films such as “Apollo 13,” “Cocoon,” “A Beautiful Mind,” “The Da Vinci’s Code,” “Angels and Demons,” and “Inferno,” among other acclaimed films. In 2013, he was inducted into the prestigious Television Hall of Fame, and he also has a star on the legendary Hollywood Walk of Fame.

He made his directorial debut with a low-budget film entitled “Grand Theft Auto,” and became popular as a director when he directed the play “Night Shift” in 1982. In 1984, he directed the romantic comedy “Splash.” The film was a box-office success, grossing millions of dollars. It was also named the best film of the year. With the huge success of the film, Ron Howard became an overnight successful director. His most proficient work was featured in the film “A Beautiful Mind,” which he co-produced. The film grossed over $313 million at the box office. He directed the famous movie “Solo: A Star Wars Story,” which was released in May 2018. Based on the famous “Star Wars” character Han Solo, the film stars Alden Ehrenreich, Woody Harrelson, and Emilia Clarke in the leading roles.