Dr Sindur Nagaraj

By Sudeshna Dutta

Sindhur Nagaraj has a talent in almost everything -- yoga, Tai chi, modelling and acting. But above all, her primary motive is to lend a helping hand to those in need

Ask Sindhur Nagaraj how she manages to be a ‘Jack of all trades’ as she is known, she smiles with a sense of calm.

Living most of her life in Malleswaram, the 54-year-old resident started her career as an Ayurveda practitioner. “Back in those days, the concept of Ayurveda was not widely accepted by society. So it took me some time to establish myself as I always wanted to be someone who can help people in distress,” she says, adding that she started a clinic in the neighbourhood in 1990 along with her husband, who is a surgeon.

With a couple of qualifications in the field of integrated medicine - Ayurveda and allopathy, including certification in dietitian courses, counselling, yoga, etc, she realised that in all the hustle, she was missing out on something. “I had lost touch with myself and wanted to do something to connect with people on a larger scale. That’s when I took up the job of teaching yoga at a school. And this was the turning point in my life,” says Nagaraj, who, in 2010, joined a movement on diabetes awareness at S-VYASA, a registered charitable institution for yoga. As the medical officer of the team, she reached out to people across Bengaluru about the benefits of yoga in keeping the sugar level in control and also saw significant changes.

.

From teaching a group of 10 to conducting multiple yoga sessions five days a week in Malleswaram, she also helps women with cancer or any other issues to feel better mentally and face the world without fear through yoga therapy. Every year on international yoga day (June 21), she and her students reach out to specially-abled children and financially distressed adults in rural areas. Nagaraj is also a Tai chi expert and teacher.

She also hosts the Samathvam Santhe to help women sell their homemade products. But there’s a glamourous side to Sindhur too. “My father, Shringar Nagaraj, produced Pushpaka Vimana. I featured in a few ads like Vasmol Hair Oil and movies like Imaikkaa Nodigal too,” she says.

Are you a resident of Malleswaram and surrounding areas? We’d like to hear from you. email: anupama.bijur@timesgroup.com