General Hospital (GH) spoilers and rumors tease there might be more than one reason Jackson Montgomery (Walt Willey) pays a visit to Port Charles. Felicia Scorpio (Kristina Wagner) and Lucy Coe (Lynn Herring) go to Pine Valley; did Martin Grey (Michael E. Knight) steal the idea for the Deceptor from Erica Kane (Susan Lucci)?

General Hospital Spoilers – Jackson Montgomery Is Erica Kane’s Husband

Erica’s been married so many times she can’t keep count, but Jackson, in addition to being a lawyer in Pine Valley is her husband. Felicia Scorpio (Kristina Wagner) and Lucy Coe (Lynn Herring) go to Pine Valley to meet with Jackson while investigating Marty, so there must be a connection.

Deception Cosmetics is a company much like Erica’s company Enchantment Cosmetics, which later merged with Fusion Cosmetics, and they make similar products.

It’s plain that Marty is hiding something, because he really isn’t giving very good reasons for not marrying Lucy. As he sat at the Metro Court pool, he got texts about bank deposits for $50,000 and muttered if he married Lucy it would ruin everything!

GH Spoilers – The Issue Seems To Be Connected To “The Deceptor”

The issue seems to be connected to “The Deceptor” and Marty’s apparent ideas of how such a product could be created to Lucy. The new product is now a best seller and although Lucy gave credit to Marty for his ideas, he deferred to Lucy and didn’t want credit or payment.

Marty also received texts from his third ex complaining she was being ignored, shortly after his texts for the deposit-that seemed to startle him as he fell in the pool!

His comment about if he married Lucy it would ruin everything seemed to be connected to the $50,000 payments and perhaps the third ex knows something about the issue.

Regardless, when Felicia starts digging around to find intel on Marty for Lucy, her search leads her to Pine Valley and Lucy goes with her.

General Hospital Spoilers – Did Martin Grey Steal Erica Kane’s Idea?

It’s possible that Martin could have worked in Pine Valley or for people connected to Enchantment or Fusion, and may have had knowledge of a product under development.

Martin seems to have worked for many clients in different parts of the country, and his ex-wives seem to be all over the place as well. Martin seems to be one of those jack of all trades master of none attorney-working cases as varied as criminal defense to contracts and torts.

Perhaps he has also done stints as a patent attorney-could “The Deceptor” be something Erica was working on? Did he knowingly give this idea to Lucy, or was it a long ago product he helped patent but forgot and now it’s come back to bite him?