General Hospital spoilers leak All My Children’s Jackson ‘Jack’ Montgomery (Walt Willey) is coming to Port Charles soon. It’s like the famed attorney is going to be there handling business on behalf of a client. Fans are wondering if Jack is headed to PC in the interest of representing Erica Kane (Susan Lucci), the famed fashion and cosmetics icon. Is the story about to overlap with Lucy Coe’s (Lynn Herring) drama at Deception — and more of it on the homefront with Martin ‘Marty’ Grey (Michael E. Knight)? It’s possible that Marty could have been wrapped up with Jack in the past when he was married to Erica, she being Jack’s ex-wife.

We have no idea what Erica has been up to for the last decade. Perhaps The Deceptor was her original idea, but Marty blatantly stole it – handing it over to Lucy and thinking no one would ever connect the dots. He thought wrong.

General Hospital Spoilers — Jackson Montgomery Is A Force To Be Reckoned With

Viewers are beaming with delight knowing that Jack is coming to town soon, but not everyone in town will welcome him with open arms. We can be almost certain that Marty won’t feel that way about him though. If Marty was mixed up with Erica in the past, then it stands to reason he already knows Jack.

These two might not be surprised to see one another in the courtroom– that is if Marty ever makes it there. Still, if Lucy, Maxie Jones (Kirsten Storms), and Sasha Gilmore Corbin (Sofia Mattson) find themselves served with a lawsuit, they’re going to expect that the likes of Erica Kane can afford some pretty substantial representation.

Will Marty come to their aid in defending the company? If not, he’s going to have some serious explaining to do.

GH Spoilers Indicate – Lucy Coe Will Want To Hire Marty Grey

Slapped with a lawsuit out of nowhere, alleging that Lucy has stolen intellectual property from Erica’s enterprise, she’ll be quick to ask her lover, Marty, to defend her in court. No other attorney knows the ins and outs of Deception better than Marty, and he can attest to being the creator of the product.

Therein lies the rub. According to GH spoilers, Marty will have to come clean with Lucy about how he actually came up with the design — and that it was never his own to begin with.

General Hospital Spoilers — Secrets Abound!

Not only is Lucy about to find out Marty was involved in the creation of The Deceptor with someone else, but she’s also going to find out he’s quite the fraud as a boyfriend, too. He’s more than just a common criminal and a liar, he’s a husband — to someone else! Suddenly, everything will fall into place.