Not only has she been married many times…but she has been a very busy lady!!!

Erica Kane

Actor History

Susan Lucci (10 January 1970 to present)

Lifeline

1954; when AMC debuted in 1970, Erica was 16 years old.

In 1993 it was changed to 1956, as Erica was said to be 14 years old than her daughter, Kendall Hart, who was 23 at the time.

In 2001, the year was changed to 1962 as Kendall’s birthdate was changed to 1976.

Occupation

Founder of New Beginnings

Member of the Board of Directors of Cambias Industries

Former CEO of Enchantment Cosmetics [Removed as CEO on September 16th, 2003]

Founder of Enchantment Cosmetics

Ex-host of The Cutting Edge talk show

Former Spokesmodel for Orsini Vineyards

Ex-fashion model

Former Waitress (when she kidnapped Bianca)

Former editor of Tempo magazine.

Owned a Disco

Writer; Penned the books Raising Kane, Erica Kane: Beyond the Pain (co-author), Having It All

Resides At

1100 Main Street, Penthouse; A penthouse apartment atop the Enchantment Building

Formerly The Valley Inn

Formerly 328 Crescent Avenue [Burned down]

Formerly at Wildwind (3900 Glenview Road)

Formerly 20 Adams Street; Linden House

Marital Status

Married (Jackson Montgomery; Married: May 24th, 2005; Engaged: Jan 2004)

Past Marriages

Jeff Martin (married 1971; divorced 1974)

Philip Brent (divorced in 1976)

Tom Cudahy (annulled 1981)

Adam Chandler (divorced)

Mike Roy (invalid)

Travis Montgomery (invalid)

Travis Montgomery (invalid)

Adam Chandler (vow renewal)

Dimitri Marick (divorced)

Dimitri Marick (divorced)

Relatives

Eric Kane (father; deceased))

Mona Kane (mother; deceased)

Silver Kane (half-sister; deceased)

Mark Dalton (half-brother)

Julie Rand Chandler (half-niece)

Children

Kendall Hart (daughter; with Richard)

Joshua Madden (son; with Jeff; originally aborted)

Unnamed Child (miscarriage; with Philip)

Bianca Montgomery (daughter; with Travis)

Unnamed Child (miscarriage; with Dimitri)

Spike (grandson; via Kendall)

Miranda Mona Montgomery (granddaughter; via Bianca)

Flings & Affairs

Richard Fields (raped on her birthday)

Charles Tyler III (1970; dated)

Jason Maxwell (1972 to 1973; deceased)

Nick Davis

Brandon Kingsley

Lars Bogard

Lincoln Tyler

Kent Bogard

Mark Dalton (before learning of their relationship; never lovers)

Mike Roy

Steven Andrews (alias: Dave Gillis)

Jeremy Hunter

Charlie Brent

Jackson Montgomery (Engaged)

Jonathan Kinder

Mike Roy (Second Time)

David Hayward (Engaged)

Chris Stamp (Engaged; August 10th, 2002)

Jackson Montgomery (Engaged)

Maladies and Hospitalizations

Admitted after unexplained fainting (Dec 20th, 2001)

Suffered unexplained blackouts [2003; Feb 2nd, 2004]

Crimes Committed

Adultery; Slept with Jason Maxwell while married to Jeff Martin

Once hired an actor to portray a minister to marry Jeremy and Natalie thus making their marriage void.

Killed Kent Bogard for having affair with Connie Wilkes who impersonated the real Silver Kane. She became a fugitive from justice when arrested for the murder and she even dressed as a nun! She was cleared of those charges.

Attempted to help Jeremy Hunter escape from prison by helicopter

Kidnapped Bianca

Lied under oath to try to retain custody of Bianca.

Arrested for slapping a police officer

Faked amnesia to hold on to Dimitri.

Stabbed Dimitri, because she thought that he had raped Kendall

Addicted to pain-killers after a fall from scaffolding during a modeling shoot

Lugged around Jonathan Kinder’s corpse—before she knew he wasn’t really dead!

Kidnapped Maria and Edmund’s baby and tried to pass it off as her own.

Tied David Hayward up in her basement and put his hand in a vise to get back at him for causing the accident that scarred her face.

Jailed for interrupting Jake and Liza’s custody hearing.

Deceptive business practices; Coerced Greenlee into signing a lopsided contract. [May 25th, 2001]

Bribery/Blackmail; Paid Rain Wilkins $10,000 and told her to leave town.

Confessed to killing Mary Frances “Frankie” Stone.

Perjury; claimed to have shot and killed Frankie in self-defense. [Jan 2002; sentenced to community service.]

Impersonated Greenlee Smythe on the phone. [Mar 18th, 2002]

Opened a letter addressed to Chris Stamp. [Jun 2002]

Withheld information offering Kendall an alibi in arson charges. [Jul 2002]

Clubbed Trey on the head with a pipe. (October 2nd, 2002)

Arrested for breaking and entering into Kendall’'s hotel room [Nov 27, 2002]

Blackmail; Held personal information over Mary Smythe’s head to prevent her from telling Jackson that he is Greenlee’s father. [Jun 2003]

Offered Lena Kundera in excess of $3 million to stop seeing Bianca permanently/

Attempted to stab Kendall Hart with a pair of scissors because she thought Kendall was Michael Cambias [Feb 2nd, 2004]

Shot Adam Chandler because she hallucinated and thought he was Michael Cambias. [Aug 29th, 2003]

Brief Character History

Erica is the number one diva in Pine Valley, and has been a prominent character since the show’s inception. Femme fatale, she just can’t seem to hold on to her man, no matter how hard she tries. Her best friend is Opal Cortlandt; and Brooke English, her favorite sparring partner. While Erica is very self-centered, the only person she loves just as much as herself is her daughter Bianca.

In 1970, high school senior Erica engineered her first successful breakup, of classmates Phillip Brent and Tara Martin. But when Erica didn’t win Phillip as she planned; she set her sights on Tara’s older brother, medical intern Jeff Martin, with whom she eloped a year later. But Erica soon was bored with her life as the wife of a struggling young M.D. and embarked on a career as a model - and an affair with her agent, suave Jason Maxwell. In 1973, certain that she was on the verge of fame and fortune, Erica secretly aborted Jeff’s baby.

Jeff stood trial for Jason’s murder, but finally, it was revealed that Mona had killed the cad. The scandal temporarily ended Erica’s days as a cover girl.

In 1974, after granting Jeff a divorce, Erica made another play for Phil, who was on the rebound from Tara. This time, he not only slept with Erica, a year later, he married her. After Erica miscarried their child and suffered a nervous breakdown, she gave Phil a divorce and began an affair with the much-older Nick Davis, her mother’s best friend.

At the same time as Erica was carrying on with Nick, she became quite taken with Mark Dalton, the new music teacher at Pine Valley University. When it appeared that Erica and Mark might become more than friends, Mona admitted that the young man was the illegitimate son of Erica’s father and his secretary, Maureen Dalton. Initially, Erica refused to accept her half-brother Mark but over time, the half-siblings became very close.

Meanwhile, Erica and Nick broke up after Mona caught them in bed together. But they couldn’t stay apart. After Erica came down with pneumonia. She lost the will to live. To insure recovery, Nick popped the question, and she accepted. When he broke their engagement in 1978, she turned around and wed ex-football star Tom Cudahy, for whom she worked as the hostess of his restaurant, The Goalpost. The Cudahy’s stormy union suffered as Tom discovered that Erica was telling him one lie after another. Among her deceptions was Erica telling Tom she wanted children, while secretly taking birth control pills. Behind Tom’s back, she opened a trendy Disco named after herself. The marriage finally came to an end after Tom discovered Erica’s dalliance with cosmetics tycoon Brandon Kingsley.

After Erica’s closed up shop in 1980, Erica herself became the prize in a battle between rival cosmetics tycoons Brandon Kingsley and Kent Bogard. Erica and Sensuelle Cosmetics boss Brandon’s affair soured when she learned that he had a wife, Sara, and kids that he had no intention of leaving. Kent offered to steal away Erica - both romantically and professionally. He would give her her own line of beauty products, he promised.

In 1982, Kent and Erica’s relationship hit a snag in the form of her mousy half-sister, Silver Kane, who had begun working as her assistant. Silver transformed herself into a glamorous vamp and seduced Kent, who was accidentally shot by Erica after learning of their fling. Silver was revealed to be an imposter named Connie Wilkes and sent to prison.

In 1983, Erica hired Mike Roy, the man who would be the love of her life, to ghost write her biography, Raising Kane. Despite her feelings for the author, she wed millionaire Adam Chandler in 1984 in order to win the part of herself in the movie version of the book. Eventually, she extricated herself from their volatile marriage, but it was too late: Mike was shot and killed.

In 1985, Erica found a new reason to love in Jeremy Hunter, an artist who once saved Mike’s life. But their romance was thwarted at every turn by a formidable rival, Jeremy’s youthful stepmother, Natalie Hunter, who wanted him for herself. In 1987, Noelle Keaton was revealed to be the real Silver Kane, Erica’s half-sister. She became obsessed with Jeremy and was killed in self-defense by Natalie.

That same year, Erica helped Mark beat his addiction to drugs. She also took her next husband, politician Travis Montgomery, when she became pregnant with his child. Finally, in 1988, after a bout with toxemia, Erica gave birth to Bianca. That same year, after Travis had himself kidnapped in a desperate bid to save his empire, Erica divorced him.

Erica’s father, Eric, left her for a second time in 1989, after she discovered that he wasn’t dead as he had led everyone to believe but traveling with a circus as Barney The Clown. In 1990, trying to be a better parent than he ever was, Erica broke her engagement to Travis’s brother, lawyer Jackson Montgomery, and remarried Travis to cheer Bianca, who had contracted Reye’s syndrome. The reunion was short-lived; Erica and Jackson resumed their relationship.

Much to Erica’s chagrin, her competition for Jack’s affection was Brooke English. The women’s longstanding rivalry dated back to their days vying for Tom’s attention. First, Erica married him, then Brooke did. After Erica’s marriage to Adam ended, Brooke married him, too. Brooke even was engaged to Mark at one time!

Erica and Jack eventually parted company, and she took as her next husband Dimitri Marick. Although initially Dimitri was out to take over Erica’s company, once they fell in love, he was as devoted to her as Kendall Hart was resentful of her. In 1992, the waif showed up on Erica’s doorstep and soon was revealed to be the product of Erica’s rape at age 14 by Richard Fields, a friend of her father’s.

Making matters worse, in 1994, Erica lost her mother, Mona. The following year, following a fall off of a scaffold during a fashion show, Erica became addicted to painkillers - and the object of unscrupulous Dr. Jonathan Kinder’s obsession. After overcoming both obstacles, Erica learned that she was pregnant with Dimitri’s child. Still in love with him, she asked Dimitri to remarry her, blissfully unaware that he had slept with their sister-in-law, Maria Grey, after catching Erica in what appeared to be a compromising position with Jonathan.

After suffering a miscarriage in early 1997, Erica soon found herself as a new mother. This requires a little setting up. Dimitri and Maria slept together. It was a one-night stand, but when Maria later discovered that she was pregnant, the baby could very well have been Dimitri’s. It wasn’t, but Skye Chandler doctored a paternity test to make it look like Dimitri was the father, not Edmund. Erica learned of the affair and cornered Maria in a cabin at Willow Lake. The stress of the confrontation sent Maria into early labor. Erica would have been content to let Maria suffer, but she felt obligated to help deliver the one month premature baby and take it to the hospital. The weather was treacherous and Erica hit a patch of ice while en route to the hospital. Erica, the car, and the baby skidded off the road and into Willow Lake. The baby ended up missing… but after being released from the hospital, Erica retraced her steps and learned that a woman had found the baby and taken it into her home. Erica then faked going to Russia to adopt a baby and used Maria’s baby, now named Sonya, as the baby she supposedly adopted. But holes in her plan began to show themselves. Dimitri made calls to the adoption agency and learned that Erica had not adopted the baby from Russia.

Erica then claimed that Esther, the woman who had rescued Sonya from the icy waters of Willow Lake, was the baby’s biological mother and had allowed her to adopt the baby. The guilt built and Erica decided that she had to take the baby back to Edmund and Maria. The infant was reunited with Maria, but simply returning the baby did not serve justice in Edmund and Maria’s eyes. Erica was charged with kidnapping and two other felonies.

From jail, Erica learned of Maddie’s true paternity. She helped reunite Edmund with his daughter. Little did Erica know that her daughter, Bianca, was suffering from Anorexia Nervosa. Erica did almost everything to get out of jail. At her parole hearing Edmund felt that it was his duty to turn the tables and say a few words on Erica’s behalf. Erica was released from prison to help Bianca recover. She is currently home, nursing Bianca back to health and has become the former owner of Enchantment. As a surprise, Erica made Bianca second in command. Bianca seemed very pleased. Erica hoped that this might be what Bianca needed to help her regain her self-confidence.

With Bianca now on the road to recovery, Erica was focusing her attentions back on her career. That was until a car accident during a snowstorm badly scarred her face and did damage to her heart. Dr. David Hayward was the driver and he was in a hurry to attend Liza and Adam’s second wedding when they hit a truck on the side of the road. The damage to Erica’s face was so severe, she wore a mask on the entire left side of her face until a renowned plastic surgeon was able to restore her original beauty.

Seeking revenge on Dr. Hayward for the damage her had done to her personally and professionally, Erica tied up David in her basement and damaged his hand in a vice. What started out so ugly for Erica and David, turned into a budding romance, with each forgiving the other for their crimes. David and Erica definitely shared passion. That there was no denying. However, their relationship ran into trouble because both felt that the other was putting something before their relationship. For Erica, David’s devotion to his job and his irregular work schedule made her feel like a second fiddle. David, on the other hand, was irritated by Erica’s persistent references and interest in her former husband, Dimitri. In a tear-filled face off, Erica told David that they were unable to love each other the way that they deserved to be loved. Passion, she said, was not enough. With that, the two parted ways.

Erica kept David in her life, especially when Bianca returned to town. Bianca’s arrival back in Pine Valley provided troublesome for Erica because she’d lost touch with her daughter and the fact that her daughter wasn’t a little girl any more. The two clashed at almost every turn, but through it all Erica remained her daughter’s biggest fan. When Travis died, Bianca was forced to remain in Pine Valley full-time. Erica continued to press her wishes and desires on her daughter and it backfired. Bianca moved out of the house and in with her Uncle Jack, though the relocation lasted barely a night. Bianca moved back into her mother’s house, but took with her a secret that was tearing at her heart.

On Christmas Eve 2000, Bianca shared with her mother the very secret that was causing her so much pain. As Erica prepared for a press conference to announce that she and her daughter would be the featured models in an ad campaign for Enchantment, Bianca remained at her mother’s house. Erica returned to find the reason for her daughter’s delay. Bianca revealed to her mother that she’s gay. Erica turned, unwilling to listen to what her daughter was saying. She asked Bianca to continue getting dressed because the media was waiting for them. Bianca tried to get her mother to listen to her, but nothing she said seemed to get through to her mother. Erica left the house and did not return home until the next morning. Erica and Bianca took several months to restore their relationship. Things did not become “normal” overnight. Erica bribed Bianca’s friend, Rain, a homeless teen, to leave town, claiming that she was a bad influence on Bianca.

In Spring 2001, an Ecstasy overdose aggravated a pre-existing heart condition in Brooke’s daughter, Laura. A cardiologist on staff at Pine Valley Hospital determined that Laura’s condition was quite grave - and potentially deadly. Erica and Brooke put aside their differences to become an unlikely pair, determined to free Dr. David Hayward from jail so that he could do risky surgery to attempt to save or prolong Laura’s life. The two women put aside their differences, brought together by a common bond: motherhood.

Erica strongly disapproved of her daughter Bianca’s friendship with tomboy Mary Frances “Frankie” Stone. Erica vowed to kill Frankie after Bianca walked in on Frankie and a boy (Adam Chandler, Jr.) in bed together. Sure enough, Frankie turned up dead several hours later. Thinking that Bianca killed Frankie, Erica decided to take the fall for Frankie’s death. The trial quickly degraded into a three-ring circus, with Erica ditching counsel in order to represent herself. Erica was ultimately found not guilty, but her relationships with Bianca and lawyer-and-lover Chris Stamp were severely strained.

Erica was soon reconciled with Bianca and Chris due to mutual hatred of Erica’s long-estranged daughter, Kendall, who had arrived back in town to play a part in Erica’s murder trial. Kendall did her best to ruin Erica’s bonds with her daughter and boyfriend, while Erica plotted various ways to drive her out of Pine Valley, none of which worked. When Erica’s home was set on fire and Bianca nearly died, Erica immediately blamed Kendall and refused to believe anyone who doubted her guilt. However, ultimately Erica learned of evidence that Kendall was not responsible and cleared her. Still, she had no intention of having a real relationship, since at one point she had even told Kendall she saw her rapist every time she looked in Kendall’s eyes.

Memories of Richard Fields continued to haunt Erica as one night she thought she heard his voice at the construction site for her new office. She hit the man on the head with a pipe, only to realize he was Trey Kenyon, Kendall’s roommate and former attorney. Soon she also learned that he was Richard’s son by Vanessa Cortlandt, and that he had burned down her home earlier that year. Erica decided to make both him and Kendall pay for their nasty ways, but ultimately landed a brief stay in jail after breaking into Kendall’s hotel room. Her friends and family rallied around her for the Thanksgiving holiday.

By February 2003 Erica’s newest concern was FUSION, an upstart cosmetics company run by, among others, Kendall and Erica’s former star employee Greenlee. Her personal life should have been perfect, as she was engaged to Chris. But her old feelings for Jack were resurfacing once again, leaving Erica guilt-ridden after she and Jack shared a passionate kiss in her apartment one day. Erica and Jack had a one-night stand. Erica was guilt-ridden and tried to stay loyal to her fiancé, Chris, but they had many communication problems, especially regarding her desire to make him come work at Enchantment, and her meetings with corporate shark Michael Cambias. After a few months, Chris found out about Erica and Jack’s tryst, and dumped her. He went off the deep end and was a prime suspect when Jack was shot, but he was soon cleared. Chris and Erica made peace as Chris announced his plans to leave town. Meanwhile, Erica rallied to Jack’s side as he recovered from his shooting. They got engaged, only to have Erica push him away when she found out Chris had been shot and killed. She saw this as a curse which she brought on men. Jack quickly wore down her defenses and they reconciled.

Michael tried his best to take over Enchantment, using Bianca’s girlfriend Lena and Kendall as pawns in his twisted mind games. Lena was arrested for her corporate espionage, and Kendall played double agent for Erica. Erica saved her from Michael’s attempt at rape. A few weeks later, after Erica reaffirmed her hold on Enchantment and forced her way into a major role at Cambias Industries (squeezing Michael out in the process), Michael tried to rape Erica, and Kendall was the savior this time. Erica disliked Lena but grew to accept her in Bianca’s life. Michael was not so easy to deal with and continued to menace Erica and her daughters. His threats spurred more flashbacks to the night she was raped by Richard Fields, and Kendall was a great comfort to her. For the first time, mother and daughter had worked out their issues and were actually close. With this fence temporarily mended, Erica worried about what was troubling Bianca (she didn’t know Michael had raped Bianca). On the romantic front, after Jack nearly died of complications from his gunshot wound, only a rare blood type saved his life. Erica discovered that Greenlee was that rare blood type, and was Jack’s daughter via a long-ago affair with Mary Smythe, who now wanted Jack back! Erica blackmailed Mary with proof of her past misdeeds while she tried her best to push ahead with wedding plans and keep the truth from Jackson and Greenlee. On their wedding day, Greenlee walked into the ceremony and announced that she was Jack’s daughter. Hurt that Erica had kept the truth from him, the wedding was called off.

During the summer of 2003, Bianca was raped by Michael Cambias, who also tried to rape Erica and Kendall, but was not successful. Bianca didn’t tell anyone about the rape, although everyone noticed the drastic and unhealthy change in her behavior. In order to cover up her rape, she told everyone that she had broken up with Lena and that is why she was so upset. She broke things off with Lena, not giving her much of an explanation or reason. Weeks later, Bianca finally admitted to Maggie Stone that she’d been raped. Bianca continued to hide her rape from her family, including her Erica, who knew better than anyone else how she felt. Erica was led to believe that it was actually Kendall who was pregnant. Kendall had devised a strategy to shield Bianca from anyone finding out that she had decided not to terminate her pregnancy. Kendall went on trial for Michael Cambias’ murder and things went terribly out of control. Ryan figured out that Bianca wasn’t pregnant and agreed to help the two women carry out their plan of deception. Ryan hired a top-notch doctor who agreed to conduct a non-invasive paternity test on Bianca and say that she had conducted the test on Kendall. The test results satisfied the court, but there were still those who doubted that Kendall was really pregnant. In the middle of court, Greenlee duPres yanked Kendall’s dress off, revealing a pregnancy pooch. The incident turned everything upside down. Everyone put two and two together and realized that Bianca was carrying Michael’s child. Erica was outraged and blasted her daughters for having lied to her. Kendall and Bianca both claimed that they had been doing what they thought was best for Erica, but Erica didn’t believe them. Slowly but surely, Bianca started to recall that she might have more information about Cambias’ murder. The pieces finally fell together and she realized that she had been the one who’d shot and killed Michael. She had visited Michael’s condo toting Reggie’s gun. When Michael again tried to harm her, she shot and killed him. Following Bianca’s confession, the judge presiding over the case leaned hard on the prosecution not to press any charges against Bianca.

The resulting stress of the situation started Erica drinking, something she hadn’t done since she’d gotten hooked on pain killers. Though her loved ones begged her to stop, Erica saw no need for their concern.

As Bianca’s due date approached, she found herself trapped in the middle of nowhere with Babe following a storm, Babe called Paul and asked that he fly his medical helicopter to take her and Bianca to the hospital. Paul initially refused, but later agreed. When he arrived, he helped Babe deliver her baby. He then administered an unknown medicine to Babe leaving her groggy. During this time, Paul staged a chopper crash. When Babe awakened, Paul told her that he baby had died during the crash. However, when help arrived and Babe’s family threatened harm to Paul if anything had happened to Babe’s child, Paul changed his story and said that Bianca’s baby had been thrown from the chopper. He had hid Babe’s baby in a nearby cabin and planned to give the baby boy to Kelly so that she could pass the baby off as her own. Bianca’s baby was then given to Babe, leaving Bianca and her family to believe that her child had been killed.

Erica was overjoyed later when she, and the rest of the family, learned that Bianca’s daughter Miranda was alive and well. She managed to put aside her reservations concerning Miranda’s conception to accept her daughter, and also cemented her relationship with Jack by marrying him in a beautiful ceremony in Florida. Shortly after she begun hosting her own show, New Beginnings, and had planned to use Greg Madden as her first guest. Before long Erica realized that Greg, who had shown an alarming interest with her, was the doctor who had performed her abortion during her marriage to Jeff. She also discovered that his son, Josh, was actually her own son – rather than abort her baby, Greg had implanted the fetus in his own wife!

Quote mrfraser:

Quote Kristi: Erica has been married 10 times...and here they are: The Valid Marriages: Jeff Martin Phil Brent Tom Cudahy Adam Chandler Dimitri Marick (twice) Jackson Montgomeryand

The Invalid Marriages:

Travis Montgomery (twice)

Adam Chandler (their second ceremony was actually a renewal of their vows, since they had never been legally divorced years earlier).

and let’s not get started on her various flings…

How many times has Adam been married? and how many children does he have of his own…

Here is some info on Adam…he has also been quite busy for a small time mountain boy!!!

Adam Chandler Sr.

Actor History

David Canary (fall 1984 to present)

Occupation

Co-Owner and Co-CEO of Chandler Enterprises

Owner, IncredibleDreams.com

Former owner and operator of “Adam’s Place,” a bar formerly known as The Pit.

Former Owner of WRCW

Former owner of a fertility clinic

Former owner of Tempo Magazine

Former producer of the movie “Raising Kane”

Resides At

Chandler Mansion (300 River Road)

Marital Status

Married; (Krystal Carey; married 21 September 2005)

Past Marriages

Althea (divorced)

Erica Kane (divorced)

Brooke English (invalid))

Dixie Cooney (invalid)

Natalie Marlowe (invalid)

Erica Kane (vow renewal)

Gloria Marsh (divorced)

Liza Colby (divorced)

Liza Colby (divorced)

Arlene Vaughan (divorced)

Liza Colby (married March 2001; divorced)

Krystal Carey (vow renewal on 23 March 2006)

Relatives

Stuart Chandler (twin brother)

Charlotte Chandler (sister; deceased)

Ross Chandler (nephew)

Scott Chandler (nephew; via adoption)

Julie Rand Chandler (great-niece)

Children

Hayley Vaughan Santos (daughter; with Arlene)

Adam Chandler Jr. (son; with Dixie)

Anna Claire Chandler (daughter; with Gloria; deceased)

Unnamed Child (with Liza; miscarriage)

Colby Marian Chandler (daughter; with Liza)

Lorenzo Hector Santos (grandson)

Adam Chandler III (grandson)

Adam and Althea had previously adopted Skye Chandler Quartermaine

Flings & Affairs

Joy Hawkins

Kay Campobello

Dixie Cooney

Arlene Vaughan

Kay Campobello

Mary Smythe

Crimes Committed

Had Stuart locked up in the West Wing of the Chandler Mansion for years

Tried to drive Dixie crazy, in order to get custody of their son, Adam, Jr.

Hired a thug to shoot Palmer Cortlandt

Paid Natalie to spy on Palmer

Faked his own death to test Erica

Stole Natalie’s money by having her sign papers she didn’t know she was signing

Blackmailed Erica into marrying him again

Illegally divorced Erica (had Stuart stand in for him)

Kidnapped Erica and took her to Canada

Rigged a pregnancy test to show that Jeremy was the father of Natalie’s baby

Told An-Li that she had to marry Brian Bodine in order to get her green card, just to keep Brian away from Hayley.

Staged his own kidnapping to test Gloria’s loyalty.

Locked a pregnant Gloria in an abandoned building because he didn’t believe her pregnancy was in danger. Swapped Jake’s sperm specimen with his own so that Liza would have his child.

Bribed a judge to grant custody of Max to Mateo rather than Raquel.

Switched Colby’s stem cells with another infant’s so that his genetic link to Colby would not be revealed

Plotted to buy a controlling percentage in WRCW so that he could ruin Tad’s career.

Blackmailed Leo du Pres into having Paolo Caseli seduce Marian (to break up Marian and Stuart’s marriage)

Sabotaged the Colmar Tower and caused it’s destruction.

Tossed Arlene’s lifeless body overboard the Fidelity after believing that Hayley had killed her.

Forged Arlene’s name on divorce papers.

Jailed for bribing a police officer; plea bargain arranged for community service. [Mar 2001]

Lying to the police; Claimed he was driving a car that crashed instead of Adam JR. [May 17th, 2001]

Assault; clobbered David Hayward [Jun 12th, 2001]

Adultery; Slept with Kaye Campobello while married to Liza. [Jul 2001]

Bribery/Judicial Tampering; Slept with Kaye Campobello so that David Hayward would be found not guilty. [Jul 2001]

Cited for contempt. [Aug 8th, 2001]

Assault; clobbered David Hayward [Mar 28th, 2002]

Ambushed Vanessa at the hospital [Apr 5th, 2002]

Hired a photographer to take pictures of Anna and David and published that they were married. [Apr 5th, 2002]

Gaslighting Liza (Making her believe she was crazy/ill) [Jun 12th, 2002]

Blackmailed Trey Kenyon [Jul 2002]

Arrested for breaking and entering into a doctor’s office as Pine Valley Hospital [Dec 24th, 2003]

Arrested for the possible murder of Michael Cambias [Feb 6th, 2004]

Had a videotape altered to make it appear as though Babe had threatened to kill JR and used the tape to blackmail Babe. [Oct 2004]

Maladies and Hospitalizations

Suffers from high blood pressure

Suffered a stroke.

Was poisoned by Gloria Marsh.

Experienced light-headedness and unexplained headaches; Possible transient ischemic attack [Apr 2005]

Brief Character History

Adam Chandler, a Pigeon Hollow native, came to Pine Valley in 1984. He grew up with Pete Cooney (aka Palmer Cortlandt) and they were rivals because of a past relationship he had with Adam’s sister Lottie. He first got involved with Erica in New York. Over the years, Adam has always been involved with dirty dealing, such as swindling Natalie, blackmailing Erica, and by trying to drive Dixie insane to get custody of Adam, Jr. He needs complete control over his children and wives, and will use every dirty trick in the book to get what he wants. Manipulation is his strongest suit.

At the end of 1996, Adam and Liza developed a scheme to make the objects of their desires (Tad and Brooke) jealous. In the scheme, the two would get married and hope that either Tad or Brooke would stop the wedding. Part of the scheme saw Liza receiving ownership of half of WRCW. When she found out that Adam didn’t own WRCW and that she was going to get nothing, she decided to forgo the plans to leave Adam at the altar and go through with the wedding. Dimitri Marick managed to turn a loan to Stuart into a way to steal ownership of WRCW. He allowed Stuart to use WRCW as collateral for the loan then turned around and demanded to have Stuart repay the loan on the spot. Because Stuart didn’t have the cash to pay back Dimitri, Dimitri and his bigwig lawyer coaxed Stuart into signing over ownership of WRCW to Dimitri.

Adam and Liza were in denial of their love for one another. As things progressed Liza tried to scam her way into Adam’s bed to consummate their marriage. At one final attempt Adam and Liza were finally intimate, but by this time Liza had fallen deeply in love with Adam and didn’t care about his money. As it ended up their one night of passion resulted in Liza getting pregnant. Revealing the shocking news to Adam, he then knew his feelings for Liza and the unborn baby were true. Liza wanted to prove that she deeply loved and cared for Adam so she wanted to buy him a real wedding ring, one with meaning. Marian and Liza took off on a shopping trip via a Transglobal jet. As luck would have it, the jet came to an abrupt hard landing, causing Liza to lose the baby. After learning about the faulty turbine blades and the company owned by Adam, she instantly blamed Adam for the loss of the baby. Liza left Adam and filed for divorce. Adam tried to protest his love for Liza in any way he could, but Liza went through with the divorce.

Adam had a mild stroke after an altercation with Liza and was hospitalized. He was released and no sooner was back at Pine Valley Hospital suffering from a bigger stroke attack. Liza became concerned and was at his bedside. Adam was given a lethal dose of a drugs causing his blood pressure to elevate and his heart beat faster. Dr. Hayward came to the rescue and claiming to be the hero for saving him, even though this “hero doctor” was the one who injected him with the drug in the first place. Dr. Hayward was hell bent on seeing to it that Jake was held responsible for it. Adam filed a lawsuit against Jake. As for the divorce between Adam and Liza, Adam refused to sign—claiming that he and Liza would get back together.

Adam still teetered back and forth whether or not to grant Liza a divorce. On the day of the divorce hearing, Liza found out the real reason why she lost the baby, Fifth Disease. Joe Martin told her that a woman in the hospital had it and that Liza could have been in contact with her at any time during her pregnancy. With this news, Liza ran to tell Adam that it was not his fault about the baby. However, both were too proud to come out and say that they didn’t want the divorce, so the divorce went through.

While at the 1997 Crystal Ball, Adam saw a vision of a woman, a woman whom he recognized from his “carnie days.” He and Stuart had rescued Joy from her abusive husband, Lee, and she and Adam fell in love. However, Joy’s husband continued to torment her, and in order to get her free from Lee’s control, Adam and Stuart faked her death. Adam was further confused when he continued to see this image of Joy in various places; as well, he began to hear voices, urging him to confess. Unbeknownst to Adam, the young woman was actually Joy’s daughter, Camille. Her father, Lee, had convinced Camille that Adam had killed Joy, and Camille was determined to avenge her mother’s death. Adam found strange things happening wherever Camille was–like an elevator that trapped Marian and Stuart and a fuse box that electrocuted–and nearly killed—Scott. Adam wanted everyone in his family to be aware that Camille was out to harm them, and even went so far as to bring Junior back to Pine Valley from Pigeon Hollow to keep him safe. However, what Adam was unaware of was that Camille was not really the one behind the threats on his family—her father, Lee, was. Camille had discovered that her father had lied to her, and was now trying to stop him. Shortly after Dixie and Junior’s arrival in Pine Valley on the 4th of July, Lee rigged a boiler at Holidays to explode. Camille learned of his plans and rushed over to Holidays. She tried to warn everyone to flee for their lives, but no one believed her. She tried to fix the boiler, but was unable to stop it from exploding. She lost her life trying to save the dozens of partygoers in the upstairs restaurant. Knowing Camille was dead, Adam believed his family was safe. However, the horror was only beginning. Lee kidnapped first Junior, then Hayley, and held them hostage, planning to kill them (as revenge for Camille’s death). Junior managed to escape, and with Tad, Edmund and Mateo’s help, they managed to rescue Hayley, but not before she received a tattoo from Lee which caused her blood to be poisoned for months and she had to wait to become pregnant.

Adam was not pleased when he learned of Stuart and Marian’s growing relationship, and went to great lengths to break them up. One of his schemes included gathering a collection of Marian’s old flames at a dinner party, and parading them in front of Stuart, to show him how unsuitable Marian was. Liza was furious at him for hurting her mother, and worked long and hard to get him to accept Marian and Stuart’s relationship. Marian and Stuart are now married, with Adam’s blessing.

Adam found out that Liza wanted to be artificially inseminated by Jake Martin. Adam wanted to put a stop to that, and, in typical Adam Chandler style, bought the fertility clinic and switched Jake’s sperm sample with his own. Liza remained completely oblivious to the switch, and accepted Adam’s marriage proposal, which put Adam on Cloud Nine. However, dastardly Dr. David Hayward had proof of Adam’s paternity of the baby and threatened to expose the truth to Liza. If Adam thought about killing David, David had already made contingency plans: copies of the DNA report linking baby Colby and Adam would be sent to the police and to Liza. Adam was forced to play along with the notion that Jake was really the child’s father, something that wasn’t easy for him to do.

Adam and Liza were married. They went away to a Adam’s secluded fishing cabin, where Liza went into labor. David, still hell-bent on toying with Adam about the sperm switch, followed them and helped Liza through the birth of baby girl Colby. David continued to play with Adam, leaving town for a few days so that David’s lawyer, Leslie Coulson, showed up at the Chandler’s with proof that David had given her, to be presented to Liza and Derek Frye in the event of his disappearance or death. Liza just missed finding out about Adam’s deception, but Erica snatched up the papers and discovered the truth. David convinced her to keep quiet.

Adam resented Jake for spending time with “his” daughter and went about attempting to control all his children. When Hayley split with Mateo, he moved her into his mansion and tried to keep her friends and family from seeing her. He got more possessive of Colby, and publicly ranted and raved when Liza and Jake agreed to give some of Colby’s stem cells to a terminally ill Dimitri Marick. Yet again, he broke into hospital records to keep his paternity secret safe.

Chandler next moved onto young Adam Jr. He was outraged that his children were being taken from him (in his mind) by the Martin’s. He was horrified that Tad had a bigger place than him as a father figure in Junior’s life and afraid that his son would grow up “to be a fool like Tad Martin.” Adam attempted to talk his son into going off to a boarding school, and when that didn’t work, tried to trick him into going. Junior ran away, terrified of his father. Tad, Dixie and Liza blew up at Adam, and when Junior was finally found, he didn’t even want to speak to him.

When Ryan’s Incredible Dreams venture hit rough water, he was forced to hand over the business to Adam. With Adam at the reigns, Ryan was forced to walk a thin line and run the business as Adam wanted. After Gillian’s death in 2001, Ryan quit his post at IncredibleDreams.com after Adam refused to give him time away from the job to mourn Gillian.

At about the same time, Adam’s son J.R. began experimenting with drugs. His drug use spiraled out of control and JR was caught admitting that he had stolen drugs from David Hayward’s room on videotape. David threatened to turn JR into the police if Adam didn’t help get him off on all of the Libidozone-related charges against him after he drugged all of Pine Valley on The Fidelity. Adam agreed to bribe the judge presiding over the case – but money didn’t quite work. Instead, Adam was forced to sleep with Judge Kaye Campobello. Accordingly, the judge found David not guilty. Liza had planned to get rid of Adam once and for all by divorcing him. She had secret meetings with an attorney, but Liza later decided to back off of those plans because Adam showed true signs of change, signs that were picked up by some of his biggest critics.

Adam took town troublemaker Mary Smythe into his home after Mary was caught off from her family’s cash supply. The two grew closer as Adam wanted someone to share his life with and Mary wanted another meal ticket. Mary tried to endear herself by breaking up the marriage of newlyweds Adam Chandler Jr and Babe Carey. Adam loathed Babe, who he felt was only after his son’s money. Try as they might, Adam and Mary were unable to split the pair up. When Adam found out that Jamie had slept with Babe – and Babe later found out that she was pregnant – Adam tried to enlist Jamie into breaking up the marriage. That too failed. Although not happy about the circumstances, Adam was pleased when his granddaughter Bess was born. It devastated him when Erica came to him with her belief that the baby was really Bianca’s daughter, but he agreed to bring the baby to the hospital for the D.N.A. test that proved it was not J.R.'s child. Seeing J.R. lose Bess devastated Adam, but he was rejuvenated when they learned, shortly after, that Babe and J.R.'s son was alive and well. He had been kidnapped by Jamie and Babe, but they managed to get him back.

Adam was thrilled when J.R. won custody of the boy in court and renamed him Adam Chandler III. Adam was more than eager to help J.R. keep Babe far away from Little Adam, but David’s offer to locate Liza and Colby for him if he tried to soften Babe up. Adam was suspicious of Di, the new nanny that J.R. hired for Little Adam, who later claimed to be Dixie and got what he wanted when Babe offered to prove that Di was an imposter. But Babe had a price – she wanted Adam to get Krystal, who was doing jail time for the baby switch fiasco. Adam agreed to get Krystal out, but a DNA test seemed to prove that Di was telling the truth, and Krystal and Adam decided to take a deeper look into Di’s past – which resulted in a drunken wedding between the two of them. Krystal took advantage of her position as Adam’s wife to get Babe more time with Little Adam. Despite himself, though, Adam soon found himself falling for his new bride, and the two renewed their vows at J.R. and Babe’s remarriage ceremony.