OMG! I honestly had no idea. So Brooke is the Queen Bee of Marrying but not got the hang of staying married?

Moving to Erica, Bing Chat says her 10 marriages were in this order:

Jeff Martin

Phillip Brent

Nick Davis

Tom Cudahy

Adam Chandler

Travis Montgomery

Jackson Montgomery

Dimitri Marick

Chris Stamp

Jack Montgomery

Edited August 13, 2023 by Donna L. Bridges

I can understand someone like Erica Kane getting married as often as Elizabeth Taylor and Zsa Zsa Gabor. But this doesn't work for all soap characters and it shouldn't be the norm

When many people have been married more than 5-6 times on a show, it is time for several of them to go (or move to the backburner) and be replaced by new people.

The problem lies with the writers/producers who keep marrying characters for short term story ignoring the long term damage. characters falling in love and marrying, claiming to be madly in love and everyone pretending they haven'tsaid and done this multiple times is insulting to viewers.

As you said it works for some characters, but overall it's lazy.

Characters can still have story and not be married. Look at Abby on Y&R . No sooner than she married Stitch, they divorced. Then another short lived marriage to Chance. At this rate, she'll catch up to her mother's marriage total in no time.

The Stitch/Abby marriage never needed to happen. They could have been involved and the problems that drove them apart could have been the impetus for one or both to decide not to commit.

Then if Chance and Abby did marry they could have played their problems a lot longer w/o heading straight to the divorce court.

But the writers seem more interested into rushing them into marriage and just as quickly breaking them up.

Things like this are particularly frustrating given the way online character profiles most likely written by fans are presented as gospel. I was reading up on Kate several months ago and somehow wrapped my brain around the evidence that both characters were one and the same but it still felt like a bit of a stretch. Someone please correct me if I'm wrong, but weren't both Kates connected to Bill which added to the justification/misunderstanding?

She never married Nick Davis.

Erica Kane Martin Brent Cudahy Chandler Roy Roy Montgomery Montgomery Chandler Marrick Marrick Montgomery - some of those weren't valid, though. I know that none of the Mike Roy marriages were legal.

Yep. I remember accepting it as gospel nearly 20 years ago. It just felt good to believe that Kate Roberts, as a character, had actually been around that long, but I don't believe there was ever any canon evidence to back that up. If the connection had ever been made when Kate first appeared in 1993, it should be super easy for a clip or two to pop up confirming it. At the very least, fans watching then would be able to point to anything that confirmed it.