The Associated Press

One day last month, I abandoned my normal life and became a soap star.

Leaving Manhattan's claustrophobic Pine Valley set behind, ABC's "All My Children" packed up all its drama and headed to Florida to film the 10th wedding of Erica Kane. And in a well-crafted publicity stunt, ABC offered the chance for this mild-mannered entertainment reporter to take on the role I was born to play: myself.

Full disclosure: I'm no soap fan. I've never seen an entire episode of "AMC," but I do know Erica Kane, the glamourpuss matriarch played with extreme sassiness by Susan Lucci. After that unprecedented Emmy losing streak, who doesn't know her?

Kane has been married nine times, a mighty feat even in a soap. This special trip to the Sunshine State is in honor of Kane's much-anticipated, double-digit nuptials to Jackson Montgomery, the hunky lawyer with a heart o' gold, played by Walt Willey.

"This is the way it should be," Lucci tells me. "This is how all the storytelling has been going. The fans have been clamoring for this for about four years. We had a near-marriage a couple of years ago that was stopped by Greenlee (Montgomery's daughter, played by Rebecca Budig) and the fans were so disappointed. This is a really a gift to the viewers."

AT FIRST, DETAILS OF MY SCENE were sketchy. It entailed a group of reporters crashing the ceremony. I'd have lines. The wedding party would be comprised only of Kane and Montgomery's children — including Kane's recently departed daughter and granddaughter — not the entire "AMC" company. Everything would be filmed at the Boca Raton Resort & Club. And there would be a pool!

Before leaving for Florida, the wardrobe department phoned me twice to insist I wear a light-blue top and khaki pants for my scene. I splurged on an enchanting turquoise shirt. Upon arriving, the staff fashionistas nix the threads — too bright. I'm ushered into the makeshift wardrobe area, a conference room lined with racks of clothes for each character. They toss me a cream-colored striped shirt to slip on under my blazer.

After becoming one with the "AMC" color palette, I saunter down to the set, where the ceremony is in full swing. The beauty of the seaside resort is coyly enhanced with more sod, more plants, more lights and more makeup. The wedding party, wearing a color I later learn is buttercup, stands under a picturesque banyan tree. Visually, the ceremony is stunning, a perfect wedding that little girls dream of and grown women are rarely granted.

BUT THIS IS A SOAP OPERA. I keep waiting for an amnesiac to show up or a fistfight to break out. After much starting and stopping and starting, the only drama comes when two cages of doves are released after the "I do's."

"It's very unusual for Erica to have a wedding like this," Lucci says. " — this romantic, this beautiful, this glamorous. It's going to be a feast for the eyes as well as for the emotions."

Just as I'm bordering on boredom, I finally receive my script. I plow through the handful of pages to find my lines, and I'm shocked. My character is referred to as "Paparazzo No. 2."

Paparazzo?! I am a journalist!

No time for a temper tantrum, though, as I'm quickly introduced to Paparazzo No. 1, the beautiful and bouncy "Good Morning America" correspondent Marysol Castro. We're then both introduced to Michael B. Jordan, who plays Jackson's adoptive son, Reggie.

"Any advice?" I ask him.

"Don't mess up," the tux-clad Jordan proclaims.

The stage manager places Castro and me behind gold velvet ropes in a crowd of local Florida media, who will provide atmosphere by waving microphones and cameras and screaming "Erica! Erica! Erica!" behind us. I offer up the actual tape recorder I use to record actual celebrity interviews as a prop, but the stage manager informs Castro and me we'll be given hand-held mikes bearing the call letters WRCW — Pine Valley's local TV station.

I begin to wonder about my backstory: Where do I live in Pine Valley? How long have I worked for WRCW? Do I have an evil twin?

I QUICKLY POCKET MY DELUSIONS. It's time for my big moment. We run through the scene once with wedding party stand-ins. Then we do it a few times with Lucci and company.

"Were the Pine Valley wedding plans just a decoy?" Castro, aka Paparazzo No. 1, screams from afar as the wedding party departs the ceremony. "Was Oprah supposed to be maid of honor?"

"What do you say, Erica?" I snark. "Is the 10th time the charm?"

Damn, I'm good. Kane doesn't answer us. She merely smiles, then — BLAM! — a cannon blasts a storm of white rose petals into the air, blanketing the sea of paparazzi and the wedding party. I haven't seen this much excitement since those doves were released.

Kane and Montgomery share a long kiss. The actors are sent away and the director sends in a camera operator to capture close-ups of the paparazzi. Castro and I run through our scene again — and it happens.

I forget my line.

It's a combination of not being able to hear Castro because of all the "Erica!" howls, and nerves from the camera lens being right in front of my face. I eventually get it right and we're wrapped.

I kiss Castro — on the cheek, natch -- goodbye and tell her I hope to work with her again soon. My blunder weighs heavy on my mind for the rest of the afternoon. This is no way to start my soap career. So I do what any self-respecting soap star would do. I go to the resort's spa for a stone massage.

When I arrive back in New York, I call up LaLucci as quick as I can because, you know, we're co-stars.

"How did I do?" I query.

"I thought you were very effective as Paparazzo No. 2," she coos.

"But Susan," I reply. "I'm a journalist."

Susan Lucci walks down marriage memory lane

When it comes to daytime TV weddings, the 10th time really is the charm for Erica Kane, the vampy center of ABC's "All My Children" played for 35 years by Susan Lucci.

"I started playing Erica (when the character was) a 15-year-old high school girl," says Lucci. "It's a journey. You don't learn your lessons overnight. No one is capable of learning every lesson."

Today's episode will mark the beginning of wedding No. 10 for the "All My Children" grand dame. Over the past 35 years, Kane has married seven men — double-dipping three times. (That's not counting her null-and-void nuptials.) What gives? Lucci points to Kane's daddy issues as the reason for the revolving chapel door.

"At the bottom of Erica has always been a woman trying to prove she is lovable to herself and to the world," says Lucci. "Erica's father really was a monster. She has a lot of abandonment issues that she tried to hide and cover up to convince herself that she could be loved."

The Associated Press recently retraced Kane's steps down the all those aisles and recollected on the subsequent divorces. Just like real life, it was easier for the 58-year-old actress to recall the good times rather than the bad.

Husband No. 1: Jeff Martin, played by Charles Frank

Occupation: Medical student

Married: 1971

Tying the knot plot: After failing to woo her rival's beau, Kane hoped marrying Martin would lead to a better life.

Lucci's memory: "Very romantic. There was a snowstorm. I remember wearing this Russian fur hat and coat."

Grounds for divorce: Boredom plagued Kane. "She got married way too young," says Lucci. "He really represented, at that time, a trophy of sorts."

Husband No. 2: Phil Brent, played by Richard Hatch

Occupation: Police officer

Married: 1975

Plot: Kane finally won her rival's beau — after she found out she was pregnant with his child.

Memory: "They were not very well matched. Phil wanted her to pick out houseplants on sale. She was not interested in that kind of life."

Divorce: Brent's father forced Kane to divorce his son, which was fine by her. She already had her sights set on another man.

Husband No. 3: Tom Cudahy, played by Richard Shoberg

Occupation: Ex-football player, restaurant owner

Married: 1978

Plot: Kane charmed Cudahy while working as a hostess at his restaurant.

Memory: "(Tom) loved her so much, but he wanted her to have babies, and she wanted to be a model in New York and live life in a faster lane."

Divorce: He found her birth control pills.

Husband No. 4 and 7: Adam Chandler, played by David Canary

Occupation: CEO

Married: 1984, 1991

Plot: After a broken engagement with journalist Mike Roy, Kane wed Pine Valley bad boy Chandler in hopes of fame and fortune. He forced her to remarry him the second time around.

Memory: "They didn't have much in common. They were sort of enemies."

Divorce: "She really didn't want to marry him. I don't remember too many of the details."

Husband No. 5 and 6: Travis Montgomery, played by Larkin Malloy

Occupation: Politician

Married: 1988, 1990

Plot: Despite continued advances from Kane, Montgomery proposed only after Erica was almost murdered — and became pregnant with his child.

Memory: "She thought she loved him. She was very taken in by the romance of the situation."

Divorce: After hiding out in Sea City, Kane hooked up with Travis' brother, Jackson. But at the insistence of her daughter Bianca, she remarried Travis. "I think after they got back together," says Lucci, "it was never the same again. There was always this rift. He became bitter and sort of cruel to Erica."

Husband No. 8 and 9: Dimitri Marick, played by Michael Nader

Occupation: Hungarian royalty

Married: 1993, 1994

Plot: After he tried to take over her cosmetics company, Kane became attracted to the mysterious Marick.

Memory: "Dimitri represented great lineage and a great ability to have an international family," says Lucci. "He whisked her away to Budapest and showed her the world."

Grounds for divorce: Erica impaled Marick with a letter opener. "To this day, the crew always teases me about letter openers and sharp objects," says Lucci. After getting back together, Erica fell off a 30-foot high platform while modeling "and had a terrible back injury and became addicted to painkillers."

Husband No. 10: Jackson Montgomery, played by Walt Willey

Occupation: Lawyer

Married: 2005

Plot: Kane was kidnapped by Montgomery and taken to Florida, where the pair spontaneously wed.

Memory: "They've always had a very hot romance."

Divorce: To be determined. If her past marriages are any indication, you'll have to watch and see. "She didn't have a lobotomy," warns Lucci. "She's still Erica Kane. We have to see if she can get it right."