Sometimes when a movie company invades a neighborhood to set up shop – a typical sight in Los Angeles – the locals aren’t too happy.

Not so for the Northridge cul-de-sac where key scenes for the Tom Hanks film “Larry Crowne” were shot.

“Everyone in that neighborhood welcomed us with open arms,” says Taraji P. Henson, who plays one of Hanks’ neighbors, adding that one of the families would bake cookies and Rice Krispies treats for the crew. The Oscar-nominated actress (“The Curious Case of Benjamin Button”) says there was “definitely a sense of community” and “they were so excited that we were there.”

Hanks, who directs and stars in the film, approached Nia Vardalos (“My Big Fat Greek Wedding”) about writing a script with him about six years ago when she was working on “My Life in Ruins” for his company Playtone.

“We sat down right there, and he laid out a story of what would happen if a man lost his job and had to reinvent himself, had never gone to college and ends up having to drive a scooter,” Vardalos says.

All of those elements are still there in the film, which opens today.

The romantic comedy tells the story of an average middle-age guy who after 20 years as a cook in the Navy becomes a model worker at retail giant U-Mart but after being employee of the month several times is essentially downsized with the excuse that he never went to college.

This leaves the divorced homeowner unable to pay his mortgage. After some advice from his neighbors (Henson and Cedric the Entertainer), Larry decides to go to community college. He also buys a scooter from his friend, finding the high price of gas eating into his budget.

“I wanted to examine the theme of reinvention, and not reinvention by the way of fate dictating it but by your own proactive place in how you move onto the next chapter of your life,” says Hanks, 54, who attended junior college in the mid-1970s, where he met a variety of people similar to Larry’s classmates in the movie.

Larry attends school at the fictional East Valley Community College, shot at Cal State Dominguez Hills in Carson, which Hanks points out has one of the most diverse student bodies of any “four-year university west of the Mississippi.” There he meets a colorful crew of fellow scooter-riding students, including the charming Talia (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) and her boyfriend, Dell (Wilmer Valderrama). Like him, they all see school as a way to a better life.

“(The casting) was a conscious thing,” Hanks says, “because the college I went to was greatly diverse.”

Vardalos says she and Hanks visited a few community colleges to do research and saw a wide ethnic range and the scooter-loving subculture among the students. A montage in “Larry Crowne” shows Hanks and the gang motoring through the Valley. What Vardalos didn’t see on those trips was a teacher who looked like Julia Roberts.

“Larry Crowne” is, after all, a romantic comedy. Roberts plays public-speaking teacher Mercedes Tainot, who has a passion for teaching. She unexpectedly finds herself attracted to Larry, whose life suddenly kicks back into gear.

“This is about people getting a second chance, and that’s what we wanted the film to represent without hitting it on the head,” Vardalos says.

The idea for “Larry Crowne” came to Hanks years before the recent fiscal crisis hit the U.S. economy.

“When the country got in its current economic situation,” Vardalos says, “we felt a responsibility to try and get it correct and not make light of it.”

“It’s not a midlife crisis. It’s a midlife disaster,” Hanks says about his character.

“A midlife crisis is when you wake up and you have everything and you’re unhappy. That doesn’t happen to Larry. He thinks it’s going to be the greatest day in the world and he loses all his community and he possibly loses his house.”

When asked about his own lowest point, Hanks recalls living in the “Valley in a house that we cannot afford … fired from the job that we have and it’s now been 13 months since you worked in the city and the phone is still not yet ringing. And you wonder if, in fact, you’re gonna take the job at the Der Wienerschnitzel on Laurel Canyon. When you have that moment, it never quite goes away.”

But as we all know, the two-time Oscar-winning actor has since had a fabulous career, and a wonderful marriage with Rita Wilson, who produced Vardalos’ 2002 breakthrough hit, “My Big Fat Greek Wedding,” after seeing the actress/comedian’s one-woman show. They have been friends ever since.

Vardalos, who is married to actor Ian Gomez (ABC’s “Cougar Town”), says she and Hanks had no rules when it came to writing, but she was still surprised when the actor told her that not only was he going to direct it but that Julia Roberts was going to be in it. “I did a double spit take,” she says, laughing.

The actress-writer spent a lot of time on the set during filming, especially since Gomez plays Frank, Larry’s military buddy and owner of a Burbank diner. The couple adopted a daughter three years ago, and Vardalos “lives to be her hero.” She says that she admires the way Hanks and Wilson have raised their children.

“Rita and Tom have managed to be a hottest Hollywood couple and still be real people,” she says.

And while “Larry Crowne” has two of the biggest stars on the planet in Hanks and Roberts, will audiences go? The film will face off against Michael Bay’s blockbuster sequel “Transformers: Dark of the Moon.”

“Forgive me, I haven’t the slightest (expletive) idea,” says Hanks, who’s been doing heavy promotion, about the film’s box-office chances.

“It’s gonna be interesting because you know, we say, `Here we are in the summer,’ but it’s not the summer – it’s year-round!”

Hanks says that while CGI makes anything possible onscreen, it doesn’t necessarily make for an interesting film.

“That’s a great brand of freedom that is given over to the filmmaker,” he says, “but when you are going to try to have people talk in a room and actually reflect life as we know it and have people recognize themselves and their own street and their own house, well then you’re aiming for the high country and it’s a much bigger gamble … .

“At the end of the day it’s got to be a good movie, it’s got to be a funny movie, and it’s got to make people think, `Hey, I couldn’t have spent my time any better.”‘

The actor-director says the best film about the economic crisis would be a documentary and the second-best version would be “a movie that at the end of the day would be extremely depressing or so serious and hard-hitting that it offers up no hope.

“We are competing in the marketplace where the one thing we may have going for us is the true battle against cynicism. That is what `Larry Crowne’ is about more than anything.”