Joseph Stalin died on March 5, 1953, after apparently suffering a stroke — but some suspect that he was actually poisoned.

Joseph Stalin’s death in March 1953 ended his long and brutal reign as leader of the Soviet Union. Since the 1920s, he’d ruled with an iron fist. He dragged his country toward industrialization at any cost and massacred his enemies — and perceived enemies — causing the deaths of an estimated 20 million people. But how did Stalin die?

The dictator’s death was a long, drawn-out affair. After he fell unconscious on March 1, 1953, his servants and advisors dawdled, unsure what to do without his direction. They eventually called in doctors, but even the physicians feared upsetting the dictator. Stalin’s condition slowly worsened over four days as doctors treated him with leeches and cold compresses.

Finally, Joseph Stalin died on March 5. But while the official cause of death for Joseph Stalin is listed as a cerebral hemorrhage, some suspect that he was actually poisoned by one or more of his advisors who wanted to undo his policies or reform the Soviet Union.

Indeed, Stalin’s legacy crumbled under successors like Nikita Khrushchev, who promptly instituted a policy of “de-Stalinization.” Since then, the passage of time has made Stalin’s cause of death even harder to discern.

Did he truly die of a stroke at the age of 74? Or was something more sinister at play?

From Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili To The “Man Of Steel”

Long before he became a Soviet dictator, Joseph Stalin was a young Georgian boy named Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili (later Russianized as Josef Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili). Born on Dec. 18, 1878, in Gori, Georgia (then part of the Russian empire), dze Jughashvili followed a strange, violent path into power.

He grew up as an insecure, angry child. His face pockmarked from smallpox, he’d suffered as a boy, and his left arm was somewhat deformed from a carriage accident. Dze Jughashvili also suffered under the thumb of his father, a violent alcoholic who regularly beat his wife and son.

In the end, he found the key to his greatness — and infamy — in a surprising place. Enrolled at Tiflis Theological Seminary, dze Jughashvili started to read Karl Marx. He found inspiration in Marx’s message and dropped out of seminary in 1899 to become a revolutionary.

Dze Jughashvili organized strikes and labor demonstrations, joined the Bolshevik Party, and met with Vladimir Lenin. Before long, he changed his name to Joseph Stalin — man of steel.

As the Bolsheviks rose in power, so did Stalin. When Lenin took control in the Russian Revolution in 1917, Stalin became the General Secretary of the Communist Party. And when Lenin died in 1924, the young man from Georgia triumphed in the power vacuum he’d left behind.

Determined to industrialize his country, Joseph Stalin ruled over the Soviet Union with an iron fist. Over the next three decades, he unleashed a series of five-year plans with lofty — some would say impossible — goals, threw dissidents in the Gulag, and instituted the Great Purge to eliminate anyone he perceived to be a threat.

By the 1950s, Stalin had steered his country through World War II and dropped an “Iron Curtain” between Eastern and Western Europe. And by 1953, some began to fear that he was gearing up to launch a new purge — or even start a new war.

That January, he ordered the arrest of many Kremlin doctors, most of them Jewish, and accused them of murdering Soviet leaders. In February, he also ordered the construction of four new prison camps.

But if the Soviet dictator had started plotting more violence, he never saw it in action. Joseph Stalin died that March. And while Stalin’s official cause of death was a stroke, some find the timing of his demise suspicious.