Genus Maculauger new genus (Fig. 7E, F)

Type species: Terebra pseudopertusa Bratcher & Cernohorsky, 1985.

Zoobank registration: urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act: 3565DB17-E4EF- 478B-8757-3A682BB8F6CF

Definition: Includes all species included in clade E5A of Modica et al. (2019) and those that show a combination of conchological, anatomical and distribution characteristics closely comparable with Maculauger pseudopertusus or any genetically proven member of the clade.

Diagnosis: Diagnostic nucleotide combinations in Table 10.

Shell: Small to medium-sized (< 60 mm); typically, orange-brown with irregular maculations on subsutural band. Whorl outline flattened or gently convex. Subsutural band lightly ribbed or flattened, separated from lower portion of whorl by narrow groove or row of punctations. Axial and spiral sculpture of about equal strength, producing cancellate sculpture below subsutural band.

Anatomy: Proboscis, radula, venom gland and accessory proboscis structure absent; salivary glands present or absent.

Distribution: Indo-Pacific; subtidal and bathyal depths to about 600 m.

Remarks: The new genus Maculauger comprises several species, formerly placed in Hastulopsis, that can be differentiated from similar species in Myurella by the equal prominence of spiral and axial spiral elements, producing a fine cancellate sculpture. Hastulopsis species have very weak sculpture and are found in the Indian Ocean or Japan. Some species of Maculauger, such as M. campbelli, are conchologically very close to Profunditerebra orientalis —a case where only anatomical and molecular characters can ensure correct identification (see Remarks on Profunditerebra).

Etymology: The name combines ‘macula’ (Latin: spot, blotch), referring to the commonly maculated subsutural band in the species of the genus, with ‘auger’, the English epithet for Terebridae (‘auger shells’). Gender masculine.

Included species:

Maculauger alveolatus (Hinds, 1844) 1 n. comb.;

M. campbelli (R. D. Burch, 1965) 1 n. comb.;

M. castigatus (A. H. Cooke, 1885) 1 n. comb.;

M. cinctella (Deshayes, 1859) 3 n. comb.;

M. minipulcher (Bozzetti, 2008) 1 n. comb.;

M. pseudopertusus (Bratcher & Cernohorsky, 1985) 1 n. comb.;