Thunderbird Films and Model House, LLC, in association with the Oklahoma Film + Music Office (OF+MO), are pleased to announce the completion of principal photography in Oklahoma for the independent feature film “Model House”. The production hired 25 local crew members and filmed throughout the month of September at several sites in Oklahoma City, as well as Turner Falls Park in Davis.

Written and directed by Derek Pike, “Model House” follows five models staying together in a secluded house as they fight to stay alive when intruders break in and extort money from their social media followers. The film stars Chris Zylka (HBO’s “The Leftovers”, “Spiderman”), Scout Taylor-Compton (“Halloween”, “Halloween II”), and Oklahoma natives Randy Wayne (“Honey 2”, “Dukes of Hazzard: The Beginning”) and Ryan Merriman (“Final Destination 3”, “The Deep End of the Ocean”).

“When I was first pitched the idea of shooting ‘Model House’ in Oklahoma, I have to admit I was a bit skeptical,” said Pike. “I had never been to Oklahoma and couldn’t imagine cheating it for California. But after I [visited Oklahoma], met the film commission and found everything I needed here without having to make any sacrifices, I was 100% in.”

“Model House” was produced by Randy Wayne and Talia Bella under the banner of their newly formed production company, Thunderbird Films. Founded in 2019, Thunderbird Films is a production company based in Oklahoma City, where Wayne grew up. After spending 18 years working in the Los Angeles film industry, where he met Bella, who worked as a producer, they decided to move back to Wayne’s home state and start a production company that utilizes their industry expertise. The company produces film, television and commercial projects while contributing to the state’s infrastructure through their rental inventory, which was recently updated to include additional trucks, grip and electric supplies, expendables, camera equipment and location services.

“It is so wonderful that Randy has moved back to his home state with his partner Talia,” said OF+MO Director Tava Maloy Sofsky. “We are excited that those who have moved away are seeing the opportunities in Oklahoma and choosing to come home. As the local film industry continues to break records and expand its infrastructure and crew depth, we are optimistic that more expatriates and companies like Thunderbird Films will proudly choose Oklahoma and make the overall industry even stronger.”

For more information on Oklahoma’s film infrastructure, workforce and other resources, visit okfilmmusic.org.

###