Welcome to Thunderbird Ranch, a meticulously remodeled Off Grid historic ranch home on 5 separate parcels totaling 45 acres just outside of the legendary Pioneertown, only a 2 hour drive from Los Angeles. Designed by a film director and his artist partner with an acute eye for detail over the course of nearly 8 years, every square inch of the home is hand-fabricated and custom made with no expense spared.

This 5 parcel property is an extremely lucrative proposition- any of the individual parcels could be easily sold or developed, in addition to remaining as a single sprawling ranch.

Thunderbird Ranch is an Off-Grid paradise in Burns Canyon offering complete privacy and serenity with undisturbed views of the valleys and foothills in every direction. Located where the High Desert meets the Alpine, the property is home to thousands of some of the world’s largest and oldest Joshua Trees (even more majestic than the National Park), ancient Juniper, Pinon, and a multitude of native flora and fauna. Being at a slightly higher elevation than Pioneertown, this locale enjoys a more temperate climate and higher levels of precipitation.

The property opens onto thousands of acres of protected wildlands, National Forest and BLM- simply hop on your horse or bike and you’re immediately in some of the most pristine and stunning undiscovered landscapes that Southern California has to offer.

The home itself comes fully furnished, and includes a priceless list of additional items from vintage and custom-made site-specific furniture, to original artworks, a 1920’s restored Sohmer grand piano, a 1974 city bus art studio (which could be converted into a guest house or an office), a vintage top of the line Marantz sound system, AR speakers, copper cookware, hand pottered Oaxacan dishware, and a new Blaze King wood fireplace to enjoy on winter evenings.

Thunderbird Ranch was built with the absolute highest quality of materials ranging from custom-fabricated steel-frame dual pane windows and doors throughout, to reclaimed solid old growth maple and oak floors, tin stamped ceilings imported from Europe, and hand-carved cabinetry with raw blue slate countertops made from property-sourced woods such as Acacia burl and Juniper.

The exterior of the house is weathering Corten steel with a new metal panel galvalume roof. Nearly 1500 sq ft of decking on two stories wrap around the home offering magnificent views in all directions and outdoor enjoyment in every season. The back deck facing west has ample lounge and dining seating, along with an outdoor kitchen with Weber bbq and pizza oven, an outdoor shower with solid brass hardware, a plumbed propane quartz rock fire pit and a quartz rock wood-burning hot tub. Below the house is a large spring-fed pond measuring roughly 30’ in diameter with a dock.

Beneath the rustic styling is a completely upgraded and updated home- Some of the items include new electrical and plumbing systems, new Samsung stainless appliances, on-demand hot water system, washer / dryer, built-in drinking water RO filter, Starlink high speed satellite internet streaming 4K content on a 5’ flatscreen LG cinema tv, a highly efficient central heating and cooling system on a smart Nest thermostat, and a built-in infrared 3 person sauna off of the front deck.

Completely self sufficient and Off Grid, Thunderbird Ranch is powered by a large cutting edge 7Kw solar system with lithium battery bank that leaves you wanting for nothing, not to mention never paying a utility bill again. A high volume, extremely plentiful 450’ deep water well is operated automatically by a dedicated solar array and a brand new top of the line Grundfos variable well pump with associated plumbing and wiring installed just last year.

With a history as an active horse property, the lower 5 acres and house are fenced with two separate corrals and a 3-4 horse shelter, while the two middle 10 acre parcels are open as a wildlife corridor, and the two upper 10 acre parcels are fenced.

In Burns Canyon the genuine romance of the Old West is still alive up here. Historic Rattlesnake Canyon and springs just beyond is where one of the last open cattle ranges of the West exists and the cowboys still drive the cattle through the hills to mark the beginning and end of each grazing season.

Just a few miles down the back road is the iconic Pioneertown where Roy Rogers and Gene Autry filmed their westerns. The nightlight is alive and hopping at the newly re-opened Red Dog Saloon and the legendary Pappy and Harriets- the roadhouse that was named by Billboard Magazine as one of the Top Ten live music venues in the country, where the likes of Paul McCartney, Robert Plant, Patti Smith, and Lucinda Williams have all played. The uber trendy little town has been the focus recently of feature articles in New York Times, LA Times, Sunset Magazine, Architectural Digest, to name just a few.

A few miles farther and you’ll find the amenities of Yucca Valley, the magnificent Joshua Tree National Park, and to the south Palm Springs, the mid-century modern haven with its museums, galleries, and highly rated restaurants. Head up the hill from the ranch in the other direction and you’ll connect to the infamous “back road to Big Bear” where an epic voyage will take you through historic gold claims and the remnants of mining towns, all the way up to Big Bear lake where the summer boating and swimming are just as fun as the winter skiing and snow sports.

Thunderbird Ranch has no neighbors for miles and is just far enough away while being just close enough to the action. It is separated from the rest of the desert and by a 5 mile private dirt road maintained by the community’s dedicated machinery. If you crave a home just off a paved road surrounded by Airbnbs, this is NOT the place for you.

This property offers the discerning buyer a unique confluence of quality, sophistication and elegance at the edge of the wilderness for the true Renaissance Man, Woman or family. Leave the madness of the city behind and start your dream life now.

The ranch is being offered for sale at $1,580,000 inclusive of 5 separate parcels totaling 45 acres.

Contact owner directly at 310 774 6329 or deliberatefilms @gmail.com