The historic Thunderbird Ranch, where high desert meets alpine, hits the market at $1.48 million.

If you’re looking to add a little Western magic to your life, presto! This property more than fits the bill. Let’s start with the movie magic associated with the location: Pioneertown is an 1880s-themed unincorporated community in the high desert of San Bernadino, California. More than 200 western films and television shows have been filmed there.

Then there’s the enchantment that comes with the property itself. The three-bedroom, one-bathroom ranch has been painstakingly restored by the owners — a film director and artist — over the last eight years with materials like custom-fabricated steel-frame dual-pane windows and doors, reclaimed maple and oak floors, stamped-tin ceiling tiles imported from Europe, and more.

But wait! It also comes fully furnished with carefully curated vintage pieces (hello, 1920s restored Sohmer & Co. grand piano), artwork, custom furniture, and even copper cookware and Oaxacan clay pottery dishware. Buckle up! There’s also a 1974 city bus that’s currently being used as an art studio but works as an office or guesthouse, too.

The charm doesn’t stop at the interiors. There’s nearly 1,500 square feet of decking along both stories of the home. The west-facing back deck is the perfect spot for outdoor entertaining thanks to lounge and dining seating, an outdoor kitchen with Weber barbecue and pizza oven, an outdoor shower with solid brass hardware, a plumbed propane quartz rock fire pit, and a quartz rock wood-burning hot tub.

Beyond the decks, the property spans five separate parcels and is home to some of the world’s largest Joshua trees, ancient juniper, piñon, and a vivid variety of flora and fauna. Below the house is a large spring-fed pond measuring roughly 30 feet in diameter with a dock. The lower five acres and house are fenced with two separate corrals and shelter for three to four horses; the two middle 10-acre parcels are open as a wildlife corridor; and the upper two 10-acre parcels are fenced.

Bonus: The ranch is powered by a large cutting-edge 7kW solar system with lithium battery bank, which means that your electric bills will be greatly reduced, as if by, well, magic!

Thunderbird Ranch

1102 Burlington Road

Pioneertown, California 92268

Price: $1,480,000

Bedrooms: 3

Bathrooms: 1

Interior Square Footage: 1,400

Acreage: 45