François Mitterrand (born Oct. 26, 1916, Jarnac, France—died Jan. 8, 1996, Paris) was a politician who served two terms (1981–95) as president of France, leading his country to closer political and economic integration with western Europe. The first socialist to hold the office, Mitterrand abandoned leftist economic policies early in his presidency and generally ruled as a pragmatic centrist.

The son of a stationmaster, Mitterrand studied law and political science in Paris. On the outbreak of World War II, he enlisted in the infantry and in June 1940 was wounded and captured by the Germans. After escaping from a prison camp in late 1941, he worked with the collaborationist Vichy government—a fact that did not become publicly known until 1994—before joining the Resistance in 1943.

More From Britannica

France: Mitterrand’s first term

In 1947 he became a cabinet minister of the Fourth Republic in the coalition government of Paul Ramadier, having been elected to the National Assembly the previous year. Over the next 12 years, Mitterrand held cabinet posts in 11 short-lived Fourth Republic governments.

Originally somewhat centrist in his views, he became more leftist in politics, and from 1958 he crystallized opposition to the regime of Charles de Gaulle. In 1965 he stood against de Gaulle as the sole candidate of the socialist and communist left for the French presidency, collecting 32 percent of the vote and forcing de Gaulle into a runoff election.

After his election as first secretary of the Socialist Party in 1971, Mitterrand began a major party reorganization, which greatly increased its electoral appeal. Although Mitterrand was defeated in his second presidential bid, in 1974, his strategy of making the Socialist Party the majority party of the left while still allied with the Communist Party led to the upset Socialist victory of May 10, 1981, when he defeated the incumbent president, Valéry Giscard d’Estaing. Mitterrand called legislative elections soon after his victory, and a new left-wing majority in the National Assembly enabled his prime minister, Pierre Mauroy, to effect the reforms Mitterrand had promised. These measures included nationalizing financial institutions and key industrial enterprises, raising the minimum wage, increasing social benefits, and abolishing the death penalty. In foreign policy Mitterrand advocated a relatively hard stance toward the Soviet Union and cultivated good relations with the United States.

Mitterrand’s socialist economic policies caused increased inflation and other problems, so in 1983 the government began to cut spending. By the end of Mitterrand’s first term in office, the Socialist Party had abandoned socialist policies in all but name and essentially had adopted free-market liberalism. In 1986 the parties of the right won a majority of seats in the National Assembly, and so Mitterrand had to ask one of the leaders of the right-wing majority, Jacques Chirac, to be his prime minister. Under this unprecedented power-sharing arrangement, known as “cohabitation,” Mitterrand retained responsibility for foreign policy. He soundly defeated Chirac in the presidential elections of 1988 and thus secured to another seven-year term.

The newly reelected Mitterrand again called elections, and the Socialists regained a working majority in the National Assembly. His second term was marked by vigorous efforts to promote European unity and to avoid German economic domination of France by binding both countries into strong European institutions. Mitterrand was thus a leading proponent of the Treaty on European Union (1991), which provided for a centralized European banking system, a common currency, and a unified foreign policy.