By NOEL MURPHY

HOMOSEXUALS should establish their own homeland, Geelong mayoral hopeful Buddy Rojek has argued on Twitter.

Buddy Rojek’s suggestion to model the country on Israel, obtain United Nations approval and name it Homotopia has infuriated gay and same-sex lobbies.

“Advice for Homos: move to a country. Sheer weight of numbers will change law and you can copulate and marry to your heart’s content,” Mr Rojek Tweeted this week.

“A Caribbean island could accept an influx of pink dollar residents in exchange for losing political majority and lift themselves out of poverty.

“Model the homosexual homeland on the Israeli homeland. UN recognition of the right of people to have a homeland. Country of Homotopia?”

The Tweets horrified Jan Farrell, who holds education and youth and community safety portfolios on Geelong’s council.

“This send(s) a horrible message to our young people who are same-sex attracted or gender questioning,” she said.

“Homophobia has no place in any community, particularly one as inclusive as Geelong.

“As someone who has campaigned for years against homophobia, I am revolted by such garbage, particularly someone who seeks to be mayor of Geelong.”

Barwon Adolescent Taskforce’s Leigh Bartlett said Geelong’s mayoralty was a “privilege reserved for people who show strong leadership and a sense of representing their community equally without favour”.

“Clearly Buddy is far from demonstrating any of these qualities and his recent homophobic comments on Twitter are offensive and do not represent the views of the majority”’ Ms Bartlett said.

“To have someone like Buddy associated with (City of Greater Geelong) would be a step back to the Dark Ages.”

Mr Rojek said his comments were misinterpreted.

“I’m one of the first politicians to openly support gay rights,” he said.

“I’ve got many gay friends – it’s a basic human right to be able to marry who you like.

“I’m actually saying it’s an unrealistic thing, getting their own country, that they shouldn’t have to go to that extent.

Mr Rojek said his support for same-sex marriage was behind Palmer United Party disendorsing him as its candidate for Corangamite at this month’s federal election.

He recently told DNA magazine, which caters to homosexual readers, that Catholics and other religions were treating gays unfairly.