The event will take place on Friday, 7 October

BY DIVA STAFF, IMAGES BY EVERYMAN LIVERPOOL/HOMOTOPIA

Calling all LGBTQIA culture heads! This Friday, DIVA is chairing a panel discussion on Queer Women on TV and Stage at Everyman Liverpool. Coordinated and supported by the wonderful Homotopia, the UK’s longest running LGBTQIA+ arts and culture festival, it’s set to be an evening of wonderfully queer discussion.

The panel will be chaired by DIVA’s junior staff writer Eleanor Noyce, with panellists including Alex Ogden Clark, Dr. Rowena Gander and Melissa Lowe. The panel will take place after a screening of A Billion Times I Love You, a beautifully queer love story by Patrick Maguire described as “one of the most real love stories you’ll see on stage” by The Guide Liverpool.

Queer representation on our stages and screens is experiencing a renaissance at the moment, with titles such as It’s A Sin and Heartstopper enjoying great success. However, representation for LGBTQIA women and non-binary people still has a long way to go. The panel will discuss queer women’s representation now and historically on our screens and stage, and what the future might look like.

The panel is free with a ticket to the screening. A Billion Times I Love You will start at 7pm on Friday 7 October. Tickets range from £11 to £21 and are available here. The panel will start at 8:15pm.

Alex Ogden Clark is a columnist, comedian and literal lipstick lesbian: they’re most known for painting faces all over the UK and on BBC’s Glow Up.

As an international performance artist with a PhD in dance practices, Dr. Rowena Gander creates thought provoking solo performance works that question and negotiate themes of sexuality, power and objectification in women. Since 2015 she has worked the stigmatised vertical pole to tease out how objects can add to or dissolve female subordination.

Melissa Lowe is currently playing Taylor in A Billion Times I Love You. Theatre credits include Bex in Hungry (Soho Theatre/ ROUNDABOUT @ Summerhall – Edinburgh Festival Fringe); June in Gypsy (Royal Exchange Theatre Manchester); Belle in A Christmas Carol (Theatre Royal Bury St Edmunds); Cecily in The Importance of Being Earnest (Octagon Theatre Bolton); Sally in The Cat in the Hat (Leicester Curve/UK Tour) and Me and My Girl (Chichester Festival Theatre). TV credits include The Midwich Cuckoos on Sky.

See you there!

DIVA magazine celebrates 28 years in print in 2022. If you like what we do, then get behind LGBTQI media and keep us going for another generation. Your support is invaluable.

linkin.bio/ig-divamagazine