The Top 10 LGBTQ+ ranking was last updated 26/06/2024.

Vuelio uses a proprietary algorithm to create these rankings, based on topic-related content in blogs on its system – you can read more about the process here. Our research team actively seeks out new blogs and bloggers for inclusion, but if you think we’ve missed someone, please get in touch to let us know.

1. Nomadic Boys

Kings of the world – and this blog ranking – are Nomadic Boys Stefan and Sebastien, who move into the number one spot. Traveling the globe and blogging to ‘inspire and show gay travelers that they can visit more places in the world than they thought possible’, the Nomadic Boys cover the amazing places they’ve been in the Destinations section; aspirational ideas for future breaks in the Inspirations channel; and list extra useful things you need to know under Travel Resources, for reference before you set out on your own next adventure.

8. Homotopia

Moving up two spaces this year is Homotopia, which has been pushing to make a ‘cultural impact through art and activism’ since its launch in 2003. Aiming to provide support and a platform to ‘local, national, and international LGBTQIA socially engaged artists and creatives’, the Liverpool arts and social justice organisation shares updates on its blog. Here you can find information on exhibitions and ongoing projects, including Homotopia’s most recent project – a celebration of the life and art of Holly Johnson. Go take a look on the blog to find out more.

10. A Spiral Dance

And a big welcome to a new blogger joining our ranking this year – A Spiral Dance, where Amanda has been writing about ‘living an unconventional life’ since 2006. While the focus on the blog has changed since its launch, these days Amanda shares on health and disability, LGBTQ+ issues, and impactful books. For fellow avid readers, make some time to dip into the 80+ LGBTQ+ books recommended on the blog, check out advice on finding your style later in life, and take note of ways you can help make change in the world.