This year we are organising again #WorkPride, a free for all, 5-day pride conference to learn and celebrate. We (and the LGBTQ+ community) would be very… Read More »My GWork – Work Pride 2021

Schools OUT UK released a press release today demanding teachers be trained to deliver new inclusive Sex and Relationships (SRE) Curriculum. In response to The Department… Read More »Schools OUT UK Says: "Train the Teachers"

Wise Thoughts, a pioneering LGBT and BAME arts charity in London, believe they were victims of a hate crime after 3 laptops were stolen from… Read More »Laptop Burglary at Charity Thought to Be a Hate Crime

Over 60% of Australian voters have said yes to same sex marriage and PM Malcolm Turnbull reckons that same sex partners will be able to… Read More »Australia Votes for Same-Sex Marriage

Teachers’ Event – Raising Awareness of LGBT+ issues With Professor Sue Sanders of Schools OUT UK Date: 8 Nov 2017 Time: 4.30-6pm Location: Museum of Liverpool… Read More »Launch Day Teachers' Event – Raising Awareness of LGBT+ issues (With Professor Sue Sanders of Schools OUT UK)

Schools OUT UK Chair and co-founder of LGBT History Month Sue Sanders had a crowd at the RSA rapt last night (25th of September) as… Read More »Sue Sanders Describes a Lifetime of Campaigning at the RSA

Glasgay! – Glasgow A vibrant festival of gay theatre, comedy, music, film, art, exhibitions, dance and clubbing – held in venue throughout the city of… Read More »Autumn Festivals: Glasgay! Homotopia, Shout and Wise Thoughts

LGBT History Month USA starts on the 1st of October. The website includes an lGBT face for every day of the month and one of… Read More »LGBT History Month USA

October is Black History Month in the UK and here is our updated list of people and organisations, with six new additions. Can you spot… Read More »Black History Month LGBT info

A damning report on the experiences of LGBT youth in Northern Ireland’s schools has just been published, but critics are asking why it took so… Read More »Why Did Government 'Sit on' LGBT Report for 17 Months?