Exchange Programs

Home

Exchange Programs

Professional lifeguards throughout the world have a rich tradition of exchanging lifesaving techniques, equipment, training methods and ideas. The CSLSA is proud to be a leader in this area by encouraging and promoting lifeguard exchanges within the CSLSA region and with New Zealand.

Inter-Agency CSLSA lifeguard exchange programs

Any professional lifeguard interested in visiting and observing the operation of a CSLSA Southern California or Hawaii Lifeguard Agency should be self-motivated and able to initiate, organize and schedule an exchange. He or she should also consider the following guidelines:

Possess a minimum of three summers of open water or surf lifeguard experience.

Exchange with and represent an organization with USLA Certification.

Obtain a letter of recommendation for an exchange from your lifeguard Chief, Captain or Lieutenant.

Develop a contact person such as the training officer from the lifeguard agency you wish to visit.

Identify an area of interest or focus such as front line or tower response, Rescue vessels or Junior Lifeguard program.

Use your scheduled days off or get approval for paid training during the exchange.

CSLSA and Auckland, New Zealand exchange program

This exchange program started in 1969 and has a rich tradition of exchanging professional and volunteer lifesaving techniques and equipment. Each year two visiting lifeguards from New Zealand visit Southern California beaches in July for six weeks. Similarly, two lifeguards from California visit the coastline of New Zealand during January for six weeks. The application is contained within the Annual Notice (below).

2023/2024 California/New Zealand Lifeguard Exchange:

TO: All current members of the California Surf Life Saving Association (CSLSA).th

WHAT: The CSLSA has again been invited by the Auckland, New Zealand SLSA representatives to participate in a lifeguard exchange program. This is the 55n year this exchange has taken place between Auckland/Northern Region and California. Delegates will tour various beaches observing and participating in lifesaving practices and procedures. This program is designed to enrich lifesaving knowledge and perpetuate international lifesaving camaraderie.

WHEN: Late December, 2024 through Mid-February, 2025 (approximate dates; actual dates decided by you and partner)

RESPONSIBILITY: The two CSLSA members will be responsible for their own food and transportation costs to and from Auckland, New Zealand. Surf Lifesaving Northern Region will provide accommodations throughout the exchange. The CSLSA will sponsor a portion of the airfare to New Zealand and provide a stipend upon delivering a report to the Board of Directors (upon satisfactorily completing the tour).

HOW TO APPLY:

1. Applicant must have a minimum of three summers of open water lifeguard experience and three years membership in the United States Lifesaving Association (USLA);

2. Applicant must presently be a member of the CSLSA in good standing;

3. Applicant must provide resume and cover page including name, mailing address, contact phone number, e-mail address, and agency.

4. Must have two (2) letters of recommendation. One from each of the following: A. Your Chief Lifeguard, Captain, or Lieutenant B. Your CSLSA Chapter President or other Executive Officer.

5. Must complete an oral interview with final approval given by the CSLSA Executive Board

6. Applicants from USLA certified agencies are highly desirable.

E-MAIL TO: E-mail your completed application with all documents to: exchanges@cslsa.org

DEADLINE: All materials MUST be e-mailed and time-stamped by Wednesday, September 12th, 2024 at 11:59pm. LATE APPLICATIONS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.

PLEASE CLICK TO DOWNLOAD AND READ THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION

2024 Exchange Delegates

Click here to Download the Powerpoint in PDF Form!

Vianne Kelly, Los Angeles City

Jackson Lawrence, City of Seal Beach