Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute Announces Partnership with

California Surf Lifesaving Association

LOS ANGELES – Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute, a world leader in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of sports-related injuries and illnesses, today announced a new partnership with the California Surf Lifesaving Association (CSLSA) as the Official Healthcare Sponsor of the 2022 West Coast Lifeguard and Junior Lifeguard Championships on July 22nd and 23rd.

The California Surf Lifesaving Association is a non-profit (501-C3 tax exempt) organization chartered to promote beach safety awareness and professional open-water lifesaving standards. The 30 CSLSA Chapters/Agencies share the mission, goals and objectives of the CSLSA. The CSLSA (West Coast Region) is one of nine regions of the United States Lifesaving Association, which is affiliated with the International Life Saving Federation.

“We are excited to partner with the California Surf Lifesaving Association because of its commitment to increasing awareness about open-water beach safety and our shared focus on injury prevention,” said Daniel Kharrazi, M.D., sports medicine specialist and orthopedic surgeon, at Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute. “As the proud and preferred provider of Southern California’s courageous first responders, our extensive experience in the fields of sports medicine, outpatient surgery, and rehabilitation will help keep lifeguards healthy and, on the beach, so they can continue to do what they do best – protect and save lives.”

As open-water lifesavers, CSLSA promotes beach safety awareness and professional lifeguard standards through public education, training programs, exchange programs, junior lifeguard programs, competition and other means. The ultimate goal is to prevent and reduce aquatic injuries, accidents and death at open-water beaches in the United States and throughout the world.

Bill Humphreys, President of the California Surf Lifesaving Association, stated: “As first responders in a challenging and often dangerous environment, lifeguards must remain in top physical condition as they serve the public. Injuries to lifeguards can be minimized but cannot be prevented entirely. When injuries to lifeguards do occur, top-notch care provided by Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute is needed in order to restore the health and functions of the lifeguard. Because of its outstanding reputation and history of serving first responders, the California Surf Lifesaving Association is very pleased to enter into a partnership with Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute as the Official Healthcare Sponsor. This is a partnership which will directly benefit and serve both lifeguards and the public for many years to come.”

For more information about the Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute, please visit www.kerlanjobe.org. For more information about the California Surf Lifesaving Association, please visit www.cslsa.org.

Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute

Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute is a world leader in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of sports-related injuries and illnesses. As the sports division of the Number 3 nationally ranked Cedars-Sinai Department of Orthopaedics, institute physicians provide comprehensive care for a broad range of adult and pediatric orthopaedic conditions. Patients benefit from world-renowned experts in multi-specialty orthopaedics and the physicians who take care of professional athletes are the same ones who treat you. For more information, or make an appointment, visit www.kerlanjobe.org.

California Surf Lifesaving Association

The California Surf Lifesaving Association is a non profit (501-C3 tax exempt) organization chartered to promote beach safety awareness and professional open-water lifesaving standards. The 30 CSLSA Chapters/Agencies share the mission, goals and objectives of the CSLSA. The CSLSA (west coast region) is one of nine regions of the United States Lifesaving Association (USLA) which in turn is affiliated with the International Life Saving Federation (ILS). As open-water lifesavers, our MISSION is to promote Beach Safety awareness and Professional Lifeguard standards through public education, training programs, exchange programs, junior lifeguard programs, competition and other means. The ultimate goal is to prevent and reduce aquatic injuries, accidents and death at open-water beaches in the United States and throughout the world. Our mission is to promote beach safety awareness and professional open-water lifesaving standards. Our members include lifeguards, junior lifeguards, and open water rescue professionals from California (Santa Cruz south to the Mexican border) and Arizona. We accomplish our mission through public education, junior lifeguard programs, training programs, exchange programs, competition and other means. The CSLSA works to prevent and reduce aquatic injuries, accidents and fatalities at open-water beaches.

Contact:

Trace Longo

Longo Communications for Cedars-Sinai Kerlan-Jobe Institute

trace@longocommunications.com

714-600-9811

# # #