MySQL Workbench is a visual tool used for database design, migration, development, and administration. It is a very powerful tool that is used by developers and database administrators. MySQL workbench has a great tool Migration Wizard. This tool will help in the the migrating database from some other database management systems( such as SQL Server, PostgreSQL, etc) to MySQL.

In this article, we are going to cover all the steps required to migrate Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using Workbench. We will provide clear explanations with images demonstrating the process.

Introduction to MySQL Workbench

MySQL Workbench is a powerful visual tool used for database design, migration, development, and administration. It is generally used by developers and database administrators. It provides a great graphic user interface( GUI) for developers and database administrators to interact with MySQL very efficiently.

It also provides powerful SQL development features. It is a cross-platform tool that ensures its accessibility across different platforms like Windows, macOS, and Linux.

Prerequisites

Microsoft SQL Server management studios

MySQL Workbench

ODBC Driver for SQL Server ( Any recent version is preferred)

Step-by-Step Guide to Migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using MySQL Workbench

Below is a Step-by-Step procedure by which we can migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using workbench.

Step 1: Open Your Microsoft SQL Server Management Studios

In the first step, we will open our Microsoft SQL Server management studios and select the database we want to migrate to MySQL. For example purpose, I have created a dummy database in the main file, gfg_database. This database will contain a table named geeksforgeeks with five rows.

Step 2: Set up a Connection with ODBC Driver

This is the most crucial step. We need to search in “ODBC Data Source” in the search bar of your operating system and hit enter. A window will gets opened. Now click on “Add” button present in the right hand side of the window. Now scroll down and select “ODBC Driver for SQL Server”.

Now click on finish. Now a pop-up window will gets opened. Now give a good generic name along with Server. As you can see in the previous image, my server is “DESKTOP-DAG4IB\SQLEXPRESS”. Now click on finish button. A data source has been added now.

Step 3: Open MySQL Workbench and Navigate to Migration Wizard

In this step, we will open our MySQL workbench and connect to the server. After connecting we will navigate to the Migration Wizard. We just need to navigate to the database option present in left hand side of the window and click on it. A drop down menu will open up. Now we have to choose Migrating Wizard option from it and hit enter.

Now select Migration wizard and click on it. A new window will open up.

Now click on “Start Migration” button. Now a new window will open up.

Step 4: Source Selection

In this step you need to select your source. In the connection method choose “ODBC Data Source”. Now, in DSN, select your created data source ( we have created a data source in step 2). Now click on “Test Connection”.

Note : If you get an error message, review the step 2 process very carefully

If everything goes fine, it will display a success message. Now click on Next button.

Step 5: Schema Selection

Carefully review, target select and fetch schema list step. After review click Next. In the Source Selection step, carefully select the database you want to migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL.

Now click on ‘Next’ button.

Step 6: Object Migration

In this step, we have to carefully review each part of object migration. We have check Source Object -> Migration -> Manual Editing -> Target Creation Options -> Create Schemas -> Create Target Result . In Source Object, we have to choose the database object we want to migrate and click next. After reviewing each step, we have to click ‘Next’.

If everything goes fine, you will this type of result in “Create Target Results” window.

Step 7: Data Migration

This is the last step in the process. We need to review two steps i.e. Data Transfer Setup -> Bulk Data Transfer. After carefully review these steps, we have to click ‘Next’. If everything works fine, you will get the success message like this.

Now your data is migrated from Microsoft SQL server to MySQL using workbench.

Performing Operations on the ‘geeksforgeeks’ Table

As we know, we have created a table in the main file named ‘geeksforgeeks’ in the Microsoft SQL Server. But now, when we have migrated it into our MySQL workbench, we can perform task in the table from MySQL workbench. Lets try to display the tables data.

Query:

SELECT * FROM geeksforgeeks

Output:

As we can clearly see that our table geeksforgeeks is present in the MySQL workbench and we can easily perform operations on it.

Conclusion

Overall, MySQL workbench is a versatile tool used by developers and database administrators (DBAs) to perform database design, migration, development and administration related tasks. It provides a great graphic user interface( GUI) for developer and DBAs to interact with MySQL database very efficiently. We have covered all the steps with clear explanations and attached an image demonstrating the process. Now you can easily migrate Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using Workbench and can perform task on the migrated database in Workbench.

FAQs on How to Migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using Workbench

What is MySQL Workbench?

MySQL Workbench is a visual tool designed for database design, migration, development, and administration. It provides a GUI (Graphical User Interface) for interacting with MySQL databases efficiently.

How can I migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using MySQL Workbench?

A: To migrate from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL using MySQL Workbench, follow these steps:

Set up a connection to your SQL Server using ODBC.

Open MySQL Workbench and navigate to the Migration Wizard.

Select your SQL Server as the source, configure the migration settings, and start the migration process.

Review and execute the migration tasks.

What are the prerequisites for migrating from Microsoft SQL Server to MySQL?

A: You’ll need Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio, MySQL Workbench, and an ODBC Driver for SQL Server installed on your system.