Including never-before-seen photographs and ephemera, a behind-the-scenes look into The Beatles' acclaimed first film

In March of 1964, director Richard Lester began shooting A Hard Day's Night, a feature film starring The Beatles. With fast, sharp humour and a brilliant soundtrack, the movie depicts the excitement and chaos of thirty-six hours in the life of the Fab Four, and stars John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr, with Wilfrid Brambell portraying McCartney's grandfather. This collection of photographs and unique ephemera captures the infectious energy and anarchic spirit of this groundbreaking film.

Specifications:

Format: Hardback

Size: 279 × 241 mm (11 × 9 1/2 in)

Pages: 284 pp

Illustrations: 323 illustrations

ISBN: 9780714871851

Mark Lewisohn was born in London in 1958. He is widely considered the world’s leading historian and authority on The Beatles, a reputation that began in his years as a researcher for other writers and was confirmed in 1986 when he authored The Beatles Live!—a diary-like account of the group as stage performers. Since then he has written several further books on the group, including Recording Sessions and the New York Times bestselling Tune In, the first volume in his independent biographical history The Beatles: All These Years. He is presently at work on volume two.

As featured in Associated Press, Guitar Aficionado, The Mail on Sunday, The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, The New York Times, Parade, Print Magazine, and on AnOther, Buzzfeed, and Goop; as heard on the Associated Press podcast

"Features a trove of previously unseen publicity stills... as well as collected ephemera from their ascent to the global cultural pantheon... The book's images capture the linear action, as well as behind-the-scenes moments that will excite any Beatles fan."—The New York Times Lens Blog

"A stunning new book spills the secrets of A Hard Day's Night."—The Mail on Sunday

"Yeah, yeah, yeah! A lavish treasure trove of rare photos and other artifacts... Offering a remarkable behind-the-scenes peek at the iconic Fab Four's first film and the surrounding 1964 swirl of chaos, charm and musical magic that reverberates to this day."—Parade

"... The ultimate tribute to the film... provide[s] context and explore[s] the film's impact and enduring legacy while capturing its infectious energy and anarchic spirit."—Guitar Aficionado

"Fantastic... An unparalleled and satisfyingly comprehensive glimpse into the behind-the-scenes of the film... Freezes this crucial moment in music history and preserves it for our own enjoyment."—AnOthermag.com

"The perfect gift for any Beatles fan."—GOOP

"Beautifully designed."— Steven Heller

"A beautiful book... Gorgeously printed photos, reproductions of the script and other ephemera. There's also a thoughtful introduction and epilogue by Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn. A must-have for 'HDN' fans. "—Goldmine

"[A] captivating inside look at the Fab Four's 1964 movie."—Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

"The group's exuberance back in the day has rarely been better conveyed."—Evening Standard