A controversial, never-aired Woody Allen TV special from 1972 that mocks then-President Richard Nixon has surfaced on the Web.

PBS initially planned to air the special, “Men of Crisis: The Harvey Wallinger Story,” in February 1972, but canceled its plans to do so, reportedly because its executives were concerned that its pointed political barbs — and especially an off-color joke about Nixon’s wife soliciting an affair — might endanger government funding for public television.

‘Men of Crisis: The Harvey Wallinger Story’

On July 4, the special was uploaded to YouTube for all to enjoy.

It’s Allen’s most overtly political work as a left-leaning writer-director, a hilarious mock episode of a TV documentary series that mines archival film clips and talking-head interviews for comedy.

It’s similar in format to both his directorial debut “Take the Money and Run” (1969) and his far more polished masterpiece “Zelig” (1983).

Allen plays Wallinger, a “flamboyant” high-ranking “German Jewish” aide to Nixon known for his high-profile romantic affairs — clearly modeled on high-profile security adviser Henry Kissinger.

There’s an interview with an ex-girlfriend played by Allen’s real-life ex-wife Louise Lasser, who describes Wallinger as a “swinger” and says “we went on a double date with the Nixons — it was a mistake.”

Wallinger’s Vassar-educated wife is portrayed by Allen’s real-life girlfriend at the time, Diane Keaton (who crosses her eyes throughout).

Allen had already completed his first film with Keaton — “Play It Again, Sam” (with both reprising roles they had played on Broadway), but it was not released until May 1972.

“I like attractive women and I like sex, but it must be American sex. I don’t like un-American sex…if you’re ashamed of it, it’s American sex,” says Wallinger.

At another point, Wallinger orders an aide on the phone: “I want you to get an injunction against the Times. It’s a Jewish New York Jewish left-wing homosexual newspaper — and that’ s just the sports section.”

Nixon is seen in a variety of unflattering clips, mangling speeches while Wallinger says things like “We decided to bomb Laos for a very strategic reason — we were not happy with the way it was spelled.”

A talking head later says: “Wallinger and Nixon’s political beliefs coincide — they both love Richard Nixon.”

Vice President Spiro Agnew’s attacks on the media were also ridiculed. “Mr. Agnew has been extremely upset over television ever since they dropped ‘Gilligan’s Island,’” Wallinger says.

Nixon’s wife isn’t spared either in the 27-minute film, which was quickly written and shot at Columbia University.

“Pat Nixon occasionally calls me, you know, and says, you know, ‘Dick’s not home. Come over. He’s on a European trip or something,’” Wallinger says directly into the camera. “But I try to discourage that kind of thing, because I don’t think it’s right.”

Asked afterward if the show was in bad taste, Allen said, “It’s hard to say anything about the Nixon administration that wouldn’t be in bad taste.”