Let's be realistic about ''Men of Crisis: The Harvey Wallinger Story,'' the newly resurfaced mock documentary written, directed by and starring Woody Allen as a Kissingeresque aide to Richard M. Nixon. It is not the Rosetta Stone of Woody Allen studies. It is not a lost masterpiece, either. (It wasn't even lost, just neglected for 26 years.)

Today, the short film can even be seen as an elaborate setup for a punch line that would land six years later in ''Annie Hall,'' Mr. Allen's first truly brilliant work. When Alvy, the Allen character, hears that Annie is living with a man who went to Harvard, he argues: ''Harvard makes mistakes too, you know. Kissinger taught there.'' That is the kind of hit-and-run political comment we've come to expect from Woody Allen: breezily topical, genuinely funny and expressing a world in which the political is narcissistically personal.

But if the bluntly political ''Harvey Wallinger'' is an oddity now, it is also nothing for Mr. Allen to be embarrassed about. This 25-minute film, tracing Wallinger's rise to become the ultimate power behind a dunderheaded Nixon, is at times hilarious and at times dated. Above all, it is sketchy in two meanings of the word: slight, and coming from a sketch-comedy background that Mr. Allen, who began as a television comedy writer and a stand-up comic, knew well. ''Harvey Wallinger'' is so much of its moment that it helps make sense of how Mr. Allen's career took shape on television and in film.

At that precise moment, near the end of 1971, the Watergate break-in was not yet a gleam in President Nixon's eye, and the self-mocking Woody Allen persona -- neurotic and wimpy, a sex-obsessed man who was not a sexual success -- was emerging in films like ''Take the Money and Run'' (1969) and ''Bananas'' (1971). But he was not far from his television past, when he wrote for Sid Caesar, appeared on the late-night ''Jack Paar Show'' and even made a ''Kraft Music Hall Special'' that comically wrapped up the events of 1967. ''Wallinger'' looks both backward and forward.