For a couple of decades now, there have been intermittent rumors about it, and sometimes a mention in a book or magazine. Fifteen years ago, one quarterly devoted several pages to it, but around WNET, where the 25-minute film was produced on the cheap in 1971, there had not been a sighting for ages.

The film may be the least publicly viewed work by Woody Allen, a raucous sendup of the Nixon Administration, replete with slapstick that recalls ''Bananas,'' juxtapositions of fictional characters and historical clips reminiscent of ''Zelig,'' and chatter about sexual foibles in line with the dialogue in just about every one of Mr. Allen's movies. The film, ''Men of Crisis: The Harvey Wallinger Story,'' was completed just in time to be shown as Richard M. Nixon, then hugely popular, was about to kick off his triumphant re-election campaign.

Perhaps for this reason, it never broadcast.

William F. Baker, the president of WNET, the public television station in New York, said he had been hearing about the film since he took his job 10 years ago. Tantalized, he asked about it around the office from time to time.

A few weeks ago, he found a cassette of the movie on his desk, courtesy of Mary Ann Donahue, a station executive who had worked on the film. Now he would like to broadcast it, he said, although securing approval from Mr. Allen and others involved in the project would be necessary.

Mr. Allen, who undertook the film without a commission from WNET and offered it to the station without charge, declined to be interviewed about ''Wallinger,'' but his longtime producer, Charles Joffe, said he doubted the filmmaker would give his approval.

Still, Mr. Baker said he was fascinated by the movie. ''I love it, and I'm going to find a way to show it,'' he said, adding that he hoped to find a way to work with Mr. Allen.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.