Read

November 14, 2010

In Death of a Thousand Cuts by Barbara D’Amato, The Hawthorne House is open for a reunion fifteen years after it was closed down. The Hawthorne House for the Treatment of Autistic Children was known for its approach in treating children with autism. The staff and former patients have returned for the first ever reunion. Some had returned because they chose to and others returned because they were told it would help to be reminded. All is well until the next day the founder of Hawthorne House, Dr. Jay Schermerhorn is found in dead the basement with his body covered in a thousand cuts.

This novel dives into the depths of autism. It gives the reader a look at the different affects it may have on people. Dr. Jay Schermerhorn focused on the patient. He listened to the patient’s words and behaviors, not those around the patient. Dr. Schermerhorn was a compassionate man. Who would want to murder such a kind man?

Although the switch from the officer’s perspective to the patient’s past memories can be confusing, Death of a Thousand Cuts is a great book for anyone who loves to read about mysteries. The first few chapters of the book seem to drag on for hours, but the suspense and mystery starts to build as the chapters go on.

Death of a Thousand Cuts

June 15, 2008

This crime novel was similar to Eye Contact in that the investigation has to involve autistic witnesses. The parts I enjoyed most about this book were how the author used the point-of-view of the autistic characters to point out the flaws we have in our societal expectations. We often try to teach others how to "behave" socially, but rarely follow those practices in the ways we wish others would.

November 7, 2014

This book kept my interest throughout. I could put it down, then pick it back up & get right back into it. I liked the different points of view. The problem posed of a detective trying to determine how to interpret statements made by the suspects, both autistic students and psychiatric professionals, was a nice twist for a police procedural.

April 28, 2024

A fiction book that contains a lot of facts and a political/social commentary; it gets the same reaction from me that a non-fiction book drawing mostly conclusions with a fair amount of story-telling. That is - Wait - this isn't what I signed up for.

I was glad enough to read about the subject of the book, except that it wasn't really much of cop-solves-murder-mystery and a lot of 'this is the best I can do to describe autism to you'. I'm happy to read Temple Grandin, or anybody else, on the subject of autism, just that I was ambushed by this innocent looking murder mystery. OK, rant over.

September 25, 2017

It was fine kind of confusing

December 23, 2022

Very unique thriller but I did find it a little bit predictable. That being said, it was very well written with interesting characters.

September 5, 2007

DEATH OF A THOUSAND CUTS (Police Procedural) – VG

Barbara D’Amato – 19th Book

Forge, 2004 - Hardcover

During a reunion weekend, famed doctor and author, Dr. Jay Schermerhorn, if found brutally murdered in the basement of Hawthorne House, once a home and treatment center for autistic children. Chicago Detectives Emily Folkestone and Oliver Parks must quickly find the killer of this high-profile victim among the former staff, doctors, family and patients.

*** Marvelous descriptions of Chicago and Hawthorne House build the foundation for this well-written book. However, it’s the relationship between the two detectives and the characters of the patients, particularly Jeffrey, that draws you in and keeps you reading. While the mystery is good, it is the look at autism that makes this a fascinating book.

March 22, 2015

A reunion at a former resident school for autistic children results in the murder of the school's founder, Dr. Jay Schermerhorn. the autistic children, now autistic adults, their parents and former staff are held for questioning. But how do the police evaluate the responses and behavior of the autistic adults? Can their answers be relied upon? And what will their parents to to protect them? These problems and more confound the police in their investigation of this high profile case.

I found the authors descriptions of various types of autistic spectrum behaviors and abilities well researched and credible. This added to the pleasure of the eventual explanation of clues and solutions. Very well done.

July 1, 2009

June 2009 COTC Book Club selection.

I actually really liked this and plan to add some more of D'Amato's books to my mental to read list. I was actually surprised to see that this is the first book featuring Emily and her partner - D'Amato wrote it such that I felt there had been previous installments and we were expected to know about the police detectives. I did see that she has a novel featuring Polly Kelly, the Chief of Detectives South, so maybe our main detecting protagonists are spin-off characters. I found the information on autism fascinating and the depiction of the original treatments saddening. The resolution to the mystery was satisfying and the interactions of autistic murder suspect Jeffrey Clifford with Emily were pleasantly unexpected.

May 5, 2009

Thoroughly enjoyed the premise of the book and felt the characterization was well done.

I felt the story started to drag somewhat, mostly because the point of view of Detective Emily Folkestone seemed to veer into events or thoughts that I didn't feel were that relevant to the story (and I do hate to feel like my time is being wasted when reading a book). This is a minor fault of the book but I was annoyed enough to rate the rating a notch.

Ms. D'Amato does extensive background research for her books which always makes for a rewarding read.

March 30, 2008

I enjoyed this book. I especially liked the portrayal of the autistic characters. There was no big "cure the defective autistic person" moment. The author must have done some research into the autistic spectrum.

It is a good mystery, with its share of red herrings and blind alleys.

July 11, 2008

This book was a good police procedural with an emphasis on the wide spectrum of autism behaviors. I liked how the point of view switched from former patient Jeffery Clifford who has developed ways of coping with the world to detective Emily Folkestone who learns about how autistic people behave.

August 2, 2011

Odd read for me. I grew up with autism (my older brother) and with my job as a speech therapist. So I am very hard to satisfy when reading anything with Autism. If you knew little to nothing of autism, this would be a good read.

July 26, 2013

Liked the autism aspect.

Very good characters, didn't guess who until late in the book.

July 11, 2016

Knew what happened before it was revealed, but still pretty good. I thought the storyline was well written.