"Although organized labor uses it often, the corporate campaign is little known and little understood. In this comprehensive and sophisticated study, Manheim makes a major contribution to public understanding of this strategy and its tactics....The Death of a Thousand Cuts is an insightful history and a useful reference for union tactics."

—Labor Watch

"This book is recommended for anyone who is involved in corporate or association communications--either as a public relations communicator trying to build community support or as a public affairs executive trying to win legislative battles."

—Impact, the newsletter of the Public Affairs Council

"One [strength] is Manheim's treatment of the 100-year history of U.S. labor, which provides an excellent contextualization for the birth and development of corporate campaigns. Extensive summaries of key case studies, including lists of key players, make the book an invaluable handbook for scholars interested in studying a particular campaign or for individuals interested in initiating or becoming involved in one."

—Communication Theory

"Academics in political science, sociology, business, and communications might find this study as a useful reference document."

—Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly

"The Death of a Thousand Cuts fills an important gap in political communication....Manheim's intriguing book offers many insights into a little explored phenomenon....The Death of a Thousand Cuts is a provocative and enlightening addition to the political communication literature, and Manheim convinces us that corporate campaigns are a form of political communication deserving increased research and theoretical attention."

—Political Communication

"This book is a great addition to the literature on social activism. Manheim does a masterful job of describing the new techniques and strategies applied by unions and other interest groups to attack corporations in order to achieve their own purposes. By making these strategies transparent, Manheim is raising the level of the public's awareness."

—Philip Kotler

Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University

"A must read for every CEO, public relations, and human resources practitioner...only after being armed with Manheim's 'big picture' knowledge can an organization hope to minimize the damage done by a corporate campaign...normal crisis communication skills/tactics cannot help a corporation under attack."

—Michael R. Walker

Chairman and CEO, Genesis Health Ventures, Inc. and Chairman, ElderTrust

"Forewarned is forearmed. In no case does this maxim pack greater wisdom into these few words than in dealing with the corporate campaign. For those who would be forearmed, Dr. Manheim's exhaustive history and analysis is more than a 'must read,' it is a definitive work to be carefully studied. Indeed, it brings to mind another maxim: those who do not study history are doomed to relive it."

—Columbus R. Gangemi

Chair, Labor & Employment Law Practice Group, Winston & Strawn