Crayon Shin-chan (クレヨンしんちゃん Kureyon Shin-chan), also known as Shin Chan, is a Japanese anime based on the manga series written and illustrated by Yoshito Usui. The show first began airing on TV Asahi in 1992, and is ongoing as of 2022, with over 1,200 episodes.

The series has had various localization attempts for English-speaking viewers, with the most well known being a gag-dub by FUNimation that aired on Adult Swim.

Dubbing History[]

Gloman Co., Ltd.[]

The first known English dub was made in South Korea and was intended to teach South Korean kids English. Episodes were released on VCD in South Korea by the company Gloman Co., Ltd. (글로만) from early 2001 until about late 2003 (when the company's websites shut down) as part of its "TV Ani•POPS English 21" monthly subscription learning program. Licensing was handled by Animation International. Gloman was in charge of planning, editing, and publishing, and manufacturing was done by Sangrok Multimedia. The first six volumes credit educational company Samsungdang Media (삼성당미디어) instead of Gloman. English was taught by the multimedia program through magazines and VCD videos, acting as the textbooks. Each volume included a booklet, alongside three audio cassette tapes and a VCD, containing English dubbed episodes to watch or to read and follow along with. The bilingual booklets contained episode scripts with screenshots, and each VCD was subtitled in English and Korean. A VHS option was also available, chosen upon subscription. Initaial volumes were dubbed by Hanbit Video Production Co., Ltd. and later ones by Toy Production Co., Ltd., with some changes in voice roles.

Lacey Entertainment[]

The series was dubbed into English by Vitello Productions in Burbank, California through 2001–2002, when TV Asahi and Lacey Entertainment decided to market the series worldwide. The dub featured veteran voice actors such as Kath Soucie, Russi Taylor, Grey DeLisle, Pat Fraley, Eric Loomis and Anndi McAfee playing the characters. During the early 2000s, it ran on Fox Kids (and later Jetix) in the United Kingdom, on Fox Kids in Australia and on RTÉ Two in Ireland.

Many characters had their names changed to American-sounding ones, the original background music was completely replaced with new background music, and scenes with nudity were edited to remove any signs of indecent exposure. Most adult jokes were re-made into family-friendly jokes, and the profanity was edited out. However, the frequent appearance of Shinnosuke's naked buttocks, as well as humor relating to breast-size and sexual themes, remained in the finished product. Some episodes that displayed adult material and mature content were not dubbed at all. Additionally, the episodes were dubbed out of their original order which created continuity errors. For example, episode 29 shows Shin bringing his classmates to visit his newborn sister, episode 30 shows his sister coming home from her birth in the hospital and in episode 52 it was revealed that Shin was going to have a sister.

In 2003, Phuuz Entertainment (formerly Media Concepts) was commissioned by Lacey Entertainment to continue the dub in similar style as the Vitello dub. However, the Phuuz dub contained none of the original voice cast from Vitello's, with all the characters voices being replaced with a different talent pool.

52 episodes have been produced by Vitello and another 52 episodes by Phuuz, with the total of episodes being 104. The episodes lasted on an average 21 minutes and contained three segments of 5 to 7 minutes. As both dubs have never been released in the US and had limited release in other countries, they are very difficult to find, with the Phuuz dub being near-impossible to find.

FUNimation[]

FUNimation Entertainment acquired the Shin-chan North America license in 2006. As per all international licenses for the series, TV Asahi remained a licensing partner for North America.

FUNimation's dub features their Texas-based cast of voice actors. FUNimation's dub was in a comedic gag-dub style, similar to ADV Films' dub of Ghost Stories, and takes many liberties with the source material and was heavily Americanized. Similar to the Vitello dub, episodes of the series were dubbed out of their original order, and segments were reordered. Additionally, many characters had their names changed to American-sounding ones (though much less compared to the previous attempts, most name changes were for comedic purposes). Many sexual references, dark humor, and references to current popular American culture were added.

New, previously non-existent backstories were created, as well as significantly different personalities for the characters. For instance, the unseen father of Nene (known in the dub as "Penny") was suggested to be physically abusive toward both his wife and daughter, and this was used as a source of black humor. Principal Ench was rewritten as a half Cuban, half Gypsy man with a complicated prior life that includes a stint as a magician, in which he accidentally injured scores of audience members. Masumi Ageo (known in the dub as "Miss Polly"), Shinnosuke's teacher, was rewritten as a kinky nymphomaniac, while Shin's schoolmate, Kazama, (known in the dub as "Georgie") was portrayed as a hawkish conservative.

The first 52 episodes of the dub aired on Adult Swim. All three seasons, 26 episodes per season, have also been released on DVD. Season 3, released in 2011, culminated in the official finale, effectively ending the Funimation series. Netflix streamed the series in the United States from April 6, 2011 until November 13, 2012. Seasons 1, 2, and 3 were once available for streaming on the US version of Hulu, they were also temporarily available for streaming in the US on the streaming service of Funimation. The series is currently unavailable for streaming.

LUK Internacional[]

A fourth English dub of Crayon Shin-chan was produced in Hong Kong by Red Angel Media in 2015 and was commissioned by LUK Internacional, the company that produces the Spanish, Portuguese, the second Italian and the second French dubs of Crayon Shin-chan and commissioned the Doraemon dub that aired on Boomerang UK. The dub was translated from LUK Internacional's Spanish dub, which is close to the Japanese original and has no censorship. The first three volumes of the dub were released in the European and South African Nintendo 3DS eShop on December 22, 2016, and the fourth and fifth volumes were released on December 29, 2016.

Wision DVD Production[]

In South Korea, 12 segments of the anime were dubbed into English and released on learn English VCDs and DVDs under the title “English with Jjanggu”, across 4 volumes. Wision DVD Production and later Daekyung DVD served as distributors. In this dub, Shin-chan's name is changed into "Shin Jjanggu" (신짱구), which is coined by his original Japanese name and the Korean word "jjanggu" (짱구) for "protruding forehead." In Korea, the animated version is severely censored compared to the original Japanese version. The voice cast for the South Korean English dub is currently unknown, being different between the first two volumes released in 2004 by Wision and the last two volumes released in 2006 by Daekyung.

Cast[]

Image Character Seiyū Vitello Dub

(Lacey Entertainment Episodes 1-52) Phuuz Dub

(Lacey Entertainment Episodes 53-104) FUNimation Dub

(78 Episodes) Main Characters Nohara Family Shinnosuke Nohara Akiko Yajima

(eps. 1-969) Kath Soucie Diane Michelle Laura Bailey Yumiko Kobayashi

(eps. 970-on) Misae Nohara Miki Narahashi Julie Maddalena Cynthia Cranz Hiroshi Nohara Keiji Fujiwara

(eps. 1-905) Eric Loomis Peter Doyle Chuck Huber Toshiyuki Morikawa

(eps. 906-on) Himawari Nohara Satomi Kōrogi Russi Taylor Colleen Clinkenbeard Secondary Characters Misae's Family Yoshiji Koyama Kenichi Sakaguchi John Swasey Hisae Koyama Noriko Uemura Russi Taylor Wendy Powell Musae Koyama Michiko Neya Carli Mosier Hiro's Family Ginnosuke Nohara Ginzō Matsuo

(eps. 1-428) Pat Fraley Sonny Strait Chō

(eps. 429-on) Tsuru Nohara Chie Kitagawa Russi Taylor Futaba Kindergarten Sunflower Class Tōru Kazama Mari Mashiba Grey DeLisle Hope Levy Brina Palencia Bo Suzuki Chie Satō Eric Loomis Richard Cansino Chris Cason Nene Sakurada Tamao Hayashi Anndi McAfee Michelle Ruff Carrie Savage Masao Sato Teiyū Ichiryūsai Russi Taylor Barbara Goodson Colleen Clinkenbeard Ai Suotome Ayako Kawasumi Monica Rial Rose Class Yasuo Kawamura Tomoko Ōtsuka Russi Taylor Trina Nishimura Kindergarden Staff Ume Matsuzaka Michie Tomizawa Grey DeLisle Clarine Harp Midori Ishizaka Yumi Takada

(first voice) Anndi McAfee Cindy Robinson Caitlin Glass Haruhi Nanao

(second voice) Masumi Ageo Kotono Mitsuishi Jamie Marchi Bunta Takakura Rokurō Naya

(first voice) Pat Fraley Jason Liebrecht Junpei Morita

(second voice) Shiizou Atsukuru Kazunari Tanaka Todd Haberkorn Kindergarden Students & Staff Relatives Junichi Ishizaka Naoki Bandō Kevin M. Connolly Moeko Sakurada Shōko Saitō

(eps. 1-97) Gwendolyn Lau

(eps. 4-48) Junko Hagimori

(eps. 98-on) Lydia Mackay

(eps. 53-71) Mineko Kazama Sakiko Tamagawa Melinda Wood Allen Ekasuky Sato Tomoko Ōtsuka Allison Tolman Kuroiso Fumihiko Tachiki Christopher Sabat Saitama Crimson Scorpions Ryuko Okegawa Kazue Ikura Brittney Karbowski Urara Takano

(ep. 843) Ogin Uonome Midori Nakazawa

(first voice) Amanda Doskocil Chizuko Hoshino

(second voice) Mary Akiko Muta Trina Nishimura Kasukabe Residents Mrs. Kitamoto Reiko Suzuki Laurie Steele Robert McGuire Yukitoshi Hori Robert McCollum Nanako Ōhara Sayuri Yamauchi

(eps. 17-763) Stephanie Young Shizuka Itō

(eps. 764-on) Micchi Hatogaya Fumie Kusachi Luci Christian Makiko Ōmoto

(eps. 503-on) Yoshirin Hatogaya Daisuke Sakaguchi Eric Vale Kenta Musashino Kenji Nojima Travis Willingham Shinobu Kandadori Mizuki Ōtsuka Wendy Powell Matazuresou Residents Nushiyo Ooya Kōko Kagawa Julie Mayfield Yonro Toshiharu Sakurai Christopher Sabat Atsuko Kutsuzoko Hiromi Ishikawa Tiffany Grant Atsumi Kutsuzoko Saori Sugimoto Leah Clark Yuu Yakutsukuri Makiko Ōmoto Jennifer Green Kyuji Oda Jun Fukuyama Troy Baker Kyousuke Nigariya Takkō Ishimori Cole Brown Fictional Characters Action Mask Tesshō Genda Pat Fraley Troy Baker Mimiko Sakura Etsuko Kozakura Russi Taylor Kate Oxley Buriburizaemon Kaneto Shiozawa

(eps. 1-355) Justin Cook Hiroshi Kamiya

(eps. 894B-on) Magical Girl Moe-P Sakura Nogawa Cherami Leigh Pets Shiro Mari Mashiba Russi Taylor Michael Sorich Chris Cason

Additional Voices[]

Vitello Dub

Grey DeLisle

Pat Fraley

Russi Taylor

Phuuz Dub

Richard Epcar

Rebecca Forstadt

Jessica Gee

David Lodge

Michael Sorich

FUNimation Dub

Maeghan Albach

Daniel Anchondo

Christopher Ayres

Greg Ayres

Laura Bailey

Charles Baker

Troy Baker

Andy Baldwin

Tia Ballard

Elise Baughman

Christopher Bevins

Zach Bolton

Anthony Bowling

Brandon Bristow

Jonathan Brooks

Madeline Broseh

Cole Brown

Majken Bullard

John Burgmeier

Douglass Burks

Chris Burnett

Shelley Calene-Black

Charles Campbell

Bob Carter

Chris Cason

Andrew Chandler

Angela Chase

Eric Cherry

Michael Chinnici

Luci Christian

Leah Clark

Kevin M. Connolly

Hilary Couch

Pam Dougherty

Jason Douglas

Jasper Dutt

Kara Edwards

R. Bruce Elliott

Megan Emerick

Elizabeth Evans

Bill Flynn

Daniel Fredrick

Scott Freeman

Cris George

Caitlin Glass

Liza Gonzales

Kenny Green

Jessie James Grelle

Jason Grundy

Martha Harms

Peter Hawkinson

Kyle Hebert

Scott Hinze

Jeremy Inman

Bill Jenkins

Jerry Jewell

Alese Johnson

Jeff Johnson

Jim Johnson

Kristi Kang

Brittney Karbowski

Gwendolyn Lau

Cherami Leigh

Linda Leonard

Jason Liebrecht

Gregory Lush

Lydia Mackay

Jamie Marchi

Josh Martin

Bryan Massey

Kim Matula

Julie Mayfield

Robert McCollum

Joel McDonald

Mike McFarland

Vic Mignogna

Rob Mungle

Anastasia Muñoz

Trina Nishimura

Stacey Oristano

Kate Oxley

Brina Palencia

Phil Parsons

Justin Pate

Chris Patton

Jenny Phagan

Newton Pittman

Orion Pitts

Brandon Potter

Wendy Powell

Monica Rial

Jaime Rivera

Jerry Russell

Christopher Sabat

Carrie Savage

Jad Saxton

Dana Schultes

Lindsay Seidel

Patrick Seitz

Jennifer Seman

Johnny Sequenzia

Stephanie Sheh

Blake Shepard

Ian Sinclair

Michael Sinterniklaas

J. Paul Slavens

Laurie Steele

Mark Stoddard

Kristin Sutton

John Swasey

J. Michael Tatum

Sean Michael Teague

Alexis Tipton

David Trosko

Eric Vale

Alison Viktorin

Kira Vincent-Davis

Maxey Whitehead

Kent Williams

Travis Willingham

David Wilson-Brown

Barry Yandell

Linda Young

Stephanie Young

LUK Dub []

Image Character Seiyū Dub Actor Main Characters Nohara Family Shinnosuke Nohara Akiko Yajima

(eps. 1-969) Jessica de Borja Yumiko Kobayashi

(eps. 970-on) Misae Nohara Miki Narahashi Candice Moore Hiroshi Nohara Keiji Fujiwara

(eps. 1-905) Michael C. Pizzuto Toshiyuki Morikawa

(eps. 906-on) Himawari Nohara Satomi Kōrogi ¿Catherine Fu? Secondary Characters Misae's Family Hisae Koyama Noriko Uemura Catherine Fu Hiro's Family Tsuru Nohara Chie Kitagawa Candice Moore Futaba Kindergarten Sunflower Class Tōru Kazama Mari Mashiba Candice Moore Bo Suzuki Chie Satō ¿Russell Wait? Nene Sakurada Tamao Hayashi Catherine Fu Masao Sato Teiyū Ichiryūsai Ben Margalith Kindergarden Staff Ume Matsuzaka Michie Tomizawa Muriel Hofmann Midori Ishizaka Yumi Takada

(first voice) Catherine Fu Haruhi Nanao

(second voice) Masumi Ageo Kotono Mitsuishi Muriel Hofmann Bunta Takakura Rokurō Naya

(first voice) Russell Wait Junpei Morita

(second voice) Kindergarden Students & Staff Relatives Junichi Ishizaka Naoki Bandō Russell Wait Moeko Sakurada Shōko Saitō

(eps. 1-97) Muriel Hofmann Junko Hagimori

(eps. 98-on) Kasukabe Residents Mrs. Kitamoto Reiko Suzuki Muriel Hofmann Robert McGuire Yukitoshi Hori Russell Wait Yoshirin Hatogaya Daisuke Sakaguchi Fictional Characters Action Mask Tesshō Genda Michael C. Pizzuto Buriburizaemon Kaneto Shiozawa

(eps. 1-355) Russell Wait Hiroshi Kamiya

(eps. 894B-on)

Additional Voices[]

Jessica de Borja - Mari Shiwasu, extras

Muriel Hofmann - Mrs. Tanaka, Reiko Kitamoto, extras

Ben Margalith - Adult Kazama, Lavender

Candice Moore

Michael C. Pizzuto

Russell Wait - Narrator, Naoki, Teacher Yamaoka, extras

Catherine Fu - Lisa Grace, Sheila Kannazuki, Yoko Narashino, extras

Note: Most voices are voice-matched, except for Jessica de Borja (Shin Chan), Candice Moore (Misae Nohara and Toru Kazama), Michael C. Pizzuto (Hiroshi Nohara), Catherine Fu (Nene Sakurada), and Muriel Hofmann (Moeko Sakurada).

Character Names[]

Original Name Vitello / Phuuz Dub FUNimation Dub Misae Nohara Misty Nohara Mitzi Nohara Hiroshi Nohara Harry Nohara Hiro Nohara Himawari Nohara Daisy Nohara Hima Nohara Yoshiji Koyama Waldo Yoshiji Koyama Masue Koyama Bitzi Koyama Ginnosuke Nohara Gary Nohara Ginnosuke Nohara Tōru Kazama Cosmo Georgie Herbert

Walker Prescott III Bo Suzuki Bo Boo Nene Sakurada Nini Penny Milfer Masao Sato Max Maso Sato Ai Suotome Sally Ai Suotome Yasuo Kawamura Cheetah Kawamura Ume Matsuzaka Miss Uma Miss Katz Midori Ishizaka Miss Dori Miss Anderson Masumi Ageo Miss Agnes Miss Polly Bunta Takakura Principal Enzo Principal Ench Shiizou Atsukuru The Flamer Junichi Ishizaka Ricky Doyle Moeko Sakurada Ruby Patty Milfer Mineko Kazama Barbara Walker Ekasuky Satoo Maso's Mother Kuroiso Mr. K Kitamoto Goobers Yuka Nanako Ōhara Miss Bono Nanako Ōhara Micchi Hatogaya Gidgy Micchi Hatogaya Yoshirin Hatogaya Luis Yoshirin Hatogaya Shinobu Kandadori Griselda Nushiyo Ooya Landlady / "Manlady" Atsuko Kutsuzoko Summer Atsumi Kutsuzoko Paris Kyuji Oda Barnie Ota Kyousuke Nigariya Ken Nakatomi Action Mask Masked Muchacho Action Bastard Mimiko Sakura Lollipop Buriburizaemon Pork-a-zoid Ham Solo Magical Girl Moe-P Yaz Heiress Shiro Lucky Whitey

Notes[]

Many foreign dubs are based on the Vitello/Phuuz dub, using the same censorship and Americanized name changes, including the Spanish dub.

Both Kath Soucie and Grey DeLisle have expressed strong distaste for the series. Soucie said that had the contract not expired, she would have quit herself, as she found the characters unlikable and wasn't pleased with the show's humor. DeLisle has admitted that she only did the dub for money, saying that the show was awful and its humor didn't translate well into English, with her even saying "I'm going to go to hell for this. This is, like, really bad for my soul."

In contrast to DeLisle and Soucie, Cynthia Cranz (Misae's voice actress in Funimation's dub) on the other hand has admitted that Shin-chan was one of her favourite shows to work on and she admitted that she really misses voicing her. [2]

Cynthia Cranz was told the reason why FUNimation chose not to continue dubbing Shin-chan was due to conflicts with TV Asahi as they found some of the jokes in their dub offensive. [3]

FUNimation originally intended to release their first Shin-chan DVD with an accompanying Japanese audio track and English subtitles, but wound up unable to clear the rights. Considering the dub consisted of cut and spliced skits from different episodes (many having aired many years apart), it may have also been difficult to have the rights to each original segment's audio cleared.

The oldest vignette featured in FUNimation's dub is from 1995.

Transmission[]

Date(s) Channel Dub Country 2002-2003 Fox Kids Vitello & Phuuz United Kingdom 2004-2005 Jetix 2006-2009 Cartoon Network

(Adult Swim) FUNimation United States

Video Releases[]

Distributor Year Format Contents Dub Region Country Magna Pacific 2004-2005 20 Episodes Vitello 4

PAL Australia 5 Volumes FUNimation Entertainment 2008-2011 The Complete Dub FUNimation 1

NTSC United States 6 Volumes 2010-2013 The Complete Dub 3 Volumes

See Also[]

Super Shiro

Crayon Shin-chan Spin-off

References[]

[]