Crayon Shin-chan (Japanese: クレヨンしんちゃん) is a Japanese animated comedy slice-of-life television series adapted from the eponymous manga created by the late Yoshito Usui, produced by Shin-Ei Animation for TV Asahi. Originally premiering in Japan on April 13, 1992, it is still ongoing on several television networks worldwide. The series currently has over 1,200 episodes and over 30 feature films. It is one of the most popular franchises in the whole world.

The series follows the adventures of a five-year old boy named Shinnosuke Nohara and his parents, his dog, his baby sister, his neighbors, and his friends. They live in Kasukabe, Saitama Prefecture, Japan. A staple of the series is its large cast of characters. Most of the plot is about Shin-chan's daily life, but it is also often interspersed with a lot of fantastic and incredible elements. Shin-chan is known for causing trouble wherever he goes due to his childish lack of tact when speaking to others, especially towards adults. The series is mainly comedic in style with some sexual innuendo. However, due to its popularity, it's also stylistically as family-friendly as possible, although it may not apply to all global audiences. Most episodes are about the importance of family and friends.

Original version[]

Episode 93 aired for the first time on April 18, 1994 in Japan. The episode has never been released on home video or streaming media, nor recently re-aired, or dubbed in other languages. The official episode list on the TV Asahi website also skips episode 93. The episode may have been pulled from circulation for content reasons, as well as being unable to be dubbed internationally or re-aired in its complete form due to its third segment acting as a preview for the then-upcoming second Crayon Shin-chan film. The first two segments could have been released separately on DVD like many others, but were likely pulled from rotation due to violent content, as TV Asahi would usually remove segments due to complaints. The episode did not resurface until September 29, 2019, when the first segment was made public online, after English-speaking fan Chimpoozle traded with a Japanese fan who recorded tapes of nearly every early episode and digitized episode 93 in June. The full episode is in the possession of English fansubbers and will be released once the fansubs reach the episode.

Episodes 48a, 57c, 63a, 92b, 92c, 95a, 97c, and 98a are also notable for only having resurfaced through foreign dubs at the moment, although episodes such as 48a have been recorded on tapes from their original broadcasts and from secondary audio tracks on Spanish TV. Some other episodes and specials also fall into this category, especially with regards to copyrighted music or undubbed and obsolete live-action segments. Some missing segments have been recorded on tapes from broadcasts subtitled in English on Hawaiian television station KIKU-TV from December 18, 1993 to December 1, 2001, at which point broadcast ended due to the American rights for the series being acquired by Lacey Entertainment for the English dub.

Additionally, multiple short “cold open” segments have not been seen since their original airings on TV Asahi or KIKU-TV.

A table detailing episode availability by Discord user @sinkadus is available here.

Dubs[]

Basque[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Basque dub of Crayon Shin-chan was aired in the Basque Country on ETB 1's Betizu Kluba block starting on November 26, 2001, reaching ETB 3 in 2011. Despite the dub running for over 15 years, a handful of episodes from the dub are not available online. The dub currently streams on Makusi, EITB's streaming service, so these episodes may turn up if added in the future.

Episodes missing in the Japanese numbering include:

Regular episodes: 185-189, 194-197, 332, 358, 370c, 374a, 376a, 380a, 381a, 382a, 384a, 385b, 387, 389c, 391b, 495, 503a, 551ab (only the beginning of 551b is missing)

Special episodes: 1-8, 9bcdefg, 10-18, 21cdef, 22bc, 42ab

Danish[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Danish dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled Shin Chan was aired on DR1, based on the English adaptation by Vitello Productions, starting on January 28, 2004. Based on schedules on the DR website, the dub aired until August 28, 2007. DR1 only aired single segments of the series in 10-minute time slots. Many episode titles have been sourced from the schedule, and while many can be matched to English titles, a handful of others are unclear. The dub was recorded at Adaptor D&D. More information can be found on Danske Film Stemmer. It is assumed based on the known episode titles that only the first 52 episodes were dubbed into Danish from the English version by Vitello Productions, and the dub did not continue to the second season's additional 52 episodes originally dubbed into English by Phuuz Entertainment.

No full episodes of the dub are available online, and the only surviving materials are the opening, the ending, and the first two minutes of episode 38c, "Where's My Sister, Mister?" The clip was uploaded to YouTube by user meinto on November 23, 2012. The opening and ending were uploaded to YouTube by another user in early December 2021, but went private on May 25, 2022, along with all other Danish-dubbed uploads on the original channel. The channel, who wishes to remain anonymous, says they have received full episodes from an unnamed contact, and that they wouldn't upload them without permission from that source. However, they have since fallen out of contact with said source and cannot upload the episodes themself for fear of being fined or otherwise penalized by Danish copyright agencies if issues arise.

All of the available materials are backed up on the Internet Archive. The clip of episode 38c has been cropped to remove padding.

Dutch[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Dutch dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled Shin Chan was aired on Fox Kids (and later Jetix in 2004) in the Netherlands, as well as on Kanaal Twee and VTM in Belgium (Flanders). The dub began on February 1, 2003 on Fox Kids, and according to Crayon Shin-chan Wiki, it was broadcast until July 23, 2008 on Jetix. The last new episodes premiered in 2005 and the remainder of its airings consisted of reruns. Kanaal Twee would broadcast the show from September 1, 2003 until March 18, 2005. Curiously, the official Japanese Crayon Shin-chan website states that the show started broadcasting in the Netherlands during July 2002, although no further evidence is known on whether or not the show was broadcast in that time frame on any channel at all, whether in Dutch or in English. The dub was recorded by JPS Producties and based on the English dub by Vitello Productions and later Phuuz Entertainment, running for a total of 104 episodes (52 from each English studio). It was relatively popular in ratings during its run, enough for parental complaints to bring the dub off the air, according to an interview with Dutch voice actress Melise de Winter, who provided the voice of Shin-chan in the Dutch dub. Dutch fans are very passionate over the dub and its voice actors and would like to see them return.

In the Dutch dub there were a lot of references to Dutch pop culture at that time. For example, one episode adds a line referencing Celsi (a CGI character of the Dutch Jeugdjournaal) wearing a string, and another adds Shin-chan and his grandfather wanting to eat with hot blondes from RTL (a umbrella of Dutch TV networks like RTL4 and RTL5).

There was also a reference to the network itself, according to anecdotal evidence. In episode 64a, "I Get a Babysitter!", Shin was told he needed a babysitter, to which he replied "bedoel je Kim-Lian van Fox Kids?" ("did you mean Kim-Lian from Fox Kids?"). Kim-Lian was a singer and also did TV presentation for Fox Kids and Jetix. She was host of Kids Top 20 for example, a program which aired on the channel at that time. Due to Shin Chan airing during the transitional period in which Fox Kids became Jetix, that line was changed to replace Fox Kids with Jetix. The clip may have also been aired in commercial breaks highlighting the channel's cartoons. Neither the episode nor any promotional spots (which are also stated by the Dutch Wikipedia to have covered Shin's hind end with black censorship bars that weren't present during the actual show) are available in either version.

Each episode consists of three segments, so each season has a total of 156 segments. In the first season, 137 segments are found and 2 are partially lost, with only 17 segments missing: 29b, 36a, 37c, 38b, 42b/42c, 45b/45c, 46c, 47c, 49a/49b/49c, 51b, and 52a/52b/52c. Segments 29a and 29c are missing small parts at the beginning but are considered found. In the second season, 30 segments are found in full, 3 are partially lost, and 1 is partially found, with 122 completely missing. The found segments are: 54c, 56a/56c, 58b, 59a/59c 60a/60c, 61b, 63a, 65a/65b, 70a/70b/70c, 71a/71b, 74a/74b, 76b, 77c, 78b/78c, 81c, 82b/82c, 83a/83b, and 84b/84c. Segments 59b, 68c and 84a are missing small parts at the beginning but are considered found. Segment 57a is missing its first half.

The first 19 episodes, as well as the 23rd, 24th, 26th and 41st episodes were released on DVD by the company Bridge Entertainment. The company also released episode 22a and 30b on another DVD given as a freebie with purchases at Dutch supermarket Super de Boer in 2004.

A list of available episodes can be found here, and they can be watched on the Internet Archive.

English (Lacey Entertainment)[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

Vitello Productions (season 1)[]

The first localized English dub of Crayon Shin-chan, titled Shin Chan, was produced in 2002 by Vitello Productions in Burbank, California, when TV Asahi and Lacey Entertainment commissioned the dub in order to market the series worldwide. Executive Brian Lacey served as executive producer and global distributor of the dub. According to Wikipedia, he orchestrated this global rollout beginning in early 2000, and “Lacey’s distribution efforts cleared the series in over 90 countries where the content garnered outstanding audience ratings.” (Although some sources say 100.) Referred to by fans as the “Vitello dub”, this version was never aired in the US, instead making its premiere in the United Kingdom from April 22, 2002 until 2003 on Fox Kids. When the channel rebranded to Jetix, the show remained on the schedule with a reduced presence, sometimes as a slot-filler between other programs such as movies that didn’t fill enough time, or as a trimmed-down short (these shorts were also included as a secret on the DVD included with issue 5 of Jetix Magazine in the UK). Contrary to popular belief, the show had its own scheduled times on both Fox Kids and Jetix, and was not exclusively broadcast during programming breaks. However, airings and time slots were sporadic, occurring in the early morning, evenings, or late at night. It appears Fox Kids and Jetix in the United Kingdom did not pay as much attention to the dub in comparison to their other European counterparts. The show was fully removed from the channel by the end of 2005.

On Fox Kids in Australia, the dub premiered in January 2003 and ran until the channel's closure in 2004. The show played on weekday mornings at 8:30 AM, and later on, all week at 6:30 AM. Once the channel closed due to Foxtel's aim to migrate all their channels to a digital platform (Disney did not acquire the channel because it was operated separately), Shin Chan and a selection of other programming had begun airing on a Fox Kids block early every morning on Fox8, which did not last long. The dub aired weekdays at around 6:50 AM during February 2004. The dub is also officially stated on the Japanese Crayon Shin-chan website to have premiered in New Zealand during July 2005, although no further details are known. The show was confirmed by entertainment executive Brian Lacey to have been sold there, as well as in Canada and South Africa.

On RTÉ Two in the Republic of Ireland, the dub premiered during January 2003 at 12:30 PM, and moved to 12:00 PM on February 1. The dub was broadcast until mid-2005, around the summer, when it aired on weekends at 2:00 PM.

On Channel i in Singapore, the dub started on May 3, 2003, airing at 10:30 AM on weekends until August 30. The following week, on September 6, the dub aired at 9:30 AM, only on Saturday. On September 13, the dub started airing on Saturdays at 11:30 AM until December 27. On July 27, 2004, the dub would return to the schedule on Tuesdays at 6:00 PM until September 28.

In subtitled form, the dub began in Iceland on January 14, 2003, airing until August 28, 2008 on Stöð 2’s Barnatími block. Subtitles were also shown in Israel in June 2004 on Arutz HaYeladim’s nighttime Telemania block, moving to the newly-formed Telemanga block in 2006 and running until the block’s closure in 2009.

Although the dub was never aired in the United States, it was sold and licensed to Fox Kids while the episodes were still in English-language adaptation. Distributor Lacey Entertainment fully anticipated that Shin-chan would be launched as a strip, and it would do very well. However, Disney acquired Fox Kids, and with that acquisition, Disney advised that they would never broadcast the program, maintaining that the series "did not fit with the Disney progamming image and strategy."

It was also pitched by Lacey with TV Asahi to both Cartoon Network and its Adult Swim block, whose VP of production Keith Crofford was revealed to be a fan of the series, during 2003, which ultimately failed. As fans of the show already, Adult Swim's staff believed that "the newly dubbed version felt more appropriate for five year olds and had lost the charm of the original," as stated on its website in anticipation of the Funimation dub's test run premiere in August 2006[1]. Three years prior, on May 27, 2003, Sarah Dyer, who also enjoyed the series and later worked as a freelance writer for the Funimation dub's test run with her husband Evan Dorkin, wrote on her blog, "I'll always be sorry that the attempt to get him for the Cartoon Network wasn't in time. I doubt the current licensee will ever get that show on the air. But you never know."[2] Despite no presence in North America, the show gained a lot of attention in other parts of the western world and Europe to make Crayon Shin-chan a larger success worldwide. The license agreement between Lacey Entertainment and TV Asahi expired at the end of 2005.

The dub contained a small pool of famous veteran voice actors that had done work in American cartoons, namely Kath Soucie as Shin-chan and Mitsy, Eric Loomis as Harry and Bo, Russi Taylor as Daisy and Max, Grey DeLisle as Cosmo and Miss Uma, Anndi McAfee as Nini and Miss Dori, and Pat Fraley as Principal Enzo and the Masked Muchacho. Kath Soucie and Grey DeLisle have voiced their disappointment in working on the dub during interviews in the late 2000’s on animation websites. Although the dub was censored and localized (as seen with the aforementioned character names), the infamous Buri Buri dance was still seen. Text edits were also made, along with a new soundtrack composed by Louis Cortelezzi and John Lissauer at Rave Music in New York. The theme song was composed by John Loeffler and John Siegler, both of Pokémon fame. It is notable that much of the dub’s music production staff also worked with 4Kids Entertainment, although 4Kids had no involvement with the series. The dub served as a basis for the Danish, Dutch, French, German, Greek, Italian, Polish, Brazilian Portuguese, European Portuguese, and Latin American Spanish dubs. Fox Kids Europe and Jetix Europe oversaw the dubbing and distribution of many European dubs based on the Vitello dub. Much knowledge on the dub has been inferred from its foreign-dubbed counterparts.

52 episodes comprising 156 segments (21 minutes each, with three segments lasting 5 to 7 minutes) were produced, of which 128 are fully found in English, 10 are found in censored form from UK broadcasts (although episode 23b is damaged at the beginning), 11 segments are completely lost, 6 segments are missing small portions (although episodes 23c and 40b are also censored), and 1 segment is mostly missing. The first 20 episodes (60 segments) were released on DVD in Australia by Magna Pacific, episode 27 was released in the UK on a DVD included with issue 4 of Jetix Magazine (although the audio was off-sync), and episode 28 was released in the UK on a DVD given away as part of a special freebie offer with the newspaper The Sun in 2004 (along with episode 13). Episodes 4 and 9 are also censored on another DVD released by The Sun in 2003. Although all 52 episodes made by Vitello were produced as a single season, Fox Kids UK split it in two for broadcast purposes.

The order of the episodes released in the dub is not the chronological order aired in Japan. For example, in episode 29, Shin brings his classmates to visit his newborn sister. Episode 30 features the baby coming home from her birth in the hospital. In episode 52, it is revealed that Shin is going to have a little sister.

The Danish dub, the Greek dub, the Polish dub, the Brazilian Portuguese dub, the European Portuguese dub, and the Latin American Spanish dub (translations of the Vitello dub) left the title cards in English, therefore the English names of missing segments of the Vitello dub are known. Most of these dubs do not have many episodes found which are missing in English, so the statement mostly applies to only the Latin American Spanish dub and sometimes the Brazilian Portuguese dub.

Most segments initially available were found by the same source on Fox Kids in the UK, uploaded to the Kametsu forums. However, some episodes appear to be sourced from second-generation tapes. Some segments recorded from Jetix were uploaded by the YouTube channel "Shin Chan", who has claimed to be in possession of 23 segments. Said user only ever uploaded 13 segments, 10 of which are available. Episodes 8a, 8c, and 17b were claimed for copyright when they were first uploaded and not backed up. Episode 30 was found from Fox8 Kids in Australia, uploaded to YouTube by GreenYoshi92, who also uploaded the contents of DVD volume 5.

On April 20, 2022, 16 complete segments and one incomplete segment were uploaded to Archive.org by user Philtype, sourced from VHS recordings captured on RTÉ2's The Den block in Ireland. On May 4, 2022, some alternate recordings of previously found episodes were added, including some new uncensored copies or copies in better quality.

It is possible some episodes were skipped by Fox Kids in the UK. For example, episode 20 is not available from a VHS rip on the channel. The Polish dub carries over the same censorship from the UK, which is also missing episode 20. It is the only foreign dub based on Vitello's dub to use this censorship.

For both the Vitello dub and the Phuuz dub that followed in the second produced season, more information and references, including UK censorship and a list of available episodes, can be found on the Lost Media Wiki, and the corresponding Japanese episode titles and numbers can be found on Wikipedia. All available episodes and alternate recordings can be watched on the Internet Archive.

Phuuz Entertainment (season 2)[]

In 2004, Phuuz Entertainment and Media Concepts gained the license to the series and produced a new season of the English adaptation, being commissioned by Lacey Entertainment to continue in similar style as the Vitello dub, featuring a different pool of Los Angeles-based voice actors known for anime. None of this dub was ever released on DVD, and no segments have appeared on the internet. Only three low-quality cell phone audio recordings exist online of Shin, Mitsy, and Harry’s dialogue. 52 episodes (156 segments) have been produced of the Phuuz dub, of 151 segments the English name is known. The missing titles are from episodes 100c, 101, and 103c.

A handful of episode titles were sourced from the European Portuguese dub, which left title cards in English. The Brazilian Portuguese and Latin American Spanish dubs also provide a small amount of these. However, most of the other titles listed on Wikipedia have no visual proof, and were likely sourced from reairings of the Latin American Spanish dub on ETC TV in Chile, due to the fact that the edits that added the titles were made at the time reruns occurred in early 2020, by a user with a Chilean IP address. The missing titles are likely to become known if ETC is to rebroadcast the Latin American Spanish dub of these episodes. The end credits for this season are also seen in the three aforementioned dubs and the German dub.

Most dubs based on Vitello’s dub also dubbed episodes from Phuuz, except for the Danish, Italian and Polish dubs. It is unclear whether or not the Greek dub may have continued. It is also unclear which channels may have broadcast Phuuz episodes given the time frame of broadcast, although according to an edit made to Wikipedia in December 2004, Fox Kids UK premiered a "new series with a different voice cast" that month. Mentions on Israeli forums also suggest that the season aired there.

The French dub, the Brazilian Portuguese dub, the Latin American Spanish dub, and the Dutch dub translated the same 52 episodes. It is commonly believed that Phuuz dubbed 78 episodes due to the German dub containing 130 episodes, but Brian Lacey has confirmed that it was only 52, stating that in Germany, the broadcaster acquired more than the 104 episodes originally adapted for the US and global markets.

English (Gloman)[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A second South Korean English dub of Crayon Shin-chan, recorded at Hanbit Video Production Co., Ltd., was released by the company Gloman Co., Ltd. (글로만) in 2001 as part of its "TV Ani•POPS English 21" monthly subscription learning program. It is also the first known English dub of the series overall. Licensing was handled by Animation International. Gloman was in charge of planning, editing, and publishing, and manufacturing was done by Sangrok Multimedia. English was taught by the multimedia program through magazines and VCD or VHS videos, acting as the textbooks. The video format as well as a choice of English or Korean subtitles was chosen upon subscription, although on VHS, each half of the runtime was made up of the same contents subtitled in either English or Korean. The "21" stands for the 21st century. Very little is known about the dub outside of a single listing on South Korean shopping website hellomarket.com. The user that created the listing has been deactivated, despite the fact the listing still appears to be for sale, and the listing was created on March 13, 2012. It is assumed from the images that the set of audio cassette tapes and VCDs included with each textbook contained English audio of episodes to watch or to read and follow along with. The cassette tapes may have instead been for music as part of the program. The bilingual textbooks contained episode scripts with screenshots. The listing states that the first 13 volumes were only being sold as companion textbooks, while the rest were new packages with tapes and VCDs included. It is assumed from the listing that only 24 volumes exist.

Newspaper advertisements were also published in South Korean paper "The Dong-A Ilbo" throughout 2001, proclaiming "Multimedia English textbooks for the 21st century are finally here!" and "English couldn't be more fun than this". These newspapers are archived on the publication's website, but payment must be made for high quality PDF access.

The company's website was once available at gloman.net until the end of 2003, with content concerning Shin-chan at gloman.net/default_ani.htm. For each volume, the website listed titles for each segment and provided a transcript in English and Korean for one of the three. Each issue also had a self-test and an English cooking feature. WMV sample video files could also be downloaded, of which seven are backed up by the Wayback Machine, making the dub partially found. Other content could also be found at egloman.net, which appears to have been an online companion to the subscription.

In late June or July 2023, a set of the first 12 volumes on VHS was listed on South Korean shopping website bunjang.co.kr by the user 김재천블루. Using the website’s official global shipping proxy, globalbunjang.com, Discord user @harmony_omega paid to buy the item on August 26, 2023. On September 8, 2023, they received the tapes, digitizing them and uploading them to Nyaa the next day, and on the Internet Archive on September 12. Despite the fact that an image of volume 20 was included in the listing, it was not apart of the package. Another listing was made by the seller on December 16, 2023, including volumes 16 and 20, which was purchased by the same Discord user on December 19, 2023. The two tapes were digitized and uploaded to the Internet Archive on January 19, 2024.

Gallery[]

Filipino[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Filipino dub of Crayon Shin-chan was aired on IBC-13, RPN-9, and ABC-5 in the Philippines. The dub began on IBC-13 on March 4, 2002, debuting alongside the series Cyborg Kuro-chan. Shin-chan was voiced by Filipino rapper Andrew E., best known for his suggestive lyrics, for the first five episodes. He also dubbed the show's theme song. What was broadcast of the theme song (with a title card at the end) is only available from a low-quality cell phone audio recording.

The series was rated PG in the Philippines due to mature content. Almost all of the character names were changed into Filipino names, including Misae becoming Carmen, Masao becoming Boyet, and Mrs. Yoshinaga becoming Pilar Miyumi (or Mayumi or Ryumi).

Only six segments of the dub are available online, commonly seen in a 42-minute-long compilation of all six. Some segments are missing the title card either partly or entirely.

Additionally, a censored clip of episode 1a, "Running an Errand" (おつかいに行くゾ) was played during a special titled "20 Japanese Anime Masterpieces Chosen by the World", broadcast on TV Asahi in Japan on July 29, 2008. Crayon Shin-chan took the 13th spot, and its segment of the special can be seen here.

Episodes[]

# Filipino Title Original Title Status 1 おゾウニを食べるゾ Partially Found たこあげは楽しいゾ Lost 雪だるまを作るゾ Lost 5 Manonood kami ng sine 映画に行くゾ Found Ang Regalo kay Maam Pilar sa Birthday nya! よい子のプレゼントだゾ Found Ang Magulong Hapunan お手伝いするゾ Found 42 Deliver kami ng pizza pie 出前ピザをたのむゾ Found Ang Hamster ni Boyet マサオ君のハムスターだゾ Found Isasampay Ko Ang Kutson おフトンをほすゾ Found

French[]

La Dame Blanche (seasons 1 and 2)[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A French dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled Shin Chan was aired on Fox Kids (and later Jetix in 2004) in France, as well as on Club RTL in Belgium (Wallonia) and on TSR2 in Switzerland. The dub began on August 31, 2002 on Fox Kids in France, broadcasting until the mid-2000’s. The last new episodes premiered circa 2005. According to the official Japanese Crayon Shin-chan website, the show started broadcasting in Belgium (Wallonia), Luxembourg, and Switzerland during July 2005. The dub was recorded by La Dame Blanche in Belgium and based on the English dub by Vitello Productions and later Phuuz Entertainment, running for a total of 104 episodes (52 from each English studio).

Each episode consists of three segments, so each season has a total of 156 segments. In the first season, 85 segments are found and 6 are partially lost, with 65 segments missing: 1a, 3b, 4b/4c, episodes 7 through 14, 16a/16c, episode 17, 18a/18b, 19c, 21a, 25c, 32a/32c, 35c, 38b/38c, 39a/39c, 40c, episodes 41 through 44, episode 50 and episode 51. Segments 22b, 27a/27b, 35a/35b, 37a, and 47a are missing small parts at the beginning but are considered found. In the second season, only five segments are found in full, and three are incomplete. They are in rather low video quality. The rest are completely missing. The found segments are: 79a/79b, 93b, 96c, and 97a. Segment 77a is missing its second half, with the available video file skipping forward to 77b, missing its first half. Segment 97b is missing its second half.

A list of the titles of every episode is available on Planète Jeunesse along with information on the dub’s staff and cast, and all available episodes (and the theme song) can be viewed on the Internet Archive.

Galician[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Galician dub of Crayon Shin-chan was aired in Galicia on TVG's Xabarín Club block starting on September 30, 2002, reaching tvG2's version of the block when it launched in 2009. Despite the dub running for over 20 years, a handful of episodes from the dub are not available online, ranging from episodes 334 to 362 (340 to 369 in Japan). Episodes 334, 339, 344a, 346, and 350-362 are not available online.

German[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

Uncensored episodes[]

The first German dub of Crayon Shin-chan was aired on RTL II in Germany, produced by Interopa Film. The dub began on April 5, 2002. 52 episodes premiered with the first season until June 24, 2002 and the second season from July 29, 2002 to September 3, 2002. The dub was also very appealing to older audiences. However, after complaints from a small group of activists, the series received a new dub later on, toning down inappropriate dialogue with new jokes and insults. Some episode titles were also modified. After this point, only the second dub was aired or released on DVD and streaming. The remainder of the series only received one dub, which was more true to the original Japanese version than the first dub. The broadcast order of the first 78 episodes also differed compared to later releases, but neither order matched the English release. An additional 26 episodes were also dubbed in German based on the Japanese version that were not dubbed in English, due to RTL II acquiring more than the 104 episodes originally adapted for the US and global markets.

11 full episodes ranging from 7 to 17 (or 7 to 11, 15, and 53 to 57 in the redub) were made available by YouTube user AvatarFanUno on December 27, 2018, burned to a DVD file format. A version split up by episode is uploaded to the Internet Archive.

A list comparing each episode in both German dubs to their corresponding English or Japanese version can be found here, where the first three seasons (colored in red and blue) are relevant.

Greek[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Greek dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled Σιν Τσαν was first broadcast in Greece on Star Channel and in Cyprus in October 2004, lasting until at least August 2007 judging by archives of the Star Channel website. Rated for all ages, the ran for either 60[3] or 80 episodes.[4] It is unknown whether this number counts single segments or full episodes, or whether this number is exact, although it is listed to have a runtime of 30 minutes. Across its run, the dub aired in an early morning time slot, ranging from 6:00 AM to 6:30 AM and 6:45 AM, on weekends. The dub was recorded by Power Music Productions in Greece.

On October 23, 2006, Audio Visual Enterprises S.A. released 6 DVDs in Greece, containing 4 episodes on each disc, making up the first 24 episodes of the dub. The contents of all 6 volumes were uploaded to the Internet Archive on July 14, 2022. It is yet to be seen whether any episodes existed on TV airings past episode 24.

Cast information can be found on the Greek Dub Database.

Hindi[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

Original dub and uncensored episodes[]

After Spacetoon acquired the series license in India, the first Hindi dub of Crayon Shin-chan premiered on Hungama TV in India on June 19, 2006, gaining up to 50-60% of the channel's market share before its hiatus. Repeated complaints of "social concerns" caused by the show were lodged by parent bodies with the main character's controversial style and behavior, and the attitudes exhibited towards elders on the show, both of which were seen as "negative impacts on kids" and a bad role model influencing their children.[5] A mother described "The character does things which are prohibitory in India." Some of this incorrigible behavior included Shin-chan arguing with his mother and critiquing her appearance, irking the elderly lot with worries their children would copy whatever Shin-chan did on the show.[6]

This consequently led to the series going off the air. The show had a query placed on it on September 23, 2008[7] by the Indian Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, who questioned the show's content on account of heavy nudity and profanity, all while it was the most-watched and most successful program on the channel. The series was required to be re-edited and re-dubbed to remove the disrespect towards elders in order to air again on the network. However, parents who had blocked Hungama TV from their children were worried that the show may still be back on the air if the channel agreed to delete the objectionable portions, so they were not convinced to unblock it by the ban.

On the other hand, Hungama wanted to continue to run the show, and younger fans who were let down by the ban wanted to watch it for entertainment. The channel launched a veiled campaign in retaliation called Mission Ha Ha Hungama, endorsed by actor Darsheel Safary. It asked viewers to combat the "Anti-Laughter Squad" (ALS) that has invaded Hungma TV, and is threatening to wipe out all the fun. Under this mission, kids along with parents were asked to come to a specified venue, and thwart the ALS's attempts. According to a Hungama TV spokesperson, the show was never banned, only questioned. "Shin Chan has not been banned. There's a query on the show from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The matter is under consideration with the Ministry. We don't have any comments at the moment." [8]

After many requests from fans, a heavily censored version with more edited family-friendly jokes restarted airing on Hungama TV starting on March 27, 2009, alongside the debut of Tamil and Telugu dubs. Nude scenes and profanity were edited out. All jokes with mature themes were translated into childish ones, and the word "alcohol" was changed to "juice". Cuts included scenes with instances of Nene's mother beating a stuffed rabbit, Shin-chan imitating Action Mask, as well as the "Mr. Elephant" dance or "Butt Alien Monster"/"Buri Buri" dance. Shin-chan's distinct voice provided by Aakash Ahuja was also replaced in 2010, around episode 230. At the age of 16, Akash Ahuja stopped dubbing Shin-chan because his voice was becoming hard as he was getting older. Shin-chan’s mother also had her voice replaced. Fans were irritated with the poor dubbing and cuts.

The original Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu dubs covered the first two seasons, equating to 104 episodes. The Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu dubs of the anime series stopped in 2015, even with mature content censored. The first two seasons (through Japanese episode 105) of the series were redubbed in 2016 for airings on Hungama TV and released on Amazon Prime Video, while the censored version of the first Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu dubs is no longer broadcast. However, even episodes that were not redubbed later received additional censorship. Episodes are still aired in the redub version in which there is no mature content, and episodes which have high amounts of mature content are not aired.[9] As such, the search continues not only for original uncensored episodes in Hindi, but also for censored episodes that were later redubbed or received further edits without a redub in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. The Hindi dub, however, is the most well-known dub of the three to have lost material due to the original ban, as well as being the most widely documented of the three nowadays.

Additionally, seasons 9 through 11, as well as the currently broadcasting episodes of season 16, have not been released to either Amazon Prime Video or Disney+ Hotstar, and not to any streaming platform, leaving fans to capture the episodes from television airings.

For unknown reasons, episodes 45 and 54 still use the first dub, and episode 51b uses the original title card narration. After the edited version premiered, the ending song sequence was also shortened for unknown reasons. The full version of the song exists online through audio, and the majortity of the video sequence is also available. Episodes were also shortened to only include one segment per broadcast instead of two.[10] The ban has also resulted in messages about the viewers' ability to file a complaint seen on screen during programming on many Indian children's channels.

33 segments from the dub's initial broadcast have been recovered from a torrent, which is no longer active, and mirrored to MediaFire. However, said torrent originally contained 11 more segments not present in the MediaFire folder. Five more segments are mirrored on Dailymotion and one on YouTube. Episodes 9c, 16a and 68b are missing their title cards. Episode 69b is missing the first 45 seconds. Episode 102c is missing the first minute.

On October 21, 2022, a clip of the first episode was posted to Reddit, but has since been removed.

YouTube user "ident logo channels with serials" is also in possession of the full ending theme with video (whereas previously only partial video was available) as well as Hungama TV bumpers.

On July 4, 2024, release group Toonworld4all added episodes from 3c to 10b on their website, continuing to add more until the 18th. REALZORO, who helped mux the audio and video tracks, mirrored the collection to the Internet Archive on July 19th, containing 50 segments.

Episodes (uncensored original dub)[]

# Hindi Title Original Title Status 1 Aaj Mein Shopping Karne Jaunga おゾウニを食べるゾ Lost たこあげは楽しいゾ Lost 雪だるまを作るゾ Lost 3 アクション仮面を見るゾ Lost 給食は楽しいゾ Lost Hum Aaj Jayenge Dentist Ke Pass 歯医者に行くゾ Found 6 Aaiye Karte Hai Kamrey Ki Safai 整理しちゃうゾ Found Aaj Hum Janenge Tadpoles Ke Baare Mein おまたじゃくしを飼うゾ Found 母ちゃんとお風呂だゾ N/A (unaired in India) 7 ひなん訓練は大変だゾ Lost Mujhe Mila Ek Puppy 小犬を拾ったゾ Found Mera Naam Hai Shiro 名前はシロだゾ Found 8 Chalo Shiro Ko Ghumane Le Chalte Hain シロと散歩に行くゾ Found シロの家を作るゾ Lost ピーマンは嫌いだゾ Lost 9 父ちゃんのジャマはしないゾ Lost Aaj Me Khelunga Clay Ke Sath 粘土で遊んじゃうゾ Found Me Books Dekhunga Book Shop Mein Ja Kar 本屋で立ち読みだゾ Found 10 University Ki Ek Ladki Meri Dost Hai 女子大生はお友達だゾ Found Mujhe Chahiye Ek Chhota Sa Swimsuit ハイグレ水着が欲しいゾ Found Pool Mein Khelne Ka Waqt Aa Gaya プールの時間だゾ Found 16 Aaj Me Mom Ka Khyaal Rakhunga 母ちゃんの看病だゾ Found Aaj Me Lunga Ek Panga いじめっ子と遊ぶゾ Found 縁日に行くゾ Lost 22 母ちゃんと格闘だゾ Lost Aaj Me Khelunga Soap Bubbles Se シャボン玉で遊ぶゾ Found またまた本屋さんだゾ Lost 29 動物園は楽しいゾ Lost 母ちゃんと美容院だゾ Lost Mujhe Bhi New Year Ka Gift Chahiye おせーぼが欲しいゾ Found 36 節分で豆まきだゾ Lost 網にかかったみさえだゾ Lost Hot Pot Khayenge Masti Karenge 冬のナベはサイコーだゾ Found (also found here) 38 たい焼きを買いに行くゾ Lost おとまり保育だゾ Lost Child Care Ke Din Ki Raat おとまり保育の夜だゾ Found 39 図書館では静かにするゾ Lost マラソンの練習だゾ Lost Me Toh Humesha Hi Jeet Ta Hoon マラソン大会だゾ Found 40 Nene Ki Mom Ganda Khaana Banati Hai おひなまつりだゾ Found スイミングスクールへ行くゾ Lost シロに芸を仕込むゾ Lost 41 バドミントンするゾ Lost Aaj Me Jaunga Study Tour Par 社会見学に行くゾ Found 名犬シロと散歩だゾ Lost 42 出前ピザをたのむゾ Lost マサオ君のハムスターだゾ Lost Aao Aaj Sukhaye Gadde Ko おフトンをほすゾ Found 44 Cherry Blossom Ke Liye Jagah Dhundhte Hai お花見の場所とりだゾ Found お花見は楽しいゾ N/A (unaired in India) Aayein Chalte Hai Dad Ke Office Mein 父ちゃんの会社へ行くゾ Found 45 Aaj Hum Boyenge Beej たねまきをするゾ Found Aaj Me Shopping Karne Jaunga 八百屋さんへおつかいだゾ Found Maine Apni Ek Eyebrow Uda Di マユゲなしの顔だゾ Found 46 よっぱらい父ちゃんだゾ N/A (unaired in India) Me Hu Ek Jasoos オラは名探偵だゾ Found 母ちゃんと買物だゾ Lost 47 鯉のぼりをあげるゾ Lost Aaj Hum Khelenge Kick Can カンケリをするゾ Found Lift Hai Bandh Par Phir Bhi Nacho Nacho Nacho エレベーターガールと一緒だゾ Found 50 Saaf Safai Mujhse Nahi Hoti おかたづけは苦手だゾ Found 夜は大人の時間だゾ Lost Meri Book Hai Best Seller オラの本はベストセラーだゾ Found 51 草むしりを手伝うゾ N/A (unaired in India) Yoshinaga Mam Kya Achanak Tabeeyat Kharaab Ho Gaee? よしなが先生が急病だゾ Lost よしなが先生のお見舞いだゾ Lost 52 Kachra Hamesha Dustbin Mein Phekna Chahiye ゴミ捨ても大変だゾ Found Sales Girl Kidnapper Bhi Ho Sakti Hai 帰ってきた地獄のセールスレディだゾ Found 回転ずしを食べるゾ Lost 53 こまってる人を助けるゾ Lost 大工仕事は大変だゾ Lost Aaj Mera Shiro Lapata Hai シロが行方不明だゾ Found 54 Me Neta Se Ek Sawal Puchna Chahta Hoon 政治家に質問だゾ Found Me Aur Meri Behen Sath Sath おねえ様に服従だゾ Found Aaj Hai Father’s Day きょうは父の日だゾ Found 56 いじめっ子と又遊ぶゾ Lost Aaj Ek Shadi Hogi Church Mein 結婚式に出席するゾ Found 結婚パーティーだゾ Lost 57 こわくて眠れないゾ Lost プール掃除で遊んじゃうゾ Lost Hum Trip Par Jayenge Guam グァム旅行が当たったゾ Found 58 風船をふくらますゾ Lost Aaj Mujhe Mila Hai Ek Purse おサイフを拾ったゾ Found じいちゃんと東京見物だゾ Lost 59 かき氷を食べるゾ Lost Aaj Hum Shiro Ko Tika Lagwaenge シロのお注射だゾ Found 家族でキャンプだゾ Lost 60 将来は人気歌手だゾ Lost Kabhi Na Khatam Hone Wale Rail Tracks 線路は続いちゃうゾ Found 暑い暑い熱帯夜だゾ Lost 61 よしなが先生の私生活だゾ Lost 最後のセールスレディだゾ Lost Aaj Hum Kharidenge Ek Air Conditioner エアコンを買うゾ Found 62 Aaj Me Jaunga Petrol Pump ガソリンスタンドへ行くゾ Found スイカがいっぱいだゾ Lost Ab Hum Batenge Tarbooz スイカ割りをやるゾ Found 63 Matsuzaka Mam Ki Date まつざか先生のデートだゾ Found お相撲のけいこだゾ Lost 相撲大会でガンバるゾ Lost 64 Ek Din Police Station Par ケーサツへ行くゾ Found Aaj Hum Pakdenge Insects Ko 昆虫採集に行くゾ Found Mom Ke Sath Ghar Ki Safai Karunga 母ちゃんとおソージだゾ Found 65 Tufaan Se Nuksan 台風で水害だゾ Found スケバンと対決だゾ Lost ドッジボールで勝負だゾ Lost 66 オラは刑事さんだゾ Lost 救急車で入院だゾ Lost Mein Toh Hospital Mai Bhi Mashoor Ho Geya 病院でも人気者だゾ Found 67 新婚さんいらっしゃいだゾ Lost Aaj Hogi Race Ki Training かけっこの特訓だゾ Found Dad Banayenge Sports Day Ka Video 運動会のビデオ撮影だゾ Found 68 母ちゃんのダイエットだゾ Lost Mai Banunga Ek Khiladi アスレチックするゾ Found 父ちゃんのマユゲがないゾ Lost 69 おみこしをかつぐゾ Lost Hum Khelenge Apni Dukaan フリーマーケットに参加だゾ Partially Lost フリーマーケットで商売だゾ Lost 80 おとし玉をもらったゾ Lost Aaj Hum Kharidaari Karenge おとし玉で買物だゾ Found Aaj Ghar Aayenge Grandpa Aur Grandma じいちゃん達が来たゾ Found 102 父ちゃんと遊んでやるゾ Lost 山のぼりはつらいゾ Lost Departmental Store Mein Maza Aayega 食品売り場は楽しいゾ Partially Lost

Episodes (reduced censorship before 2016)[]

Italian[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

The first dub, made in 2005 by E.T.S. European Television Service, which was based on the English dub made by Vitello Productions, is completely found.

CD Cine Dubbing Int. s.r.l. (season 2)[]

On May 19, 2009, it was announced that new episodes in Italian would start broadcasting on Cartoon Network on June 15, 2009, from Mondays to Fridays at 3:00 PM. A contest was also held on Cartoon Network’s Italian website.[11] Although the show was broadcast on Hiro starting on June 18, 2009, the episodes played were from the original 2005 season of the series. The season would be recorded in Rome, as was the previous dub, but this time at CD Cine Dubbing Int. s.r.l. Massimo Corizza, who had played the title character in the previous dub, would direct the dubbing as he did the first time, although the voice of Shin-chan himself was replaced with a female voice actress, Monica Bertolotti.[12] Between episodes 26 and 27 there was a break in the broadcast to dub other episodes. New episodes would again be broadcast by Cartoon Network, starting with episode 27, on October 7, 2009, airing again at 3:00 PM in addition to a slot at 9:15 PM.[13][14] The second wave of episodes would make a small update to the ending theme, adding some Italian dubbing credits in place of Luk Internacional’s logo and broadcasting the song in full where a small part had previously been cut. The first version of the ending theme was once available on the YouTube channel SuppaMan, but was claimed for copyright. This dub would also rerun on Boing starting in March 2010.

The dub was based on Luk Internacional's Spanish dub, which is close to the Japanese original and has no censorship. It had some different voice actors than the first Italian dub, although the writing was similar and common phrases were retained. 50 episodes from the Spanish dub, 387 through 438 (excluding episodes 413 and 415), were dubbed into Italian, of which episodes 31 through 50 are lost. The first 26 episodes of this dub were also released for purchase on the Nintendo eShop for Nintendo 3DS in five volumes, with the first three releasing on December 22, 2016 and the final two on December 29, 2016, for €1.99 each (although the first volume was free). The opening and ending themes, originally Italian dubs of OP3 and ED5, were replaced with instrumental versions of OP8 and ED3 in this release. The episodes, which were rearranged in broadcast and even segment order on Cartoon Network, were also reverted to match the Spanish dub. Any text translated into Italian on Cartoon Network and Boing was not translated here.

A list of episodes can be found on the Italian Wikipedia. All 30 available episodes are on the Internet Archive.

Khmer (dub)[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

In addition to the readily available illegal VHS voice-over covering early episodes of the series, a Khmer dub was made legally for television in 2014. It is difficult to determine information about either of the two Khmer versions of Crayon Shin-chan.

An officially licensed Khmer dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled សុឹន ចាំង premiered on TV3 Asia at launch in July 2014. It was recorded at Planet Wave Studios and FX Animation, which appear to have later become Fil-K Entertainment in August 2015. According to their Facebook page for Doraemon in Cambodia, 52 episodes were planned to be dubbed when production began in March.[15] No full episodes have resurfaced from the dub, and only a short ten-second promo without dub samples has been available online since October 20, 2014 on TV3 Asia's official TV3 Asia Trailer YouTube channel. The promo states that the show aired every Saturday and Sunday at 5:30 PM, with rebroadcasts on Saturdays and Sundays at 9:00 AM. It is possible that Planet Wave Studios was not happy with TV3 Asia's promo video, since they left a comment stating "Nightmare Quality." However, this is likely also because the master for the opening Dame Dame no Uta has poorly blended frames.

A single screenshot taken with a camera of the dub airing on TV exists on a Japanese blog written by a woman living in Cambodia, which also mentions the dub’s overall quality.

Brazilian Portuguese[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Brazilian Portuguese dub of Crayon Shin-chan titled Shin Chan was aired on Fox Kids in Brazil starting on November 9, 2002, with a preview of the first two episodes. The official premiere happened on November 11, 2002, and the dub premiered its first 25 episodes on the channel, on a regular basis from Mondays to Fridays at 11:00 PM, until December 11, 2002 (episode 19 premiered following episode 11, when they were repeated until another 23 episodes premiered from June 6, 2003 to July 8, 2003. Its last broadcast was on September 30, 2003. It premiered on Animax when the channel bought the rights with its launch on July 31, 2005, scheduled from Monday to Sunday. On Animax, the first season was re-aired with four additional episodes that were not broadcast by Fox Kids: episode 12 aired on August 6, 2005 (despite a Fox Kids promo using clips from the episode), episodes 48 and 49 premiered on August 25, 2005, and episode 52 premiered on August 26, 2005. The second season of the dub premiered on June 9, 2008 on Animax, where the series would be rerun until it was removed from the schedule during October 2010. A promo from Animax is also available.

The first season was recorded in São Paulo at Parisi Vídeo in 2002, and the second season was recorded at Álamo in 2006, due to the closure of Parisi Vídeo in 2005 (and because it dubbed most Animax content). Unlike the Latin American Spanish dub, the cast was not changed. Each season had 52 episodes licensed by TeleVix Entertainment, based on the Vitello Productions and Phuuz Entertainment English dubs of each respective season. TeleVix entertainment held the license to the dub from when it was first broadcast until February 2014.

Controversy arose during the dub's run on Fox Kids due to the anime's content. The then-deputy César Maia issued an action against the anime to call for its censorship, demanding that it be moved to a late night time slot or removed from the schedule. This soon caused the series' broadcasts, although relatively successful, to be halted until Animax started its broadcasts.

Six episodes from the first season were released on DVD by Imagem Filmes in 2005 and 2006 across three volumes, containing two episodes on each disc. The first volume was released on September 15, 2005, the second on March 24, 2006, and the third on September 15, 2006. For unknown reasons, the second volume excludes episode 3b from the list on its packaging despite its presence on the disc itself. Only some segments from the DVD release are actually sourced from it (1c, 2, 3), with the rest being sourced from Animax broadcasts.

Out of all 104 episodes, all of the first season is available, in addition to five segments from the second season (episodes 54 and 58ac). The second season used the English opening instead of the first season's dubbed opening. All available episodes can be found on the Internet Archive.

Episodes[]

# Portuguese Title Original Title Status 1 Brincando de Casinha Playing House Found Mamãe quer dirigir Mom Wants to Drive Found Mamãe toma aulas de direção Mom Takes Driving Lessons Found 2 Mamãe esta engordando Mom's Getting Fat Found Sou Um Grande Soldado I'm a Kiddie Commando Found Papai perdeu as sobrancelhas Dad Lost His Eyebrows Found 3 Festa do Pijama P.J. Party with Miss Dori Found Venda Difícil I Meet a Hishi Found A Mamãe Quer Um Ar Condicionado Mom Wants an Air Conditioner Found 4 Vamos Esquiar I Go Skiing Found Diversão no hotel de ski Fun at the Ski Lodge Found Trapalhadas na Neve Dopes at the Slopes Found 5 Mim quer biscoito Me Want Cookie Found Meu encontro com a Senhorita Uma My Date with Miss Uma Found Mamãe fugiu Mom Runs Away Found 6 Divórcio à Vista? We're Getting a Divorce?! Found O jogo Parte Um Play Ball (Part One) Found O jogo Parte Dois Play Ball (Part Two) Found 7 Vamos Reciclar I Get Recycled Found Mamãe matou a TV Mom Killed the TV Found A namoradinha do Lucky Lucky Gets Lucky Found 8 Brincando com Balões Fun with Balloons Found Achei uma carteira I Found a Wallet Found Passeio na Cidade I Go to the City Found 9 Saindo de Férias We Go on Vacation Found Diversão de Férias Vacation Fun Found Férias na Fazenda Dad Has a Breakdown Found 10 A noite livre do Papai A Dad-Free Night Found Eu acertei no Totó I Hit a Homer Found A Faxina I Clean Up Found 11 Vamos Pescar Let's Go Fishing Found Marti espertinha Smarty Pants Marti Found Dirigindo com a Mamãe Driving with Mom Found 12 Transformando Max em homem I Make a Man Outta Max Found A grande noite do papai e da mamãe Mom and Dad's Big Night Found Vou Para o Hospital I Go to the Hospital Found 13 Visita do Vovô A Visit from Grandpa Found O zoologico de mulheres I Go to Girl-Zoo Found Vovô não vai embora Grandpa Won't Leave Found 14 Eu vou ao correio An Errand to the Post Office Found A Casa Mal Assombrada Going to a Haunted House Found A greve da Mamãe Mom Goes on Strike Found 15 Quem é Eisenhower? Who's Eisenhower? Found A Admiradora do Papai Dad's Secret Admirer Found As Folhas Leaf Me Alone Found 16 Não se deve apostar The Late Great Me Found Viciada em compras Mom's a Shopaholic Found Insonia I Can't Sleep Found 17 O carinha do gibi Me and the Comic Book Guy Found O germinador Cosmo the Germinator Found Papai faz cooper Dad Goes Jogging Found 18 Brincando com o papai Playing Around with Dad Found Vou fazer trilha I'm Going Hiking Found Diversão no Supermercado Fun with Food Found 19 Alguém tem um namorado Someone's Got a Boyfriend Found Quarto proprio I Get My Own Room Found A promessa do papai Dad Breaks a Promise Found 20 Subindo a montanha I Climb a Mountain Found Perdidos na montanha I'm Mountain Meat Found Sobrevivência Survival of the Fattest Found 21 A Roupa nova da Mamãe Mom Has a New Dress Found Adeus, Cosmo Bye Bye Cosmo Found Cade a mamãe Mom Leaves Me on the Subway Found 22 Mamãe está enjoada Mom's Gotta Barf Found Minha Coleção Legal My Cool Collection Found Adoro livros da Asquerosa I Love Nasty Books Found 23 A visita da Vizinha I'm on Spring Break Found Lucky ficou doente Lucky Feels Yucky Found Vamos Fazer Um Piquenique Let's Have a Picnic Found 24 Quero Relaxar I Jump-Start the Baby Found Cosmo Está Apaixonado Cosmo's in Love Found Ajudando o Cosmo I'm a Love Doctor Found 25 Quero Uma Mamãe Nova I Want a New Mom Found Brincando na Piscina Playin' in the Pool Found Mês da mamãe grávida It's Pregnant Mom Month Found 26 Brincando de Pega Pega Playing Tag Found Tenho um encontro I Go on a Date Found Meu encontro com Ricky My Date with Ricky Found 27 A História do Shinocchio The Story of Shinocchio Found Quero a minha bola Gimme Back My Ball Found Guarda-costas da Mamãe I'm Mom's Bodyguard Found 28 A soneca da Mamãe Mom Takes a Nap Found Almoço de graça I Get Free Lunch Found As barbeiras Dad's Close Shave Found 29 Visitando o Bebê Check Out My Baby Found Picnic com a Senhorita Bono A Picnic with Miss Bono Found Brincando com o padrinho Fun with the Godfather Found 30 O bebê chega em casa The Baby Comes Home Found Dançando com a irmãzinha Hanging' Out with the New Baby Found Estou cansado I'm Tired Found 31 O dia de folga da Senhorita Uma Miss Uma's Day Off Found Mamãe perdeu a chave Mom Lost Her Key Found Troca de maes I Swap Moms Found 32 Ajudando a limpar a neve I Help Dad Shovel Snow Found Luta de Mulheres Lady Wrestlers Rock Found Uma carta de Amor I Get a Love Letter Found 33 Vou ter um irmão ou o que? Am I Getting a Brother or What Found Ajudando o cara dos gibis I Help Out the Comic Book Guy Found Papai vai ter que ficar comigo Dad's Stuck with Me Found 34 O papai tem uma namorada Dad's Got a Girlfriend Found A mamãe descobre Mom Finds Out Found A estréia no Parque Debut in the Park Found 35 O Açúcar Subiu à Cabeça da Daisy Daisy Gets Buzzed Found O Cachorro de Três Olhos The 3-Eyed Dog Found Quem precisa dormir? Who Needs Sleep? Found 36 O Último Resort de Papai Dad's Last Resort Found Cosmo Confia em mim Cosmo Trusts Me Found Shin, o Vendedor Salesman Shin Found 37 Max perde o dinheiro do lanche Max Lost His Snack Money Found Uma viagem para o rio A Trip to the River Found Estou perdido de novo I Get Lost Again Found 38 O padrinho da Sala The Godfather Glasses Found Uma adora gatos Uma the Cat-Lover Found Cade a minha irmã? Where's My Sister, Mister? Found 39 Os pombinhos estão brigando The Lovebirds Are Fighting Found Sozinho em Casa Home Alone Found Dormimos no Corredor We Sleep in the Hallway Found 40 Dia dos Namorados Antecipado Early Valentine's Day Found O chefinho joga golfe Little Bigboss Plays Golf Found O dia de namorados da senhorita Uma Miss Uma's Valentine Found 41 Tia Minnie Vem nos Visitar Aunt Minnie Comes to Visit Found O Sedutor de Menores The Godfather is a Cradle Snatcher Found Treinando Pra Chegada do Bebê We Drill for the Baby Found 42 Eu sou o chefe I'm the Boss Found Ei, Lembram de Mim? Hey, Remember Me? Found Ninguém me ama Nobody Loves Me Found 43 A gratificação baiacu The Blowfish Bonus Found Comendo Fugu? Fugu Whogu? Found Shin Contra o Garoto Kung Fu Shin vs. the Kung Fu Kid Found 44 Mamãe vai as compras Mom Gets Malled Found Daisy me deixa louco Daisy Drives Me Crazy Found Jantarzinho no gambazinho Fun at Skunky's Found 45 O mapa do tesouro I Make a Treasure Map Found Eu deixo a senhorita Dori doente I Make Miss Dori Sick Found Que fresquinho We're Coolie-Oolie Found 46 Um pouco de classe I Get Some Class Found A tartaruga e as lebres The Tortoise and the Hare-Bags Found Kamikazes na Piscina The Kahzu Kamakazes Hit the Pool Found 47 Esquiando de graça We Ski for Free Found A esquiadora Uma Uma Whoma? Found Fliperama divertido Fun at the Arcade Found 48 Trens cancelados No Train in the Rain Found Tem Um Estranho na Porta There's a Stranger at the Door Found Os Pombinhos Se Mudam The Lovebirds Move In Found 49 O Massageador What's the Massager For? Found Senhorita Dori Quer Se Casar Miss Dori Wants to Get Married Found Ricky Passa a Bola Ricky Makes the Pass Found 50 O Namorado da Dori Tem Namorada Dori's Boyfriend Has a Girlfriend Found Daisy começa a engatinha Daisy Starts Crawling Found Sou Um Mentor I'm a Mentor Found 51 O Homem bumbum salva o dia Buttman Saves the Day Found Hannah bacana Hurricane Hannah Found Fuga do planeta escola Escape from Planet Kindygarten Found 52 Sou uma Bailarina I'm a Ballerina Found Tempo de qualidade com o papai Quality Time with Dad Found O que a mamãe tem? What's Up with Mom? Found 54 Shin-Chan, o pichador Shin-Chan, Graffiti Man! Found A bolsa nova de Mitsy Mitsy Gets a Freebie! Found Dotty vem se hospedar Dotty the Drop-Out! Found 58 O posto de gasolina I Go to the Gas Station! Found Too Many Watermelons! Lost Mais divertimento com melancias More Fun with Watermelons! Found

European Portuguese (Nacional Filmes)[]

This dub is separate from the 2009 dub by Santa Claus Audiovisual that aired on Animax, Biggs, and Fox Comedy, which is still receiving new episodes on the official YouTube channel. More information on the differences between the two can be found on Wiki Dobragens Portuguesas.

See more on The Dubbing Database

The first European Portuguese dub of Crayon Shin-chan premiered on SIC in Portugal on May 17, 2003, at 10:00 AM in the Fun Totil Block, according to schedules on Portuguese TV forum Zapping[16]. This is due to SIC electing to launch the series after Easter to avoid any parental complaints, as the official Japanese Crayon Shin-chan website claims it was originally planned for March 2003. Later, when the SIC Kids block was launched in 2006, the dub was moved there, airing until some later point withinin the year. Based on the Vitello and later Phuuz English dubs, this dub was produced by Nacional Filmes. At the time, SIC had a contract with Fox Kids/Jetix and Disney for the rights to their programming. The dub aired early in the morning around 7 or 8 AM alongside shows that were not licensed from Disney on SIC Kids, although during Fun Totil it was scheduled at 10:00 AM, according to schedules on Portuguese TV forum Zapping. Many episodes may have aired only once and then never again.

Six episodes from the first season were released on DVD by Prisvideo S.A. in 2004 across two volumes, containing three episodes on each disc.[17][18]

Out of all 104 episodes, only 6 full episodes from Vitello Productions' season, and 13 full episodes with an additional 3 segments and 1 more incomplete segment from Phuuz Entertainment's season, are available online. Eight more segments from the second season were once available on YouTube Channel AlfaCanal, but have since been claimed for copyright, in addition to one more from the first season on an unknown channel. All available episodes can be found on the Internet Archive.

Episodes[]

# Portuguese Title Original Title Status 1 As crianças no recreio Playing House Found A mãe quer conduzir Mom Wants to Drive Found A mãe tem aulas de condução Mom Takes Driving Lessons Found 2 A mãe está gorda Mom's Getting Fat Found Sou o pequeno soldado I'm a Kiddie Commando Found O pai perde as sobrancelhas Dad Lost His Eyebrows Found 3 Festa com Miss Dori P.J. Party with Miss Dori Found O encontro com a Hishi I Meet a Hishi Found A mãe quer ar condicionado Mom Wants an Air Conditioner Found 4 Vamos esquiar I Go Skiing Found Diversão no abrigo de neve Fun at the Ski Lodge Found Ás voltas na neve Dopes at the Slopes Found 5 Eu quero bolachas Me Want Cookie Found O passeio com Miss Uma My Date with Miss Uma Found A mãe fugiu Mom Runs Away Found 6 Vai haver divórcio?! We're Getting a Divorce?! Found Jogar basebol Play Ball (Part One) Found Jogar basebol (continuação) Play Ball (Part Two) Found 38 Os óculos do Padrinho The Godfather Glasses Lost Uma the Cat-Lover Lost Where's My Sister, Mister? Lost 61 Roupas de verão New Summer Clothes! Found Eu quero comer carne Wanna Eat Meat! Found Um dia no hipódromo A Day at the Races! Found 64 A minha ama I Get a Babysitter! Found Vamos fazer um churrasco A Picnic Barbecue! Found A depressão do pai Pop's Pooped! Found 66 O jogo do mata I Play Dodgeball! Found Preparações para a feira da ladra We Get Ready for the Fleamarket! Found Vamos à feira da ladra We Go to the Fleamarket! Found 67 A Misty em part-time Mom's Part-Time Job! Found A amiga da mãe Mom's Got a Girlfriend! Found Vou fazer sopa I Make Soup! Found 71 O desfile de moda I'm a Model! Found A minha primeira conta bancária I Have My Own Bank Account! Found Os sinos de Ano Novo I Stay Up for New Year's Eve! Found 73 Competição na neve We Have a Snowball Fight! Found Ficamos todos doentes We're All Sick! Found A Miss Uma vai-se embora Uma's Gonna Quit! Found 74 A garça, o pinguim e o betinho The Crane, the Penguin, and the Little Brown-Nose! Found Massa explosiva Killer Noodles! Found A chuva é uma seca The Rain's a Pain! Found 75 Com o Lucky vou fugir I Run Away with Lucky! Found Pottery Whattery! Lost A mãe ficou doida com os cartões de desconto Mom Goes Bargain Card Cuckoo! Found 80 Perdi outra vez o autocarro I Missed the Bus Again! Found Estamos todos atrasados We're All Late! Found A Daisy dá comigo em doido Goin' Crazy with Daisy! Found 85 I Find a Snake! Lost We Stay at a Hotel! Lost A Day at Rancho Muchacho! Partially Lost 87 Os bilhetes de comboio Tickets for the Train! Lost Vamos andar de comboio We Take a Train Trip! Lost Vamos dar uma festa We Give a Party! Found 88 O engano da Misty Mitsy's Mis-steak! Found Shinny Baba e os Ladrões Shinny Baba and the Thieves! Found Vou arranjar a casota do Lucky Fixing Up Lucky's House! Found 89 O meu trabalho na livraria I Work at the Bookstore! Found O mealheiro secreto da mãe Mom's Secret Cash Stash! Found Vou almoçar a casa da Miss Bono I'm Going to Miss Bono's! Found 91 Daisy, a super estrela Superstar Daisy! Lost O incrível rolo cola-unhas The Incredible Toenail Roller! Lost O drama com a cassete do pai Dad's Tape Trouble! Lost 97 Anjo da Morte vs. Febradzilla Killer Angel vs. Babezilla! Found Os melhores amigos do Cosmo Cosmo's Best Buddies! Found Uma pilha de nervos Assault and Batteries! Found 98 Vamos quebrar o gelo Breakin' the Ice! Found Gangue de miúdas disfarçadas Girl Gang in Disguise! Found O tesouro secreto da Daisy Daisy's Secret Stash! Found 99 Eu e o meu grupo de buscas Me and My Posse! Found Sinto-me bonita I Feel Pretty! Found A maldição do assassino de cupido The Cupid-Killer Curse! Found 102 Já não quero a Daisy I'm Dumpin' Daisy! Lost Lucky, o super cão Superdog Lucky! Lost A Daisy vai para o infantário Daisy Goes to Kindygarten! Lost

Latin American Spanish[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

The first season, recorded at Audiomaster 3000, has been completely available online for many years, although if it has dubbing credits they are not available.

Fogarty Studios (season 2)[]

During 2007, ETC TV, a cable television network that broadcast the series in Chile, announced that it would premiere new episodes not previously broadcast by the channel. The episodes finally began to air on March 24, 2008 on ETC TV and on June 9, 2008 across Latin America on Animax. TeleVix entertainment held the license to the season from when it was first broadcast until February 2014, presumably being picked up afterwards by KORA International like the third season. The season would be recorded in Mexico at Fogarty Studios (then known as AF The Dubbing House, before Dubbing House split off into its own studio in 2010) due to the shutdown of Audiomaster 3000 a few years prior, and contained 52 episodes based on the English version, whose second season was recorded by Phuuz Entertainment. The second season used a totally different cast from the first, possibly because the studio was not aware of the first cast. Fan complaints came as a result of the cast change, especially of Shinnosuke, and these protests caused the second season to be broadcast less frequently. For example, ETC TV only showed the second season after broadcasting episodes of the first season. Crayon Shin-chan was removed from the Animax schedule in October 2010, and from ETC TV in March 2017. The first and second seasons returned on September 2, 2019 (after an announcement on August 9), became a part of ETC's slate of classic programming on November 11, 2019, and was once more removed in October 2020. Many English titles for episodes from this season were added to Wikipedia in early 2020 from a Chilean IP address, so it can be assumed that those titles were drawn from these broadcasts. However, most of these broadcasts have yet to resurface.

Along with the opening and credits, FLV files of episodes 53 through 55 have been available in full since their Animax broadcast on the Shin Chan Latino Online page on Blogspot, while episodes 57 and 84 were uploaded in segments from their 2019/2020 broadcasts on ETC TV to Facebook page "Kureyon Shin Chan Latino XD" on October 23 and November 2, 2021, until the page was removed in 2022. All of these episodes can be found on the Internet Archive. On May 30, 2023, Internet Archive user Umulti 003 uploaded eight more segments from the season, three of which form the full episode 95, along with the third segments of episodes 81, 83, 86, 88, and 98. The same archive was later updated on December 14, 2023, with 15 additional segments, including 77c, 78c, 79b, 80ab, 81ab, 92ab, 100ab, 102ab, and 103ab.

The dub has also been planned to premiere on Senpai TV in Chile since March 17, 2022[19], before its launch on April 1; however, it remains unbroadcast, with no confirmed premiere date.

Episodes[]

# Spanish Title Original Title Status 53 Todos huimos de casa We All Run Away! Found Puedo hablar con bebes I Can Talk to Babies! Found Júnior, la amenaza del tenis Sharpie, the Tennis Menace! Found 54 Shin-Chan, el grafitero Shin Chan, Graffiti Man! Found La bolsa nueva de Mitsy Mitsy Gets a Freebie! Found Dotty viene de visita Dotty the Drop-Out! Found 55 La fiesta de fin de año We Have a New Year's Party! Found Vacaciones para esquiar My Holiday Ski Trip! Found Perdido en el frio Lost in the Frost! Found 57 Me gusta el hielo Ices is Nices! Found La inyección de Lucky Lucky Gets a Shot! Found De campamento We Go Camping! Found 77 Kindergarten Camp-Out! Lost Ghosts in the Woods! Lost Mucho relajo por un Melon A Lotta Yellin' Over Melon! Found 78 We Got a Fax Machine! Lost I Hassle Tubasso! Lost Me lesioné el tobillo I Broke My Leg! Found 79 Mom's Graduation Party! Lost Calefacción descompuesto The Heater's Broke! Found Dad Gets a New Suit! Lost 80 Perdi el autobus de nuevo I Missed the Bus Again! Found Todos vamos tarde We're All Late! Found Goin' Crazy with Daisy! Lost 81 Mamá aprender a jugar golf Mom Learns to Golf! Found Estoy en la Mini olimpíada I'm in the Peewee Olympics! Found Estoy harto del tofu I'm Tired of Tofu! Found 83 I Run an Errand! Lost Gimme Them Donuts! Lost El corte de cabello de Daisy Daisy Gets a Haircut! Found 84 Tejí un suéter I Knit a Sweater! Found Montando el tren de las prisas Ridin' the Rush-Hour Train! Found Voy al trabajo con papá I Go to Work with Dad! Found 86 We Go Rollerblading! Lost Rollerblading with the Gang! Lost Vamos a la tienda del salcon We Go to the Thrift Store! Found 88 Mitsy's Mis-steak! Lost Shinny Baba and the Thieves! Lost Arreglando la casa de Lucky Fixing Up Lucky's House! Found 92 El caso del pastel de fresa The Case of the Strawberry Shortcake! Found Mamá se queda encerrada en casa Mom's Locked Out! Found The Air Conditioner's Broken! Lost 95 Jugamos avioncitos We Play Airplane! Found Desenterrando patatas I Dig Potatoes! Found Cosmo ama Elita Rosita Cosmo Loves Hinky Pinky! Found 98 Breakin' the Ice! Lost Girl Gang in Disguise! Lost El guardadito de Daisy Daisy's Secret Stash! Found 100 El Abuelo va por la señorita Bono Grampa Goes for Miss Bono! Found El dia de belleza de Cosmo Cosmo's Day of Beauty! Found Lost 102 Daisy no es mi hermana I'm Dumpin' Daisy! Found SuperPerro Lucky Superdog Lucky! Found Daisy Goes to Kindygarten! Lost 103 Voy a la Universidad de nenas I Go to Babe College! Found Mi viejo auto My Old Car! Found Lost

Dubbing House (season 3)[]

On July 22, 2014, Mexican voice actress Laura Torres, voice of Shin-chan in the first season, announced on Twitter that she had started directing the new season the previous day, revealing more details later on. The season would be recorded at Dubbing House. She along with many others reprised their roles from the first season, and Boo and Max from the second season. The third season premiered in Mexico on the Tiin channel on November 10, 2014, running until 2017. This season would also later run on ETC in Chile starting on July 15, 2019, being removed from the channel's schedule after October 2020.

On July 21, 2023, it was announced by ETC that the dub would return to the channel on August 1, 2023, providing another opportunity to recover lost episodes[20][21].

Most characters would retain their names established by the English dub, with the exception of characters introduced in the second season reverting to their original Japanese names, such as Ai (previously Sally) and Miss Ageo (previously Miss Agnes). Action Mask, referred to previously as Muchacho Enmascarado (from the English dub's Masked Muchacho), is now called Ultrahéroe, his name in Spain. Likewise, Buriburizaemon, previously Porkazoid, is called Cerdito Valiente like in Spain.

78 segments from 39 episodes, 527 through 565, were dubbed, all of which have been found as of August 31, 2023. This season does not feature an opening or ending theme, although the original dubbed opening and credits are added on ETC broadcasts. Licensed from Luk Internacional in Spain to the company Kora International, these episodes are 560 through 588 in Spain (removing in Latin America episodes 577 through 579, which cover Japanese specials 45 through 47), thus making up 26 episodes as broadcast in Spanish. Most episodes aired on Tiin are available on the Shin Chan Latino Blogspot page.

All available episodes from Tiin are also on the Internet Archive, along with the 2023 ETC broadcasts.

Episodes[]

# Spanish Title Original Title Status 560 Mañana me pongo a dieta 明日からダイエットだゾ Found Vamos a visitar los estudios de televisión テレビ朝日を見学するゾ Found Oigan, papá tiene un amor escolar ひろしのときめきの日々だゾ Found 561 Voy a agitar la coctelera ふってふってふってだゾ Found Yo amo a Gidgi アイ・ラブ・ミッチーだゾ Found Me voy a preparar una supercopa あこがれのゴージャス・パフェだゾ Found 562 Voy de paseo con mi papá 父ちゃんとお散歩だゾ Found No podemos usar la cochera ガレージが使えないゾ Found Oigan, a mi papá le gustan los globos 父ちゃんは風船がお好き！？だゾ Found 563 Hoy la señorita Ageo es la orientadora 上尾先生がご指導するゾ Found Huy!! Cosmo explota. グレてやる！？だゾ Found Cosas de celulares ケータイの番をするゾ Found 564 Silbar no es sencillo 口笛はヒュ～ゥだゾ Found Haremos un Okonomiyaki お好み焼きを作るゾ Found No es fácil ser Moe Pi もえPに大変身だゾ Found 565 Te descubrí señorita Uma まつざか先生見ちゃいや～んだゾ Found Firme un autógrafo サインしちゃうゾ Found Mi hermanita va al otorrinolaringólogo ひまわりが耳鼻科に行くゾ Found 566 Mamá yo te cuido 母ちゃんを看病するゾ Found Vamos a un restaurante secreto 隠れ家レストランに行くゾ Found ¡¡¡Que pompas!!! めんどうくさいゾ Found 567 Hoy mi papá y yo haremos unos zancos 竹馬作って乗っちゃうゾ Found Creo que vamos al dentista ズッキンでドッキン！だゾ Found ¡Tengo sed quiero un jugo! ジュースが飲みたいゾ Found 568 Voy a la tienda de discos CDショップへ行くゾ Found Vamos a ver los fuegos artificiales ゆかたで花火大会だゾ Found Voy a cazar escarabajos (parte 1) オオクワガタを捕るゾ(1) Found 569 Voy a cazar escarabajos (parte 2) オオクワガタを捕るゾ(2) Found Mi mamá quiere un masaje かたたたたき券だゾ Found Es muy agobiante あつくるしいゾ Found 570 Hoy llega el profesor Agobino あつくる先生、登場！だゾ Found Doy un paseo por la mañana ウォーキング・デートだゾ Found Vamos a jugar fútbol サッカーで勝負だゾ Found 571 Daisy hace malabarismos ひまわりがのっけちゃうゾ Found Hoy nos pondremos fuertes con un extensor エキスパンダーできたえるゾ！ Found Mmm, que rico huele アロマ〜な気分だゾ Found 572 Hay que hacer un fueguito. プチファイヤー ポだゾ Found Hoy haremos bisutería アクセサリーをつくるゾ Found Oigan, Nini esta muy rara ネネちゃんがおヘソを曲げちゃったゾ Found 573 Nos regalan un hongo まつたけをもらったゾ Found Al que madruga Dios lo ayuda 早起きは三文のトク！？だゾ Found En la vida hay que superarse 苦手をコクフクするゾ Found 574 El festival deportivo está lleno de fuego 運動会でファイヤーだゾ Found No queremos que se vaya profesor Agobino しいぞう先生やめないで！だゾ Found Mi mamá quiere comer a pesar de todo ギックリ腰でも食べたいゾ Found 575 Adios profesor del fuego さよならファイヤー！だゾ Found Hoy voy a pintar ペンキを塗るゾ Found Que gustos tiene Daisy ひまのお気に入りだゾ Found 576 La señorita Ageo aprende a conquistar 合コンデビューだゾ Found Mi papá solo quiere estar muy tranquilo 頼むからひとりにしてだゾ Found Lucky también puede ir a la moda シロもおしゃれをするゾ Found 580 Mi papá quiere cenar tofu 湯豆腐を食べたいゾ Found Mi mamá come demasiado 食べ過ぎちゃったゾ Found Mi corazón tiene mucho prestigio オラの心はエリートだゾ Found 581 Cuida a otro niño かあちゃんは子育て中だゾ Found De regreso a la universidad femenina また女子大に行ったゾ Found ¡Genial! Me van a llevar a esquiar (parte 1) オラをスキーに連れてってだゾ(1) Found 582 ¡Genial! Me van a llevar a esquiar (parte 2) オラをスキーに連れてってだゾ(2) Found Hoy vamos a jugar en la nieve しいぞう先生と雪遊びだゾ Found Daisy es una verdadera princesa ひまわりはお姫さまだゾ Found 583 Hoy haremos fila para comer 行列のラーメン屋に行くゾ Found La señorita Uma me lleva a casa まつざか先生に送ってもらうゾ Found ¡Escúchame cuando te hablo! 人の話を聞きなさいだゾ Found 584 Hoy esquiamos en familia ファミリースキーだゾ Found Mi mamá es una maestra de la limpieza 母ちゃんはお掃除名人だゾ Found Vamos a comprar un auto 新車を買いに行くゾ Found 585 Hoy conozco a una mujer policía ミニパトのおねいさんだゾ Found Papá presume su camisa nueva 父ちゃんの大事なシャツだゾ Found Mi tía viene de visita おばちゃんが来たゾ Found 586 Hoy vamos al parque おっきな公園に行くゾ Found Me gane mis galletas de chocolate チョコビをかせぐゾ Found ¡Qué horror! La familia crece 大変！今日から家族がふえたゾ Found 587 Encuentro cercano del tercer tipo 未知とのそーぐーだゾ Found Estas hermanas son unas flojas グータラ姉妹だゾ Found No te rindas Mitsu 負けるな、むさえちゃん！だゾ Found 588 Cosmo pasea a Lucky 風間くんとシロのお散歩だゾ Found Le damos un sermón a Mitsu むさえちゃんにお説教！だゾ Found Nos vamos en tren 電車でおでかけだゾ Found

Valencian[]

See more on The Dubbing Database

A Valencian dub of Crayon Shin-chan was aired in the Valencian Community on Punt 2's Babalà Club block starting on August 27, 2001, reaching Canal Nou's version of the block on May 25, 2002. The dub was pulled from the air by RTVV (Radiotelevisió Valenciana) on November 29, 2002, due to the show's content was not "suitable" for children's programming. According to a press release from the Valencian station, "the adventures of Shinosuke Nohara were conceived as a caricature against the social chakras, but lately he has been developing a line of acid humor more typical of adults".

Outside of the show's opening and ending, only a handful of episodes from the dub are available online, ranging mostly from episodes 200 to 252, but also including two segments from episode 85. Episode 202c was once on YouTube channel Dibuixos en valencià and its website, but has been claimed for copyright on YouTube, and removed from the website for unknown reasons. The website also removed episodes 230a, 230b, 233b, and 233c. They also state on Twitter to have more single segments in their possession (such as 217a, 218c, and 226b) that have not been uploaded to the site because they had to decide whether to upload them alone or as a fake 22-minute episode. Note that some episode numbering has been slightly altered to match the original Japanese version instead of the Spanish version, which skipped episodes 93 and 179. 260 episodes were dubbed.

As of July 8, 2023, the Dibuixos en valencià website is shut down, leaving most episodes lost, but presumably still accounted for by the site's owner until the website eventually makes its return.

On January 16, 2024, several episodes were uploaded to the Internet Archive by user Valencian Dude.

Episodes[]

# Valencian Title Original Title Status 49 Ei, que ens anem d'excursió! 遠足へ出発だゾ Found Ei, que ens hem perdut a la muntanya! 遠足でソーナンだゾ Found Ei, que no s'ha de jugar amb foc! 火遊びはこわいゾ Found 52 Ei, que traure el fem pot ser molt complicat! ゴミ捨ても大変だゾ Found Ei, que torna la venedora a domicili! 帰ってきた地獄のセールスレディだゾ Found Ei, que eixim a dinar fora! 回転ずしを食べるゾ Found 53 Ei, que ajudo la gent que ho necessita! こまっている人を助けるゾ Found Ei, que fer de fuster és una faena molt dura! 大工仕事は大変だゾ Found Ei, que el Nevat ha desaparegut! シロが行方不明だゾ Found 54 Ei, que parle amb un polític! 政治家に質問だゾ Found Ei, que tinc una germana gran! おねえ様に服従だゾ Found Ei, que hui és el dia del pare! きょうは父の日だゾ Found 55 Ei, que hui cuinem el pare i jo! 男の料理を作るゾ Found Ei, que la mare té mal de queixal! 母ちゃんの歯痛だゾ Found Ei, que anem a mirar vestits de novia! 結婚衣装を見に行くゾ Found 56 Ei, que torne a jugar amb el busca-raons! いじめっ子と又遊ぶゾ Found Ei, que anem a un casament! 結婚式に出席するゾ Found Ei, que anem al convit del casament! 結婚パーティーだゾ Found 57 Ei, que tinc tanta por que no puc dormir! こわくて眠れないゾ Found Ei, que ajude a netejar la piscina! プール掃除で遊んじゃうゾ Found Ei, que ens ha tocat un viatge a Guam! グァム旅行が当たったゾ Found 58 Ei, que la mare m'infla globus! 風船をふくらますゾ Found Ei, que hem trobat una cartera pel carrer! おサイフを拾ったゾ Found Ei, que vaig a Tòquio amb el iaio! じいちゃんと東京見物だゾ Found 59 Ei, que menje gelat fet en casa! かき氷を食べるゾ Found Ei, que porte el Nevat a vacunar! シロのお注射だゾ Found Ei, que anem a un càmping! 家族でキャンプだゾ Found 60 Ei, que seré un cantant famós! 将来は人気歌手だゾ Found Ei, que juguem a dibuixar vies de tren! 線路は続いちゃうゾ Found Ei, que hi ha una onada de calor! 暑い暑い熱帯夜だゾ Found 61 Ei, que passe la nit a casa de la senyoreta Yoshinaga! よしなが先生の私生活だゾ Partially Lost Ei, que la venedora a domicili diu que no tornarà! 最後のセールスレディだゾ Found Ei, que instal·lem l'aire condicionat! エアコンを買うゾ Found 62 Ei, que anem a la gasolinera! ガソリンスタンドへ行くゾ Found Ei, que tenim moltes sindries! スイカがいっぱいだゾ Found Ei, que encetem les síndries! スイカ割りをやるゾ Found 64 Ei, que el pare es renova el carnet de conduir! ケーサツへ行くゾ Found Ei, que anem a atrapar insectes! 昆虫採集に行くゾ Found Ei, que ajude a la mare a fer les faenes de casa! 母ちゃんとおソージだゾ Found 65 Ei, que un tifó provoca inundacions! 台風で水害だゾ Partially Found Ei, que conec tres xiques molt valentes! スケバンと対決だゾ Found Ei, que juguem a empomar la pilota! ドッジボールで勝負だゾ Found 66 Ei, que faig de detectiu! オラは刑事さんだゾ Found Ei, que m'han de dur a l'hospital amb ambulància! 救急車で入院だゾ Found Ei, que en l'hospital sóc molt popular! 病院でも人気者だゾ Found 69 Ei, que fem un palanquí! おみこしをかつぐゾ Found Ei, que triem coses per dur al mercat de productes de segona! フリーマーケットに参加だゾ Found Ei, que anem al mercat de productes de segona mà! フリーマーケットで商売だゾ Found 70 Ei, que s'ha d'arreglar la canal! 雨どいの修理だゾ Found Ei, que el sushi acabat de fer m'agrada molt! 特上寿司は好みだゾ Found Ei, que tinc un pollet! オラの弟はヒヨコだゾ Found 71 ニワトリさんを探すゾ Lost お洗濯を手伝うゾ Lost Ei, que anem a casa de Keiko! 新婚さんちへ行くゾ Found 74 Ei, que aprenc a cosir! ぬい物をするゾ Partially Lost Ei, que no m'agrada que em posen injeccions! お注射はキライだゾ Found Ei, que tenim un convidat! お客様をもてなすゾ Found 75 Ei, que la mare ja no em bonega! ほめ殺しはつらいゾ Found Ei, que al pare no li agraden els gats! 父ちゃんは猫ギライだゾ Found Ei, que torne a la llibreria! 今日も本屋さんで遊ぶゾ Found 76 Ei, que mengem sopa de fideus! ラーメンを食べるゾ Partially Lost Ei, que tinc talent pel patinatge! スケートの天才だゾ Found Ei, que Keiko i el seu home han renyit! 新婚さんのケンカだゾ Found 85 Ei, que la mare em talla els cabells! オラ髪形を変えるゾ Lost Ei, que Kazama està malalt! 風間くんをお見舞いするゾ Lost 課長の家は新築だゾ Lost 97 Ei, que la mare encara va a l'autoescola! 交通ルールの特訓だゾ Found Ei, que hem vist un ovni! 宇宙人に会いたいゾ Found Ei, que firme llibres! オラのサイン本だゾ Found 99 Ei, que la mare em porta a l'escola en bici! 自転車通園楽しいゾ Found Ei, finalment la mare es treu el carnet de conduir! 運転免許がとれるゾ Found Ei, que la mare em porta a l'escola amb cotxe! 母ちゃんとドライブだゾ Found 100 Ei, que resulta que sóc bon xiquet! 良い子のしんちゃんだゾ Found Ei, que juguem a bitlles! ボウリングをするゾ Found Ei, que cuidem un altre gos! サブちゃんのお世話だゾ Found 200 Ei, que el pare rep una carta d'amor! 父ちゃんがラブレターもらったゾ Found Ei, que se n'arma una bona per culpa de la carta! ラブレターで災難だゾ Found Ei, que portem Hitoshi al parc per primera volta! 公園デビューにつきあうゾ Found 201 Ei, que torna la tieta Masae! マサエおばさんがまた来たゾ Lost Ei, que Miho torna a estar enamorada! ラブレターで災難だゾ Lost Ei, que ens preparem per a quan la mare vaja de part! 出産のリハーサルをするゾ Lost 202 世界迷作しんのキオだゾ Lost ボールをとりもどすゾ Lost Ei, que sóc el guardaespatlles de la mare! 母ちゃんのボディーガードをするゾ Lost 203 Ei, que la meua germaneta arriba a casa! 赤ちゃんのお帰りだゾ Lost Ei, que faig dormir la xiqueta! 赤ちゃんをあやすゾ Lost Ei, que tinc molta son! 眠くて眠くて眠たい一日だゾ Lost 204 Ei, que ens fem una foto de família! 家族4人の記念写真だゾ Found Ei, que hem de decidir el nom de la xiqueta! 赤ちゃんの名前を考えるゾ Lost Ei, que finalment decidim com és dirà la xiqueta! 赤ちゃんの名前が決まったゾ Found 205 Ei, que sóc un bon germà! オラはやさしいお兄ちゃんだゾ Found Ei, que hui ha un combat! 決闘! 紅さそり隊だゾ Lost Ei, que anem a comprar bolquers a mitjanit! 夜中におむつを買いに行くゾ Found 208 Ei, que jo també faig de cangur! オラは子守上手だゾ Lost Ei, que coneixem un dibuixant de còmics famós! 有名マンガ家と本屋さんだゾ Lost Ei, que obrim un compte en el banc! オラだけの銀行口座を作ったゾ Lost 209 Ei, que arriben els iaios de Kyūshū! 九州のじいちゃん達が来たゾ Found Ei, que vaig de passeig amb els dos iaios! 二人のじいちゃんと出かけるゾ Found Ei, que Shinnosuke traballa en una empresa! オラはサラリーマンしんのすけだゾ Found 227 Ei, que hui és el dia dels xiquets! 今日は男の子の日だゾ Lost Ei, que anem a la cerimònia del té! お茶会におよばれしちゃったゾ Lost Ei, que apanyem el peix de tela! こいのぼりの修理だゾ Lost 230 Ei, que cuide de Himawari als grans magatzems! ひまわりと一緒にお買物だゾ Lost Ei, que quedar-se a soles amb Himawari dona molt faena! ひまわりの相手はつかれるゾ Lost ファミリーレストランに行くゾ Lost 233 電気マッサージ機で遊ぶゾ Lost Ei, que la senyoreta Yoshinaga es baralla amb el seu xicot! よしなが先生の恋の破局?だゾ Lost Ei, que la senyoreta Yoshinaga està feta pols! 落ちこんだよしなが先生だゾ Lost 234 Ei, que hi ha una caputxeta roja i una caputxeta morada! 赤ズキンと紫ズキンだゾ Lost Ei, que ens entrenem per a jugar a beisbol! 草野球のトックンだゾ Lost Ei, que juguem contra les princeses precioses! プリティーギャルと草野球だゾ Lost 235 Ei, que Nevat cuida a Himawari! シロもひまわりを見守ってるゾ Lost Ei, que eixim a jugar amb la pluja! 雨の日でもお外で遊ぶゾ Lost Ei, que la senyoreta Matsuzaka ix amb un iaio molt divertit! まつざか先生とひょーきんおじいさんだゾ Lost 236 ひまわりとお留守番で疲れたゾ Lost Ei, que la senyoreta Yoshinaga es prepara per a la nova vida de casada! よしなが先生新婚生活の練習だゾ Lost Ei, que un pervertit perseguix Nanako! ストーカーは許さないゾ Lost 248 Ei, que encara que hi ha un tifó el pare va a la faena! 台風の中でも出勤だゾ Lost Ei, que venen a fer-nos una enquesta! アンケートにご協力するゾ Lost Ei, que Yoshirin i Michi venen a viure al costat! ミッチーとヨシリンが来たゾ Lost 249 Ei, que anem a comprar llepolies per a l’excursió! 遠足のおやつを買うゾ Lost Ei, que hui ens ho passem molt bé a l’excursió! きょうは楽しい遠足だゾ Lost Ei, que m’he tornat a perdre anant d’excursió! 遠足でまたまた迷子になったゾ Lost 250 Ei, que Michi i Yoshirin s'han barallat! ミッチーヨシリンのケンカだゾ Found Ei, que em deixen la casa per a mi a soles! ひとりでのんびりお留守番だゾ Found Ei, que al rebedor s'està molt bé! 玄関ぐらしも快適だゾ Found 251 Ei, que Himawari està borratxa! 酔っぱらった?ひまわりだゾ Found Ei, que anem a buscar el terrorífic gos de tres ulls! キョーフの三つ目犬だゾ Found Ei, que el pare lluita contra la son! ネムケと戦う父ちゃんだゾ Found 252 Ei, que pense un regal per Nanako! おねいさんにプレゼントだゾ Found Ei, que la senyoreta Yoshinaga busca pis! よしなが先生とモデルルームだゾ Found Ei, que juguem amb la llanterna! かいちゅう電灯で遊ぶゾ Found 253 Ei, que faig arròs amb curri! オラだってカレーを作れるゾ Found Ei, que Nene és l'Heroïna de la Justícia! 正義のヒロインネネちゃんだゾ Found Ei, que se'ns tanca la porta del cotxe! 車のドアをロックしちゃったゾ Found 254 Ei, que Himawari fa de model! ひまわりがモデルになるゾ Found Ei, que hem descobert un cofre enterrat! まいぞう金を掘り当てるゾ Found Ei, que la mare tenia un passat amagat! 母ちゃんのかくされた過去だゾ Found 255 Ei, que amb la paga extra ens podem permetre un luxe! ボーナスで少しゼイタクするゾ Found Ei, que per fi aconseguim menjar peix globus! 初めてフグを食べちゃうゾ Found Ei, que m'enfronte al drac errant! さすらいのドラゴンと対決だゾ Found

References[]

[]