About

Crayon Shin-chan (クレヨンしんちゃん Kureyon Shin-chan) is a slice of life manga series created by Yoshito Usui and adapted into an anime in 1992 by Shin-Ei Animation. The anime has over 900 episodes and is still being aired by TV Asahi in Japan.

History

Crayon Shin-chan was serialized in 1990 by Weekly Manga Action (1990 – 2000) and Manga Town (2000 – 2010). The manga follows the adventures of the five-year-old kid Shinnosuke Nohara with his family and friends in Kasukabe, Saitama Prefecture. Shin-chan is mostly known for dancing while shaking his butt and yelling "Buri Buri!" and by drawing an elephant on his penis and start moving his hips while saying "Zō-san, Zō-san!" ("Mr. Elephant, Mr. Elephant!"). He also hates green peppers.

Crayon Shin-chan gained popularity among adults and even kids in Japan, despite it being a seinen manga. The anime and manga were a success with 20+ movies and a lot of merchandise being made.

In September 11th, 2009, Yoshito Usui disappeared when going hiking in nearby Gunma Prefecture. On September 19th, 2009, his body was found dead at the bottom of a cliff at Mount Arafune. After this event the last volume of the manga was released in 2010, but members of the Yoshito Usui Team made a new manga on the same year titled New Crayon Shin-chan (新クレヨンしんちゃん Shin Kureyon Shin-chan).

Crayon Shin-chan had many guest characters, one of the most remarkable being Kyary Pamyu Pamyu, singer and protagonist of PONPONPON.

An spin-off series called Crayon Shin-chan Gaiden consisting of three seasons is exclusively streaming on Amazon Prime Video worldwide. The first season is Crayon Shin-chan Gaiden: Alien vs. Shinnosuke and the second is Crayon Shin-chan Gaiden: Omocha Wars

Dubs

The anime received four English dub, the first one being made by Vitello in 2001 and a second dub by Phuuz with different voice actors in 2004, the show was made kid friendly, censoring genitalia and adult-jokes but was still close to the original and did feature Shin's famous butt dance (Buri Buri/Hula Hula). These dubs aired in the UK, Australia and in the Republic of Ireland. A translations of these dubs aired in some European countries and Latin America.

The third dub was made in 2005 by Funimation , this one being more like a parody, taking many liberties, using a lot of adult-jokes, making non-existent backstories of some characters and it wasn't censored. This dub was the only one released in the US, airing on Adult Swim with 3 seasons made and 5 DVD releases.

The fourth dub was produced in 2015 in Hong Kong and was commissioned by LUK Internacional. The dub was released in the European Nintendo 3DS eShop on December 22, 2016, consisting of 14 episodes.

Online Relevance

Shin-chan has received a lot of fanart from sites like pixiv (over 7000 results), especially beloved characters from movies and special episodes like Topemma, Buriburizaemon, Tsubaki-chan, Mari-chan, Action Kamen, Kantam Robo, Moepi and Robot Dad. The series has also received fanmade crossover mangas with other series like Osomatsu-san, KanColle and Shingeki No Kyojin.

Related Memes

I want 300 Girlfriends

I want 300 Girlfriends is a phrase spoken by Shinnosuke in the second movie of the series, named クレヨンしんちゃん ブリブリ王国の秘宝 (Crayon Shin chan: Buriburi Ôkoku no hihô).

Look, I'm making the missing children fight each other

Another phrase spoken by Shinnosuke, this time in the Funimation dub episode Lactose Overdose.

To be a man, you must have honor, honor and a penis

A popular phrase spoken by Shinnosuke and Hiroshi in the Funimation dub episode To be a man.

Playing Dead

Playing Dead (시체놀이) is a photo fad inspired by one of Shinnosuke's favorite pranks, which gained alot of popularity in Korea and Japan around 2003. Probably inspired by 1971 cult classic film Harold and Maude.

Ora Wa Ninkimono

Ora Wa Ninkimono (I'm such a popular kid) is the third opening of the anime and the most known and popular one, having numerous parodies and MAD videos on sites like Nico Nico Douga.

I can't see the front.

I can't see the front (前が見えねェ) is a photo fad based on an early manga story from the series depicting Shinnosuke with his face battered.

Search Interest

External References