Leslie Ann Pehrson Reese crossed through the veil on Sunday, July 1, 2018 to start her new mission for her Savior, Jesus Christ. She was surrounded by her loving family who rejoices in the knowledge that they are an eternal family and will be together again. She was and is a beloved wife, mother, grandmother, great-grandmother and friend.

Leslie was born on September 4, 1952 in Salt Lake City and spent her early years in Rose Park. Her family moved to North Salt Lake while she was in junior high, and she graduated from Viewmont High School in 1970.

While attending the young adults, she met her future husband, Randy Scott Reese. They were sealed for time and all eternity in the Salt Lake Temple on March 20, 1974 by Elder Thomas S. Monson. They became the proud parents of Chad (Brynn) Reese, Shawn (Jenn) Reese, Brett (Amy) Reese, Jennifer (Josh) Hardy and Bart (Jo) Reese. Leslie was the loving grandmother of twenty-one grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. Her family meant all to her, and she rejoiced in being with them. She was very thankful that she could be at home with her family during their school years. She rapidly became the ‘go-to’ mom for the neighborhood. She loved her ‘burb’ and used it well.

Leslie was an active member of the LDS faith and served faithfully in many callings in the Relief Society, Young Women and Primary. She most enjoyed her service with the Young Women. They played, served, camped, cried and grew together. She always greeted them with a smile and loved them unconditionally. She further enjoyed playing the piano in the Primary. When she made a mistake, she and the children would giggle together and then try again.

Leslie was an amazing example of simple innocence with no guile. She portrayed unconditional love and endurance to the end. She found blessings in all things and had gratitude in the face of trials and adversity. On the fridge was her favorite quote, “Don’t treat people the way they treat you. Treat people the way God treats you.” This was her creed.

Leslie had many hobbies, but her favorite was cooking. She loved to read cookbooks, alter recipes, create recipes and cook for others. Her desserts were especially good. Leslie was an accomplished quilter and enjoyed needlepoint. With her family raised and on their own, she returned back to school. She graduated from BYU with her Bachelor’s Degree in 2012.

Leslie is survived by her family, her brother Brent Pehrson, her sister Carol (Doug) Nielsen and her mother-in-law Bea Reese. She was preceded in death by her parents, Lester O. and Marjorie A. Petty Pehrson, sister-in-law Rhea Pehrson and her father-in-law J.L. Bud Reese.

The family expresses sincere gratitude to Dr. Wayne Ormsby and Dr. Grant Hunter for their loving care of Leslie, and also to Quality Hospice for their concern and care, especially for the tender mercies offered by McKenzie and Alexis.

In honor of Leslie, there will be a visitation at Russon Mortuary, 295 N. Main, Bountiful on Thursday, July 5, 2018 from 6-8 pm. The service will be held on Friday, July 6, 2018 at 11 am at the LDS Canyon View Stake Center, 2110 N. Main, Centerville. There will be a visitation prior to the service from 9:45-10:45 am at the chapel. Interment will be in the Centerville City Cemetery.