Leslie Ann Gaidjunas passed away on Thursday, January 10, 2013, in Maryville, TN after a number of months battling cancer. She was born in Ann Arbor, MI on January 23, 1948, the daughter of Paul Magnason and Frances Gracey and spent her youth in Seattle, WA, Camden, AK, Lexington, MA and Huntsville, AL, but Lexington provided her with the fondest memories of childhood. She is survived by her husband, Frank Gaidjunas and daughter, Lee Anne Sittler (living in Madrid, Spain), and also her step children, Kerrin Bitterman and her husband Jeff and their 5 children (living in Fort Collins, CO), Frank Gaidjunas, Jr. and his wife Jen and their 2 children (living in Tower Lakes, IL), and Amy Ganguly and her husband Shukie and their 1 child (living in Lexington, MA). Leslie earned a Bachelor of Science degree at the University of Tennessee in 1971 after graduating Huntsville High School in 1966. While in Lexington, Huntsville, and at UT, she made life-long friends that have come together to provide comfort, support and aid in her time of illness. After graduation Leslie worked in retail in East Tennessee, then joined friends in Los Angeles and started a career at J. Walter Thompson as a media buyer. Her success there led to a better opportunity in the same field at Olgilvie & Mather in New York City. While in New York she met her first husband and had her child, Lee, who has been the light of her life. After her divorce, she met Frank and they married in 1995 and have lived together in Ridgefield, CT, Alpharetta, GA and Maryville, TN. Leslies abilities to decorate and accessorize a home, cook wonderful, unique meals, and entertain family and friends are a hallmark of her post working career. She never stopped working, only with different interests. Frank and Lee would like to give special thanks to family and friends who have comforted Leslie with visits, phone calls, emails and gifts.....Beverly, Millie, Donna & Kelly, Sharon & Rick, Diane & Pat R., Diane B., Alice & Larry, Louise, Ellen, Kerri & Jeff and family, Frank Jr. & Jen and family, Amy Shukie and family, Ruth, Bob & Agnes and family, Ken & Pam, Joe & Ann, Joe & Donna, Jan & Ed and so many others that reached out in Leslies time of need. Services will be at McCammon-Ammons-Click Funeral Home at 220 W. Broadway Ave., Maryville, TN 37801 (865-982-6812) on Tuesday, with receiving of friends from 10:30-12:00 p.m. followed by a 12:00 p.m. funeral service with Father Steve Mosher officiating. A reception at Sullivans Restaurant at 121 W. Broadway Ave., Maryville, TN 37801 will follow the service. She will be interred in Grandview Cemetery. Flowers are welcome at the funeral service, but in lieu of flowers, a contribution to Connie Davis Memorial Hospice Fund administered by the Blount Memorial Foundation at 907 East Lamar Alexander Parkway, Maryville, TN 37804 in her name would also be much appreciated. This facility, which has been an extraordinary support to Leslie, also provided services to many not able to afford care. McCammon-Ammons-Click Funeral Home, Maryville, TN in charge (865