Amy Leslie (Barr) Wilson, 47, passed away Friday, November 29, 2019, at home in Colorado Springs, Colorado with family around her; after a courageous 2 year battle with cancer.

Amy was born July 4, 1972, in Liberal, KS, to Maurice Duane and Lesta Mae (Griffith) Barr and was the beloved eighth of eight children. She graduated from Southwestern Heights High School, Kismet, Kansas, in 1990. She attended and worked at Seward County Community College, Liberal, Kansas and graduated from Wichita State University of Wichita, Kansas, in 1993. She completed her master’s in psychology through Webster University in 2002. She made a career as a Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC) helping others with her authentic compassion and applying her counseling skills as an Alcohol and Drug Prevention Counselor in Liberal, Kansas; a Student Counselor for at-risk youth in Lee’s Summit and Pleasant Hill, Missouri; and an LPC for children with parents serving in the military in Colorado Springs, Colorado. On May 31, 1997, she married Ryan Dolan Wilson in Wichita, Kansas. They made their home in Missouri for 18 years and moved to Colorado Springs, Colorado in 2015. One of her dreams was to have her own counseling practice.

Amy was an amazing daughter, daughter-in-law, wife, sister, sister-in-law, mother, friend, counselor, neighbor, and person. She had a genuine smile that pulled the world in. She touched a lot of lives and they responded to her loving spirit. She always helped others and was a completely devoted wife and mother. She was very active in the adolescent counselor community. She enjoyed her cats, walking, sightseeing, taking day trips, and zumba. She was an avid reader and a lifelong learner. She most enjoyed and cherished spending time and making memories with her family.

Amy is preceded in death by her brothers-in-law Michael Ray Wilson and Richard Freeman.

Amy is survived by her husband Ryan and their two sons Bryce Robert Wilson (17) and Brody Ryan Wilson (14) of Colorado Springs, Colorado; her parents Maurice Barr of Satanta, Kansas and Lesta Mae (Griffith) Barr of Liberal, Kansas; her father-in-law Gary Robert Wilson and mother-in-law Carolyn Sue (Masters) Wilson of Greenwood, Missouri; her seven brothers and sisters: Becky and (Mike) Gatlin of Pueblo West, Colorado; David and (Barbara) Barr of Turpin, Oklahoma; Mark and (Linda) Barr of Plains, Kansas; Martha and (James) Darnell of Liberal, Kansas; Sarah Barr of Turpin, Oklahoma; Elizabeth and (John) Parsons of Wichita, Kansas; and Matthew Barr and (Matthew Albers) of Wichita, Kansas. She also has numerous aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, great nieces, and great nephews.

Visitation will be held 9:00 to 10:30 a.m. Saturday, December 7, 2019 at the Pleasant Hill United Methodist Church (1300 Lexington Road Pleasant Hill, Missouri 64080)

Funeral services will be held 10:30 a.m. Saturday, December 7, 2019, at the Pleasant Hill United Methodis Church. Reverend Carl Knapp will officiate. Burial will follow in the Pleasant Hill Cemetery

Memorial contributions are suggested to the Pleasant Hill United Methodist Church, ReDiscovery of Kansas City or the Humane Society, and may be sent in care of the funeral home.

Online condolences may be sent to the family at www.stanleydickeyfuneralhome.com