Rocky and Bullwinkle brought a refined form of comedy through their self-titled Saturday morning cartoon.

In the early days of television, afternoons were reserved for children with cartoons and reruns of shows like "The Lone Ranger" and "Superman." The oldest generation programming was for the teen-oriented American Bandstand. In late afternoon, parents were often coming home and watching with the kids.

On Nov. 19, 1959, a new program debuted on ABC at 4:30 p.m. Nashville time. Children found that their parents were laughing at the cartoons over their shoulders. It was, in fact, one of the first, and still one of the best presentations of political and social satire. It starred a moose and a squirrel.

Rocket J. Squirrel and Bullwinkle J. Moose, stars of "Rocky and his Friends," were the brainchild of animated filmmaker Jay Ward, who created the first animated series, Crusader Rabbit, and voice actor Bill Scott.

Done with partial animation, the shows relied on dialogue rather than sight gags. They made particularly skilled use of puns. It might be hard for many today to understand that the names “Boris Badenov” “Claire Loosebooth”, “Rocky Knute”, or “Pericles Parnassus” were taken from Boris Godenov, Claire Booth Luce, Knute Rockne and Aristotle Onassis respectively.

Rocky was the brains and Bullwinkle brought the jokes

The show would begin and end with cliffhanger episodes of various adventures in which the duo from Frostbite Falls would, unwittingly, fall into a cold war plot and face their nemesis, “that crum of crums” Boris, and his sidekick Natasha Fatale, patterned on Gomez and Morticia from the New Yorker Charles Addams cartoons.

When Bullwinkle inherited an “upsidasium” mine, or the economy was being undermined by counterfeit cereal box tops, or the duo helped Captain Peachfuzz in his quest for “Maybe Dick,” Boris and Natasha can be counted on to “make beeg trouble for Moose and Squirrel”.

The episodes were narrated in the deep baritone voice of William Conrad. At the end of one episode, the narrator asks, “Can Bullwinkle extricate himself?” to which the moose answers, “I will as soon as I get loose”.

The first episodes, in which the duo is involved with two moon men, poke fun at the military. Although comedies about the peacetime military were common at the time ("No Time for Sergeants," "GI Blues"), it was risky; the popular "The Phil Silvers Show" was cancelled because of pressure from the Army after Sgt. Bilko inducted a chimpanzee.

Tackling the hot button topics

After the show moved to NBC primetime as “The Bullwinkle Show” in 1961, they took on the greatest sacred cow: college football. Bullwinkle is recruited to play for “Whotsamatta U”. He is met by the college dean who gives him his courses: Advanced Trigonometry, Chemistry, and History of the Peloponnesian Wars.

When the dean learns that the moose is a football player, he quickly gives him new courses: knitting, basket weaving and reading a modern classic “Dick and Jane at the Seashore.” In their dorm room, Rocky asks: “Bullwinkle, why are you doing all that knitting?” Bullwinkle replies, “I’m studyin’ for the big exam, Rock.” “Why are you doing it so fast?” “I’m Cramming.”

In one episode, Bullwinkle becomes the possessor of the “Kerwood Derby”, which makes the dumbest creature on earth, Bullwinkle, the smartest. Ward received a letter from the attorney for television personality Derwood Kirby, who told them to stop or be sued; Ward responded, “Go ahead and sue, we need the publicity.”

The show lasted five years, the reruns continued for eight years on Saturday morning and in syndication ever since. It was a precursor for "The Simpsons" and "South Park." Business Professor John Hoover's book "Bullwinkle on Business" presents the amiable moose as a CEO with great motivational success. It is only sad that someone does not produce new episodes, and introduce new generations to clever satire. Bullwinkle is one of several clever, sophisticated sitcoms which, alas, ended too soon.

How we need a good laugh today.

Robert Pickard is an adjunct history professor at Nashville State Community College and Tennessee State University.