The Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle is a 2000 animated/live action comedy directed by Des McAnuff and based on the 1960s variety cartoon show of the same name. Rocky & Bullwinkle is one of the greatest cartoons ever created. While it never had the animation of Warner Bros. or Disney, it was able to overcome this issue with witty writing and clever social/political commentary, namely in regards to the Cold War that was going on at the time. However, the show was abruptly canceled in 1964 and though it lived on in syndication, it never again reached the level of popularity that it had in its heyday. However, in 2000, Universal attempted to revive the famous Cartoon duo by giving them their own movie…...which sadly bombed at the box office and received mixed reviews from critics. However, it did its job of introducing Rocky & Bullwinkle to a new generation. I remember when this movie came out and going to see it in the theaters. I loved it and it got me interested in the cartoon, which started airing again on Cartoon Network to promote the film. Even today, the film is starting to get a bit of a cult following and for good reason because while the film does have some pretty big problems, it is still a very entertaining and faithful adaptation.

The film takes place in the modern day and Rocky & Bullwinkle have seen better days. With their show canceled, the duo’s cartoon home has been decimated and they now live off of ever diminishing royalties from their cartoon reruns. Their arch enemies, Boris & Natasha as well as their Fearless Leader are in a similar position but aren’t content with just sitting by and fading into obscurity. The trio trick a movie producer into putting a Rocky & Bullwinkle movie and use this to be turned into live action characters so that they can take over the real world using TV so bad that it turns people into mindless zombies…..so basically normal TV. Hmmm…..anyway, the FBI catches wind of this and attempts to deal with the trio but their methods prove ineffective against the crazy cartoon villains. So the FBI dispatches Agent Karen Sympathy (yeah, I hate the pun too) to bring Rocky & Bullwinkle into the real world to defeat their enemies one last time.

I actually really like the plot of Rocky & Bullwinkle. The film came out in a time long after many of the events the show satirized occurred so it wouldn’t be relevant anymore. So the film makes a point to bring the characters in the modern day and it works. This is mostly because the filmmakers understood that part of what made Rocky & Bullwinkle so much fun to watch was the witty humor, which carries over into the film. The dialogue is funny, the wordplay is clever and they are constantly finding creative ways to break the fourth wall. It’s one of those movies that I can still watch as an adult and fully enjoy because of how clever it is. There is some wasted potential though, namely in how Rocky & Bullwinkle interact with the real world. I don’t know what it is, but the real world is almost as cartoonish and silly as….well...a cartoon. I think it would have been more interesting if the people in the real world were played completely straight while Rocky & Bullwinkle act like their usual cartoon selfs. That would have been funny but as is, it mostly just feels like a live action cartoon through and through.

It’s still funny though and that mostly has to do with its cast of characters. Believe it or not, they actually got June Foray, the original voice actress who played Rocky to reprise her role and she does a fantastic job. He’s a kind and likable character but is still cynical and can get frustrated with the people around him, namely Bullwinkle who’s slow witted clumsy nature often causes problems. Bullwinkle is still really funny in his stupidity though and the two share a believable friendship. Sadly, Bullwinkle is not voiced by Bill Scott as he passed away 1985. However, Keith Scott takes over and he does such a great job that no one is liable to notice. Boris & Natasha are played by Jason Alexander & Rene Russo respectively and what great picks for the roles. They capture the bumbling nature of the characters perfectly and are enjoyable to watch. I also adore Robert De Niro as Fearless Leader. He just looks like he’s having so much fun with the character. Those three aren’t the only big name actors in the movie. It seems like every big star at the time made a cameo in the film. Billy Crystal, Whoopi Goldberg, John Goodman, even Kenan & Kel. It blew my mind as a kid to see two comic duos from two different time periods interact with each other.

Alright, so what’s wrong with the movie? Well the first big problem is the leading lady. Carin Sympathy is a f***ing piece of wonder bread. She is so bland and boring and only serves the purpose of acting as Rocky & Bullwinkle’s liaison to the real world. Even then, she doesn’t do her job very well since she gets separated from them midway through, leaving the two on their own in the modern world. And you know what…..it was pretty funny. The thing about Rocky & Bullwinkle is while they were often the victims of Boris & Natasha’s schemes, most of the time, they dealt with the two without even realizing what was happening. It’s a little weird seeing the two actively trying to stop them. Heck, at one point, Bullwinkle refers to the two by name which isn’t supposed to happen. The other thing that sort of hinders the movie are the special effects. The CGI is super dated and some of the practical effects are a bit silly. I will say this though, the animated sections of the movie are fantastic. I’m used to seeing these characters depicted with stilted movement so it’s neat to see them move so fluidly.

Overall, I think Rocky & Bullwinkle is a fun movie. It definitely is a film by fans for fans so if you are expecting something a little deeper, you aren’t going to find it here. Personally, I still like this movie and I would prefer they do stuff like this when adapting old cartoons as opposed to a CGI film by Illumination that relies more on crappy pop culture references. However, I would not be against an animated film in a similar fashion to how Dreamworks handled Mr. Peabody & Sherman, two characters who also appeared on the Rocky & Bullwinkle show. To wrap things up, it’s a fun movie, albeit an imperfect one. I give The Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle a 7 out of 10.