Jay Ward must be rolling on his grave after He sees this insult of a legend...

Genre: Comedy

Fantasy Directed By: Des McAnuff Written By: Kenneth Lonergan Starring: Rene Russo

Jason Alexander

Randy Quaid

Kel Mitchell

Kenan Thompson

Piper Perabo

Robert De Niro Distributed By: Universal Pictures Release Date: June 30, 2000 Runtime: 92 minutes Country: United States

The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle is a 2000 live-action/animated adventure comedy film produced by Universal Pictures, based on the television cartoon The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show by Jay Ward. The animated characters Rocky and Bullwinkle shared the screen with live actors portraying Fearless Leader (Robert De Niro), Boris Badenov (Jason Alexander), Natasha Fatale (Rene Russo), Piper Perabo, Randy Quaid, Kel Mitchell, and Kenan Thompson. Reprising her role as Rocky was June Foray, and Keith Scott voices Bullwinkle and the film's narrator.

The film features an ensemble cast of guest appearances by performers including Paget Brewster, Janeane Garofalo, John Goodman, David Allen Grier, Don Novello, Jon Polito, Carl Reiner, Whoopi Goldberg, Max Grodenchik, and Jonathan Winters. The film received mixed-to-negative reviews and was a box office bomb, making $35.1 million out of its $76 million budget.

Plot

Rocky the Squirrel and Bullwinkle J. Moose live a melancholic life ever since their television series was cancelled in 1964. Their animated home, Frostbite Falls, is deforested, Rocky can no longer fly, and their show's unseen Narrator lives with his mother. Meanwhile, their archenemies, Fearless Leader, Boris Badenov, and Natasha Fatale, have all lost power in Pottsylvania following the end of the Cold War. They escape by tunneling to a Hollywood film studio, where they trick executive Minnie Mogul into signing a rights contract to their series and green-lighting a potential movie, dragging the villains out of the animated world and transforming them into live action characters.

Six months later, Fearless Leader and his minions have founded RBTV ("Really Bad Television"), a cable television network in New York City that is programmed to control the population by brainwashing American audiences into voting Fearless Leader in as the next President of the United States. FBI Director, Cappy von Trapment, deploys agent Karen Sympathy to recruit Rocky and Bullwinkle to stop RBTV's intended broadcast. Karen travels to a movie-generating lighthouse in Los Angeles, summoning Rocky, Bullwinkle, and the Narrator into the real world.

Upon learning of Rocky and Bullwinkle's return, Fearless Leader deploys Boris and Natasha to destroy them. They are given the CDI ("Computer-Degenerating Imagery"), a laptop-like weapon that can trap cartoon characters within the Internet. The villains' truck is stolen by Karen, who is swiftly arrested by Oklahoma State Police troopers when Natasha poses as her. Boris and Natasha later steal a helicopter to continue their pursuit. Karen is sent to prison but manipulates a love-struck Swedish guard named Ole to help her escape. Rocky and Bullwinkle are picked up by students Martin and Lewis, who attends Bullwinkle's alma mater Wossamotta U. Boris and Natasha launch an elaborate plan to assassinate Bullwinkle, donating a cheque to the university in his name, inspiring the academic board to award Bullwinkle with an honorary "Mooster's Degree". As Bullwinkle addresses the students, Rocky regains his ability to fly, stopping Boris from killing Bullwinkle with the CDI.

Boris and Natasha chase Rocky and Bullwinkle through Chicago, but disintegrate their own helicopter. Karen reunites with Rocky and Bullwinkle, but the trio is arrested again by numerous state troopers. They are trialed for numerous misdemeanors in ten states, but the presiding Judge Cameo has the charges dropped upon recognizing Rocky and Bullwinkle, informing the district attorney that celebrities are above the law. The trio buys a rickety biplane and escapes Boris and Natasha once again. The two villains consider retiring, lying to Fearless Leader that they had defeated Rocky and Bullwinkle, confident that they have already won. Meanwhile, the heroes' plane begins to lose altitude due to the combined weight. Rocky flies Karen to New York to stop the broadcast, but they are captured by Boris and Natasha. Fearless Leader initiates his plan and broadcasts programs to brainwash most of the country.

Bullwinkle crash-lands the plane outside the White House in Washington, D.C., and finds the President to be brainwashed by the RBTV programs, which Bullwinkle is immune due to his natural stupidity. Cappy finds Bullwinkle and scans him into the White House's computer system, then e-mails him to the studio just as Fearless Leader addresses the nation, disrupting the broadcast, and a chaotic fight breaks out, leading to the capture of the villains. Karen, Rocky, and Bullwinkle then ask the American public to replant Frostbite Falls, and Bullwinkle accidentally activates the CDI, transforming the villains back to their animated forms and banishing them to the Internet once and for all.

In the aftermath, Rocky and Bullwinkle's careers are renewed in RBTV, renamed to "Rocky and Bullwinkle Television", and Karen goes on a date with Ole as Rocky, Bullwinkle, and the Narrator return home to a rejuvenated Frostbite Falls.

Bad Qualities

The characters' personalities changed pretty badly.

Garish and bland CGI. For example, Rocky and Bullwinkle look quite unfinished and in some scenes, they do not look as though they're really there.

The film has some plot holes.

Lots of filler.

Unfunny jokes.

The effects used on turning people from fruit and vegetables look pretty disgusting.

There's a pointless romantic subplot between Karen and the prison guard.

The narrator overtalks the story which gets annoying.

On top of that, in this film, he is a ripoff of the original Powerpuff Girls' narrator, in which case, the Powerpuff Girls' narrator is a better narrator than the movie's narrator.

The scene where a young scientist girl tests the CDI (Computer Degenerated Imagery) against a hand-drawn animated character is creepy for a family movie, as he explodes and you can see blood on the target, and it also makes no sense since the CDI would mean that it would only work on computer-animated characters, but for some reason, it also works on hand-drawn characters. And real people, as it was seen at the end. It almost feels as if the film is in the same or similar universe as mh:greatestmovies:Who Framed Roger Rabbit, but this is never once made clear to the audience.

For some reason, Boris, Natasha and Fearless Leader were all pulled out from the TV but Rocky and Bullwinkle were brought to life from the green light from Hollywood and it makes absolutely no sense.

Mr. Big, apparently superior to Boris, Natasha, and Fearless Leader, is completely absent in the movie, though to be fair, he was only featured in the show's second season then largely forgotten.

Characters such as Gidney and Cloyd (the moon men) and Captain Peter "Wrong Way" Peachfuzz were also absent from the movie. They were written out in the last two seasons of the show.

Lots of product placement throughout the film mainly for Coca-Cola drinks.

Even while it stays faithful to its material, the jokes are a bit too inappropriate for a family movie.

Some scenes go on for too long like when the RBTV group finds out that their machine works, they dance to a cover of Secret Agent Man and it goes on for quite long.

The ending makes no sense.

False advertising: One of the posters show Fearless Leader, Boris, and Natasha on a road setting up bombs and TNT'S, but they never do it in the movie at all.

Good Qualities

Decent 2D animation.

Decent voice acting by Robert De Niro, Rene Russo, and Jason Alexander. June Foray reprises her role of Rocky after 35 years and still does a good performance, while Keith Scott as Bullwinkle does a good impression of the original voice.

Some cameos make good impressions.

Sometimes it feels like a Rocky and Bullwinkle episode.

Relating to Bad Qualities #9 above, the scientist girl remarks to Fearless Leader about how his concept for the CDI is similar to mh:greatestmovies:Who Framed Roger Rabbit, to which he angrily rebukes, "No, shut up, this is totally different!" and she pauses awkwardly.

It is at least faithful to the source cartoon.

The movie does have a bit of potential to be a great adaptation of a classic cartoon show, despite the subpar execution.

Some moments worth a laugh, like when Karen's love interest is still outside a movie theatre where she ditched him cooking a burger.