Laramie Movie Scope:

The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle

Or how I learned to stop worrying and love moose and squirrel

by Robert Roten, Film Critic

July 2, 2000 -- I have fond memories of the Rocky and Bullwinkle television show, which aired from 1959 to 1964, and lives on forever through reruns. I really didn't know what to expect from the feature-length motion picture "The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle," but it turns out to be quite charming.

I wasn't a big fan of the original show, but I did like it and I was happy to see the movie stays true to the spirit of the original, except for all the product placements. It is whimsical, irreverent, satirical and funny. It is full of bad puns and good humor.

In the story, Rocky the flying squirrel (voice by June Foray, who did the original Rocky voice and those of many other cartoon characters) and Bullwinkle J. Moose (voice by veteran voice man Keith Scott, who also narrates the film) come out of retirement to rescue the nation from an evil plot to fix the election, no, not by buying them, that's legal. This plot is more insidious than that. The plot is to turn the whole nation into mindless zombies using bad television. The problem is, Rocky and Bullwinkle are 36 years too late to stop it.

Fearless leader (played by Robert De Niro), aided by Boris Badenov (Jason Alexander) and Natasha Fatale (played by an unrecognizable Rene Russo) have plotted to buy up all the TV stations. Transmitting special bad programming, they plan to turn voters into zombies who will vote for whoever they are told to vote for. The three villains are transported into the real world from the cartoon world by the use of legal trickery, while moose and squirrel become three-dimensional by the use of a special green light. Like the special effects in "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" this film blends three-dimensional-looking cartoons with live action seamlessly.

Also on the quest to stop the bad guys with moose and squirrel is FBI agent called, and I'm not making this up, Karen Sympathy (played by Piper Perabo, and no, I didn't make that up, either). The movie is loaded chock full of gags and puns. At one point we see a car crossing a bridge over a river. Next the bridge is a sign: "Crymea River." Another example, moose and squirrel are flattened when they are run over by a bus. Laying on the pavement, Bullwinkle says, "Don't you think ... " He's interrupted by Rocky, who says, "Don't say it." Bullwinkle continues, " ... this movie is getting a little two dimensional."

De Niro is wonderful in his role as Fearless leader, even using his old "You talkin' to me?" soliloquy from "Taxi Driver" as a gag line at one point. Newcomer Perabo is perfect as Karen Sympathy, an agent who wants to let her inner child out. Alexander and Russo are perfect as Boris and Natasha. Randy Quaid ("Independence Day") does his usual good job as 'Cappy' von Trappment, FBI chief. Billy Crystal has a cameo as an unlucky mattress salesman. Whoopi Goldberg plays Judge Cameo, who says (shades of O.J.) "Celebrities are above the law." John Goodman has a cameo as a state trooper, who, hauling Karen Sympathy off to jail as she protests that she is an FBI agent on duty, replies "Yeah, and I'm John Goodman." The wonderful, but seldom-seen Jonathan Winters has some small roles in the movie as does Janeane Garofalo and Carl Reiner.

The movie captures the essence of the old TV show. It is aimed at adults, but kids will like it too, they just won't get all the jokes. It has plenty of energy and action, but also a gentle humor to go with its satire. It is a nice combination and it brings back a lot of good memories. This film rates a B.

Click here for links to places to buy this movie in video and/or DVD format, the soundtrack, books, even used videos, games and lots of other stuff. I suggest you shop at least two of these places before buying anything. Prices seem to vary continuously. For more information on this film, click on this link to The Internet Movie Database. Type in the name of the movie in the search box and press enter. You will be able to find background information on the film, the actors, and links to much more information.

Copyright © 2000 Robert Roten. All rights reserved.

Reproduced with the permission of the copyright holder. Back to the Laramie Movie Scope index. (If you e-mail me with a question about this or any other movie or review, please mention the name of the movie you are asking the question about, otherwise I may have no way of knowing which film you are referring to)