NEW BEDFORD — During the month of May, the 488th flag to fly atop Old Glory Tower in the North End honors the memory of combat veteran Tech Sgt. Frank Lawrence, Jr., a member of the Army Air Corps who was held as a POW during WWII.

Lawrence served in the 454th Bombardment Group and participated in 47 heavy bombardment missions aboard a B-24 Liberator. He was shot down over the Ploesti oil fields and held as a prisoner of war in Bulgaria.

According to an article in the Journal of the Air Force Association. dated Jan. 1995, "Between April 5 and Aug. 19, 1944, 15 Air Forces' heavy bombers hit Ploesti 19 times. Oil production in the complex was reduced by 80%, but enemy defenses remained strong, downing 223 bombers and many fighters. Some 1,100 captured bomber and fighter crews become POWs." The story added that although the POWs were not harmed physically, living conditions in the prison were appalling.

Lawrence served in the Army Air Corps from Jan. 26, 1943 to Oct. 13, 1945. He received several medals including: the Purple Heart, Air Medal with three clusters, Presidential Unit Citation, European-African-Middle Eastern Theatre Campaign Ribbon, Distinguished Unit Badge, Good Conduct Medal, American Campaign Medal and Prisoner of War Medal.

Lawrence lived in New Bedford all of his life. He was a 1935 graduate of New Bedford High School and played varsity football and baseball. In 1989 he was inducted into the New Bedford High School Gridiron Club Hall of Fame. During the 1930s he played in the American Legion and Twilight Baseball Leagues. He went on to play semiprofessional football for the Murphy Club.

He was employed as a letter carrier with the U.S. Postal Service in New Bedford for 30 years until his retirement in 1976. He also held many part-time jobs, including working as a cashier at area race tracks. He was a member of American Legion Post 397 in Dartmouth, the Disabled American Veterans and the Knights of Columbus Council 4532. He died April 19, 2000 at the age of 82.

Lawrence's eulogy read "his heroic efforts to save a friend when his plane was shot down, nearly cost him his life." It went on to say, "after being released as a prison of war and his recuperation from war injuries, he returned to continue his dedication to his own growing family."

The unidentified person who wrote his eulogy said, "We will always remember his ability to recall names and places like no one else. We will always remember his keen and very sharp mind and intelligence. We will always remember his ease of telling jokes. Each day when we think of this tower of a man, we will remember to thank God for allowing our lives to be touched by this gentle giant in so many ways."

Lawrence was interviewed on radio's Jack Benny Show in May of 1945 titled "The Road Ahead", and his name, rank and bombardment group number are engraved on the present B-24 that flies today making yearly appearances for shows and rides at the New Bedford Airport as well as shows throughout the country.

Lawrence was married for 57 years to Isabelle C. (Andrade). They had 15 children; five daughters: Lynne Machado of Lewiston, Maine, Rosemary Machowski of Sabbatus, Maine, Roseanne Mandeville of New Bedford (deceased), Isabelle Boucher of Middletown, Penn. and Marianne Morrissey of New Bedford; 10 boys: Frank Lawrence III of New Bedford, Stephen Lawrence of Fairhaven, Michael Lawrence of Acushnet, Peter Lawrence of New Bedford, Paul Lawrence of Buffalo, N.Y., Patrick Lawrence of New Bedford, Matthew Lawrence of Wausau, Wis., Christopher Lawrence of North Anson, Maine and two deceased sons: Mark and Luke Lawrence. They also had 22 grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren.

The information featured in this article was provided by Lawrence's son, Patrick of New Bedford, to honor his father.

The late Joseph Theodore, a World War II veteran and Purple Heart recipient began the practice of flying veterans' flags above the Old Glory Tower 44 years ago.

Linda Ferreira, a marketing representative at Ashley Ford in New Bedford, researches the life histories of area veterans. Paul Neary, general manager of the dealership raises the memorial flags on the veterans' behalf. Those who would like to honor a veteran by flying a flag at Old Glory Tower can contact Ferreira at (508) 996-5611 or at marketing@ashleyfordsales.com