Program Description

"WKSU-FM is a 50,000 watt National Public Radio affiliate with a current average audience of 135,000 serving the major cities and their contiguous communities of Cleveland, Akron, Canton and Kent, Ohio. The station's mission and format focuses on both in-depth news, classical music and the arts. Research and meetings with the more than two dozen major arts organization within the broadcast area revealed two conflicting forces: the need for more promotion at a time when budgets are declining. WKSU chose to address this issue in 1990 by developing [an] on-going, comprehensive 'Arts Awareness Campaign' that would: 1) Build awareness of the local arts organizations through in-depth arts news features 2) Place locally recorded music on the same 'playing field' with internationally released CDs and LPs. 3) Encourage listeners to attend upcoming performances. "Many stations broadcast concert programs. These are typically real-time recreations of the concert experience that air one time in the evening when few people use radio. These programs tend to segregate locally recorded music from the mainstream. Perhaps most importantly, WKSU recognized that no one time is a good listening time, rather the nature of radio listening is such that a schedule of various times is the only way to maximize reach and frequency of listening. "WKSU chose to mainstream recording and features as part of its regular programming in a schedule that would maximize effectiveness to area arts and cultural organizations. WKSU's exclusive digital recordings were broadcast 2 times per day Monday thru Friday, and once each on Saturday and Sunday. WKSU produced one to two arts news features per week, each airing twice daily during drive-time at 8:50a.m. and 4:50p.m. "WKSU's 1990 Arts Awareness Campaign demonstrated a unique and on-going commitment to enhancing the quality of life in its service area."--1990 Peabody Awards entry form.

Broadcast Date

1990

Asset type

Program

Media type

Sound

Duration

00:15:56.400