Nice to meet you, we’re Tubi. We’re more than a completely fee-free streamer with the largest library in the entire streaming universe. We’re entertainment fiends and collectors, and never judgers. So, get comfy and settle into whatever you’re feeling. It’s about to get good.

WATCH WITH ZERO FEES EVER (YES, REALLY!):

Live TV: news, weather, sports, & entertainment

It’s live, always on, forever fee-free and has way fewer ads than cable. We call that a win-win-win-win.

+ Check your local news channels for weather and news.

+ Get game day ready with pre-game excitement.

+ Unwind with your favorite TV competitions and guilty pleasures.

Movies

From the biggest names in the industry to the indie darlings we can’t get enough of.

+ Top titles added every month.

+ Bask in loads of drama that isn’t your own.

+ Comedy, action, and horror…oh, my! Whatever genre you’re looking for, we have it.

Series

Marathon all the best series, all in one place, with zero subscriptions ever.

+ Refine your taste buds with cooking shows and competitions.

+ Get lost in the drama of an evening soap.

+ Decompress with laugh-out-loud sitcoms.

Tubi Originals

Made by us, just for you. And only available on Tubi.

+ Critically acclaimed series like Boarders and Big Mood.

+ Live out your fantasies with all-new reality shows, series, and movies.

Tubi Comic Con(tent)

It's a bird, it's a plane, it's...all your favorite comic book heroes and caped crusaders!

+ Binge full series, old school and new.

+ Stay current with the latest Hollywood releases.

Tubi Español

Tú perteneces aquí. Watch in Spanish with no subtitles necessary.

+ Keep up with all your telenovelas.

+ Stream Spanish-first favorites and discover dubbed blockbusters.

International Entertainment

+ Ikuze! We have all the anime!

+ Korea’s in the house!! Get your fill of K-pop, horror, action, comedy, and drama.

+ Live the Bollywood dream and dance along with tons of favorites.

MORE PERKS

+ Swipe your way to discovering new content.

+ Never run out of stuff to watch. We add new arrivals every week.

+ Not sure what to watch? Tap the dice icon in the corner to do the Tubi Shuffle and get a randomized pick!

+ Here, there, everywhere. Tubi works on 30+ devices, so it goes wherever you go.

+ We’ll never ask for your credit card, ever. You’ll pay zero fees forever. For really.

+ Create an account to build your own watchlist, save your watch progress, and get better recommendations.

See You In There™

OMG Name Already ,

Love it so much!

I truly appreciate the like/dislike option. It helps me keep track of what I’ve watched. I watch Tubi more than any other app. Including Netflicks and the like. Recently there have been a few glitches though. When I watch a preview sometimes the actual movie will play afterwards or, if I exit out before the movie starts then the audio will start playing. This issue includes live tv as well. It usually fixes itself after I turn off and then back on again or sometimes I have to unplug the box altogether. I’ve gotten to where I will back out of the app after each interaction and then reopen. That seems to help. Also, would you please hold the suggestion bar until the movie is over and playing the credits. Sometimes, especially with old movies ( which I love) the suggestion bar will pop up while the action is still playing thus hiding part of the screen. If I exit out of the suggestion bar it just comes back and if I exit again the whole movie exits out and I don’t get to finish the movie unless I start it over and fast forward to the end and I still have to contend with the suggestion bar, so can still only see part of the screen. All in all it’s a great app, even if you don’t fix those things. Thanks.