Hardcore Henry director Timur Bekmambetov is set to adapt Julian Terry's Animal Crossing horror short 'Don't Peek' into a full-length feature film. According to Deadline, Terry is returning to direct the feature film adaptation of his horror short while Bekmambetov, who helmed Wanted and Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter, is set to adapt the story and produce the picture with Majd Nassif under Bekmambetov's production banner Bazelevs. Creative executive Pavel Bozhkov is also onboard to oversee the project.

Don't Peek made its official world premiere on March 15, the first day of SXSW Online, after a small team of people led by Terry created the film using a Blackmagic pocket camera during quarantine last year. The short film follows a young woman, played by Katie Cetta, who "discovers a frightening video game character intent on crossing into the real world."

Loading

Play

It's fair to say that after you've watched it, you may think twice about playing Animal Crossing late at night. However, if you're feeling brave enough, then you might want to turn your attention to New Horizons, a game that IGN called an "expanded, polished, next-generation reboot," where you can escape to a deserted island and explore, create, and customize your very own paradise.

There's plenty to do in paradise but if you're stuck for ideas, then you may want to check whether you have collected all of K.K. Slider's songs or see how many Sanrio items you've spotted in the game. If the Sanrio collaboration isn't your thing, perhaps you'd like to take a look at the Mario-themed items that you can buy to possibly share your own Mushroom Kingdom creation with the community. Adele Ankers is a Freelance Entertainment Journalist. You can reach her on Twitter.

Correction: An original version of this story didn't make clear that Julian Terry is returning to direct the feature film adaptation of Don't Peek. Timur Bekmambetov is attached to the project as a producer. The story has been edited to highlight this correction.