The Japanese director Akira Kurosawa loves big storms, and nature in all its majesty is an intrinsic force in his latest film. Yesterday, New York briefly handed him a whopper for background - Hurricane Gloria - to usher in his epic movie ''Ran,'' the opening work at the 1985 New York Film Festival.

''Ran'' means ''chaos,'' and the rains and winds that lashed the city earlier in the day threatened to play havoc with the two sold-out showings of the 2-hour, 40-minute film at Avery Fisher and Alice Tully Halls in Lincoln Center. But several thousand lovers of film turned out last night as the weather cleared to give standing ovations to the man who made ''Rashomon,'' ''Seven Samurai'' and ''Throne of Blood'' - and now, his 27th film, ''Ran,'' a work that has won critical acclaim and that recalls Shakespeare's ''King Lear.''

Responding to a lustily cheering full house at Tully Hall, Mr. Kurosawa said he was ''deeply happy'' that his film had been chosen to open the festival. ''Tonight I will be very pleased if you are pleased,'' he said through his interpreter.

Slightly stooped, somewhat bemused, always accompanied by his friend and interpreter, Audie Bock, who translated his autobiography and is a scholar of Japanese films, the world-famous director shuttled between the two crowded auditoriums on West 65th Street to take his bows. He had dinner in the board room of Avery Fisher Hall with 60 guests, including trustees of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and officials of Orion Films, and capped the evening with a black-tie midnight party for 1,300 at the Tavern on the Green in Central Park.

A Slender, Elegant Figure

Mr. Kurosawa is 75 years old, a slender, elegant figure close to six feet tall, a towering height for a Japanese of his generation. Only an occasional stiffness in his gait betrays his age. He usually wears tinted glasses to protect his eyes against glare. He arrived in New York Tuesday, submitting to a steady drumfire of interviews and appearances that will go on through tomorrow, speaking always in Japanese except for a few polite phrases in English. He displayed almost none of the autocratic manner that has earned him the nickname of ''The Emperor'' in Japan.

At his side always, along with Miss Bock, was Serge Silberman, the dapper, silver-haired producer of ''Ran.'' It was Mr. Silberman who brought five of Luis Bunuel's films to the screen and who offered to produce ''Ran'' in 1982 after Mr. Kurosawa failed to obtain financing from Japanese and Western sources. ''Ran,'' the most ambitious and expensive undertaking in Japanese movie history, ultimately cost $11.5 million, and has obsessed Mr. Kurosawa for a decade.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.