Mike Miller Biography

Mike Miller is an American basketball coach and former professional player who is the current boys basketball head coach at Houston High School in Germantown, Tennessee. Miller played college basketball for the Florida Gators before entering the National Basketball Association (NBA). He played 17 seasons in the NBA after being selected by the Orlando Magic in the first round of the 2000 NBA draft with the fifth overall pick. Miller was named the NBA Rookie of the Year with the Magic in 2001 and was voted NBA Sixth Man of the Year with the Memphis Grizzlies in 2006, He won two consecutive NBA championships with the Miami Heat in 2012 and 2013. He also played professionally for the Minnesota Timberwolves, Washington Wizards, Cleveland Cavaliers, and Denver Nuggets. He was a swingman who was primarily a three-point specialist. After his playing career, he became a college assistant coach with the Memphis Tigers. He resigned after two seasons before becoming the head coach at Houston High.

Book Mike Miller for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Mike Miller for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Mike Miller. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Mike Miller, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Mike Miller's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Mike Miller, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Mike Miller for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Mike Miller for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Mike Miller for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Mike Miller’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Mike Miller for your Virtual Meeting