RUDY Gobert joined the NBA in 2013 and has since become one of the league's most vital players.

Here's everything we know about Rudy Gobert and his long line of basketball success.

Who is Minnesota Timberwolves player Rudy Gobert?

Rudy Gobert-Bourgarel is a French basketball player born on June 26, 1992, in Saint-Quentin, France.

Gobert currently plays professional basketball with the NBA's Minnesota Timberwolves.

He started his career in sports in 2003 when he played in the Saint-Quentin BB club.

Four years later, Rudy trained with the Cholet Baskets before participating in the FIBA Europe Under-18 Championship.

In 2013, Gobert was part of the NBA Draft Pick where he played with the Utah Jazz until 2022 before transferring to Minnesota.

Gobert also represents the French national basketball team and received a silver medal during the 2020 Summer Olympics.

What happened to Rudy Gobert?

On Sunday, April 9, Rudy Gobert got into a physical altercation with his teammate during the Minnesota Timberwolves' game against the New Orleans Pelicans.

In the second quarter, Gobert was seen punching teammate, Kyle Anderson after a heated argument between the team.

According to ESPN's Adrian Wojnarowski, the argument started after Anderson told Gobert to block more shots.

Due to the altercation, Rudy was sent home mid-game.

Gobert has since released a statement on Twitter saying: "Emotions got the best of me today. I should not have reacted the way I did regardless of what was said.

"I wanna apologize to the fans, the organisation and particularly to Kyle, who is someone that I truly love and respect as a teammate."

What is his net worth?

According to multiple outlets, Rudy Gobert has a reported net worth of $40million.

He currently has a yearly salary of $4million and a monthly salary of $0.3million.

Gobert is currently endorsed by Nike and their Air Max Dominate line for $1million.

Since starting his basketball career, Gobert has been named the NBA All-Star for three years in a row starting in 2020.