Awem Games announces the release of its first free-to-play title Cradle of Empires™, the most adventurous match-3 puzzle game ever

Mogilev, Belarus - June 5, 2014 - Awem Games, the developer of such titles as Cradle Of Rome™ 1-2, the Golden Trails™ series, Letters from Nowhere™ series, and other casual games and mobile apps, announces the official release of Cradle of Empires™ for iOS devices. The application is now distributed for free and available on the App Store worldwide.

Cradle of Empires™ is an adventurous match-3 game with elements of city builder that features a rich storyline, thrilling quests, and a dozen of appealing characters! It is the successor of the well-known Cradle titles that has an absolutely unique twist on the classic gameplay of the series.

Cradle of Empires™ is an exciting, yet cool, calm and collected family-friendly adventure.

The player takes the role of the Chosen One, whose mission is to help ancient empires (Egypt at first) rise from the ruins. Fulfilling tasks from the citizens, collecting powerful artifacts and bonuses on match-3 levels and in the cities, the player can work out his (or her) own gameplay strategy in the battle against the evil and bring the ancient civilizations to their former glory.

Cradle of Empires™ Key Features:

• A unique mix of match-3 puzzle, adventure and city builder never seen before

• All-new bonus system including amulets, totems, artifacts and more to help you choose your own gameplay tactics

• Original twists on classical Match-3 featuring six new modes of play

• Fairy-tale inspired story line with unexpected twists, interesting quests, and lots of appealing characters

• Additional content coming in updates with new quests, buildings, characters and civilizations

• Mesmerizing hand drawn graphics and original music

Pricing and Availability

Cradle of Empires™ is officially launched worldwide for the family of iOS devices. It runs on iPad 2 or later, iPhone 4 or later and requires iOS 5.1 or later. The application is free to play and includes in-app purchases. More information is available at https://itunes.apple.com/app/cradle-of-empires/id738480930

About Awem Games

Awem Games, an independent game development company founded in 2002 with the sole mission of developing high quality casual PC and Mac Games for the whole family. The company has established itself as the premier casual game developer in Eastern Europe. Its superior titles include Cradle of Rome™ 1-2, The Island: Castaway™ 1-2, Letters from Nowhere™ 1-2, Letters From Nowhre: A Hidden Object Mystery, Golden Trails: The New Western Rush™, Golden Trails 2: The Lost Legacy™, Romance of Rome™, and Cradle of Persia™, etc which have delighted millions of families across the world. At present, Awem is on its way to conquer the mobile casual gaming market all over the world. To learn more, please visit www.awem.com

Cradle of Empires™

https://itunes.apple.com/app/cradle-of-empires/id738480930

Cradle of Empires™ Trailer

http://youtu.be/f9sOmOgBtRw

Cradle of Empires™ Press Kit

http://www.komkov.awem.com/PressKit-COEm-iOS-Awem.zip

Press contact: Olga Berezko

Company: Awem Games

E-mail: berezko@awem.com

Related Media