Mogilev, Belarus, 2017-May-08 — /EPR Network/ — Awem Games, the developer of such titles as Cradle Of Rome™ 1-2, the Golden Trails™ series, Letters from Nowhere™ 1-2, and other casual games and mobile apps, announce the official release of Cradle of Empires™ for Mac. The application is now distributed for free and available on Mac worldwide.

Cradle of Empires™ is an adventurous match-3 game with elements of city builder that features a rich storyline, thrilling quests, and a lot of appealing characters! It is the successor of the well-known Cradle titles that has an absolutely unique twist on the classic gameplay of the series.

Cradle of Empires™ is an exciting, yet cool, calm and collected family-friendly adventure. The player takes the role of the Chosen One, whose mission is to help the Egyptian Empire rise from the ruins. Fulfilling tasks from the citizens, collecting powerful artifacts and bonuses on match-3 levels and in the city, the player can work out his own gameplay strategy in his battle against the evil and bring the ancient civilization to its former glory.

Cradle of Empires™ Key Features:

• A unique mix of match-3 puzzle, adventure and city builder never seen before.

• Build the ancient city: Collect resources by playing match-3 levels, which help to build the city destroyed by evil

• Different game modes: 6 unique match-3 modes and 4 special modes of play, a variety won’t find anywhere else.

• Mega-sized adventure: Engaging adventurous story with unexpected twists, gripping quests and memorable characters.

• All-new bonus system including spells, totems, artifacts and more to help players choose their own gameplay tactics.

• Mesmerizing hand drawn graphics: The artwork isn’t a simple, bland cartoon. it’s a graphical masterpiece, drawn down to the smallest detail.

• Never ending story: New quests, collections, levels, buildings and special events in every update.

Pricing and Availability

Cradle of Empires™ is officially launched worldwide for Mac. It requires Mac OS X 10.10 or later and 64-bit processor. The application is free to play and includes in-app purchases. More information is available at

Mac App Store:

http://bit.ly/coe-mac

About Awem Games

Awem Games, an independent game development and publishing company founded in 2002 with the sole mission of creating high quality casual games for the whole family. The company has established itself as the premier casual game developer in Eastern Europe. Its superior titles include Cradle of Rome™ 1-2, Cradle of Egypt™, Golden Trails™ 1-3, Letters from Nowhere™ 1-2, Letters From Nowhere: A Hidden Object Mystery™, The Island: Castaway™ 1-2, Romance of Rome™, Cradle of Persia™ and Star Defender™ 1-4, which have delighted families across the world.

In 2014, Awem Games published another hit title – Cradle of Empires™. Since then, company has focused on free-to-play games for smartphones and tablets. Since its release, Cradle of Empires has consistently been among the Top 50 Grossing Apps in the Apple Apps Store. This is the first port on a stationary devices of the mobile game already loved by millions of players. The company will also consider porting Cradle of Empires™ to the Windows App Store in the foreseeable future.

To learn more, please visit www.awem.com

Game Trailer:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xQZRyFY1ZXE

Game on Mac App Store:

http://bit.ly/coe-mac

Web site:

http://cradleofempires.com

Game page on Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/cradleofempires