The Los Angeles Clippers have been the NBA's biggest story this season, and after signing Kenyon Martin, the team continues to make headlines.

Martin had been playing for Xinjiang Tigers in China, but his team missed the playoffs, and he is now available to rejoin the NBA.

Los Angeles is 13-7 and third in the Western Conference right now. Oklahoma City and Denver are in the top two spots, but adding Martin makes the Clippers better than both of these teams.

OKC has the stars and Denver has the depth; the Clippers now have both.

Here are the top-five reasons why K-Mart will be the final piece to a Clipper team that will be the favorite to reach the finals come playoff time.

A productive veteran taking a pay cut to sign with the Los Angeles Clippers is something that many NBA fans thought they would never see.

After Blake Griffin's rookie season and the trade for Chris Paul, the Clippers have proved to be a legitimate title contender.

Martin signed for a mini mid-level exception that will pay him $2.5 million.

The 11-year player had no shortage of options when choosing which team to sign for, and many of his suitors had the cap space to give him more money.

Martin may be the first person in league history to sign with the Clippers because he wants to win a championship.

Martin was the best free agent available once he was eligible to leave his Chinese team and had many suitors.

The Lakers, Heat, Spurs, Knicks and Hawks were all reportedly interested in signing the forward.

Martin could have signed with another team for more money and been assured more playing time.

His decision to join his former teammate Chauncey Billups shows that his primary concern is to play for the team that gives him the best chance at a ring.

With a championship as his primary goal, the veteran will provide motivation for the younger members of the Clippers.

Martin will likely be a model citizen in "Lob City."

The 6'9" power forward has been one of the more athletic players at his position during his career. He has a reputation for fearlessly attacking the rim and will fit well with other Clipper big men who like to do the same.

Even though Martin is 34, he still has some hops. He may not be able to jump like Griffin and DeAndre Jordan, but he is still more than capable of catching some alley-oops from Paul and Billups.

Martin likes to run the floor and will become a reliable recipient of the many lob passes that the Clipper guards toss.

Martin has not always been a likable player during his career due to his aggressive style of play.

He has embraced the role of a banger down low and never shies away from contact.

The Clippers will have to go through a loaded Western Conference to reach the finals, and tough, physical defenders are a necessary commodity in the playoffs.

Martin is the type of player that can guard athletic power forwards and traditional post players. His presence will provide a badly needed edge on defense for the Clippers bench.