Bruce Willis has been diagnosed with aphasia, a condition that affects the ability to communicate. As a consequence of his health condition, Willis has decided to retire from the entertainment industry. Known as an actor who often plays characters in action movies, Willis has contributed to various famous productions. In this article, Dafunda will discuss the best Bruce Willis movies.

Bruce Willis is an American actor and producer who has been an icon in the Hollywood entertainment industry for decades. He was born on March 19, 1955, in Idar-Oberstein, West Germany, but his career took off in the United States. Willis is best known for his role as John McClane in the “Die Hard” film series, which has become one of the world’s most famous action franchises.

Here’s a list of Bruce Willis’ best movies

The following is a list of best movies that have featured Bruce Willis in lead roles.

1. Pulp Fiction – 1994

The movie “Pulp Fiction” was released in 1994, starring John Travolta, Samuel L. Jackson, Uma Thurman, and Bruce Willis. The narrative structure of the movie is divided into three distinct chronological segments, which are woven through three interrelated main stories.

The story begins with Vincent Vega as a hitman, then the story of Butch Coolidge, a boxer, and then continues to the narrative of Jules Winnfield.

2. 12 Monkeys – 1995

The movie “12 Monkeys” is an adaptation of Chris Marker’s 1962 short film “La Jetée”. Universal Studios commissioned Terry Gilliam to direct the project, with Bruce Willis as one of the lead actors.

The film’s story centers on the emergence of a virus in 1996 that causes a global pandemic, resulting in massive destruction on the surface of the Earth. As a result, survivors are forced to flee underground.

In 2035, a convict named James Cole is sent back in time from the ruins of Philadelphia on a mission to discover the origins of the virus in an effort to find a way to treat it.

3. Last Man Standing – 1996

“Last Man Standing” is an American Western action film released in 1996, with script and direction by Walter Hill. The movie features Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, and Bruce Dern in the lead roles. The movie was inspired by Akira Kurosawa’s “Yojimbo”.

4. Armageddon – 1998

The movie “Armageddon” marked a prominent moment in Bruce Willis’ career, as he was awarded the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor that year.

Director Michael Bay directed this film, which earned several Oscar nominations and is recognized as one of the best disaster movies of 1998. Besides Bruce Willis, the movie also stars Ben Affleck, Liv Tyler, Billy Bob Thornton, and more.

5. The Jackal – 1997

“The Jackal” is an American action-thriller film released in 1997. The movie is an adaptation of the novel “The Day of the Jackal” by Frederick Forsyth. Michael Caton-Jones acted as the director for this movie. In terms of cast, the movie features Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sidney Poitier, and Diane Venora in the lead roles.

6. Die Hard – 1998

“Die Hard” is an action movie that was instrumental in increasing Bruce Willis’ popularity in the Hollywood film industry. The story follows Detective Lieutenant John McClane of the New York police department who travels to Los Angeles.

With the aim of mending fences with his wife. While in Los Angeles, he encounters an unexpected situation when a group of extremists from West Germany take control of an airport in the city.

7. Sixth Sense – 1999

“The Sixth Sense” is a movie that combines elements of drama, mystery, and thriller, with Bruce Willis, Haley Joel Osment, and Toni Collette as part of the main cast. The movie tells the story of Malcolm Crowe.

A child psychologist was assigned the case of a young boy who had the unique ability to see and interact with people who had died. During the therapy process, Crowe communicated more with the boy than with his mother.

8. Unbreakable – 2001

In this movie, Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson play the main characters. The story is set in Philadelphia and follows the story of a man who discovers that he has super abilities.

One of the central characters, Elijah, played by Samuel L. Jackson, is an individual who suffers from osteogenesis imperfecta type 1, a rare condition that makes his bones extremely fragile and easily broken.

9. Tears of The Sun – 2003

“Tears of the Sun” is an American war film released in 2003. The movie tells the story of a rescue operation carried out by a team of US Navy SEALs during a civil conflict in Nigeria.

At the core of the story, the main character, Lieutenant A.K. Waters Bruce Willis, is tasked with evacuating a US citizen, Dr. Lena Fiore Kendricks. Dr. Kendricks is in a hospital in the middle of a conflict zone.

10. Surrogates – 2009

Surrogates is a science fiction and action movie adapted from the novel of the same name. The director of this movie is Jonathan Mostow. The story follows the main character, FBI agent Tom Greer who is investigating a series of murders involving surrogates, which are human substitutes.

In her investigation, Greer is assisted by agent Jennifer Peters. Other cast members in the movie are Rosamund Pike who plays Maggie, Boris Kodjoe as Andrew Stone, Peters James Cromwell as Lionel Canter, and Ving Rhames as Prophet.

The film was first released on September 25, 2009. Surrogates depicts a world where humans live in isolation at home and use surrogates to interact in the outside world.

11. Moonrise Kingdom – 2012

In a movie released in 1965, Bruce Willis plays the character of a police officer from a small town who is tasked with finding two teenagers who have fallen in love and decided to run away together into the woods.

12. Looper – 2012

Looper is a sci-fi action thriller film, whose script is written and directed by Rian Johnson. The production of the movie was under the responsibility of Ram Bergman and James D. Stern.

In this movie, Bruce Willis, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Emily Blunt play the lead roles. The story in this movie focuses on a group of contract killers known as “loopers”.

They work for a crime syndicate from the future that uses time travel as a way to send their victims to the past, where the loopers are then tasked with eliminating them.

13. Death Wish – 2018

Dr. Paul Kersey is a surgeon who faces a personal tragedy when his wife, and son become victims of a brutal attack by a stranger.

Faced with the limitations of the police force in dealing with this case, Paul Kersey decided to take matters into his own hands. He began to pursue and confront individuals involved in criminal activities.

His actions received mixed views from the public; some saw him as a protector, while others saw him as someone who took the law into his own hands.

14. Glass – 2019

The final film in the series directed by M. Night Shyamalan, which follows “Unbreakable” and “Split”, features Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Spencer Treat Clark, and Charlayne Woodard back in their previous roles.

In this series, characters with superhuman abilities undergo a rehabilitation process. Bruce Willis plays a character, who has the unique ability to detect a person’s evil through touch.