For more book titles, try our custom GPT.

Click the "Get Titles" button above to see titles.

How To Use the AI Essay Title Generator

Our AI essay title generator uses the power of large language models to generate interesting and unqiue titles for your essays. Simply enter a topic in the textbox above and click the "Get Titles" button. A title will be generated for you.

If you almost like a title generated, but want some modifications, you can rewrite the title.

Persuasive Essay Topics

Should people with higher income pay more taxes? Why or why not?

Which class is more important: physical education or music class?

Uniforms in school: should they be mandatory or should they be banned? Elaborate on your reasoning.

Should parents and teachers be able to ban certain books from schools?

Should kids learn sign speech instead of a foreign language at school?

Home economic classes: why or why not?

Should recycling be made mandatory?

Do zoos help or harm animals?

Should chess be considered a sport?

Should kids be able to opt out of pledging alliance to the flag?

Can online school be as effective as traditional school?

Should kids under 18 be banned from playing dangerous sports like tackle football?

Informatics and computer classes: why or why not?

Should it be mandatory to volunteer some hours before graduating high school?

Should young adults graduating high school take a gap year before going to University? why or why not?

Descriptive Essay Titles and Topics

The best trip of my life

My first pet

My favorite animal

My favorite meal

Special memories with grandpa and grandma

These are the games I play with my friends

I miss the day when...

This is why I love my best friend

This is why I love my family

What I want to be when I grow up

My hero

The toy I play the most with

A day at the park

I went to the dentist

My last birthday party

A magical animal

What I carry in my backpack

This is my house

What I like about my teacher

My hobbies

Advanced Topics (Middle and High School Essay Topics):

If I could meet any celebrity, dead or alive, that would be...

My daily routine

The books that I enjoyed the most

If I was a movie director, this would be the plot of my first movie

If I was a writer, this would be the plot of my first book

My dream profession

My proposal for a new school subject

What I feel most excited about

The person who influenced me the most

Traits that I have in common with my friends

The world needs a new superhero

If I was the president of the country this is what I would do

A perfect week would look like this

What I would take to an island

Where I would go if I could travel back in time

What will the future look like

A precious memory from childhood

How can a student make the world a better place?

What beauty means to me

What I could be famous for one day

Persuasive Essay Topics

Google vs Bing: Which is better?

Teens or 20s: When is the perfect time to start dating?

Major differences between US English and UK English

What makes 20th century and 21st century similar?

Is working from home more efficient than working from the office?

Freelancing vs Permanent Job

Comparison between Trump's and Obama's ideas

Differences between the lifestyle of rich and poor

Morning vs Evening

Fashion in winter and summer: Different or the same?

Effects of healthy food and fast food

Differences between the lifestyle of people living in a city and people living in a village

Tall guys against short guys

True love and fake love

Long-distance relationship vs short-distance relationship

Friendship vs. romantic relationships

Advantages and disadvantages of working till late

What adults prefer: Reading or watching?

What is more trendy: TV show or web series?

What is more fun: Playing games on a computer or on a smartphone?

Argumentative Essay Titles and Topics

Can smoking be prevented by making tobacco illegal?

Is global climate change caused by humans?

Education should be free.

Is college tuition becoming way too expensive?

Is religion the cause of war?

Do we have a fair tax system?

Should working moms be given special privileges?

A well-read person isn't necessarily a smart person.

Are cell phones dangerous?

Which secondary languages are worth studying today?

Steroid takers should be banned from team sports activities.

Are CEOs paid too much?

Should the government provide health care?

Beauty magazines should stop photoshopping models.

Smartphones actually help the learning process.

Are we too dependent on computers?

Is homework harmful or helpful?

Should euthanasia be illegal?

Alcohol usage should be controlled.

Is college admission too competitive?

Does social media fame impact one's life?

Will paper money be substituted by electronic money?

Third World War should be prevented by Russian and the US government.

Are schools and teachers responsible for low test scores?

Does the educational system prepare students for the real world?

Narrative Essay Topics

Tell me about your biggest success

Tell me about your biggest failure

Tell me about a time you had to deal with a difficult situation and how you overcame it.

An experience that left you feeling frustrated, and how you dealt with the feelings.

If you could have any superpower you wanted, which one would you choose? Elaborate on why and how you would use it.

Tell me about a random act of kindness that happened to you or somebody else.

Tell me about an issue that you care about.

When are you the most happy?

A time where you had a lot of fun.

A time when you got lost.

A time where you were afraid.

A time where you looked up to your parents.

Have you ever met a famous person? If you haven't, which famous person would you like to meet and why?

A time where you stood up for your beliefs.

A time where you felt really proud of yourself.

Expository Essay Topics

What is the best way to improve your grades at school?

How does television influence our perception of reality?

What is the easiest way to get started in the stock market?

Who was the best athlete of the 20th century?

Can videogames really increase violence?

What's the effect of extended quarantine in our health?

Is bullying unavoidable in a school setting?

How to improve your running speed.

Why are yawns contagious?

How did dogs really become man's best friend?

How to be time efficient on college

Why does super glue dry so fast?

What was the influence of Sigmund Freud on modern psychology?

What is the most affordable country in the world?

Should internet be a basic human right in the 21st century?

What is the origin of last names?

Are Marvel movies an accurate representation of the original source?

What is the biggest crisis the film industry has faced in history?

Other Options

You can get titles that are more specific to your use case by selecting more options. Just click on the down arrow next to the "More Options" box to get started.

Tone: By selecting a tone, you can choose whether your title sounds salesy, funny, creative, catchy, serious, and more.

Use: By selecting a use, you can choose whether your title will be used for marketing, an essay, a newspaper, a book, and more.

Refining Your Titles

You can also refine titles that are generated. By click "More like this" next to a generated title, you can get another title that is similar to the title that was just generated.