Travel

Photo books about travel are some of our favorites to name. The places you go can so easily supply you with inspiration, from incorporating a phrase in the local language (think: "Aloha") to simply calling a spade a spade by naming it after the city. The cover title can go a long way to prime your reader for the adventure that lies inside.

Thought-starter: What made this trip unique? Was it the modes of transportation, your first time with a passport, the lack of a solid plan? Think through what made it most memorable to encapsulate that quality in a few words.

Travel Photo Album Title Ideas

The Road Best Traveled

By the Seaside

A Summer Spent Seaside

Adventures With Mia

The Wild Places

Wherever We Go

On the Road

See the World

Lessons From a Passport

A Weekend in Colorado

Along the Way…

Here & There

Favorite Adventures

Mountain Majesty

Without a Map

(Last Name) Family Vacation 2024

Our Iceland Honeymoon

Adventure, Found

In the Sun

Family

We see these albums ranging from annual recaps of immediate family members to album titles for bonding moments with extended family or friends. An easy and common route for photo book title ideas involves any variation of your family's last name and the year(s) pictured within. But for a more expressive cover, we recommend going a step further to convey the binding connection that your book represents!

Thought-starter: What relationships are featured throughout your book? Does it cover a broad span of time (e.g., a generation, a decade) or does it hold smaller, everyday moments that defined a single season? Family albums might be among the ones pulled out and paged through the most, so choose a title that reflects that same timelessness.

Family Photo Album Title Ideas

Better Together

Generations

Days Together

Moment By Moment

Gather Together

Home is with you

Family is Forever

Days at Home

Together as Family

A Love Like Ours

The (Last Name) Family

2024 with the Wolfes

This Is Us

Days with Dad

Moments with Mom

Celebrating Sisterhood

Siblings & Forever Friends

My Brother and Me

Two of a Kind (great for siblings)

Ties That Bind

Adventures with (Pet Name)

Wedding

Your wedding album is one that'll bring joy (and maybe a tear to your eye!) for decades to come. There are so many defining qualities of a relationship and all that goes into a wedding that it can be hard to summarize it in just a few words. That's why we tend to lean toward traditional, enduring phrases that signify the start of something equal parts strong and sentimental.

Thought-starter: This is a perfect place to incorporate a key phrase from your vows, or maybe even the title of the song played during your first dance. While the ideas below skew more conventional, there are many other ways to customize yours to feel more abstract or uniquely you.

Wedding Album Title Ideas

On This Day

To Have and to Hold

Where We Begin

Our Best Day

Established 2021

From This Day Forward

Bound to Be

(First Name) & (First Name)

(First Name) & (First Name) (Last Name)

The Story of Us

You and I

We Do

Beginning Our Forever

The (Last Names) — Est. 2023

Our Love

From Now Until Forever

Anniversary

Anniversary photo albums are a timepiece through which we can admire all that a couple has endured, created, and explored together. It could be after one year of marriage, or maybe 50, but what these all have in common is a retrospective and appreciative lens to view their experiences. That's why we suggest a title evoking reflection and a special connection.

Thought-starter: What type of photos will compose this book — a wide-ranging chronological timeline or a recap of recent years? One simple way to give the album a personalized feel with an all-encompassing title is to include the number of years celebrated together.

Anniversary Photo Book Title Ideas

Our Time Together

Looking Back on Love

Ten Years Together

Our Story So Far

A Love Like Ours

Growing Old

Over the Years

Side by Side

Just the Two of Us

P.S. I love you

A Love Story

Through the Years

Love, Our Legacy

Our First Five Years

To Infinity...

So Far

Baby

Photos of our little ones are never hard to come by — in fact, they fill most parents' camera rolls. But finding a perfect title for your baby's photo album may be more of a task. There are so many stories and family structures a child may be brought into, so use yours as a springboard for ideation!

Thought-starter: Is this baby number one — or two or three? Is adoption part of your parenting journey? It's these key details that lend themselves to a title most fitting for your family.

Baby Photo Book Title Ideas

When We Met You

Your First Years

Welcome to the World

Baby Luca (First Name)

Our Little to Love

When We Became Three

Becoming a Big Brother

From Three to Four

A Year of Firsts

Our Bundle of Joy

Worth the Wait

Our Adoption Story

The Greatest Gift

Welcome Home

Year-in-Review and Beyond

We might be biased, but photo books are the easiest and most tangible way to recollect a period of time and experiences shared. Whether it's on an annual basis or whenever-you-can basis, your titles can be both descriptive and even serial in nature.

Thought-starter: Think through the time frame your album covers — is it a single season, a year, or a broader assortment? Base the book's name around that period to give readers an idea of the contents inside.

Memory Book Title Ideas

Days Well Spent

A Year to Remember

Our Best Times Together

Remember When

Little Joys in Life

A Trip Around the Sun

2023: Our Year in Review

A Year for the Books

Easy Living

Simplicity in Springtime

In Bloom

A Look Back

Celebrating the Everyday

Two Thousand Twenty

Best of Times

Making the Most of It

A New Chapter

Favorite Moments of (Year)