What makes a great song title? For artists, they typically want to keep titles as concise as possible to not only capture the song's context, but also make it memorable. There is no better way to do that than to keep a title short and sweet with the least amount of words possible.

One-word song titles highlight how artists can show impact and power with a simple statement. Here is a list of memorable songs throughout the years with one-word titles.

1 of 20

“Believe” by Cher

Chelsea Lauren/WireImage

In 1998, Cher had nightclubs in a frenzy with her hit song “Believe.” At the time, Cher used auto-tune and became an early rendering of other artists using the vocal effect in their music. On the track, Cher highlights trying to move on after dealing with a heartbreak. As she sings on the hook, "Do you believe in life after love? / I can feel something inside me say / I really don't think you're strong enough, no."

2 of 20

“Fallin’” by Alicia Keys

Theo Wargo/Getty Images for AK

On Alicia Keys’ debut single “Fallin,’” the singer highlights how people fall in and out love, and how it can take the toll on a person’s emotions. She stresses that people can be either head over heels with someone one day, and then can’t stand the sight of their face the next day. Her stance is evident throughout the track as she sings, "I keep on fallin' in and out of love with you / Sometimes I love ya, sometimes you make me blue."

3 of 20

“Grenade” by Bruno Mars

Rich Fury/Getty Images for The Recording Academy

Bruno Mars is willing to put his life on the line for the person he loves on his 2010 single “Grenade.” Mars knows he gives his all in the relationship, however he knows his partner wouldn’t do the same for him. So although he loves his partner, the song is a bit heartbreaking that he doesn’t feel the same love in return.

4 of 20

“Umbrella” by Rihanna

Larry Busacca/MTV1617/Getty Images for MTV

Rihanna’s third album Good Girl Gone Bad brought a new look and sound for the singer. The album was helmed by lead single “Umbrella,” a track written by Tricky Stewart and The-Dream. “Umbrella” finds Rihanna showing her relentless support for someone she deeply cares about. It’s evident on the hook as she sings, “Now it’s raining more than ever / Know that we’ll still have each other / You can stand under my umbrella.”

5 of 20

“Despacito” by Luis Fonsi feat. Daddy Yankee

Kevin Mazur/Getty Images for NARAS

In 2017, there was no escaping the Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee hit “Despacito.” When they added Justin Bieber to the remix, it took the song to even more massive success. “Despacito” is all about having a sexual relationship with someone, in a slow and sensual way.

6 of 20

“If” by Janet Jackson

Alexander Tamargo/Getty Images

On Janet Jackson’s 1993 single “If,” the singer expresses seeing a guy at a club and is having erotic fantasies about him. As she sings on the hook, “If I was your girl, oh, the things I’d do to you / I’d make you call out my name, I’d ask who it belongs to.” The song and music video helped showcase Jackson’s more edgier and sensual side.

7 of 20

“Circles” by Post Malone

L. Busacca/Getty Images for Songwriters Hall of Fame

Post Malone brings a smooth pop-rock ambiance to his 2019 hit single “Circles.” On the track, Malone expresses how he and his partner are constantly going through a repeated cycle of ups and downs, when in reality, they should probably end the relationship completely.

8 of 20

“Irreplaceable” by Beyonce

Kevin Mazur/WireImage for Parkwood

Beyonce is telling her ex-partner that she can find another man in no time on her 2006 single “Irreplaceable.” Sometimes people can be so full of themselves that they think they’re greatest catch, but Beyonce is ready to bring her ex-partner back down to earth. Basically, one shouldn’t always toot their own horn when there’s always going to be someone better.

9 of 20

“Ghostbusters” by Ray Parker Jr.

Thomas Niedermueller/Getty Images for ZFF

Sometimes the music from a soundtrack is just as iconic as the film it derives from, which is the case for Ray Parker Jr.’s song “Ghostbusters,” the theme song to the film of the same name. While the film’s plot highlights three individuals starting a ghost-catching business, Parker makes sure to add the theme into his song as well. It’s evident from the beginning of the track as he sings, “If there’s something strange in your neighborhood / Who you gonna call? / Ghostbusters.”

10 of 20

“Dynamite” by BTS

Kevin Winter/Getty Images for MRC

There's no doubt that K-pop continues to grow across markets worldwide, and pop group BTS is just one element of the genre's ascension. The band's hit single "Dynamite" took over the charts in 2020 and it's the type of song that easily sparks joy and positive vibes for any listener.

11 of 20

"Yeah!” by Usher feat. Lil Jon and Ludacris

Christopher Polk/Getty Images for iHeartMedia

Usher teamed up with Lil Jon and Ludacris on his hit 2004 track “Yeah!,” the lead single to his fourth album Confessions. Using the distinct crunk production from Lil Jon, “Yeah!” became not only a radio hit, but an essential party record at clubs everywhere. Not only did “Yeah!” peak at the No. 1 spot on the Billboard Hot 100 for three months, it’s still a fan favorite whenever Usher performs the track.

12 of 20

"Foolish” by Ashanti

Jeremychanphotography/Getty Images

On Ashanti's debut single "Foolish," she reflects on being silly in love. A topic like that is one that plenty of listeners can relate to, especially since everyone deals with different dynamics in a relationship. On the track, Ashanti is well aware that she should be treated better, but it's hard for her heart to let go of the person she believed would be around forever.

13 of 20

“Happy” by Pharrell Williams

Matt Winkelmeyer/Getty Images

In 2013, Pharrell Williams gave the world a joyful anthem with his hit song “Happy.” The feel-good song soared to the top of the charts, became the most successful song of 2014, and was deemed the world’s first 24-hour music video. It's safe to say it was the type of song that was hard to escape.

14 of 20

“Waterfalls” by TLC

Jim Smeal/Ron Galella Collection via Getty Images

TLC teamed up with production team Organized Noize on their 1995 hit song “Waterfalls.” On the track, the group addresses different themes of violence and HIV/AIDS. “Waterfalls” is more about telling people to slow down and be as safe as possible.

15 of 20

“Roar” by Katy Perry

Kin Cheung-WPA Pool/Getty Images

In 2013, pop singer Katy Perry released her fourth album Prism, led by the hit single “Roar.” On the self-empowerment track, Perry asserts herself as a strong person who continues to fight for what she wants and what she believes. As she sings on the hook, “I got the eye of the tiger, a fighter / Dancing through the fire / ‘Cause I am a champion and you’re gonna hear me roar.”

16 of 20

“Superstition” by Stevie Wonder

Emma McIntyre/Getty Images for The Art of Elysium

On Stevie Wonder’s 1972 hit song “Superstition,” he expresses how there are many things that people are superstitious of, but he believes people shouldn’t have those beliefs. He mentions everything from ladders falling, to glass breaking, and things of the sort that people think could bring them years of bad luck. The song became a No. 1 hit on the Billboard Hot 100.

17 of 20

“Fantasy” by Mariah Carey

Gotham/Getty Images

Mariah Carey’s 1995 hit single “Fantasy” tells the story of woman who’s crushing on a potential partner, and every time she sees him, she fantasizes about being with him. The smooth sample of Tom Tom Club’s 1981 hit song “Genius of Love,” helps give the song a vibrant and feel-good vibe on the production, which helps give listeners hope that Carey’s fantasy will become reality.

18 of 20

“Thriller” by Michael Jackson

KMazur/Getty Images

Whenever people are trying to curate the perfect Halloween playlist, Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” is an absolute must. Maybe it’s the spooky voice (famed horror film star Vincent Price) heard on the track or the scary music video in which Jackson turns into a zombie, whatever the case is, a Halloween party isn’t truly ready until “Thriller” is heard.

19 of 20

“Roses” by Outkast

Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images

In 2003, hip-hop duo Outkast released its hit song "Roses." On the track, they reflect on a beautiful woman whose personality and terrible attitude are a high turnoff.

20 of 20

“Wannabe” by Spice Girls

Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic

In 1996, the Spice Girls took what world by storm with their debut single “Wannabe.” On the track, the group values their friendships pretty highly, and if anyone wants to be their lover, they also have to be really cool with their friends. Basically, if a future lover can’t appreciate their partner's friends, the relationship simply won’t last.

Mya Singleton is a freelance music journalist and social strategist based in the Bay Area, with experience covering R&B and hip-hop. Her reporting has appeared in several publications including Yardbarker, The Sports Fan Journal, AXS, and Hollywood Unlocked. With a career spanning over ten years, she’s covered concerts across the West Coast and interviewed some of the entertainment industry’s leading figures including Anderson .Paak, Nonstop Da Hitman, Laurieann Gibson, and Floyd Mayweather. You can find her talking about all things music and sports on Twitter at @MyaMelody7.