Wu-Tang Clan’s RZA has partnered with Irving Azoff‘s Iconic Artists Group and LL Cool J‘s Rock the Bells in an effort to amplify and expand the lauded hip-hop collective’s music, brand and lifestyle.

The partnership encompasses all of Wu-Tang Clan‘s music, intended to create more opportunities in television, merchandise, brand partnerships and film. Most recently, a teased collaboration with Nike hinted at the potential prospects for the deal. Beyond business opportunities, the partnership seeks to bring together Wu-Tang Clan’s global communities through a singular online destination.

Wu-Tang Clan has been consistently relevant since releasing its debut album “Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)” in 1993. In addition to six studio albums (plus its long-fabled, one-of-a-kind “Once Upon a Time in Shaolin”), its members have released numerous classic albums and been undoubtedly influential on hip-hop culture and beyond. In September, Wu-Tang will return to Las Vegas to continue its residency Wu-Tang Clan: The Saga Continues…

“As we evolve from ‘Legendary Status’ to ‘Iconic Status’ it’s only fitting and serendipitous that we join the team at Iconic Artists Group and Rock the Bells,” said RZA in a statement. “This partnership will help us continue to expound and expand the Wu-Tang Clan’s Legacy.”

“Wu-Tang Clan’s influence on hip hop – and way the world views hip-hop – is undeniable,” adds Susan Genco, co-president of the Azoff Company. “The partnership with RZA and Iconic is committed to ensuring that the importance of WTC’s music and their message is celebrated now and for generations to come.”

LL Cool J added, “The Wu-Tang Clan’s brand and music have been cornerstones of Hip-Hop culture. Our partnership with Iconic Artists Group will enable us to leverage Rock The Bells’ multi-faceted platform—encompassing radio, e-commerce, licensing, content, and live events—to unite and engage fans with this iconic brand. Together, we’ll guarantee that the Wu-Tang Clan’s legacy and timeless Hip-Hop remain powerful forces for generations to come.”

President of Iconic Jimmy Edwards said, “The Wu-Tang Clan is much more than a music group; they’re a cultural phenomenon. We can’t wait to bring our unique strengths together to create something truly unparalleled.”