Stars might rock diamonds from Tiffany, Cartier or Bulgari for red carpet events, but not all celebrity bling requires its own bodyguard.

In fact, some of Hollywood’s favorite jewelry brands — including Jenny Bird, BaubleBar and Melinda Maria — offer pretty pieces for under $100.

And while few would advise running errands or meeting friends for brunch in Beyoncé’s priceless yellow diamond or Zendaya’s 93-carat emerald, celeb go-tos like Missoma and Mejuri specialize in dainty options you’ll want to reach for every day.

Below, shop the jewelry brands celebs rely on for adding a little extra sparkle to their outfits.

Jenny Bird

Jenny Bird’s contemporary jewelry designs may be a hit with celebrities, but that doesn’t mean they’ll be a big hit to your wallet. Everyone from Taylor Swift to Hailey Bieber to Kylie Jenner has sported the brand’s bling, with the latter favoring the Icon Hoops (from $88) and Chunky Doune Hoops ($138).

“These women can wear whatever they want and they’re choosing to wear an accessibly priced brand, which is great,” Bird previously told Page Six Style of her A-list-loved pieces.

Just in time for Valentine’s Day, the label even launched a Puffy Hearts collection, featuring heart-adorned baubles your Valentine will want to wear all year.

Monica Vinader

The British jeweler makes pieces quite literally fit for a princess; Kate Middleton’s a big fan, as is Meghan Markle. But you don’t have to be a duchess to sport one of Vinader’s signature friendship bracelets (from $160), which have also graced the wrists of Cara Delevingne and Jennifer Lopez. In a commitment to sustainability, the brand uses only recycled gold vermeil, sterling silver and sustainably sourced natural gemstones.

For those who want to wear their heart on their jewelry this Valentine’s Day, the label’s also added plenty of heart-shaped styles to its collections, including royal-worthy layering pieces like the new Heart Station Chain Necklace ($135).

Catbird

Catbird’s tiny pieces are big hit with stars like Emma Stone and Meghan Markle, the latter of whom owns the NYC-based brand’s Threadbare Ring ($48). Phoebe Bridgers is also a longtime fan of the dainty designs, and even teamed up with Catbird on a collection in February 2023.

Taylor Swift’s been in her Catbird era as of late, having worn pieces from Bridgers’ collaboration as well as the diamond version of the Spring Fairy Necklace ($358 $267).

Zoe Lev

Personalized pieces in 14-karat yellow gold are this Los Angeles brand’s bread and butter. Ana de Armas, Margot Robbie and Charlize Theron have all been spotted wearing the Diamond Evil Eye Ring ($960), while Gabrielle Union and Shay Mitchell love Zoe Lev’s initial necklaces.

Frasier Sterling

Big names like Hailey Bieber, Vanessa Hudgens and the Hadid sisters are charmed by this brand’s charm jewelry — particularly its pearl-accented necklaces, like the Custom Lucky You Choker ($68) and Monaco Cord Choker ($36).

Frasier Sterling also offers playful hoop earrings, ID bracelets and even hair accessories, and with prices this low, you can afford to scoop up a few.

Bea Bongiasca

Looking to add some flower-powered pieces to your jewelry collection? Stars like Dua Lipa, Camila Cabello, Megan Fox and Selena Gomez — to name just a handful — are all fans of Bea Bongiasca’s whimsical wares, which include colorful delights like the Baby Vine Ring ($685) and Short Wave Earrings ($655).

Melinda Maria

Stars like Taylor Swift, Demi Lovato and Vanessa Hudgens love this LA designer’s accessible gems, which include sweet stacking rings, chunky chain necklaces and not-so-basic hoop earrings; think twisted, spiked and star-shaped versions, like the Gabrielle Spiked Hoop Earrings ($78) seen on Swift.

“I think the idea that it has to be expensive to be cool and [for you to] feel good in it is totally passé,” Maria told Page Six Style in February 2023.

Kendra Scott

With buzzy releases like a Barbie collection and style staples like the bestselling Elisa Pendant Necklace ($65), Kendra Scott offers pieces loved by stars like Taylor Swift, Gwyneth Paltrow and Simone Biles.

“I knew when I was starting this business that I really wanted to have shapes that were identifiable, and that were so different than what any other brand was doing,” Scott told Page Six Style in February 2023.

This year, the brand’s Valentine’s Day gift guide include plenty of pieces to heart at a range of price points — from the delicate, heart-shaped Kynlee Huggie Earrings ($130) to the 24-karat gold Herringbone Chain Necklace ($200).

Jordan Road

No need to jump through hoops to score the under-$100 hoops celebrities and “It” girls are obsessed with. Hailey Bieber wore Jordan Road’s Coco Earrings ($95) no fewer than six times in 2023, while Emily Ratajkowski lived in her gold Monaco Hoops ($85) all summer long. Alix Earle, meanwhile, prefers its silver designs, which she used to dress up an NFL tee last year.

Jennifer Fisher

Arguably Hollywood’s queen of hoops, Fisher offers versions ranging from tiny huggies to several-inch statement-makers, available in both 14-karat gold and more wallet-friendly brass. Jennifer Lopez, Emily Ratajkowski, Olivia Rodrigo, Kylie Jenner and Dua Lipa all own pairs, while Selena Gomez sported the brand’s styles on “Only Murders in the Building.”

J.Crew

Not everything in Meghan Markle’s jewelry box comes with palace-sized price tags. The Duchess of Sussex is a longtime fan of J.Crew’s elevated basics, and its accessories are no exception. She rocked its dainty hoop earrings for a 2023 gala, while Florence Pugh modeled its dazzling designs for a 2022 campaign.

Pandora

While Pandora’s been making its famed charm bracelets since 2000, celebrities are still just as charmed by its designs over two decades later. In addition to campaign stars like Pamela Anderson, celebrity devotees include Olivia Rodrigo, Jennifer Lawrence, Selena Gomez and Lea Michele.

BaubleBar

In search of fun, flirty and seriously budget-friendly accessories? Look no further than BaubleBar’s trend-forward gems. The brand’s gold Pisa Bracelets are a hit with Hailey Baldwin and Kate Hudson, while Jennifer Aniston loves the Alidia Ring ($48). Blake Lively, Mindy Kaling and Katy Perry, meanwhile, can’t get enough of BaubleBar’s colorful statement earrings.

Mondo Mondo

Stars like Bella Hadid, Megan Thee Stallion and Kendall Jenner all own bold bling from Mondo Mondo, which offers plenty of playful pendants like the Gold Tropicana Necklace ($149) and sparkly styles like the Gold Lush Ring ($195).

Awe Inspired

With its goddess-inspired designs seen on Taylor Swift, Demi Lovato and Nina Dobrev, Awe Inspired aims to “raise inner strength, celebrate diversity, spread feminism, and advocate for social justice.” The brand donates 20% of all proceeds to charity partners, and shoppers can even choose which cause they’d like their purchase to benefit at checkout. No wonder Meghan Markle — who owns the Woman Power Necklace ($175) — is a fan.

And Alyssa Milano loves the brand so much, she even teamed up with Awe Inspired for a jewelry collection in 2023, telling Page Six Style at the time that “fashion is an important form of storytelling.”

Maria Tash

Star-approved earrings? We’re all ears. Maria Tash’s designs have had everyone from Rihanna to Kylie Jenner to Blake Lively to Taylor Swift dripping in diamonds. But you won’t need a red carpet invite to curate your own sparkling style selection, thanks to pieces like the Faceted Short Spike Earring ($295) and the Triple Chain Single Earring ($453).

Adina Eden

Young designer Adina Kamkhatchi’s trend-setting collection (formerly known as Adina’s Jewels) is huge with social media stars like Charli D’Amelio, Addison Rae and Madison Beer. Her reasonably priced pieces range from classic huggie earrings to colorful tennis necklaces.

What’s more, the entire line is currently 40% off during the brand’s massive Valentine’s Day sale.

Mejuri

Mejuri’s assortment of “everyday fine jewelry” is loved by the likes of Selena Gomez, Meghan Markle, and Taylor Swift and includes dainty gold hoops, chains and bold rings — like Swift’s garnet-studded Heirloom Ring ($598).

Aureum Collective

Designed by NYC couple Cass DiMicco and Matthew Hoyle, Aureum — Latin for “golden” — offers vintage-inspired signet rings, statement earrings and chains plated in 24-karat gold. Dua Lipa, Hailey Baldwin and Bella Hadid were among the first stars to build buzz around the brand.

Anna Beck

Founder Becky Hosmer works with heritage artisans in Bali to create the brand’s bohemian, one-of-a-kind designs, which celebrate “the beauty of artisanship.” Anna Beck pieces have been worn by Vanessa Hudgens, Jessica Alba and Drew Barrymore, to name but a few.

Missoma

This UK-based brand offers “demi-fine” baubles that are perfect for layering, mixing and matching. You’ve probably spotted Missoma’s gold chain necklaces and delicate hoop earrings on big names like Emily Ratajkowski, Florence Pugh and Gigi Hadid.