What exactly is the Sovereign Military Order of Malta?

I’ve gone through this before but a quick recap. The official name of the country is a long one – The Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of Saint John of Jerusalem of Rhodes and of Malta! These days it is also known as the Order of Malta and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. But apart from having a residence in the Upper Fort in the Republic of Malta, do not confuse them with Malta!! The country’s official language is Italian, their currency is the (now defunct elsewhere) Maltese Scudo and the national religion is Roman Catholic. The country was founded way back in 1099 in Jerusalem, during the era of Crusaders, it was formed by the Blessed Gerard. All this means that officially, it is the world’s oldest surviving chivalric order.

But the Sovereign Military Order of Malta has had land of course, and in many different locations. Through the years, the Order has owned land and resided in modern day Palestine, Israel, Cyprus, Greece, Italy and Malta. The Sovereign Military Order of Malta has its own government, laws, passport, and population – basically two knights and thousands of members including some in Northern Ireland (my country). The Sovereign Military Order of Malta has its own flag – a white cross on a red background (but not to be confused with Switzerland or Denmark!!) and they also have their own coat of arms. You will actually see the flag flying in a lot of places around the world, mostly in Malta though.

To Visit it you Have Three Options

So now you know all about it – let’s backpack it! OK, for all you budding crackpackers, whackpackers, backpackers, travel freaks and tourists, you really want to visit it and become a real tourist, so you have three main options to say you have backpacked to the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. While it doesn’t have any land per say, it does have rent and leases on this hat-trick…two of which are in Italy.

1. Palazzo Malta (Rome, Italy)

Start with the “capital city” eh? Eh what? It has a capital? Well not exactly but with the headquarters of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta being located at the Palazzo Malta in Rome, Italy, then this is as near a visit to the country’s capital as you can get. In the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, this is the most important building and it is located near the Spanish steps at Via dei Condotti 68. The Order flag flies from the building’s exterior.

2. Villa Malta (Rome, Italy)

After backpacking through the capital, stay in Rome and head to the Villa Malta which is a building on top of a hill which is home to the Grand Priory of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. The Villa Malta and the Palazzo Malta sit within the borders of Italy, so adding these to San Marino, Seborga and The Vatican City would mean that Italy contains a mammoth four other countries within its borders!! As far as official status is concerned, both these venues owned by the Sovereign Military Order of Malta have been granted extraterritorial status of Italy – therefore they are separate – they are NOT part of Italy. And this is your loophole to backpack them and prove it and add another country to your list of Counting Countries. Italy is one of those aforementioned 107 countries that recognises the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and therefore they also recognise this place as part of that country. Villa Malta also contains the embassy of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta to Italy, the irony on that is not lost either.

3. Fort St. Angelo (Vittoriosa, Malta)

The third option and the coolest one for me is to visit their largest leased premises. People get confused by the title of the country and often mix it up with Malta and the Republic of Malta. That gets even more confusing when you learn that on the island of Malta (that’s the Republic of Malta) you can visit both countries:

1.Malta or the Republic of Malta

2.The Sovereign Military Order of Malta

Here is how to visit the Sovereign Military Order of Malta on the island of Malta

Head to the city of Vittoriosa (also called Birgu) in Malta and walk to the huge fort there – Fort St. Angelo. The Fort is on the island of Malta of course, but the Upper Part of the Fort is currently on a 99 year lease (and has been since 1998). Once you arrive at reception, you will find that there are two types of ticket. One is the normal entry ticket for 5 Euros. The second is a special guided tour ticket to the Upper Part of the Fort! This is the one you want and this is your dramatic entrance into the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, which was country 156 on my wacaday journey!

So naturally I booked the guided tour. The tours are held ONCE a day only and between Monday and Friday only. This information was true as of October 2017. I had 6 days in Malta in 2017 and pencilled this one in for day two. I told them a day in advance that I would be backpacking it – and yes backpacks are permitted and of course I wore mine. In fact, Senegal and the Gambia are the only two countries of the 160 that I haven’t actually backpacked in – I was there on a no luggage challenge and simply toured them with no bags.