Previously head of network and communications at a famous LCC

Its telco services used in over 200 countries, Malaysia toughest nut to crack

IT would be fair to say that not many people follow through on their childhood career choice. It would also be fair to say that Noor Mohd Helmi Nong Hadzmi (pic above) is not like most people.

“It was my childhood ambition to be an engineer and a business owner. That inspired me to pursue engineering and entrepreneurship, and to start my own telecommunications company,” he says.

As founder and chief executive officer of IX Telecom Sdn Bhd, Helmi is also the epitome of success. The engineer who started his first company in his bedroom has grown IX Telecom to epic proportions.

Today, IX Telecom is essentially a behind-the-scenes hero to globally renowned telecommunications providers and partners.

The company provides global connectivity services such as Internet access, broadband and IP-VPN (Internet Protocol-Virtual Private Network) across more than 200 countries. IX Telecom also helps many of its clients set up business and technical operations when they set up operations in a new country.

Solid foundation

Helmi, who pursued an education in telecommunications engineering, started his entrepreneurial journey back in 1999.

That was the year he set up a dotcom with his university roommate Mohd Amzari Tajudeen, IX Telecom cofounder and chief financial officer.

While his dotcom did not catch on, it proved beneficial for Helmi, as upon graduation in 2002 he was one of the first engineers to be offered a job at a new telecommunications startup.

“I learned how to establish a telecommunications company from the ground up. It gave me a solid foundation,” says Helmi.

Embracing the challenge

After two years with the telecommunications startup, Helmi moved on to a new low-cost airline startup.

“This new startup asked me to head its network team, and I decided to take up the challenge,” he recalls.

“My responsibility was to take this company online. I was also tasked to design, operate, and manage the growth of the airline’s global network infrastructure from the five aircraft it had at the time to almost 100 when I left in 2008,” he says.

That low-cost airline is now a globally-recognised name: AirAsia.

“I was 25 when I was heading the network and communications department in AirAsia,” says Helmi. “It was a great learning experience for me.”

Staying flexible

Helmi’s early achievements only served to inspire him to reach higher and build his own successful business. The ambitious engineer left AirAsia after four years to found IX Telecom.

“We started IX Telecom with only RM30,000 (only about US$7,500 at current rates!) and we had a hard time securing our first client,” he says.

“We had to go out of Malaysia to get clients. It was while we were in Singapore and Hong Kong that we managed to seal the deal on our first few projects,” he says.

In fact, it was only a year after operating out of Malaysia that IX Telecom managed to penetrate its home market and sign on Malaysian clients.

“It was frustrating, not being able to provide services of any kind to Malaysian businesses in the first year.

“But as I learned, flexibility is important, and in our case, we had to venture out of our home country to establish ourselves and find success,” he adds.

Steep learning curve

“You could say my journey has been a steep learning curve. I did not have any formal education in business, finance, sales or marketing,” says Helmi.

“I am an engineer, and all the management people in IX Telecom are engineers by profession,” he adds.

Fortunately, the Coach and Grow Programme (CGP) shed light on tricky business terrain.

“Before the CGP, we ran our company by leveraging on our logical and analytical thinking. We did not know how to raise funds or even understand what a venture capital was!” he admits.

“Without the CGP, we would not have been as successful as we are now, and we would not have learned how to run a business.

“The programme changed the way we think, the way we look at ourselves, and the way we look at the future,” he adds.