With the tagline “Intelligence For Life,” Hayat sets the foundation of its development philosophy geared towards Social Determinants of Health. These profound factors – where one is born, grows up, lives and works as well as the resources and opportunities available to them – significantly influence people’s health and well-being along their life journey.

Domains such as income, education, healthcare access, and social support play pivotal roles in determining overall health. These factors can lead to disparities in health outcomes among diverse populationsshould they be rendered inaccessible to them.

“Through innovations, we aim to ‘exist’ in all of these domains, utilising technology and behavioural economics to optimise individual lifelong health outcomes. Our mission is clear: to harness the power of AI and create an extensive ecosystem of tools and services that support individual well-being,” explains Dr Helmi.

Hayat strongly believes technology plays a significant role in managing healthcare resources and optimising costs. Committed to preventive care, it emphasises early detection and personalised interventions. To date, its predictive profiling has unveiled almost 33,000 undiagnosed cases of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and impending complications, saving numerous lives from preventable early mortality and millions of Ringgit from unnecessary spending on long-term medical management.

Disrupting design and long-standing tenet on health data, Hayat strives to put patient at the centre of health data ownership & record potability. One such offering is the “Lifetime Health Record” module, representing a paradigm shift in providing joint ownership and authority of medical records between healthcare providers and patients, offering greater convenience and accessibility.

Up next, Hayat is set to introduce a comprehensive suite of lifelong care solutions, including:Currently, Hayat boasts an extensive list of health tech products, including:

AI.rbo (arbovirus outbreak surveillance and prediction system)

Lifetime Health Record (a patient-centric integrated electronic health record)

Digital Health Screening Tool (a precision screening tool for non-communicable diseases)

Learning Management System (self-paced online training and upskilling platform for field

epidemiology)

Home Health Assessment Tools (remote patient monitoring platform)

Up next, Hayat is set to introduce a comprehensive suite of lifelong care solutions, including:

A user-centric lifetime health record platform with a behavioural economic approach

A digital risk mitigation tool for mental health resilience

An e-management portal for the ageing society

A digital platform for public health preparedness

Hayat Technologies Managing Director Datuk Wira Satya Kumar says, “Beyond products, we are now

embarking on a transformative path, one defined by powerful partnerships.”

On a larger scale, Hayat is proud to be a driving force behind shaping global policy agendas, collaborating with

esteemed organisations that are at the forefront of policy space in health innovation:

Digital Technology for Health (Chatham House UK)

AI application in Outbreak Prediction (World Health Organisation and International Telecommunication Union)

Global Initiative for AI in Health (United Nations)

Capacity Building for Identifying Emerging Disease in One Health (SafetyNet and the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention)

Datuk Wira Satya Kumar adds, “At Hayat, we firmly believe that diversity in partnership is the key to unlocking

equitable innovation. And we invite you to join us on this exciting lifelong journey.”

For the latest updates on Hayat, visit myhayat.my or follow Hayat Technologies on LinkedIn