Helmi Hisserich, Bureau Director

Helmi.Hisserich@portlandoregon.gov | 503-823-2289

For scheduling requests, please contact Jennifer.Ori@portlandoregon.gov.

Helmi A. Hisserich, MBA (she/her/hers), who joined the Portland Housing Bureau’s as its new director in early 2024, has spent her professional life dedicated to advancing solutions to the affordable housing and homeless crisis. A forward-thinking housing leader, Helmi spent 22 years working for the City of Los Angeles, eventually serving as Deputy Mayor of Housing and Homelessness and as the director of Housing Development and Finance at the Los Angeles Housing Department, where she oversaw the creation of over 6,000 units of affordable housing.

“Over decades of work in affordable housing development,” Helmi says. “I saw many examples of the success of the United States’ tax-credit-based financing system, but I also began to recognize it’s limitations. I wanted to research and develop new approaches to meet the enormous need we faced in Los Angeles, and which we face here in Portland as well.”

Helmi began looking abroad for inspiration, which led her to a major career shift: in 2021, she became the director of the Global Policy Leadership Academy (GPLA), an educational institution that prepares policy leaders to tackle complex societal challenges. Her purview at GPLA centered around leading delegations of US housing policy makers and elected officials to Vienna, Austria to learn about the Vienna Social Housing Model, a globally recognized housing system that has led to Vienna being consistently ranked the most livable city in the world. As she steps into her new role at the Portland Housing Bureau, Helmi aims to take lessons from Vienna and attempt to innovate new approaches to our affordable housing crisis, which can serve as a model for other US cities struggling with similar issues.

Helmi is deeply committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion in all areas of her work. Having grown up in a mixed-race family in Northeast Lost Angeles, she became a fluent Spanish speaker in part because she was surrounded by Mexican cultural influences throughout her early years. She is a proud member of the LGBTQIA+ community and has been in a relationship with her now-wife for 37 years, beginning long before same-sex marriage was legalized in California.

Before domestic partnership existed, Helmi fought an unfair eviction by a homophobic landlord, learning firsthand what it feels like to face the loss of a rent-controlled apartment due to discrimination. And in 2001, she won a landmark tax case in California that created new tax law for same-sex parents after a battle with the California Franchise Tax board over her ability to file as “head of household.” Her professional legacy reflects this commitment to equity, with a track record in hiring and promotion that has increased the diversity of managers at all levels.

“I’m inspired by what I’ve seen so far in Portland’s housing landscape,” says Helmi, citing our commitment to equity demonstrated by policies like the N/NE Neighborhood Housing Strategy, to our dedication to sustainable practices, and our excellent track record of producing high-quality multi-family affordable housing. She looks forward to finding forward-thinking strategies for helping Portland meet our serious need for affordable housing, including ideas like land banking, mass timber construction, and effective leveraging of state and federal funding.

Helmi earned a BA in Comparative Literature from the University of Southern California and an MBA from Cornell University with an emphasis in finance. She attended the Harvard Kennedy School Program for Senior Executives in State and Local Government and was awarded a Stanton Fellowship in 2016 for thought leadership in housing.

Director's Calendar

2024

By newest first

View past years

Leslie Goodlow, Equity & Business Operations Manager

Leslie.Goodlow@portlandoregon.gov | 503-823-4160

Leslie Goodlow joined Portland Housing Bureau as the Business Operations Manager in September of 2012. Leslie held progressively responsible jobs with Multnomah County during her 20 years there. She began her career at the County as a Mental Health Consultant with the Partner’s Project a multi-jurisdictional demonstration grant funded by SAMHSA. She moved into management and participated in the development of Multnomah County’s capitated mental health plan – CAPCare.

In 1998 she took over the Child and Adolescent Mental Health direct service programs for the County. In this role, she partnered with school districts across the county, Child Welfare and Juvenile Justice to improve services and outcomes in mental health care for children. Her last position with the County was serving as the Senior Manager in charge of Coordination, Safety and Intake Services for the Developmental Disabilities Services Division, which also included business operations and information technology. Leslie holds a Bachelor of Arts in Psychology from Grambling State University and a Master’s in Social Work from Portland State University.

She is very active in the community, most notably with the Portland Rose Festival Foundation, where she has been a board member since 1999 and served as President of the organization in 2007 for the Centennial Celebration. She is a member of the Portland Kaohsiung Sister City Association, and Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority Incorporated. Leslie has a tremendous personal and professional commitment to the communities we serve at PHB.

PHB Management Team