June 16, 2022

I'm almost at the end of my journey through the Sebastian Darke series, & I have certainly enjoyed it much more than Max enjoys his & Sebastian's adventures adventures. This is a very solid entry in the series, with many of the series' staples still being present within. My biggest qualm with this book was it's ending, which felt certainly abrupt, but also a tad too dark for a book of this calibre. Leaving Sebastian essentially depressed after the death of his sweetheart doesn't thematically fit a comedic book for kids, & makes for a very poor ending to this series. I can certainly understand why more people wanted a better ending for our trio of heroes, because this just isn't it.

What I really liked about this story, however, was certainly the setting. Although it's been mentioned here in there in the previous two books, the world of Sebastian Darke is a very old one, with many empires & civilisations having fallen prior to the books taking place. With the lost city of Mendip almost imitating many of our modern cities, with its stony skyscrapers, it gives the entire book a very post apocalyptic feeling that I really enjoyed. Not as much as the sea-faring setting of the second book, but I certainly enjoyed this book more than the first one.

July 14, 2017

Es ist wirklich recht anders im Vergleich zu seinen beiden Vorgängern.

Es hat irgendwie die moralischen Werte gewechselt und versucht sie zum Ende wieder gerade zu biegen. Gerade diese Veränderung wider zum alt Gekannten hin, gefällt mir sehr. Zwischendrin gab es allerdings einige Längen und irgendwie ist die Reihe doch noch nicht ganz zu Ende.

April 19, 2020

7/10 en 2009.

Literatura juvenil, mi hijo me dijo que lo leyera y lo hice. Aventuras de jóvenes buscando una ciudad perdida, tribus en lucha contra crueles rivales, selvas y esas cosas.

Entretenido.

Read

June 29, 2021

fantastic book of fiction

just couldn't set my eyes off when I started it

the ending was just extraordinary

I stared continuously at the last 7 pages to find out what happened to his lover

Satisfactory ending at last

September 5, 2023

cerita bukan untuk anak-anak. walau alur ceritanya lucu, tapi ceritanya banyak adegan dewasa yang penuh darah dan kekejaman. Yang sepertinya kurang cocok di kenalkan ke anak-anak. walau cover nya terlihat menarik bagi anak kecil. Khusus untuk terbitan versi indonesia ya.

April 27, 2011

Once again Sabastian Darke, the half elf, ventures forth to make his fortune; this time into the deepest jungles in search of a lost city. Peril seems to stalk our one time jester and his diminutive warrior companion, Cornelius, down any path they follow or, in this case, hack into being with a machete. The presence of danger is almost as interminable as the pessimistic witticisms of the third member of their trio, Max, the sentient buffalope.

Philip Caveney opens up new vistas in his fantasy world filling this corner with primitive tribes at war, a perilous river journey, and, finally, the hidden city itself and the terrible secret it harbors. He also introduces a new romantic interest for Sebastian in the form of a tribal princess eager to fulfill the prophesies that she would marry a champion with pointed ears. With Sebastian still enraptured his love interest from his last adventure (currently pursuing her own adventure elsewhere), Caveney squeaks out every awkward moment between them that he can in this comedy of errors.

This volume is more anchored by moments of serious consequence than his previous offerings, and we can see the author stretching toward more solid storytelling.

November 10, 2013

Actual rating: 3.5

Well, this is it for the Sebastian Darke series. I really enjoyed it! Each book had a new adventure that was pretty different from the last. This one had the twist of the supernatural with zombie-like creatures called Night Runners, so that was neat. And even though I was sad about it, I was happy there wasn't entirely a happy ending for all the characters. I always appreciate when authors do that.

Philip Caveney is a fantastic writer. The books are easy to read and engaging, and even though they are pretty hefty, it's easy to get lost in their pages. I read all three books in about a months time. Usually it takes me a month to read one book just because I get busy doing other things and don't read as much, so that speaks to how fun these books were to read. I really loved the characters and found them all charming in their own way.

The books are basic adventure books but despite that, they have their own charm and draw in the reader. Fun characters paired up with Caveney's easy but still well written writing makes these books enjoyable and entertaining.

April 1, 2016

It was frustrating how every character managed to die but the three protagonists and the clingy female. I felt that the writer strained to establish the setting as an epic fantasy world, but couldn't keep it consistent when writing the dialogue. Plus all the attempts to incorporate humor were lame, which is a shame considering that the main protagonist is supposed to be a talented jester. Perhaps the writer should have chose a more fitting title for his hero. Given all those, however, I think this was a decent attempt at writing an adventure story for young readers. The language was simple enough to understand, and there were "sweetheart" scenes all over the place--which I think the young girls would love.

I would say that the only reason I didn't like it as much is because I am a bit too old to be reading books like these, but my younger 12-year-old sister agreed with pretty much everything I said, so...

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

July 14, 2012

The trilogy is now over, and it had such an awesome ending! I'm a little upset that there will be no more Sebastian Darke books, but Philip Caveney did an amazing job this time. I think this book is the most 'emotional' book of the three, I think everything that happened in the lost city of Mendip really touched me. I really loved it! It's a great book if you want to read something with a little touch of adventure. Totally recommend the series to everyone! :)

I love the character relationships, Sebastian/Cal, Sebastian/Keera, Max/Cornelius, Phelan/Salah! This is an amazing adventure/friendship book. Aaron's relationship with the children of Mendip was so sad, all Aaron had done for the children... TOTALLY LOVED IT! I enjoyed it a lot, there's a mixture of everything. Romance, adventure, action, mystery. TOTALLY LOVED IT! :)

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

February 21, 2019

Language - G, Sexual Content - G; Violence - PG

Sebastian and his friends were sent to find a lost city that is supposed to hold untold riches. Little did any of them know that some would die, one would be part of a prophecy, and the city would be a nightmare.

I really liked that you start the first page and the action starts. I also liked that there were trials and tribulation and still no one gave up. I very much enjoyed all the little complications that showed up that no one could have foretold and how they adjusted to make it work. Their logic always make me rethink how I would've done it.

Reviewed for https://kissthebook.blogspot.com/

January 22, 2012

Sabastian Darke: Prince of Explorers was very disappointing. It is basically a really bad rip-off of I Am Legend mixed with a boring, annoying, depressing storyline that was already going downhill by the second book. I was hoping that the author would redeem himself in this book and fix the storyline but I was wrong. Not only did it not get better, this book got infinitely WORSE. I was not impressed.

May 21, 2012

lucu dan konyol...

di sini si Prince of fools resmi berpredikat prince of explorer.

Berkat Aaron, Sebastian tahu bahwa pelawak sejati haruslah bisa melawak di depan anak-anak. Dan, dia berhasil.

Tapi, walaupun pada akhirnya Sebastian bisa berhasil dengan pertunjukan lawaknya di depan anak-anak, dan menikmati kekayaannya, Sebastian merindukan petualangan. Dan akhirnya, mereka bertiga, bersama Max dan Cornelius, ikut Cornelius pulang kampung ke Golmira ....

February 7, 2011

Well, our hapless jester is off on another adventure, this time to uncover pirate treasure. The peril and humor blend well in this volume. Tangled in with the complexities of the plot is Sebastian's romance with a seafaring lass, while trying to free himself from a love enchantment with a willowy witch. THis isn't the strongest fantasy fiction I've run across but it is a fun diversion.

July 4, 2010

This book finishes off the trilogy well. Not too different from the first two, constructionwise: Seb's complicated relationship(s), Moaning Max, small number of characters, et cetera. Not much character development, but the plotline is excellent if a bit predictable in places.

May 14, 2011

Sebastian, Cornelius and Max, the buffalope, are looking for a lost city filled with fabulous treasure. The find it, but it's filled with zombies. Still the same humor as the other 2 books in the series. New illustrator make the occasional pic not as annoying.

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

June 15, 2011

This book was awesome and is perfect for people who love a sense of adventure.

It is about a young elfling and his friends as they go through death trauma and fights with the impossible.

Reccomend to everyone!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

June 29, 2010

2 1/2 stars. Had some random elements that detracted from the story.

August 23, 2010

These books are fun adventure stories and a fun laugh. I Am Legend meets Sebastian Dark and friends.

May 19, 2011

The first zombie book that I've read It was sweet.

May 5, 2011

i liked it, but again he falls in love with some girl. i personally really liked the girl in the first book.

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

August 25, 2011

This book is really good and it has a lot of adventures in it. A good book!!

Want to read

December 25, 2012

I trono tenis Book is very good. It also is funy

October 25, 2013

more about this book, just check my review at here :

( still in progress )