The Crime Beat: With his Harry Bosch detective novels, Michael Connelly has always harked consciously back to the glory days of Los Angeles crime writing. Once, he even rented the apartment where Raymond Chandler’s hero Marlowe lived in the 1973 film version of “The Long Goodbye.” So if you hear an echo of that title in the latest Bosch book, “The Wrong Side of Goodbye” (new at No. 2 in hardcover fiction), you’re not mistaken. “I really wanted to go back to my elders with this book — the private eye novels and writers that inspired me,” Connelly said via email. “The title, the opening in Pasadena, the missing-heir case, much of the book is a tip of the hat to writers like Chandler and Ross Macdonald.”

A missing heir, you say? Well, maybe: Bosch, who in the series’s previous go-round had retired from the Los Angeles Police Department and become a private investigator, is hired in the new book by an aging billionaire to track down the child he might have sired years before. Along the way, Harry has cause to revisit his ervice in the Vietnam War more thoroughly than he has before. “The construction of the book — Harry looking for a man who was his own age — allowed me to have the investigation go right through the Vietnam era and gave me the perfect opportunity to explore Harry’s own history as a soldier,” Connelly said. “I felt it was long overdue because while I had only hinted at his Vietnam experiences in previous books, that period of time really helped form his character, and readers deserved to know more about it.”

Connelly worked as a crime reporter before he was a novelist — I used to read him in The Los Angeles Times in the early 1990s, when I lived in Southern California — and he said that his journalism career had influenced his approach to fiction. “My mind-set is that I am still a reporter and not a novelist,” he said. “So I go for accuracy about time and place and hope there is a level to the books that serves as reportage, grabbing a little bit of a reflection on how the world is and maybe explaining a few things about where we are and how we got here.”