Enterprise Utah is a city in Washington County Utah and home to about 2000 residents although only has a population of about 1700 within the city limits. It’s located on the south rim of the Great Basin, 40 miles northwest of St. George and 45 miles southwest of Cedar City.

This small resort town is located extremely close to the Arizona and Nevada border and provides a rural feel, small town atmosphere, and excellent schools and diversity. Enterprise got its start back in 1896 just two months after Utah obtained statehood. The first settlers were originally from the town of Hebron, later abandoned and those settlers worked hard to build a community as this was part of Utah’s yet untamed frontier. Today, Enterprise features a vibrant parks and recreation department, law enforcement and fire department, city Council and planning commission and while it’s population still remains relatively low, if you’re looking for a quiet, rule community just outside of the larger city of St. George, Enterprise might just be it.

Schools

Enterprise is part of the Washington County school district and the community is home to just to schools, the Enterprise Elementary, and Enterprise High School. The elementary services grades kindergarten through sixth grade and the high school is for grades 7 through 12. The schools in Enterprise are considered above average with higher graduation statistics and several academic and extracurricular activities and programs.

Homes and Area

The median income for Enterprises about $53,000 with the median age of just 30. Enterprise boasts a lower unemployment rate with the median home price of about $220,000. 83% of residents own their own homes and there’s a median rent of about $976. (Specifics are based on 2020 statistics)

The border to Enterprise covers a small demographic but there are so many outlying highways, backcountry roads, and state routes, that the population really expands upwards of about 5000 or more. Highway 18 runs east and west through the center of town converging with Highway 219 W. to Nevada.

There are a variety of homes and real estate options for sale in Enterprise. Browse all available Enterprise Utah homes for sale and real estate listings on my website and don’t hesitate to contact if you have questions about any property, listing, or if you’d like to schedule a showing.