The Secret Garden is a 1949 American drama film. It is the second screen adaptation of the classic 1911 novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. (The first was a silent version released in 1919.) The screenplay by Robert Ardrey was directed by Fred M. Wilcox. It centers on a young orphan who is thrust into the dark and mysterious lives of her widowed uncle and his crippled son when she comes to live with them in their isolated country house in Yorkshire, England. A 1987 Hallmark Hall of Fame TV film titled The Secret Garden stars Gennie James and Jadrien Steele. A 1993 adaptation, The Secret Garden, starred Kate Maberly and Heydon Prowse. A 2020 version, set in 1947, was released in the United States in August 2020 on premium streaming video because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The MGM film was filmed primarily in black-and-white, with the sequences set in the restored garden of the title filmed in Technicolor. The movie was Margaret O'Brien's final film for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. The film was released on DVD on May 7, 2013 as part of the Warner Archive Collection.

Plot[]

When tempestuous Mary Lennox (Margaret O'Brien), born in India to wealthy parents, is orphaned by a cholera epidemic, she is sent to live with her reclusive and embittered Uncle Archibald Craven (Herbert Marshall) and her ill-behaved, bedridden cousin Colin (Dean Stockwell), about her own age, at their desolate and decaying estate known as Misselthwaite Manor. Dickon (Brian Roper), the brother of one of the house maids, tells her of a garden secreted behind a hidden door in a vine-covered wall. When a raven unearths the key, the two enter and discover the garden is overgrown from neglect since Craven's wife died there in an accident. They decide to keep their discovery a secret, and begin to restore it to its original grandeur. Under the influence of the Secret Garden, Mary becomes less self-absorbed, Colin's health steadily improves, and Archibald's curmudgeonly personality fades away.

Cast[]

Margaret O'Brien as Mary Lennox

Herbert Marshall as Archibald Craven

Dean Stockwell as Colin Craven

Brian Roper as Dickon

Gladys Cooper as Mrs. Medlock

Elsa Lanchester as Martha

Reginald Owen as Ben Weatherstaff

Isobel Elsom as Governess

Aubrey Mather as Dr. Griddlestone

George Zucco as Dr. Fortescue

Lowell Gilmore as British Officer

Billy Bevan as Barney

Dennis Hoey as Mr. Pitcher

Mathew Boulton as Mr. Bromley

Norma Varden as Nurse

Production[]

MGM announced the film in November 1946. It was to be a vehicle for Claude Jarman Jr and was to be directed by Clarence Brown.

Reception[]

According to MGM records the film earned $610,000 in the US and Canada and $383,000 overseas, resulting in a loss of $848,000.

On TCM, Margarita Landazuri writes that at the time of release, many critics "felt, as did the Variety critic, that 'the allegorical and psychological implications that have been carried over from Frances Hodgson Burnett's book are clearly for the grown-up trade. Not only that, but a good bit of the production is designed to create eerie terror that may discourage parents from letting moppets see the pic.' In this era when even the youngest 'moppets' take Harry Potter in stride, however, such criticism seems quaint, and The Secret Garden seems ahead of its time."

Leonard Maltin gives the “Vividly atmospheric“ film three out of four stars.

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

Differences from the novel[]

References[]

[]