The 1993 adaptation of The Secret Garden is one of two major adaptations of novels by Frances Hodgson Burnett. The Secret Garden sees Mary Lenox (Kate Maberly), a 10-year-old British girl who was born in India. She is a spoiled brat who has her own personal servant, but is emotionally distance because she was neglected by her parents. But after a massive Earthquake in India, Mary is orphan and sent back to England to live with her uncle. The Northern English manor is run by a harsh matriarch, Mrs Medlock (Maggie Smith) and limits Mary's access to most of the house. But Mary forms friendships with the servant girl Martha (Laura Crossley) and her brother Dickon (Andrew Knott) who has great animal taming abilities, discovers her aunt's secret garden and finds her 'sick' cousin Colin (Heydon Prowse).

The Secret Garden does share similarities to A Little Princess, both feature young girls who grew up in India, have lost their parents in some form, both are forced to go to move to a foreign land, have to deal with an authoritarian figure, befriends a servant girl and there is a character who has a magical element to him. But there are differences as well: the main one being the central characters: Mary is a more selfish, spoiled character who has to learn to open up, show emotions, be kind and help her people whilst Sara in A Little Princess has to keep her imagination and kind spirit despite the hardships and lost she suffered. The actual story and setting for both stories is also different with Mary having to help to her cousin, lead to have a passion and learn about her family's past.

In comparison to A Little Princess the direction is more sombre and bleaker tone. Director Agnieszka Holland shot the film using a grey fillers and added with the mostly winter setting and barren landscape of the moors gave the film a drowsier feel. Comedy, fantasy and whimsy is toned down and The Secret Garden is a much more grounded and serious film until the end. But it is a delightful family film for all ages and genders.

As well as the Earthy look Holland brought there is also some fantastic music from Zbigniew Presiner: perfectly fitting for the film throughout. Those I am a sucker for choir music.

The cast is great throughout the filmmakers did find some very talented young actors who gave very convincing performances. Many of them have gone on to have fairly successful careers beyond the film and brought out the interesting aspects from their characters. I personally thought Maberly was actually a better actress then Eleanor Bron was in A Little Princess and she did give a very emotional performance in that film. Smith is also a very formable present, as she is always is, and have very strange motivations to why she is treating Colin the way she does? Is it out of crudity, love or protection? It is up to the audience.

The Secret Garden is a very good and strong family film that is serious minded and old-fashioned, but in a good away. I personally preferred The Secret Garden to A Little Princess and I speak as a fan of Alfonso Cuaron.