Secret Garden, The (1993)

This topic contains:

overall comments and recommendations

details of classification and consumer advice lines for Secret Garden, The (1993)

a review of Secret Garden, The (1993) completed by the Australian Council on Children and the Media (ACCM) on 21 September 2020.

Overall comments and recommendations

About the movie

This section contains details about the movie, including its classification by the Australian Government Classification Board and the associated consumer advice lines. Other classification advice (OC) is provided where the Australian film classification is not available.

ACCM review

This review of the movie contains the following information:

a synopsis of the story

themes

use of violence

material that may scare or disturb children

product placement

sexual references

nudity and sexual activity

use of substances

coarse language

the movie’s message

A synopsis of the story

1901, India: The Lennox's are a wealthy British couple living in India, where they mostly enjoy the colony's high society glamour and party life. Their 10 year-old daughter, Mary (Kate Maberly), is rich when it comes to wealth and attention of servants but deprived of parental love and attention, or friendships with other children, which has turned her into a spoilt and angry girl who is unable to cry. When her parents die in an earthquake, Mary is sent back to Yorkshire, England, to live with her uncle, Lord Archibald Craven (John Lynch). Craven is a lonesome and grief-stricken man ever since, ten years ago, his beloved wife – twin sister of Mary's mother – died. He spends most of the time away, and leaves head housekeeper Mrs. Medlock (Maggie Smith) in charge. While exploring the Manor, Mary discovers her late aunt's room, and in it a key that unlocks the door to a secret garden. A gardener tells Mary that this was her aunt's garden, and after she died Lord Craven locked it up and forbade anyone to ever enter it again. And this is not the only secret Mary discovers: following mysterious crying and whining, she finds that she has a same-aged cousin, Colin (Heydon Prowse), who has been spoilt and wrapped in cotton wool all his life, to the extent that he has never left his room, is too weak to walk, and believes that he is very ill and going to die soon. Both spoilt, lonely, and confused in their own ways, the two cousins become friends, and it does not take Mary long to challenge Colin to discover his mother's secret garden, and along with it an entire new world of possibilities.

Fantasy Drama; Coming of age; Friendship; Personal growth.

There is some violence in this movie including:

Mrs Medlock pushes Mary into a room and locks her in.

Mrs Medlock slaps a maid in the face.

Material that may scare or disturb children

In addition to the above-mentioned violent scenes, there are some scenes in this movie that could scare or disturb children under the age of five, including the following:

In one scene, Colin gets extremely angry, frustrated and distressed. He throws a hysterical tantrum during which is kicking, punching, and screaming, and adults hold him down to restrain him.

In addition to the above-mentioned violent scenes and scary visual images, there are some scenes in this movie that could scare or disturb children aged five to eight, including the following:

Sensitive children in this age group might get upset over the death of Mary's parents and Colin's mother, and seeing Colin's father broken by his grief to the extent that he is too afraid to see and spend time with his own son because it is too painful to be reminded of his dead wife.

Nothing further of concern.

Product placement

None noted.

Sexual references

None noted.

Nudity and sexual activity

There is some nudity and sexual activity in this movie, including:

In one scene, 10 year-old Mary is getting dressed by servants and is briefly seen bare-chested.

Use of substances

None noted.

Coarse language

None noted.

In a nutshell

The Secret Garden is a 1993 adaptation of the popular 1911 children's novel of the same title, written by Frances Hodgson Burnett. It is a story about self-discovery and personal growth, as well as about the importance of family and friendship. Positive role-models and messages make it a film worth watching for a family audience. Compared to modern standards, the sedate pace, lack of loud and fast action, and the presence of rather heavy themes may pose a challenge to young, modern viewers that is worth tackling. Lack of interest and heavy themes make it unsuitable for children under 6 and warrant parental guidance for children aged 6 and 7.

The main message from this movie is that "if you look the right way, the whole world is a garden".

Values in this movie that parents may wish to reinforce with their children include:

Friendship

Determination

Courage

Growing and learning

Not getting stuck in the past but to look forward

Facing fears

Making the world your oyster.

This movie could also give parents the opportunity to discuss with their children the power of the mind: for a long time, Colin believes that he is weak and terminally ill, which leaves him completely dependent, bed-bound, and miserable. His life turns around and he starts healing physically and emotionally once he finds the courage and determination to challenge himself.