It’s another remake for “The Secret Garden.” A new version, starring Colin Firth and Julie Walters, hits VOD platforms on Friday, but that might make some viewers think about the 1993 movie (which is currently streaming on HBO Max). Find out where producer Francis Ford Coppola’s “Secret Garden” cast is now:

Kate Maberly played Mary Lennox in the 1993 film when she was 11 years old, and she stuck with acting. The now 38-year-old has continued with plenty of period dramas on the BBC, like "Anglo-Saxon-Attitudes" and “Victoria and Albert,” and appeared as Wendy Darling in “Finding Neverland.” She has also started directing and producing, with her debut being the short “Charlie's Supersonic Glider.”

Heydon Prowse portrayed Mary’s sick cousin Colin Craven. Now, he’s making political comedy. He is known for the British satire show “The Revolution Will Be Televised,” which included headline-making skits like “Real Housewives of ISIS.” He has also garnered attention for political pranks, such as giving a politician a math text book and convincing the Prime Minister’s office that President Trump wanted to send her Valentine’s Day flowers.

Laura Crossley appeared in “The Secret Garden” as Martha Sowerby, Mrs. Medlock's servant. Now 40 years old, the actress went on to work steadily on British TV series like “Hollyoaks” and “Emmerdale” through the ‘90s and ‘00s. Her last screen role was on “Coronation Street” in 2011.

Andrew Knott played Martha's younger brother, Dickon Sowerby, in “The Secret Garden,” which was his first big role. He went on to star in “Black Beauty” and “Coronation Street” before landing a role in “The History Boys,” where he eventually made his Broadway debut. The now 40-year-old has appeared in dozens of movies and TV shows, including Peacock’s new adaptation of “Brave New World.”

John Lynch played Lord Archibald Craven in the 1993 film, and he’s still working plenty. He played Pope Sixtus IV in last year’s “Medici,” John Bridgens in “The Terror” and Jim Burns in “The Fall.”

Maggie Smith played Mrs. Medlock, Lord Craven's servant, in “The Secret Garden.” She worked for decades before the film and she is still working on new projects. At 85 years old, she’s most recognizable as Professor McGonagall from the “Harry Potter” films and the Dowager Countess on “Downton Abbey.”

Irène Jacob appeared as Mrs. Lennox/Lilias Craven in 1993 and hasn’t slowed down since then. Most recently, American audiences might recognize her from Netflix’s “The OA,” Showtime’s “The Affair” or Showtime’s “Patrick Melrose.”

Walter Sparrow memorably played Ben Weatherstaff, the gardener, in the film. He went on to appear in the films “Now and Then,” “Ever After: A Cinderella Story” and “Treasure Island.” He died in 2000 at age 73.

“The Secret Garden” is based on the Frances Hodgson Burnett book of the same title, and the 1993 movie was also a remake. The first was in 1919 and was followed by remakes in 1949, 1975 and 1987.