Salamanca

Salamanca (Spanish pronunciation: [salaˈmaŋka]) is a city in northwestern Spain, the capital of the Province of Salamanca in the community of Castile and León.

Kingdom of León

The Kingdom of León (pronounced: [leˈon]; Leonese:Reinu de Llión, Spanish: Reino de León, Galician: Reino de León, Portuguese: Reino de Leão, Latin: Regnum Legionense) was an independent kingdom situated in the northwest region of the Iberian Penins…

University of Salamanca

The University of Salamanca (Spanish: Universidad de Salamanca) is a Spanish higher education institution, located in the town of Salamanca, west of Madrid, in the autonomous community of Castile and León. It was founded in 1134 and given the Royal …

Battle of Salamanca

The Battle of Salamanca saw an Anglo-Portuguese army under the Duke of Wellington defeat Marshal Auguste Marmont's French forces among the hills around Arapiles, south of Salamanca, Spain on 22 July 1812 during the Peninsular War.

New Cathedral, Salamanca

The New Cathedral (Spanish: Catedral Nueva) is, together with the Old Cathedral, one of the two cathedrals of Salamanca, Spain. It was constructed between the 16th and 18th centuries in two styles: late Gothic and Baroque. Building began in 1513 and…

Old Cathedral, Salamanca

The Old Cathedral (Spanish: Catedral Vieja de Santa María) is one of two cathedrals in Salamanca, Spain, the other being the New Cathedral of Salamanca.

Alba de Tormes

Alba de Tormes is a municipality in the province of Salamanca, western Spain, part of the autonomous community of Castile and León. The town is on the River Tormes upstream from the city of Salamanca. Alba gave its name to one of Spain's most import…

Salamanca Airport

Salamanca-Matacán Airport (IATA: SLM, ICAO: LESA) is the airport serving the province of Salamanca in the autonomous community of Castile and León.

Santa Marta de Tormes

Santa Marta de Tormes (Saint Martha upon Tormes) is a municipality in the province of Salamanca, western Spain, part of the autonomous community of Castile and León, on the outskirts of the capital Salamanca, located only 3 kilometres away.

O Pino

O Pino is a municipality of northwestern Spain in the province of A Coruña, in the autonomous community of Galicia. The capital of the municipality is O Pedrouzo, which is 18 kilometres from Santiago de Compostela.

Arapiles, Salamanca

Arapiles is a village and municipality in the province of Salamanca, western Spain, and part of the autonomous community of Castile-Leon. It is located 8 kilometres from the city of Salamanca and has a population of 466 people.