Shaquille O'Neal

Born: Monday, 06 March 1972

Shaquille O’Neal is a renown athlete, Olympian, sports commentator, and Freemason who helped redefine the sport of Basketball.

Shaquille O’'Neal was born in 1972 in New Jersey. Despite his Father's absence, Shaquille grew up with structure and security. His Stepfather was a career soldier, and O''Neal spent his youth living on military bases in Germany and Texas, as well as at the Boys and Girls Club of America. His talent for basketball, along with his 7'’ 1”' height, became evident while he was in High School and would go on to define his career.

He proceeded to go to Louisana State University, where he would play with such skill and distinction that he received two “College Player of the Year” awards. He ended his time in college when he was drafted for the Orlando Magic team out of Orlando, Florida. It became immediately clear that he was something special, and he was voted All-Star Starter in his first year—a feat that put him on the same level as Michael Jordan.

His national fame was so great that he was tapped to join the American Olympic Basketball team for the 1996 Atlanta Olympics. His star was definitely rising, and after his contract with the Orlando Magic team was up, he signed up with the Los Angeles Lakers. It was there that he won three consecutive championships and was raised to level of cultural icon in the United States. He also completed his college degree during this time, paying attention to his studies as well as his physical performance.

He would go on to play for the Miami Heat, the Phoenix Suns, the Cleveland Cavaliers, and finally the Boston Celtics before retiring from basketball in 2011. During his 19 year career, he became one of the greatest basketball players of all time, alongside Michael Jordan, Kobe Bryant, and Magic Johnson.Upon his retirement, he was made a Freemason at sight at Widow's Son Lodge No. 28, PHA in Boston, Massachusetts.

Shaquille has long been a patron and supporter of youth programs and the Boys and Girls Club of America, providing charity uplift the poor and disadvantaged in society. Among these efforts, O''Neal helped homeowners affected by the 2008 housing crisis to keep their homes by buying their mortgages and offering better terms. It was for these charitable inclinations, as well as his excellence in the sport of Basketball, that Brother O'Neal was made a Master Mason ""at sight""—a rare and exclusive honor.

Brother Shaquille O'Neal currently is one of the stars on the show "'Inside the NBA'"—a commentary show where he gives his take an various happening and games in the NBA. Continuing to influence millions long after he has retired, he continues to provide a sports and philanthropic role model for future generations.