This post is about the weather in London in October, including what to expect with temperatures and rain, and tips on what to wear and things to do.

In my dual role as a tour guide and retired meteorologist, I ensure you know what weather to expect this month.

Average Temperatures

How Much Sun and Rain

What to Wear

Things to Do in October

Weather in September

Weather in November

Weather in London by Season

AVERAGE TEMPERATURES

Afternoon temperatures early in the month are between 17-18 C (in the low to mid-60s F) falling to 13-14 C (into the mid-50s F) by the end of the month.

And on some occasions, it can reach 32-23C (into the low 70 F).

Overnight low temperatures run mostly near 10 C (50 F) early in the month to 7-8 C (the mid-40s F) towards the end of this month.

HOW MUCH RAIN IN OCTOBER?

Yes, the weather is wet in London.

However, there are still about 13-15 days during this month that will see either sunny or partly sunny skies with the remainder of the month being mostly cloudy.

Some rain occurs on about 20 days this month with about 16 of these having moderate to sometimes heavy rains.

At least you do not have to worry about any snow this time of year.

WHAT TO WEAR

London has one of the mildest climates in the U.K.

However, as the weather is changeable, it is always best to carry an umbrella. In addition, a light to medium-weight waterproof jacket is a must.

Please don't forget to join us and explore London on one of our several London walking tours this month.

THINGS TO DO IN OCTOBER IN LONDON

Below is our top 10 list of things to do in October in London.

Read our full post on things to do this month in London as well as our post on things to do any time in London, for more ideas.

If you are planning on visiting many of London’s top attractions, then you should consider a tourist attraction concession pass.

These passes could save up to 55% of retail ticket prices to tours, attractions, and restaurants.

Attend Frieze Art Fair London.

See a concert.

Attend a football match.

Enjoy a theatre production.

Sample delicious treats at the London Food Festival.

Attend MCM Comic Con.

Go to the Festival of the Dead.

See the Ocean Film Festival.

Find new favorite authors at the London Literature Festival.

Save money with a London tourist attraction concession pass.

Read our full post on things to do in October.