Normal weather for London in October

It's cool to moderate in October in London with an average temperature of 15°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 13°C to a high of 17°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between 6°C and 12°C.

In October, there is an average of 115 mm of precipitation, spread over 14 days days. The wind speed is around 3 Bft, mostly coming from the South.

The UV index is a maximum of 4 this month. That's a moderate value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn in about 30 minutes.

Looking for sun and warm weather? October isn’t a good month to be in London. The temps are too low for a warm stay this month.

Check out the climate of London for all months and discover the best travel time

London in October

New York

Average Temperature

15°C 16°C

High Temp

17°C 18°C

Low Temp

13°C 14°C

Total Rainfall

115 mm 87 mm

Rainy Days

14 days 16 days

Discover cheap trips to London

Daily Temperature in October in London

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in October in London, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of October. Based on historical data, it shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Rainfall in October in London

This chart shows the average daily rainfall in October for London, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of October. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily UV Index in October in London

This chart shows the average daily UV index in October in London, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.

Temperature in October in London Over the Years

This chart shows the average temperature in October in London, measured in degrees Celsius, over the past years.

Total Rainfall in October in London Over the Years

This chart shows the average rainfall in October in London, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail.