What's the Weather Like in London in October?

October is a welcoming month to visit London, UK. The autumnal colours and textures are very attractive and for many locals, it's a favourite time of year - and not too chilly yet! With an average of five hours of sunshine each day, you'll have plenty of daylight to explore this exciting city.

How Warm Is London In October?

The average temperature is 13°C in October which is made up of highs of 14°C and lows of 9°C

Extreme Temperatures in London

The highest temperature ever recorded for London and the extended southeast area is 29.9°C in Kent in 2011. The lowest temperature was 1°C. But these extremes and very unlikely during your holiday.

How Much Does Ir Rain In London In October?

With 71mm of rain across 15 days, October is usually the rainiest month in London, so pack plenty of waterproof clothing and an umbrella!

The average cloud cover for London fluctuates between 69% and 76%. London experiences fog for less than one day each October.

How Warm Is The Sea Near London In October?

At 16°C, the average sea temperature for the closest coastal location to London is very chilly and much too cold for most people to endure.

Daylight Savings Time

Don't forget Daylight Savings Time ends at 2 am on October 26, shifting the sunrise and sunset times to an hour earlier..

Is London Windy In October?

Across October, typical wind speeds usually fluctuate between light and moderate breezes.

London Hotels in October

The Savoy

For the ultimate in British elegance and luxury, the Savoy is one of London's legendary grand hotels. Located just off The Strand right on the Thames, the supberb location allows you to see all of the London famous landmarks, designer shopping in Knightsbridge and Mayfair, the cultural theatreland of Covent Garden, the Houses of Parliament and the National Gallery...The list is endless. The rooms are finished in either Art Deco or Edwardian style and marble clad bathrooms many with views over the Thames landscape. The Savoy has two cocktail bars, Gordon Ramsey's Savoy Grill, Kaspar's all day menu and Simpsons in the Strand. A stay in this London icon will be unforgettable.

The Taj 51 Buckingham Gate

Another 'wow' experience in quintissential London luxury is The Taj 51 Buckingham Gate. This hotel is steeped in history and is is built around St James Court's fountain which was once home to the Lords and Ladies of the Royal Courts. It has been beautifully restored in keeping with a London Heritage hotel and is simply magical and indulgent in every way. Five minutes walk from Buckingham Palace, it offers 5 star plush suites with bespoke interiors and state of the art luxury with a nod to . The Taj is also home to one of the best Indian restaurants in London.

The Montcalm at the Brewery

Transformed from an historic brewery to a luxury hotel with 235 rooms, The Montcalm at the Brewery has maintaind it's original heritage with a touch of the modern. The is on a quite side street that is very close to St Pauls catherdral and bang in the middle of the lively Financial district. The rooms are decorated with a contemporary style, complete with all the amenities of a lavish hotel. There are two lovely eateries to choose from in the hotel, a traditional British pub and The Chiswell Street Dining Rooms.

Bars and Restaurants

The Delaunay

For the exceptional service and high class food, The Delaunay, Covent Garden is excellent value for money for what you receive. An ideal and stunning art deco venue for a pre or post theater meal, the menu offers popular dishes such as schnitzel, with its thin and perfectly fried crispy coating. For dessert, treat yourself to a traditional and warming slice of hot strudel - perfect for the winter month of October.

Bierschenke Beer Hall

Throughout October, experience the excitement of Oktoberfest at Bierschenke Beer Hall, near Liverpool Street. With free entry, and lively entertainment, it's the perfect venue. Explore the signature craft beers, crafted by authentic Bavarian brewery Müllerbräu of Neuötting, established in 1768.

Things to do in London in October

The Leighton House Museum and Art Gallery

October can be a very cold and damp time to visit London, so you're best off planning indoor activities for your trip. The Leighton House Museum and Art Gallery is a great place to visit for art lovers. Set in the former home of the Victorian artist Lord Leighton, this museum is one of the 19th century's most remarkable buildings and is home to a selection of artwork created by Leighton and his contemporaries.

The museum also displays the large collection of phenomenal 16th century glaxed Middle Eastern tiles. In addition to the permanent collections which include sculptures, paintings and other masterpieces, the Leighton House Museum and Art Gallery also features various temporary exhibitions.

The Museum of London

With free entry every day, the Museum of London is a top attraction to visit if you're on a low-cost holiday in the city. This museum features various permanent galleries including London Before London, Roman London, Medieval London, War, Plague and Fire, Expanding City, People's City, World City, City Gallery and Sackler Hall each of which provides visitors with a new understanding of the capital.

Tower Bridge

Tower Bridge is one of the most iconic buildings in London and is a must-visit during your stay. At this popular attraction you can admire the structure from the side of the Thames or venture inside and explore the exhibition. If you visit the Tower Bridge during the day, you'll be able to see the structure in its true glory, but if you visit after dark you'll have a completely different experience, with the tower lit up by thousands of lights. Highlights include animated videos, high-level walkways, panoramic city views, international bridge displays, artwork displays and Victorian engine rooms.

St Martin in the Fields

St Martin in the Fields is one of the most popular churches to visit in London. Set in the heart of the city, this church offers regular services in several languages and also features a café set inside the crypt, providing a budget-friendly option of London dining in unusual surroundings.

London Transport Museum