London weather in October (Greater London, United Kingdom)

Will it be rainy or sunny in London this October? Check out our in-depth weather guide for this month.

Temperatures

Typically, October in London includes moderate temperatures and moderate rainfall. Throughout the daytime, temperatures often hover around 16°C. However, as the sun sets and evening approaches, there's a noticeable cool-down. Temperatures gently drop to a more temperate 8°C.

Precipitation

London in October usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 65 mm for the month. Analyzing past climate data, one can expect approximately 14 days of rain.

Average sunshine

Expect a moderate amount of sunlight, with approximately 113 hours. This means a pleasant mix of sun and clouds.

If your ideal day consists of dry skies and moderate temperatures June, July, August and September generally stand out with the best circumstances. While January, February and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized London climate page with graphs.

London, monthly averages in October

Min Temperature 8°C

Max Temperature 16°C

Chance of Rain 46%

Precipitation 65 mm

Rainy days 14 days

Humidity 78%

Windspeed 11 km/h

Sunshine 113 hours

Percentage Sunshine 34%

Where to go in the United Kingdom in October

Find out more about the weather in the United Kingdom and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Plan on layering your clothes. Some days or part of the day it will be nice and warm and some moments it can be a bit chilly. Bring a rain jacket in case it rains during your stay.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 5/10

Cycling 6/10

Walking 6/10

Camping 4/10

Outdoor sports 10/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in London.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to the United Kingdom? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in the United Kingdom. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.