542J. Joseph Warder active 1688-1718.

The true amazons: or, the monarchy of bees. Being a new discovery and improvement of those wonderful creatures. Wherein is experimentally demonstrated, I. That they are all govern’d by a queen. II. The amazing beauty and dignity of her person. III. Her extraordinary authority and power. IV. Their exceeding loyalty and unparallel’d love to their queen. V. Their sex, male and female. VI. The manners of their breeding. VII. Their wars. VIII. Their enemies with directions plain and easy how to manage them, both in straw-hives and transparent boxes; so that with laying out but four or five pounds, in three or four years, if the summers are kind, you may get thirty or forty pounds per annum. Also how to make the English wine or mead, equal if not…

London : Printed for John Pemberton, at the Buck and Sun over-against St. Dunstan’s Church in Fleet-street, and William Taylor at the Ship in Pater-noster-row, 1716 Price $ 1,400

Octavo 18 ½ x 11 ½ cm. signatures: A-H8, I4

The third edition with additions. Engr. Portrait of Warder Bound in Contemporary calf, with raised bands, boards with gilt-ruled border, rebacked with gilt-ruled spine. Red sprinkled edges. Occasional minor spotting. Traces of cautiously repaired worming on portrait and first two preliminary leaves. Contemporary correction on p. 44 where the printed king has been replaced by queen. Inscription on rear board William Tvy His book at Bagshot 1717.

Without a doubt the concept Warder takes is from Butler’s Female Monarchy . The work, which was considerably in advance of any former treatise and contained many curious particulars concerning the habits of bees as well as practical instructions for their management, went through nine editions, the last of which appeared in 1765 (London, 8vo). It remained the standard work on the subject until it was superseded by John Thorley’s ‘Mελισσηλογία, or the Female Monarchy’ (London, 1744, 8vo). A portrait of Warder, engraved by Henry Hulsberg, was prefixed to his book on bees.

[Warder’s True Amazons; Noble’s Continuation of Granger’s Biogr. Hist. ii. 313; Mills’s Full Answer to Mr. Pellonière’s reply to Dr. Snape, 1718; A Vindication of Joseph Warder and Charles Bowen from Mr. Mills’s Calumnies, 1718. These two pamphlets, which contain some personal particulars, were the products of a petty local squabble in which Warder was involved.