Indiana Jones is back and better than ever! From the crocodile-infested waters in Ceylon to the bustling streets of Hong Kong, perennial action hero Indiana Jones' wits, agility, whip lashing and hand-to-hand combat skills will be put to the test as never before in Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb from LucasArts Entertainment Company.

The exhilarating third person action-adventure is expected to release fall 2002 for Xbox, PlayStation 2, and PC. The game is being developed in collaboration with The Collective, Inc.

Indy's latest adventure plays out in dramatic fashion thanks to new gameplay features such as brawling combat. This time, in addition to using his trademark whip and pistol, Indy can engage in fierce hand-to-hand combat against foes, many of whom are well-versed in martial arts. Improvised weapons such as shovels, chairs and table legs also can be used to fend off adversaries. The result is a more immersive and more Indy-like gameplay experience, set amidst spine-tingling movie-like action sequences, such as a rickshaw chase in Hong Kong and a spectacular battle atop moving gondolas in the South China Sea area.

Jump To:

Indy's whirlwind adventure, set in the Far East in 1935, plunges him into an international crisis of terrifying magnitude. As the game begins, a powerful underground Asian society, the Black Dragon Triad, and a German mercenary, Albrecht Von Beck, have formed an unholy alliance in the hopes of acquiring the Heart of the Dragon, a black pearl that gives its possessor the power to mold minds. Rumored to be buried in the crypt of China's first emperor, it has been safely hidden for more than two thousand years. Now, with this unwelcome coalition in desperate pursuit of one of the most powerful artifacts known to man, it's up to Indy to prevent the Heart of the Dragon from falling into the wrong hands. Indy enters the race for the Heart at the behest of Marshal K'ai, an Asian businessman who asks him to retrieve the pearl and return it to the government of China. But in order to retrieve the Heart, Indy must first traverse the world to find and assemble the three scattered pieces of the Dragon Seal, the key to unlocking the crypt. Jones is aided in his search by K'ai's stunningly beautiful assistant, Mei Ying, who helps him throughout this epic conflict.

Every good Indiana Jones story needs a sacred artifact, since the movies had already used the arc and the holy grail this time the constantly confused archaelogist is now after the Heart of the Dragon. This is what Nate Schaumberg, Assistant Producer had to say about it The Heart of the Dragon is a single black pearl that has been buried with the first Emperor of China. The heart of the dragon lies with the Emperor's body. It's gaining access to the tomb that is the trouble, since the key to the tomb is in three pieces and scattered across the globe. The key is being sought after by Indy, The Black Dragon Triad, and the Nazis. According to Nate the developing team have gone to extraordinary efforts in order to provide an immersing, involving story, The storyline for this game is very well thought out. We've taken into account many aspects of Chinese history and folklore to make the story recognizable and deep. There will definitely be some surprises along the way...

The gameplay has evolved since previous versions of the game and will feature Indy using a lot more of his fists, people who have seen demos claim these sequencies are breathtaking. Indy has all sort of moves in this title. The type of moves you'd expect from Indiana Jones. The combat system consists of two buttons, which, when pressed in any order, will perform a number of punches, kicks, and grabs. Combos are generally three button pushes in a row. A quick tap on either button will throw right and left jabs, and most combos work off of those.

He does uppercuts, haymakers, two-handed haymakers, punches to the gut, kicks to the gut, kicks to ... it hurts to think about it. He can grab opponents and punch them, knee them in the gut, throw them to the ground, throw them off of buildings... and that just the stuff he does with his two hands. said Nate Schaumberg, Assistant Producer.

Jump To:

Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb features The Collective's proprietary 3D engine that supports completely immersive, highly interactive environments. The game will offer 10 levels, all set in unique locales such as a 15th century castle that looms over Prague, an underwater palace in Istanbul, and a mountaintop fortress in China. A sophisticated camera tracking system makes sure that the player always has an optimal view of the third-person action.

Indiana Jones is back in a bold new way that players have never seen him, says Tom Byron, director of product marketing for LucasArts. Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb faithfully recreates all the heroism, action and edge-of-the-seat adventure of the blockbuster film series thanks to a state-of-the-art game engine, a rich story, and compelling gameplay.

Many questions concerning the choice of engine for the game have come up, this is what Nate Schaumberg, Assistant Producer had to say, We chose The Collective's engine for a few reasons. First and foremost, we felt that the functionality they have captured lends itself extremely well to the Indiana Jones franchise and really brings to the table some great features that one would expect from an Indiana Jones title. Their engine is also allowing us to bring Indy to next generation consoles (for the first time) and really provide highly detailed characters, environments, and gameplay elements.

Being the robust 3D engine that it is, we are really able to concentrate on story and gameplay elements that bring the Indiana Jones franchise to life and deliver a game that has all the qualities you'd expect from a high quality 3D action / adventure game as well as delivering on the expectations of the Indiana Jones property.

More on The Collective

Founded in 1997 by industry veterans, The Collective, Inc. is a leading developer of interactive entertainment software and technology for all major console and computer platforms. In recent years, the Collective has created groundbreaking 3rd person action adventure games, including the critically acclaimed Star Trek: Deep Space Nine - The Fallen, and the highly anticipated Xbox title Buffy the Vampire Slayer. In the process, the studio has developed world-class content creation tools and technology.

Jump To: