Rick Watters on Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb

By Andrew S. Bub |

A look inside the Emperor's Tomb.

Taking a break after just completing work on Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb, The Collective's Rick Watters talks Indiana Jones, licensing big-name properties, and what's next for the company.

GameSpy: Hello Rick, thanks for your time. What was your role on the project?

Rick Watters: I worked as producer on Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb.

GameSpy: The Collective seems to be carving a niche in licensed properties, first Buffy now Indy. What do you have to look out for when dealing with other people's characters?

Rick Watters: Well, first of all it has to be a license that we're excited about, that we feel really lends itself to the genre of game that we're doing. Of course, Indy is one of the top licenses out there, so it was very exciting to get the opportunity to do an Indy game. At the same time, The Collective's "Slayer" game engine really is a perfect match for the kind of fast-paced, action-adventure game we wanted to do. It was a good fit all around.

GameSpy: How daunting is it to approach such a well-known character like Indiana Jones?

Rick Watters: Well, to many people on the team, the Indy world has an almost a mythic quality to it. Many of us on the development team are from the generation where Star Wars and Indiana Jones were the epic movie adventures we grew up with. We saw them in our youth, and to some degree, are still influenced by these movies. So, yes, being charged both with maintaining and adding to the Indiana Jones world was a bit daunting to think about. At the same time it is a very exciting prospect. It pushed us to do a game we'd all be happy with, not only for ourselves, but for all the other people who we know feel the same way about the Indy world.

GameSpy: The last game (Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine) took it on the chin, receiving very tepid reviews. Did the development team pay close attention to that games Was it a conscious decision to move away from "Lara Croft's control scheme?"

Rick Watters: We wanted to make a fast-paced game, one different from the standard action-adventure fare out there. We felt that we could emphasize the action part of the equation more so than had been done in the past and focused a lot of our attention on this. Of course, there are puzzles to solve and traps to figure out, but from the beginning we were turned off by the slow pace of most action-adventure titles. We wanted the game to feel more like one of the Indiana Jones movies than other games in the genre. The hand-to-hand combat is part of what adds to the depth we were looking for, but I also think players will find that we've been able to speed up other aspects of the gameplay as well, which, in my opinion, makes for a much more exciting game.

Next: Page 2 >>

Page: 1 2