The work on the rehabilitation of the consequences following a devastating earthquake, measuring 5.4 on the Richter scale continues, which struck in the nights between 2 and 3 November, at 1.56 pm, hit Kraljevo and the surrounding villages. The earthquake was felt in all parts of Serbia. Two persons were killed and about a hundred people were injured. Many houses, towers, schools, medical and cultural institutions were damaged in the earthquake.

The Ministry of Defence of Serbia will receive 1 million USD in aid, and through the IMET program, dealing with education and training of officers, the ministry can count on additional $ 900,000, said Defense Minister Dragan Sutanovac in Washington.

Defense Minister Dragan Sutanovac with the delegation of MoD participated in the second Security Forum in Halifax, Canada hosted by the Government of Canada and the U.S. German Marshall Fund.

We have currently some 90 % of professional soldiers in our ranks, which signals that we are approaching the realization of strategic objectives and commitments. We have seen a dramatic rise in interest for the military profession this year, so that we have had as many as 10 candidates applying for one position as LTG Dikovic, Commander of the SAF Army, said in an interview to Odbrana magazine on the occasion of the 16th November-the Day of the Army.

All six factories of the Serbian defense industry groups are working in three shifts and have deadlines to meet, said Minister Sutanovac during his visit to Krusevac, stressing that they should remain state-owned because they represent an outstanding state resource which the local defense industry must not lose.

Completion of the reform planning process for the Military Security Service, which started in 2002, will be marked with an exhibition on the development of military security services. Today, the Military Security Agency is a modern agency trained and ready to respond to modern threats and risks which uses modern mechanisms for collecting data, fully consistent with the highest international standards of human rights.

Six school-fighter planes Galeb G-4 have been taken over from Montenegro adhering to the Agreement on the exchange of resources and documents between the two governments, which was signed on 14 April this year at Batajnica airport by Ministers of Defence of Serbia and Montenegro Dragan Sutanovac and Boro Vucinic respectively.

Photo-coverage of the exercise "SAVA 2010" and "Jesen 2010"

Hido Biscevic, Secretary General of the Regional Cooperation Council, in an interview to ODBRANA magazine points out that the Council promotes mutual cooperation and European and Euro-Atlantic integrations of the South Eastern Europe with the aim of encouraging development in the region for the benefit of its citizens. Initiating and encouragement measures to strengthen security in the region are essential imrpoving regional cooperation.

A regional seminar of students of political science that brought together students from Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia was held in Kopaonik. Not sparing their fellow participants, the academics from the region during this four-day seminar argued about the positive and negative aspects and experiences of countries in the Euro-Atlantic integration.

Serbia’s opening to the world and the increasingly more active involvement in the Partnership for Peace, has opened the doors of many countries not only to the professional members of the Ministry of Defense and the Army, but also for future officers, cadets of the Military Academy, which in this way, even while studying, have a chance to look at different systems of military education and the living and working conditions of their counterparts in foreign countries. This time they were on a study tour to the Czech Republic.

History seems to have omitted a lesson or two in the story abbot winners and losers. New details of the operation Halyard, the largest rescue mission of Allied pilots during World War II, carried out by Serbs, members of the Ravna Gora Movement will serve to fill these historical gaps.

Anja Krneta, the first woman, helicopter pilot in the Army of Serbia.

Strategic concept of NATO is one of the basic documents of NATO in

setting forth his political and geostrategic assessments, the place and position in the international environment and directs policy and strategy of the alliance for the future.

The British government was faced with the choice to increase the cost of defense systems or to give up part of military equipment that have become too demanding for the consumer budget. That the costs of serving the Army in peace and participation in international missions have become too heavy a burden for the British can be seen from a new Strategic Defence Review for the period up to 2015 which stresses cost reduction as its priority.

Lazar Ristovski, actor, screenwriter, director and producer, said in an interview to ODBRANA: I am a small man, who is trying to make it big, and at the same time I was a great man, who is seeking to be happy on daily basis as any ordinary man. One of my heroes at the end of my new film says: In this life we were lucky, in another we will be rich.

The competition for a journalist prize "Ivan Markovic" is open and as well as the competition for the best athletes and sports teams of the Serbian Armed Forces. Signing up to 31 December 2010.

From sport

- New success of the Special Brigade shooters.

- The Military Cadet Games, held from 17 to 24 October in Ankara, with cadets from 26 military academies participating in the event. Our cadets, who competed in archery,

came in second and third in the team.

HOUSING ADS

Special supplement- ARSENAL NUMBER 47th

You can purchase ODBRANA at FUTURA PLUS and STAMPA news stands and at the military bookstore in 22 Vasina Street in Belgrade at 100 RSD.