The Inception Story

Headquartered in Milpitas, CA, SonicWall was founded in 1991. The company wants to help organizations protect their networks and sensitive data from advanced cyber-attacks.

SonicWall provides small- and medium-sized businesses and enterprises worldwide with real-time breach detection and prevention solutions. Its security solutions help organizations run more effectively and securely in today’s risky cyber landscape.

The company regularly updates its product to provide several layers of defense against cyber threat trends identified by the SonicWall Capture Labs Threat Research Team.

The Experienced Leader

With a career across high-tech industries spanning more than 30 years, Bill Conner, President, and CEO of SonicWall is a corporate turn-around expert and global leader in security, data, and infrastructure.

He began his leadership tenure with SonicWall when the company broke off from Dell in November 2016. Conner has a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering from Princeton University and an MBA from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.

A staunch supporter of public-private cybersecurity partnerships, Conner regularly shares his expertise with global financial, enterprise and government leaders.

He has introduced a clear plan for strengthening SonicWall’s distribution channel and improving its rate of innovation. This strategy has helped the company exceed every growth goal it set for itself. Within one year under Conner’s leadership, SonicWall surpassed financial and operational goals, delivering:

Record partner registrations of more than 18,000 global channel partners with 5,000 new partners

Strong pipeline growth with over $330M in new partner deal registrations

Key service improvements with 80% reduction in wait times

A new global marketing campaign

Record new product releases

Exclusive Array of Services

Most firms offer the products of companies with which they partner as the best solution for all their clients. At SonicWall, the expertise of their consultants is their largest asset, allowing them to offer the very best solution to their client. The company’s industry-specific solutions include:

SonicWall Next-Generation Firewalls: When the Capture Labs threat researchers noted a rise in malware hiding within SSL/TLS encryption to evade firewalls, they developed a broad range of next-generation firewalls that can inspect SSL/TLS-encrypted traffic without slowing network performance.

Capture Advanced Threat Protection (ATP) Service: In response to the growing number of advanced persistent threats, SonicWall introduced the Capture Advanced Threat Protection (ATP) service; a cloud-based, multi-engine sandbox designed to discover and stop unknown, zero-day attacks at the gateway and provide automated remediation.

Capture Cloud Real-Time Deep Memory Inspection (RTDMITM): To help customers identify and mitigate deceptive memory-based threats and future Meltdown exploits, they unveiled the patent-pending SonicWall Capture Cloud Real-Time Deep Memory Inspection (RTDMITM) in February 2018.

SonicWall Secure Mobile Access (SMA) Appliances: To help companies with mobile workforces keep their hybrid IT environments secure while providing a consistent experience for authorized users, SonicWall released its Secure Mobile Access (SMA) appliances that provide granular, single sign-on (SSO) access control; context-aware authorization; file inspection in a multi-engine cloud sandbox; and easy integration with enterprise mobility management solutions.

SonicWall Email Security: Designed to make secure and compliant email access easier, SonicWall Email Security is a next-generation email security platform that scans a wide range of email attachment types, then analyzes them in a cloud-based, multi-engine sandbox and blocks suspicious attachments until they are reviewed by an authorized administrator.

A Unique Approach

SonicWall thrives on a culture of open information sharing.

This ranges from the real-time alerts and threat information shared by Capture Labs to the customer service team’s systemized sharing of feedback with other lines of business, to the ongoing education of partners and employees through SonicWall University, to CEO Bill Conner’s leadership on cybersecurity trends and legislation.

The company believes that only by having a real-time understanding of the cyber threat landscape can one develop and implement best practices and innovative solutions that work.