This month marks 30 years since SonicWall’s founding in 1991. To celebrate, we’ll be spending the month of August spotlighting the history, customers, products, partners and people that have helped shape SonicWall over the past three decades and will continue to inspire us in the years ahead.

SonicWall has enjoyed tremendous growth over the past 30 years, but it hasn’t happened by accident. From the beginning, we’ve strived to keep the customer at the forefront of our business — a decision that has taken us from our roots as a small peripherals provider to the full-service cybersecurity leader we’ve become.

Even before the company released its first firewall, SonicWall (then called Sonic Systems) had dedicated itself to helping small- and medium-sized businesses (SMB) find more cost-effective ways to deploy, operate and protect their network. Despite the countless advancements, developments and changes that brought the company from that point to now, we’ve never wavered in our commitment to this mission.

We have expanded on it, however. Today, SonicWall serves more than 500,000 customers in more than 215 countries and territories, and among these are many of the world’s largest organizations, enterprises and government agencies.

There are many reasons customers choose SonicWall. Our product portfolio incorporates the newest threat-prevention technologies while continuing to offer an industry-leading TCO. Our Boundless Cybersecurity model offers a platform approach to cybersecurity, employing artificial intelligence and machine learning to help businesses bridge the cybersecurity business gap. And our solutions continue to earn the approval of third-party testing agencies.

But one factor is cited again and again in their decision to stay with SonicWall: Our customer service. We strive to provide a variety of avenues for customers to address any question or issue, and take the feedback we receive on the resolution process seriously.

Because some customers don’t want to have to make a phone call to resolve a simple issue, we’ve modernized self-service options that have earned high ratings from users. SonicWall’s self-service score is a best-in-class 16:1, meaning that among those who choose to troubleshoot an issue on their own, the overwhelming majority are able to quickly and easily able to find a satisfactory resolution. And our knowledgebase, which is home to a wide assortment of technical documents and how-tos, has earned a 96% satisfaction rating.

But for more complex issues, we recognize that there’s often no substitute for speaking to a real person. SonicWall’s technical agents have earned an 86% satisfaction rating, and 56% of our support cases are resolved in the first business day — allowing our customers to more quickly resume business as usual.

We’ve seen similar positive responses via the Gartner Peer Insights portal. Despite the fact that the SonicWall Community has only been online for a little over a year, it’s already earning a 4.2 out of 5 from respondents. Respondents that have utilized technical support have been similarly satisfied, ranking that facet a 4.3 out of 5.

And, true to its name, SonicWall ranks high in timeliness of vendor response, earning a 4.4 out of 5 — the same score given to SonicWall’s service and support overall.

As a whole, SonicWall earns a 4.62 out of 5 rating — higher than the Gartner Peer Insights score for a majority of our competitors, and a testament to our continued commitment to customer service, before, during and after the sale.

We’d like to take this opportunity to thank each and every one of the customers who have chosen to put their trust in us. It’s been a privilege serving you over the past 30 years, and we hope to spend the next 30 years doing all we can to continue earning your loyalty and exceeding your expectations.