The University of East Anglia is situated at Earlham on the western edge of Norwich. It was designed by the architect Denys Lasdun in the Brutalist (concrete monstrosity) style and constructed between 1962 and 1972. Its 'ziggurat' halls of residence are particularly distinctive and can be seen to best advantage from the university lake.

UEA Halls of Residence

The university is also home to the Sainsbury Centre - a Norman Foster designed building which houses the private art collection of the Sainsbury family. There are three Henry Moore sculptures outside this building.

Henry Moore Sculpture (Outside Sainsbury Centre)

In 1970, Malcolm Bradbury and Angus Wilson founded the famous MA in Creative Writing course at the university. It was the first course of its kind and has spawned many imitators. Its emphasis has traditionally been on fiction, but poets such as Andrew Motion (the Poet Laureate) and Michèle Roberts have been involved as tutors. Ian McEwan was the first ever graduate from the course but many other talented students have followed including: Rose Tremain, Angela Carter, Clive Sinclair, Adam Foulds, Simon Scarrow, Trezza Azzopardi, the poet Owen Shears and Kazuo Ishiguro (An Artist of the Floating World).

Malcolm Bradbury (1932-2000) was a critic, novelist and TV script writer. He is probably best known for The History Man (1975) - a campus novel set in the fictional university of Watermouth - which later became a TV play. Eating People is Wrong (1959) was an earlier campus novel with a similar satirical tone. Bradbury is buried in the churchyard of St. Mary the Virgin at Tasburgh.

Angus Wilson (1913-1991) was also a novelist and is particularly remembered for Anglo-Saxon Attitudes (1956) and The Old Men at the Zoo (1961). Wilson lived for many years in a cottage at Felsham Woodside in Suffolk. He also edited East Anglia in Verse and Prose (1982) - a collection which has proved invaluable in constructing this website.

The Heart of Darkness

It has to be said that many of the writers associated with the UEA Creative Writing course have not been directly influenced by Norfolk - but have brought with them inspirations from other parts of the country.