February 4, 2023

Trinity Episcopal Church of Morrisania, Bronx, New York

The home of God is among mortals. He will dwell with them; they will be his peoples, and God himself will be with them; he will wipe every tear from their eyes.

Today we say good-bye to Arthur Lake. It is hard to let go of him. I knew him as a devout and faithful bulwark of this church. People looked up to him, and at the end of the service most Sundays, he would offer a brief collect or prayer, meditating on the goodness of God, giving thanks and requesting assistance in living a Christian life.

Our New Testament lesson from the book of Revelation shows the final culmination of the world with the New Jerusalem appearing in the sky. The God of heaven and earth, the source of the universe, the source of all life and of everything that is, reveals the truth of who He is. And what does it say? His home is among mortals—he will dwell with us. Not far away and remote, in some inaccessible edifice far away, but in a city, right here, filled with people, praising Him always and everywhere, without even needing a temple or church, because God is always with them.

Arthur knew that the home of God was among mortals. It was so clear that he loved being among people—though he was a quiet person, I could see him smiling when surrounded by children, or laughing with other church members or family. Members of this congregation grew up with Arthur in Antigua and they remember him as a gentle, caring tutor, helping them to learn their lessons. A devout man, for whom living in the presence of God meant dwelling with God among people, caring for them whether they were well or sick, in good times and in bad.

Martha, in her grief, came to Jesus and remonstrated with him. When Jesus told her that her brother Lazarus would rise again, she said, “Oh sure, I know all about that stuff at the last day, far off in time.” Jesus’ response was, “I am the Resurrection and the Life. Those who believe in me, even though they die, will live, and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.” Jesus lives. God is dwelling with us, right now. His home is among us people. Arthur is at home with God, smiling and blessing and praying for us. Let us remember Arthur and mourn well. Thank God for his goodness. Thank God for Arthur’s time with us and the gift of his presence.

I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though this body be destroyed, yet shall I see God; whom I shall see for myself and mine eyes shall behold, and not as a stranger.