Page Content

Experience New 360° Virtual Tours of Mountain View Campus

Our new 360° virtual tours offer an immersive look at the spaces that make Mountain View special like the iconic entrance to campus, welding and nursing labs, and Kiva Gallery.

Start Virtual Tour

Mountain View Fast Facts

20+countries represented by international students

Urban wildlife sanctuary recognized by U.S. Humane Society

50+ yr.Mountain View opened its doors in 1970

On-campus observatory

TEDxHost of TEDx event

Community garden

Mountain View Interim President

“What I like the most about Mountain View is the community it serves. It’s a community that is hardworking, that is only looking for an opportunity. We are the place where you can find that opportunity for your next step, for your family, for yourself.”

Learn more about Dr. Joseph

Our Signature Programs

Mountain View’s programs prepare our community for in-demand, meaningful work.

Learn more about the seven unique schools that house our programs.

Nursing

Provide expert, compassionate care.

Welding

Hands-on training for future welders and welding inspectors.

Occupational Therapy

Help others improve from injury or disability.

Mechatronics

Diagnose and repair high-tech machinery and robotics.

Mountain View Services and Highlights

All Student Resources and Services

Bilingual Education Center Dedicated to training bilingual teachers for elementary and secondary school classrooms

Mariachi Ensemble

Join MVC music students in our performing mariachi band

Trinidad Garza Early College High School A national award-winni​ng dual and college credit program for high schoolers

Senior Adult Services Offered in conjunction with Dallas County Department of Health and Human Services

All Athletics

Where We Are

Mountain View Campus

4849 W. Illinois Ave.

Dallas, TX 75211

972-860-8680

Take the 360° Virtual Tour

Directions to Mountain View

Interactive Campus Map

Community Partnerships

Thank you to our partners who support us in building a brighter future for our students.

For more information on ways to support, please visit Dallas College Foundation.

​