About Mountain View Academy

Mountain View Academy is a ministry of the Seventh-day Adventist Church. MVA is a college-preparatory school serving students from the San Francisco Bay and various International Countries in grades 9-12. MVA offers a balanced approach to Education that fosters the development of the whole student – spiritual, physical, intellectual, and social-emotional – a process that spans a lifetime. Our goal is to partner with the Home and Church to prepare learners to be good citizens in this world and for eternity.

Why Mountain View Academy

Mountain View Academy exemplifies excellence in education. Through our challenging curriculum, over 95% of our students attend college after graduation. MVA offers our students extra-curricular activities in athletics, art, music, and community service. Additionally, MVA provides activities with spiritual emphasis that build upon their foundation in Christ. Our low student-to-teacher ratio (12 to 1) gives our teachers the flexibility to provide differentiated instruction.

Mountain View Academy History

The beginning foundation of Mountain View Academy can be seen in the importance of Christian Education for many Seventh-day Adventist families that journeyed to Mountain View, California. In 1904, several Seventh-day Adventist families arrived in the area with the relocation of the Pacific Press Publishing Association from Oakland to Mountain View. Several families desired to have their children receive a Christian education so that they might “grow in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” With that, the SDA church established an elementary school in 1906.

As the first students progressed in their education, the need for a secondary school became apparent. Mountain View Union Academy was established in 1918 and graduated its first Class of 1923. The block bounded by Dana Street, California Street, Mountain View Avenue, and Shoreline Boulevard has been the continuous site of the school. The original two-room structure was expanded as needed until it became too unwieldy, and a better plant was planned.

A new structure was built in 1968, with a chapel, auditorium, print shop and home economics room added as time went on.