Ducato di Massa e Principato di Carrara

Flag (1790-1796) & (1815-1829) Capital Massa (Duchy of Massa)

Carrara (Principality of Carrara) Ruler Maria Beatrice Ricciarda d'Este (1790-1796) & (1815-1829) Language Italian, Emilian-Romagnan (Local Dialect) Religion Roman Catholicism Affiliation Coalition (1814-1815)

The Duchy of Massa and Principality of Carrara (Ducato di Massa e Principato di Carrara) was a minor state formed in what is modern day the region of Tuscany. It was passed around several times during the Napoleonic wars, being apart of the French department of Appeninns in 1798, being restored as the Imperial and Royal Regency Council of Massa and Carrara and then being reintegrated the following year into France with their victory over the Austrians at Marengo. It transferred into Italy to form part of the Department of Crostolo, and lastly was handed on the 14th of March, 1806 to the Principality of Lucca and Piombino.

History

Pre-Napoleonic History

The states of Massa and Carrara were located on the southern part of the region of Lunigiana, a region composed of various minor Italian duchies placed between the larger states of Tuscany, Parma, Modena, Genoa, Lucca, and Piedmont. These neighbors took interest and possessions in the region over several hundred years. Amidst this situation, the states of Massa and Carrara had been in personal-union with one another since 1473 when they were united by the Malaspina family, with Massa being a Marquise and Carrara being a Lordship at their time of union. Few territorial changes were made to the two states in the subsequent centuries, with the only notable changes being the elevation of their titles, first in 1568 where Massa became a Principality and Carrara a Marquisate and finally in 1664 when Massa became a Duchy and Carrara became a Principality.

By the beginning of the 18th Century the rulers of the states, now being the House of Cybo-Malaspina, became increasingly more fearful that they may be absorbed by other states, particularly Tuscany and the Estense State, the formal name for the Duchy of Modena and all her other titles and possesions. These fears would soon become reality however when the final Cybo-Malaspina ruler, Maria Theresa died without a Malaspina heir in 1790, with her only surviving child, Maria Beatrice of the House of Este of Modena inheriting the states, the only thing preventing a union of the two states at this point was the strict succession laws of the Estense State that only allowed for men to rule them. However, the House of Este did not have good fortunes during the French Revolutionary Wars, they supported their traditional allies in Austria during their campaign against the French, and so when Napoleon Bonaparte found out they had repeatedly colluded with the Austrians behind his back he abolished the states of the House of Este in 1796.

The smaller states of Massa and Carrara were also seized from Beatrice, who despite being an independent state and had nothing to do with the collaborations of their neighbors in Modena were condemned by the blood of their ruler to suffer the same fate, being overthone on June 30th. Beatrice alongside many of the Este family members fled to the Austrian court where they would reside for nearly the next 20 years.

Revolutionary & Napoleonic Period

See also: Principalities of Lucca and Piombino

The states of Massa and Carrara alongside the various duchies and states of the Estense Sate were merged together to form a new Cispadane Republic on the 16th of October, 1796. This republic however would be shortlived as on June 29th, 1797 it, and several other Italian republics would be merged together to form a larger Cisalpine Republic, underwhich Massa and Carrara were put under the Department of Crostolo. This state of affairs would remain in place until 1799 when the War of the Second Coalition brought a Austro-Russian invasion of Northern Italy, Massa and Carrara were taken control of by Austrian forces and a Provisional Regency was established on July 28th of that year, with the intentions of eventually restoring the states.

Following Napoleon's victory over the Austrians at the Battle of Marengo on June 13th, 1800 the Provisional Regency was brought to an end on July 20th, as Massa and Carrara were reincorporated into the Cisalpine Republic. Due to its inefficiencies Napoleon reformed the Cisalpine Republic into the Italian Republic in 1802, and then in 1805 Napoleon crowned himself King of Italy, turning it into a kingdom. Amidst all of these changes though, Massa and Carrara remained as part of the Department of Crostolo until in the aftermath of the Third Coalition where Napoleon decided to award territories to the ruler of the neighboring Principality of Lucca, his sister Elisa Bonaparte.

The towns of Massa, Carrara, and Garfagnana alongside their respective territories were handed from the Kingdom of Italy to Lucca on March 30th, with the transfer being completed on May 6th. during this time Garfagnana governed by the administrators of Massa and Carrara, meanwhile those two became dependencies of the Principality, never being fully integrated like Piombino or Lucca was. Massa and Carrara were instead exploited for their mineral wealth and made contributions to the Luccan Militia and a unit of Guards of Honour for the City of Massa.

Interestingly, despite assigning Massa and Carrara governance to the rulers of Lucca Napoleon reserved the title of the Dukes of the states to himself to give, declaring it a "Grand-Fief Duchy of the Empire". He eventually ended up granting the title to his Minister of Justice, Claude-Ambroise Regnier on August 15th, 1809. His full title was Duc de Massa di Carrara, but this was often shortened to Duc de Massa either implying a unification of the titles or the elevation of them both to the status of Duchies. Regnier enjoyed 1/15th of the income that the Principality of Lucca extracted from the states until the end of Napoleonic rule, ontop of this he was mandated to spend atleast one year in the states although its not clear if this ever occured. Despite the aforementioned "duchy" though the principality was not sovereign in anyway like some others, and was not governed by him or administrators loyal to him.

Restoration

The Austrians soon invaded Northern Italy again in 1813, and with the help of the Neapolitans Lucca soon was occupied by the Neapolitan forces and were put under a provisional government on March 18th, 1814, this state of affairs would exist for a month until Neapolitan troops withdrew from Massa and Carrara on April 26th, letting the Austrians establish their own provisional government in the area. The new government, known as the Delegazione Governativa Provvisoria degli Stati di Massa e Carrara, was put under the Provisional Regency for the Estense States instead of made its separate government like in 1799. The continued existence of such a tiny state as Massa and Carrara by this point was in question, as was many of the other tiny and defunct Duchies in Germany and Italy.

Fortunately for Massa and Carrara, Beatrice's ties to the House of Este who were relatives to the Habsburgs of Austria, and her being the mother of the soon to be Duke of Modena allowed for her to retain her possessions in Massa. And so in Article 98 of the Treaty of Vienna on June 9th, 1815 that the States of Massa and Carrara were to be restored to the last ruler, Duchess Beatrice, and Massa would be temporarily granted the fiefdoms of Lunigiana which with the Grand Duke of Tuscany intermediating infavor of Modena at a convention on the 20th of December (see Administrative Divisions for more information on the fiefdoms ceded), this transfer would be completed on the 4th of February 1816. During this brief period of restoration the state was too small and too new to have had any chance of raising an army, and its likely that there were some volunteers that instead had served in the units of the Modenese Army in their campaign against the French and Neapolitans in 1815.

Due to her eldest son being the ruler of Modena it was inevitable that the states of Massa and Carrara would become inherited by the Dukes of Modena, and this happened when Beatrice d'Este died in 1829, where the Duchy and Principality still technically existed but were inherited by the ruler of the Estense States and added to their vast amount of titles.

Vexillology

The Vexillology for the states of Massa and Carrara is a bit of a mystery, and its not entirely certain if it had a flag at all. But if it did it would've likely had the coat of arms of the ruler, during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars Beatrice d'Este, planted atop a white field, as was the case for the time periods before this when different houses had sat on the thrones of the states. For more information on the various flags of Massa check out this site. This flag would've been first introduced when Beatrice took over the states in 1790 and ended usage in 1796 with its seizure by Napoleon.

During its time under the various Italian republics and kingdom it would've hoisted the national colors of those respective nations. Meanwhile during the brief Austrian backed regency of 1799-1800 its unlike the states had a flag, probably hoisting the old colors of 1796 or more likely Austrian colors as it was a provisional government setup by and for the Austrian army.

During the time of the "Grand-Fief Duchy of the Empire" and its part as a dependency of the Principality of Lucca it would've hoisted the tricolor of Lucca as it was the nation responsible for the governance of the territory despite the duke of the area being a French minister. The coat of arms of the Duchy would've likely been those of Regnier, although these were not modified to include any imagery from his new title.

In 1814 and early 1815 during the delegation period where Massa and Carrara were put under governance of the Estense State they would've flown the flags of the Duchy of Modena. With the return of Beatrice d'Este in 1815 the flag would've returned to the white field with her coat of arms atop it, remaining this way until in 1829 with her death Modena inherited the states and their blue banner was flown.

State Flag (1790-1796) & (1815-1829)

Administrative Divisions

Duchy of Massa (Italian: Ducato di Massa)

Principality of Carrara (Italian: Principato di Carrara)

Marquisate of Fosdinovo (Italian: Marchesato di Fosdinovo) - granted June 9th, 1815 ceded to Modena on December 20th, 1815.

References

Please note some of the general sources only work during the daytime in Italy due to Italian archives efforts to save money.

General

Bongi, Salvatore. 1880. Inventario Del R. Archivio Di Stato in Lucca. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Inventario_del_R_Archivio_di_Stato_in_Lu/yo1HAAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0

Cappelli, Adriano. 1906. Cronologia E Calendario Perpetuo: Tavole Chronografiche E Quadri Sinottici per Verificare Le Date Storiche Dal Principio dellE̕Ra Cristiana Ai Giorni Nostri. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Cronologia_e_calendario_perpetuo/JzFLAAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0

"Delegazione governativa provvisoria degli Stati di Massa e Carrara." n.d. beniculturali http://dati.san.beniculturali.it/SAN/produttore_GGASI_san.cat.sogP.20106

“Ducato di Massa, 1814-1829.” n.d. Sistema Informativo Degli Archivi Di Stato. https://sias.archivi.beniculturali.it/cgi-bin/pagina.pl?TipoPag=contesto&Chiave=65

"Ducato di Massa e Principato di Carrara, sec. XV metà - 1796." n.d. Sistema Informativo Degli Archivi Di Stato. https://sias.archivi.beniculturali.it/cgi-bin/pagina.pl?TipoPag=contesto&Chiave=51&RicVM=indice&RicSez=contesti&RicTipoScheda=cps

"Reggenza provvisoria di Massa e Carrara." n.d. beniculturali http://dati.san.beniculturali.it/SAN/complarc_GGASI_san.cat.complArch.17137

Contemporary Documentation

"Final Act of the Congress of Vienna." June 9, 1815. Wikisource (2009): https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Final_Act_of_the_Congress_of_Vienna/General_Treaty.

Journal Des Débats Et Des Décrets. 1809. Vol. 2. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Journal_des_débats_et_des_décrets/UwEwAAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0

Modena. 1814. Leggi Proclami, Avvisi E Disposizioni Del Governo Provvisorio Degli Stati Estensi: Collezione Generale Delle Leggi, Costituzioni, Editti, Proclami Ec. Per Gli Stati Estensi Tom. 1. 1814. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Leggi_proclami_avvisi_e_disposizioni_del/Qqf0l6VFU40C?hl=en&gbpv=0

Lucca, Lucca Center of Contemporary Art, and Francesco Gaetano Carrara. Bollettino delle Leggi della Provincia Lucchese, 1807. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Bollettino_delle_leggi_della_Provincia_l/x3crAQAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0

Further Reading

Full View of 1715-1730 Map