Biography Saul Stacey Williams is an American poet, actor, writer, rapper and musician born in Newburgh, New York on February 29, 1972. His mom was a school teacher and his dad was a preacher. With two parents in very influential careers, it is no surprised on where Williams got his talent from. Growing up in Newburgh more than likely had a huge impact on Williams and influenced his talents, considering it is one of the most dangerous cities in New York and in the country. Williams is currently married to Rwandan actress and a playwright, Anisia Uzeyman. His former spouse was American actress and musician Persia White who were married less than a year in 2009. He currently has two kids a daughter, Saturn Williams, and a son, Xuly Williams. …show more content…

This poem comes from William’s very first book of poems which was published by Moore Black Press back in 1998 called The Seventh Octave. The layout of Language in Zoos is complex in its rhyme scheme and patterns because the stanzas are broken unevenly yet rhyme scheme always begins after the first three lines of every stanza. The poem itself can be interpreted in many different ways, yet I feel Williams sought to speak on social inequality vs intelligence. As you read the poem, Saul slowly delves into his own personal experiences and talks of how he sees great intellect shunned and “hue mored” by …show more content…

Saul Williams also performed this poem in the movie he starred in and also helped write in 1998 called Slam. Amethyst Rocks is similar to that of His Dilemma in that they both have tercets, but instead of stanzas it appears as three lines rhyming back-to-back-to-back or rhyming tercets (i.e. And I know god personally, In fact he let 's me call him me,Yea I 'm serious "B"). Majority of the poem is comprised of back to back rhyming couplets written and broken down into two stanzas. This poem can be interpreted as Saul Williams rising above what history has dictated for him to become. It talks about the ancestry of blacks and they are stuck in a perpetual “life sentence” under the white man and that as African Americans and white we must do what we know is right because we control our