When Persia White married her co-star Joseph Morgan in 2014, Mecca White, the daughter of The Vampire Diaries actor Persia White, acquired a terrific father figure. Morgan and Mecca seem to have formed a strong relationship when Morgan joined her life.

Mecca White Has A Close Relationship With Joseph Morgan.

After the actor married her mother, a great relationship seemed to have grown between the father and his stepdaughter. Morgan was the one who introduced her to the worlds of art, movies, and comedy. The young woman is following in her parents’ footsteps and pursuing a career in show business.

Looking at the videos and photos shared by the actress on her Instagram page, it’s clear that the trio is having a great time as a family; whether it’s dancing at Thanksgiving dinner, wandering through the winter wonderland, or spending Saturdays at the beach, the family never fails to give us major family goals. Mecca, on the other hand, isn’t shy about expressing her feelings for her father. In one such case, she went to Instagram to wish him a happy birthday on May 16, 2021. In the caption of a photo of the whole family standing for the camera, she referred to him as “the coolest dad on the island,” alluding to the site of the birthday festivities.

Not only the young actress but also the TVD actor enjoys sharing family photos. On May 16, 2020, The Big Bad Vampire/Werewolf posted an Instagram video in which he and his family answered fan questions. Although Morgan hosted the program on his Instagram page, it was Mecca who made the event feasible by collecting potential fan questions. At times, the child dedicates whole captions to her father while leaving out her mother, even though she is there in the photograph.

Mecca White’s parents have never had a child together.

Morgan and White’s love affair started in 2011 when they met on the third season of The Vampire Diaries. They dated for three years before marrying on July 5, 2014, in a stunning wedding ceremony in Jamaica. More in love than ever, the British actor celebrated their six years of marriage with his wife with a gorgeous Instagram post: Love, adventure, creativity, and passion are all words that come to mind. Persia, after six years of marriage and almost nine years of this great trip with you, you are my heart. The pair, however, does not yet have a kid of their own. But who knows, maybe one day they’ll give Mecca a gorgeous sister.

Mecca White’s Biological Father’s Unsolved Mysteries

Mecca, who was born in 1995, was raised only by her mother. Persia has never disclosed the name of her daughter’s biological father to the world. There have been some allegations floating around that Persia’s ex-husband, Saul Williams, was Mecca’s father. While no one has corroborated this specific rumor, Williams and Persia dated for just five years before getting engaged in 2008. There is a gap of over a decade that this conjecture does not account for. It’s impossible to think the singer could have fathered Mecca.

Related tags :

Post navigation

ncG1vNJzZmiamaS0s63PobCgoaOpe6S7zGiknpuTlnq4tMitnGaZnpl6q7vSnqehZZ2kv6itzWafmq6VYq5ur8uoqp5lkqS7pXuLZWNlZFxh