Source: Hindustan Post

Taruni Sachdev is an Indian child actress. She was born in Mumbai, India, on May 14, 1998. She was born to Haresh Sachdev, an industrialist, and Geetha Sachdev. She studied up to class nine at Bai Avabai Framji Petit Girls' High School.

Career and Filmography

Her passion and her dream were to become a heroine. She debuted in the industry with the help of director Vinayan T. G., who debuted in films during the year 2004.

She was active during the years 2003–2012. She made her film debut in 2004 with "Vellinakshatram," which endeared her to Malayalam audiences, and the following year she co-starred with Prathiviraj in "Sathyam.

"In 2009, with Amitabh Bachchan in the lead role, she acted in the Hindi film "Paa," where she starred as Somi, Amitabh Bachchan’s classmate. She approached over 50 companies for various projects. Her final film was Vettri Selvan, a Tamil film released two years after her death.

During the debut days, the director Vinayan had spotted Taruni in an advertisement with Amitabh Bachchan and contacted Bachchan’s manager to cast her in the films. That time, the director claimed, "We were all amazed by how she performed.

She was just five then and could render Malayalam dialogues after listening to them a couple of times. "I still remember the intensity with which she performed in the climax of the film, where even senior actors found it difficult to work against high-speed propellers."

Commercials

Besides acting, she appeared in more than fifty commercials, including those for Colgate, ICICI Bank, Parachute, Saffola Oil, and finally Kesar Badam Milk. She is best remembered for doing her favorite shoot for Rasna commercials with Karishma Apor and being nicknamed "Rasna girl."

She also appeared on the television game show Kya Aap Paanchvi Pass Se Tez Hain? which was arranged by the leading Bollywood actor, Sharukhan It was the Indian version of the popular American game show "Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?" and was telecast on the Indian television channel STAR Plus. The show premiered on April 25, 2008, and the last episode was broadcast on July 27, 2008, with Lalu Prasad Yadav as the special guest. The grand prize was worth Rs 5 crore.

Death and Misery

Her dream was cut short after a few films when she was killed in a 2012 Agni Air Dornier 228 crash near Jomsom Airport in Nepal on Monday. She was followed by her mother, Geetha, who also died in that air crash. Unfortunately, the day he passed away was his birthday.

Her sudden death shocked the entire film industry. Many famous actors from the same film, including Amitabh Bachchan and Karisma Kapoor, mourned his death. According to reports, there is something more shocking than his sudden death. Taruni Sachdev had her own "death moment" before she boarded what would be her last flight.

Taruni's classmates alleged that a day before the accident, she said "finally" to them. She hugs them and tells them that this is the last time they will meet. Unfortunately, what seemed like a joke at the time turned out to be reality the next day.

According to reports, Taruni texted her friends a few moments before she left and asked them what would happen if the plane crashed. It would have been heartbreaking for their loved ones and the other co-actors to witness a child actress take such a path so early in her career due to her unfortunate fate.

Reality

Even someone who would know such a famous Indian child actress as Taruni Sachdev, who was very productive and enthusiastic at the age of 11, would face such a miserable tragedy as giving away her life in a plane crash. Isn't God a cruel God? This isn’t the case if she hasn’t gone on a trip to visit pilgrimage sites with her mom in Nepal.

According to what I've learned about Taruni Sachdev, she has a plethora of fandoms and is still alive in people's hearts due to her good name and fame. Not every child gets a chance to explore the industry with big-name actors and co-stars, regardless of their dream.

But Taruni Sachdev, unlike the other kids, has a chance to excel in the film industry with her dream and passion. She had done her best with whoever she was acting for. An interesting thing to note is that she was a very enthusiastic and active child during the shoot times, and she was a very quick learner in remembering dialogues and other situations where even the senior actors found it difficult to work against the high-speed propellers.

But, unfortunately, her fate did not do her justice, which I thought was very cruel, because she died before she could achieve, act in more diverse film projects, and earn the fame and title of memorable actress, which is very uncomfortable and makes my heart clutch 1000 times when I think about it. It is a sad part of her life that everyone close to her feels and stays sad because they were unable to spend time with her while she was filming. Still, we know that life exists in the world for one reason or another.

Bottom Line

After that period, everything seems appealing, and after that, everybody has to die and reach their afterlife. Since this is the bitter truth that everyone has to accept and go forward with to move on in life.

Written by Purnimaa Alagappan