Taruni Sachdev was an Indian child actress and model who is best remembered for her appearance in the Rasna advertisements. She had worked in many films and television commercials. She garnered much praise in the entertainment world and became popular as the Rasna girl. Her role as a classmate of Amitabh Bachchan in the Bollywood flick Paa also received appreciations.

Personal Life of Taruni Sachdev

Taruni Sachdev was born on 14th May 1998 in the city of Mumbai, in Maharashtra, to Haresh Sachdev and his wife Geeta Sachdev. Her father is a city-based industrialist. She was a student of Bai Avabai Framji Petit Girls High School in Bandra, Mumbai. Her mother was a congregation devotee member at the Radha Gopinath Temple of ISKCON in Mumbai. Taruni was a regular performer in dramas at various temple festivals.

Career of Taruni Sachdev

Taruni Sachdev appeared in a number of television advertisements endorsing brands like Rasna, Star Flush Dreams, Shakti Masala, Gold Winner, Coffee Bite, LG, Reliance Mobile, ICICI Bank, Colgate and others. In the Indian entertainment industry, Taruni was one of the busiest child models. In the year 2009 she had acted alongside Vidya Balan, Abhishek Bachchan and Amitabh Bachchan in the Hindi movie Paa. She had also featured in two Malayalam films namely Sathyam and Vellinakshtram, both in 2004. She had also acted in the film Koi Mil Gaya. She last starred in the Tamil film Vetri Selvan which released after her demise. In her time she was accredited as the highest paid child artist and had more than 50 commercials to her credit. Her appearance as the Rasna girl alongside Bollywood actress Karishma Kapoor is most remembered among all her works.

Death of Taruni Sachdev

Taruni Sachdev died on 14th May 2012 in the Agni Air Flight CHT plane crash in Nepal. The day also marked her 14th birthday. Her mother who accompanied her on the flight also died in the crash.

Filmography of Taruni Sachdev

Year Title Language 2003 Koi Mil Gaya Hindi 2004 Vellinakshatram Malayalam 2004 Sathyam Malayalam 2009 Paa Hindi 2014 Vetri Selvan Tamil

This article is a stub. You can enrich by adding more information to it. Send your Write Up to content@indianetzone.com