Born:

Kelly Brianne Clarkson

April 24, 1982

Fort Worth, Texas, U.S.A.

Hometown:

Burleson, Texas, U.S.A.

Occupation:

Singer-songwriter, actress & author

Years active:

2002-present

Parents:

Jeanne Taylor

Stephen Clarkson (deceased)

Siblings:

Jason Clarkson (big brother)

Alyssa Jackson (big sister)

Eric Clarkson (younger half-brother)

Kevin Clarkson (younger half-brother)

Ex-Boyfriends:

Graham Colton (May 2005 - November 2005)

Ryan Key (January 2006 - July 2006)

Ex-Husband:

Brandon Blackstock (m. 2013-2022)

Children:

River Blackstock (b. 2014; daughter)

Remy Blackstock (b. 2016; son)

Nickname:

Kellbelle

Labels

RCA Records, 19 Recordings, S Records, Atlantic Records

Kelly Brianne (previously: Kelly Brianne Blackstock; born Kelly Brianne Clarkson on April 24, 1982) is a Greek-American/Welsh-American/English-American/Irish-American/German-American/Scottish-American singer-songwriter, actress & author. In 2002, she rose to fame after winning the first season of American Idol, Since then, Clarkson has been established as "The Original American Idol". Her debut single "A Moment Like This" topped the US Billboard Hot 100 and broke the record for the biggest jump to number one in the chart's history, becoming the best-selling single of the year in the country. In a career spanning over a decade, Clarkson has accumulated ninety-one number ones on the Billboard charts and eleven international number one singles and has sold over 20 million albums worldwide. She is known for her vocal versatility and range. Her music has mainly dealt with themes of heartbreak, independence and self-empowerment for women & young teens. Apart from her work in music, Clarkson has also ventured into television and film such as the movie "From Justin to Kelly," the NBC drama series "American Dreams" and the WB comedy series "Reba." She has also appeared on "The Voice" as a guest advisor & "Duets" as a judge & mentor.

Clarkson has also gained numerous accolades, including three Grammy Awards, three MTV Video Music Awards, twelve Billboard Music Awards, four American Music Awards, two Academy of Country Music Awards, two American Country Awards and a Women's World Award. In 2012, Clarkson was ranked nineteenth on VH1's list of "100 Greatest Women in Music". In 2013, she was ranked number 105 on Joel Whitburn's "Top 500 Artists Of All Time", number 5 on both "Top Billboard 200 Female Artists" and "Adult Contemporary Artists", number 27 on "Top Billboard 200 Artists" and number 75 on "Billboard's "Hot 100: Top 100 Artists". Billboard also ranked Clarkson as the 14th-best-selling artist of the 2000s and one of the top 200 album sellers of the Nielsen SoundScan era at number 187.

Early Life[]

Clarkson was born in Fort Worth, Texas to Jeanne Ann Rose, a first-grade English teacher and Stephen Michael Clarkson, a former engineer. She is the youngest of three children with a brother, Jason (who appeared in one of her music videos) and a sister, Alyssa. She also has two younger half-brothers from her father's second marriage. Clarkson's parents divorced when she was five years old, following which her brother lived with their father, she stayed with their mother and her sister went to live with an aunt. Her mother later re-married to Jimmy Taylor. Clarkson's ancestry is primarily Greek (from a maternal great-grandfather) and Welsh, but she also lays claim to English, Irish, German, and Scottish descent. Her mother is a descendant of Republican state senator Isaiah Rose (whose life story was discussed on Clarkson's episode of "Who Do You Think You Are?" in 2013). Clarkson was raised Southern Baptist. She has said: "I always grew up in church. I was the leader of our youth group. I’ve always grown up pretty close to church and with God. But I think I’ve just gotten a lot closer just because he's the only one I can lean on." She later said of her upbringing: "My family was highly conservative; I had to go to church on Sunday and Wednesday." She attended Pauline Hughes Middle School. Clarkson initially wanted to become a marine biologist, but she changed her mind after viewing the movie "Jaws." In the seventh grade, her school's choir teacher, Cynthia Glenn, overheard Clarkson singing in a hallway and asked her to audition for the school choir. She told her that she had never received any professional vocal training. She graduated from Burleson High School, where she performed in several musicals, such as "Annie Get Your Gun", "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" and "Brigadoon". Clarkson sang at her high school talent show after which an audience member shared some inspiring words with her: "God has given you this gift. You've got to sing. You're destined to sing." Clarkson continued singing and soon started classical training, hoping that music would be her ticket to a college scholarship. Upon graduating from high school, Clarkson was offered full scholarships to The University of Texas at Austin, University of North Texas and Berklee College of Music, but she later declined them, explaining: "I've already written so much music and wanted to try a career on my own" and added "you're never too old to go to college."

Career Beginning[]

After graduation, Clarkson worked several jobs to finance a demo, recording material and trying to market it to record labels, but received little response. She turned down two recording contracts from Jive Records and Interscope Records, stating: "They would have completely pigeonholed me as a bubblegum act. I was confident enough that something better would come along." In 2001, she traveled to Los Angeles, trying to pursue a career in music. Clarkson appeared as an extra in a few television series such as "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch" and "Dharma & Greg." Clarkson briefly worked with musician Gerry Goffin to record five demo tracks in trying to secure a record deal. Lack of other career opportunities and a fire incident in her apartment forced Clarkson to return to Burleson where she worked at a movie theater, promoted Red Bull energy drink, worked as a telemarketer and as a cocktail waitress in a comedy club.

Personal life[]

Marriage & family[]

Clarkson began dating talent manager, Brandon Blackstock in February of 2012. Brandon is Reba McEntire's stepson through her marriage to Narvel Blackstock, who is Kelly's manager. In a May 2012 interview, she told the Daily Mail: "Brandon is my manager's son. I've known him for six years, but he was married. Then, suddenly, there he was at the Super Bowl and he was single." In December of 2012, Clarkson and Brandon became engaged. They married on October 20, 2013 at the Blackberry Farm in Walland, Tennessee. Upon her marriage, Clarkson became a stepmother to Brandon's daughter, Savannah and son, Seth from his previous marriage. On June 12, 2014, Clarkson gave birth to her first child and Brandon's third, a daughter named River Rose Blackstock. On April 12, 2016, Clarkson gave birth to her second child and Brandon's fourth, a son named Remington Alexander "Remy" Blackstock. The two filed for divorce in 2020, which was finalized in the years following.

Political Views[]

On December 29, 2011, Clarkson posted on Twitter that she would vote for US Congressman Ron Paul as a 2012 presidential candidate, saying: "I love Ron Paul. I liked him a lot during the last Republican nomination and no one gave him a chance. If he wins the nomination for the Republican Party in 2012 he's got my vote. Too bad he probably won't." After stating her support for Paul, she came under fire on Twitter, due to her pro-gay rights views. She later apologized for the tweet, saying she did not intend to offend anyone. In 2012, Clarkson stated she would vote for President Barack Obama again. She stated: "I can't support Romney's policies as I have a lot of gay friends and I don't think it's fair they can't get married." She also cited women's rights issues by saying: "I'm not a hardcore feminist, but we can't be going back to the '50s."

Philantrophy[]

In April 2007, Clarkson took part in "Idol Gives Back," a fundraiser for people in poverty in both Africa and the United States, performing "Up to the Mountain" along with Jeff Beck. She would also perform a five-song set later that year on the American leg of Live Earth concerts opting for environmental awareness about climate change. Clarkson is currently an ambassador of "March of Dimes," raising money regularly and assisting in volunteer service, having walked for "March for Babies" for the cause of improvement of the health of mothers and babies. Additionally, Clarkson got involved in the organization "Houses of Hope" who take care and build orphanages for children in South Africa who have been affected by HIV/AIDS, abuse and poverty. She has visited those children and also participated in "A Night for Hope" fund-raiser concert (held by Clarkson's background vocal singers, Jill and Kate), where she performed a song she wrote after her trip to South Africa, "You Still Won't Know What It's Like." Clarkson also supports the charities Save the Children, UNICEF, "Do Something" and "STOMP Out Bullying" and music causes like the Save the Music Foundation. She has a ranch in Texas for unwanted animals which includes amputee goats, blind dogs and horses with colic; there are more than 80 animals at the sanctuary. Clarkson helps provide veterinary care for them and finds them an adoptive family. Clarkson performed in a benefit concert on March 1, 2013, supporting Omaha's based Opportunity Education Foundation (which is an organization that provides access to education for children around the world) stating: "Education was a key part of my childhood, and I am better for it. Anything for education I am really into and especially for kids. A lot of people don't have computers, and they can't afford them. Without education, you get far behind. As long as they have a chance, you know, I think that's important. I want every kid to have a chance." In 2013, she teamed up with State Farm Insurance to support teen safe driving as a part of "Celebrate My Drive" program. In 2013, Clarkson supported Feeding America and its Child Hunger PSA Campaign which provides food for children facing hunger. Also in 2013, she participated in Green Mountain Coffee's Great Coffee, Good Vibes, Choose Fair Trade campaign by traveling to coffee farms in Peru to draw attention to the importance of being Fair Trade Certified. In December of 2013, Citizen Watch Co. announced that Clarksom is their newest Brand Ambassador.

Jane Austen[]

In 2013, Clarkson purchased a turquoise and gold ring that had belonged to the British novelist Jane Austen. She paid £152,450 ($231,227) for the ring at auction house Sothebys, against a reserve price of £30,000. Kelly is a fan of Jane Austen's work and also bought a first edition of her 1816 novel "Persuasion." The ring is one of only three surviving pieces of jewelry known to have belonged to the author, and had remained in her family until the sale. The British government placed an export ban on the ring owing to its historic importance, describing it as a "national treasure." Jane Austen's House Museum in Chawton, Hampshire, eventually raised the money with the aid of an anonymous donor, to buy the ring by the export deadline. It was placed on display at the museum in February of 2014. Clarkson had intended to wear the ring as her engagement ring. Brandon, who was her fiancé at the time, commissioned a replica of the ring for her, which she has been seen wearing on many occasions, most notably during the 2013 Grammy Awards and the second inauguration of Barack Obama.

Quotes[]

"God will never give you anything you can't handle, so don't stress."

"Everyone says I'm like the girl next door... Y'all must have really weird neighbors!"

"I'm so happy now. I love that I'm in a relationship right now... I want a life... The past five years or so I've found my groove and my balance."

"I'm actually not a big fan of the word hope. I think it's depressing word. I don't want to hope-I want to know. Like I don't hope that there's God, I know there is."

"I'm always going to live in Texas. Texas is my home- it'll be my home forever."

Discography[]

Studio albums

Thankful (2003)

Breakaway (2004)

My December (2007)

All I Ever Wanted (2009)

Stronger (2011)

Wrapped in Red (2013)

Piece by Piece (2015)

Meaning of Life (2017)

When Christmas Comes Around... (2021)

Chemistry (2023)

Tours & Residencies[]

Headlining[]

The Breakaway Tour (2005–2006)

Hazel Eyes Tour (2005)

Addicted Tour (2006)

My December Tour (2007–2008)

All I Ever Wanted Tour (2009–2010)

Stronger Tour (2012)

Piece by Piece Tour (2015)

Meaning of Life Tour (2019)

Chemistry: An Intimate Evening with Kelly Clarkson (2023–2024)

Co-Headlining[]

American Idols LIVE! Tour 2002 (2002) (with the American Idol season one finalists)

Independent Tour (2004) (with Clay Aiken)

2 Worlds 2 Voices Tour (2008) (with Reba McEntire)

Kelly Clarkson / The Fray Tour (2012) (with The Fray)

12th Annual Honda Civic Tour (2013) (with Maroon 5)

Filmography[]

Movies[]

From Justin to Kelly (2003)

The Star (2017)

UglyDolls (2019)

Trolls World Tour (2020)

Television[]

American Idol (2002)

American Dreams (2003-2004)

Duets (2012)

The Voice (2018–2021, 2023)

The Kelly Clarkson Show (2019–present)

American Song Contest (2022)