Kelly Brianne Clarkson was born on April 24th of 1982 in Fort Worth, Texas. She is the youngest of three children, and after her parents' divorce, she was raised separately from her siblings. While her brother and sister moved in with other family members, Kelly remained with her mother.

Clarkson was reared a Southern Baptist and credits her early life's influences to the church. In middle school, she joined the chorus, which was her first exposure to singing. When Clarkson was in high school, she participated in a lot of the school's talent events and musicals.

Kelly Clarkson turned down all of the university scholarships she was offered due to her singing talent. She was eager to devote all of her attention to her musical career, and she wanted to get going right away.

When Clarkson received her high school diploma in 2000, she prioritized creating a demo reel. She took on various jobs to pay for the recording sessions, and some record labels showed interest.

She had a few offers, but declined them because she thought she would be pigeonholed and exploited. She left for Los Angeles in 2001 because she thought there would be more prospects there.

She was able to record a 5-track demo reel, but no record label would sign her despite that. Later, due to financial issues, she was compelled to go back home. She was a cocktail waitress and a movie theater host during this difficult time.

Kelly Clarkson's pals persuaded her to try out for "American Idol" not long after she got back home. The creators were still winging it as the series developed because it was the first season of the program.

With her victory in the competition's final round, Clarkson officially began her career. Simon Fuller, the show's creator, signed "American Idol" champion Clarkson to RCA Records. Eventually, "A Moment Like This," her debut single, reached the number one position on the Billboard Hot 100. It was the best-selling single in the country in 2002.

What is Kelly Clarkson's net worth?

Kelly Clarkson is an American singer, songwriter and reality TV star who has a net worth of $45 million. The reason Kelly Clarkson is most well-known for her music is because of her participation on the reality TV program "American Idol."

Along with her success in the entertainment industry, a number of wise financial decisions have contributed to Clarkson's enormous net worth. She also achieved popularity as a writer, particularly in the field of children's literature.

Kelly makes $560,000 per episode as a judge on "The Voice." That equals almost $14 million for each season. Her total compensation from "The Voice" in prior seasons was $13 million. Kelly made $53 million in total, before taxes, working on "The Voice" alone between 2012, 2017, 2018, and 2019. Kelly's career-long earnings, including those from her songs, totaled little under $100 million.