What you need to know

Call of Duty: Modern Warfare has added a ton of post-launch content, especially to its battle royale mode Warzone.

The latest Operator, or playable character, to join the ranks is a westerado by the name of Morte, who looks quite cool.

What makes this Operator unique is that he is played by Italian superstar Fabio Rovazzi, who has made his name in acting, music, and more.

Morte is joining the game today, with a mysterious background and a collection of cosmetics to accompany him.

If you were looking for a gunslinging bounty hunter to play as in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, or in its intense Warzone battle royale mode, look no farther than Morte, the game's newest Operator. Morte isn't a real bounty hunter, but he follows that aesthetic because of childhood dreams of becoming law enforcement and a passion for Western films. Now, he is a deadly tool of war, and is ready to take to the battlefield with the player at the wheel.

What makes Morte particularly unique, however, is that he is being played by Italian superstar Fabio Rovazzi, who has made his name known as a musician, actor, and film director, and is positively massive in Italy and the surrounding area. His long time dream, according to him, was becoming a character in a Call of Duty game, and now his dream is finally coming true.

From Fabio: "...there are no words to describe the excitement of the opportunity to give my voice and my appearance to an operator. I also love the character tribute to the Italian Western tradition. When I think that millions of players will be able to play with my character, I feel flattered and satisfied beyond imagination."

If you're interested, you can take a look at Morte in the game right now, as well as an Operator pack to start you out with some cool cosmetics. You can also check out this behind-the-scenes video for some additional insight into how this character came to life.

Don't forget that Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War is on the horizon as well, giving players another way to jump into the world's largest FPS franchise.

Xbox

Main