THE SUBHUMANS' classic first album Incorrect Thoughts was released on Vancouver label Friends Records in 1980. They always planned to make their older material available again, but due to legal issues never could with this album. They decided to meet the challenge to their ownership of their own material by rerecording all of the songs from the Incorrect Thoughts album, plus six additional tracks from the same period, and it's never sounded better!

Legendary Canadian punk group Subhumans emerged from the 1978 front of creativity that produced DOA and The Pointed Sticks. They have been part of the Alternative Tentacles family since being included on the infamous Let Them Eat Jellybeans compilation and played shows with Dead Kennedys, Minor Threat, Black Flag, and Bad Brains.

Their first album "Incorrect Thoughts" was released on Vancouver label Friends Records in 1980. They always planned to make their older material available again, but a now defunct San Francisco label had issued an unauthorized version of "Incorrect Thoughts" in the '80s which substituted some remixes without the band's knowledge, included tracks which hadn't made the cut for the original album, and changed the cover art. It was an unpleasant mystery for the band and three decades later the former owner of that label was asserting ownership over the original album, preventing its re-release without an expensive and contentious legal tussle.

The Subhumans decided to meet the challenge to their ownership of their own material by rerecording all of the songs from the "Incorrect Thoughts" album, which they proceeded to do at the Hive Studios in Vancouver, assisted by Jesse Gander. Original members Brian Goble (vocals), Gerry Hannah (bass), Mike Graham (guitar), and newly-recruited drummer Jon Card (formerly with Personality Crisis, SNFU, and DOA among others) got together in 2005 to record a new album of original material, "New Dark Age Parade," for Alternative Tentacles (Virus366) and the band had reactivated into a live entity. The intent was neither to slavishly recreate the old recordings nor to radically reinterpret the songs, but updating the sounds and the recording techniques while maintaining the original spirit of the album. As a bonus, Subhumans recorded six additional songs from the same period for the second 12" of a two LP set, some of which had never been recorded before!