CHICAGO -- The parent company of the five Midwestern Bell companies Thursday announced formation of its first subsidiary, saying it will be the first in the nation to offer mobile telephone service using cellular radio technology.

Ameritech, the parent of Illinois Bell, Indiana Bell, Michigan Bell, Ohio Bell and Wisconsin Telephone, said the subsidiary will be called Ameritech Mobile Communications.

'I see cellular service going from a phone in the car, to a phone in the briefcase, to a phone in the pocket,' said William Weiss, Ameritech chairman and chief executive officer.

Pending regulatory approval, the company plans to start service in the Chicago area within the next two months and in Detroit, Milwaukee and Cincinnati by the end of 1984.

It will be the first such service in the nation, Weiss said.

The subsidiary is awaiting approval from the Illinois Commerce Commission on a requested tariff and the Federal Communications Commission on an operational license before it can begin service.

The cellular system relies on low-powered radio transmitters and control equipment located in cell sites, which are connected through electronic switching systems to the public telephone network.

For example, the Chicago area will be divided into a honeycomb of small cells equipped with low-power radio transmitters. As a caller drives across the city, his mobile call will be passed electronically from one cell to another.

Weiss said this concept will improve the quality and availability of mobile telephone service.

Robert Barnett, president of the new subsidiary, said use of the cellular system in mobile communications will allow more calling capacity because frequencies can be reused.

Weiss said the mobile phones have been tested in the Chicago area for four years by 2,000 customers. He termed the service 'very efficient. The calling quality is equal to regular land line service.'

'I'm as optimistic about this service as anything in this industry in a long time,' he said.

Industry experts predict the cellular radio market will total $2.7 billion nationwide by the end of the decade, Weiss said. More than three-fourths of that market is in Chicago, Milwaukee, Detroit, Cleveland and Indianapolis, he said.

The proposed rate for the Chicago area service is $50 a month.

Weiss said Ameritech Mobile Communications will remain a regional subsidiary of American Telephone & Telegraph until the split of the Bell System next January. At the time of divestiture, it will become a wholly owned unit of Ameritech.