100 miles from Dodge Center, MN

Map of local cities around Dodge Center, MN

Major cities near Dodge Center, MN

This is a list of large cities closest to Dodge Center, MN. A big city usually has a population of at least 200,000 and you can often fly into a major airport. If you need to book a flight, search for the nearest airport to Dodge Center, MN. You can also look for cities 4 hours from Dodge Center, MN (or 3 hours or 2 hours or 1 hour) or just search in general for all of the cities close to Dodge Center, MN.

65 miles to Saint Paul, MN

69 miles to Minneapolis, MN

184 miles to Madison, WI

245 miles to Omaha, NE

255 miles to Milwaukee, WI

293 miles to Lincoln, NE

299 miles to Chicago, IL

351 miles to Kansas City, MO

396 miles to Saint Louis, MO

434 miles to Fort Wayne, IN

More trip calculations

Hotels near Dodge Center, MN

Airports near Dodge Center, MN

Location of Dodge Center, Minnesota

Airports in Minnesota

Cities in Minnesota

Airports in the United States

Cities in the United States

Local towns near Dodge Center, MN

This is a list of smaller local towns that surround Dodge Center, MN. If you're planning a road trip or exploring the local area, make sure you check out some of these places to get a feel for the surrounding community. You can also search for cities 100 miles from Dodge Center, MN (or 50 miles or 30 miles).

Heritage Estates, MN

Valley View Park, MN

Wasioja, MN

Vlasaty, MN

Eden, MN

Windsor Court Mobile Home Community, MN

Kasson, MN

South Fork Homes, MN

Fryers Mobile Home Park, MN

Mantorville, MN

Claremont Mobile Homes, MN

Claremont, MN

Westfield Center, MN

Concord, MN

West Gate Mobile Home Park, MN

West Concord, MN

Poolers Mobile Home Park, MN

Dodge Center, Minnesota

City: Dodge Center

State: Minnesota

Country: United States

Category: cities

Nearest cities

Travelmath helps you find cities close to your location. You can use it to look for nearby towns and suburbs if you live in a metropolis area, or you can search for cities near any airport, zip code, or tourist landmark. You'll get a map of the local cities, including the distance and information on each town. This can help in planning a trip or just learning more about a neighboring city so you can discover new places.