Living in Dodge Center , Minnesota

5.74 million people live in Minnesota (1.7 % of the US population 334.9 mln as of 2023) on the territory 86,936 square miles (2.3 % of the US territory).

2,830 of residents of Dodge County call Dodge Center their home (13.04 % of Dodge County population).

Should you move to Dodge Center , Minnesota ? Is Dodge Center , Minnesota a good place to live?

When determining what cities are good for your personality, life situation, and personal preferences, there are many factors to consider including climate, cost of living, community, job opportunities, population makeup, activities, and things to do.

After our extensive analysis of Dodge Center, MN across all our Top 100 Best Location lists, we believe this place is the best for families with kids.

Healthy Living in Dodge Center , MN

Dodge Center 's Outdoor Living Score is 66.91 out of 100 (find the best location for Outdoor living here or explore Dodge Center 's climate in detail here). We examine health risks, safety and natural disasters among other metrics important for outdoor activities.

Are public schools good in Dodge Center , MN ?

There are 1 elementary, 1 middle and 1 high schools for children within the borders of Dodge Center , MN .

An important fact to note from the editor:

More on the Education quality in Dodge Center , MN

Is Dodge Center , MN affordable?

Cost of living in Dodge Center , MN is in the group of 20 % of locations in the US with high cost of living. When we compare the cost of living in Dodge Center to other locations within Minnesota state only, it is in the moderate group. To learn more about the income, taxes and various budget itemized costs, navigate to the page Cost of Living in Dodge Center , MN.

When we figure out the Cost of Living, we don't look at just what things cost. We also see how much money you'd have left after paying taxes and living expenses. In places where it's cheap to live, there might not be many jobs that pay well. In areas without income taxes, you might pay more in property taxes. And in places where living costs a lot, you could earn a lot more money. So, what really matters in the end is looking at your whole budget and seeing how much money you have left after all deductions at each location.