Brian Wilson is also known as Brian Douglas Wilson (born June 20, 1942). He is an American musician, singer, songwriter, and record producer and co-founded the Beach Boys. He is one of the most innovative and significant songwriters of the 20th century.

Brian Wilson is known for his high-ranged singing. He faced lifelong struggles with mental illness. Brian Wilson was raised in California. He began his professional career as a member of the Beach Boys in 1961.

He served as the band’s producer, songwriter, co-lead vocalist, keyboardist, and de facto leader. After signing with Capitol Records, he became the first pop artist credited for writing and performing his material. He produced other acts like The Honeys and American Spring.

Wilson had a nervous breakdown and resigned from regular concerts, in 1964. He formed a business partnership with his psychologist. In 1988 he relaunched his solo career with the album Brian Wilson. He works as a solo artist from 1999 to 2022.

Brian Wilson Childhood

Brian Wilson was born on June 20th, 1942 in Inglewood, California. He was the son of Audree Neva and Murry Wilson. Wilson’s ancestry includes Dutch, Scottish, English, German, Irish, and Swedish origins. Wilson had two younger brothers Dennis (1944) and Carl (1946). Shortly after Dennis birth, the family moved near Hawthorne, California.

Wilson and his siblings suffered psychological and physical maltreatment from his father. when he was 12 years old his family purchased a piano for him. Wilson began learning to play piano by spending hours mastering his favorite songs. He learned how to write manuscript music from one of his uncles. Wilson guided his brothers in learning harmony parts by which they would rehearse together.

Wilson submitted an essay ” My Philosophy in which he stated that his ambition was to make a name for himself in music. Wilson’s earliest public performance was at high school. He started his career in singing from high school.

Brian Wilson Family

He was in relation with Judy Bowles, who was a high school student. Wilson met her at a baseball game in mid. During Christmas in 1963, they got engaged and were to be married the following December. Judy was the inspiration for Wilson’s songs “Judy” (1962), “Surfer Girl” (1963), and “The Warmth of the Sun” (1964), the latter being written shortly after they had separated.

After that, Wilson fell in love with another high school student singer Marilyn Rovell. He met her in August 1962. Wilson wrote “Don’t Hurt My Little Sister” in 965 about his early relationship with Marilyn.

Brian Wilson and Marilyn got married in December 1964 and had 2 daughters. Their names were Carnie and Wendy. He characterized himself as a neglectful father and husband. His daughters inspired his songs “Roller Skating Child” in 1977 and “Little Children” in 1988.

Wilson and Marilyn separated, in July,1978. Wilson filing for divorce in January 1979. Marilyn was given custody of their children. After Marilyn he maintained a relationship with Keil until 1981. Then Wilson dated with his nurse Carolyn Williams. He had met in 1979. Their relationship lasted together until January 1983.

In starting of1986 till 1989 he dated former model and car saleswoman Melinda Kae Ledbetter. In 1991 he got married with Ledbetter. They adopted 5 children. Wilson had six grandchildren, two daughters of Carnie and four sons of Wendy by 2012. Wilson’s wife Ledbetter died on 30th June, 2024.

Brian Wilson Deafness in Right Ear

During a Christmas choir recital he found that Wilson can’t hear properly from his right ear at age 11. The issue was diagnosed by a family doctor. They were not able to find the cause but possible cause include a birth defect, an injury from his father, Murry. or a another child. According to Wilson his deafness was not from his birth defect. It can happened by slapping his father before three years. In the late 1960s, he had a corrective surgery that was unsuccessful for his deafness in ear.

You can read biography of the following personalities:-

Austine Reaves Biography, Dua Lipa Biography, Bruce Willis Biography, Stephen Curry Biography, Taylor Swift Biography