Pizza 73 is one of the most prominent Canadian Pizza restaurant chains. In 2007 it was acquired by a Toronto-based pizza chain and is still going strong. You will be surprised to know that Pizza 73 has around 89 locations in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and British Columbia. Everyone loves to eat delicious pizza and their mouth starts watering when they hear the word Pizza. But for Muslims, the quest for Halal status is always a point of concern. Is Pizza 73 Halal? Let’s find out the answer to this!

Halal Status of Pizza 73

The large Muslim community in Canada is always on a hunt to find Halal food choices. They want to eat tasty meals while keeping in mind the halal factor. The good news is that Pizza 73 offers halal food options for Muslims. Whether you place an order online or by phone, they will cater to everyone’s needs. The restaurant makes fresh pizza with top-notch ingredients.

The menu offered at Pizza 73

If you are planning to eat out from a halal restaurant, keeping Pizza 73 in your list will be the best option. You can order delicious pizza, side dishes, desserts, and dips. The food they make is not only halal and gelation-free but also fresh and tasty. They are proud that none of their products contain any artificial flavors, colors, or trans fats. You can enjoy the finest taste of tandoori chicken that will satisfy your taste buds. The new curly fries are another good option in the entire menu. If you are a fan of the fries, don’t forget to try out this one.

Many Muslims ask this question whether the doughs used by the chefs are vegan or not. You will be delighted to know that their classic and whole grain dough doesn’t contain any animal by-products. One of the most popular menu choices is halal “New York Pepperoni”. It doesn’t contain wheat gluten. If this is not enough you can try out the delicious butter chicken. Here is what you try to order:

Everyday deals: It includes large two-topper pizza, large BBQ chicken pizza, large deluxe pizza, and large butter paneer pizza

Special deal: Pizza plus drinks available in large, small, and medium sizes

Solo deal: It offers various pizza choices like BBQ chicken pizza

Under $10 Deal: You will get popcorn chicken, fries, and classic curly fries in this deal

Spice Delights: The Spice Delights offers 10 to 20 pieces of wings

Gourmet thins: You will get the ultimate pepperoni

Alternative crusts

Chicken: The chicken choices are plenty and halal. You can try out boneless wings

Sides and snacks: Popcorn chicken fries and more

Dips: The dipping sauce is delicious

Drinks: You can have beverages of your choice

Desserts: From the desserts you can have cookies, brownies, donuts and caramel dip

Does Pizza 73 Dough Use Eggs?

The dough used at Pizza 73 is made with tomato sauce and cheese but they don’t use eggs for it. However, they do offer a good range of sauces such as Buffalo Blue cheese that contains eggs. Muslims can also opt for vegan choices that are completely halal for them.

Is Pizza 73 Halal and Can Muslims Eat from There?

Yes, Pizza 73 is halal and there are many delicious food choices on their menu. Muslims don’t need to restrict themselves and can dine out at this restaurant. As the Muslim community continues to grow in Canada, their food choices are becoming wider than before. You can try out their shawarma, pizzas, and desserts.

The ambience of this restaurant is welcoming and you will enjoy it with your family and friends. There is a tandoori chicken wing that is spicy and full of flavors. The shawarma chicken offers the best topping for all the lovely customers. Moreover, the best part is that it is completely halal. They use only halal meats keeping in mind the dietary requirements. You can have takeout or delivery of food, depending on your mood.

However, there are some reports too that claim that not all the outlets of Pizza 73 are halal. In this matter, it is better for you to ask the restaurant management yourself before dining in there!

So, this is all about Pizza 73 halal status. Remember to always verify the halal status of your local Pizza 73 outlet to ensure your dietary requirements are met before ordering. Enjoy your meal with peace of mind!