General information about Pizza 73

Pizza 73 is a Canadian restaurant chain, delivering pizza to its customers since 1985. With 89 locations in the biggest cities in the country, it offers a variety of pizza, chicken dishes and sides for any appetite.

What can be bought at Pizza 73?

Pizza 73 specializes in pizza, and besides the well known classics, their menu features gluten free options, alternate crust options, as well as chicken dishes, burgers and a grand choice of sides.

Pizza 73 coupon – how to get it?

Pizza 73 has codes featured on their official site, providing discounts for products specified in promotions. By ordering via UberEats, you can get access to more codes for your Pizza 73 order as well.

You can also try our Picodi extension, which will automatically check if any Pizza 73 coupon is available and will also apply it to your order.

Pizza 73 coupon – how to use it?

Here is a step-by-step guide on how to use Pizza 73 coupons:

Visit Picodi.com and search for Pizza 73.

Select a coupon which suits your order and click “Reveal the Code”.

Pick your Pizza 73 dishes at UberEats as usual.

Proceed to checkout and log in to order.

Enter your Pizza 73 coupon into a dedicated field.

Promo will be applied to your order.

ⓘ Our tip: You can completely skip the process of looking for coupons by installing the Picodi extension. It will automatically check all coupons and automatically apply the most fitting one to your cart. The extension can be downloaded from here.

What should I do if Pizza 73 coupon doesn't work?

Here are the most likely reasons why Pizza 73 code won’t work:

The code you selected has expired.Some codes are valid for a limited time only. This can be the case with UberEats monthly codes and Pizza 73 codes from seasonal promotions.

The code has additional terms and conditions. Often the UberEats codes will work only when your order reaches a specified value.

What Pizza 73 coupons exist?

Pizza 73 offers codes for items specified in promotions, orders of specified value or over that set amount. The UberEats codes function in a manner similar to the latter instance.

Does Pizza 73 give a discount on the first purchase?

Yes.By ordering at UberEats, you can enjoy a discount on your first Pizza 73 order by using a code at checkout.

Pizza 73 free delivery – availability and terms

Pizza 73 may offer a free delivery on your order via UberEats, depending on the specific restaurant’s location as well as your order’s value.

What other offers are available at Pizza 73

Pizza 73 often has featured specials on their page, offering extra items with your order, new products and options for your pizza.

Does Pizza 73 have a loyalty program?

No.As of now, there doesn’t seem to be an available loyalty program at Pizza 73.

Is shopping at Pizza 73 safe?

Yes, shop ensures safety of its customers by operating in accordance with Alberta’s Personal Information Protection Act.

Pizza 73 payment methods

The available payment methods at Pizza 73 include both debit visa card as well as at door payment.

Pizza 73 delivery methods

Pizza 73 offers either pick up option or delivery to your doorstep, depending on the location.

Pizza 73 reviews

Pizza 73 only has ★1.9 total score on Yelp, with overwhelming majority of negative reviews, often criticizing the quality of food, with only a few positive experiences with both the service and products.