Anterior tibial artery

The popliteal artery divides and gives off an anterior tibial branch that supplies the anterior compartment of the leg i.e. tibialis anterior, the extensor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus muscles. This artery passes through the oval aperture of interosseous membrane and travels on the anterior surface of interosseous membrane.

There is a useful mnemonic for remembering the branches of the anterior tibial artery;

A Physician Can Make Cough Mixture

Anterior tibial recurrent

Posterior tibial recurrent

Circumflex fibular

Muscular

Cutaneous

Malleolar

When this artery is found in the ankle/foot region, it is referred to as the dorsalis pedis. The artery lies lateral to the tendon of extensor hallucis longus. The dorsalis pedis gives rise to the deep plantar artery and the first dorsal metatarsal artery.

In order to remember the branches of the dorsalis pedis artery, you can use the mnemonic FADT that stands for:

First dorsal metatarsal

Arcuate

Deep plantar

Tarsal

The deep plantar artery passes between the heads of the first dorsal interosseus muscle and unites with the lateral plantar artery. The first dorsal metatarsal divides into two arteries in the first web space and passes deep to the tendon of extensor hallucis longus.

The dorsalis pedis artery is an important vessel for assessing peripheral blood flow particularly in diabetics and those with existing vascular disease. The dorsalis pedis descends to supply the tarsals as well as the dorsal part of the metatarsals. Next it dives deeper into the foot and anastomoses with the lateral plantar artery to form the deep plantar arch.

Posterior tibial artery

The other division of the popliteal artery is the posterior tibial artery. This courses in the posterior compartment of the leg and supplies the posterior muscles and structures, such as the achilles tendon, gastrocnemius muscles, the deep posterior muscles i.e. flexor halluces longus, flexor digitorum longus and tibialis posterior muscle.

When the posterior tibial descends it eventually passes behind the medial malleolus along with a number of other structures. A mnemonic for remembering these structures is: 'Tom Dick And a Very Nervous Harry', from closest to the medial malleolus to furthest away. The structures these words denote are the:

Tibialis posterior tendon

flexor Digitorum longus tendon

posterior tibial Artery

posterior tibial Vein

tibial Nerve

flexor Hallucis longus tendon

These structures wind behind the medial malleolus and pass anteriorly to enter the foot via the tarsal tunnel. The posterior tibial artery divides to form the medial and lateral plantar arteries that broadly supply the sole of the foot. The medial and lateral plantar arteries supply the toes via the deep plantar arch. The medial plantar supplies part of the hallux (big toe), the lateral plantar supplies the vast majority of the foot.

Fibular artery

This vessel is a branch of the posterior tibial artery. And is the artery of the lateral or fibular compartment of the leg. Although it supplies the lateral compartment, it actually runs in the posterior compartment, and from there, sends perforating branches into the lateral compartment to supply the fibularis muscles (longus and brevis).

It has three main branches that supply the lateral part of the calcaneus, the anterior part of the lateral malleolus and also a perforating branch which communicates with the anterior tibial artery.

The plantar arch is formed by the medial and lateral plantar arteries. The arch extends from the 1st to the 5th metatarsal and also unites with the deep plantar branch of the dorsalis pedis.

Isn't the neurovasculature interesting? Review all the major arteries, veins and nerves of the body and increase your knowledge about the arteries of the leg and foot with our study units:

Clinical aspects

Peripheral vascular disease and the diabetic foot

Peripheral vascular disease usually involves peripheral vessels; the disease that involves arteries is called peripheral arterial disease. In this disease vessels get narrowed due to arteriosclerosis. This will initially manifest as angina (pain in the heart with exercise) and intermittent claudication (pain in the legs on walking).

As the extent of disease worsens, more serious complications result. These include strokes and heart attacks. Diabetes is one of the many causes of this condition and is strongly related to lower limb arterial disease. Due to loss of pain perception in the presence of peripheral neuropathy patient with diabetes are more likely to present with gangrene and diabetic foot which in some cases results in amputation.

Vascular surgery

With advances in vascular surgery, the commonest approach is now endovascular i.e. within the vessels themselves rather than making a big incision and opening the vessel. This entails a very minor amount of trauma to the patient, as well as a faster recovery time. The technique also allows for access to parts of the body that would be very traumatic to expose in open surgery.

Embolectomy is the removal of an embolus that is blocking blood flow. Angioplasty is a technique using a thin tube passed into a narrowed vessel, and a balloon inflated to squeeze the atherosclerotic plaques against the vessel walls. It is a temporary fix and the vascular disease will return and cause blockage. Hence, stents (to keep the vessel open) embedded with anti-coagulant medication are now left behind to prolong the effect of the treatment.

Bypass grafting is a technique used to bypass vascular disease by using other vessels to bridge to supply a collateral route past the blockage.