Lakers hero Pau Gasol sat and comforted Kobe Bryant's daughter Natalia - his goddaughter - in Thursday's game against Denver Nuggets, hours after a ceremony unveiling a statue honoring her late father had been held by the NBA team.

The Bryant family took a seat in the stands at Crypto.Com Arena on Thursday night as the Lakers narrowly lost by eight points to the current NBA champions.

They were joined by Bryant's old teammate Gasol, who has made every effort to rally around the family since Bryant's death in a 2020 helicopter accident in California that took the life of eight other people - including his 13-year-old daughter Gianna.

Natalia, 21, was pictured putting her head on Gasol's shoulder during the game, a heartwarming moment that fans responded to on social media.

'Uncle Pau sitting with Kobe’s daughter Natalia at Lakers game,' wrote on fan, sharing the video on Instagram.

Another wrote: Pau Gasol is an incredible human being. This is the type of brother you want in your life.

'The bond between Pau and Kobe went far beyond the game. Since, Kobe passed Pau has been with his daughters and wife every step of the way.'

Speaking prior to Thursday's ceremony, Gasol said of his former teammate: 'He just wanted to be the best that he could possibly be.

'He wanted to be the best, period. He understood for that to happen it required special focus and he put in the work.'

'The impact that he has had on so many people stand out. So many emotions, I was so fortunate to be on the same team, to have helped in some way.

'He pushed me to be a better player and a better person overall. It is hard not having him here today but we are honoring him and his legacy, which goes beyond.'

The Lakers honored their late superstar with a 19-foot bronze statue on Thursday, the first of three that are planned for Bryant.

The 4,000-pound statue depicts Bryant in his white No. 8 jersey with his right index finger raised as he walked off the court following his 81-point performance against the Toronto Raptors in January 2006.

Bryant's widow, Vanessa, said during the dedication ceremony that the statue is the first of three that will be created to honor the five-time NBA champion and top scorer in Lakers history.

Another statue will feature Bryant in his No. 24 jersey, which he wore for the second half of his career, while a third will depict Bryant and his daughter, Gianna.