After doing all they can in the series, LeBron James and the Los Angeles Lakers have finally been eliminated by the Denver Nuggets. This loss prompted former NBA star Pau Gasol to reveal what he thinks of this season’s iteration of the Purple and Gold and how they have performed in the playoffs so far.

In Game 5 of the series, the Nuggets took home the close 108-106 win over Los Angeles. Jamal Murray stepped up and imposed his will by dropping 32 points on 50 percent shooting from deep, three boards, and seven assists. MVP-favorite Nikola Jokic tallied a monster performance of 25 points, 20 rebounds, and nine assists, while Michael Porter Jr. added 26 of his own points to help Denver take care of business against LA.

James played his heart out by finishing the game with 30 points, nine rebounds, and 11 assists. Austin Reaves contributed 19 points on 50 percent shooting from the field, while Anthony Davis notched 17 points and 15 rebounds. Meanwhile, Rui Hachimura made 15 points in the Lakers’ final game of the season.

As a result of their elimination, Los Angeles will now find a way to become better next season. At the center of their predicament is James’ player option and the front office can build a more competitive team around the aging superstar. The Nuggets, on the other hand, will face the Anthony Edwards and the Minnesota Timberwolves in the next round.

Former NBA Star Pau Gasol Praises Los Angeles Lakers on Playoff Exit Against Denver Nuggets

After the game, various personalities gave their take on the Lakers’ elimination. Among those who dropped a positive reaction is one of its greatest players ever, Pau Gasol:

“This playoff round has been a lot closer than the 4-1 result. The @lakers played their hearts out and gave themselves a chance in every game. Proud of our team. #GoLakers“, Gasol tweeted.

Gasol is no stranger to the limelight after winning two rings with a Lakers team led by the late Kobe Bryant. His take on the team’s loss acknowledges the hard work they’ve put out all season long, despite facing countless odds along the way.

Even with so many variables in the offseason, there’s hope that the Lakers can come back stronger later this year. And if their recent series against Jokic and the Nuggets has shown, there’s a lot of fight left for this team once they figured out how to resolve their weaknesses on and off the court.

For More Great Basketball Content