There are nearly 10 million reasons why the Nuggets could finally attract a bona fide star to Denver during the next 12 months.

Los Angeles Lakers veteran Pau Gasol has won two NBA championships, been named to the All-Star Game four times and runs the triangle offense favored by new Denver coach Brian Shaw to perfection.

Boston Celtics guard Rajon Rondo has earned one championship ring, while also leading the league in assists and steals during his seven-year NBA career.

Would either one of those NBA stars look good in a powder blue?

The NBA is anticipating one of its wackier seasons, because traditional powers are reeling, while a marquee free-agent class is due in 2014 and the next draft also features Andrew Wiggins, guaranteed to be the most anticipated rookie since LeBron James.

It’s all important to the Nuggets, who have a trade exception of more than $9 million in their pocket after trading Andre Iguodala to Golden State.

“The trade exception was a big piece of the move. It creates a lot of flexibility for us going forward with a young roster,” Nuggets president Josh Kroenke said. “With a young roster and almost $10 million in a trade exception, it gives a lot of flexibility to make this team better.”

A trade exception is the NBA’s version of a gift card. In a salary cap league, the Nuggets have nearly $10 million to combine with one of their own players to help facilitate a blockbuster deal for a star.

Gasol is 33 years old and in the final season of a contract scheduled to pay him $19.3 million. Think he and JaVale McGee might be able to create some offensive and defensive matchup problems in the Denver frontcourt?

With a salary of $11.9 million, Rondo is in the prime of his career, but stuck as the last proud Celtic standing amid the rubble of a franchise’s messy rebuilding project. He’s a triple-double waiting to happen. He can also be a pain in the rump. Nevertheless, you think Rondo might be any good in a three-guard rotation with Ty Lawson and Wilson Chandler?

If the Lakers or Celtics fall out of the playoff race, they could also look to move salary.

This is not to suggest either Gasol or Rondo should begin consulting with a real estate agent in Colorado. But if Denver wants to become relevant again among the NBA elite, the Nuggets might look to spend that $10 million gift certificate on a big purchase.