Pau Gasol Celebrates Big Sports Day For Native Spain

One thing that has always been known about Los Angeles Lakers legend and Basketball Hall of Famer Pau Gasol is that he is very proud of where he comes from and is always supportive of his native Spain.

Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan, Pau Gasol & More React To Passing Of Lakers Legend Jerry West

Los Angeles Lakers legend and basketball Hall of Famer Jerry West passed away at the age of 86 years old, it was announced on Wednesday morning. While

Pau Gasol ‘Proud’ Of Lakers Despite Losing To Nuggets In First Round Of 2024 NBA Playoffs

For the second consecutive year, the Los Angeles Lakers’ title hopes were ended by the Denver Nuggets though this past series was much more heart wrenching.

Lakers Hall of Famer Believes Denver Series Was Closer Than 4-1 Finish Suggests

The Los Angeles Lakers have officially been knocked out of the playoffs after Monday's 108-106 Game 5 loss to the Denver Nuggets. The Lakers did not get swept by the Nuggets this time, but were still handily defeated as they lost the series 4-1.

Marc Gasol joins Lakers legend brother Pau to become first brother-duo to have jerseys retired in NBA history

The Gasol brothers, Pau Gasol and Marc Gasol spent over a decade each, playing in the NBA. The Spanish brothers have an age gap of four years, and nearly same was the gap between their debuts.

Grizzlies Retire Jersey of Beloved Big Man

On Saturday night, the Memphis Grizzlies honored beloved big man Marc Gasol with a jersey retirement ceremony. Surrounded by friends, family, former teammates, fans, and members of the Grizzlies organization, the 39-year-old watched his familiar No.

Pau Gasol Emphasizes Need For Lakers To Get Healthy To Make Postseason Run

While it has been a disappointing season for the Los Angeles Lakers, there are still people who believe in this team, one of them being franchise legend Pau Gasol.

Pau Gasol Opens Up About Feelings After Vetoed Chris Paul Trade

Back in 2011, there was almost a blockbuster trade that would have changed so much about the Los Angeles Lakers and NBA as a whole. Of course everyone is now aware of the infamous three-way trade that would have sent Pau Gasol and Lamar Odom out and brought Chris Paul to the Lakers.

Pau Gasol: It’s Our Responsibility To Pass Down Lakers Legend Kobe Bryant’s Mindset To Younger Generation

Last week finally saw the unveiling of the first of three Kobe Bryant statues that will grace the plaza outside of Crypto.com Arena. The ceremony brought back many legends of the Los Angeles Lakers including Phil Jackson, Derek Fisher, Lamar Odom and Pau Gasol, amongst others.

Pau Gasol To Coach In Rising Stars Game During All-Star Weekend For Second Straight Year

The 2024 NBA All-Star weekend is approaching fast, beginning on Feb. 18 and taking place in Indianapolis, Indiana. With the All-Star Game returning to the Western Conference vs.

Pau Gasol recalls how special his Bulls tenure was: "I wanted to be challenged and I wanted to be in a winning situation"

In 2014, Pau Gasol was contemplating what would be the next stop of his NBA career. He proudly bled Purple and Gold as he served as one of the cornerstones of the Lakers for seven seasons and helped them to win back-to-back world championships in 2009 and 2010.

The best international NBA players of all time

The NBA has really developed into an international league in recent years. Here are the 20 best international players in NBA history.