David J. Rawlings, MD, is chief in the Division of Immunology, overseeing the immunodeficiency clinic at Seattle Childrens Hospital. He is also director of the Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies leading the immunology research programs at Seattle Childrens Research Institute. Dr. Rawlings is professor of pediatrics and adjunct professor in the Department of Immunology at the University of Washington School of Medicine.

He earned his MD with honors from the University of North Carolina School of Medicine and completed a residency and chief residency in pediatrics at the University of California, San Francisco. He was an intramural research fellow at the NIH and a senior fellow at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCLA. He completed specialty training in pediatric rheumatology and immunology at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and directed the pediatric rheumatology program at UCLA. Dr. Rawlings has been the recipient of many awards including election to the American Society for Clinical Investigation, Association of American Physicians, and the Childrens Hospital Guild Association Endowed Chair in Pediatric Immunology Research. Dr. Rawlings also co-directs the Northwest Genome Engineering Consortium, a research program funded as part of the NIH Roadmap for Medical Research and focused on developing enzymatic reagents and delivery methods for site specific gene repair in hematopoietic stem cells. His publications include more than 90 peer-reviewed papers and many invited reviews. His primary research interests include dysregulated B cell development and signaling leading to immunodeficiency, autoimmunity or lymphoid malignancies, and the development of gene therapy for primary immune deficiency diseases. His laboratory uses expertise in basic and clinical immunology, signal transduction and lymphocyte developmental biology to understand how altered signals can lead to immunologic disease, with the ultimate goal of developing translational therapies capable of specifically modulating these disorders. He is also actively involved in collaborative studies with the bone marrow transplant team to design and test of new protocols for stem cell transplant in non-malignant disorders. Dr. Rawlings is a member of multiple regional and national organizations, an NIH study section member, and ad hoc reviewer for various grant programs and immunology journals.