Sports car Ferrari opens new production plant

Ferrari has opened a new production plant. Here, the sports car manufacturer plans to build cars with all types of engines—including its first electric car.

Ferrari has opened a new production plant at its Maranello headquarters. The sports car manufacturer intends to build his first electric car, as well as vehicles with combustion engines and hybrid drives, on 42,500 square meters with over 300 employees.

In the so-called "e-Building", Ferrari builds cars with all types of drives under one roof. High-voltage batteries, electric axles, and electric motors are also being produced here. According to the news agency Reuters, production is set to begin in early 2025.

More than 3,000 solar panels on the roof of the new plant generate 1.3 megawatts of energy, according to Ferrari. By the end of the year, Ferrari plans to shut down the block heating power plant currently operating in Maranello and use only renewable energy. To air-condition the plant, Ferrari operates an electric heat pump powered by renewable energy.

Protection against the effects of heavy rain.

More than 60 percent of the energy used for battery and engine tests is recovered by Ferrari, according to the company, and is used for further processes. There is also a basin for processing rainwater. It holds 200 cubic meters. The automaker uses it to water the green areas of the building. According to Ferrari, there are 200 trees in the green area at the factory. In addition, a basin with a volume of 1,000 cubic meters serves as a retention basin in case of heavy rain.

Ferrari itself aims to certify the building as a "Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" at the platinum level. It is therefore considered a low-energy building. According to Ferrari, the energy efficiency in terms of emissions is -2.7 kt CO2—compared to a comparable building that is not electrified.

The E-Building is located on an existing industrial site.

The E-Building was created north of the Ferrari Campus. The sports car manufacturer purchased around 100,000 square meters of existing industrial space with 39 buildings and redeveloped the site. According to the company, no new space was used. This was supplemented by a better road network around the site and 1.5 kilometers (approx. 0.93 miles) of bike path.

Gallery

Gallery with 5 images

With a visual history like Ferrari's, the description of the building is not without well-sounding words: "It harmonizes with the landscape and surrounding buildings, while being recognizable by a facade with a custom-made, highly efficient 'skin'. The use of opalescent glass, interspersed with clear glass surfaces, reduces the visual bulk and mass of the building. Moreover, this design improves the distribution of natural light inside, while the facade design at night resembles a glowing lantern."

Environmentally friendly materials

The designers of the facade components designed them in line with the technical methodology "Design for Manufacturing and Assembly" according to Ferrari. This simplifies assembly and maintenance, is cheaper and reduces the environmental impact associated with the materials and processes used.

For the opening of the E-Building, the Italian President Sergio Matarella, Stellantis and Ferrari President John Elkann, Vice President Piero Ferrari, CEO Benedetto Vigna and representatives of the workforce were present.