Ferrari is an Italian car manufacturer founded by Enzo Ferrari. It produces luxury sports cars and racing cars, which participate in the top world competitions. It was founded in 1929 with the name Scuderia Ferrari (Ferrari Stable); in the first years of activity they did not manufacture their own cars, they prepared Alfa Romeo cars. The manufacturing factory was founded on 13 September 1939 in Modena, with the foundation of Auto Avio Costruzioni, when Enzo Ferrari decided to produce a sports car, the 815, which participated in the 1940 Mille Miglia. The factory moved to the province of Modena in 1943 and in 1947 the 125S was the first Ferrari car to exit from the historic gate in via Abetone Inferiore, Maranello. The first victory in a sports race came in Rome’s Grand Prix on 25 May 1947. Ten years later, the Auto Avio Costruzioni was renamed as Auto Costruzioni Ferrari, and in 1965 it became Ferrari SpA. To respond to the increasing market demands, in 1969, Enzo Ferrari sold 50% of his shares to the FIAT Group, a percentage that in 1988 rose to 90%.

Enzo Ferrari had always been a fan of car racing and he was convinced that sports competitions allowed the introduction of significant technological innovations, which were useful to improve the performance of road cars, too. Ferrari cars are renowned for their sophisticated style, due to the work of top designers. In 1950, the Scuderia Ferrari entered the Formula 1 World Championship - the first year the championship took place. The following year, they won the championship with driver José Froilan González. The first Drivers title came in 1952, won by Alberto Ascari. Ferrari became one of the most important stables, winning dozens of championships in the most prestigious car races. Together with the successes at the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the victories at the Mille Miglia, Ferrari is among the most-winning teams in Formula 1, as regards the number of titles for Constructors and Drivers. Some of the most famous Ferrari drivers are Juan Manuel Fangio, Niki Lauda, Gilles Villeneuve, Michael Schumacher, Fernando Alonso and Sebastian Vettel, among others.Ferrari cars are all over the world: the brand with the black prancing horse on a yellow background has become a legend, together with the red colour of their bodywork. In 2005 in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates, the Ferrari World theme park opened. In 2011 it was the time of the Ferrari Museum in Maranello, in the province of Modena, followed by the Shangai Museum, in China, in 2012. In 2013 and in 2014, Ferrari was considered as the most influential brand in the world.