Akram Khuzam was the Al Jazeera Channel’s former Moscow Bureau chief. He served as the Bureau Chief in Moscow for 9 years until he was replaced in a storm of controversy by Amro Abdel-Hamid in late September 2005.

Akram Khuzam was born on August 2, 1956, in Homs, Homs, Syria. His birth geographical coordinates are 34° 43’ 37” North latitude and 36° 43’ 24” East longitude. Akram Khuzam is currently 68 years old.

Astrologically, Akram Khuzam falls under the Sun sign of Leo, with Scorpio as his Ascendant, Gemini as his Moon sign, and Capricorn as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Leo Moon Gemini Ascendant Scorpio Midheaven Leo Mercury Leo Venus Gemini Mars Pisces Jupiter Virgo Saturn Scorpio Uranus Leo Neptune Libra Pluto Leo Ceres Aries Chiron Aquarius Eros Capricorn Hygiea Capricorn Juno Capricorn Pallas Pisces Vesta Scorpio Black Moon Lilith Capricorn North Node Sagittarius South Node Gemini Part of Fortune Virgo Vertex Gemini

Sunin Leo10° 4’ 4”

The Sun in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for assertiveness and charm. You are passionate and dynamic, using your strengths to […] Read more »

Moonin Gemini12° 32’ 28”

The Moon in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you lighthearted and compassionate. You are playful and use your creativity to help inspire others. You […] Read more »

Ascendantin Scorpio9° 37’ 24”

Scorpio Ascendant makes you eager to use your image and appearance to convey authority and power. You are determined to show your influence by speaking […] Read more »

Midheavenin Leo15° 13’ 54”

Leo Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you encouraging and enthusiastic. You are determined to succeed, and your optimistic and playful nature will help you […] Read more »

Mercuryin Leo24° 2’ 20”

You are determined to make your case and can be enthusiastic and uplifting. You are sincere and can be assertive and genuine. Your intellectual gifts […] Read more »

Venusin Gemini28° 47’ 29”

Gemini Venus in the Natal Chart attracts you to people who are friends first. You need a partner you can spend time with casually without […] Read more »

Marsin Pisces23° 11’ 16”

Pisces Mars in the Natal Chart makes you imaginative and dreamy. You are expressive and loving, showing your unique talents through the arts and humanities. […] Read more »

Jupiterin Virgo5° 0’ 22”

Virgo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you confident in your beliefs. You are a leader or spokesperson who helps others find security and health. […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio26° 10’ 19”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Leo3° 6’ 24”

Leo Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you a part of an excitable and enthusiastic generation. You are born among people with a Karmic mission […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra27° 48’ 9”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo27° 41’ 17”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Aries20° 28’ 19”

Ceres in Aries in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting and helping others. You are motivated and can […] Read more »

Chironin Aquarius8° 58’ 51”

Aquarius Chiron in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing and self-expression. You are true to your authentic desires and channel intense creative […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn25° 17’ 21”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Capricorn21° 3’ 56”

Hygiea in Capricorn in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for productivity and efficiency. You are eager to stick with healthy routines and can […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn9° 16’ 43”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces0° 15’ 58”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Scorpio8° 40’ 47”

Vesta in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and sensual. You are devoted to your sexual fantasies and eager to explore your fantasies. […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Capricorn26° 42’ 32”

Capricorn Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and independent in your career. Your business strategies are wild and based on your […] Read more »

North Nodein Sagittarius4° 44’ 31”

Sagittarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you determined and headstrong. You overcome being scattered and develop a passion for your mission. Your destiny […] Read more »

South Nodein Gemini4° 44’ 31”

Gemini South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you have the potential to lead others as a creative and independent thinker. You are comfortable with […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Virgo12° 5’ 48”

Virgo Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you a perfectionist with a desire to serve others. You have high standards, but this helps […] Read more »

Vertexin Gemini26° 37’ 59”

Gemini Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates a gift for communication, writing, and the arts. Unexpected changes help you gain recognition and accomplish your desires. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Eighth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eighth House Mars Fifth House Jupiter Tenth House Saturn First House Uranus Ninth House Neptune Twelfth House Pluto Tenth House Ceres Sixth House Chiron Third House Eros Third House Hygiea Third House Juno Second House Pallas Fourth House Vesta Twelfth House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node First House South Node Seventh House Part of Fortune Tenth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 26 major aspects, alongside 18 minor aspects, as well as 5 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Square Ascendant Neptune Sextile Pluto Mercury Quincunx Mars Venus Trine Neptune Venus Sextile Pluto Sun Sextile Moon Mercury Square Saturn Saturn Square Pluto Moon Quincunx Ascendant Moon Sextile Midheaven Venus Quincunx Saturn Mars Trine Saturn Mercury Sextile Neptune Mercury Conjunct Pluto Sun Conjunct Midheaven Jupiter Sextile Ascendant Mercury Sextile Venus Mars Quincunx Neptune Mars Quincunx Pluto Uranus Square Neptune Ascendant Square Midheaven Venus Square Mars Sun Conjunct Uranus Uranus Square Ascendant Jupiter Conjunct Pluto Saturn Trine Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Akram Khuzam’s life journey.

Sun Square Ascendantorb: 0°

The Sun square Ascendant in the Natal Chart creates friction between your identity and outer appearance. Your first impressions don’t align with your authentic self. […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Marsorb: 1°

When Mercury is quincunx Mars in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person is both intelligent and impulsive and that these two sides […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Plutoorb: 1°

Venus sextile Pluto in a chart typically indicates a person is highly passionate about expressing love and affection. They are devoted friends and partners, though […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Moonorb: 2°

The Sun’s sextile Moon in the Natal Chart makes you easygoing and friendly. You are optimistic and share your charming nature without overwhelming others. You […] Read more »

Mercury Square Saturnorb: 2°

Mercury square Saturn in a Natal Chart can be an incredibly challenging square to work through. Many lessons can be learned from this aspect, but […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Ascendantorb: 3°

The Moon quincunx the Ascendant in a chart creates a disconnect between the inner, emotional self and how someone portrays themselves and expresses their emotions. […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Saturnorb: 3°

Venus quincunx Saturn in a chart typically creates difficulty expressing emotions, especially feelings of love and affection for others. There is a strong desire for […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Neptuneorb: 4°

Mercury sextile Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person has high intuition and perception. They may seem psychic at times, though much of […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Plutoorb: 4°

Mercury conjunct Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you intense and magnetically charming. Your words have a powerful impact, and you can be seductive and […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 5°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 5°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Neptuneorb: 5°

Mars quincunx Neptune in a chart can create an overinflated sense of self. An inability to set realistic goals and follow reasonable boundaries causes someone […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Plutoorb: 5°

Mars quincunx Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person has a lot of ambition and a desire to be successful. They want to […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Uranus in your Natal Chart impacts your personality in unusual ways. You can be innovative and creative. You are known for being […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Plutoorb: 7°

Jupiter conjunct Pluto in a chart can create a lot of power and influence, but it isn’t always easy to deal with. There are many […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Square Part of Fortune Juno Sextile Ascendant Jupiter Square North Node Jupiter Square South Node Saturn Quincunx Vertex Sun Opposite Chiron Sun Quincunx Juno Sun Square Vesta Chiron Square Ascendant Vesta Conjunct Ascendant Venus Trine Pallas Saturn Sextile Eros Saturn Sextile Black Moon Lilith Neptune Square Black Moon Lilith Neptune Trine Vertex Pluto Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Pluto Sextile Vertex Uranus Trine North Node

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Akram Khuzam’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Opposite Chironorb: 1°

The Sun opposite Chiron in the Natal Chart makes you defensive about your pain. You compensate for your wounds by being bubbly and entertaining. You […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Square Vesta Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Vertex Ceres Square Hygiea Eros Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Juno Sextile Vesta

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Akram Khuzam’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Vertexorb: 0°

Black Moon Lilith quincunx the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you clash with people who try to help you. You don’t understand your destiny […] Read more »

Eros Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

Eros conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart aligns inner desires with primal instincts. It can give someone a need to break free from societal […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.