Listen to This Episode!

We are heading back to the Buckeye State for another President, this time in the big city of Cincinnati, for William Howard Taft. Perhaps the most reluctant of our Ohio Presidents, and the one for whom being president was definitely a secondary achievement.

Learn about what happened to Taft’s birthplace, as well as how his childhood and ambition were shaped by his upbringing.

William Howard Taft National Historic Site‘s official webpage.

Virtual Tour of the William Howard Taft birthplace.

Interiors of William Howard Taft birthplace from Cincinnati Refined.

Be sure to check out William Howard Taft’s “Visiting the Presidents” Episode from Season 2, “William Howard Taft and Washington, D.C.”!

From My August 2020 Visit!

From My July 2022 Visit!

William Howard Taft Birthplace: 2038 Auburn Ave, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Check Out Recent Episodes!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb – Visiting the Presidents

"Doctor, I am going. Perhaps it is best.” Our First President to die in a foreign country, John Tyler, 10th President of the United States.! Learn about his tumultuous post-Presidency; his illness and death; his funeral, burial, and commemorations, plus his controversial gravesite!Check out the website at VisitingthePresidents.com for visual aids, links, past episodes, recommended reading, and other information!Episode Page:Season 1&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Greenway Plantation" on his birthplace!Season 2&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Sherwood Forest" on his home!Support the Show.Visit the social media on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb 45:01

BONUS! How I Spent My Christmas Break with Presidential Travels 2024! 21:30

S3 E9 William Henry Harrison's Tomb 49:49

S3 E8 Martin Van Buren's Tomb 49:07

S3 E7 Andrew Jackson's Tomb 53:53

Recommended Reading for William Howard Taft

Pringle, Henry. The Life & Times of William Howard Taft (Volume 1).

Anderson, Judith Icke. William Howard Taft: An Intimate History.

Burton, David. William Howard Taft: Confident Peacemaker.

Share this:

Like Loading...

Related

Published by visitingthepresidents

I'm a Professor of History at Central Arizona College and someone who loves history and travel; my new blog will combine those interests! View more posts