1. William Howard Taft Essay William Howard Taft was Americas 27th president. William was born on September 15, 1857. He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio into the Taft family. Taft's dad, Alphonso Taft was a lawyer and public official; he was Presidents Grant's secretary of war. Taft's father was a lawyer. William's mother Louise Maria Taft was Alphonso's second wife. William had two half brothers, two brothers and one sister. His ancestry consists of English, Scotch–Irish. William attended a public school in Cincinnati. He went to Woodward High School and then Yale University in 1874. He was quite a smart boy; he graduated second in his whole class of Yale University. Williams's father also attended Yale and graduated in 1833 to later become a tutor at Yale. Taft, after ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Taft was opposed by William Jennings Bryan, running for a third time. Progressives were excited with Taft's election and conservatives were delighted to be rid of Roosevelt. The campaign which Taft won was more about personality than the issues. Taft won with 52% of the popular vote. Taft knew his techniques would be different from Roosevelt. Unlike Roosevelt Taft did not believe in stretching his presidential powers. In foreign affairs Taft pursued an active role in Latin America. Taft thought of the idea of a World court to deal with issues all over the world. Domestic issues included Taft shunning many progressive republicans by defending the Payne–Aldrich act which continued high tariff taxes. A trade agreement with Canada was pushed through congress with Taft's help, but unfortunately the Canadians rejected it. Taft had many accomplishments as president, but many were not recognized. One accomplishment of Taft's was 80 antitrust suits. During the Taft administration, more than twice the numbers of antitrust suits were instigated than under Roosevelt. Major victories were won against Standard Oil of New Jersey and the American Tobacco Company, the Sugar Trust and U.S. Steel. Roosevelt was generally supportive of these Taft actions, but not the move against Morgan and U.S. Steel; the former president criticized Taft by proclaiming that Taft was unable to see the difference between a good trust and a bad one. Also ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

5. William Howard Taft Achievements William Howard Taft was born on September 15, 1857 in Cincinnati, Ohio. He was born into a large family of five siblings – two of which were from his father's first marriage. Taft's father was deeply involved in politics by the time he was born, serving as both secretary of war and attorney general for President Ulysses S. Grant. Taft's' mother, Louisa Taft, was a powerful women's rights activist. Her adventurous character and intelligence swept the family along at a rapid pace. At a young age, Taft developed a fear of disappointing his accomplished parents. Taft's infamous fluctuating weight is often contributed to these family stresses and anxieties. Subsequently Taft threw himself into his studies. His eagerness to please makes it easy to ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Progressives, keen on attacking Taft for non–progressive ways, fail to credit him with cracking more "trust–busting" cases than Roosevelt. Taft created the eight–hour work day for government employees, and supported the Sixteenth Amendment by reinstating the income tax. He threw the first pitch of the baseball season opener, creating the presidential tradition. Helen planted the first saplings of the famous Japanese cherry trees with the Japanese ambassador's wife. More humorously, Taft owned the first presidential car and the largest bathtub. Overall, Taft as a person is remembered as simple, honest, and civilized. Taft's own view of the presidency is simply stated in this quote: "I don't remember that I was ever President." It was never Taft's goal to become President, but Taft carried through honorably. After he left office, former President Taft went back to his passion: law. He taught for over eight years as a professor of law at Yale University. When President Harding appointed Taft to be the ninth Chief Justice of the US in 1921, his dream was finally fulfilled. Taft served as chief justice until his death leaving behind him a legacy of hard work and an honorable service ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

9. Chief Executive : The President Of The United States... Chief Executive: As a chief executive the president has the power to Enforce laws, act as administrator of the federal bureaucracy, issue executive orders, and appoint and remove judges and other high ranking officials in the government. The first person to go was Chief of the United States Forest Service,Gifford Pinchot, due to a scandal involving U.S. Secretary of Interior, Richard Ballinger.Ballinger accused Roosevelt of using his power improperly by moving large tracts of public lands into reserve status.Interior employee Luis Galvis accused Ballinger and said that he had acted improperly by opening Alaskan coal fields to private mining interests.Galvis then looked to Pinchot for help. Everyone involved was later investigated and it was concluded that Ballinger 's actions were proper and that Pinchot would be dismissed for insubordination however Pinchot openly criticized Galvis and Taft indirectly he was fired immediately. Taft later hired Walter Fisher as the new secretary of interior. He also hired multiple justices of the supreme court such as Horace Harmon Lurton and Mahlon Pitney. Chief Diplomat: As chief Diplomat the president has the power to to make treaties, make executive agreements with foreign nations, and extend or withdraw diplomatic recognition to a nation. This job also requires you to have a foreign policy. Taft's foreign policy was based on the concept of Dollar Diplomacy. Dollar Diplomacy was to ensure the financial stability of a ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

13. Eisenhower Compare And Contrast Essay William Howard Taft / Dwight D. Eisenhower William Howard Taft and Dwight D. Eisenhower both contributed immensely on the development of where the United States stands today even though both presidents served the country with different morals on where the country needs to stand. The purpose of this report is to express the similarities and differences between William Howard Taft and Dwight D. Eisenhower during the course of their early life, public service, their presidency, post presidency, and their death and legacy. William Howard Taft was born in Cincinnati, Ohio on September 15, 1857. William's mother, Louisa Maria Torrey, and his father, Alphonso Taft, gave birth to William's five siblings. Many of William's relative predecessors were highly involved in law, including William's father. Alphonso served as Secretary of War and Attorney General under President Ulysses S. Grant, and also served as an ambassador to President Chester A. Arthur. Unlike Huck Finn in The ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... During the summer of 1921, Taft accuired his dream of sitting in the Supreme Court. He was appointed Chief Justice of the Supreme Court by President Warren G. Harding, becoming the only president to hold a seat on the Supreme Court (Whitehouse.gov staff 3). Bradsky 4 William Howard Taft died on March 8, 1930, in Washington D.C. He was the first president to own a car which inclined him to change the White House stables into garages. He was the first to take up the Oval Office, which was viable as of October 1909, the first to throw the ceremonial first pitch at a baseball game, and the first to have a hobby of playing golf. Aside with all of his "firsts", Taft was the last American president to have facial hair (Biography.com Editors ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

17. The Progressive Era Turning Points in America The Industrial Revolution is known as a time–period of great significance in America. Between the late 1700s and the early 1800s, this period not only changed America; it changed the world. This revolution began when people started to burn fossil fuels to use as sources of energy for their farming and daily tasks. Although in modern times fossil fuels seem to be decreasing quickly due to excessive use, society has become extremely dependent on them for gasoline and transportation, machine fuel, and the generation of electricity. The Industrial Revolution increased living standards immensely. The Progressive Era of 1900–1916, which is covered in chapter 18 of the text, Give Me Liberty, also marked a turning point for America regarding social change, political reform, and urban growth. It was during this period that Americans began to question their freedom. Overall, the Progressive Era showed expansion of political and economic freedom. Examples of this are as follows; "Americans demanded immigrants abandon their traditional cultures and become fully "Americanized"; political power was used to expand workers' rights; the women's suffrage movement was revived; efforts were made to improve democratic government by weakening authoritative powers and giving ordinary citizens more influence on legislation" (Give Me Liberty, page 683). In the beginning of the Progressive Era, a fire broke out at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company which drew much public ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

21. Goals of the Progressive Era Essay The term Progressivism implies a philosophy that promotes change/reform in the current political, economic, and social aspects of society while conservatism stresses gradual change in society but promotes tradition rather than change. The Progressive movement from 1901 to 1917 worked to improve aspects of society that grew out of problems which occurred during the Industrial Age. The goals of the "Progressives" were to stop monopolies, corruption, inefficiency and social injustices. Both progressive acts and amendments were being passed to deal with social ills, corruption in politics and corporate America. The period from 1901–1917 was more a victory for liberalism, mainly "modern liberalism", than a triumph of conservatism due to the ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Through busting the bad trusts Theodore attempted to stop monopolies from forming. This is an example of government intervention to remedy the effects of capitalism and a liberal practice. He also started the progressive or the "Bull Moose" party. Clearly, these reform movements as well as the busting of trusts move away from the traditional aspect of politics and promotes autonomy of the individual as well as strong government to remedy the defects of capitalism, both liberal ideals. Furthermore, economics also played a key role in describing whether liberalism or conservatism triumphed in this era. President William Howard Taft encouraged a policy known as "Dollar Diplomacy" where the United States invested in foreign countries in order to gain power. This dollar diplomacy would make money for as well strengthen the US. Later Taft went on to become more of a trust buster than Roosevelt. His most noteworthy bust was the Standard Oil Company, one of the largest trusts of the time, which was ordered to be broken into smaller companies in 1911. He then went on to attack another one of the largest trusts, The US Steel company which Roosevelt had allowed to survive since he deemed it as a good trust. Roosevelt became furious as Taft when he heard of this. Taft then passed the Payne–Aldrich bill which he unwisely named "the best bill that the Republican Party ever passed" which split the Republican Party into old school/more ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

25. Why Is William Howard Taft Considered A Failure Of President William Howard Taft was president in the 1910's and served as the 27th president of the United States until 1913. His tendency to contemplate every side of an issue served him well as chief justice but rendered him indecisive as President. In general his presidency was seen as a failure. William was later defeated for re–election by Woodrow Wilson in 1912. During Woodrow's presidency world war 1 started in 1914. He was for world peace and democracy. During the war he tried to keep America neutral but felt he had to declare war on Germany in 1917. After the war, he helped negotiate a peace treaty called 14 points. Woodrow expressed equality for all americans but in the end those words where just outright lies. He threw civil rights activist ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

29. The Progressive Era Of The Revolutionary Era Which of the primary features of grassroots Progressivism was the most essential to the continued growth and success of the reformist movement? Why? The root of the Progressive Era comes from the emergence of industrialism in the United States had created some terrible problems and they wanted to work together to change the U.S government. Therefore, address the problems that had come about from the Industrial Revolution. The progressive era was all about making advances in a better society, the feature of democracy during the progressive movement a lot of these progressive at local state levels started to focus on cleaning up the government, they believed that too many governments elected officials did the bidding of corporations rather ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... One of the strategies used by the progressive was mass organizations, the mass organization was used by groups who otherwise lacked political power. 21.2). How did the goals and reform agenda of the Progressive Era manifest themselves during the presidential administrations of Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson? Roosevelt 's going to embrace what he likes to call a square deal for the American people the square deal is going to embrace the three C 's Roosevelt 's going to want to control the corporations or have control of the corporations for his actions. Roosevelt 's going to be seen as a trust buster, this will be one of the first times that the government is going to use the Sherman Antitrust to effectively break up a monopoly. Roosevelt utilized the legislature as a vehicle to assist the general population intrigue, he saw the administration as a Bully pulpit to lecture thoughts to the general population and get the American individuals on his side. He was exceptionally occupied with both local and outside approach and he sets the political plan for the entire nation. His political program the square arrangement, intended to recognize great organizations that gave valuable items and administrations at reasonable costs from detestable partnerships that existed just to profit. Roosevelt was also a ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

33. Woodrow Wilson: The Presidential Election Of 1912 "The ear of the leader must ring with the voices of the people." – Woodrow Wilson The presidential election of 1912 was by far the most interesting election in history. It was the 32nd election of the United States and it was held on November 5, 1912. There were three major parties, the Democratic Party, the Republican Party, and the newly added Progressive Party. The three people running were, Woodrow Wilson as a Democrat, Theodore Roosevelt as the Progressive Party runner, and William Howard Taft as a Republican. The candidates were very competitive and really wanted to be the President of the United States. However, as we know there is only one winner, and that was very hard for all the candidates to understand. William Howard Taft ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Both of the men really wanted to win, but it turned out both of them didn't win. It was Woodrow Wilson, the democrat who won. Woodrow Wilson was the New Jersey Governor. The people thought that he was such a fantastic governor of New Jersey that he won the country over. He had experience in leading and making decisions. Even though Roosevelt also had experience for one term in the white house, the people wanted someone new; fresh face in the white house. (Mulder 7) Wilson won by a huge landslide. He won the country over which ensured that he won almost every state. Wilson took home 42 states, Roosevelt took six, and Taft only took two. This was a very surprising win similar to the recent election of 2016 with candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. Trump won by about 70 electoral votes and Wilson won in a landslide. Both the men won, but they also experienced a lot of conflict during the elections. In conclusion, the election of 1912 had a new party, interesting candidates, conflict between the two friends, relation to the 2016 election, and a huge landslide from Wilson. For these reasons, the election of 1912 is a very interesting election. "Nobody cares how much you know, until they know how much you care." –Theodore ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

37. American Imperialism At the time of American Imperialism, the world was also having their own kinds of Imperialism. European powers were taking spheres of influence in China. American policy changed between Presidents on issues like this. Three important Presidents during this Imperialism era are Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson. Each of these Presidents supported different kinds of diplomacies. American Foreign Policy was affected by the three major diplomacies, but the Big Stick Diplomacy had the biggest effect of Foreign Policy. Big Stick Diplomacy was based on the African proverb "speak softly and carry a big stick". This diplomacy meant that its interests was for the defense of the country. Theodore Roosevelt was the man who implemented this ideology into American Foreign Policy. This diplomacy had the biggest effect on Foreign Policy as it encouraged Imperialism for the defense of the country. This diplomacy called for the creation of a strong navy to be a world power. TR made this navy in the form of the Great White Fleet. The Great White Fleet toured around the world and showed the United States' naval power to discourage war or acts of aggression against the U.S. This diplomacy was also a deciding factor in the creation of the Panama Canal. The Panama Canal would help the defense of the country by allowing a much quicker response of the navy across the oceans and the gave the U.S. power over trade going through the canal. The Panama Canal needed to be built ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

41. Essay On The Progressive Era Part I: The United States in Latin America since the Spanish–American War of 1898 American historians commonly refer to the period between the 1890s and the end of the First World War as the Progressive Era (Cocks, Holloran, & Lessoff, 2009, vii). The Progressive Era is mostly associated with the presidencies of Republican heads of state Theodore Roosevelt (1901–09) and William Howard Taft (1909–1913) but also, with Democrat Woodrow Wilson (1913–21). It is generally remembered as a time of political reforms and of governmental desire to tackle social evils and inequality. The Progressive Era also embraced an important foreign policy agenda. Following the U.S. crushing victory in the Spanish–American War of 1898 under William McKinley, the United States began a new chapter in its relationship with Latin America. While some would see an inherent contradiction between Progressive values and the U.S. expansionism that arisen in Latin America (and in the Pacific), such paradox was not necessarily apparent to Washington. As argued by historian Lester D. Langley (2002), "despite their profound political differences, Roosevelt, Taft and Wilson agreed that the government played a powerful role in advancing hemispheric trade and in safeguarding U.S. investment" (p. xvii). Scientific racism, pre–conceived notions about Latin American and non– whites countries inferiority and the need to expand American financial enterprises made it easy for U.S. officials to reconcile ideals about ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

45. America 's New Sense Of World Power Abby Thompson Period 5 HOTA Paper After the years of the American Civil War, America embarked on a manifest destiny, 2.0. America decided they wanted to expand their territory across the waters. There were many approaches that were suggested by previous presidents, all with the same goal: World Dominance. The Big Stick idea was brought to light from President Theodore Roosevelt. The plan reflected many of the same impulses that were motivating domestic reforms that were taking place in America. He wanted to expand that reform to Cuba. He wanted to send a message that reflected to nations America 's new sense of world power. With this policy Presidents could exercise power unfettered and alone if he was overseas in an american territory. Roosevelt believed that a civilized (industrial) nation was to go in to uncivilized (non industrial) countries and have the right as well as the duty to intervene in the affairs of a "backward" nation to preserve order and stability, "for the sake of both nations" he said. Venezuela, for example, had a deteriorating economy that began to renege on debts of european bankers. In response, the Roosevelt Corollary (now the Monroe Doctrine), was put into play. the Roosevelt Corollary claimed the united States had not only the right to European intervention in the Western hemisphere but also to intervene itself in the domestic affairs of its neighbors if those neighbors proved unable to maintain order and national sovereignty on their own, such ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

49. The Reform Of Progressive Era Brought Not everyone welcomed the reforms that Progressive era brought. As people who believed in Constitution of United States is the best political charter yet created by mankind, "conserve" it and handed it down to the next generation as it is the best practice to guarantee the free exercise of the inherent rights of individual through strictly limiting the power of the government, Elihu Root, William Howard Taft and Henry Cabot Lodge, Sr., leading members of the Republican Party, faced challenging time during the Progressive era. They strove to "conserve" the core principles of the American constitutionalism from reformist of Progressivism. As people trust that our (Americans) liberties can remain secure only if government is so limited that it cannot infringe upon inherent rights, they resisted the Progressive ambitions for direct, unrestrained democracy and the resulting the attacks on the courts, representative government, and the traditional limits of the presidency. Three men, mentioned above, understood and accepted the necessity of Progressive reforms, and new Amendments, although many people saw them as a big boulder blocking their way to Progressive. In fact, they didn't try to The Sixteenth Amendment had widespread support, and they gave it theirs in part to end the bitter disputes about tariff schedules that had long divided the Republican Party. It is also worth noting that the first income tax passed under the Sixteenth Amendment had a top rate of 7 percent and ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

53. What Are The Similarities Between President Bill Clinton... President Bill Clinton and President William Taft Has anyone ever thought about our greatest presidents? Who was better than who? Why? Many have and one can find the easy answers, but this paper goes deep into the lives of two great presidents, President Bill Clinton and President William Taft. President Clinton and President Taft were very different presidents for the United States of America, however, President Clinton had a more accomplished presidency because he signed the violent crime control and law enforcement, he led the nation to a period of strong economic prosperity, and while he was in office, unemployment rates were the lowest in decades. Read into the depths of both of their lives and presidency, then anyone would agree. President Clinton's life was very exciting and interesting, especially his early life. He was born on August 19, 1946 in Hope, Arkansas. "His father died in a car crash 3 months before Bill was born. He was left in the care of his mother, Virginia Cassidy Blythe. To provide for Bill, his mother moved to New Orleans, Louisiana to study anesthesiology, while Bill stayed with his grandparents, Elridge and Edith Cassidy." (Biography.com, April 25, 2017.) His grandparents, while opposites in many different ways, did well raising President Clinton. They both loved ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Who would have thought that Bill Clinton had problems at home or was raised mostly by his grandparents? Again, President Clinton and President Taft were very different presidents for the United States of America, however, President Clinton had a more accomplished presidency because he signed the violent crime control and law enforcement, he led the nation to a period of strong economic prosperity, and while he was in office, unemployment rates were the lowest in decades. And remember, as Bill Clinton once said, "There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be fixed by what is right with ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

57. The Presidential Election Of 1912 The presidential election of 1912 was fought amongst four major candidates. Woodrow Wilson was brought up by his father, a Presbyterian minister, and his mother, daughter of a Presbyterian minister brought up Woodrow Wilson. He was president of Princeton University and governor of New Jersey. He represented the Democratic Party and had a combination of high morality and high–minded detachment. Eugene Debs was a well–known Socialist and union man for the Fireman's Brotherhood and American Railroad. He was never interested in the complex economic and political theories but in the dignity and humanity of the average worker. Another candidate was Theodore Roosevelt who revolted from the Republican Party and helped form and led the Progressive Party. He was brought up by a moderately wealthy family and ended up being governor of New York. Our final candidate was William Howard Taft who's "first love was always the law, and his highest aspiration to serve as chief justice, not as president" and a close friend to Theodore Roosevelt. Taft was also representing the Republican Party. One issue that would have been important to me if I were a voter in 1912 would have been Women's Suffrage. Many men and women believed that men were "fundamentally different" and that women should stay out of politics because its just a "man's world". Others argued that it was time for women to come out of the shadows of men and prove that they, too, can help their country and other residents with ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

61. Why The United States Has Only Two Major Political Parties Final Exam Essays Essay Prompt 1: Discuss why the United States has only two major political parties. The United States government is commonly referred to as a "Duopoly", which means that there are two established political parties, Democratic and Republic, and that these two parties share the vast majority of the political power in the country. This is because the United States follows a winner– takes–all voting system, utilizing a "single–member district plurality". The "single–member district" portion means that for each geographic area or district, there is only one elected official, and the "plurality" portion means that in United States elections, the representative or politician who receives the most number of votes, wins the given election, even if it's less than half the percentage of votes. According to Duverger's law, a Political Science principle, plurality voting procedures correlationally support the emergence of only two political parties, in contrast to a multiparty democracy. This is largely because there have only been two parties for so long, and these two parties have made it such a point to make their separation of ideals and beliefs blatant, so the vast majority of the voters have for the most part picked a definitive "side", so to speak, and have registered as a member of the corresponding political party, that caters the most to their individual ideals. Because of this, it has made it very hard for any smaller parties to gain enough support to ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

65. The Philosophies Of Theodore Roosevelt And William Howard... When thinking about the numerous, dynamic leaders that America has had over the course of the nation's history, it can become troublesome to fairly compare these respective heads of state. Though each American president has unquestionably left their own unique legacy from their time in office, when comparing leaders from similar times, certain consistencies can present themselves. While the Presidency is of course beholden to constructs of political normativity subjective to the era they presided in, by choosing two POTUS' from the same era, we can more adequately synthesize comparable actions and philosophies between the two. To this end, we will analyze the terms of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft, cutting through narratives of their tenures to truly delineate their comparability. Through a comprehensive analysis of these two leaders on the subjects of foreign policy, we begin to parse out many similarities and differences between these two early 20th century leaders. First, we will look at aspects of Theodore Roosevelt's presidency as they pertain to issues of foreign policy and diplomacy. Famous for his "cowboy demeanor" and unwavering bravado, Roosevelt was once quoted talking about his diplomatic philosophy, noting that one should "speak softly and carry a big stick". (Morrissey) This statement came to typify what pundits referred to as his "big stick ideology", or a foreign policy founded in political realism, that operated on the notion of "peaceful" ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

69. The Revolution Of The United States From 1900 to 1920 a political group called the progressives demanded change and more government involvement after the gilded age where there barely was any action taken by the government. While the progressives were becoming more and more popular among politicians and people they brought reform and change to the United States. The progressives brought change through industries, social movements and the economy. The progressives, (as their name suggests) brought progress to America that forever changed the United States for the better. Without the progressives Americas change to more government involvement for the time being would never have happened thus showing the American people what is truly "American". As the industrial age was booming and factories were abundant among the United States, progressives thought about what was unfair in America and came to the realization that something had to be done about factory conditions. The idea of unfair labor treatments was brought to the courts many times but the most significant was Hammer v. Dagenhart (Document G). The supreme court struck down the Keating– Owen child labor law which reduced child labor in factories for kids who were under 14. Now instead of being born into a job that your parents have or just taking the quickest job you can to get money, kids were more likely to go to school and diversify their intelligence (document C). Progressives were also bringing the awful factory conditions of the time to light. ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

73. Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson: Progressive Presidents Progress is not something that comes very quickly. It is a gradual process that takes time, in the interest of our country and the Progressive Era, more than a decade. The presidents of this time, Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson, were like chefs developing a recipe for the betterment of the United States. Every act that was passed, each decision that was made, was a trial or taste–test of the constantly changing recipe for the country. If something angered citizens or drew criticism, the president went back to his office, his kitchen, and was ready to make more changes. Where he left off in the progressive recipe, the next chef took over. He would analyze what had been done, identified his plan of action, and then set to work by either making ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... William Howard Taft spent the majority of his presidency concerning himself with foreign policy and proving to be even more progressive than Roosevelt in terms of busting trusts. Taft was very interested in involving American politics to areas abroad, a foreign policy critics dubbed "dollar diplomacy". Along with the help of Washington, Taft encouraged Wall Street bankers to invest their superfluous money into foreign areas of strategic concern to the United States, such as the Far East and regions critical to the Panama Canal. Their investments would supposedly "strengthen American defenses and foreign policies, while bringing further prosperity to their homeland– and to themselves" (683). Taft's "dollar diplomacy", although not coinciding with the domestic progressivism norm exemplified by Roosevelt, was progressive nonetheless as it replaced the necessity of the big stick. Not only interested with matters abroad, Taft focused his eyes on the issue that made his predecessor famous, busting the trusts. In all, Taft brought 90 suits against the trusts during his four year term, largely outnumbering Roosevelt's 44 suit total in seven and half years. Taft's most famous and publicized antitrust suit was against the U.S. Steel Corporation. This suit also brought the most criticism, surprisingly by Taft's "creator", Theodore Roosevelt. Under Taft's control, trusts were ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

77. President Taft Dbq Although William Howard Taft had been President Theodore Roosevelt's handpicked successor, Taft soon proved to be incompetent in many foreign and domestic affairs. To many Americans, it quickly became evident that Taft did not share the same political viewpoints as his successor, Roosevelt, had. Compared to Roosevelt, Taft was not as energetic and ardent; his policies caused much controversy from the Republican Party and Roosevelt himself (Brinkley 606). In addition to Taft's passivity towards Congress, his administration was significantly comprised of members who did not stress reform. This would lead to poor decisions regarding Progressive Era reforms (Bailey 697). Even though President Taft had a few international accomplishments and domestic achievements dealing with trust busting, his ineptitude in office led to the splitting of the Republican Party and the outrage of former president Roosevelt. President Taft's foreign policy increased political interests internationally, and they quelled revolts in the Caribbean. "Dollar diplomacy", which referred to his approach to foreign affairs, established financial security in the Far East using the money earned by bankers on Wall Street. This would "strengthen America's defenses and foreign policies,", and it would prevent other European countries from interfering in South American affairs (Bailey 698). All in all, "dollar diplomacy" was Taft's generally successful way of secure foreign markets using American investments. ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

81. William Howard Taft Dbq William Howard Taft once said "Action for which I become responsible, or for which my administration becomes responsible, shall be within the law" (Brainyquote.com). Taft was the first U.S President to throw a first pitch at a baseball game. President Taft was easy going even with the nickname of Big Lub (because of his weight). After his Presidency, Taft lost about 70 pounds within a few years of leaving the White House. Taft attended Yale university and came in second in his class. In college, he stayed away from sports to focus on his studies. Taft was the twenty–seventh president of the United states of America. He served from 1909–1913. In 1921 President Warren Harding made Taft Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court, ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... When Roosevelt returned he gave speeches that undermined the work Taft had done. Roosevelt once again became involved in politics but continued to attack his successors administration. He received many letters from people wanting him to run for president. Roosevelt had decided to run for president once again. William Taft made his nomination acceptance speech on August 1, but had a hard time financing the campaign and most people knew he couldn't win. Governor Woodrow Wilson was the Democratic nominee. Woodrow Wilson was to become the next President of the United ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

85. The 1912 Crucial Election The year 1912 brought one of the most important presidential elections in United States history. Four nominees confronted one another during this election: Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson, Progressive leader Theodore "Teddy" Roosevelt, Republican William Howard Taft, and Socialist Eugene Debs. This election also proved to be crucial as it brought forth new considerable and "substantive" discussions concerning the Union and its future. These issues included, whether government should expand democracy, apply more control over businesses, and how solve the labor conflict, among others. Each of the four major presidential candidates took a position on these issues, either choosing to support or oppose such changes. The presidential ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... The final nominee in the 1912 Election was the Socialist Eugene Debs. Debs as a Socialist deeply cared for the needs of the worker and pledged to take the necessary steps to strengthen America's working class. As a former Conventional Trade Unionist, Debs knew that reform was needed in order to change conditions for working Americans. "True socialists" however, differentiated themselves from "unionists" how sought for more industrial action than political action. Even though Roosevelt, Wilson and Debs seemed to express support to worker rights; each had his own position on the issue. Each advocated for different measures that would help the individual worker's social needs as well financial needs. Taft, however, did not fully support the worker's rights. The issue of direct democracy was another important question during the election of 1912. Direct democracy concerned whether to expand the United States' rule of democracy. Under the established democratic system, the people had very little active participation. However, the newly found ideals of direct democracy called for the "people to rule," thereby increasing their role in the American government. Direct democracy included many ideas, but among the most important were the ideas of initiative, referendum, and recall. The initiative allowed a group of voters who obtained a certain number of signatures on a ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

89. William Howard Taft: The Reluctant President Essay The 27th President of the United States was born William Howard Taft on the 15th day of September, in the year 1857 to Alphonso and Louise Taft, of Cincinnati, Ohio. As he was the first of their sons to survive past infancy, his mother did not mind that he had outgrown all the baby clothes she had sown for him when he was only seven weeks old. Due to his large size he was given the nickname of "Lub" or "Lubber" which only fueled his desire to succeed in school and on the playing field. He later became to be known as the largest president in the history of United States, weighing in at 320 pounds. Although it was rumored that due to his large size he actually got stuck in the White House bath tub. It took six aides and a gallon of butter to ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... They both shared a love for reading and books and soon fell in love but there was no talk of marriage. Then in 1882 Williams' father was appointed the judge ambassador to Austria–Hungary and William was appointed the collector of Revenue for the first district in Ohio, thus his political career seemed to be off to a good start. That is until he was asked by the Republican Party to do something unethical and he refused. He resigned in December and took a position at a law firm that was headed by a former associate of his dad. The following summer he visited his parents in Austria and traveled about Europe but he soon became anxious to return home as he could not stop thinking about Nellie. They courted for a year before William finally asked her to marry him. They were married on June 19th in 1886. They honeymooned in France, England, and Scotland before settling down in Cincinnati, OH. Nellie became the driving force behind William, pushing him into politics. In 1900 president McKinley promised him a position as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court if he would consent to be the civil governor of the Philippines. He took the position organizing civil government and proved to be an excellent executive and administrator. During service to the Philippines he was offered two positions as Chief Justice which he turned down in order to ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

93. Was Theodore Roosevelt A Productive President? Theodore "Teddy" Roosevelt was the president of the United States during the time of 1901 to 1909. He was vice president during William McKinley's term. When McKinley was assassinated in 1901 by Leon Czolgosz, Roosevelt had to step up. He was a Republican, but his foundations were more progressive. This plays a part in why he did not get the Republican nomination in the year 1912. He lost the nomination to his handpicked successor Taft, who had run as president in the previous term (1909–1913). When he did not get the nomination, Roosevelt decided to run as a third party which he called the bull moose party. By doing this, it splits the Republican vote between Taft and Roosevelt. This has a large effect on the election, causing the Democrat Woodrow Wilson to become president. Woodrow Wilson was president from 1913 to 1921 with World War I happening in 1914. Wilson declared neutrality. Because of this, some people ask, "What if Theodore Roosevelt has been president during World War I?" In the article, "The Election of Theodore Roosevelt, 1912" by John Lukacs, he writes about an alternate universe of sorts where Roosevelt wins the Republican nomination and the presidential election of 1912. In this report, the following questions will be answered: Was Roosevelt a productive president? How do Roosevelt and Taft compare and contrast, as well as Roosevelt and Wilson? Would Roosevelt be an efficient president if he won the 1912 election? My thoughts are weaved throughout the ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

97. Was William Taft an Effective President? A fat guy stuck in a bathtub? Or an effective President? Though President Taft was mostly thought of as the man who had to be lifted out of the bathtub, in reality, he was much more than that. President William Howard Taft was the 27th President of the United States. But, was he any good? Although Taft is not a famous president (aside from the only thing that people actually remember him for), he did make some very important contributions to our country. Persistence and intelligence are two of the most important qualities of an effective president. President Taft had both of these qualities, and that is part of what made him an effective president. Even before his presidency, Taft was a lawman. His first venture into politics and law was becoming Assistant Prosecutor of Hamilton County, Ohio. In 1887, he was appointed judge of the superior court in Cincinnati. At age 32, he became the Solicitor General of President Benjamin Harrison. He was the youngest person to receive this position at the time. From 1901 to 1904, he was the first civilian Governor–General of the Philippines. The last position he held before his he became president was Roosevelt's secretary of war in 1904. All of these positions gave him political experience, which prepared him for presidency. Taft was extremely intelligent. As a young adult, he attended Yale College. He graduated 2nd in his class and received a bachelor's degree in law. He was also highly educated in politics. His proposals as ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

101. The Gilded Age Preceding the Progressive Era, the Gilded Age showcased a vast number of changes in the industrial, economic, political, and social aspects of developing America. These changes, such as the rise of competitive industries, the continuous diverge of social and economic classes, and government authority, were issues carried into the early 20th century. Resulting from these issues were those that emerged, causing a reform movement, the Progressive Era. These leaders included Woodrow Wilson, incumbent President William Howard Taft, Theodore Roosevelt, and Eugene V. Debs. These candidates in the Presidential Election of 1912 campaigns were dominated by the reform efforts. While the candidates had the similar desire to reform the nation, their plans contrasted in the aspects of the limitations of the government, control over businesses in accordance with the economy, and civil rights and service for the people. Aforementioned, the candidates sought to reform the government in the manner of how it controlled America, nationally and locally. Prior to the developed political ideas of the candidates, America was flourishing in industrialization with new industries in the Gilded Age. Major business tycoons and their corporations such as John D. Rockefeller and the Standard Oil Company became so powerful that they ultimately began to control the government. This was also because the government decided to regulate businesses in a "laissez–faire" manner, which means the government would ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

105. How FDR Transformed Progressive Ideas The progressive party promotes quite an aspiration, engaging political, social, and economic reform. Ted Roosevelt and his supporters triggered a debate about the future of America. Milkis shows this political battle and revisits a time when a party was swallowed by it's leader's goals. These goals were kept and then emerged mass democracy. Milkis shows the members of the Progressive Party as activists led by TR who dedicate their program to direct democracy, civic duty and rights. Men who want to fight for civil rights and antitrust policy through a created concept that would succeed in ending their long term goals for the political future of America. 1912, A "critical year" as Milkis calls it. In this election we have an ex–president who returns from retirement and goes up against the successor in his own party. New tactics were used as there were "technological breakthroughs," "dynamic growth," "new sources of capital," and much more(pg1). TR leads his followers out of the party and creates the progressive party which "remains the most important third party on the American political landscape(pg2)." near the end of the election, TR gives a speech and at its end he gets shot. Roosevelt was very unconcerned with direct democracy but whenever he was put up against Howard Taft he would dedicate much effort from his enthusiasm, created through an entanglement of personal need and a political motive. His campaign superseded the idea of political ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

109. William Howard Taft : The President Of The United States William Howard Taft served one term as the 27th President of the United States from 1909 until 1913. While he is perhaps best known for his plump figure and the embarrassing bathtub incident he endured while in the White House, Taft is also the only person in United States history to have held both the offices of President and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Prior to securing the Republican Party's presidential nomination and subsequently winning election in 1908, Taft served in various judicial and executive roles in the government, including as a judge on the U.S. Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, civilian governor of the Philippines, and Secretary of War under President Theodore Roosevelt. While Taft came into office hoping to pass audacious legislative reform, his reluctant approach to pushing his agenda through Congress, as well as his below–average political acumen, significantly hindered his capacity to affect meaningful change throughout his time in office. Secretary Taft ran in the presidential election of 1908 as President Theodore Roosevelt's handpicked successor and protector of his legacy. Due to the tremendous popularity and support of President Roosevelt and because he had significant control and influence over the Republican National Committee power structure, Taft did not face any legitimate opposition in the primaries, with the exception of President Roosevelt, who had pledged not to seek reelection despite a relatively easy path to reelection, given ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

113. Objectives Of The Progressive Era LESSON 17 – Progressive Era Objectives: Identify and understand how reform movements changed society Identify and understand how women influenced change Identify and understand the impact of Presidential policy upon America Change comes to the United States In the beginning of the 20th Century, a movement called Progressivism began to improve American society. The Progressivism movement had four major goals: A) To protect social welfare by fixing the various problems of city life. Organizations were created to forward this goal, such as the YMCA that built libraries and public gyms and the Salvation Army provided food for the poor and nursery care for the young. B) To push for moral reform, with a special emphasis on ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Woman were largely responsible for cooking, cleaning, sewing and raising the children as well as assisting with the farm crops and animals. In cities, many women who lacked higher education joined the workforce by becoming domestic servants and maids. African–American and unmarried immigrant women often used this path to employment. In 1900, a quarter of women who worked outside the home worked in industry, with almost half working in the garment industry. The growth of business demanded workers to fill in the expanding clerical, stenograph and office work. To meet this demand, more women sought further education to train for these jobs. Women in the middle and upper classes created and joined groups dedicated to promoting culture and education. Due to their efforts, the number of women's colleges increased and many of the new college graduates joined and aided the various reform movements. These reform movements were focused on increasing safety in the workplace and at home. The National Association of Colored Women was created to help African Americans by providing family based support opportunities such as nurseries, reading rooms and kindergartens. Another important cause of woman Reformers was the suffrage movement, which promoted the right to vote for woman. This effort was headed by the National American Woman Suffrage Association, and by their efforts, Wyoming became the first state to grant women ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

117. A Brief Biography Of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th president of the United States, was born on October 27, 1858 in New York City, New York. In 1880, Roosevelt married Alice Hathaway Lee, and had one daughter with her. His mother and Alice died on the same day, Alice died from Bright's disease two days after the birth of their only child. After Alice's death, Roosevelt married Edith Kermit Carow, and begot five children with her. In 1889, Roosevelt became the Governor of New York, and later on was chosen as McKinley's vice president because Thomas C. Platt conspired with national party boss Mark Hanna to keep him from running for a second term in the governor's office. After McKinley being assassinated, Roosevelt was sworn as the 26th president at the age of 42, ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

121. History: Theodore Roosevelt And William Howard Taft In history Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft made a major impact. Theodore Roosevelt made a huge impact when he went into office and accomplished so many things while he was president as well as William Howard Taft. They both had their own ideas of reformation, their interpretation of progressive, and their accomplishments in the presidency. Both the presidents had different but similar ideas of reform. They both supported each other with the idea of a "Square Deal" to help the people as well as to break up the monopolies but the difference was that Roosevelt supported labor unions and Taft was less Progressive. Theodore Roosevelt served as the 26th president from 1933 until his death in 1945. He entered the White House and the progressive ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

125. Theodore Roosevelt and Progressivism Essay Theodore Roosevelt, like Jackson and Lincoln, believed that the president had the duty of initiating and leading Congress to implement a policy of social and economic benefit to the people at large. As he himself put it, he found the presidency &quot;a bully pulpit.&quot; Roosevelt's policies, designed to secure a greater measure of social justice in the United States, were outlined in his first message to Congress, on December 3, 1901. Roosevelt's address included demands for federal supervision and regulation of all interstate corporations; for amendment of the Interstate Commerce Act to prohibit railroads from giving special rates to shippers; for the conservation of natural resources; for federal appropriations for irrigation of ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Among the new laws were the Elkins Act (1903), aimed at eliminating the discriminatory practice of secret rebates given by various railroads to certain shippers, and the Hepburn Act (1906), aimed at strengthening the Interstate Commerce Commission in its authority over railroads and other public carriers. During his administrations (after completing McKinley's administration, Roosevelt was elected in 1904), the Department of Justice instituted 43 suits against the trusts and won several important judicial decisions, including one ordering the dissolution of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey as a holding company with a monopoly on oil refining. Other domestic reforms in Roosevelt's program, which he called the Square Deal, were his expansion of forest reserves and national parks; the appointment of the National Conservation Commission in 1908 to promote further conservation; and the passage of the Meat Inspection Act. Also passed was the first of the Pure Food and Drug Acts, which followed a federal investigation of packing–house conditions prompted by revelations made in Upton Sinclair's novel The Jungle (1906) (see Sinclair, Upton Beall). Roosevelt gained worldwide importance through his dramatic speeches and actions as president, his inauguration of the building of the Panama Canal, and his activities in ending the Russo–Japanese War (1904–1905). Roosevelt declined to run for reelection in 1908 and the ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

129. Taft Dbq Throughout the beginning of the 1900's, Roosevelt became immensely favored and adored by the majority of United States citizens. After Theodore Roosevelt served his terms of presidency from 1901–1909, he declared that he would not accept a renomination for another term. With being in control of the Republican Party and also becoming quite favored, Roosevelt was able to name who his successor would be. With having being so popular and trustworthy, Roosevelt commanded the Republican Party to stay loyal to his ways by nominating and supporting Roosevelt's secretary of war, William Howard Taft. When Roosevelt left office, he stated, "I have the profound satisfaction of knowing that he [Taft] will do all in his power to further every one of the great causes for which I have fought and that he will persevere in every one of the great governmental policies in which I most firmly believe" (6). However, when election time came around, many Americans were not impressed by the actions that Taft had taken and the way he carried himself. Many Americans were against Taft and believed that he was not competent enough to take on the job. When Taft ran for his second term in 1912, his opposers, betrayal of the Republican Party and his seemingly lack of political knowledge and training cost him the election. Mid–way through his first term, Taft had changed his motives and wanted to remove so called "disloyal" members from the Republican party. Around this time, Taft was also in a ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

133. Theodore Roosevelt Was The Best Man I Ever Know. Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt was fond of quoting an old African proverb that admonished people to "speak softly and carry a big stick." Ironically, it was his thunderous voice that made him president, earned him enemies and brought him friends. That voice also made him the bulwark of the Progressive Movement. On October 27, 1858, Roosevelt was born on East Twentieth Street in New York City to Martha Bulloch, who he described as a "sweet gracious, beautiful Southern Woman" and Theodore Roosevelt Sr., who he wrote was "the best man I ever knew." Roosevelt was born into wealth, with his father a henchman of the family firm, Roosevelt & Son. Roosevelt's grandfather, Cornelius Van Schaack Roosevelt, had earlier redesigned ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... After that conversation, Roosevelt "fully intended to make science my life work." He had not considered becoming a politician. Rather, he was hard at work on a book he would later publish on the War of 1812. As time progressed, Roosevelt became bored with laboratory science. When he left Harvard, he studied law "but the law books ... seemed to me to be against justice." Almost immediately, Roosevelt became interested in politics. He joined the Republican Party in 1880 when the party was treated like a "private corporation." Roosevelt had to muster his strength to "break into the organization." And break into the party he did. He was elected as the youngest legislator in fall of 1881 and reelected the next two years. Roosevelt would write, "three years' experience convinced me, in the first place, that there were a great many thoroughly corrupt men in the Legislature, perhaps a third of the whole number." He also was angered by the courts and would write, "I grew to realize that all that Abraham Lincoln had said about the Dred Scott decision could be said with equal truth and justice about the numerous decisions which in our own day were erected as bars across the path of social reform, and which brought to naught so much of the ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

137. William Howard Taft Influence On Big Fat William Howard Taft was the United States, 27th President. He held office from 1909 to 1913. He is the only person to ever serve as a president, as well as a US Chief Justice. During his college years, he adopted the nickname "Big Lub," due to his large size. His weight would eventually lead to adulthood obesity, which would result in him developing sleep apnea and high blood pressure. These healthy conditions eventually led to his death on March 8th, 1930. Obesity happens when calorie becomes more than the calories burned by exercise and daily physical activity on a daily basis. William Taft stood 6 feet tall, weighing over 300 pounds once in his life. His profuse appetite led to morbid obesity. According to the CDC, weight that is higher than what is considered as a healthy weight for a given height is described as overweight or obese. Obesity is a scary condition, being that is a gateway for many other ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... President Taft suffered from severe obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep apnea is a common disorder that's causes your breathing to stop or become very shallow. Taft's airways collapsed or became blocked during his sleep, which would result in a snort or choking to regain breaths. Due to this, he could sleep, but was incapable of getting full rest. Bad eating habits, being male, and small airways are all factors that contribute to sleep apnea. Many cases of sleep apnea are treatable with weight loss, surgery, adjusted sleep position, and the avoidance of sedatives. According to Kingsman P Strohl, MD, "people with severe obstructive sleep apnea(OSA) are more than twice as likely to be involved in a motor vehicle accident as people without these conditions ." Left untreated, sleep apnea can ultimately lead to cardiovascular conditions, like high blood pressure, heart attack, stroke, and abnormal heart rhythm. These underlying conditions would eventually lead President William Taft to his sudden ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

141. Theodore Roosevelt 's The Progressive Era Essay Theodore Roosevelt's presidency marked the beginning of a very liberal period in American history. This new 'Progressive Era' was mobilized largely by the middle class as an attempt to put an end to the problems created by the period of excess that was the Gilded Age. Believing that big business was ruining democracy, and assuming a moral obligation to shield the poor and downtrodden from corrupt capitalists, the Progressives commenced an era of sweeping reforms. From the outset, the Progressive movement targeted domestic issues such as political machines, monopolies, and factory regulations. While President Roosevelt–the face of the Progressive movement–frequently became entangled in global affairs during his time in the Whitehouse, the focus of Progressives during this stage remained primarily on domestic concerns. It was not until after Roosevelt's presidency that the Progressives followed their patron's lead, becoming active participants in foreign affairs. Theodore Roosevelt's exit from the spotlight and subsequent return to politics in 1912 caused the Progressives to split from the Republican Party, and when war broke out in Europe in 1914, Progressives were then divided amongst themselves regarding how the Great War should be handled from afar. As foreign policy issues became a larger concern than domestic issues, the Progressives shifted their attention away from home and toward foreign policy. As his second term concluded, Theodore Roosevelt handpicked William ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

145. Political And Political Ideology Of William Howard Taft Background & Political Ideology William Howard Taft was the son of Alphonso Taft, the U.S. attorney General and then Secretary of War in President Ulysses S. Grant's Cabinet, ambassador under Chester A. Arthur, and politically active Progressive Republican. William Taft went to Yale and was a member of the Skulls and Bones Society, an elite club known to host many powerful and influential members of society that his father was an original member of, many of them businessmen or future businessmen. He married Helen "Nellie" Herron, daughter of a judge and Republican Party activist. He became friends with Theodore Roosevelt. It's safe to say these direct connections to politically active Republicans influenced Taft to be a Conservative–leaning Progressive Republican. Taft's own ambitions to be Chief Justice and work as a judge also gave him temperance and value literal interpretations of laws and the constitution. When Taft was appointed as governor general of the Philippines and then later served as provisional governor in Cuba, he came to feel sympathy for their problems but also came to believe that East Asian and Latin/Central American societies were immature and required long–term U.S. involvement. Political Ideology– Campaign and Election Taft was nominated by the Republican Convention as Teddy Roosevelt's successor. He held similar positions to Roosevelt such as laborers being allowed to organize and his policies on trust–busting. He focused on economic issues and ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

149. Theodore Roosevelt And The Progressive Party In 1912, the Progressive Party formed to support Theodore Roosevelt in his attempt to be elected for a third presidential term (O 'Toole par. 7, 11). The party was formed after the Republican National Convention repudiated the nomination of Roosevelt (Bardes, Shelley, and Schmidt 251). Furthermore, this resulted in Roosevelt splitting the Republican vote between him and William Howard Taft and gave Democrat Woodrow Wilson an advantage (Bardes, Shelley, and Schmidt). The Progressive Party took a platform that was new and innovative for the time period in which it began. To understand the the start of the Progressive Party one must acknowledge its political platform, the outcome of the presidential election between Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson, and the outcome and end of the Progressive Party. After failing to receive the nomination, those who supported Roosevelt had to develop another strategy for his campaign. To run as a third party member, Roosevelt would continue to require financial support. James Chance, professor of government and public law at Bard College, claims that, "Roosevelt was assured that he would have the financial backing he would need . . . when his financial supporters, George Perkins and millionaire publisher Frank Munsey, met with him . . . At that moment the Progressive Party was born" (120–121). Following this meeting, all that was left before the Progressive Party would have a nominee was for Roosevelt to accept. He responded saying, "I shall accept ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...