Sentrigo, Inc., a provider of database security software, today announced that Sentrigo Hedgehog Enterprise and vPatch are now available for installation on GoGrid's cloud computing infrastructure for database audit, protection and breach prevention. By leveraging Sentrigo's database compliance and security solutions, organizations can implement cloud computing on GoGrid while addressing concerns regarding protection of sensitive data as well as issues related to compliance audits for key industry regulations.

As a greater number of applications move to cloud computing, organizations that manage their databases in virtual environments increase their risk of exposing highly-sensitive data to a broad base of internal and external attacks. Sentrigo's host-based software approach monitors and audits data access from the inside of each database virtual server, enabling efficient operation in distributed, virtualized environments.

"If your application stores any kind of sensitive information, such as credit card details, social security numbers, or other PII, it is likely subject to some kind of compliance requirements, for example PCI DSS or HIPAA," Andy Feit, VP of Marketing at Sentrigo, tells 5 Minute Briefing. "It's hard enough to demonstrate to auditors that your data is subject to proper controls when it's sitting on a machine in your own network, but in the cloud you aren't even sure where it is, never mind who from the cloud provider might have access."

Hedgehog provides canned compliance templates for SOX, PCI-DSS, SAS70, HIPAA, and more, that allow the GoGrid users to quickly and easily satisfy regulatory requirements. As part of the combined solution, the monitoring and management console can be hosted either in the GoGrid cloud, or behind the customer's firewall, where compliance and security events or audit reports can be sent securely over the WAN regardless of the physical location of the virtual infrastructure.

Sentrigo will be partnering with additional cloud providers in the future, notes Feit. "Our technology is a great fit for cloud architectures and can be installed along with database software on various platforms, including EC2 or Rackspace platforms. Since Hedgehog is a software-only solution, it is a quick, simple process; however, the partnership with GoGrid is the first to package a pre-built image for a cloud computing platform that is this easy to implement."