PRESS RELEASE

Santa Clara, CA (PRWEB) November 2, 2010

Sentrigo, Inc., the innovator in database security software, today announced that Sentrigo Hedgehog Enterprise and vPatch solutions are now available on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) for database audit, protection and breach prevention. Sentrigo's database compliance and security solutions allow organizations to more easily run applications subject to PCI-DSS, HIPAA, SEC regulations and more on Amazon EC2.

Sentrigo's Hedgehog Enterprise is a scalable database activity monitoring and intrusion prevention solution that provides full visibility into all database activity, including external threats from hackers, as well as local privileged access. Sentrigo's vPatch protects unpatched databases against known vulnerabilities and exploits using unique virtual patching capabilities.

Built on a distributed model using autonomous sensors to monitor databases wherever they are hosted, Hedgehog is ideally suited for cloud computing environments. By packaging Hedgehog into an easy-to-install Amazon Machine Image (AMI), the Sentrigo solutions can be installed on existing Amazon EC2 instances in minutes. Wizard-driven templates for key industry regulations, as well as out-of-the-box audit reports, quickly enable organizations hosting databases to demonstrate compliance.

"As more organizations move toward cloud computing to take advantage of lower costs of computing, more flexibility, greater reliability and availability, and almost unlimited scalability, those that manage their databases in the cloud must also ensure they are compliant with various regulations," said Andy Feit, vice president of marketing for Sentrigo. "Only Sentrigo's Hedgehog Enterprise monitors and audits data access from the inside of each database virtual server, allowing efficient operation in distributed cloud computing environments, immediate local termination of suspicious sessions, and the necessary separation of duties to ensure proper controls over privileged users."

For more information about Sentrigo's cloud security solutions, please visit www.sentrigo.com/cloud-security.

Additional information on Hedgehog Enterprise is available at www.sentrigo.com/products/hedgehog-enterprise.

For vPatch, visit www.sentrigo.com/products/hedgehog-vpatch.

Tweet this: Sentrigo Database Security Solutions Now Available for Amazon EC2 Follow Sentrigo on Twitter at: http://twitter.com/sentrigo

About Sentrigo Sentrigo is a recognized innovator in database security solutions, offering a full suite of products for vulnerability assessment, virtual patching and database monitoring/auditing. The company's flagship product, Hedgehog Enterprise, provides Database Activity Monitoring (DAM) and real-time Intrusion Prevention, protecting sensitive data from external threats and misuse by privileged insiders. Hedgehog can be quickly and easily deployed at small and midsize organizations, and scales to handle the largest enterprises, providing full visibility into all database activity and allowing enterprises to enforce security policy and comply with regulatory requirements, such as PCI DSS, Sarbanes-Oxley, and HIPAA. The company is a member of the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), and recently received the Cloud Computing World Series Award as the 'Best Security Solution', the 2010 Global Product Excellence Award for Database Security from Info Security Products Guide and was a recipient of the 2010 Red Herring 100 North America Award. For additional information and to download Hedgehog, visit www.sentrigo.com.

Read more: http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2010/11/02/prwebprweb4724514.DTL#ixzz14F3lmwDG