Mitroshin Viktor Fedorovich (born August 3, 1955, Chelyabinsk), a sculptor, a member of the Artists' Union of the USSR (1989). He graduated in 1981 from the Chelyabinsk Art College, studying with LL Venikovetskoy, BA Maganova. It works in the plastics of small forms, interior and prize, decorative landscape and monumental sculpture.

His exhibitions were held in his native Chelyabinsk, Moscow and St. Petersburg, Helsinki, Paris, Vienna, London and New York. He is the author of prizes, awarded to winners of the Ballet Competition "Maya", the contest of young singers under the auspices of Elena Obraztsova, film festivals, "Golden Eagle", "Constellation of Aquarius" Festival of Arts "Southern Nights". One of his sculptures is recognized as a symbol of UNESCO.

In the work Mitroshina, reflected the philosophy of postmodernism, harmony and contradictory relationship between man and nature. The sculptor has different materials: fire clay and salts ("first meeting"), pottery ("Flash"), tree ("Judoka"), marble ("Morning"). The most famous work of M. brought in which are connected to bronze casting and precious (semi-precious) stones, shells, petrified wood and others. Member of All-Union, republican, zone, regional exhibitions since 1983. Personal exhibitions held in Helsinki, Moscow, St. Petersburg , Vienna, London, New York, Paris, Chelyabinsk.

Diverse world of artistic images of the sculptor: fantastic beasts ("Miracle Yudo fish", "Fantastic bird" - a symbol of music festival of the Finnish city of Lahti, dinosaurs for the children's playground at the Crimson Field Chelyabinsk) and quite recognizable wild and domestic animals ("Panther", " Rhino "," Chimpanzee, "" Wolves, "" Cat ").

Celebrities of the 20th century: Yuri Gagarin (arts and monument. High relief in a camp "Star"), M. Plisetskaya (portrait Plisetskaya, the Grand Prix of "Maya" for the international competition of the same name), GV Verichev ( Portrait Verichev), RH Nureyev (Grand Prix of his name), and symbolic of the Virgin ("Virgin of the Sun," "Maid of the Moon," "Maiden Ocean," "Tree of the East"); composition, which reflected the rhythms of time, escaping the reality of the present ("Running Time", "Mirage", "wave", "Balance") and a variety of subjects in the eternal themes: the Bible ("Jesus Christ"), mythological. ("Icarus"), ist. ("Columbus"); symbols and prizes at international competitions and festivals (apart from the above, the "Golden Pearl" for Sochi "Kinotavr", "Phoenix Bird" for the Screen Actors Guild of Russia, "Eagle" - a symbol of America). Mitroshinskie projects monument "to the victims of the disaster near Ashoy", "Sergei Diaghilev" for Paris at national and international competitions, won the first place.

The largest monumental landscape composition on decorative Mitroshina - "Field of Love" - ​​was built in Chelyabinsk. (in the park near the "Kinomax"). The works of the sculptor are in the Museum space (Moscow), CHOKG, Chelyabinsk geology and mineralogy museum collections of Boris Yeltsin, Nursultan Nazarbayev, Plisetskaya, N. Mikhalkov and others. Private collections in Russia and abroad.