Viktor Fedorovich Letyanin was born in the town of Kalinino, Gorki region, Russia on November 30, 1921. Letyanin’s father, disabled from a wound received in World War I, was dispossessed and exiled for his attempts to organize the workers of the local collective farm. Because of his father’s actions, the young Letyanin was branded a "Kulak’s son" and banned from attending school. Due to his own persistence, he gained admission into the Gorki Art School, where he studied for two years until the outbreak of World War II. The young Letyanin was drafted into the Red Army and assigned to the Northern Front. He achieved the rank of lieutenant and was wounded three times prior to his discharge in 1945. He was awarded four military orders and three medals for his service. Letyanin returned to the Gorki Art School in 1947 and graduated in 1949. Because his final academic painting, "Crossing the River Dnieper", won critical acclaim, he was recommended for further studies. Letyanin lost a competition for acceptance into the prestigious Repin Institute in St. Petersburg, and entered the Tartu Art Institute in Tartu, Estonia. After studying there for one year, he transferred into the Repin, where he entered the workshop of R.R. Frentz. He graduated in 1955 and returned to Gorki to pursue his career. He established himself as a highly-respected painter of every day life in the Soviet Union. Letyanin began exhibiting in 1955 in Tambov. Since then, he has participated in major exhibitions in Gorki, Moscow, St. Petersburg, Novgorod and Volgograd. His works may be found in numerous Russian museums and in major private collections in Russia, Western Europe and the United States. Letyanin has participated in many art exhibitions in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Novgorod, Gorki, and Volgograd. He was honored with his first one-man show in 1976 and his works are in the collections of numerous Russian museums and the United States. Viktor Fedorovich Letyanin died on July 4, 2009 at 87 years of age. Letyanin's early exhibitions are as follows:1955 Exhibitions by local artists, Tambov1956 "Autumn Exhibition of Studies and Sketches by Gorki Artists" Art Salon Gorki1957 "Exhibition of Works by Young Artists of the Soviet Union for the 6th World Festival of Youth and Studies" Academy of Arts, Moscow1957 "Exhibition of Works by Artists of the Russian Federation Dedicated to the 40th Anniversary of the Great October Revolution" Gorki Park, Moscow1958 "Exhibition of Works by Artists of the Volga Region" Yaroslavl1967 Tonal Exhibition "The Great Volga"1972 "Exhibition by Gorki and Novgorod Artists" Leningrad1974 Zonal Exhibition "The Great Volga"1975 Exhibition Celebrating the 30th Anniversary of Victory in WWII, Gorki