Table of Content

Definition of Cheer Up

Forms and tenses of Cheer Up

Meaning and usage of Cheer Up

Common expressions with Cheer Up

The list of synonyms for Cheer Up

The list of antonyms for Cheer Up

50 Example sentences with Cheer Up

Definition of “cheer up”: the exact definition of the phrasal verb “cheer up” and how it is used in a sentence

The phrasal verb “cheer up” means to become happier or more hopeful, or to try to make someone else happier or more hopeful. It is often used to encourage someone who is feeling sad or down.

For example:

“I know you’re feeling down, but cheer up! Things will get better.”

“After the long and difficult day, my friend needed some cheering up, so we went out for dinner and a movie.”

“I tried to cheer up my little sister by telling her a joke, but she just couldn’t seem to shake her sadness.”

Forms and tenses: the different forms and tenses of “cheer up” and examples of how to use each one

“Cheer up” is a phrasal verb, which means it is a verb made up of two or more words: the verb “cheer” and the adverb “up.” It can be used in several tenses and forms, including the present simple, present continuous, past simple, past continuous, present perfect, and future simple.

Here are some examples of how “cheer up” can be used in different tenses and forms:

Present simple: “I always try to cheer her up when she’s feeling down.”

Present continuous: “I’m cheering you up with a hug and a warm cup of tea.”

Past simple: “I cheered him up by taking him out for ice cream.”

Past continuous: “I was cheering him up with jokes and funny stories.”

Present perfect: “I have cheered you up countless times with my silly antics.”

Future simple: “I will cheer you up with a movie night and your favorite comfort food.”

Note that “cheer up” is an intransitive phrasal verb, which means that it does not take an object. Instead, it is followed by the pronoun “you” or the person’s name. For example: “I’ll cheer you up with a silly joke” or “I’ll cheer John up with a hug.”

Meaning and usage: the different meanings and uses of “cheer up” and examples of how to use it in different contexts

“Cheer up” is a phrasal verb that can be used in a variety of contexts to mean becoming happier or more hopeful, or to try to make someone else happier or more hopeful. It is often used to encourage someone who is feeling sad or down.

Here are some examples of how “cheer up” can be used in different contexts:

To encourage someone who is feeling down: “I know you’re feeling sad, but cheer up! Everything will be okay.”

To try to make someone feel better after a difficult or stressful situation: “I’ll take you out for ice cream to cheer you up after your tough day at work.”

To lift someone’s spirits when they are feeling depressed or hopeless: “I know you’re feeling down, but cheer up! You have so much to be grateful for.”

To try to make someone feel better by doing something fun or enjoyable: “Let’s go out and do something fun to cheer you up.”

To encourage someone to be more positive or hopeful: “I know you’re feeling frustrated, but cheer up! Things will get better.”

In all of these examples, “cheer up” is used as a way to encourage someone to feel better and be more positive. It is often used as a way to show support and care for someone who is going through a difficult time.

Common expressions with “cheer up”: some common expressions that use “cheer up” and their meanings and uses

Here are some common expressions that use “cheer up”:

“Cheer up, things will get better.” This expression is used to encourage someone who is feeling down or discouraged, and to remind them that things will improve in the future.

“Cheer up, it could be worse.” This expression is used to try to put someone’s problems or difficulties into perspective, and to encourage them to be more positive.

“Fake it until you make it. Cheer up!” This expression is used to encourage someone to put on a happy or confident front, even if they don’t necessarily feel that way inside. It suggests that by pretending to be happy or confident, they may eventually start to feel that way.

“I’ll cheer you up with a joke.” This expression is used to offer to try to make someone feel better by telling them a joke or something humorous.

“Cheer up, tomorrow is a new day.” This expression is used to encourage someone to start fresh the next day and to be more positive about the future.

All of these expressions use “cheer up” as a way to encourage someone to be more positive and hopeful, and to try to lift their spirits when they are feeling down.

The list of synonyms for “Cheer Up”

These words can be used interchangeably with “cheer up” to convey the idea of improving someone’s mood, morale, or emotional state.

Here is a list of synonyms for “cheer up”:

Brighten

Lift spirits

Perk up

Encourage

Hearten

Inspire

Comfort

Reassure

Gladden

Motivate

Rejuvenate

Enliven

Stimulate

Revitalize

Uplift

Boost morale

Exhilarate

Make happy

Put at ease

Elevate

The list of antonyms for “Cheer Up”

These words represent concepts opposite to “cheer up” and imply actions or situations that cause negative emotions or lower one’s spirits.

Here is a list of antonyms for “cheer up”:

Sadden

Depress

Dishearten

Discourage

Dismay

Upset

Bring down

Deject

Demoralize

Crush

Break

Worry

Aggravate

Dispirit

Torment

Discomfort

Perturb

Disconcert

Disturb

Frustrate

50 Example sentences with Cheer Up