Angela Aki is one of the first Japanese singers I started listening to, after discovering her through FFXII’s Kiss Me Good-Bye. I think what I love about her is that she really enjoys singing from her heart and the piano, and you can really see it when she performs. I guess as a fellow piano player having most of her songs with piano as the main instrument, played by Angela herself is an added value which I appreciate a lot too.

I just never get bored of her songs, catchy, sad and hopeful ones have accompanied me for life on bus rides and tougher moments. She’s really good at English too, being half Italian, and I wish she was more popular in Europe here. I was so sad when she announced that she postponed her career to study Music in Washington University, and I’m so glad she recently announced she will be returning to the music scene with a renewed spirit and knowledge. I’m really looking forward to that!

Honestly I wish there was a way for me to contact her and say how much of a calming influence she has had on my life, I’ve been thinking of sending her a message/email, but it’s probably read by PR people and if there’s a mistake in it I sound so gaijin, maybe I better wait a little bit.

Below are the Japanese, Romaji and English transcription/translation of Again, an energetic song about a broken relationship sung in the big Budokan concert hall back in 2006. I managed to find this on YouTube, but unfortunately a lot of her videos on there have been struck by copyright so you will have to download or buy her albums somewhere if you want to listen to more of her work.

(Lyrics Source)

English Translation

The last words of my love keep on

ringing like a siren of regret

Because I kept my cowardly heart in check

I couldn’t tell you how I felt

Though you’re no longer near me, I want to be by your side

so I can look at your delighted expression as you

smile through your tears

Oh let my wish come true, come true, come true

Oh let me love you, love you, love

Let me turn to you just one more time

Oh let my wish come true, come true, come true

The time for reality and ideals comes and goes

as the pendulum of sentiment trembles

I don’t care if rains, or storms, or if the sky

is clear. I want to be there

walking besides you

Oh let my wish come true, come true, come true

Oh let me come back to you, come back to you, come back to you

Let me turn to you just one more time

Oh let my wish come true, come true, come true

You and I in love again,

you and me again

I want you to see my delighted expression as I

smile through the tears

Shake off the memories of the past

I don’t care if rains, or storms, or if the sky

is clear. I want to be there

walking besides you forever

Oh let my wish come true, come true, come true

Oh let me come back to you, come back to you, come back to you

let me love you, love you, love

Oh let our hearts be bound together, together, together

If I can turn to you one more time

My wish will come true, come true, come true

You and I in love again

Romaji