FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

CONTACT

September 19, 2013

Suzie Raven

202-429-5481

WVEE-FM NAMED URBAN STATION OF THE YEAR

Orlando -- WVEE-FM Atlanta was named Urban Station of the Year at the 2013 National Association of Broadcasters' Marconi Radio Awards. The awards were announced Thursday night at the annual NAB Marconi Radio Awards Dinner & Show held during the Radio Show in Orlando, FL.

The prestigious awards recognize radio's outstanding personalities and stations. Marconi finalists were selected by a task force of broadcasters, and the winners were voted on by the NAB Marconi Radio Awards Selection Academy. The votes were tabulated by an independent firm.

For more information on the station's accomplishments, contact Shelice Smith.

The NAB Marconi Radio Awards Dinner & Show was hosted by "Shotgun Tom" Kelly of CBS Radio's KRTH-FM in Los Angeles. The show also featured a performance by Grammy Award-Winning band The Mavericks from Big Machine Label Group.

About the Radio Show

The 2013 Radio Show, produced by the Radio Advertising Bureau (RAB) and the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), will be held September 18-20 in Orlando. This year's show brings radio broadcasters and industry colleagues together to share knowledge, discover the latest innovations, network with industry leaders and explore creative business strategies for the digital age. To learn more about the 2013 Radio Show, visit www.radioshowweb.com.

About NAB

The National Association of Broadcasters is the premier advocacy association for America's broadcasters. NAB advances radio and television interests in legislative, regulatory and public affairs. Through advocacy, education and innovation, NAB enables broadcasters to best serve their communities, strengthen their businesses and seize new opportunities in the digital age. Learn more at www.nab.org.

About RAB

The Radio Advertising Bureau serves more than 6,000 member Radio stations in the U.S. and over 1,000 member networks, representative firms, broadcast vendors, and international organizations. RAB leads and participates in educational, research, sales, and advocacy programs that promote and advance Radio as a primary advertising medium. Learn more at www.rab.com.