Katy Perry is entering a new musical chapter now that her American Idol era is over. Her upcoming album, 143, will hit shelves Sept. 20. After seven seasons judging alongside Luke Bryan and Lionel Richie, the “Roar” singer leaves big shoes to fill. Speculation has run rampant about Perry’s replacement since the GRAMMY nominee announced her departure back in February. And a new report lists this GRAMMY winner and pop music industry icon as the favorite to take over Perry’s chair.

Will Miley Cyrus Replace Katy Perry on ‘American Idol?’

So far, 2024 has been a monumental year for Miley Cyrus. In February, the “Flowers” singer, 31, scored her first GRAMMY Award for Best Pop Solo Performance. Then she made an appearance on Beyoncé’s groundbreaking country album Cowboy Carter, teaming up with the “Crazy in Love” singer on the track “II Most Wanted.” Now, will the former Disney Channel star add “American Idol judge” to her resume?

A report published by the Online Betting Guide last Thursday (July 11) lists the “Wrecking Ball” singer as the 6/4 favorite to replace Katy Perry. Cyrus dethrones Jennifer Lopez, who was listed as the favorite in May but did not appear in the most recent running.

Cyrus isn’t new to reality TV, appearing as a coach on seasons 11 and 13 of The Voice. And she certainly can match Perry’s banter.

Who Else Is in the Running?

Luke Bryan has previously dropped Miley’s name as someone who is “in the talks” to join the American Idol judging panel. The “Mind of a Country Boy” singer also mentioned another pair of GRAMMY winners, Meghan Trainor and Pink. OLBG listed Trainor’s odds at 2/1, with Pink’s at 5/1.

[RELATED: ‘American Idol’ Fans Urge Original Judge To Return as Search for Katy Perry’s Replacement Drags Out]

Pink didn’t seem too keen on the idea when Entertainment Tonight broached the subject during a recent interview. “I don’t like hurting people’s feelings,” said the “Just Like A Pill” singer before adding, “I like my day job.”

Meghan Trainor, on the other hand, has relentlessly campaigned to replace Perry on American Idol. The “Dear Future Husband” singer is a longtime fan of the show and says becoming a judge is an “ultimate bucket list dream.”

(Photo by Monica Schipper/Getty Images)