She is an award-winning singer.

But Katy Perry was at the 10th Annual DVF Awards on Thursday to receive an award for her work as an activist.

The 34-year-old musician stunned in a blue dress as she made her way into the event in Brooklyn.

The Roar singer's patterned frock hugged her curves and settled down to just below her knees in diamond-like feathers.

Blue was the central theme to her ensemble and Perry matched elegant royal heels to wabi-sabi inspired earrings.

Her short bleach blonde tresses were brushed back into a wave and she painted her lips a soft pink.

The Firework singer was set to receive the Inspiration DVF Award at the Brooklyn Museum-held event.

While Perry is best known for music, she received the award on Thursday night for her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and LGBTQ equality advocate.

Diane von Furstenberg arrived at her award showed donning a shimmering silver, green, and white dress.

Later, the 72-year-old designer took to the stage to speak and had a large smile across her face.

Allison Williams was feeling the blossoming spring season as she sported a flowing floral dress while making her way into the event.

The 30-year-old actress blonde tresses were left unencumbered and tumbled around her face in waves as she took to the stage.

Jessica Hart, 33, looked stunning as usual as she flaunted her cleavage in a low-cut snakeskin-patterned dress.

Coco Rocha, 30, cut a chic figure in a light peach suit and parted her brunette tresses into a slick look.

Nicky Hilton Rothschild, 35, donned a tiered ice blue dress and tied an orange ribbon around her waist.

Hadeel Mustafa Anabtawi arrived on the carpet in a black dress covered in pink and yellow flowers.

The social entrepreneur was awarded The International DVF Awards for her work empowering girls.

Nadia Murad, 26, also received The International DVF Award, she was co-recipient of the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize.

Anita Hill donned an all-black ensemble down the carpet as she collected The Lifetime Leadership DVF Award.

Susan Burton donned the same dress as Anabtawi as she was awarded The People’s Voice DVF Award.

Julia Stiles looked stunning in a powerful red suit with a lacy white camisole underneath.

The 38-year-old actress pulled her brunette tresses into a ponytail and later took the stage to speak.

Arianna Huffington donned an off-the-shoulder blue suit with a low-cut neckline.

The 68-year-old businesswoman handed Perry her award after taking the stage with a big smile on her face.

Elaine Welteroth, 32, donned an orange dress with exotic purple flowers patterned across it.