The avant-garde poetry of what may be Ford's greatest film - almost impervious to analysis, a film stripped down entirely to 'grace notes.' Quite the achievement for a film that depicts all life as a struggle! But in that struggle there is only one option - move forward. This film is a series of movements, a series of suites - the great tone poem of all symphonies. Like The Long Gray Line five years later, there are two ideas fully consistent in this film. One is that life will move forward with or without you. The other is conscience. These movements forward transcend even the races we are gifted, the classes we are born into, our faiths, the places we…

The right way ain't always easy. The unknown hangs over the buttes and plateaus like anticipation on their breath, ethereal and majestic, as ghosts who witness the courageous. Heroism is sublime. Settlers bear their souls upon the monolithic cathedrals of the West, only sometimes mistaken as tombstones. Those ghosts hang, tacked to the air ready to haunt. Meanwhile communal song rings outward, rolling over vistas and rocky rivers, fading fog and frenzy. The path less traveled is gospel. Simple and understated, Ford's direction summons beauty with a tantalizing level of quaintness. Resiliency is reflected toward humanity back from nature, a mirror we all fail to hold at one time or another, as we are reminded the unknown can be frightening…

“Wagon Master” carries the glorious simplicity of unbridled hope — an optimism that bore thousands Westward, on nothing more than wooden wheels and a prayer.

Lacking any above-the-title star, John Ford’s “Wagon” has a cast made up primarily of his stock player company. The lack of a singular name emphasises that the film isn’t so much about a lone rider, as it is about community.

“Wagon” can be viewed as Ford’s treatise on his particular vision of an American utopia.

The movie depicts a pacifist group of Mormons out to create an Edenesque farmstead in the West. There’s little strife within the Mormon ranks; all threats and conflict are external - to be dealt with in the most pragmatic…