Citrix Systems, Inc. (NASDAQ: CTXS) today announces that it has closed the acquisition of Netviewer AG, a leading, privately held European Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) vendor in collaboration and IT services. As announced on December 17, 2010, Netviewer will become part of Citrix Online, the online services division of Citrix Systems. The acquisition will accelerate Citrix Online’s global expansion and extend its SaaS leadership in Europe.

Netviewer’s Robert Gratzl has been appointed vice president and general manager for Citrix Online in EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) and will oversee an operation that will be one of the leading SaaS-based organizations in Europe specializing in collaboration and IT services. Netviewer's Karlsruhe office will remain an important center for Citrix Online's operations in the region, driving expansion in Central and Southern Europe. Citrix Online will continue to serve and support Netviewer’s more than 18,000 customers, located primarily in Germany and continental Europe, which complements Citrix Online’s current strength in the UK, Ireland and the Nordics.

For more information on Citrix, visit http://www.citrix.com/.

For more information on Citrix Online services, visit http://www.citrixonline.com/.

Related links:

Citrix Online to Acquire Netviewer

Citrix Online Accelerates European Expansion

GoToMeeting and GoToWebinar Raise Citrix Online to #2 in Global Web Conferencing Market

Citrix Online Rated Best Overall Web Conferencing Experience by Users, Again, According to Wainhouse Research

Workshifting.com

Twitter: @citrixonline, @workshifting, @GoToMeeting, @GoToWebinar, @GoToTraining, @GoToAssist, @GoToManage

About Citrix Systems

Citrix Systems ("Citrix") is a leading provider of virtual computing solutions that help companies deliver IT as an on-demand service. Founded in 1989, Citrix combines virtualization, networking, and cloud computing technologies into a full portfolio of products that enable virtual workstyles for users and virtual datacenters for IT. More than 230,000 organizations worldwide rely on Citrix to help them build simpler and more cost-effective IT environments. Citrix partners with more than 10,000 companies in more than 100 countries. Annual revenue in 2010 was $1.87 billion.

For Citrix Investors

This release contains forward-looking statements which are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The forward-looking statements in this release do not constitute guarantees of future performance. Investors are cautioned that statements in this press release, which are not strictly historical statements, including, without limitation, statements concerning Citrix’ SaaS leadership in EMEA and its global expansion, and future organizational structure and operations, constitute forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, the reaction of customers of Citrix and Netviewer to the acquisition; Citrix's timing and ability to successfully integrate Netviewer's products, operations (including migration of Netviewer to Citrix's systems and controls) and employees; the introduction of new products by competitors or the entry of new competitors into the markets for Citrix's and Netviewer's products; the failure by Citrix to retain key employees of Netviewer; failure to further develop and successfully market Netviewer's technology and products, including failure to execute Citrix's sales and marketing plans and to achieve or maintain anticipated revenues and profits; the impact of the global economy and uncertainty in the IT spending environment, including Citrix's European markets; the company's ability to maintain and expand its business in small sized and large enterprise accounts; the size, timing and recognition of revenue from significant orders; the success of investments in its products, foreign operations and vertical and geographic markets; the management of anticipated future growth; risks in effectively controlling operating expenses, including failure to manage unexpected expenses; the effect of new accounting pronouncements on revenue and expense recognition; litigation, including litigation challenging Citrix or Netviewer intellectual property rights or alleging the infringement of the intellectual property rights of third parties; changes in the company's pricing and licensing models, promotional programs and product mix, all of which may impact Citrix's revenue recognition or those of its competitors; charges in the event of the impairment of assets acquired through business combinations; competition and other risks associated with the markets for Citrix's SaaS collaboration and IT services; unanticipated changes in tax rates or exposure to additional tax liabilities; risks of political and social turmoil; and other risks detailed in the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Citrix assumes no obligation to update any forward-looking information contained in this press release or with respect to the announcements described herein.

About Netviewer

Netviewer is Europe's leading producer and provider of web conferencing solutions. Founded in Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2001, the company currently employs more than 220 people. Netviewer enables Internet users to share their screen display live, so as to jointly edit texts, calculations, graphics and other documents. Visual real-time communication over the Internet enables businesses to reduce their travel times and costs, as well as to improve productivity. Moreover, users are actively contributing towards the protection of the climate and the natural environment.

These advantages are being enjoyed by more than 18,000 corporations and mid-size companies from 68 different countries.