David Grose

David Grose is the inventor of the Castlepines investment model and has been the driving force in the growth and expansion of Castlepines across the world. Today Castlepines has offices and rep offices in the United Kingdom, Australia, Western Europe, Africa, North America, South America and Asia. David Grose has expanded the business such that it is represented globally with a specific focus on sectors that provide secure and stable revenue streams.

Working with Governments and official bodies has allowed Castlepines to facilitate providing investment into large-scale existing assets, or the development of new assets.

Jolyon Moss

Jolyon has had over 40 years experience in the property, leisure and latterly the energy and infrastructure finance sectors. He is a Senior Adviser and General Manager Real Estate and Banking for Castlepines. He has run his own property and corporate finance consultancy since 1994 active in the financing and structuring of debt, mezzanine and joint ventures principally in the commercial and residential real estate and renewable energy sectors .

Prior to that he ran the European Real Estate Division of Security Pacific Bank and then of Bank of America following their merger. Before banking he held senior positions in a publicly quoted US cross-border leasing company. Jolyon graduated in law at the University of Bristol and qualified and practiced in the City as a solicitor with Allen & Overy and Stephenson Harwood. He is a founding member of The UK Association of Property Lenders.

Owen Morgan

Owen Morgan has over 13 years of business development experience with corporations including the BBC, Sony Pictures Television and through consultancy services for Televisa. His diverse range of professional experience encompasses franchising, licencing, business development, IP acquisition and exploitation through sales and distribution.

Owen has worked and been responsible for multiple operations across the US, Europe, Africa and Asia throughout his career in the Media and has an awareness and understanding of cultural differences, stemming from his love of languages with an MA in French from The University of Edinburgh.

Since 2015 Owen has been working across the US, the UK and Europe, developing operations with Media organizations. Owen’s current focus is to expand Castlepines’ business in North America.

Fabio Yamada

Fabio Yukio Yamada has 35+ years of experience in business development with top international corporations such as Chemical Bank, Johnson & Johnson, Du Pont and 3M. Mr. Yamada has a degree in Electrical Engineering in Brazil, and postgraduate studies in Finance in Japan and Canada.

Since July 2001, Mr. Yamada has successfully represented US States in Brazil to promote US exports and in the attraction of companies to the USA. Currently Mr. Yamada’s company, is the Trade and Investment Authorized Representative in Sao Paulo – Brazil, for the States of Florida, and Maryland.

For the past 13 years, Mr. Yamada has been working with Castlepines Global Equities, to support low risk and long-term green and brownfield projects where Investment Grade Rated companies are involved. Renewable energy and infra structure projects are always a top priority in the region.