David Joseph Sheets passed away peacefully at home on June 4, 2024, surrounded by his loved ones. David was born in Osceola, IN on November 11, 1952, to Joseph and Wynona (Grose) Sheets. David was one of three children, two boys and one girl (Dianne and Jody).

David was a 1971 graduate of Penn High School where he met many good friends who remain his “buddies for life.” After high school, he attended Western Michigan University and joined the US Army. Stationed around the world, especially Germany, he had a good time driving Generals and Colonels in Jeeps which helped keep him out of trouble.

David married the love of his life, Wendy Kelver, in 1979. Shortly thereafter, they welcomed their daughter, Sarah, into the world. 14 months later, at 36 weeks pregnant, David and Wendy found out they were having twin boys, Aaron and Corey. His children were very important to him throughout his life. They also gave him the gift of grandchildren, whom he loved to spend time with and be an active presence in their lives.

After spending some time in the corporate world as an accountant, David found joy as a business owner at The Fireside in Edwardsburg, MI. Many lifelong friendships were made in the 18 years David ran this small-town tavern. Finally, he finished his career pairing people up with their favorite wine and spirits at Martin’s Supermarket in Granger, IN.

On August 15, 2022, David received a second chance at life. After several years of respiratory illness, he received the most special gift of a lung transplant through Northwestern Hospital in Chicago. Not only did an organ donor give him this precious gift, but Northwestern also believed in David’s commitment to the new lifestyle and approved him for the transplant. David repeatedly expressed his gratitude to Northwestern’s entire lung transplant team, including the doctors, nurses, and social workers. Some of Northwestern’s team members even lovingly referred to him as “Papa David,” as he was known to his grandchildren.

David was preceded in death by his parents, Joe and Wynona, his sister, Dianne, and brother, Jody. He is survived by his wife of 45 years, Wendy, their 3 children: Sarah Sheets (Steven Suglia) of Granger, IN, Aaron (Hailey) Sheets of Granger, IN, Corey (Laura) Sheets of Edwardsburg, MI, 3 grandchildren: Julia Sheets (Lincoln Adams), Chandler Sheets, and Claire Sheets, and a great-grandchild: Elliot Adams.

David enjoyed spending time with his family and friends, cooking and baking, hunting and outdoor activities, traveling in his RV, and caring for the many dogs he made a part of his family over the years (especially Pipi Marie). David was also a Freemason.

David was a strong advocate for organ donation, as he witnessed firsthand the profound impact it can have on the lives of donor recipients and their families. He would be honored if you considered becoming an organ donor, a gift of life that is truly immeasurable. In lieu of flowers, the family kindly requests that donations be made to Northwestern's lung transplant program to support their life-saving work and honor David's memory. To donate online, please follow this link: https://nmgive.donordrive.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=donate.event&eventID=619 and complete the form. Under “Please direct my gift toward” and type in “Canning Thoracic Institute Lung Transplant Assistance Fund” in memory of David J. Sheets.

Visitation will be held 2 hours prior to the 6:00 pm Celebration of Life on Tuesday, June 11, 2024, at Cruz Family Funeral Home in Osceola with Military Honors to follow. Pastor Denver Burns of Michiana Community Church will officiate the services. *For those unable to attend, David’s service will be streamed in real time in the window below starting 10 minutes prior to his service time*

To light a virtual candle, share a story of David’s life, or leave a message of comfort for the Sheets family, please follow the links provided on the Tribute Wall tab above.