This edited article about cinema originally appeared in Look and Learn issue number 647 published on 8 June 1974.

“Help!” Fleance cried, as he fled to escape his would-be murderers The play was “Macbeth.” The aspiring young actor playing Banquo’s son, and speaking his tiny part was Harold Lloyd, making his debut in a village repertory company in Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A. He could hardly realise then that years later, the word “Help” would become closely associated with him in quite another sphere – motion pictures – and would be used time after time as a caption to the many thrilling sequences in his silent film comedies which would make him world-famous and a multi-millionaire.

Stick a pin in the most central point on a map of America, and it will land not far from a place called Burchard, in Nebraska, where Harold Clayton Lloyd was born in 1893, two years before Buster Keaton, but in very different circumstances. There was no music hall or theatrical tradition on either side of Harold’s family. His father was a photographer, who was often on the move from town to town, searching for work.

From an early age, Lloyd was stage-struck. Even as a little boy, he was fascinated by make-up, spending hours in front of a mirror, painting eyebrows and moustaches with charcoal or anything else which would make a mark on his small face. When he was twelve, he was playing Little Abe in “Tess of the D’Urbervilles” with an amateur dramatic company.

Only once did his craving for a stage career weaken. As a student at one of the several high schools he attended, a fondness for gym turned his thoughts towards boxing, but he soon abandoned the idea. Throughout his life, however, he remained keen on exercise and sport, not only as an enjoyable pastime, but as an indispensable aid to keeping fit. When he began making comedies, he found that extreme physical fitness was essential when performing many of his athletic antics and stunts.

In 1910, the Lloyd family found themselves in San Diego, California. At this time, moving pictures were just getting started, and the West Coast of America, with its sunny climate, was an ideal spot for film-making all the year round.

The Edison Company of New York were doing studio location work in San Diego when Harold joined the company for one day’s work as an “extra.” He played a Yaqui Indian – his first appearance on film. He was nineteen.

He remembered those days in San Diego as the hardest times in his career. “I was literally down to one nickel (about 2p). I bought six doughnuts with it and they were the best doughnuts I ever ate in my life,” he said.

In 1913 he decided to go to Hollywood to try to find work in pictures there.

“Extra” work was desperately hard to get and he met discouragement at every stage. Even getting through the Universal Studio gates without a pass proved impossible at the start. However, using the initiative which would become a part of his screen character in later years, he finally managed to get in by using a trick. He sneaked behind the building, put on make-up, turned his hat into a new shape and mingled with a crowd of extras returning to the studio after the lunch break. Once inside the studio, he besieged the assistant directors and was given some small parts.

Later, he joined Hal Roach and made a series of one-reelers based on a character called “Lonesome Luke – The Human Rubber Ball.”

“Luke” was a success and established Lloyd as a popular comedian, but he never liked the role, feeling that it could be thought of as an imitation of Charlie Chaplin. At that time, a great many comics imitated Chaplin in one way or another, such was his immense world-wide popularity, and “Luke” was a tramp-like figure, even though he wore skin-tight clothes in contrast to Charlie’s baggy outfit.

Odd clothes and funny make-up were considered important to many comedians in those days in order to get laughs, but Lloyd wanted to be different, and after a struggle, he was allowed to try a new character. He hit on the idea of a fresh-faced young man without make-up, in very ordinary clothes, who always wore horn-rimmed glasses and a straw hat. These glasses became his trademark and he was never seen without them on the screen again. The original pair, which he kept until they fell apart, cost about 15p in an optician’s shop in Los Angeles. He immediately removed the lenses, knowing that the reflection of light on the glass would cause trouble when photographed. For two years Lloyd developed this role, which he called his “glasses character” and met with great success.

In their films, Keaton and Chaplin both portrayed the underdog. Lloyd’s “eager-beaver” epitomised the young American of that era – an ordinary fellow who was likable, always cheerful and who, by dogged perseverance, triumphed over every disaster, while still getting his laughs.

He was twenty-six when a terrible event happened which put him out of work for nearly a year and almost caused his death.

Harold was asked by his publicity department for some still pictures of his latest releases. One of these was to show him holding a mock bomb. As he posed for the photographer there was a huge explosion – it had blown up in his hand! A live bomb had been placed accidentally among the papier-mache “props” used for the scene and Harold had unluckily by-passed the imitations and picked out the real thing.

The blast caused serious damage, injuring several onlookers. Harold’s right hand was shattered and it seemed certain that he would be blind for life. His face was a mass of powder burns.

Miraculously, the only permanent damage was to his hand. His face and eyes healed after treatment in hospital and, within ten months, he was back at the studio filming “Haunted Spooks,” his fifth two-reeler, wearing a special glove. “When I found out I had emerged practically unscathed, except for my hand injury,” he said, “I resolved never to forget my good fortune. I don’t believe I ever have.”

Lloyd made nearly three hundred films (mostly shorts) including “High and Dizzy,” “The Freshman,” “Welcome Danger” and “For Heaven’s Sake,” but “Safety Last” was undoubtedly his most famous feature film, made in 1923.

“Safety Last” is also his greatest “thrill picture” and tells the story of a country boy in a big city who agrees to become a professional “human fly” and climbs the exterior of a skyscraper. They shot the climbing scenes first and, because of shadows blotting out the middle of the street, could only work for short periods each day. Lloyd used a real building and had platforms covered with mattresses built about ten to fifteen feet below the skyscraper windows, out of sight of the camera. After the picture was completed, a dummy was dropped on to one of these platforms and, to everyone’s horror, it bounced off into the street many feet below. When the young man is seen hanging precariously from the huge clock, many storeys high, it really is Harold up there. He admitted later that he must have been crazy to have taken part in such dangerous stunts, but said, “At first I was just scared to death. But after I’d worked up there a few days I got just as goofy as anybody.”

He is remembered for his exciting skyscraper comedies, but there are many thrilling sequences in his other pictures, too. In “For Heaven’s Sake” the scenes showing a double-decker open-top Los Angeles bus hurtling through the streets are not only hilariously funny, but also chillingly convincing. Lloyd put the whole bus on top of a huge lorry and on rockers. As it tipped, he and his supporting players went over the edge, giving the perfect illusion of a bus cornering on two wheels.

Lloyd planned his gags carefully, mathematically at times, and his scenes play as effortlessly on the screen as if everything is happening spontaneously.

Like Keaton, he was not at home with sound pictures and withdrew from films in the Thirties. Always a shrewd business man, he invested his money wisely and died in 1971 a very rich man.