In this work, the authors revise 10 pairs of northeastern Atlantic sister cryptic species of the genus Raphitoma Bellardi, 1847 as currently conceived. The species within each pair differ only or mostly in their protoconch morphology, which reflects their larval developmental type (multispiral vs. paucispiral, corresponding to planktrotrophic vs. non-planktotrophic development, respectively). Of the ten studied pairs, one (R. histrix/R. pseudohystrix) includes species with almost allochronic ranges; one pair includes species with allopatric ranges (R. oblonga NE Atlantic, R. alleryana Central editerranean Sea); the remaining 8 studied pairs include exclusively Mediterranean species. Four species are described as new: R. skylla Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. kharybdis Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. bartolinorum Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. ebreorum Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp. Neotypes are designated for Raphitoma hystrix Bellardi (type species of Raphitoma), Pleurotoma laviae Philippi and Pleurotoma philberti Michaud (type species of Philbertia); lectotypes are designated for Clathurella pseudohystrix Sykes, C. servaini Locard, C. purpurea var. denseclathrata Dautzenberg & Durouchoux, Philbertia alleryana Sulliotti, Ph. papillosa Pallary, Pleurotoma bicolor Risso.

"In this paper, the authors deal with Raphitoma corbis (Potiez et Michaud, 1838) (Gastropoda Conoidea), a poorly-known taxon differently interpreted over time, by fixing a neotype in order to stabilize the nomenclature because the type material has been lost."

KEY WORDS In the present work we present a complex of species of the family Raphitomidae (Mollusca Gastropoda) comprising three entities: two have multispiral protoconchs, Raphitoma pupoides (Monterosato, 1884), the less known R. radula (Monterosato, 1884) and a new species with paucispiral protoconch.

A new raphitomid toxoglossan, &lt;em&gt;Raphitoma spadiana &lt;/em&gt;n. sp., is described from the Mediterranean Sea. It is the sister species to &lt;em&gt;R. contigua &lt;/em&gt;Monterosato, 1884, from which it differs in the different protoconch (paucispiral vs. multispiral), adding to a long list of pairs of caenogastropod species differing in their larval development.

Received 16.11.2018; accepted 07.12.2018; printed 30.12.2018; published online 07.01.2019 A new raphitomid toxoglossa, Raphitoma griseomaculata n. sp. (Gastropoda Conoidea), is described from the Ionian Sea. It is the sister species to R. densa (Monterosato, 1884) from which it differs in the different protoconch (paucispiral vs. multispiral), adding to a long list of pairs of the cenogastropod species that differ in their larval development.

Two poorly known species of genus Raphitoma Bellardi, 1847 (Gastropoda Conoidea) are revised. Raphitoma pumila (Monterosato, 1890) is redescribed and Cordieria cordieri var. hispida, Monterosato, 1890 is raised to species level and transferred to the genus Raphitoma, hence requiring the creation of a replacement name (R. hispidella nomen novum) due to secondary homonymy with R. hispida Bellardi, 1877.

Published morphometric data of the maximum diameter of protoconch I of 20 Raphitoma species belonging to 10 pairs of “sibling” species grouped in 12 sets were subjected to Orthogonal Regression Analysis (ORA) for congruence with the poecilogony hypothesis proposed by MANOUSIS et al. (2018). Results exclude the possibility that the obtained data are random but further investigations (e.g. DNA) will support the hypothesis.

The present paper is the second of a series dedicated to Pliocene molluscs of Liguria. lt deals with 13 gastropods species belonging to the superfamilies Rissoacea, Rissoinacea, Cerithiopsacea and Triphoracea. The generic assignment of each taxon is reviewed on the basis of the protoconch characters, and the description is provided for less known species. The genera Cerithiopsidella and Retilaskeya are quoted for the first time in Mediterranean area as well as Rissoina ( Rissoina ) varicosa Boettger and Metaxia abrupta (Watson). The new species Alvania ( Alvania ) obliquistoma is proposed.