1921 – Ali Sokoli, a well-known Albanian pulmonologist, was born in Rahovec. In the spring of 1946 he was denounced by the Serbo-Slavic communists and expelled from the Popular Front (later the Yugoslav Socialist League) and stripped of his Yugoslav citizenship. Due to the danger he was in, he was forced to hide in Belgrade for a while. To make a living, he worked hard in Belgrade. Around 1960 he went to Pristina to continue the fight against tuberculosis in the lung hospital (building of the Ministry of Health of Kosovo) where about 100 patients were regularly hospitalized. There he was appointed director of the ward for lung diseases and tuberculosis. He stood out as a fierce fighter against tuberculosis, which at that time was taking many lives, especially in poor countries like Kosovo. In Prishtina he also worked as a lecturer (Docent) in the field of Pulmonology. Working in this hospital was quite difficult because it worked with pre-World War II equipment. There he worked until his death on September 23, 1974, from a heart attack.

1927 – Attempts to make the first non-stop transatlantic flight from Paris to New York by French war heroes Charles Nungesser and François Coli disappear after taking off with their White The Bird. The disappearance of The White Bird is considered one of the great mysteries in the history of aviation. Some rumors circulated as if they had been lost in the heart of the Atlantic.

1945 – At the end of World War II, German military forces in the West agree to an unconditional surrender. The German instrument of capitulation was the legal document that carried out the annihilation of Nazi Germany and ended World War II in Europe. It was signed before the Allied High Command stationed in Karlshost, Berlin. 24 hours later it was also signed for the Soviet Union.

1960 – Franco Baresi is born in Travagliato. Baresi is a former Italian player and coach. He mostly played as a central defender, and spent his entire 20-year career with the Serie A Milan club, capturing the club for 15 seasons. He is considered one of the greatest defenders of all time and ranked 19th on the list of World Soccer magazine’s list of the 100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century.

1973 – A 71-day blockade between federal authorities and members of the Indian-American Movement occupying the Pine Ridge Reservation in Wounded Knee, South Dakota, ends with the surrender of militants. The protest followed the failure of an attempt by Oglala Sioux, the Civil Rights Organization, to blame tribal leader Richard Wilson, whom they accused of corruption and abuse of opponents.

1978 – The first Everest mountain climb without additional oxygen is made by climbers Reinield Messner and Peter Habeler. This adventurous challenge is undoubtedly the most dangerous and courageous in the sport of mountaineering. After the climbing of Everest by Messner, and Habeler, who were without supplemental oxygen, no group of climbers could undertake such a thing.

1988 – A fire at Illinois Bell’s Hinsdale Headquarters causes an extensive outage of the 1-AESS network. This is considered to be “the worst telecommunications disaster in the history of the telephone industry in the United States.” The number one electronic switching system (1ESS) was the first control system of the large-scale stored program or the electronic switching system in the Bell system.