Patrick Jude O'Brien, beloved husband, father, and grandfather, passed away on July 3, 2024, at the age of 70. Born in Winona, Minnesota on September 27, 1953, Patrick was the cherished son of Paul and Virginia O'Brien. He completed his education at Cotter High School before pursuing his passion for music and performing arts at Winona State University and Hosanna International College for Theology.

Following his dreams, Patrick journeyed to Colorado to work in a dinner theatre before settling in Ohio, where he became an integral part of the Alliance Christian Center community. It was there that he met the love of his life, Julie McCullough, whom he married on December 19, 1981. Together, they raised a beautiful family of five children in Winona, MN.

Patrick's entrepreneurial spirit led him to establish a successful floor cleaning business, which later evolved into Professional Cleaning Equipment, a business venture he shared with his son, Sean. Alongside his professional pursuits, Patrick had a deep passion for music and songwriting, showcasing his talents on stage playing guitar, harmonica, and sharing his soulful voice at various local venues.

Known for his outgoing and extroverted nature, Patrick was a dedicated family man who treasured his time with his family and grandchildren, showering them with love and creating lasting memories. His unwavering faith in Jesus Christ was a cornerstone of his life, influencing all aspects of his being and inspiring him to share the Gospel with all those around him.

Pat is survived by his loving wife of 42 years, Julie O'Brien, and their five children, Kelly (Dylan) O'Brien Pahman, Ashley (Brian) Schroeder, Sean O'Brien, Shannon O'Brien; seven grandchildren, Charles, Hunter, Brendan, Liam, Aidan, Erin, and Gregory "Callaghan" and siblings, Teresa Manlove, Kevin O'Brien, Virginia O'Brien, Rosemary (Jeff Scardamaglia) O'Brien, Maryanne (Michael Hancuch) O'Brien; brother-in-law, Gregory (P.J.) McCullough, and sister-in-law, Janel McCullough.

He is preceded in death by his parents; daughter, Erin; brothers, Dennis, Michael, and Paul.

A Memorial Service for Patrick will be held on Saturday, July 6, 2024 at 11 a.m. at Hoff Celebration of Life Center in Winona, MN. Visitation will begin at 9:30 a.m. until the start of the service.

In Lieu of Flowers, memorials are preferred to Stand in the Gap Ministries. SITGM is a ministry that provides relational care for widows nationwide with the mission of no widow alone. Donations can be made on the give page with Patrick O'Brien's name in the memo. https://www.standinthegap.org/

We would like to extend a special thank you to the medical team at Gundersen Health palliative team, St. Croix Hospice, and Bethany St. Joseph nursing home.