Our Team

Meet Neil P. O’Brien, M.B.A.

Neil P. O’Brien was born in Boston, Massachusetts and raised in Pinellas County, Florida where he attended Clearwater Central Catholic High School. Neil earned his BA degree from St. Leo University in Business Management. He then went on to Stetson University College of Law where he earned his Juris Doctorate Degree and Master of Business Administration in 2005. While in law school, Neil P. O’Brien spent time clerking for the Honorable Emmett Lamar Battles of the Thirteenth Judicial Circuit for Hillsborough County, Florida. Additionally, he completed an internship at the Office of the State Attorney for the Sixth Judicial Circuit for Pinellas and Pasco Counties, Florida.

Upon graduation from law school, Neil was immediately employed as an Assistant State Attorney with the Sixth Judicial Circuit serving the residents of Pinellas County and Pasco County, Florida from 2005 through 2009. While working as an Assistant State Attorney Neil was primary counsel in thousands of criminal cases ranging from misdemeanors to first degree felonies. He was lead counsel in over forty jury trials in his years as an Assistant State Attorney.

Prior to joining Florin Roebig, Neil P. O’Brien spent several years practicing law in the area of civil litigation where he represented homeowners, condominium associations, and commercial property owners in property damage disputes ranging from Construction Defects, Sinkhole Claims, Water Loss Claims, Mold Claims, Fire Claims, and Storm Damage Claims. He is also experienced in representing individuals in personal injury claims.

Neil has been admitted to practice by the Florida Bar since 2005, the Minnesota Bar since 2016, the Texas Bar since 2019, the United States District Court, Middle District of Florida, and the United States District Court, District of Colorado. Neil is also recognized as a member of the Million Dollar Advocates Forum. The Million Dollar Advocates Forum is recognized as one of the most prestigious groups of trial lawyers in the United States. Fewer than 1% of U.S. Lawyers are members.

Neil is married and has two young daughters.