Brian O’Brien

Published 12:00 am Tuesday, June 16, 2009

Brian Joseph O’Brien died June 5, 2009, at Lutheran Hospital in Wheatridge, Colo., surrounded by his loving family.

Brian was born June 30, 1952, in Newton, Iowa, to Frank and Ruth O’Brien. Brian graduated from Albert Lea High School in 1970. He moved to Colorado in 1978 with his first wife, Lori, and their children, Heather and Joseph. Their son, Ryan, was born in Wheatridge.

Brian’s fun-loving personality and gift of gab made him a successful car salesman and commercial roofing salesman.

Brian was united in marriage to Ronda Chandler on Nov. 4, 1990. Family meant everything to Brian and Ronda. Their greatest joy was having their family together. They also enjoyed taking long walks with their dogs, Guinness and Jack.

Brian loved playing golf with friends on the weekend. He was an excellent cook and enjoyed cooking dinner for family and friends. Sunday evenings were a a special time for family to gather together to enjoy Brian’s cooking. He had a friendly competition with his children as to who was the best cook.

A memorial service was held on Sunday, June 7, 2009, at Indian Tree Golf Club, Arvada, Colo., officiated by the Rev. Greg Bohlman.

Survivors include: his wife, Ronda, of Arvada; daughter, Heather (Joshua) Owen of Henderson, Colo.; sons, Joseph (Jaime) of Fort Collins, Colo., and Ryan and his special friend, Ariel, of Lakewood, Colo.; granddaughter, Harper Owen of Henderson; parents, Frank and Ruth O’Brien of Albert Lea; brother, Brendon O’Brien of Albert Lea; sister, Kerry O’Brien of Mound; sister, Maureen (John) Frydenlund of Albert Lea; sister Paddy (David) Baldwin of Venice, Calif.; sister Kim (Joseph) Forman of Albert Lea; sister, Kristy (Michael) O’Brien-Wetzel of Elyria, Ohio; sister, Mary (Peter) Grundhoeffer of Center City; sister, Angela (Richard) Greywitt of Savage; sister, Alice (Martin) Fauchier of Van Horn, Iowa; brother, Shane (Amy) of Bentonville, Ark.; nieces and nephews: Christine, Amy, Michael, Rubina, Angi (Tim), Tony (Christian), Alycia, Boston, Sarah, Samantha, Erica, Kelsey, Alex, Katie, Frankie, Jack, Richard, Michael, Sean, Charlie, Erin, Sam and Shea; and his loving mother-in-law, Mickey Barringer of Arvada.

Brian was preceded in death by his paternal and maternal grandparents; brother, Kevin O’Brien; and brother-in-law, Charles Faith.

Brian will be greatly missed by family and friends. Blessed be his memory.