Scholarships

Bradford Ross Adams Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was begun in 2001 to provide scholarships to Guilford history majors with demonstrated financial need.

Donald W. Adams Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide financial assistance on the basis of need to full-time male students enrolled at Guilford College, with preference given to residents of Texas, who have maintained a minimum G.P.A. of 3.00 while enrolled or have graduated from high school with a minimum 3.0 G.P.A. Students must also have demonstrated leadership ability and have participated in extracurricular activities and/or community service. The director of student financial services will administer the fund in accordance with the College’s financial assistance policies.

Adelberger Research Endowment

The Fund was established in 1999. The earnings are to be used on the research needs of physics students.

George I. Alden Excellence Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established in 1981 to provide scholarships to rising juniors without regard to need, with a G.P.A. greater than or equal to 3.25.

George I. Alden Endowed Scholarship Fund for CPPS

The endowed scholarship fund was established for Center for Principled Problem Solving scholars.

Albert N. Alexander Scholarship Fund for International Study and Capacity Building

The scholarship will be awarded annually with an annual gift donated by the Alexander family to a current student with demonstrated need, who is currently working off or on campus. The recipient must also major or minor in a field related to international studies or have an interest in international affairs, international relations or pursuing a career in a capacity building organization such as the U.S. State Department, Peace Corps, etc. The scholarship can be awarded in consultation with the business, political science and international studies departments. A new recipient should be chosen each year. If a student receives this award but does not return for the spring semester, a new recipient may be selected to receive the remaining portion of that year’s award. This is a temporary current scholarship that will not be available after the 2019-2020 academic year.

Dr. Malcolm U. Alexander Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established in 1996 to provide scholarship assistance for female students in good academic standing majoring in education studies, with preference given to minister-of-music students.

Charles Almy Memorial Fund for Student Research

The fund was established by various former students, friends and colleagues of Charles Almy, a long-time professor at Guilford College. Earnings from the fund will provide support to students and their faculty mentors for undergraduate research projects and field work in the geosciences. Support may include supplies, field work expenses, lab expenses, travel to professional meetings, etc. Awards will be based on merit, and applications will be assessed by a committee of faculty members from the Department of Geology.

Alumni Association Scholarship Endowment Fund

The endowment was established by the Alumni Association in the names of E. Garness Purdom and Clyde A. Milner. Awards are made annually to two rising seniors.

Sherwood Anderson Foundation Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to create the Sherwood Anderson Scholarships to offer creative-writing students scholarships to pursue their final years of undergraduate study at Guilford College. The scholarship funds will be used to satisfy the unmet financial portion of the student’s financial aid package, thus eliminating the need for the student to obtain loans.

The scholarship will be used to support not more than four students at any given time who have demonstrated interest and capacity in creative writing in any genre (prose, poetry or drama), with one of these scholarships reserved for a student writer from under-represented racial, ethnic, cultural and social groups in the United States and abroad. The preference of the scholarship is to support third- and/or fourth-year students that demonstrate a financial need. However, if there is a first- or second-year student who exhibits an exceeding ability and demonstrates a financial need, an exception can be made by the committee. There is no requirement for students to be English majors. A committee of three faculty members from the Department of English and Creative Writing will review the applicants and determine the qualified applicants who should be awarded the scholarship. The renewal of the scholarship from one year to the next is at the discretion of the selection committee. The scholarship recipients will be required to read Sherwood Anderson: Collected Stories (Modern Library 2009) during the academic year.

BAGC Boost Award

The award was established to provide financial assistance to students, with preference for students of color and with consideration of two factors: (1) urgent need and (2) merit.

All students meeting Guilford’s criteria for need-based financial aid are eligible to apply for emergency funding, which will help manage unexpected hardships and challenges during the school year. Rolling applications will include a one-page written statement to the committee describing the in-semester hardship and will be accepted throughout the year.

Any student meeting the criteria listed below is eligible for the merit award, which will be distributed during the school year. Criteria that will be considered for the merit award include:

enrollment as a full-time student;

a cumulative G.P.A. of at least 2.8 or a term G.P.A. of at least 3.0 for the most recent two semesters;

involvement in at least two extracurricular activities, which may include varsity sports and student-run organizations or clubs; and

involvement in at least one community service program on or off campus.

Please contact the director of the Multicultural Education Department for applications.

Karen Baldwin Endowed Quaker Scholarship

The fund was established in 2008 to provide one scholarship annually to a financially deserving Quaker student selected by Guilford.

The Barrow Family Endowed Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established to provide need-based scholarships to business or elementary education majors from North Carolina.

The Beaman Family Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established to provide unrestricted scholarships.

B. J. Beason Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship grants to Quaker students enrolled at Guilford with preferential consideration given to, but not limited to, Quaker students from North Carolina.

Anthony and Barbara Blake Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarships to students with demonstrated financial need studying in the areas of humanities, natural sciences and mathematics, and social sciences.

Bonner Scholars Endowment

The fund was established to provide scholarships to 60 Bonner Scholars. The Bonner Scholars Program provides four-year community service scholarships to students with high financial need and a commitment to service, with applications accepted year-round and admissions decisions made on a rolling basis.

J.R. and Margaret Boyd Scholarship in Mathematics

The fund was established to provide financial aid to Guilford mathematics majors. Students eligible for awards from the fund are defined as full-time students having:

completed at least one academic year with a minimum of 24 credits hours at Guilford prior to the semester(s) of the award;

declared a major in mathematics; and

demonstrated through academic work at Guilford exceptional promise in becoming a mathematician.

Mary Broos Endowment for Athletic Training

The endowment was established in 2008 by gifts from many donors. The endowment is to be a comprehensive fund that will create scholarships for students pursuing a degree in sports medicine and provide programmatic support for sports medicine and athletic training within the intercollegiate athletics program.

Joseph M. Bryan Sr. Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established in 1995 to provide scholarships to Guilford students.

Dr. Edward Flud Burrows Endowed Service Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 2006. Recipients shall be upper-class Guilford students (juniors and seniors) who in their first two years have demonstrated community service in the areas of peace studies, racial justice, or gay and lesbian issues.

Campbell Presidential Scholarships

The scholarship was created by Malcolm and Jeanne Campbell for new incoming students from Montclair and/or West Essex counties in New Jersey. The intent is to provide a scholarship that the same student will continue to receive for up to four years if he or she maintains a 3.0 G.P.A. and remains in good standing at the College.

Eva Campbell Fund

The fund was established to provide aid for biology majors.

Cargill Foundation Endowment for Environmental Studies

The fund was established by the Margaret A. Cargill Foundation to support the Environmental Studies department as well as provide merit-based student scholarships for study abroad opportunities that demonstrate values and interest for the environment. Environmental Studies Scholars also demonstrate further good stewardship by interning with an environmental group in our local community, sharing their knowledge and experience from abroad, thereby completing a circle of learning, experience and application.

M.L. Carr Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1986 to provide scholarships to support full-time Guilford students.

Jesse C. Carson, Jr., Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2004 to provide financial aid to Guilford students, with preference to students who are residents of Rowan or Stokes counties, North Carolina.

Mary Ellen Cathey Scholarship for Music

The endowment was established in 1995 to provide financial assistance to Guilford music students in good academic standing with financial need, and with preference to a minority student.

Ethel J. Chadwick Scholarship

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarships to students with economic need and with preference to students from Guilford County, North Carolina.

Chamberlin Family Scholarship Fund

Earnings from the fund provide scholarships to one or more students who have demonstrated financial need. The award will be determined by the director of financial aid. Awards may be renewed up to four years as long as the student is in good standing and making acceptable progress toward completion of a degree.

Dr. Robert E. Clark ’49 Endowed Math Scholarship

The fund was established in 2002 to provide two scholarships per year: one for a traditional-age student majoring in math and one for an adult student of any major.

Zvi Cohen Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established in 1990 to provide a prize for a student with serious interest in environmental issues.

The Continuing Education Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship assistance to CE students.

Continuing Education Endowed Scholarship

The fund was established in 1992 to provide financial aid for CE students with preference given to women with experience working and/or raising families.

Frank L. & Ethel W. Crutchfield Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1988 to provide scholarships with preferential consideration given to, but not limited to, students majoring in the physical sciences.

Raymond E. and Nan B. Cummings Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships for Guilford students.

Sarah T. Curwood Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1992 to provide scholarships to African American students majoring in education studies.

Charles A. Dana Scholarship Fund

The endowment was established to provide scholarships for students demonstrating academic excellence with potential for future leadership.

Carrie Perkins Davis Fund

The endowment was established to provide scholarships for Guilford students.

J. Franklin Davis Endowment Fund

The fund was established to provide unrestricted scholarships.

Laura Kelley Dobbins Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1973 to award annual scholarships with preference to students especially interested in preparing for service as part- or full-time ministers of music.

Dumas Endowed Scholarship Fund

Earnings from the fund provide financial assistance on the basis of need to one or two students. This fund provides financial assistance to those admitted to the College via the Student Success Program (SSP). The award will remain with the student for up to four years, until he or she graduates or ends his or her enrollment. Recipients must remain in good academic standing. The director of financial aid will administer the fund in accordance with the College’s financial assistance policies.

J. Wilbert and Marianna Dow Edgerton Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1999 to provide scholarship assistance for deserving students selected by Guilford, with preference given to members of the Society of Friends in North Carolina.

The Mary Ellen Ekblad Endowed Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 2014 by the estate of Mary Ellen Ekblad. The recipients must be majoring in biology or health sciences and in good standing. The scholarship can be renewed up to four years as long as all other criteria are maintained.

Nereus C. English Trust Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships for Guilford students. In granting such scholarships, first consideration is to be given to students nominated by the Quaker Club, provided such nominees meet the qualifications of the College for receiving scholarships.

Nereus C. & Mae Martin English Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships to worthy students.

Mary M. and Ray L. Evans Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1996 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students who are in good academic standing and who have demonstrated financial need, with preference given to students in the natural sciences or students who are Quakers, particularly those in the Quaker Leadership Scholars Program.

Newton F. & Laura Farlow Fund

The fund was created to provide scholarships for descendants of donors Newton F. and Laura M. Farlow.

James Maynard Farris Endowment Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide financial assistance to students demonstrating acceptable academic performance, financial need and some potential of becoming a leader in his or her chosen field; applicants must be residents of North Carolina.

The Mary and Carroll Feagins Study Abroad Scholarship

The fund was originally established by a bequest from Mary B. Feagins. The earnings are to be used for Guilford students that will be studying abroad.

A. Brown Finch Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1945 to provide scholarships for Guilford with preference given to residents of Randolph and Davidson counties, North Carolina.

Charles Allen Fletcher CPPS Scholarship

The endowed scholarship fund provides scholarships for Principled Problem Solving Scholars.

Victor and Rodgeryn Flow Study-Abroad Scholarship Fund

The fund will provide need-based study-abroad scholarships for expenses related to studying outside the U.S. with preference to North Carolina students. The director of the study away department will administer the funds available each year based on focus of study, a compatible opportunity and financial need.

First Union Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1995 to provide scholarship assistance to deserving upper-class students who qualify for need-based assistance.

The Stanley and Dorothy Frank Fellows Program at Guilford

The program was established to support upper-class students, juniors and seniors, who aspire to careers in business and industry. Scholarships are awarded to one or more full-time students with preference given to candidates who have shown leadership in student activities and public service, as well as unusual initiative through some type of entrepreneurial endeavor.

Hannah Katherine Gibson Fund

The fund was established in 2006 to provide financial assistance on the basis of need to Guilford students.

Joyce Gibson Scholarship

The fund was established to provide financial assistance on the basis of need to female students enrolled at Guilford College pursuing a degree in the sciences. The Director of Financial Aid will administer the fund in accordance with the college’s financial assistance policies.

Glaxo Women in Science Scholars Program

The endowment was established in 1994 to recognize outstanding scholarship, to provide an incentive for women science students to enter the science profession and to provide students with a woman scientist mentor at Glaxo, Inc. Recipients must be full-time women students at Guilford with a grade-point average of 3.0 or better.

The Googe Family Scholarship

Earnings from the fund will provide scholarships to one or more students who have financial need with preference to those who have matriculated through the Crosby Scholars Program within the Crosby Scholars Community Partnership in Forsyth County, North Carolina. Recipients must maintain at least a 2.5 G.P.A. Scholarship awards may be renewed up to four years as long as the student is in good standing. The award will be determined by the director of financial aid.

J. Robert and Rhetta English Hardin Endowment Fund

The fund was established to provide aid to deserving young men and women to secure an education which will make them more efficient workers in the Society of Friends.

Cyril Harvey Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships to students chosen by the Department of Geological Sciences with preference given to rising juniors and seniors majoring in a natural science.

Byron Haworth Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1995 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students in good standing with preference given to Quaker students with principal residence in Guilford County, North Carolina.

Horace S. Haworth Sr. Memorial Scholarship

The fund was established to provide scholarships to Guilford students with preference given to Quaker students from North Carolina.

Howard & Patricia Haworth Honors Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide scholarships to students of the highest academic caliber.

Samuel L. & Evelyn M. Haworth Fund

The fund was established in 1967 to provide scholarships to members of North Carolina Yearly Meeting to attend Guilford.

Jan Lippincott Healy Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1993 to provide a scholarship to a financially needy Guilford student who participates in a work-study program.

William Randolph Hearst Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1997 to provide scholarships to African American and Native American students who intend to reside in the United States after completing their studies.

Charles C. Hendricks Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide financial aid to a senior student in good academic standing of noteworthy character and achievement.

Hinshaw Education Fund for North Carolina Quakers

The fund was established in 1991 to provide a source of financial aid to enable North Carolina Quakers to attend Guilford, to promote scholarship, leadership and the development of Quaker ideals.

The Hinshaw-Hobson Educational Fund

Earnings from the fund provide scholarships to Guilford students as follows: 50% to students who are or whose immediate family are members of the Centre Monthly Meeting; 25% to students who are or whose immediate family are members of Providence Monthly Meeting; and 25% to students in good standing with preference to those who are descendants of the Hinshaw family. The award will be determined by the director of financial aid, along with the recommendation of the director of the Friends Center. Scholarship awards may be renewed up to four years as long as the student is in good standing and making acceptable progress toward completion of a degree.

The Mary Ann Hobson Scholarship Fund

Earnings from the fund will provide scholarships to students at Guilford who are members or whose family are members of the following Friends Meetings: Western Quarterly Meeting of the North Carolina Yearly Meeting of Friends or West Grove Monthly Meeting. The award will be determined by the director of financial aid, along with the recommendation of the director of the Friends Center. Scholarship awards may be renewed up to four years as long as the student is in good standing and making acceptable progress toward completion of a degree.

Eugene S. Hire Memorial Award Fund

The fund was established to provide a scholarship award to a student completing the junior year who has demonstrated the highest standards of scholarship.

Gertrude E. and A. William Hire Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships for junior and senior students who are preparing for careers in teaching.

Mary Ann Hobson Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships to students who are or whose family members are members of the following Friends Meetings: Western Quarterly Meeting of the North Carolina Yearly Meeting of Friends or West Grove Monthly Meeting.

James L. Hopkins Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1990 to provide financial aid to students graduating from East Forsyth High School.

Herbert & Virginia H. Howard Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1978 to provide scholarships to deserving students.

Lawrence T. Hoyle Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1979 to provide scholarships for students in good standing in either their junior or senior year who have demonstrated a strong interest together with a level of excellence in the courses of study in English (3.0 or above) and an interest in preparing for a career in law. The recipient must be a genuine applicant for admission at two or more accredited law schools in this country.

Alan Walter Hull Memorial Scholarship

The endowment was established in 1982 to provide financial aid for worthy and needy students preparing for a service vocation.

International Quaker Student Financial Assistance Fund

The fund was started by various donors to meet unmet needs for international students. The awards are selection in collaboration with the director of Friends Center and the Financial Aid Office.

Jefferson-Pilot Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1990 to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students.

Jeglinski Physics Award

The award was established in 1990 to provide scholarships to those selected by the faculty of the Department of Physics, based on academic achievement and promise in applied physics or astronomy.

Rose McGinnis Wilkerson King Scholarship

The fund was established in 2006 to provide scholarships with the following preferences:

entering or continuing students with financial need,

continuing students majoring in any of the social sciences, and

entering students expressing an interest in majoring in the social sciences.

Roxie Armfield King Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship assistance for North Carolina women with preference given to women from Guilford County.

W. F. King and Lorraine Hayes King Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2000 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students of outstanding financial need. Scholarship recipients are selected in accordance with the following guidelines:

Students must be American citizens who are in good standing or, in the case of new students, admitted to attend Guilford.

Preference shall be given to students from Halifax and Northampton counties, North Carolina.

Scholarships may be renewed for up to four years as long as the student is in good standing with a cumulative grade-point average of at least 3.0 on a 4.0 scale and making acceptable progress towards completion of a degree.

Recipients are to be selected by the Student Aid and Awards Committee.

The scholarship may not be applied to room and board.

William A. & Anne L. Klopman Endowment Fund

The fund was established in 1989 to provide financial aid on the basis of need to Guilford students with preference being given to those who are participating in overseas study programs sponsored by Guilford.

S. and E.P. LaRose Endowed Scholarship for CPPS

The endowed fund was established for Principled Problem Solving Scholars.

James Sampson Laing Art Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide scholarships for students with excellent capabilities in the field of art.

Rachel Lindner Leahy ’14 Memorial Fund to Support Experiental Learning

The fund provides financial assistance for Guilford College English and creative writing majors to engage in experiential-learning opportunities that will enrich their educational experience. Successful applicants must have a minimum of a 3.2 grade-point average. Awards are for use by majors at any point during their sophomore and junior years, including fall, spring, summer and January semesters/terms. Awards are to be used to support students completing an experiential-learning activities, such as internships, study-abroad programs, conference attendance and other activities that engage the student beyond the classroom as determined by the Department of English and Creative Writing. All else equal, preference will be given to students with demonstrated financial need. Awards will be awarded one or two times per year through an application process determined by the Department of English and Creative Writing.

Lhomon Hope Scholarship Fund

The fund provides financial assistance on the basis of need and merit to continuing international students from the indigenous Buddhist/shamanist tribes of the Eastern Himalayas that have completed two semesters at the College. The purpose of the fund is to encourage and support these international students in their continued education at Guilford.

Miriam C. Lindau Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1988 to provide scholarships to Guilford students.

Barbara Hagy Lindsay Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1991 to provide need-based scholarships to Guilford students.

Arthur & Ethel L. Lineberry Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1979 to provide scholarships for students from Chatham County enrolled at Guilford.

Harvey A. & Maxine K. Ljung Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide an annual scholarship to a chemistry major and a music major.

John L. Lomax Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established by John L. Lomax to benefit Guilford College students with demonstrated financial need who are junior-level or senior-level traditional-age students or adult students. Recipients are expected to complete an internship with John’s company. The internship will be coordinated by John, the College and the recipient.

Edward Lowe Endowment Fund

The fund was established in 2000 to provide scholarship assistance for music students to be selected by the Department of Music chair in consultation with other members of the music faculty.

Helen Margaret Dukes Mann Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1995 to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students with strong academic achievement in high school, strong character, SAT scores of at least 1000, and with preference to students from North or South Carolina. Recipients will be known as Margaret Mann Scholars.

Mary H. Marley Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships to students with demonstrated financial need with preference given to students preparing for careers in Christian ministry and service.

Robert K. Marshall Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide need-based scholarships to Guilford students.

Dorothy Ragsdale McMichael Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1993 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students who have exhibited outstanding academic ability and who have a demonstrated financial need with preference to students from Rockingham County, North Carolina.

Kenneth J. & Deborah Miller Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1986 to provide unrestricted scholarships for full-time Guilford students from countries that recognize the State of Israel, with priority to students who are full-time U.S. residents. This excludes students from countries that participate in any economic boycott of the State of Israel.

Eugene Earnest Mills Scholarship Fund

The scholarship was established in 1980 to provide unrestricted scholarships.

Clyde A. & Ernestine C. Milner Scholarship

The fund was established to provide financial assistance for Guilford students, with preference given to Milner relatives enrolled at the College.

James E. & Katheryn W. Mims Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1986 to provide scholarships to students majoring in economics, business management or business finance-related majors.

Mitchell Family Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students in good standing.

Abigail, Randolph, & Douglas Moore International Student Scholarship Fund

The fund was established from the J. Floyd and Lucretia Moore fund. The fund is named after their children. The earnings are to be used to provide assistance with a preference to international students

Alma Chilton Moore Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide scholarships to students who demonstrate financial need and who are making satisfactory progress toward their degree.

Joseph & Mary Thorne Moore Science Fund

The fund was established in 1968 to provide scholarships for science majors.

The Natural Sciences Scholarship Fund

The fund will provide financial assistance to an incoming first-year student majoring in one of the natural sciences. The fund is not based on financial need. The recipient will receive the scholarship for up to four consecutive academic years so long as the recipient:

remains enrolled at Guilford

maintains a cumulative G.P.A. of at least 3.25 (measured at the conclusion of each academic year)

remains a natural science major, and

stays in good standing at the College

The aim of the donor is to have the gift support one or two students, but not more than two students at any one time. Representatives from the natural sciences faculty, with assistance from the Admission Office, will select the student(s) in accordance with the purpose stated above. This is a temporary scholarship that will not be available after the 2018-2019 academic year.

Algie I. Newlin Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship assistance to full-time history majors with preference for rising juniors and seniors.

Elizabeth M. Newlin Memorial Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students with preference given to, but not restricted to, Quaker students from Alamance and Chatham counties, North Carolina.

H. R. & Elizabeth Newlin Scholarship Endowment Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships for Guilford students.

News & Record Sophomore Leadership Scholars Fund

The fund was established in 1998 to acknowledge a rising sophomore for leadership potential in the Guilford College and/or greater Greensboro communities.

Thomas Lorenzo O’Briant and Lillian O. Jordan Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2002 to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students who are in good academic standing and have demonstrated financial need.

The Marjon Ornstein Endowed Scholarship

The fund will provide financial assistance with preference to academically-achievement focused students from Palestine. Graduates from Ramallah Friends School may be considered, should other students from Palestine not be available.

Susanna Osborne Fund

The endowment was established to provide scholarship assistance to women residing in Mary Hobbs Hall.

George C. and Elizabeth G. Parker Family Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1995 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students who are in good academic standing and who have demonstrated financial need. Recipients shall be members of the Religious Society of Friends with preference given to students from northeastern North Carolina.

Eldon & Zetta Parks Scholarship Program

The fund was established by Dr. Eldon H. Parks ’56 and his wife, Zetta, with earning to provide scholarships to traditional and CCE students at Guilford with preference to those who live in Surry County, North Carolina and surrounding counties.

Curtis and Katherine M. Price Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1986 to provide scholarships for Guilford students with first preference given to residents of Union County, North Carolina, and second preference given to students preparing for the field of College education.

J. Hampton & Sallie Hester Price Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide an honors scholarship grant to students of the highest academic caliber.

E. Garness Purdom Fund

The fund was established in 1991 to provide an annual merit award to an outstanding junior at Guilford with high academic standing in physics or math.

Quaker Leadership Scholarship Program Endowment

The endowment was established to provide scholarship and/or program costs as determined annually by the QLSP director and senior College staff.

Amos and Martha Ragan Family Memorial Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1943 to provide scholarships to able and worthy members of North Carolina Yearly Meeting with preference to Friends from the Trinity and Archdale communities.

Herbert T. and Elizabeth H. Ragan Fund

The fund was established in 1968 to provide scholarship aid to Guilford students studying in the area of sports management, sports medicine and other related areas.

William G. and Mary Perry Ragsdale Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1989 to provide scholarships to financially needy students.

Ramallah Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 2014 for students with demonstrated financial need from the region of Ramallah, Palestine, or the Ramallah Friends School. Students are selected in collaboration with the College’s Friends Center and Financial Aid Office.

Haul M. and Mary Reddick Scholarship

The fund was established in 1979 to provide scholarships.

Robert Register Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarships to students with demonstrated financial need with preference to those majoring in English or communications, or participating in the College’s overseas study program.

Eric Reid Memorial Leadership Fund

The fund was established in 1991 to provide an award to rising seniors who must be in good academic and judicial standing throughout their years at Guilford. Recipients should exhibit leadership that enhances campus life, sustain a sense of contribution as student leaders, be recognized by peers as encouraging community, and conduct themselves with a balanced sense of humor and an energy about life that inspires others.

J. Paul Reynolds Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1984 to provide scholarships to one or more students enrolled at Guilford. The recipients must show particular potential in the arts or sciences and have a need for financial assistance.

Lola Monroe Richardson Endowment Fund

The fund was established in 1984 to provide scholarship assistance with preference given to incoming first-year students who wish to pursue a course of study in the area of first, business; second, math; and third, science. The recipients shall be of good academic ability with preference shown to students from first, Montgomery County, North Carolina; second, Randolph County, North Carolina; third, North Carolina; and fourth, the United States. It is intended that the scholarship provide assistance for one or more students for a four-year period with the requirement that a 2.2 grade-point average be maintained. The end of the second, fourth and sixth semesters will be used as appropriate periods for determining grade-point averages.

Lunsford Richardson Jr. Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1991 to provide a scholarship for students with demonstrated financial need.

Mamie G. Richardson Scholarship Fund

The fund was established as an endowed scholarship for students at Guilford College with preference for, but not restriction to, members of the Religious Society or Friends.

Charlotte M. Roberts Fund

The fund was established in 1996 to provide support for Quaker students, particularly the Quaker Leadership Scholars Program, at Guilford.

The Kenneth A. Ross and Alia J. Ross Lawson Scholarship

The endowment was established to provide scholarships with preference for Quakers.

The Kenneth A. Ross and Alia J. Ross Lawson Fund for QLSP

The endowment was established to provide direct scholarships with preference for Quakers and may include conferences, books and other direct student support at the discretion of the director of Friends Center.

Clyde G. and Mattie K. Rush Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2000 to provide scholarships for students who are members of the United Methodist Church in North Carolina or The Religious Society of Friends in North Carolina. Additionally, these students shall have demonstrated a commitment to their respective church or Meeting and shall have graduated from any secondary school program in North Carolina approved by the State of North Carolina. The recipient will be selected based on academic standing or potential, community service, character, leadership, and financial need. Preference shall be given to recipients who have demonstrated a willingness to support their financial need through the work-study program or any other work program administered by Guilford. Preference also shall be given to recipients who have expressed a desire to become upon graduation involved professionally in working in North Carolina with mentally retarded residents, the United Methodist Church or the Religious Society of Friends.

Mary Ina Shamburger Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide scholarships to Guilford students to recognize academic excellence.

Joseph H. Sherrill Jr. Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1989 to provide scholarships to Guilford students with demonstrated financial need. The recipients are to be financially needy students from Forsyth County and other counties in northwest North Carolina.

The B. Clyde Shore Endowment Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships for North Carolina Quakers.

Marvin H. & Pansy D. Shore Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1981 to provide scholarships to young people seeking Quaker higher education at Guilford.

Elvira Lowe Smith Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1970 to provide scholarships for “worthy students at Guilford College.”

William Frazier Smith Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1985 to provide financial aid with preference given to:

the children of the pastor at New Garden Friends Meeting;

heirs of Patricia Johnston Faherty and T. J. Faherty;

Ross Kendall and Ryan Kendall, sons of Gary and Sheila Kendall; and

Jason, Jamie and Melissa McClellan, children of Charles Richard McClellan Jr. and Peggy McClellan

Elisha T. and Louisa B. Snipes Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1952 to provide scholarships for lineal descendants of Elisha and Louisa Snipes attending Guilford and, if none, then to “worthy” members of the Society of Friends attending Guilford.

Hazel Steinfeldt Scholarship Trust

The trust was established in 1991 to provide scholarships to one or two of Guilford’s current junior or senior students, preferably students having financial need. The recipients must have a commitment to work for peace and justice in the world and it should be reflected in their career plans and goals.

Bruce Stewart Scholarships at Guilford College

These scholarships support honorees from a pool of eligible first-year candidates based upon need and merit. While financial need will be a prerequisite for consideration, an excellent academic record is expected of all Stewart Scholars. A recipient may receive the scholarship in subsequent years until graduation (maximum of four years) provided they maintain a grade-point average of at least 3.25.

Penny Smith Stiffler Endowed Scholarship Fund

This scholarship is to be awarded to two students per year that have demonstrated financial need. Preference shall be given to North Carolina residents who live in Mary Hobbs Hall, or if Hobbs no longer exists, a cooperative housing unit. The scholarship is renewable up to four years as long as the students are in good standing.

David L. Stumpf Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1996 to provide one annual scholarship to a student who demonstrates financial need and has a strong record of academic achievement. The scholarship is renewable each year during an undergraduate student’s career at Guilford as long as the student remains in good academic standing.

Ella and Les Swindell Scholarship Endowment Fund

The fund was established in 1994 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students who meet the normal admission standards and are in good academic standing. Preference will be given to students from split families or single-parent families.

Algernon Sydney Sullivan Foundation Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarships for Guilford students of demonstrated financial aid eligibility, academic promise, high personal character and a commitment to public service.

J. Spotswood Taylor Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1996 to provide tuition for needy students.

Emil Maywood Thompson Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide financial assistance on the basis of need to fulltime female students enrolled at Guilford College, with preference given to residents of Texas, who have maintained a minimum G.P.A. of 3.00 while enrolled or have graduated from high school with a minimum 3.0 G.P.A. Students must also have demonstrated leadership ability and have participated in extracurricular activities and/or community service. The director of student financial services will administer the fund in accordance with the College’s financial assistance policies.

Board of Trustees Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1978 to provide scholarships, one for minority students and one for foreign students.

Ulmer Family Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1990 to provide scholarships for students based on financial need.

Pringle, Jones, Van Huyck Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1972 to provide scholarships to a sophomore, junior or senior demonstrating excellence in biology and special aptitude for the study of medicine.

Van Leer-Campbell Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1996 to provide two scholarships annually: one to a Center for Continuing Education student and one to a traditional-age student. Recipients should have demonstrated financial need, a strong record of academic achievement and a commitment to community involvement during or immediately after College.

Vick Scholarship Fund – Vick Manufacturing Co

The fund was established in 1945 to provide two annual scholarships to young men and women with proficient academic records in high school, ability for leadership and interest in chemistry or allied fields. Preferences will be given to residents of Greensboro, North Carolina.

The Versal Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2003 to provide scholarships to students at Guilford with preference to those who are traditional-age upper-class students majoring in the hard sciences.

Wachovia Fund for Leadership

The fund was established to provide scholarships to juniors and seniors with financial need. The recipients must demonstrate leadership skills through active participation on campus and in the community.

JM Ward North Carolina Fund

The fund was established in 1948 to be used for JM Ward Scholarships with preference to Guilford students from Ohio, Tennessee and North Carolina who appear qualified for training as prospective leaders in the Society of Friends.

Elton and Edith Hedgecock Warrick Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1968 to provide scholarships to deserving students from Wayne County, North Carolina.

Kenny R. Watson ’61 Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1982 to provide scholarships to Guilford students with financial need with preference to those students from Surry County, North Carolina.

Van L. Weatherspoon Jr. Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1989 to provide scholarships for students with outstanding attributes.

Harry A. & Esther L. Wellons Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1983 to provide scholarships based on evidence of academic promise and demonstrated financial need.

Frank Erwin and Ava Roberts Werner Endowed Scholarship Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarships with preference given to students majoring in education studies (with an intent to enter careers in teaching or educational administration), business (economics, management or accounting) or foreign languages (French, German, Spanish or Japanese). Additional preference shall be given to students from Judeo-Christian traditions. Recipients will be Guilford students with documented financial need.

David J. White Memorial Fund

The fund was established to provide scholarship assistance to Guilford students with demonstrated financial need.

Nell Chilton White Scholarship

The scholarship was established in 1987 to provide tuition scholarships for Guilford students who are members of First Friends.

V. R. and Ruth L. White Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1968 to provide scholarships to Guilford students.

Robert and Lottie Wall Wildman Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1977 to provide scholarships to Guilford students.

Merry Moor Winnett Scholarship Fund

Named in memory of Guilford photography instructor, Merry Moor Winnett, the fund was established by her husband in 1995 to provide scholarship assistance for Guilford students who are in good academic standing and who have a demonstrated need, with preference given to students studying art, especially photography.

Thomas Wesley Wooten Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 1964 to provide scholarships for students preparing for Christian service, preferably members of the Society of Friends.

Atha C. Wright Endowment Fund

The fund was established in 1994 to provide scholarships for Guilford students.

William L. Yates Scholarship Fund

The fund was established in 2001 to provide scholarships to worthy students from North Carolina and South Carolina who need financial assistance to attend Guilford.

Prizes and Cash Awards

Fred I. Courtney Fund for Scholars in Management

The fund was established to provide scholarship grants to one or more students based primarily on academic excellence in management and demonstrated leadership potential.

Frederic and Margaret Crownfield Religious Studies Fund

The fund was established in 1982 to provide an annual prize to the student who submits the best paper in the field of religious studies as judged by the religious studies faculty.

Lynn and David Odom Leadership Award

Earnings from the fund will provide an award to a rising junior who has demonstrated leadership at the College and maintained at least a 2.5 G.P.A. The award may be renewed in the senior year as long as the student is in good standing and maintaining the acceptable G.P.A. The award will be determined by an awards committee to be defined by the associate dean of students, and should offer representation from the faculty or Provost Office as well as the office of the athletic director.

Hege Library Research Award

Hege Library celebrates excellence in student research through the Hege Library Research Award. This award is made possible by the generosity of the Guilford College Friends of the Library and Guilford alumni H. Curt ’56 and Patricia S. ’57 Hege. The establishment of the award coincided with the 25th anniversary of the 1989 addition to the Hege Library, as a celebration of faculty mentorship and librarian engagement in furthering students’ development as critical thinkers and thoughtful and creative scholars.

E. Garness Purdom Memorial Fund for Women in Physical Science

The fund was established to encourage female students enrolled at Guilford to consider a major in the physical sciences or in science education. Students of physics, chemistry, mathematics, environmental studies, geology, astronomy and physical science education submit proposals for consideration by a faculty committee from the physical science and mathematics departments. The award may be used for, but not limited to, funding travel to a meeting, seminar or workshop, or funding travel, equipment or materials for research. Students are encouraged, under the guidance of a faculty member, to propose creative and appropriate uses for the award.

Helen E. and Winslow Womack Research Award

The fund was established in 1997 to provide awards to encourage students with demonstrated financial need to continue their studies in the field of physics through research projects. The award recipient or recipients are chosen by the Department of Physics faculty, and that selection is independent of prior academic performance. This award or awards will usually be made annually, and a recipient can receive this award more than once.

Student Awards

Dean’s List

The Dean’s List, published at the end of each semester, consists of the names of students who carried at least eight credits of academic work for the part-time Dean’s List and at least 12 credits of academic work for the full-time Dean’s List in the previous semester and earned a 3.50 grade-point average.

Graduating Honors

Honors are awarded to graduating seniors who have attained a grade-point average of 3.5. High Honors are awarded to seniors who have attained an average of 3.7.

Eugene S. Hire Award

The award is given to an outstanding junior or senior who exhibits a willingness to help others learn.

Guilford College Scholarship Society

The society was organized in 1937, the centennial year of the College, to encourage and recognize high academic achievement. Students with a cumulative grade-point average of 3.5 are eligible for election upon passing 60 credits of academic work at Guilford.

Student College Marshals

The Convocations and Celebrations Committee presents candidates for the role of student College marshals to the faculty each spring. Eligible students are sophomores or first-semester juniors with at least a 3.5 grade-point average. The marshals serve at Commencement and public functions for the following two years. The student receiving the highest number of votes is designated chief marshal.

Who’s Who in American Universities and Colleges

Based on nominations, seniors excelling at leadership and scholarship are named to this national list of high-achieving students.

Faculty/Staff Awards

Bruce Stewart Teaching and Community Service Awards

Named in honor of Bruce, a 1961 Guilford graduate who served the College as director of admissions, assistant professor of education, assistant to the president, provost, acting president, associate to the vice president for development, trustee, chair of the Board of Trustees and trustee emeritus. He is currently head of school at Sidwell Friends School in Washington, D.C. The awards of $5,000 each were generously established and endowed by Trustee Bill Soles ’81; his wife, Melanie; his sister, Jan Soles ’87; and their father, the late W. Roger Soles. The College awards three Stewart awards: two teaching awards for faculty and one community service award for staff.

Professorships

Raymond Binford Memorial Professorship Fund

The professorship provides, as a part of the core curriculum, such functioning knowledge of the scientific bases of physical and mental health as will enable the student to appreciate the significance of these fundamentals, and to make practical use of them in the intelligent direction of his own life and the maintenance of all phases of his personal health.

Eli Franklin and Minnie Phipps Craven Professorship of Religion

The fund was established to promote the teaching of religion at Guilford.

Glaxo Wellcome Professorship in the Natural Sciences

The professorship was established in 1997.

H. Curt and Patricia S. Hege Professorship in the Arts and Humanities

The professorship was established in 1985.

Jefferson-Pilot Professorship Fund

The professorship, established in 1970, may be awarded in any academic discipline within the College.

Robert K. Marshall English Professorship Fund

The fund was established to support a professorship in the Department of English.

Sulon Bibb Stedman Professorship

The professorship was established in 1990 for an outstanding faculty member in the academic areas of accounting, economics or management.

John K. Voehringer, Jr. Business Professorship

The fund was established to support a professorship in any academic discipline within the business management department.

John A. Von Weissenfluh Chair of Ethics and Religion

The chair was established with preference given to senior faculty in areas of religion, philosophy, ethics or psychology. The chair is concerned with the interdependence of the culture of any society and its religion with special emphasis on that function of religion which deals with the definition and maintenance of the mores of that society.