We’re excited to announce that DUST, the largest online platform for science fiction films, has picked up our film ‘Make Do Or Mend’ for distribution across their platforms. Released through the official DUST website, Facebook and Youtube, the film has so far amassed close to 50,000 views which brings a film we initially wrote, filmed and edited in just 48 hours to a larger global audience than we could have ever hoped for. The film is now available to view on their website here.

Per their official website, “DUST is the first premium sci-fi entertainment brand that reaches fans across all platforms, giving voice to emerging, diverse and established filmmakers. We feature the best sci-fi short films, series, and innovative content that cuts through the present to invite the future.”

Being fans of DUST’s approach to sci-fi filmmaking and content, we jumped at the chance to have the film released by them and are excited at the opportunities ahead. It’s been a fresh experience for us reading the feedback to the film and a tremendous learning experience. We have many more stories to tell in the universe of Make Do Or Mend, something alluded to in the short.

Our thanks to DUST for the incredible opportunity of having our film released on their platforms, and a thank you to everyone involved in the making of the film, both in front of and behind the camera. And if you’ve not had chance yet, please do check out the film and let us know what you think!

About Make Do Or Mend

“For Hunters, victory is the only alternative to death. When Irix (Miranda Heath) returns with a new trophy, her kill has already attracted dangerous attention from rival Hunters. With the seconds counting down until the next hunt, her companion Ashak (Dan McGrath) claims to have a way out for both of them. Surrounded by enemies and with another brutal hunt about to begin, the two Hunters must decide whether to make do and embrace the inevitable or take up the ﬁght against their fate.”

Make Do Or Mend is directed by Christopher Bevan, written by Dan McGrath and produced by Christopher Bevan and James Hutton. To find out out more about the making of the film, visit our blog post here. To date the film has received a Special Mention in the Sci-Fi London 48 Hour Film Challenge, received official selections for The Short Cinema, Fargo Fantastic and Birmingham Film Festivals, and at the latter of these was nominated in 3 categories for Best Micro Short, Best Production Design and Best Costume.