Famous Delhi-based writer and activist Sadia Dehlvi, who prolonged battle with cancer, has passed away at her home. She was 63 and is survived by her son Arman Ali Dehlvi. Dehlvi hailed from the royal 'Shama' family. Shama was founded in 1938 by her grandfather Hafiz Yusuf Dehlvi.

Sadia's fame also came from her book on Delhi's culinary history in 2017 which is titled, Jasmine & Jinns: Memories and Recipes of My Delhi. She was a well-known food critic and understood the nuances of the culinary world. Following her death, prominent historian Irfan Habib tweeted, "Sad to hear about the tragic demise of Sadia Dehlvi, a well known cultural figure of Delhi, a dear friend and a wonderful human being. Rest in Peace."

She was born in Delhi to Yunus Dehlvi and lived in Shama Ghar in New Delhi. In 2009, Sadia published her book on Sufism with the title Sufism: The heart of Islam. The same was published by Harper Collins Publishers. Her second book also focussed on Sufism and was titled The Sufi Courtyard: Dargahs of Delhi. It detailed history and relevance of Delhi's Sufi culture. Sadia also edited Bano, an Urdu women's journal for the Shama Group.

Dehlvi was a close friend and confidante of the popular late author Khushwant Singh. In fact, Singh dedicated the book Not a Nice Man to Know to Sadia and wrote: "To Sadia Dehlvi, who gave me more affection and notoriety than I deserve." Following the release of the book, Dehlvi also produced a television show with the late author interviewing women from all walks of life.

Sadia Dehlvi was married to a Pakistani, Reza Pervaiz in 1990, with whom she had a son, Armaan in 1992. She stayed in Karachi along with her husband. Their marriage lasted for 12 years and ended in divorce after Pervaiz emailed her 'Talaq' thrice. She remarried later to 45-year-old Sayyed Karamat Ali. The two met at Hazrat Shah Farhad, a Sufi shrine present in Delhi. Sadia was prominently known for her work and continues to be an inspiration to many writers and poets.