Discover the charming allure of Burgersdorp, with its picturesque streets and welcoming atmosphere. Stroll through the historic town center and soak in the quaint ambiance, or visit the striking landmarks that define Burgersdorp's unique character. Experience the best of Burgersdorp while staying in one of its top hotels, ensuring a comfortable and unforgettable visit.

5-star hotels in Burgersdorp

Drostdy Hotel

30 Church Street, Graaff Reinet, South Africa

Located merely 5 minutes' walk from Urquhart House Museum, the 5-star Drostdy Hotel Graaff Reinet has a terrace. The luxury hotel offers an à la carte restaurant and features prime location with a…

Radisson Blu Hotel, Port Elizabeth

Corner Of Marine Drive & 9Th Avenue, Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Offering a currency exchange and a lift, Radisson Blu Hotel, Port Elizabeth is about 5 minutes' walk from Piet Retief Monument. Featuring 173 rooms with views of the sea, the hotel is at a distance…

Nova Boutique Hotel, Spa And Conference Venue

62 Albert Road, Walmer, Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Located about 10 minutes by car from Horse Memorial in Port Elizabeth, Nova Boutique Hotel, Spa And Conference Venue offers a steam room, a Jacuzzi, and an outdoor swimming pool. The hotel features…

Intle Boutique Hotel

Hacklewood Hill Country House Bed & Breakfast

Canal Guest House - Waterfront Accommodation

Mantis No5 Boutique Art Hotel

Dio Dell Amore Guest House

The Sands @ St Francis

Mi Casa Guest House

Bush Lodge - Amakhala Game Reserve

Isango Gate Hotel

Gorah Elephant Camp

Tenahead Lodge & Spa

The Oyster Box Beach House By The Oyster Collection

Anfani Boutique Hotel

Casabella Guesthouse

Miarestate Hotel & Spa

Glamping Safari Camp - Bellevue Forest Reserve

Shamwari Explorer Camp

Show more

Hide

4-star hotels in Burgersdorp

Premier Hotel East London Icc

Marine Park Complex, 22 Esplanade, Beachfront

The 4-star Premier Hotel East London Icc is located near a beach district, nearly 20 minutes' walk from Buffalo City Stadium. Guests can take advantage of an outdoor pool area as well as fitness…

The Beach Hotel

Marine Drive, Summerstrand, Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Situated 4 km from Saint Augustine's Catholic Cathederal, the 4-star The Beach Hotel Port Elizabeth includes views of the Indian Ocean. Offering a location a stroll from the Indian Ocean, this Port…

Paxton Hotel

Carnarvon Place, Humerail, Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Located nearly a 5-minute walk from HumeRail, Paxton Hotel Port Elizabeth includes 105 rooms with views of the harbour. This hotel features both Wi-Fi in the rooms and a private parking garage on…

The Kelway Hotel

Blue Lagoon Hotel And Conference Centre

Singa Lodge - Lion Roars Hotels & Lodges

Royal St. Andrews Hotel, Spa And Conference Centre

Mypond Stenden Hotel

On The Beach Guesthouse Jeffreys Bay

Luxe-Molen Boutique Hotel

Courtyard Hotel Gqeberha

Shaloha Guesthouse On Supertubes

The Boardwalk Hotel, Convention Centre & Spa

Beachwalk Bed And Breakfast - #Solar Energy #No Loadshedding

Bluewater Bay Sunrise Hotel

Cintsa Lodge

Oyster Bay Lodge

Mayfair Hotel

Southern Sun The Marine

Busa Guest House

Show more

Hide

3-star hotels in Burgersdorp

Pine Lodge Resort

Marine Drive, Summerstrand, Port Elizabeth, South Africa

The 3-star Pine Lodge Resort Port Elizabeth has 52 rooms and is located at a distance of 4.9 km from Happy Valley. Boasting the location only minutes from SANCCOB Seabird Rehabilitation Centre, the…

Hotel Osner

Court Crescent, Esplanade

Situated at a distance of 3.6 km from East London Lion Park, the 3-star Hotel Osner East London features Wi-Fi in the rooms, and a private parking lot nearby. Featuring a year-round outdoor swimming…

Premier Hotel Regent

22 Esplanade, Beach Front, East London, South Africa

The elegant 3-star Premier Hotel Regent East London is located within a 10-minute drive of East London Golf Club South Africa, offering 175 rooms along with a fitness centre, a shared lounge, and a…

Hotel Savoy And Conference Centre

Tsitsikamma Village Inn

Treetops Guesthouse

City Lodge Hotel Gqeberha

Greystone Guesthouse

Riverside Lodge & Conference Center

First Group Hole In The Wall

Tsitsikamma Lodge & Spa

Ocean View Hotel

Morgan Bay Hotel

Hogsback Arminel Hotel

Halyards Hotel

Cape St Francis Resort

Gonubie Hotel

The Duke Of Bedford Hotel

Humewood Hotel

Windsor Cabanas & Courtyard Hotel

Show more

Hide