Burgersdorp

Geography and History

Burgersdorp is known to be the oldest town in the Northern region of the Eastern Cape province of South Africa. Burgersdorp lies to the South in the tip of an inverted triangle between Aliwal North and Venterstad. The San (also sometimes known as 'Bushmen') lived here first, and left artistic evidence of their lives and visions in many caves throughout the area.

Burgersdorp has a rich cultural historical background and many call it "cultural heart of the North Eastern Cape". The crisp clean air, the friendly people and the various tourist attractions make the town a popular stop-over place. Many tourists, on the look out for something "truly South African", take the alternative route to pay the town a visit.

Churches: Several Christian churches are established in Burgersdorp e.g. Dutch Reformed, Reformed, A.G.S., the A.P.K, Anglican, Roman Catholic and the Methodist.

Activities

Many regard the beautiful town, surrounded by the Stormberg Mountains, as the cultural heart of the northern reaches of the province with no fewer than 10 national monuments - the museum alone is made up of four buildings worth a visit.

The major encounter that took place in these parts was the Battle of Stomberg, in which 400 Boer soldiers fought a much stronger British contingent and won, taking possession of Burgersdorp. Their joy was short-lived, however: 4 months later, Burgersdorp was re-taken by the British. As a result, a short town walk will reveal an interesting array of monuments.

Sport and Recreation: Outstanding sporting facilities can be found in and around Burgersdorp e.g. Fishing, water sport, camping and caravan, Golf, Rugby, soccer, bowls, squash, netball, tennis and cycling. Athletic meetings are often organised. The annual partridge hunt and pointer competitions are also very popular.

A memorial to the people of Burgersdorp who died in the South African War was unveiled by legendary Boer general Koos de la Rey in 1908.

Activities outside the town include fishing and hiking.

Accommodation

Accommodation options include B&B's, guesthouses and self catering.

Latest Listings - View All