This lush adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love marked Antonio Banderas' American film debut in 1991. Already a star in his native Spain after appearances in several Pedro Almodovar films, he plays Nestor Castillo, the soulful composer, trumpeter and younger brother to Cesar (Armand Assante), also a musician, but more interested in being a huckster.

They emigrate from Cuba to New York City to find fame and fortune, but end up working days in a meat packing plant with their band mates to support their gigs at night. Booking strongman Perez (Roscoe Lee Brown) makes life tough when they refuse sign with him and it's only a break from Desi Arnaz (Desi Arnaz Jr.) that launches them into the limelight. Of course, no one lives happily ever after.

While the production is nicely detailed and the performances are good across the board - from Assante and Banderas as well as Cathy Moriarty and Maruschka Detmers as their respective significant others - I couldn't warm up to the story because Nestor is too much a simp and Cesar is written in a contradictory manner which makes it hard to understand what's driving him: His quest for fame or his desire to help the little brother he took a knife across the jugular to save? Motives and allegiances are too oblique for the story's own good.

The song Nestor writes expressing his pining for the girl (Talisa Soto) he left behind, "Beautiful Maria Of My Soul", gets played almost as much as the title tune from That Thing You Do was, so it's a good thing it's a good song believably performed by the stars. It also shows that Nestor is ignoring his here and now (i.e. his wife and child) while mourning the past and gone, ignorant as to what really happened to make them leave Cuba in the first place.

Less a musical than a drama with music, The Mambo Kings does feature some good numbers with Tito Puente and Celia Cruz and the montage of the lousy gigs the band plays while awaiting their break was clever. The scenes portraying their encounter with Desi Arnaz - a ringer for his old man - and the subsequent appearance on the I Love Lucy show are also good.

For whatever reason, the movie just didn't connect with me; I was left with less a feeling that the movie was mediocre and more of a sense that it just wasn't coming across as well as it could have. When all the passion, music and immigrant tales on display, I should've felt something more in the end. Consider the score an ambivalent, just-above-sideways thumb up.

Score: 6 out of 10

The Video

The video is presented in 1.85:1 anamorphic widescreen and while there is light grain present, it doesn't detract from the overall image and lends a nice film-like look to the picture.

Detail is very good in both the fine hair and clothing details and in darker areas. The saturated reds and blues are free from objectionable noise and smearing. Black levels are good and skin tones are accurate.

Score: 8 out of 10

Languages and Audio

Audio is in English Dolby 5.1 Surround or Spanish and French 2.0 Surround with subtitles in English, French or Spanish. Audio tracks can be switched on the fly.

The sound is pretty much confined to the front of the soundstage with minimal rear channel involvement except for the musical scenes. Left-right stereo positioning is much better with accurate locational sound in relation to the picture. Some slight hiss was noted, but wasn't chronic or distracting.

Score: 7 out of 10

Packaging and Extras

The disc comes in the standard keepcase without an insert. No trailers appear before the main menu.

The Behind-the-Scenes Featurette is such a slight extra, it makes the puny bit on the bare-bones Sin City DVD look like the Appendices from The Lord of the Rings Extended Editions! A mere 4-1/2 minutes of generic EPK material, it provides little in the way of useful info.

The feature-length commentary by director Arne Glimcher is much better, but with a few too many lengthy pauses for my taste. He goes into many of the aspects of the picture's design - drawing on his artistic background - and how they're meant to reflect the characters' emotions.

He also dishes about the studio's ideas for casting the picture - they wanted Jeremy Irons and Ray Liotta(?!?) - when he was always set on Assante and had to bamboozle the studio as to how fluent Banderas was at English. (Not at all.)

Somewhat hidden on the case back is the detail that this is an unrated version with a restored scene which explains what happened to the Lanna character. The commentary reveals that test audiences didn't like part of the scene which won't be spoiled here, but it should've been left in for story purposes.

Score: 4 out of 10

The Bottom Line

While the movie didn't quite make me want to do a Carmen Miranda tribute, those who are fans of this movie - like my girlfriend who said this review should've read, "Mambo Kings features Antonio Banderas and is HOT! The End!" - will be pleased by this DVD, despite its thin supplements.