The Mambo Kings is based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning 1989 novel The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love by Oscar Hijuelos, about two Cuban brothers trying to break into the music business in 1950s America. The 23 Feb 1992 NYT reported that director-producer Arne Glimcher purchased the film rights just prior to publication, after reading galleys of the manuscript. Although best known at the time as the owner of the Pace Gallery, a prominent art establishment in New York City, Glimcher had movie experience, having previously served as an associate producer on Legal Eagles (1986, see entry), and as producer on Gorillas in the Mist and The Good Mother (1988, see entries). The Mambo Kings marked Glimcher’s directorial debut.

The 407-page novel proved challenging for screen adaptation, but Glimcher hired Cuban-born screenwriter Cynthia Cidre. She eliminated the second half of the book, which primarily followed “Cesar Castillo’s” memories. Working together for eighteen months, Cidre and Glimcher wrote twenty-four drafts before completing the final screenplay.

After several major studios rejected the project, Glimcher convinced Universal Pictures chairman Tom Pollock to finance it on a low budget, according to the 27 Feb 1992 NYT. The book contains scenes in which the fictional Castillo brothers appear on an episode of the I Love Lucy (CBS, 15 Oct 1951—24 Sep 1961) television series, and Pollock’s funding was contingent on being able to use a clip from the show, believing that the I Love Lucy scene would bring in mainstream audiences. However, I Love Lucy star Lucille Ball died on 26 Apr 1989, and when Glimcher approached her children, Lucie Arnaz and Desi Arnaz, Jr., they were still grieving and would not consider licensing the show.

Without I Love Lucy, Universal dropped the picture and Glimcher personally paid pre-production salaries while looking for another studio. About a year later, Glimcher wrote Desi Arnaz, Jr., a letter asking him to reconsider and they worked out a deal. With I Love Lucy, producer Arnon Milchan agreed to finance the film on a $15.5 million budget, along with Warner Bros. and Le Studio Canal +.

While actor Kevin Kline was announced as the film’s lead in the 25 Aug 1990 Screen International, Jeremy Irons later tested for the part, as reported in the 11 Feb 1991 Var, but Glimcher ultimately selected Armand Assante to play “Cesar Castillo.” Spanish actor Antonio Banderas made his American film debut playing “Nestor Castillo.” The actor spoke little English and worked with coaches before and during production to learn the language, as well as how to play the trumpet.

Principal photography began on 18 Mar 1991, according to a 15 Apr 1991 DV production chart. Promotional materials in AMPAS library files indicate the film shot on sound stages for three weeks at Ren-Mar Studios in Los Angeles, CA, then began location work in the Los Angeles area. The Embassy Theatre downtown was transformed into Club Babalu, while the Tower Theater became the Empire Ballroom. The Ambassador Hotel served as the location for the Palladium Nightclub, as well as the Starlight Lounge and the Hotel Splendor. A meat-packing plant in Vernon, CA, was used for the Castillo brothers’ workplace, while Lacey Park in San Marino, CA, doubled for New York City’s Central Park, and Westward Beach, near Malibu, CA, was used for the Cuban coast.

When Glimcher convinced Desi Arnaz, Jr., to let them use I Love Lucy footage, he also persuaded him to portray his father, Desi Arnaz, Sr., marking the first time, save for a brief comedy sketch on television’s Saturday Night Live (NBC, 11 Oct 1975—present), that the son had played his father. The 1 Apr 1991 DV reported that the I Love Lucy living room and Tropicana nightclub sets were recreated on Stage 3 at Ren-Mar Studios, which was known in the 1950s as Desilu Studios. By coincidence, Stage 3 was the stage in which I Love Lucy was filmed. While Desi, Jr., portrayed his father, footage of Lucille Ball as “Lucy Ricardo” in a 1952 episode titled “Cuban Pals” was intercut with the newly shot footage. The movie script was written so that Ball’s dialogue from the “Cuban Pals” episode would fit with the sequence.

The film was originally scheduled as a Christmas 1991 release, but the 15 Nov 1991 DV reported it was held up in post-production and its release would be delayed.

The picture opened on 28 Feb 1928 to mixed reviews, as a limited release on thirty-two screens, earning $319,793 from its opening weekend, according to the 3 Mar 1992 DV box-office report. The film expanded to 185 screens on 13 Mar 1992, and after a month in release, had grossed a total of $4.5 million, as noted in the 31 Mar 1992 DV.

The Mambo Kings received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for “Beautiful Maria Of My Soul.”

End credits state: “Special Thanks to Mario Bauza, Pedro Knight, Harriet Wasserman, Ralph Mercado, Jeffrey Hoffeld, Hilda Grillo, and the entire Machito Family; ‘I Love Lucy’ appears courtesy of CBS.”

Less

In 1952 Havana, Cuba, drummer Cesar Castillo and his younger brother, trumpeter Nestor, are rising stars, playing mambo at the Tropicana club. When Nestor’s fiancée, Maria Rivera, marries rival suiter, Luis Fajardo, the Tropicana club owner, Cesar confronts her, but Luis beats him. Maria confesses that Luis, who has mafia connections, would have killed Nestor if she had not married him. She swears Cesar to secrecy, and advises him to take Nestor to America for his safety. In New York City, the brothers stay with family in Spanish Harlem, and get jobs as butchers in the meatpacking district. Hoping to revive their music careers, they go to the ritzy Palladium, where Tito Puente and his band perform. Tito remembers Cesar from Havana, and allows him to join him on stage. When a shootout ensues on the dance floor, Cesar fails to notice, as he is having too much fun drumming. Soon after, Cesar falls for Lanna Lake, a cigarette girl at the Palladium, and makes love to her. Meanwhile, Nestor pines for Maria Rivera and writes many versions of a ballad about her, “Beautiful Maria Of My Soul.” Cesar promises Nestor that they will achieve success. One day, music arranger Miguel Montoya gives them an audition at Club Babalu, a small venue in Harlem owned by his mother, singer Evalina Montoya. The tryout is successful and later, the brothers hold auditions for a band. Their newly formed group, the “Mambo Kings,” books a show at the large Empire Club, opening for Puerto Rican singer Johnny Casanova. The Empire audience loves their sound and Fernando Perez, one of the biggest managers in the music business, offers to represent them. ...

More Less

In 1952 Havana, Cuba, drummer Cesar Castillo and his younger brother, trumpeter Nestor, are rising stars, playing mambo at the Tropicana club. When Nestor’s fiancée, Maria Rivera, marries rival suiter, Luis Fajardo, the Tropicana club owner, Cesar confronts her, but Luis beats him. Maria confesses that Luis, who has mafia connections, would have killed Nestor if she had not married him. She swears Cesar to secrecy, and advises him to take Nestor to America for his safety. In New York City, the brothers stay with family in Spanish Harlem, and get jobs as butchers in the meatpacking district. Hoping to revive their music careers, they go to the ritzy Palladium, where Tito Puente and his band perform. Tito remembers Cesar from Havana, and allows him to join him on stage. When a shootout ensues on the dance floor, Cesar fails to notice, as he is having too much fun drumming. Soon after, Cesar falls for Lanna Lake, a cigarette girl at the Palladium, and makes love to her. Meanwhile, Nestor pines for Maria Rivera and writes many versions of a ballad about her, “Beautiful Maria Of My Soul.” Cesar promises Nestor that they will achieve success. One day, music arranger Miguel Montoya gives them an audition at Club Babalu, a small venue in Harlem owned by his mother, singer Evalina Montoya. The tryout is successful and later, the brothers hold auditions for a band. Their newly formed group, the “Mambo Kings,” books a show at the large Empire Club, opening for Puerto Rican singer Johnny Casanova. The Empire audience loves their sound and Fernando Perez, one of the biggest managers in the music business, offers to represent them. However, a drunken Cesar insults Perez, believing he is a crooked mafia manager like those they knew in Havana. Perez withdraws his offer and makes a veiled threat that they will never succeed without his help. The brothers expect to get more gigs at the Empire after the success of their show, but the owner reports the club is booked for the next month. Turned away at other venues, the band finds work at wedding receptions, bar mitzvahs, and birthday parties. They start playing clubs in New Jersey, and a dispirited Nestor wants to return to Cuba, but Cesar reminds him that Maria is not waiting for him. In time, Nestor marries a maid named Delores Fuentes, and they have a son. However, he still longs for Maria and calls out her name in his sleep. Meanwhile, Cesar dreams of meeting a nice girl and starting a family of his own. Band leader and movie star Desi Arnaz is impressed after seeing the Mambo Kings at Club Babalu, and invites them to come to Hollywood, California, to appear on his television show, I Love Lucy. They film scenes with Lucille Ball, and perform “Beautiful Maria Of My Soul,” to the delight of friends and family watching at home. While staying at the posh Garden of Allah hotel in Hollywood, Nestor has an affair, and Cesar chastises him for not being faithful to Maria. As they argue, Cesar reveals the true reason for their move to America, reporting that Maria’s husband planned to kill Nestor. Back in New York City, the brothers release an album, “The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love,” and start making money. While Cesar dreams of becoming a star, Nestor is not as ambitious, and wants to open a small club. Nestor secretly has dinner with manager Fernando Perez, who offers to represent him. Perez notes that Nestor is a songwriter and can succeed without Cesar. When Cesar’s girl friend, Lanna Lake, learns of Nestor’s plans to leave the band, she reminds him that Cesar will be devastated, and champions the importance of family. Club owner Carlo Ricci invites the brothers to perform at the Palladium, and Cesar attributes the show to their appearance on I Love Lucy. However, Nestor knows that Perez arranged the gig, and that it will be the last time they will perform together. Perez has arranged for Nestor to join a show in London, England. The Palladium gig is a success, but as the brothers drive home, the car spins out of control in the snow, hits a tree, and Nestor is killed. Afterward, Cesar drinks heavily and refuses to perform until singer Evalina Montoya advises him that the music in his soul must be released. In time, Cesar opens a small venue, Club Habana, where he sings “Beautiful Maria Of My Soul” in honor of his brother.

Less