Sold Out – Sign Up for Back in Stock Email Alerts

入荷時に通知する

チェックマークアイコン ありがとうございました。通知が登録されました。

有効なメールアドレスが必要です。

By entering your Email Address you agree to receive marketing emails from us.

Selling Vinyl Since 1985. Over 15,000 5 Star Reviews.

ARTFUL DODGER It's All About The Stragglers (2000 US promotional-only 12-track CD album - the debut from the UK's most prominent garage duo, that launched Craig David to stardom. Features the breakthrough track Re-rewind with Craig David, as well as Movin' Too Fast with Romina Johnson and Woman Trouble. This custom printed disc is complete with custom printed back insert, featuring full tracklisting information)

TRACKLISTING AND EXTRA INFORMATION

1. Think About Me - featuring Michelle Escffery

2. Re-Rewind - featuring Craig David

3. Outrageous - featuring Lynn Eden

4. Please Don't Turn Me On - featuring Lifford

5. Twentyfourseven - featuring Nicole

6. Something - featuring Lifford

7. Movin' Too Fast - featuring Romina Johnson

8. R U Ready - featuring MC Allistair

9. I Can't Give It Up - featuring Nadia

10. Woman Trouble - Robbie Craig featuring Craig David

11. What You Gonna Do - featuring Craig David

12. We Should Get Together - featuring Nadia

Artist - Artful Dodger (click link for complete listing)

Title - It's All About The Stragglers (click link for more of the same title)

Promo - This item is a Promotional Item - Promos or ‘advance’ pressings differ to final or commercial releases, and are often unique. Typically sent to record stores, radio stations and DJs to market the artist, music, or both.

Year of Release - 2000

Format - CD album (CDLP)

Record Label - London Records

Catalogue No - PRO500035-2 (click link for more)

Country of Origin - United States (USA)

Language - Regardless of country of origin all tracks are sung in English, unless otherwise stated in our description.

Additional info - Picture Sleeve

Global Trade Item Number (GTIN) - 5052795649860

Condition - This item is in Excellent condition or better (unless it says otherwise in the above description). We buy items as close to Mint condition as possible and many will be unplayed and as close to new as you could hope to find. Irrespective of the source, all of our collectables meet our strict grading and are 100% guaranteed. Click here for more info.

RareVinyl.com Ref No - ATDCDIT464499

GENRES

00s Artists, Dance, House/Garage.

REFERENCE

Email - sales@rarevinyl.com to contact our sales team.

RareVinyl.com Reference Number - ATDCDIT464499

SELL TO US

Got vinyl records, CDs or music memorabilia to sell? – Sell to us at our buying site https://vinyl-wanted.com