Artful Dodger

It's All About the Stragglers (LONDON/SIRE)

Although the label sounds familiar, garage - a composite of drum and bass, R&B, dancehall, and house - is the latest musical sensation. And Artful Dodger is the hybrid genre's hottest duo; their first single, "Re-Rewind," topped the UK charts. Here, they subtly update the R&B prototype by adding multiple vocalists. Once again, the Brits rethink an essentially American form and make it their own.

Rainer Maria

A Better Version of Me (POLYVINYL)

Taking cues from their poetic namesake Rilke, Rainer Maria creates lyrics that transcend the boundaries of simple verse and chorus. On "Spit and Fire," vocalist / bassist Caithlin De Marrais sings: "Open up your chest / Put my hand inside / It's dishwater warm, smooth as porcelain, and I'll flake away like red rust." As De Marrais' voice strains to break free from her slight frame, Kyle Fischer's guitar adds steady precision and fierce hooks. With a jangly rhythm section, Rainer Maria try to shrug off the "emo" tag that has followed them since their inception. If their music didn't make such poignant commentary on human emotion, maybe they'd succeed.

BS2000

Simply Mortified (GRANDROYAL)

Adam Horovitz and his friend Amery "Awol" Smith started BS2000 as a side project, but all signs indicate that the band will take on a life of its own, outside of the Beastie Boys/Grand Royal association. While some cuts sport Adrock's familiar New York/Jewish rap ("Dig Deeper"), the highlights of this 20-song album are the instrumentals. Heel-kickers like "No Matter What Shape (Your Stomach Is In)" sound like something from under the big top with dancing Farfisa beats and pattering drums. And oddities such as "N.Y. Is Good," with its welcome from a little girl and its pipe organs, keep the CD spinning.

Moreno Veloso + 2

Music Typewriter (HANNIBAL)

Moreno Veloso has a lot to live up to. His father, Caetano Veloso, founded Brazil's tropicalia movement in the '60s. On his debut release, the younger Veloso emerges in full form. His idiosyncratic, wry style shines in the shift from the lilting bossa of "Para Xò" to the tortuous lyrical melody in "Das Partes." Electronica butts up against melodies before a surprising, bilingual cover of "I'm Wishing" (from Disney's Snow White) closes the set.

SoVoSò

Bridges (PRIMARILY ACAPPELLA)

A spinoff of Bobby McFerrin's Voicestra, SoVoSò is a stunning sextet whose a cappella blends jazz, gospel, and world rhythms with a strong Afro-Latin bias. The inventive, tightly structured arrangements retain an air of spontaneity; they are clearly the outworking of improvisational forays. From gentle, hymnlike ballads to driving grooves, SoVoSò dishes up collective creativity and supreme artistry.