Michael Chertoff (born November 28, 1953, Elizabeth, New Jersey, U.S.) is an American lawyer who was secretary of the Department of Homeland Security (2005–09).

Chertoff was educated at Harvard University (B.A., 1975; J.D., 1978) and graduated with top honours. He was admitted to the bar in the District of Columbia (1980), New York (1987), and New Jersey (1990). He began his career as a federal prosecutor, and, after receiving his law degree, he served as a clerk for U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., and later worked in the U.S. attorney’s office, becoming U.S. attorney for the District of New Jersey in 1990. In 1994–96 he was special counsel for the U.S. Senate Whitewater Committee, which led an investigation into Pres. Bill Clinton’s prepresidential financial dealings, centring on a failed real-estate development in Arkansas. He worked in the private sector at Latham & Watkins in 1980–83 and again in 1994–2001.

Chertoff first worked for Pres. fGeorge W. Bush as an adviser in his campaign for the presidency in 2000, and following the election he served in the Department of Justice Criminal Division. There he advocated the detention of hundreds of people of Arab ancestry following the September 11 attacks in 2001, a position for which he was later criticized. In June 2003 Chertoff became a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.

In February 2005 Chertoff was appointed secretary of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the second person to hold the post, upon the retirement of Tom Ridge and after an earlier nominee, Bernie Kerik, withdrew his candidacy. Chertoff received immediate and unanimous confirmation by the Senate, and supporters lauded him as a disciplined prosecutor who would take a hard-line stance against terrorism. He set about reorganizing the sprawling DHS, focusing on improving the screening of passengers boarding airplanes, the security of the U.S. borders with Mexico and Canada, and the safety of urban mass transit. Chertoff attempted to balance the need for homeland security with that for civil liberties.

During his first year in office, Chertoff’s biggest challenge was not an external terrorist threat but a domestic natural disaster. In August 2005 Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, killing more than 1,000 Americans and leaving hundreds of thousands homeless. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), since 2003 subordinate to DHS, bore primary responsibility for providing immediate assistance to victims of natural disasters of this sort and for managing the recovery effort. Accordingly, Chertoff was one of the federal authorities who was faulted for the slowness and inadequacy of the official response in the aftermath of Katrina. The disjointed actions of his cabinet-level department—despite its confident statements—compounded the human tragedy among those who were stranded or made refugees by the storm. Despite coming under fire for FEMA’s poor response, Chertoff continued in his position, working in subsequent years to tighten the borders and to guard against terrorism.

After stepping down as Homeland secretary in 2009, he helped form the Chertoff Group, a security consulting firm. In addition, he resumed his legal career.