Damascus - More than 130 Syrian lawmakers have prepared a draft law to impose sanctions on United States interests in Syria, parliamentary sources said on Saturday.

In a faxed statement, the sources said the draft law was a response to Washington's policy in the Middle East region. Last month, US President George W Bush banned all US exports to Syria except for food and medicine. Flights to and from the United States were also banned after complaints that Syria was supporting terrorism and undermining US efforts in Iraq.

The sources said that the lawmakers, independents and members of the ruling National Progressive Front, would submit the draft law on June 27, and expected it to pass overwhelmingly.

Further details of the sanctions on US interests in Syria were not given. However, the sanctions could impose restrictions on US oil companies working in the country, they said.

They added that Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa would attend the parliamentary session on Sunday to explain the Syrian government's stance.

According to Syrian media, lawmaker Sulaiman Haddad said some members of parliament had called for a complete boycott of the US. "But we in Syria believe in that there is still a thread between us and America", Haddad added.

The sanctions may be in the form of boycotting American goods and dismissed speculation that they could be against US companies working in the country, Haddad said.

Bush imposed the embargo under the Syria Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Restoration Act that the US Congress passed by an overwhelming majority last year. The sanctions authorise the US treasury department to freeze the assets of Syrian nationals and entities involved in terrorism, weapons of mass destruction, the occupation of Lebanon and terrorism in Iraq.

They also restrict relations between US banks and the Syrian national bank. Trade between the United States and Syria amounts to only $300m annually and there are currently no flights between Syria and US airports. Goods have traditionally been transported across the border from neighbouring Lebanon to Syria. - Sapa-dpa