Damascus & Beirut: Syria promised to fully cooperate with the new UN chief investigator into the assassination of a former Lebanese leader, but repeated its demands for a protocol with the UN commission defining the terms of its cooperation.

The comments by Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Al Sharaa came as UN officials said Secretary-General Kofi Annan has nominated a Belgian prosecutor to lead the next stage of a probe into the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.

Syria wants to reach a cooperation protocol with the new chief of the UN commission "to define the levels of cooperation (to a point) when they say that Syria cooperated fully with the commission without conditions," Al Sharaa said.

He spoke at a meeting of the National Progressive Front, Syria's highest decision-making body.

Mehlis has rejected a previous Syrian demand to sign a cooperation protocol with the UN commission .

Serge Brammertz, a deputy prosecutor at the International Criminal Court in the Hague, Netherlands, is to replace Detlev Mehlis, the German prosecutor.

Mehlis had concluded that high-ranking Syrian and Lebanese intelligence officials played a role in Hariri's February 14 slaying in a car bombing that also killed 20 other people.

UN spokeswoman Marie Okabe said that Annan had completed the selection process and would announce his choice on January 11.

UN diplomats said Brammertz had accepted Annan's offer to take the job and that the world body was waiting for the chief ICC prosecutor, Luis Moren -Ocampo, to write a letter formally releasing him.

Meanwhile, a pro-Syrian group that claimed it killed a Lebanese editor has threatened to kill the next head of the UN commission investigating the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, the editor's newspaper reported.

An-Nahar newspaper reported on Wednesday that it had received a statement signed by "The Strugglers for the Unity and Freedom in Al Sham," the group that claimed responsibility for the death of the paper's general manager Gibran Tueni with a car bomb on December. 12.

Al Sham is the Arabic term for the historical region that encompassed Syria, Lebanon, Israel and the Palestinian territories.

Brammertz was not commenting on issues relating to the Hariri position, including the threats, ICC prosecution spokesman Christian Palme said. The UN. also had no comment on the threats.

The alleged authors of the statement had not been heard of until they claimed responsibility for Tueni's killing.

Tueni, who was also a member of parliament, was a leader of the campaign to remove Syria's influence from Lebanon.