Congressman Mark Kirk is the frontrunner for the Republican nod for U.S. Senate, and three challengers made that abundantly clear Friday.

The four touted why they are the GOP's best choice in a strong shot at winning the seat vacated by now-President Barack Obama during a 90-minute session with The State Journal-Register's editorial board.

Kathleen Thomas, Patrick Hughes and Don Lowery noted differences they have with Kirk, R-Highland Park, the suburban Chicago congressmen with strong backing and money labeled as the most moderate of the bunch on social issues.

Hughes was the most vocal, criticizing Kirk for votes on the cap-and-trade environmental legislation and a partial birth abortion measure. But he also tried to stress that he's the only one of three in real position to challenge Kirk for conservative support.

"This is a race between Congressman Kirk and myself," Hughes said. "I've put together a serious campaign effort."

Lowery, a former southern Illinois judge, said candidates need to have a record and suggested Hughes hadn't voted until recently in Republican elections.

"We can't blame all the ills of society on Congressman Kirk," Lowery said.

Hughes, who lives in suburban Chicago, said he has often voted for Republicans but couldn't remember which Republican primaries he voted in before 2008.

"When I decided to get involved in the political process, I did it in a major way," Hughes said. "There are many ways to show your patriotism."

Mostly, though, the candidates stuck to stressing how they disagreed with Democratic leadership in Washington on three main issues: war, health care and the economy.

On the war, all four said they supported Obama's decision to send 30,000 more troops to help stabilize Afghanistan but don't think it's productive to set a summer 2011 on withdrawing troops.

Kirk, a naval reserve officer, said it's clear from trips over there that the country needs more support – which means more risks and sacrifice from the United States.

"I think the price is worth it," Kirk said.

Lowery said the country risks a repeat of the mess of the Vietnam War he served in unless it takes political games out of war decision-making.

On the economy, the candidates disagree with bailouts of financial institutions and stimulus programs backed by Democrats.

Thomas, of Springfield, said she thinks government should stay out and let free markets determine success and failure.

"It will rise and fall of its own accord," Thomas said.

The others criticized stimulus spending for the wrong priorities, including lawmakers' pet projects, waste and hidden costs.

"In the teeth of the Great Recession, I think that's probably not the way to go," Kirk said.

And on health care, all said they strongly oppose the reform measure Democrats are pushing in Congress.

Kirk said the Republican response he helped put together would reduce costs through tightening lawsuit restrictions and giving patients more options to buy cheaper insurance.

Hughes said he supports that idea but fears Kirk and other Republicans in Congress waited too long to push it.

"I just wish it had come sooner," Hughes said.

Lowery said health care reform has to be realistic and fair.

"We have to let health decisions be between the individual and the doctor," Lowery said.