MARTIN PARMER FOSTER

MARTIN PARMER FOSTER was born 3 Nov. 1822 in Glasgow, Howard Co., Missouri, son of Pethuel and Margaret (Bones) Foster. His father, Pethuel Foster, was a disabled War of 1812 Veteran who came to Missouri before 1820. Pethuel was born in Massachusetts, but lived in New Hampshire. Martin's grandfather was Revolutionary War Veteran John Foster, who married Anna Beard. Martin's mother, Margaret Bones, was born in Tennessee, a daughter of William and Jane (Bogard) Bones.

Martin Foster married on 1 Jan. 1850 in Johnson Co. Mo ( the marriage was recorded in Cass Co.) to (Polly) Mary Delia Carpenter, daughter of William and (Polly) Mary Margaret (Warren) Carpenter. Mary Margaret was the Daughter of Revolutionary war veteran, Martin Warren, founder of Warrensburg, Mo. Mary's other grandfather, Adam Carpenter, also fought in the Revolutionary War, and his father, George (Zimmerman) Carpenter, was killed in that war. The Carpenter and Warren families both had forts in Lincoln Co., Kentucky as early as 1780 and both families came from Virginia.

Mary Carpenter was a granddaughter of Martin Warren Sr., founder of Warrensburg. Her mother, Polly (Warren) Carpenter died and she was raised from age 3 by her uncle, Anderson Warren, along with his sons Tom, Jim and Martin V. who later rode with Bill Greenwood, Dave Pool, Anderson and Quantrill. Tom was at the Lawrence, Kansas Raid and Jim at Centralia. All three were probably at both fights. Anderson Warren, in his 60's, was called a Bushwhacker by the Federals. Mary Carpenter had married Martin Foster in 1850.

Martin and Mary (Carpenter) Foster worked for (he was slave overseer) and lived with, Larkin Maddox and family in 1850 in Jackson Co. Larkin's sons, George and Richard Maddox, who later were Quantrill Lieutenants, were teenagers at the time. Martin and Mary moved to the Kingsville area before 1860. Martin probably supported Quantrill's Guerrillas, or was a member of the Band. No proof. On 10 Aug. 1862, Martin and brother, Wm. P. were listed as "Disloyal" and required to take an oath of allegiance to the U.S. He was a Mexican War Veteran. The Alliance, Nebraska, City Cemetery, where he is buried, has Martin listed as a Confederate veteran, but no record of service has been found.

Martin's brother, William P. Foster, married Eveline Lusby in Johnson Co., Mo.,10 May 1852. He died in Johnson Co. 17 Mar.1864 and is buried in Pemberton Cemetery. William Perry Foster (called "Perry"), died in or around Kingsville on 17 Mar. 1864 at age 30. A 43 year old neighbor of his, Noah O'Neal, died the same day. Perry's wife's family handled the probates of both men. There is no record of how they died, but they were probably Guerrillas, possibly part of Andy Blunt's band. A Federal Unit went through the area that same week, hunting and killing guerrillas. On 10 Aug. 1862, Wm. P. and brother, Martin were listed as "Disloyal" and required to take an oath of allegiance to the U.S. Perry had been raised by his uncle, James C. Bone, from Tennessee, in Johnson and Cass Counties. Our ancestor, Pethuel Foster, had been married to James C. Bone's sister, Margaret Bone. Martin and Perry Foster were their sons.

His sister, Nancy Jane Foster, married Samuel Smith, 25 Dec. 1854 in Johnson Co., Mo. She died 14 Aug. 1859 in Johnson Co. There was at least one more sister, name unknown, listed as age 10-15 on the 1840 census.

Martin had served as a contract teamster for three months during the War With Mexico, driving a wagon loaded with supplies from Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas through Indian Territory to Sante Fe. He received 160 acres of bounty land for his service but his application for a pension ( #SA2279 ) was rejected, stating that he had been a civilian employee of The Quartermaster Department, not a soldier.

Between 1850 and 1883, Martin and Mary lived in Jackson Co. Mo., Gunn City in Cass Co., and Kingsville in Johnson Co., Missouri. Although there is no evidence that Martin supported Quantrill's Guerrillas during the Civil War, they often camped on the farms where he lived and worked.

In 1883 they moved to Fremont, Dodge Co., Nebraska, then on to Fontenelle, Cass Co. Nebraska. They can be found there on the 1885 state census. In 1886 they moved to Box Butte County and homesteaded near Alliance. They lived in a "dugout" home. In 1895 they had settled into the town of Alliance, where their daughter Cynthia and her husband, William Wiley Baker were living. W.W. and Cynthia moved on to Coffeyville, Kansas, and in 1896, to Nevada, Missouri, but Martin and Mary stayed in Alliance.

Martin died 17 Feb. 1897 in Alliance and was buried in Alliance Cemetery. His gravestone says "G.A.R. 1860-1865" but there is no record found of his civil war military service in the National Archives, Missouri State Archives or the Nebraska state G.A.R. records. The G.A.R. probably furnished their standard gravestone because of his service in The War With Mexico. Mary died 27 July 1907 at nearby Scottsbluff, Nebraska, where she had been living with her daughter, Pearl for five years. She was taken to Alliance and buried beside Martin.

Martin and Mary Foster's children were: Elizabeth Jane, Cynthia Azem, Horace Gaines, Nancy A.C., Mary, Lola, Columbia and Pearl Ellen.

My line of descent from Martin Parmer Foster:

Martin Parmer Foster m. Mary Delia Carpenter

Cynthia Azem foster m. William Wiley Baker

James Otis Baker m. Bertha Rachael Love

James R. Baker, Sr. m. Ruby Alene Wardrip