@jashugan said:

@the_hajduk:they we're running full on, not jogging

It might appear to us, mortal that they're running full on, but to super soldiers, it's like jogging. Perspective wise.

And why would they run full on wasting their energy when they can save up for the fight.

@stormdriven said:

@jashugan: If they were running full on, there’s no way they’d be slower than bolt, since Cap already jogged that fast during Winter Soldier

Cap is definitely not "jogging" in the tunnel chase. The life and death of his friend is at stakes. He is running full on in the tunnel but not in the Wakanda scene.

@skywalker95 said:

That scene where him and BP Sprinting was insane. The whole Cinema went mad

I remember I was so pumped at that scene lol. But i was like "where is Bucky?"

@skywalker95 said:

@goddamnironman: It was soo Cool how they were charging at the front towards the outriders.

Yeah wtf was Bucky

My sister tells me maybe he is carrying a gun, so pointless to charge up close. But would be way cooler to see 3 of them run together.

@renny said:

Im not sure as to mph. But they were running as fast as humanly possible. Faster than anyone else on their side of the battlefield.

They are in fact faster than everyone on the field, but I don't believe those soldiers are running as fast as your typical sprinters. Keep in mind they have all the battle gears on, and they are running on very rough and uneven surface.

@stormdriven said:

@goddamnironman: I never mentioned the tunnel chase, since that’s a different movie. I was referencing when he was jogging with Sam at the beginning of The Winter Soldier

I remember clearly Sam said he "ran like 13 miles in 30 minutes". Of course it's guess from Sam, but a former air trooper's guess should be fairly accurate. Then he will be jogging 26mph for half an hour. To give you clear perspective, Usain Bolt top speed is 27.8mph, but kept the speed less than 10 seconds.

Hence, proof of my original statement that what is jogging for Steve, from our perspective is world class sprint speed. But Steve and BP didn't quite reach 20mph in the battlefield tho.

@soaringturkeys said:

@socajunkie: except that calc hinges on the speed limit being 50kph.

Which is true, in small streets. but I lived in Berlin for 2 years. That underpass is 100kph. Like any city, underpasses are designed as fast motorways. This goes the same as Bucharest.

The Guy who made videos knows his math. But he doesn't understand City planning and only googled "speed limit in x"

Actually it's physiologically impossible for human to run more than 40 mph due to aerodynamics, frictions as well as gravity. You can read more about it here

No matter how strong Steve, Bucky and T'challa are, if MCU Earth's gravity is still 9.81m/s2 and no wacky hax like Spidey wall sticking power...then 40mph is the top speed.

@goddamnironman: lololololo

Did you just say it's physiologically impossible?

Ok. I guess you have a problem with cap pulling down a helicopter then.

You can't pick and choose what to add science to and when to suspend belief.

He was outrunning cars going 100kph. We see that. You can write an essay about it but I'll roll my eyes at you because Please tell me more how impossible running that fast is but it's okay for Tony not to be concussed every hit he takes. Every other physically impossible things that happen every single minute in CMBs.

@soaringturkeys said:

@goddamnironman: lololololo

Did you just say it's physiologically impossible?

Ok. I guess you have a problem with cap pulling down a helicopter then.

You can't pick and choose what to add science to and when to suspend belief.

He was outrunning cars going 100kph. We see that. You can write an essay about it but I'll roll my eyes at you because Please tell me more how impossible running that fast is but it's okay for Tony not to be concussed every hit he takes. Every other physically impossible things that happen every single minute in CMBs.

I am not sure "physiologically" is the right word, English is my fourth language, I mean should be "physically" right?

Because the simple fact that humanoid run with each leg strikes consecutively on the ground and friction generates pull, you can only strikes so hard on the ground before it becomes a jump motion. So it's just my best guess that they are running what scientist say is max possible speed.

And you keep saying 100kph without any actual proof, while I did at least based on a scientific paper. Like I said, it's the best guess and I think it's better than you just saying "100kph" all the time.

@goddamnironman: The speed of the underpass is besides the point of the argument here. Some parts are 80kph others are 100 kph. They are highway systems that extend straight through the city to the autobahns. Everyone speeds beyond 100kph despite 80 or 100.

The point is you disregarded a feat because you wanted to put scientific notions behind this.

That's utter ridiculousness. If you can't see the fallacy in that then what are you doing in a forum about fictional beings.

Tell me what does science say about the possibility of a man being able to handle a chainsaw to the stomach?

Tell me what does science say about being pounded and thrown around the city inside a metal suit?

Tell me what does science say about receiving a blast from nuclear radiation

Tell me what does science say about being bitten by a radio active spider?

Tell me what does science say about anything else.

You can't. You simply can't pick and choose what belief to suspend. And it is not to your credit just because I didn't give proof.

By your standards of arguing. You can claim that the world is flat and give me calculations.and if I say no the world is round, you disregard my claim because I didn't put evidence up. Just because you said something ridiculous, doesn't mean i'm in any obligation to entertain it.