Topline

Universal Pictures’ Fast and Furious is a media franchise of at least 10 action, street racing films that have aired over the past 20 years–here’s how to watch the Fast and Furious films in order.

Key Facts

Chronological Order Of Fast And Furious

The Fast and the Furious (2001)

The first installation of the film series follows Brian O’Conner, portrayed by the late Paul Walker, an undercover cop investigating Los Angeles street racers Dominic Toretto, played by Vin Diesel, and his rival, Johnny Tran.

2 Fast 2 Furious (2003)

Released two years after the original and now set in Miami, this film follows now ex-officer Brian O’Conner continuously dabbling in street racing and now tasked with working with federal agents to take down a drug lord. Franchise regulars rapper Chris “Ludacris” Bridges and singer Tyrese joined in this film.

Fast & Furious (2009)

Returning to Los Angeles, Brian O’Conner, now an FBI agent, and Dominic Toretto collaborate to investigate the death of Toretto’s loved one.

Fast Five (2011)

Brian O’Conner, Dominic Toretto and his sister and O’Conner’s lover, Mia Toretto, are on the run in Brazil from federal agent Luke Hobbs, who is played by Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson.

Fast & Furious 6 (2013)

The federal agent played by Johnson is now collaborating with Dominic Toretto, Brian O’Conner and their street racing crew to take down a gang and a terrorist named Owen Shaw for full pardon of everyone in their crew who are now living as fugitives after the heist in Brazil.

The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006)

Though released in 2006, moments of this movie in the franchise take place amid Fast and Furious 6, as Owen Shaw’s brother, Deckard Shaw, supposedly kills a former member of Dominic Toretto’s crew, Han Lue, while he is in Japan. This was the least successful film of the franchise.

Furious 7 (2015)

This film, which was the most successful of the franchise and lead character Paul Walker’s last film after he died amidst filming it in the fall of 2013, follows the crew attempting to rescue a kidnapped programmer in exchange for their protection from Owen Shaw’s brother, Deckard Shaw.

The Fate of the Furious (2017)

The crew, scattered across the globe, unites to bring Dominic Toretto to safety after being tricked into working for a criminal mastermind named Cipher.

Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw (2019)

Luke Hobbs and Deckard Shaw collaborate to stop a former soldier's plot to destroy humanity.

F9: The Fast Saga (2021)

While living off the grid now, the crew reunites to challenge Dominic Toretto’s long lost brother behind the scheme, Jakob Toretto, who is played by pro-wrestler John Cena. It is also revealed in this film that Han Lue was alive.

Fast X (2023)

In this film, the crew must battle a former foe who has plotted revenge against them.

Most Successful Fast And Furious Films