Yves Bonnefoy, generally regarded as France's pre-eminent poet of the postwar era, as well as its leading translator of Shakespeare and a wide-ranging art critic, died on July 1 in Paris at the age of 93.

French President François Hollande called Mr. Bonnefoy "one of the greatest poets of the 20th century" and praised him for "elevating our language to its supreme degree of precision and beauty." His wrote more than 100 books, and saw his works translated into 30 languages.

Mr. Bonnefoy burst onto the literary scene in 1953 with On the Motion and Immobility of Douve, a long poetic sequence that revolved around a mysterious female figure, Douve, whose shifting guises invoked the powers of death and rebirth and poetry itself.

"It was a stunning achievement, a work of extraordinary technical mastery, playing with the traditional alexandrine, the 12-syllable line, but subverting it," John Naughton, the author of The Poetics of Yves Bonnefoy (1984), said in an interview. "Readers sensed that a new voice had come on the scene and that a new generation was coming to prominence after the war."

By 1978, when his collected poems were published, Mr. Bonnefoy's position as France's most important poet, and one if its most influential men of letters, was secure. The French Academy awarded him its grand prize for poetry in 1981, and in 1987 he was awarded the Goncourt Prize for Poetry.

Yves Bonnefoy was born June 24, 1923, in Tours. His father, Élie, who worked in a locomotive-assembly shop, died when Yves was 13. His mother, Hélène, worked as a schoolteacher to support the family.

After graduating from the Lycée Descartes, where he took advanced courses in philosophy and mathematics, Yves studied mathematics at the Université de Poitiers. In 1943, he headed to Paris, ostensibly to complete his studies in mathematics, but he was determined to establish himself as a writer and, deeply influenced by André Breton and Paul Éluard, to mingle with the surrealists.

He started a surrealist journal, called Revolution, Night, in which he published a long poem, Heart Space. Gradually, however, he found himself out of sympathy with the movement and its obsession with magic and the supernatural.

He took courses at the Sorbonne, somewhat aimlessly, but managed to obtain travel grants that took him to Italy, the Netherlands and London. He returned to the study of philosophy and completed a thesis on Kierkegaard and Baudelaire at the Sorbonne under the direction of Jean Wahl, a pivotal figure who helped introduce Hegel and Kierkegaard to France.

Mr. Wahl found a position for Mr. Bonnefoy at the National Centre for Scientific Research to write on what was known as the New Criticism and the philosophy of literary criticism in the English language. An essay he wrote about English and French criticism found its way to the journal Encounter, which published it in 1958, securing his entrée to the British and U.S. academic worlds. He later taught literature at several U.S. universities, including Brandeis, the City University of New York, Johns Hopkins, Princeton and Yale.

Mr. Bonnefoy came of age in the midst of a world war and a seeming collapse of all civilized values and beliefs. His poetry was suffused with the search for unity and meaning in a meaningless age. Central to his thinking was the concept of "presence" – usually stimulated by the natural world, of "time transfigured by the moment," as he once put it.

In this quest, language was the key that both opens and locks the doors of perception. "We are deprived through words of an authentic intimacy with what we are, or with what the Other is," he said in a 1994 interview with The Paris Review.

"We need poetry, not to regain this intimacy, which is impossible, but to remember that we miss it and to prove to ourselves the value of those moments when we are able to encounter other people, or trees, or anything, beyond words, in silence."

His self-searching continued in his 1958 collection Yesterday's Wilderness Kingdom, but his 1965 book, Words in Stone, reflected a sense of spiritual calm, or at least resignation. For several years, he had been renovating an old farmhouse in Provence, with Lucy Vines, an American expatriate whom he married in 1968. (His first marriage had ended in divorce.) She survives him, as does their daughter, Mathilde Bonnefoy.

The countryside surrounding his new home supplied him with an inexhaustible store of images that populate Words in Stone, The Lure of the Threshold (1975) and In the Shadow's Light (1987). In 1972, he published a philosophical memoir, L'Arrière-Pays (Heartland), about his summer visits to his grandparents, who lived in a village in the Lot River valley.

In 1954, translator Pierre Leyris, who was overseeing the publication of the complete works of Shakespeare into French, assigned Mr. Bonnefoy a few scenes from Julius Caesar as a tryout. Delighted with the results, he asked him to translate the entire play, then added Hamlet; Henry IV, Part I; The Winter's Tale; and the poems. Mr. Bonnefoy plunged deeply into Shakespeare and his works, and never emerged.

Over the years, he translated 15 of the plays and all of the sonnets, and wrote extensively on Shakespeare's poetics. His translations of Yeats are equally well known in France. His many works of art criticism include studies of Goya, French Gothic murals and Italian Baroque painting.

"When I went to America in 1958 I knew Elizabethan English better than the contemporary idiom," he recalled to The Paris Review. "You were lucky if I didn't use 'multitudinous' or 'incarnadine' instead of 'many' or 'red.'

New York Times News Service