Come aboard for the most romantic things to do on a Princess Cruise. Whether you want to celebrate a special occasion, pop the question, embark on a honeymoon cruise, get married at sea, or simply set sail with your sweetheart — the Love Boat cruise line is a dreamy way to go. My husband and I commemorated our wedding anniversary on a Princess Cruise and fell in love with the selection of special surprises, heart-pumping shore excursions, and romantic activities.

“Love, exciting and new. Come aboard. We’re expecting you.” Sound familiar? These lyrics were part of the theme song for the immensely popular scripted Love Boat TV show, which aired from 1977 to 1986 on ABC. Then, in 2022, a spin-off reality dating game series called The Real Love Boat aired on CBS. What could be more romantic than a vacation on a Princess Cruise, the setting and inspiration for these two passionate series? Let’s set sail!

Thank you to Princess Cruises for hosting my husband and me on our romantic cruise vacation aboard Caribbean Princess.

Travel Mamas and Grownup Getaways sometimes receive compensation and/or hosted travel and sample products related to blog posts. This story may include affiliate links for which we receive a small commission at no extra cost to consumers. As an Amazon Associate, we earn money from qualifying purchases.

For cruising couples, every dinner is date night. Having sailed with a variety of cruise lines over the years, my husband and I were surprised by the scrumptious and innovative food served by Princess Cruise Lines.

Even the Main Dining Room wowed our taste buds at every meal. Included at no extra cost, each evening diners choose from a selection of appetizers, main dishes, and desserts. You might start your meal with a Crab and Shrimp Seafood Bisque with brioche croutons and basil. Then tuck into Seared Duck Breast served with sour cherry jus and celeriac purée. Top off your meal with a Princess creation like a Chantilly Swan cream puff, which was just as delicious as it was pretty.

With the high quality of food at Main Dining, you need not necessarily splurge on a specialty dining experience when sailing with Princess Cruises. But what a shame it would be to skip the delightful atmosphere and meals at these restaurants! Available by reservation at an additional charge, options vary from ship to ship. Foodie couples may want to purchase a discounted bundled dining package in advance.

Princess Cruises Specialty Restaurants

Crown Grill (steak house)

Sabatini’s Italian Trattoria

The Catch by Rudi (seafood restaurant)

Sterling Steakhouse

Kai Sushi

O’Malley’s Irish Pub

Crab Shack

Harmony (Chinese restaurant)

The Salty Dog Gastropub

Bayou Café (New Orleans cuisine)

Chef’s Table and Chef’s Table Lumiere (the ultimate gourmet dining experience)

2. Pose for professional portraits.

You know when you ask a stranger during your travels to take your picture and then you must politely act like the amateur photographer didn’t cut off your partner’s feet and perfectly capture your double chin? Instead, leave it to the professionals to snap a flattering photo of you two on your Princess Cruise!

Photographers will take pics of passengers at a number of venues, including as you board on embarkation day. Depart for your shore excursions with time to spare so you can take advantage of photo spots highlighting the port and in front of the ship. Look for portrait ops at onboard events like outside live shows, too.

Every evening (besides on the final night of the cruise!), wander through the Atrium to find temporary studios where you can be posed and photographed. Dress up for Formal Night for an opportunity to memorialize both you and your partner looking your snazzy best.

Strike a pose whenever you can because you only purchase the photos you like. View the results in your ship’s Photo Gallery. Digital images, single prints, and discounted image packages are available.

3. Surprise your sweetheart with a special gift.

Show your love by surprising your sweetheart with a special gift. Before setting sail, order treats to be delivered to your stateroom. Purchase beautiful floral arrangements, sweet treats like chocolate-covered strawberries, and Champagne on ice. Other fun options include a bucket of beers, Princess gift cards, or an adorable stuffed version of Prince Cruise Line’s mascot, Stanley the Bear.

Even if you didn’t order something in advance, you can still pick up the perfect gift while on your couples cruise. Peruse Princess Cruises gift shops for perfumes, watches, jewelry, handbags, and Princess souvenirs. Keep in mind that ship stores are only open while sailing, not in ports.

Also, the Princess Art Gallery features an array of art pieces for sale during live auctions, with shipping around the world. Or, pick up a present in one of the ports like handicrafts, candies, and duty-free liquor (for consumption after your cruise).

4. Renew your wedding vows.

Rekindle your love by exchanging vows on a Princess Cruise. What could be more touching than promising you’d marry your spouse all over again?

Princess offers a Renew the Love – Vow Renewal package for couples with a short but lovely indoor or outdoor ceremony officiated by the ship’s captain. The couple will receive fresh flowers, a celebration cake, and a sparkling wine toast. A pre-cruise and onboard wedding organizer will help coordinate everything so you can focus on the celebration.

Remember this special event with professional photos and a keepsake certificate. You will also be treated to sweet surprises in your stateroom. (Cost is $1,595.)

5. Get pampered at Lotus Spa.

Lotus Spa on Princess Cruises provides a great way for couples to relax together or apart. Save 10% off regular pricing for a couple’s massage for side-by-side services compared to when the spa treatments are booked separately. Options include a deep Bamboo Massage, Aroma Stone Therapy, and Coconut Poultice Massage with warm coconut-infused compresses.

For the ultimate in relaxation, reserve a Romance Package complete with a steam and aromatherapy mist in your own private therapeutic thermal suite before your couples massage. Afterward, you’ll be treated to two glasses of sparkling wine and a box of chocolates. My husband and I agree this was one of the dreamiest spa experiences of our lives!

Lotus Spa offers additional treatments like body therapies, Elemis facials, and even traditional Chinese acupuncture. On the day of a spa service, you will also gain access to the Lotus Spa relaxation area with fruit-infused water and tea selection, locker room, steam room, and/or dry sauna (on select ships).

Choose from salon services, too, like manicures, pedicures, teeth-whitening treatments, and hair appointments. Men can indulge in a Pro-Collagen Grooming Treatment with Shave including a mini facial. I got my hair professionally styled the night of our anniversary and my husband loved my curls! (Keep in mind that salon customers do not receive access to the additional spa amenities outlined above.)

6. Decorate your cabin door.

Decorating the exterior of your cabin door with festive magnets adds extra pizazz to your romantic cruise. It’s so fun to spot these displays as you walk the ship hallways. Plus, it makes it easier to spot your abode.

Some luxury cruise brands, like Norwegian Cruise Line, do not allow cabin door decorations. Thankfully, however, Princess does. Make sure to use magnets and not adhesive items because those are forbidden.

Use your door décor to let other cruisers know what you’re celebrating, whether it’s a birthday, anniversary, honeymoon, your first cruise, or a holiday.

Romantic Stateroom Door Magnets

Honeymoon Cruise

Just Married

Couples That Cruise

Our First Cruise

Birthday Cruise

Anniversary Cruise

Tropical Cruise

Christmas Cruise

Mixed Holidays

7. Order room service to your cabin.

Unlike many of the other best cruise lines, Princess Cruises offers room service 24 hours per day, every day of your cruise (besides disembarkation day). This was a glorious feature, especially after tiring port days when we wanted a quick snack while we kicked back. We could simply pick up the phone and order a bite to eat.

You’ll also find a continental breakfast card in your cabin. Fill it out and hang the form on your door before bedtime. Your meal will be delivered during the half-hour timeframe selected the next morning. Options include breakfast drinks, fresh fruit, yogurt, cold cereals, bread and pastries, and an egg, bacon and cheese breakfast muffin. There’s something so special about eating breakfast with an ocean view from a ship’s stateroom balcony!

Princess Cruise Line takes room service to a whole other level with Ultimate Balcony Dining, a paid option. Enjoy a four-course intimate dinner in your stateroom complete with crafted cocktails, fresh flowers, Champagne, and lobster or steak. An upgraded romantic balcony breakfast is available, too.

8. Connect during shore excursions.

Princess Cruises offers an array of shore excursions. From beach days and boat rides to cooking classes and sightseeing tours, there’s something for all types of couples at worldwide destinations.

Nothing brings couples closer than sharing new experiences. For adventurous couples, there are exciting activities like ATV tours and scenic helicopter rides. History buffs will enjoy exploring ancient ruins and fascinating monuments. Meanwhile, animal lovers will want to swim with stingrays, go dog-sledding with huskies, or meet capuchin monkeys.

9. Sign up for a wine tasting.

Swirl and savor a collection of bubbles, whites, and reds at a wine tasting during a Princess Cruises sea day. Go to the Vines Wine Bar to reserve your spots at this event and pay the required fee in advance.

You’ll receive information about the vintages from experts and take notes on appearance, nose, palate, and finish. Learn interesting tips for pairing wines with foods, too. Best of all for us, we met and chatted with another fun-loving couple, leading to lots of celebratory toasting!

10. Spend quality time together at the ship pools.

One of my favorite couple’s activities on a cruise is relaxing at a ship pool with a tropical beverage. The number of pools varies from Princess ship to ship. Those sailing in warm weather destinations typically offer more splashy options than those that frequent chilly ports like Alaska. Complimentary loungers and paid shaded cabanas are available as well.

Our ship, Caribbean Princess, boasted four pools, seven hot tubs, and a children’s water splash pad and plunge pool with an adorable whale-shaped small water slide. Two of the pools were reserved for adults aged 18+ only. The quiet Princess Terrace Pool was located all the way aft. The more social Retreat Pool was found near Lotus Spa and Sanctuary area. There is no fee for cruisers to go for a dip.

11. Relax on the Sanctuary Sun Deck.

Take advantage of cushy lounge chairs, fruit-infused water, and attentive service by Serenity Stewards at the luxurious adult-only Sanctuary Sun Deck. Some Princess ships even offer alfresco massages in poolside cabanas for an additional fee.

You must reserve a paid spot in the Sanctuary on Princess Cruises. The partially shaded Sanctuary is extremely popular on sea days so reserve as soon as you board. You can book a half-day or full-day. We never were able to nab a spot, but it did look dreamy.

12. View Movies Under the Stars.

Despite the name, Movies Under the Stars take place both during the day and at night. Hold hands with your honey as you view a movie poolside. Swim in the water or lie back in a lounge chair as you watch the plot unfold. In chilly climes, cozy up under provided fleece blankets. Complimentary snacks like popcorn or cookies are provided.

Contemporary feature films as well as classic movies are projected on a large screen at the Main Pool on Princess Cruises. Music concerts and live sporting events are also sometimes shown.

13. Watch the sunset from the ship.

Set the mood for romance by watching the sunset together. If you have a balcony stateroom, then step outside to take in tangerine and yellow stripes shimmering across the ocean as the sun descends below the horizon. There’s a reason it’s called the Golden Hour, so be sure to snap a duo selfie.

There are lots of other pretty spots to view nature’s nightly show on Princess Cruises. Seek a spot on the west side of the ship on pool decks, a top deck, or at the Sanctuary. All the way forward or aft should give a spectacular sweeping view, too.

14. Propose to your partner.

Pop the question on your cruise! Propose marriage during a special dinner, while taking in the sunset, or at the perfect moment in the port of your choice.

Take things up a notch with Princess Perfect Proposals. A pre-cruise and onboard coordinator will ensure all the details are covered including setup in a secret, private indoor or outdoor location. A proposal rose and rose petal décor will set the mood along with stateroom gifts, treats, and a celebration cake. A dedicated photographer will be there to capture this exciting occasion with keepsake prints. (Cost is $795.)

15. Get married at sea.

The most romantic thing you can do on a Princess Cruise is get married at sea, of course! Princess Perfect Weddings offers three tiers of wedding packages. With each, you can choose a symbolic ceremony or a legal wedding with an official marriage license. All ceremonies are performed at sea by the ship’s captain, with additional options for getting married ashore in select Princess ports.

Perfect Pair Wedding

For the couple and up to two guests, the Perfect Pair Wedding includes a pre-cruise and onboard wedding coordinator plus a wedding cake, a sparkling wine toast, and a keepsake certificate. Choose from a variety of colors for the groom’s boutonniere and bride’s rose bouquet. A personal photographer will provide lifelong memories as prints from the event, too. Special extra touches for the couple include a romantic breakfast and stateroom gifts and goodies. (Cost is $2,995 – $3,495.)

Timeless Ceremony at Sea

The happy couple may invite up to eight guests to the Timeless Ceremony at Sea. In addition to the perks listed above, this package also includes a solo live musician during the ceremony and digital photos. (Cost is $3,995 – $4,995.)

Timeless Wedding at Sea

The most elaborate wedding package offered by Princess combines all of the Timeless Ceremony at Sea highlights with even more romantic touches. Start with bridal hair styling and makeup for that perfect look. Then a live musician will provide entertainment at the ceremony as well as the reception. Along with the couple, up to 18 guests will enjoy a dedicated reception venue with custom custom-designed signature cocktails. Plus, the newlyweds will be treated to a premium dining experience. (Cost is $5,995 – $6,495.)

Wedding Extras and Larger Parties

Couples may choose to upgrade their wedding cake, purchase additional fresh flowers, or participate in a mother’s rose exchange ceremony. You can even expand your at-sea reception with live music or a DJ, wine service, cocktails, appetizers, food service, and more for up to 200 guests.

Larger weddings and receptions with an abundance of customization options are available for those wishing to tie the knot ashore in the Princess port cities of Fort Lauderdale in Florida, Los Angeles in California, or Juneau in Alaska.

Book a Romantic Princess Cruise

Ready for romance? Book your cruise directly with Princess Cruises now! Read Princess ship reviews and look for cruise deals via Cruise Critic.

Read More Romantic Vacation Tips for Couples

Explore activities for couples in Monterey, California.

Sailing with children? Learn how to plan a romantic getaway WITH kids.

Discover romantic things to do on a Royal Caribbean Cruise.

Plan the most romantic trip to New Orleans.

Save These Romantic Things to Do on a Princess Cruise

For future reference, keep this ultimate guide to Princess Cruises for couples. Just pin the graphic above to Pinterest. I hope you’ll follow Travel Mamas on Pinterest while you’re at it!

Which of these romantic things to do on Princess Cruises would you like to experience with your partner? Let us know in the comments below!

A Note from The Travel Mama: Princess Cruises hosted my husband and me aboard a Caribbean Princess Cruise in the Western Caribbean. I will not receive any monetary compensation related to this review. All opinions are mine, as always.

Sharing is caring!