01 of 21

Royal Hearts (2018)

Reality turns into a fairytale when Kelly, a hopeless romantic in Montana, and her father, Hank, a humble rancher, find out that he has inherited an estate located in a faraway land. When they travel there to sort things out, they discover that Hank has not only inherited the estate but the title that goes along with it: king. Father and daughter learn how to navigate the complicated waters of royalty and find unexpected love along the way. Starring James Brolin, Cindy Busby, and Andrew Cooper.

02 of 21

A Winter Princess (2019)

Carly, who is secretly a princess working at Snowden Peak ski resort, teams up with Jesse, the ski resort owner's brother, to plan the resort's 50th-anniversary celebration, in hopes of raising funding to make the ski resort into a year-round destination. Without a celebrity draw to the resort and a lack of interest from investors, Snowden Peak is put up for sale. Carly must decide if she should reveal her true identity as a princess to save the resort. Starring Natalie Hall and Chris McNally.

03 of 21

Royal Matchmaker (2018)

Kate has a gift for matchmaking, and now her reputation as the "Queen of Hearts" has reached King Edward of Voldavia. He wants his son Prince Sebastian to present his future bride at the Jubilee and brings Kate on board to help. Soon it's clear the Prince has a moat around his heart, but slowly Kate finds herself falling for Sebastian herself. Still, she's bent on doing her job and introduces him to her top match, Petra. Who will win the prince's heart? Starring Joy Lenz, Will Kemp, and Brittany Bristow.

04 of 21

A Royal Winter (2017)

After embarking on a last-minute European holiday, a young woman lands herself in the middle of a real-life fairytale after a chance meeting with a handsome local. The simple romance seems anything but after she learns that the "local" is actually a prince about to be crowned king. The couple must fight for their love—against the forces of the prince's mother who is set against her royal son's romance with the tourist. Starring Merritt Patterson, Jack Donnelly, and Samantha Bond.

05 of 21

A Christmas Carousel (2020)

When Lila is hired by the royal family of Ancadia to restore a historic carousel for the prince's niece, she finds herself falling for Prince Whitaker and connecting with him over their shared love of art. With Lila's help, Prince Whitaker is able to share his hidden interest in art with the duke. Starring Rachel Boston and Neal Bledsoe.

06 of 21

William & Catherine: A Royal Romance (2011)

Chronicling the love story of Prince William and Kate Middleton, this docu-drama lets you see the beginnings of what was to become one of the most celebrated weddings in history. At a pivotal point in their early relationship, William follows his heart and the advice of his mother, the late Princess Diana. An interview before her death held the message she left for her son: Hold on to the love of your life and protect it with all of your heart. Starring Jane Alexander, Victor Garber, Jean Smart, Alice St. Clair, Dan Amboyer, and Lesley Harcourt.

07 of 21

Royally Ever After (2018)

Sara is a schoolteacher whose boyfriend reveals he's the prince of a small country called St. Ives—only after proposing. His disapproving parents pose a threat to the engagement, while his sister surprisingly supports the marriage, training Sara to be perfect princess material. While adjusting to this new fairytale lifestyle, where love comes with rules and regulations, Sara must fight to remain true to herself. Starring Fiona Gubelmann and Torrance Coombs.

08 of 21

Fit For A Prince (2021)

Fashion designer Cindy is hired to design gowns for the ladies of the Hamilton family, who are hosting a charity ball. Prince Ronan, in town to attend the ball as a family friend to the Hamilton family, becomes smitten with Cindy upon their first meeting. The day before the event, an unfortunate turn of events happens, which causes Cindy to wonder if the dresses will be done on time. Starring Jonathan Keltz and Natalie Hall.

09 of 21

Royal New Year's Eve (2017)

Caitlyn, a magazine assistant and aspiring fashion designer, gets her world turned upside down when Prince Jeffrey and his presumed future fiancé, Lady Isabelle, come into town. Caitlyn gets the opportunity of a lifetime when Isabelle hires her to design a dress for the royal New Year's Eve ball where she's expecting the prince to propose.

Caitlyn splits her time creating a gown fit for a princess and planning the ball with Jeffrey. Romance starts brewing, but Jeffrey's royal commitment to marry an aristocrat and assume the throne stands between them. As the New Year's Eve ball approaches, Jeffrey and Caitlyn must decide if they can overcome royal tradition to pursue true love. Starring Jessy Schram, Sam Page, and Cheryl Ladd.

10 of 21

A Princess For Christmas (2011)

When her sister and brother-in-law are tragically killed in an accident, Jules Daly becomes guardian to her young niece Maddie and nephew Milo, and a knock on the door late one evening gives them an interesting offer. A proper English butler comes with a curious invitation in tow: a Christmas holiday with their grandfather, Edward, the Duke of Castlebury Hall, who was always absent from the kids' lives but wants to reconnect after the passing of his late son. Though Jules initially wants to decline, her acceptance makes for an unexpectedly magical Christmas season for the whole family. Starring Katie McGrath, Miles Richardson, and Roger Moore.

11 of 21

A Royal Queens Christmas (2021)

After physically running into Dee Dee Paretti, a Queens, New York native, and knocking over her box of dessert, Prince Colin agrees to make it up to her by playing the piano at rehearsals for a local Christmas children’s show. But what happens when Dee Dee discovers his true identity? Starring Megan Park and Julian Morris.

12 of 21

A Royal Christmas (2014)

A young woman who works as a devoted seamstress at her father's tailoring business finds out her doting European boyfriend is actually a prince. She travels to his home over Christmas to find a less-than-enthused mother, Queen Isadora, who makes her feel more at home with the servants than the royal family. Starring Lacey Chabert, Jane Seymour, and Stephen Hagan.

13 of 21

Christmas At Castle Hart (2021)

Brooke Bennett goes to Ireland to learn more about her Irish roots. When mistaken for a well-known event planner by Aiden Hart, the Earl of Glasgow, Brooke is hired on to plan his castle's huge Christmas party. As Aiden and Brooke spend more time together, things start to get complicated. Can Brooke keep her true identity a secret and successfully pull off the event? Starring Lacey Chabert and Stuart Townsend.

14 of 21

Once Upon A Holiday (2015)

A royal princess, Katie, is in the city on official business when she decides to sneak out and do some sightseeing on her own. After an unfortunate mishap, Jack is at the right place at the right time and comes to her rescue. They spend the next couple of days together enjoying the holidays before he realizes her true identity. Starring Briana Evigan, Paul Campbell, and Greg Evigan.

15 of 21

A Crown For Christmas (2015)

A young woman accepts a position as a governess for a European princess after getting fired from her maid position at a ritzy New York hotel. She initially butts heads with the troubled girl but eventually becomes a role model and friend to her—while falling for her widowed father, King Maximillian, at the same time. But a scheming countess wants the king's heart and hand in marriage and is determined to make the governess' life difficult. Starring Danica McKellar and Rupert Penry-Jones.

16 of 21

The Royal Nanny (2022)

MI5 agent Claire goes undercover as a royal nanny to protect Princess Rose and her children during the holidays after a threat is made to the royal family. As a childless orphan, Claire feels she doesn't know enough about caring for children to take the job. But when no other agent is available, Claire has to take the assignment.

While trying to connect with the children, Claire realizes that winning over their uncle, Prince Colin, could make her assignment easier. While spending lots of time together, and realizing their shared passion of pranking, the two begin to fall for one another. But what happens when Claire receives evidence that Prince Colin is involved with the threat against his family? Starring Rachel Skarsten, Dan Jeannotte, and Katie Sheridan.

17 of 21

Once Upon A Prince (2018)

A young woman, Susanna, is in for a surprise after she accepts help one day from a handsome stranger, Nate, at her parents' garden store in small-town Georgia. Sparks between them fly, but she gets the shock of her life when a photo of them gets leaked to the press and Nate is called back home by his mother. . . for his coronation as King Nathaniel of Cambria. The couple tries to make true love last despite royal setbacks. Starring Megan Park and Jonathan Keltz.

18 of 21

A Royal Corgi Christmas (2022)

Cecily, an American dog trainer, is hired to tame the new corgi Prince Edmond got for his mother, the queen, as a gift. Cecily teaches Prince Edmond how to train the corgi, Mistletoe, and along the way, they start to develop feelings for each other. Starring Hunter King and Jordan Renzo.

19 of 21

My Summer Prince (2016)

Mandy Cooper, a young executive assistant aspiring to become a PR executive, heads to Greenbriar, Idaho, after landing an opportunity to launch her career. After her move, a handsome British monarch with a history of scandalous behavior—Prince Colin of Edgemere—is arrested in the town for defacing a landmark while making a public appearance. Seizing the opportunity, Mandy sets out to repair Colin's image, but pretty soon things get a little complicated. The young publicist wonders if she can juggle it all: saving her own reputation and still having a chance at summer love. Starring Taylor Cole and Jack Turner.

20 of 21

Dater's Handbook (2016)

Meghan Markle plays Cassandra Barber who, after realizing she has a recurring habit of picking the wrong type of guy, turns to relationship expert, Dr. Susie, and her latest self-help book, The Dater's Handbook to help with her ailing love life. She follows the advice in Dr. Susie's book to find and evaluate potential suitors, and then must ultimately choose between reliable George and fun-loving Robert. It's hard to change old habits and place your faith in the experts, especially when your heart tells you something different. Looks like everything worked out in the end though, right? Starring Meghan Markle, Kristoffer Polaha, and Jonathan Scarfe.

21 of 21

A Royal Runaway Romance (2022)

Princess Amelia of Bundbury travels to the U.S. to reconnect with the artist who painted her portrait after the two sparked a romance during their time together. When the princess lands in California with no way of getting across the country, her uncle's bodyguard, Grady, (reluctantly) agrees to drive her there. But along the way, they realize that they have a lot in common and sparks begin to fly between the unlikely pair. Starring Philippa Northeast, Brant Daugherty, Sarah-Jane Redmond, and Vincent Gale.