You may not think Disney's streaming service would be the ideal spot to find romantic comedies, but you'd be wrong. Tucked in with the classic animated films and Marvel movies, Disney+ has an impressive selection of rom-coms. Thanks in part to the company's acquisition of 20th Century Fox, the streamer is home to gems like "10 Things I Hate About You" and "The Princess Bride," as well as Disney favorites like "The Princess Diaries: A Royal Engagement."

Of course, there are also plenty of fairytale-inspired stories that happen to be rom-coms, from "The Princess and the Frog" to "Enchanted." A lot of these movies are just as fun to watch as an adult, and many of them have become beloved by all generations for a good reason — they're full of the whimsy that makes a classic Disney film while also offering plenty of show-stopping romance. You're not going to find a comprehensive library of iconic romantic comedies, but there are more than enough nostalgic favorites on Disney+ to fill your queue with swoon-worthy goodness. Ahead, check out some of the best romantic comedies on Disney+, grab your box of tissues, and get ready to fall in love all over again.

— Additional reporting by Kalyn Womack

01

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Dan in Real Life"

Steve Carell stars as a hapless single father who's great at giving advice despite his own life being a bit of a mess in "Dan in Real Life." Things only get more complicated for Dan when he realizes he's falling in love with his brother's girlfriend.

Watch "Dan in Real Life" on Disney+ now.

02

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen"

Lindsay Lohan stars as Lola, a dramatic teen who isn't pleased when her family moves from New York City to New Jersey. Still, she keeps alive her dream of being the leading lady in the school play while balancing backstage drama and teenage crushes.

Watch "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen" on Disney+ now.

03

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "10 Things I Hate About You"

Heath Ledger and Julia Stiles's chemistry is still palpable in "10 Things I Hate About You." As Patrick and Kat, they bring "The Taming of the Shrew" into the 20th century and offer up plenty of unforgettable moments along the way. And that definitely includes Patrick performing a rousing rendition of "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" on the bleachers while a security guard chases him.

Watch "10 Things I Hate About You" on Disney+ now.

04

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Freaky Friday"

At its heart, "Freaky Friday" is a comedy about a mom and daughter who swap places and gain a better understanding of each other's lives in the process. But it also features a romantic subplot between Lindsay Lohan and Chad Michael Murray that is pure cuteness.

Watch "Freaky Friday" on Disney+ now.

05

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Geek Charming"

Opposites attract in "Geek Charming," a sweet Disney Channel original movie starring Sarah Hyland. Hyland plays her school's queen bee, Dylan, who becomes the subject of film geek Josh's documentary about popularity. Of course, it doesn't take long for sparks to fly between the unlikely pair.

Watch "Geek Charming" on Disney+ now.

06

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "While You Were Sleeping"

Sandra Bullock proves there's no character she can't make likable when she plays Lucy, a woman who saves a man's life and then lets his family believe she's his fiancée. Her charade gets even more complicated when she begins to have feelings for the comatose man's brother.

Watch "While You Were Sleeping" on Disney+ now.

07

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Lizzie McGuire Movie"

The Lizzie McGuire remake may have been canceled, but Lizzie's big-screen adventure is still an unforgettable burst of nostalgia and fun. There's life-swapping, sightseeing, and a kiss between Lizzie and her best pal Gordo that we're still screaming over more than a decade later.

Watch "The Lizzie McGuire Movie" on Disney+ now.

08

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: Rom-Coms on Disney+: "The Parent Trap" (1961)

If you've only seen the Lohan version of "The Parent Trap," then you need to watch the 1961 original starring Hayley Mills. The premise is the same — twins separated as babies reunite at Summer camp and hatch a plan to get their parents back together — but the different eras lead to subtle differences that are fun to spot.

Watch "The Parent Trap" on Disney+ now.

09

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: Rom-Coms on Disney+: "The Princess Diaries"

Mia Thermopolis's transformation into the princess of Genovia is a light and funny coming-of-age tale we can watch over and over again. Anne Hathaway brings Mia to life with a strong sense of humor and plenty of grace, and the movie's love triangle is the perfect subplot for a story that devotes so much time to hilarious royal etiquette lessons.

Watch "The Princess Diaries" on Disney+ now.

10

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Parent Trap" (1998)

If you prefer the childhood nostalgia that comes with watching the 1998 "The Parent Trap," then you're in luck, because Disney+ has that version, too. Watch as Lohan's Hallie and Annie concoct a brilliant plan to make their mom and dad reunite.

Watch "The Parent Trap" on Disney+ now.

11

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Three Men and a Little Lady"

The sequel to "Three Men and a Baby" shifts the focus away from bachelors parenting a toddler to matters of the heart. This time around, the now-5-year-old Mary's mom, Sylvia, plans on getting married and moving to London, but one of Mary's three dads has stolen her heart.

Watch "Three Men and a Little Lady" on Disney+ now.

12

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement"

In the second installment of "The Princess Diaries," Mia learns she has to get married right away or lose the crown. Enter two potential suitors: Chris Pine as the roguish Nicholas Deveraux and Callum Blue as the typical royal Andrew Jacoby.

Watch "The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement" on Disney+ now.

13

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Tangled"

It may be animated, but "Tangled" is still one of the best rom-coms of the 2010s. Flynn Rider and Rapunzel's slow-burn love story has plenty of laughs and misadventures, but they don't mess around when it comes time to up the romance ante. Case in point: the boat scene between Flynn and Rapunzel is nothing short of iconic.

Watch "Tangled" on Disney+ now.

14

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Zapped"

Zendaya stars in "Zapped," a DCOM about a young woman who discovers a magical app on her phone that controls boys. Initially, she uses her powers to get her unruly stepbrothers under control, but it doesn't take long for romantic complications to ensue.

Watch "Zapped" on Disney+ now.

15

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Last Song"

A teenage girl is moving against her will from New York to the South to spend the summer with her dad. While there, she struggles to convince her mother to allow her to pursue her music career at Juilliard. After being rejected by her mother, her spirits are lifted once she meets Will, a local aquarium keeper who helps her get settled in her surroundings.

Watch "The Last Song" on Disney+ now.

16

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Ever After: A Cinderella Story"

In this "Cinderella" adaptation, Danielle becomes a servant after her father dies, stuck cooking and cleaning for her cold-blooded stepmother and stepsisters. However, things take a turn for the better when she meets Prince Henry.

Watch "Ever After: A Cinderella Story" on Disney+ now.

17

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Aladdin"

In the live-action adaptation of the classic Disney love story, petty thief Aladdin befriends a genie and wishes to become a prince to charm Princess Jasmine. However, dangerous sorcerer Jafar competes with him for Jasmine's hand in marriage. Aladdin and the genie work together to keep the empire from falling at the hands of Jafar's greed for power.

Watch "Aladdin" on Disney+ now.

18

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Splash"

When a mermaid saves young Allen from drowning in the ocean and then returns to find him 20 years later, the two fall in love, causing Allen to decide whether he wants to pursue his love underwater or on land. In the midst of making his decision, a scientist plots to sabotage his relationship.

Watch "Splash" on Disney+ now.

19

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Jungle Cruise"

Dr. Lily Houghton starts a journey to find an ancient tree that blooms flowers with powerful healing abilities. Frank Wolff, Amazon expert, travels with her in his boat, risking both their lives to change the course of medicine.

Watch "Jungle Cruise" on Disney+ now.

20

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Princess and the Frog"

Tiana, talented cook and workaholic, is trying to make as much money as she can to build her own restaurant as she and her late father had dreamed of doing. Prince Naveen, heir to the French throne and in danger of losing his inheritance, tries his luck with a voodoo man, who turns him into a frog. When he runs into Tiana, he accidentally turns her into a frog with a kiss. The two then travel down the bayou to reverse the curse.

Watch "The Princess and the Frog" on Disney+ now.

21

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: Rom-Coms on Disney+: "Confessions of a Shopaholic"

Rebecca Bloomwood has dreams of writing for New York City's top fashion magazine, and she's run up a ton of debt buying all the fashion pieces that make her look the part. When Rebecca lands a job as an advice columnist for a financial magazine under the same company as her dream publication, it becomes an overnight success, but her shopping addiction threatens to derail her fledgling career — and romance with her handsome new boss.

Watch "Confessions of a Shopaholic" on Disney+ now.

22

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Enchanted"

"Enchanted" is a wonderful musical romance that explores what happens when a princess from a fairy-tale land accidentally ends up in New York City. Things get complicated when she meets a jaded New York City man who takes her in, and when her Prince Charming tries to save her, chaos — and plenty of musical numbers — ensue.

Watch "Enchanted" on Disney+ now.

23

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "Cinderella" (1997)

Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein's iconic adaption of "Cinderella" takes this beloved fairy tale and gives it a musical twist, bringing the composers' beloved songs to the screen. This 1997 adaption stars Brandy Norwood and is particularly beloved and full of sparkle and whimsy.

Watch "Cinderella" on Disney+ now.

24

Romantic Comedies on Disney+: "The Princess Bride"

With unforgettable lines like "as you wish" and "my name is Inigo Montoya, and I killed your father," "The Princess Bride" is a wild, fanciful, and often hilarious ride, but it's truly a romance at its core. It tells the story of a young woman named Buttercup and a farm hand named Westley, who fall in love and face impossible odds to be together.

Watch "The Princess Bride" on Disney+ now.