In The Aristocats, a kind and eccentric millionaire wills her entire estate to Duchess, her high-society cat, and her three kittens. When her greedy, bumbling butler attempts the ultimate catnap caper, the rough-and-tumble alley cat Thomas O’Malley and his band of swinging jazz cats must save the day! With Roquefort’s help, of course.

The Aristocats (1970) starring Phil Harris, Eva Gabor

Review

In short, The Aristocats is a wonderful family-friendly animated musical, made by the Walt Disney Company at its highlight. The basic story has a nice, elderly, eccentric widow leaving her entire fortune to ….her cats. Which her butler is angered and frustrated by. So, he kidnaps the high-society felines, planning to make himself wealthy by kidnapping. Or, Catnapping. But the lovely Duchess (Eva Gabor) and her kittens are rescued by a street cat, Thomas O’Malley (Phil Harris). So, he’s both a “Tom cat” and as his mouse friend Roquefort (Sterling Holloway) calls him, “O’Malley Cat!”

They hide out with some of O’Malley’s friends, leading to a very memorable jam session — Everybody Wants to Be a Cat — and more conflict and danger before everything’s resolved.

It’s a funny, enjoyable fast-paced kids film that adults still love as well, and its highly recommended.

From the manufacturer – The Aristocats

Product Description

n unforgettable mix of colorful characters, heart, and humor, The Aristocats dazzles with an all-new digital restoration. Complete your family’s Disney animation collection with this timeless classic!

Magic in the details

Everybody wants to be a cat! Disney’s unforgettable classic The Aristocats swings like never before. Share all the heart, humor, and irresistible music with your family! In the heart of Paris, a kind and eccentric millionairess wills her entire estate to Duchess, her high-society cat and her three kittens. When her greedy, bumbling butler attempts the ultimate catnap caper, the rough-and-tumble alley cat Thomas O’Malley and his band of swingin’ jazz cats must save the day. It’s the purr-fect blend of comedy and adventure.

This timeless treasure boasts remarkable picture and sound quality, fun-filled bonus features, and memorable songs the whole family will enjoy. With the voice talents of Eva Gabor, Phil Harris, Sterling Holloway, Hermione Baddeley, George Lindsay, Pat Buttram, Scatman Crothers, and a memorable title tune sung by Maurice Chevalier — everybody wants to be a cat!

Cast of characters

Phil Harris (Walt Disney’s The Jungle Book) … O’Malley (voice)

Eva Gabor (The Rescuers) … Duchess (voice)

Sterling Holloway (Alice in Wonderland 1951) … Roquefort (voice)

Scatman Crothers (Silver Streak) … Scat Cat (voice)

Paul Winchell (The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh) … Chinese Cat (voice)

Lord Tim Hudson (The Jungle Book) … English Cat (voice)

Vito Scotti (Loaded Weapon 1; The Addams Family season 1) … Italian Cat (voice)

Thurl Ravenscroft (How the Grinch Stole Christmas) … Russian Cat (voice)

Dean Clark … Berlioz (voice)

Liz English … Marie (voice)

Gary Dubin … Toulouse (voice)

Nancy Kulp (The Beverly Hillbillies) … Frou-Frou (voice)

Pat Buttram (The Rescuers) … Napoleon (voice)

George Lindsey (The Andy Griffith Show) … Lafayette (voice)

Monica Evans (Walt Disney’s Robin Hood) … Abigail (voice)

Carole Shelley (The Odd Couple) … Amelia (voice)

Charles Lane (Miss Grant Takes Richmond; The Yellow Cab Man) … Lawyer (voice)

Hermione Baddeley (The Secret of NIMH) … Madame (voice)

Roddy Maude-Roxby … Edgar (voice)

Bill Thompson (Sleeping Beauty) … Uncle Waldo (voice)

Additional Cast

Mel Blanc (Looney Tunes) … Frogs (uncredited)

Ruth Buzzi (Laugh-In) … Frou-Frou (singing voice) (uncredited)

June Foray (Rikki-Tikki-Tavi) … Cat Screeches (uncredited)

Robie Lester (Santa Claus is Comin’ To Town) … Duchess (singing voice) (uncredited)

Clarence Nash (Pinocchio) … Cat Screeches (uncredited)

Peter Renaday (Million Dollar Duck) … Milkman / Le Petit Café Cook / Truck Movers (voice) (uncredited)

Songs

The Aristocats

Words and Music by Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman

Sung by Maurice Chevalier

Scales and Arpeggios

Words and Music by Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman

Performed by Liz English, Gary Dubin, Dean Clark, and Robie Lester

Thomas O’Malley Cat

Words and Music by Terry Gilkyson

Sung by Phil Harris

Ev’rybody Wants To Be A Cat

Words and Music by Floyd Huddleston and Al Rinker

Performed by Phil Harris, Scatman Crothers, Liz English, Thurl Ravenscroft, Lord Tim Hudson, Paul Winchell, Vito Scotti, and Robie Lester

She Never Felt Alone

Words and Music by Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman

Performed by Robie Lester

Ta Ra Ra Boom De Ay

Written by Henry J. Sayers

Performed by Charles Lane

Carmen Suite No. 2 – Habanera

Written by Georges Bizet

Rock A Bye Baby

Traditional