Does Maddie have a thing for Zack and Cody?! Ashley Tisdale appeared on Wednesday's Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen where talk quickly turned to her Disney past.

When one fan asked Tisdale to dish the most insane thing she'd ever seen a Disney co-star do, she replied, "I plead the fifth on that. I'm not going there."

But when it came time for the 34-year-old actress to play a game of "Shag, Marry, Kill," she was willing to choose between her Suite Life of Zack & Cody co-stars, 27-year-old Cole and Dylan Sprouse, and her High School Musical co-star, 32-year-old Zac Efron.

"Are you kidding me? You pick twins and Zac? Oh my gosh, this is so brutal, man," she began, before revealing, "I would say I would shag Cole Sprouse."

"Who do you kill?" host Cohen asked.

"Zac Efron," replied Tisdale, who is best friends with Efron's former girlfriend and co-star, Vanessa Hudgens.

"OK, and you marry Dylan Sprouse!" Cohen noted.

"Yes, he's such a good guy," she gushed of Dylan.

Tisdale played hotel employee Maddie on the Disney Channel original series, The Suite Life of Zack & Cody with the Sprouse twins, and the iconic Sharpay Evans in the HSM films.

Though she's willing to "kill" Efron, she revealed another HSM co-star wasn't exactly her biggest fan -- her on-screen brother Lucas Grabeel (Ryan Evans).

"Lucas and I didn't get along at first because when we were screen testing I was giving him line readings and it's not an actor thing to do," she revealed. "I don't really do method acting, but I took a class in it when I was younger, and I do think I become a lot like the character and I think he thought I was really like Sharpay. And it wasn't until we wrapped that he was like, 'Oh, you're not that person.' And I was like, 'Yeah!'"

Tisdale even gave an example of how she took charge of the part when working with Grabeel, saying, "Giving him line readings at the screen test I was like, 'I want the last line so this is what I was going to say.' I was 18, but I wanted the job, so I got it!"

For the 10th anniversary of HSM, Tisdale told ET's Katie Krause back in 2016, "Nobody thought it was going to be as successful as it was. It was really, purely because of the fans that it was that successful and the fact that they've supported us throughout the years has been amazing."