Ashley Tisdale will star in a comedy for CBS loosely based on the life of the High School Musical star.

The network has moved the single-camera comedy Brutally Honest into development with Ashley, 37, also serving as an executive producer, according to an article on Thursday by The Hollywood Reporter.

The series inspired by Ashley looks at how having a baby can ruin, save, change, destroy and inspire your marriage ...all before lunch.

The project being produced by CBS Studios will feature a script written by Sarah Haskins and Emily Halpern, who were behind ABC's critically acclaimed comedy Trophy Wife and the 2019 feature film Booksmart.

Sarah and Emily also created the CBS sitcom Carol's Second Act that premiered in September 2019 and was canceled in May 2020 after one season.

Carol's Second Act starred Patricia Heaton, 64, in the title role and also co-starred Ashley.

Ashley has been married since 2014 to singer Christopher French, 40, and they have 19-month-old daughter Jupiter Iris French together.

The couple got engaged when Christopher got down on one knee on top of the Empire State Building in 2013. They married the following year in Santa Barbara.

Ashley and Christopher waited quite a few years to have a baby, which she explained in 2020 as wanting to build a 'strong foundation' as a couple.

'After six years of marriage, we built a strong foundation,' she wrote in an Instagram post. 'I gave it to God and the universe and honestly didn’t feel stressed about it and then it happened very quickly. I’ve had my highs and lows during quarantine and have to say I’m so grateful for this gift.'

The New Jersey native starred in the 2019 Netflix series Merry Happy Whatever that was canceled in April 2020 after one season.

Ashley played Maddie Fitzpatrick from 2005 to 2008 in the Disney Channel teen sitcom The Suite Life of Zack & Cody and also portrayed Sharpay Evans in the High School Musical film series from 2006 to 2008.

She also served as a panelist on the 2020 show The Masked Dancer that was a spin-off of the hit Fox show The Masked Singer.