Director: Malcolm D. Lee

Starring: Charlie Sheen, Lindsay Lohan, Ashley Tisdale, Simon Rex

Certificate: 15

Run-time: 85 minutes

IN SHORT: Scary Movie 5 is quite simply terrible. A firm contender for worst ‘film’ of the year.

I work in a cinema and for most releases we have special staff screenings. It’s a pretty nifty perk of the job… when the films are good. There were a handful of us at this screening sat down with the lowest of low expectations. We expected to laugh a little; whether that was with or at the film didn’t really matter. Within an hour I was left alone in the screen, everybody had walked out, unable to bear the embarrassingly poor level of supposed ‘comedy’ being offered to them. And with half an hour remaining, I left too. I have better things to do with my time like finally finishing the last hour of Godfather II or sorting through my huge stock-pile of utility bills.

You may be wondering how I can review a film if I didn’t sit through it all but believe me, I saw enough. The fact that a group of people saw a film FOR FREE and still felt short-changed should be all the warning you need against this juvenile insult to celluloid. Now, usually I’ll use the second paragraph of my review to reveal plot details but needless to say, there’s no real plot here. Paranormal Activity, Mama and Cabin in the Woods are the three main films being parodied with as much subtlety as a Nicolas Cage crying scene. There are also lame riffs of Black Swan, Ted and Rise of the Planet of the Apes, y’know those really scary horror movies…

Ashley Tisdale, say goodbye to your career because it’s over.

Scary Movie 5 isn’t funny, unless you laugh at bodily fluids, the mere mention of sexual organs or the abuse of small children. In one particular scene, a supposed parody of Black Swan, a pregnant ballerina is performing in front of a packed auditorium. As her male partner lifts her up, her water’s break and a baby slides out onto the stage. The partner proceeds to slip on the amniotic fluid, kicking the newborn baby into the crowd. I was sat in my seat appalled, disgusted and offended. The scene didn’t just cross the line, it grabbed a giant eraser and rubbed it out entirely. If you find this type of low-brow ‘comedy’ funny, I pity you.

This is just one example of a whole host of tasteless, humourless, witless visual jokes. In a Mama skit, one of the feral little girls is given a lollipop. She starts to chew on the stick end of the lollipop, so her father advises her to use ‘the other end’. Instead of putting the lolly in her mouth, she puts it in her rear end. She then sniffs the lollipop. Cue looks of disgust from her father. End of scene. Did the writer really think this was funny when he wrote it? It baffles me that this film was funded and theatrically released by the Weinstein Company. It makes me wonder if producers even watch their own films…

Ashley Tisdale is always pouting. Always.

Even at a most basic film-making level, Scary Movie 5 is a catastrophe. Frequently, the dialogue is out of synch, to the point where I thought I was missing out on an intentional joke (I wasn’t). And any scenes with Charlie Sheen and Lindsay Lohan are replicated with the most obvious stunt doubles and not a single care for continuity. The sheer sloppiness of this film’s presentation makes no sense to me as director Malcolm D. Lee, whilst no Paul Thomas Anderson or Coen brother, isn’t a rookie to the industry. He’s previously directed Soul Men, a film I haven’t seen, and Undercover Brother, an admittedly stupid film with some great moments.