DATA CONTROLLER

Identity: HAAN BRAND, S.L. (hereinafter HAAN)

Tax identity code number: B-67343376

Registered office: C/ de Mañe i Flaquer 16, 08017 Barcelona, Spain.

E-mail: dataprotection@haanready.com

PURPOSE

- To answer inquiries/requests made by users.

- Provision of sales services offered on the web.

- Commercial communications requested by the user.

DATA TRANSFER

No data is transferred to third parties, except legal duties.

LEGAL BASIS

The user's consent and contractual relationship.

CONSERVATION TIME

The data will not be passed on to third parties, except where mandatory for legal reasons.

RIGHTS

of access, rectification, erasure and object and restriction of processing.

Visiting the website does not imply that the user is registered or an obligation to provide personal data.

Pursuant to the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (hereinafter the "GDPR"); HAAN BRAND S.L. (hereinafter HAAN) informs the users of the website of its Privacy Policy, so that they can freely and voluntarily determine if they wish to provide the personal data that is required of them when filling in any contact form or email.

When you want to contact us or register as a Web user, you must fill out a contact form, where you will be informed about the mandatory provision of some data; the mandatory data is shown by an asterisk[*].

Where do your data go?

The personal data that you provide us implies your express consent for processing and inclusion into a filing system held under the responsibility of HAAN BRAND S.L., with tax identity code number: B-67343376; registered office at Carrer de Mañe i Flaquer 16, 08017 Barcelona, and contact e-mail: dataprotection@haanready.com.

Why do we need your data?

The data collected will be processed by HAAN for the following purposes:

To deal with, manage and answer your queries and/or requests that may be made through contact forms or via email.

To fulfil contracted services.

To send commercial communications related to the products marketed by HAAN by any means (postal, email or telephone). They may be personalised according to the user's interests and preferences.

HAAN declares that the data provided by the user will not be segmented or used for purposes other than those set out above; except when anonymised for the company's internal statistical and historical studies.

What are the legal basis for the processing?

The user's consent and/or the fulfilment of a contractual obligation. Sending contact forms or registering as a user are positive and unequivocal actions giving consent to the processing of data, insofar this is necessary for the fulfilment of the purposes mentioned above.

Will your information be shared with anyone?

HAAN does not transfer personal data without the user's prior consent, except when fulfilling its legal obligations.

However, it may provide temporary access to third-party companies acting as processors solely for the management of the shipment of products purchased on the web, complying with the requirements of the GDPR.

Does HAAN use cookies and other tracking technologies?

HAAN may use cookies and similar tracking technologies (such as web beacons and pixels) to access or store information. Specific information about how HAAN uses these technologies and how you can reject certain cookies is set out in our Cookies Policy.

How long do we keep your data?

"Until the data subject withdraws their consent and during the periodfor compliance with a legal obligations of HAAN."

What data do we need?

The data collected is basic identification such as the name, address and contact information.

The boxes marked with the [*] symbol are compulsory, and filling them in implies full and unconditional acceptance of this privacy policy.

Accuracy of data

The user will under all circumstances be responsible for the veracity of the data provided. HAAN reserves the right to exclude any user who has provided false data, without prejudice to any other action admissible in law.

What are the right to complain for any breach?

It is the user's responsibility to provide all the updated data that are required as compulsory for the use of the products on the website. The data and information provided will be assumed to be true, truthful and up to date, and it is the user's responsibility to amend and/or update this information at all times; otherwise, the data will be deemed to have not been amended, and to be accurate and up to date.

If you have given us personal data belonging to a third party, prior to their inclusion you must have informed them and requested their consent to the provisions set forth herein.

You may at any time exercise your rights of access, rectification, erasure, object and restriction of processing in writing, addressed to DATA PROTECTION at the address of our registered office at C/ de Mañe i Flaquer 16, 08017 Barcelona, or by emailing dataprotection@haanready.com. In cases of marketing or direct electronic communications, the shipments will provide an automatic system to reject the receipt of future commercial communications; all this has no retroactive effects on the prior processing or transfer of data to third parties, and is without prejudice to the obligations and legal consequences arising from it.

In specific terms, the general contents of your rights are as follows:

(1) Right of access. The right to confirm that we are processing your personal data and if so, to obtain a copy of that data and complete information about the processing thereof.

(2) Right to rectification. The right to correct errors, amend inaccurate or incomplete data, and ensure the accuracy of the information being processed.

(3) Right to erasure. The right to request the deletion of your data without undue delay, if the processing is unlawful, or the personal data is no longer necessary for the purpose it was originally collected or processed for.

(4) Right to restriction of processing. The right to request the suspension of the processing if it is unlawful or the accuracy of the data has been contested.

(5) Right to object. The right to object to the processing of your data when it is for direct marketing purposes, or when it must end on grounds relating to your personal situation, unless the processing is necessary for the exercise or defence of claims.

(6) The right not to be the subject of individual decision-making. Although HAAN does not make automated decisions, you are informed that you nevertheless have the right not to be the subject of a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces legal effects concerning you or affects you, unless this is necessary for the execution of a contract, is permitted by law or you have given your explicit consent.

The exercise of these rights is free, except in cases of manifestly unfounded or excessive requests, in which case the data subject may be required to meet the costs of processing the request.

Likewise, we remind you that according to EU Regulation 2016/679, you have the right to seek redress for any breach of the law before the competent data protection authorities.

Security and confidentiality

HAAN will treat the data with the utmost confidentiality and will maintain professional secrecy with regard to all of them, and undertakes not to disclose them to unauthorised third parties without their respective consent, even for the purposes of conservation. This obligation will persist even after the commercial relations with you have ended; all in accordance with the applicable legislation, and it shall take the technical, organisational and security measures necessary to ensure the security of the personal data that is processed, and prevent its alteration, loss or unauthorised processing, taking into account the state of the technology, the cost of application, the nature of the stored data, the scope, context and purposes of the processing, and the risks of varying degrees of probability and severity to which they are exposed and which the processing entails for the rights and freedoms of natural persons.

Cookies

Don't worry: cookies are very simple, and all websites need them to work properly. Here we explain what cookies are, and how we use them on our website.

What are cookies?

A cookie is a file that is downloaded in order to store and retrieve data from a terminal on the user's computer or computer equipment, when certain websites are accessed. It is stored on the hard disk or in the temporary memory, and retains data on the user and on the browsing that takes place on that computer, and enable actions such as remembering a password and performing faster queries.

The user can delete cookies from their hard drive or block information from being gathered whenever they wish. If you do not want cookies to be stored, the web browser must be configured to be used in this way. Some HAAN functionalities may not be available if cookies are not stored, but you will be able to browse the website. The information is solely for the private use of HAAN, and this information will not be disclosed or shared with third parties.

The information that this website stores on your computer by means of this mechanism consists solely of a number that identifies the user, as well as preferences such as their preferred browsing language, and the date on which the cookie was placed. This will enable us to recognise the user on their future visits to our website. Cookies help us improve our website and provide a better and more personalised service. In specific terms, they enable us to:

- Estimate numbers and patterns of use.

- Store information about your preferences and personalise our website according to your individual interests.

- Speed up your searches.

- Recognise you when you return to our site, as long as you access it from the computer where you have logged in as a member with your name and password.

- Analyse users' browsing (browsing statistics). The application used to obtain and analyse browsing information is: Google Analytics: www.google.com/analytics and http://www.google.es/intl/es/analytics/privacyoverview.html

This tool does not gather data on the names or surnames or the postal address from which they are connected, or any other personal identification data of the user.

The information obtained is related to the number of pages visited, the language used, the social media on which our news is published, the city where the IP address from which users access is assigned, the number of users who visit us, the frequency and recurrence of visits, the visit time, the browser used, and the operator or type of terminal from which the visit takes place. We use this information to improve our pages, identify new needs and assess the improvements to be made in order to provide a better service to the users who visit us, and adapt them to the most widely used browsers or terminals, for example.

What types of cookies does HAAN use?

How can you set up your cookies?

When you access HAAN websites for the first time, you can manage your consent for cookies in the pop-up window about their use, and by clicking on the button or option link: "Configure Cookies".

By browsing and continuing to use our website, you will be consenting to the use of cookies under the conditions set out in this Cookies Policy. As a user, you may exercise your right to block, eliminate and reject the use of cookies at any time by modifying the browser options; for example:

Internet Explorer: Tools > Internet Options > Privacy > Settings. Please consult Microsoft support or the browser's Help section for more information.

Mozilla Firefox: Tools > Options > Privacy > History > Custom Settings. Please consult Mozilla support or the browser's Help section for more information.

Google Chrome: Settings > Show advanced options > Privacy > Content settings. Please consult Google support or the browser's Help section for more information.

Safari: Preferences > Security. Please consult Apple support or the browser's Help section for more information.

Opera: Settings > Options > Advanced > Cookies. Please consult Opera support or the browser's Help section for more information.

If you use a browser other than those listed above, please check its policy regarding the installation, use and blocking of cookies.

Most advertising networks also give you the opportunity to opt out of targeted advertising. If you would like more information, please visit http://www.aboutads.info/choices or https://www.youronlinechoices.com.

What happens if cookies are disabled?

Some functionalities of the Services or areas of this website may not work.

Do we update our cookie policy?

We may update our website's Cookies Policy, and as such we recommend that you review this Policy every time you access our website, in order to be appropriately informed about how and why we use cookies.