Best Industrial Engineer Consultants in Livonia, Michigan

During construction, it is vital to have reliable engineering consultants to make sure your architecture design is completed efficiently and safely. For the industries in Livonia, Michigan, STEVENS Engineering and Constructors can design, manage, and provide the resources needed to make sure your project meets your business’ requirements.

Backed by over 75 years of experience, commitment, and quality, STEVENS Industrial Engineering Firm strives to provide the industries in Livonia with the resources needed to plan and execute your projects efficiently. With our team of experienced, licensed consultants helping businesses in erecting their desired structures, we guarantee excellent service and meeting your business' unique project demands.

In 1991, STEVENS created the subsidiary, CDMG, to help industries in Livonia regarding their more complex architectural designs.

CDMG and STEVENS – Your High-Quality Engineering consultant

CDMG, STEVENS’ own engineering firm, offers the following services:

Facility Planning

Feasibility / Appropriation Studies

Site Development

Civil / Structural

Process

Electrical

Piping / Mechanical / HVAC

Automation / Controls

Machine Design

Material Handling

Architectural Design

At STEVENS, we use Building Information Modeling (BIM), an advanced 3D engineering software that allows you to see your project before construction begins. With BIM, our team can be sure that the architectural design is structurally sound and avoid potential hazards before it becomes a problem deeper into the project. Thanks to this technology, changes to your design can be implemented before the project begins construction.

Utilizing BIM allows STEVENS, to deliver projects on time, within budget, and to the highest level of quality that our clients have come to expect from us.

Designing, Planning, And Managing For Success

Because of our extensive experience as engineering consultants, we know that the key to every successful construction project in Livonia, Michigan is good engineering and design principles.

Effective planning, scheduling, discipline, and teamwork are essential to us, which is why we strictly maintain these factors for every project. These are the reasons why STEVENS is capable of meeting your unique project requirements. In this way, we can deliver fit-for-purpose designs and personalized service

Communication with our clients is an asset of STEVENS that sets us apart from other industrial engineering teams in Livonia. We provide collaboration and proactive problem solving by involving project stakeholders in the conversation on every level. We also provide regular detailed reporting, so you are kept up to date regarding your project. In this way, we can eliminate communication errors and allow for a smooth flow of information.

Because of our intentional communication, we have forged relationships with our clients that allow us to fulfill their business requirements and meet their project expectations. We here at STEVENS Engineers and Constructors guarantee you the best services and structures so you can achieve success.

Top-Notch Engineering CONSULTANTS in Livonia

We offer the following services to our clients in Livonia:

Project Management- At STEVENS we have an experienced multi-discipline staff of project management professionals. Through our intentional communication we will make sure that you are involved and kept up to date throughout the project.

Engineering- Our firm consists of multi-discipline engineers and contractors who are able to meet your project needs.

Automation- With our state of the art technology at STEVENS, we utilize industrial automation to accelerate our projects in Livonia.

Design/Build- We utilize a 3D imaging model in our designs known as Building Information Modeling. With BIM, your project is secure and precise to meet the project's specifications.

Building Supply- STEVENS is the one-stop Industrial Engineering Firm in Livonia for building supplies. Our pipe fabrication plants and partnership with NUCOR All-American steel allows us to provide you with all the supplies you need for your project.

Industries Our Engineering Firm in Livonia Services

At STEVENS we serve the following (but not limited to) industries:

Metals

Glass

Oil and Gas

Chemical

Power

Light Manufacturing

Contact The Best Industrial engineering Firm in Livonia

At STEVENS, we take pride in creating meaningful and productive relationships with our clients, ensuring that we understand their specific needs and requirements for their business.

Regardless of the size and nature of your project, STEVENS' staff of experienced engineering consultants and project management professionals can provide your company in Livonia, Michigan, with the resources to design and manage your next project.