Projects in Livonia, Beaverton Twp. and Lakeview generate more than $11.6 million, add 96 jobs; Projects underscore strength of state’s manufacturing talent.

LANSING, Mich. – Three companies are planning expansions in Michigan with support from the Michigan Strategic Fund, the Michigan Economic Development Corporation announced today. The projects are expected to generate $11.6 million in total private investment and create 96 jobs in Livonia, Beaverton Township and Lakeview.

“The projects approved by MSF today are a testament to Michigan’s business-friendly environment and talented workforce,” said Jeff Mason, CEO of the Michigan Economic Development Corporation, the state’s chief marketing and business attraction arm that administers programs and performs due diligence on behalf of the MSF.

David visits Marquette to speak with Dr. Brian Kulbieda, creator of the Posture Plank. After meeting a 70 year-old patient with perfect posture, Kulbieda found inspiration to invent a comfortable board to correct posture in only a few minutes per day.

“We’re pleased to work with our local partners and support these investments, which will mean more jobs and greater economic opportunities for Michigan residents,” he said.

My trip to a remote part of Eastern Turkey to follow the footsteps of Ron Wyatt and see Noah's Ark and a town called Arzan, translated to English meaning the "Valley of Eight".

Infineon Technologies Americas Corp. is a subsidiary of Infineon Technologies AG, a German semiconductor manufacturer founded in 1999. The company manufactures power semiconductors that convert raw power from an electrical outlet, battery, alternator, hybrid electric vehicle or electric vehicle, or renewable energy source. The company is expanding into the connected and autonomous vehicle space based on the need for diversification and customer demand. The company plans to expand at its existing facility in the city of Livonia, investing $1.55 million and creating 25 jobs. As a result of the expansion, the company has been awarded a $200,000 Michigan Business Development Program performance-based grant. Michigan was chosen over competing sites in California, Japan and Europe. The city of Livonia has offered to support the project with recruitment efforts. Individuals interested in careers with Infineon should visit https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/careers/.

“Beginning in 2004, the City of Livonia and MEDC have partnered with Infineon Technologies on multiple expansion projects. Infineon’s continued investment in Livonia is great news, and more evidence that the City and region are a great place to do business,” said Livonia Director of Planning and Economic Development Mark Taormina. “We are pleased to work side-by-side with the MEDC on developing a strategy that helps the company realize its growth potential.”

Kember Flooring, Inc., founded in 2013, manufactures flooring products for higher end homes, luxury condos, and apartments. Products include laminate, floating hardwood and real hardwood flooring. The company currently imports its products but plans to increase its manufacturing operations in the U.S. The company will renovate an existing plant in Beaverton Township (Gladwin County) and add machinery and equipment. The project is expected to generate a total private investment of $5 million and create 25 jobs, resulting in a $200,000 Michigan Business Development Program performance-based grant. The Michigan Department of Transportation will be providing $438,486 to assist in upgrading Lyle Road, where the plant is located. Gladwin County will also assist the company with drainage work on the road.

Parker Hannifin Corporation, headquartered in Mayfield Heights, OH, is one of the world’s largest manufacturers of motion control technologies, including aerospace, climate control, electromechanical, filtration and more. The company has a facility in the village of Lakeview (Montcalm County) as well as locations in in Indiana and Ohio. Parker plans to construct an addition at its Lakeview facility to expand its plastics injection production, investing $5.1 million and creating 46 jobs. As a result, the company has been awarded a $250,000 Michigan Business Development Program performance-based grant. Michigan was chosen over the sites in Indiana and Ohio. The village of Lakeview has offered a 50 percent property tax abatement in support of the project. Individuals interested in careers with Parker should visit here.

“Parker has been a stable presence in Lakeview, and the fact that they have chosen to bring this expansion here speaks volumes of their confidence in the ability to continue to be successful,” said Kathy Jo VanderLaan, Business Development Coordinator – Montcalm County, The Right Place, Inc. “As always, The Right Place and Montcalm Economic Alliance’s great partnerships with the MEDC, West Michigan Works!, Montcalm Community College and the Village of Lakeview put this project in the win column.”

About Michigan Economic Development Corporation (MEDC)