Infineon Technologies Corp. is investing $1.5 million in its Livonia facility and creating 25 high-tech jobs as it expands in the self-driving auto industry.

Local and state officials lauded the decision by Infineon, a company that makes power semiconductors that convert raw power from electrical outlets, batteries, alternators, electric vehicles and renewable energy sources. It also is involved in research and development.

Infineon, a German-based company with 37,500 employees worldwide, moved its local headquarters from Northville to Livonia in 2004, initially leasing a site before building its own 46,000-square-foot building in 2012 on Victor Parkway.

"It's a great place," said Mark Toarmina, Livonia director of planning and economic development, adding that the technology Infineon uses "is as advanced as it gets."

More: No joke - GM partner's self-driving car gets a ticket from cop

More: Detroit area's cutting edge center for self-driving autos opens

The company's North American subsidiary was founded in 1999 and is now poised to grow with the autonomous auto industry. Infineon has received a $200,000 performance-based grant announced by the Michigan Economic Development Corp. It also has received tax incentives in Livonia.

Michigan — specifically Livonia — was chosen over competing sites in California, Japan and Europe. Toarmina said Livonia and MEDC have partnered with Infineon on multiple expansion projects.

"Infineon’s continued investment in Livonia is great news and more evidence that the city and region are a great place to do business,” he said. "We are pleased to work side-by-side with the MEDC on developing a strategy that helps the company realize its growth potential.”

Livonia Chamber of Commerce President Dan West said Infineon invested in Livonia even when the economy was sluggish.

"They've continued to grow," he said, adding that Michigan, rather than high-tech corridors like Silicon Valley in California, needs the technology and jobs that Infineon brings.

"We don't need California to do what we should be able to do right here in Michigan," he said.

More: Carson's at Laurel Park Place in Livonia likely to close

More: After two years, Wayne County returns for Eight Mile construction in Livonia

The MEDC's announcement that Infineon was getting support from the Michigan Strategic Fund came as the state also named two other companies receiving help with expansions. In total, projects in Livonia, Beaverton Township and Lakeview amount to $11.6 million in private investment and a total of 96 jobs.

Kember Flooring, Inc., in Beaverton makes flooring products for high-end homes, luxury condos and apartments. It is receiving $200,000.

Parker Hannifin Corp., which has a facility in Lakeview, is headquartered in Ohio and is one of the world's largest manufacturers of motion control technologies, including aerospace and climate control. It is getting $250,000.

Jeff Mason, CEO of the MEDC, said the three projects approved by the Michigan Strategic Fund "are a testament to Michigan's business-friendly environment and talented workforce,”

“We’re pleased to work with our local partners and support these investments, which will mean more jobs and greater economic opportunities for Michigan residents,” Mason said.

Contact Darrell Clem at dclem@hometownlife.com. Follow him on Twitter: @CantonObserver.