Magellan GPS

Magellan Navigation, Inc. is a producer of consumer and professional grade global positioning system receivers. Headquartered in Santa Clara, California, with European sales and engineering centers in Nantes, France and Moscow, Russia, Magellan also produces aftermarket automotive GPS units, including the Hertz Neverlost system found in Hertz rental cars. The Maestro, RoadMate, Triton, and eXplorist lines are Magellan's current consumer offerings. The company also produces proprietary road maps (DirectRoute), topographic maps (Topo), and marine charts (BlueNav) for use with its consumer GPS receivers.

Magellan started as an independent company. It was once owned by Orbital Sciences Corporation, which purchased it in 1994. In 2001, Thales purchased the Magellan division of Orbital Sciences for about $70 million and the Company became known as Thales Navigation. Five years later, private equity firm Shah Capital Partners and other investors purchased Thales Navigation for $170 million and the company was officially renamed Magellan Navigation.

Magellan was the creator of the Magellan NAV 1000—the world’s first commercial handheld GPS receiver, which debuted in 1989. In 1997, Magellan also introduced the first handheld global satellite communicator—the GSC 100. Later consumer handheld products included the Magellan GPS 2000, GPS 315, Meridian, SporTrak, and Magellan RoadMate models. The MobileMapper CE and ProMark3 have been marketed to professionals like surveyors and GIS (geographic information systems) users.

Magellan GPS units include a variety of different viewing options, including a 3D bird’s-eye view, a night view, and pop-up visuals of upcoming turns. Some models use SiRFstar III for position accuracy within three meters, and voice and onscreen prompts that provide directions on how to drive to a particular destination. Certain Magellan vehicle navigation systems are also Bluetooth-compatible for integration with mobile phones, and traffic upgradeable for real-time traffic information. The Maestro 4050 is the first portable vehicle navigation device to offer drivers the convenience of voice command capabilities. The Company has a partnership with AAA that provides drivers with AAA TourBook guide travel information, AAA Member Roadside Assistance details, and AAA Show Your Card & Save Member Discount locations on specific models.

Professional Products

The MobileMapper CE and ProMark3 are marketed to professionals like surveyors and geographic information systems (GIS) users. * MobileMapper CE assists surveyors with its embedded GPS capability and a fully-integrated, 14-channel receiver that delivers sub-meter accurate data positioning in real-time, and a GPS/Differential module that offers sub-foot mapping with post-processing. The device maintains its high precision with multi-path mitigation that is able to perform in urban canyons and dense foliage. * The ProMark3 is a survey system that performs centimeter-accurate static, stop and go, and kinematic surveys, as well as GIS/mapping. The device allows for GPS surveying under poor satellite tracking conditions. A simple interface that’s available in nine languages, intuitive software, a large color touch screen, and an alphanumeric keypad combine to simplify the deployment process.

Magellan Products

RoadMate

Street smart and ultra-cool navigation. Nuvi series features Color touchscreen, automatic routing, voice guidance, address look-up, 2D or 3D maps, anti-theft feature, travel kit, picture viewer, SD card slot. Nuvi series is one of the most popular auto portable navigators. Start from Nuvi 200 and add maps, hands free calling, games, mp3 player, FM traffic receiver, speech recognition, MSN Direct and much more. More about Nuvi Car GPS...

Maestro

When it comes to GPS devices, there are a lot of choices out there, and the selection can be overwhelming. GPS devices have become nearly as indispensable to most people, as their cell phones. Garmin has always been a well-respected maker of GPS devices and other electronics, and this model is no disappointment. More about StreetPilot Auto GPS...

eXplorist

Portability meets capability in the pocket-sized Garmin Quest. This system has a high-speed processor which in laymen's terms means fast automatic off-route and detour recalculation. It has voice guidance and an automatic routing with turn-by-turn directions to help you get to where you wish to go. There is an internal battery, which is rechargeable, that has up to 20 hours of usage. More about Quest Navigators ...

Triton

Zumo GPSs are specialy designed for navigation on motorcycle. Some of its features are Glove-friendly, left-handed controls, sunlight-readable screen, motorcycle console with resettable fuel gauge, motorcycle mount, waterproof case, vibration-tested design, MP3 player, picture viewer, anti-theft feature, SD card slot. Zumo GPS is definitly navigator that each motorcyclist need to have on its motor bike. More about Zumo GPS ...