Orbital Sciences Corporation announced today that it received about $725 million in new orders

for its space and ground infrastructure systems during the first six months of

2000.

As a result, Orbital expects its firm contract backlog at June 30, 2000

to be approximately $2.1 billion and its total contract backlog including

options to reach $5.0 billion.

“All of Orbital’s infrastructure systems groups reported strong new order

bookings during the past six months,” stated Mr. David W. Thompson, Chairman

and Chief Executive Officer. “With continued robust contract wins in the

second half of the year, 2000 has the potential to be Orbital’s fifth straight

year of $1 billion-plus annual new order bookings,” he added.

Orbital’s space and ground infrastructure systems consist of satellites

and other space systems, launch vehicles, electronics and sensors, and ground

systems.

Its largest infrastructure product sector, satellites and related

space systems, received approximately $220 million of new orders so far this

year.

In addition, launch vehicle new orders exceeded $265 million, while

electronics, sensors and ground systems bookings totaled about $240 million in

the first half of 2000.

Orbital is one of the largest space technology and satellite services

companies in the world, with 1999 total enterprise revenues (including

revenues from unconsolidated affiliates) of approximately $915 million.

The

company, headquartered in Dulles, Virginia, employs about 5,500 people at

major facilities in the United States, Canada and several overseas locations.

Orbital is the world’s leading manufacturer of low-cost space systems,

including satellites and space robotics, launch vehicles, electronics and

sensors, satellite ground systems and related digital infrastructure.

Its

Magellan subsidiary is a pioneer in satellite-based navigation and

communications products for consumer and industrial markets.

Through its

ORBCOMM and ORBIMAGE affiliates and ORBNAV subsidiary, Orbital is also a major

operator of satellite-based networks that provide data communications, high-

resolution imagery and automotive information services to customers around the

world.

To learn more about Orbital, as well as to access its recent press

releases, please visit its web site at http://www.orbital.com.