Sharon Lou Noteboom, age 85, a gentle spirit who touched countless lives through her passion for teaching and service to others, passed into the loving arms of her Lord and Savior Thursday, July 18, 2024. Born October 9, 1938 in Flint, Michigan, Sharon's story is one of steadfast faith, dedication to family, and a pursuit of knowledge and new experiences.

Sharon was preceded in death by her parents, Robert and Marian (O'Rourke) Snyder, and her siblings, Mary Frances (Gene) Field and R. Thomas Snyder. She is survived by her loving husband of 62 years, Richard Noteboom; her sisters, Kathryn Starkel of Fenton, MI, and Janet (Gary) Hills of Des Moines, IA; her children, Robert (Susan) Noteboom of Reston, VA, William (Carolyn) Noteboom of Cumming, GA, Rebecca (Dennis) Shelp of Littleton, CO, and Bethany (Dan) Wassink of Holland, MI; her grandchildren, Joseph, Grace, Anna, Richard, Niguse, and Senbate; her great-grandchild, Luke Andrei; and numerous nieces and nephews.

Sharon attended Longfellow Elementary and graduated from St. John Vianney school, where she forged lifelong friendships which she continued to cherish through frequent lunch dates with classmates. She graduated from Flint Junior College and Flint College of the University of Michigan and was a member of Beta Sigma Phi Sorority. She also studied at Michigan State University.

For over three decades Sharon enjoyed teaching at the elementary school level. She began teaching in 1960 at Central Elementary in Flushing, but it was at St. Robert Catholic School in Flushing where she truly left her mark, dedicating more than 25 years to shaping future generations. While teaching, Sharon’s colleagues became lifelong friends. She valued her relationships with both her St. Roberts and Powers Catholic families, with whom she shared many memories.

Her commitment to community was evident in her extensive volunteer work, including roles as a Newman Club Leader, Cub Scout Leader, Brownie Leader, and Cadette Leader. Her Catholic faith was a cornerstone of her life, evidenced by her years teaching CCD and religion classes, serving on the Altar Guild and Parish Council, and assisting with funeral luncheons.

In 1985 Sharon and Richard embraced "country living in the city" when they moved to Flushing. This move marked the beginning of a new chapter, filled with gardening adventures that eventually led to her proud status as a Master Gardener, another position of service.

Sharon's life was full of diverse interests and experiences. She enjoyed traveling, taking nature walks, listening to the waves of the Great Lakes and oceans, playing bridge and other games with friends and family, and reading. She also loved watching her grandchildren participate in their sports and hobbies, making many trips across the country to see them in person. A voracious reader, Sharon cherished the discussions and friendships formed in her beloved book clubs.

In retirement Sharon was her husband Richard's biggest fan and supporter. She traveled with him throughout the US to countless softball games, always incorporating stops at botanical gardens, Catholic churches, national parks, presidential libraries, art museums, and other historical sites along the way. Sharon formed special friendships with other players' wives and enjoyed these friendships long after softball days, attending weekly lunch group that brought her joy and companionship. She and Richard also traveled with friends on a group trip to Ireland, and with her daughter and son-in-law to Italy.

While Sharon has left this earthly plane, her spirit of curiosity, kindness, and adventure continues to inspire all who knew her. Her life serves as a testament to the power of education, the importance of community, and the enduring strength of love and family. As we bid farewell to this remarkable woman, we celebrate a life well-lived—a life that has left an indelible mark on the hearts of many.

Visitation will take place at Sharp Funeral Homes, Miller Road Chapel, 8138 Miller Road, Swartz Creek. Visitation hours will be Monday July 22, 2024 from 1:00 PM to 8:00 PM with a rosary to be prayed at 7:00 PM. On Tuesday morning July 23, 2024, Sharon will be taken to St. John Vianney Catholic Church, 2415 Bagley Street, Flint, MI 48504 to lie in state from 10:00 AM until the time of Mass. A Funeral Mass will be celebrated at 11:00 AM by Father Mathew Bonk. Memorial contributions may be made to St. John Vianney Catholic School in Flint, St. Robert's Catholic School in Flushing, or St. Luke N.E.W. Life Center in Flint. Tributes may be shared at www.sharpfuneralhomes.com