As medical imaging student, Sharon Coffey attended UTMB at Galveston, and graduated from the Ben Taub General Hospital School of X-ray Technology in 1963. Sharon received her Associates Degree in Applied Science in Radiologic Technology from Houston Community College in 1976. She continued her education at the University of Houston earning a Bachelors of Science graduating Magna Cum Laude. Sharon also received a Masters of Science in Occupational Education. Without a doubt, education was an important part of her life and legacy.

Mrs. Coffey served as both a didactic and clinical instructor for Houston Community College for over 27 years, twice being recognized as the Outstanding Instructor of the Year. Sharon’s accomplishments lead her to be listed in the “Who’s Who Among America’s Teachers”.

An outstanding imaging professional, Sharon was elevated as a Life Member to TXSRT, a recognition that she greatly valued. She was also bestowed presented and celebrated with the prestigious “Wade L. Hoots Lecture Series”. She co-authored a published monograph on genitourinary tract trauma entitled, “The Tactical and Operant Diagnosis of Genitourinary Tract Trauma”. Her current writing material can be found in Ballinger’s Merrill’s Atlas of Radiographic Positioning and Radiographic Procedures. She was also a Radiography site visitor for the Joint Review Committee in Education in Radiologic Technology (JRCERT), a position that ensures that educational programs are providing consistent and appropriate education and opportunities for radiography students.

Staying active in her profession was Sharon’s passion. She served as an ASRT Delegate, TXSRT President, and a Houston Area Radiologic Technologist Society (HARTS) board member. She rallied in Austin, Texas and did television campaigns to establish the Medical Radiologic Technologist Licensure Act in the State of Texas. Sharon retired in 2008 and continued lecturing until her death in 2009.

The Sharon Coffey Educator of the Year Award emphasizes the impact educators have on our profession. This is an honor to be reserved for the champions who maintain high standards qualifying medical imaging professionals and radiation therapists.

Qualifications

1. Current member of the Texas Society of Radiologic Technologists Inc.

2. Must be credentialed in a medical imaging or radiologic science by a recognized credentialing agency

3. Must be formally recognized and/or employed as an educator (clinical/didactic instructor, professor, program director, department chair, dean) with a direct responsibility to students). *** Full time, adjunct, and retired statuses may be nominated. ***

4. An Impact Statement must be submitted to demonstrate someone who has been directly impacted or can attest to the integrity of the impact made by this educator. The formal statement should be written by a current/former student, colleague, or a respective academic leader who works/has worked directly with the nominee. At least one Impact Statement must be submitted to qualify. If the nominator qualifies as such, he/she may write the letter. But if the nominator does not, the nominator must solicit the Impact Statement from one of the qualifying individuals previously described. (pdf. / Word doc only).

5. Must be nominated by a TXSRT member

Honorees of the Sharon Coffey Educator of the Year Award

2009 – Gloria Clemons – Tarrant County College

2010 – Cleveland Black – Harris Health Systems

2011 – Christie Carter – Brookhaven College

2012 – Margaret Bishop – Austin Community College

2013 – Melanie Hail – Lone Star College – Montgomery

2014 – Hazel Bourne – Harris Health Systems

2015 – M. Elia “Smiley” Flores – Blinn College

2016 – Jeniesa Johnson – Tarrant County College

2017 – Sandra J. Lara – Harris Health Systems

2018 – Gary Morrison – Midwestern State University

2019 – Brenda A. Barrow – Lamar Institute of Technology

2020/2021 – Dr. Francis Ozor – Lone Star College, Montgomery

2022 – Dr. Beth Vealé – Midwestern State University

2023 – Roger Bumgardner – Houston Community College

2024 – Christopher Daza – Houston Community College