How are the figurines measured?

Standing figurines are measured from the top of the head to the bottom edge of the base.Please consider that, since the woodcarvings are handcrafted, a certain margin of tolerance in the measurement is required. For example, a figurine with an indicated size of 20 cm can actually measure between 19 and 21 centimeters.Sculptures such as those of animals, reliefs, etc., whose longest side is horizontal, must be measured in their width.

For the nativity scene figurines, we indicate the size of the series that corresponds to the height of a standing male figurine. All the other figurines (kneeling ones or animals) are carved proportionally. For example, in the collection of the Artis nativity set in 12 cm, the statue of St. Joseph measures 12 cm, Holy Mary 7.5 cm and a standing sheep 5 cm. Please consider that, since the woodcarvings are handcrafted, a certain margin of tolerance in the measurement is required.

We recommend buying all the figurines of a series in the same size to make them fit together perfectly.

Are nativity scene figurines always available?

Yes, our nativity scene collections are available all year round. We also guarantee that you can buy the figurines to complete your collection in subsequent years as they remain available.

How can I place an order?

You can place an order quickly and easily via our online shop. For more information regarding the online shopping procedure click here: Buying guide

Of course, you can also contact us directly by phone, fax or e-mail. We will be happy to advise you personally.

Do you have any doubts or do you need some advice? We remain at your disposal at any time and we will gladly help you with the choice of our products.

What are the delivery times?

99% of our products are always in stock. After receiving your order, we will process it within the following business day. Delivery times vary depending on the country of destination. For more information on delivery times for your country, please click here Buying guide

In exceptional cases products could be out of stock. If an item is not available for instant delivery, you will be contacted immediately by e-mail or telephone and informed of the expected delivery date. In that case you can choose to agree with the delivery date or you can opt to cancel the order and withdraw from the purchase contract.

Can I return an item that I do not like?

The customer has the right to return any item within 14 days of receipt without stating the reasons. The paid amount will be refunded. Shipping costs must be paid by the customer.

Can I collect my order personally?

Yes, we have two shops located in Ortisei and S. Cristina in Val Gardena where it is possible to collect orders personally.

You can pay when you pick up your order. Payment can then be made in cash or by debit or credit card. The order can be made by phone, fax or e-mail and we will reserve the ordered items for you until the pick-up date at one of our stores.

How can I dust and clean my sculpture?

To dust a sculpture, the best thing is to use a brush or a cotton cloth. In addition, you can use a vacuum cleaner or compressed air. Do not use water or wet cloths as they could damage the painting of the sculptures.

Can a figure crack?

We only use high quality wood. Before being used for carving, the wood must be seasoned for a long time, sometimes even for years. In some cases, we use special drying chambers to reduce the moisture level below 10%. For larger figures, we also glue together several wooden boards. This process is very important because it allows us to guarantee the stability of the wood and, thus, to reduce the risk of damage. Therefore, it is extremely rare for a figure to break. However, wood is a natural product and a living material. In the event that a sculpture should crack despite the precautions indicated above, you can contact us to have the damage repaired. We will perfectly restore the damaged part so that it can no longer be identified.

Do you restore or repair sculptures?