HER MAJESTY QUEEN MARIE JOSE OF ITALY, who has died in Geneva aged 94, was the widow of Umberto II, the last King of Italy, and the daughter of King Albert I of the Belgians.

Marie-Jose was Queen of Italy for some five weeks in 1946, between the formal abdication of her father-in-law, King Victor Emmanuel III, on May 9 and the banishment of her husband on June 14, after the monarchy had been abolished by referendum. "The Queen's personality effaces that of everyone else," an observer noted of that period. "Even when she is silent, she outshines them all."

After 1983 she was allowed back into Italy, in part because of the support which she had given to the opponents of Mussolini. In later years, she devoted her talents to historical writing.

The royal children were sent to England, to Lord Curzon's seat at Hackwood. Leopold went to Eton; Marie Jose was sent to a school at Brentwood.

Of the period at Hackwood in the company of the elder Curzon daughters, Irena and Cynthia (who married Oswald Mosley in 1920), Marie Jose wrote an entertaining account, recalling the noise caused one night by Lord Lansdowne's frantic efforts to escape from a lavatory in which he had been locked.

On occasional visits to her parents at the Western Front, she met the French President Raymond Poincare, the French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, and the Prince of Wales - as well as the Belgian poet Emile Verhaeren, the violinist Eugene Ysaye and many others.

In 1916 Princess Marie Jose was sent to the smart convent school at the Poggio Imperiale, outside Florence. After the Italians had been defeated at Caporetto in October 1917, the Belgian sovereigns visited King Victor Emmanuel III and Queen Elena at Battaglia, near Padua.

Marie Jose was brought over from the Poggio to see them, and also to meet Umberto, Prince of Piedmont and heir to the throne, who was then aged 13. Umberto liked the tall, cheerful girl with the curly blonde hair sufficiently for ideas of a possible match between them to be entertained by their parents.

After the war, Marie Jose continued her education in Italy, returning for intervals to her family's home at Laeken, where the life was strict and ceremonious to a degree. Lady Curzon recalled a visit there in 1920: "The royal children were never allowed to utter a word at meals unless they were addressed by one of their parents, etiquette of the most elaborate kind prevailed, conversation was solemn and serious. . . Long formal conversations, formal walks and drives - it was rather like a grave and stately minuet that went on from morning until night."

Marie Jose's schooling in Italy, meanwhile, helped to prepare her for what was increasingly seen as her future role in that country. Discreet meetings were arranged between her and Umberto, and on October 25 1929 the Prince arrived in Brussels for the announcement of their engagement.

The next day the Prince had a lucky escape when an Italian anti-fascist fired on him after he had laid a wreath on the tomb of the Unknown Warrior - an inauspicious start to the young couple's engagement. Nor was their wedding at the Quirinal Palace, Rome, in January 1930 without incident. Guests had to assemble at 8am and then wait four hours before the bride arrived. When she did, she thrice lost her veil on her way up the aisle.

The presence of numerous former monarchs prompted the bride's father to remark: "There are many unemployed in our trade." The former King Amanullah of Afghanistan, thinking all the cheering was for him, grabbed a nearby top hat and waved it about. But when he placed the large hat on his small head his jubilant face suddenly disappeared from view.

The Duke of York (later King George VI), who was representing his father, King George V, felt slighted when the King of Italy sent the bride's brother, Prince Charles of Belgium, into dinner ahead of him. Reporting to his father he declared: "There's one thing, Papa, I'll never go to Rome again!" King George V replied: "And I don't expect you'll have to!"

The Italian monarchy had hitherto been somewhat overshadowed by the Pope in Rome, and the wedding was the first great secular occasion there since the Treaty of Lateran, which had established the Vatican City State and given the Pope his liberty as a temporal sovereign. Immediately after the wedding ceremony, Umberto and Marie Jose had a State audience with Pope Pius XI.

After a prosaic honeymoon at San Rossore, and with in-laws at Courmayeur, they settled at the Royal Palace in Turin. The differences between the couple were soon apparent: she, simple, spontaneous, indifferent to protocol; he, punctilious, hidebound to the stiff military traditions of the House of Savoy, though not unromantic and with exquisite taste.

Marie Jose was soon dashing off to festivals and concerts, usually at the wheel of her motor car, while her husband was more interested in the routine and social round of an army officer.

In 1931, with Umberto's promotion to general, they moved to Naples, to Lord Rosebery's villa at Posillipo, renamed Villa Maria Pia after the birth of their first child in 1934. Three years later the succession was assured with the birth of Victor Emmanuel, styled Prince of Naples. Two other daughters followed, Maria Gabriella in 1940 and Maria Beatrice in 1943.

At the time of the Abyssinian war, Marie Jose was Inspector of the Italian Red Cross. She already had doubts about where Mussolini was leading the country, and these were fuelled by her unconventional contacts with the influential philosopher and historian Benedetto Croce and others.

She tried to persuade Count Ciano, Mussolini's son-in-law and foreign minister, to prevent Italy from entering into the war in March 1940. From conversations with Italian colonial pro-consuls Italo Balbo and the Duke of Aosta, she gained the impression that Hitler's successes would be ephemeral. In May her native Belgium was invaded, and her brother King Leopold III, who had succeeded to the Belgian throne after his father's death in a climbing accident in 1934, was forced to capitulate.

While a prisoner of the Germans at Laeken, King Leopold asked King Victor Emmanuel to allow his sister to visit him. The meeting took place on September 27 1940, and Leopold asked Marie Jose to see Hitler to secure the early release of Belgian prisoners of war and food supplies for his country's beleaguered population.

Marie Jose had met Hitler in Naples in 1938 and did not relish the prospect of a further encounter, but she had tea with him at Berchtesgaden in October. Hitler was unmoved, and the subsequent meeting between him and King Leopold was equally cool and fruitless.

As the war progressed, Italy fared less well, and in March 1942 Marie Jose met, through an intermediary, Professor Carlo Antoni, a figure initially hostile to the monarchy, with whom she discussed the possibility of a coup d'etat. Under the pretext of giving her philosophy lessons, the professor saw her daily at the Quirinal. Others joined the plot: Nicolo Carandini, Manlio Brosio, Ivanoe Bonomi, Luigi Einaudi, and a young diplomat at the Vatican, Monsignor Montini (later Pope Paul VI).

Their aim was a coup staged by Marshal Pietro Badoglio with the support of the armed forces, followed by a request for an armistice from the King to the Allies. This was roughly the scenario adopted a year later, after the legal overthrow of Mussolini by the Grand Council and the King in July 1943.

By that time, however, Marie Jose had been ordered to keep out of politics by her father-in-law, and on August 14 she was banished to Sant Anna di Valdiere, where she learned of the armistice. The next day she fled by car to Switzerland with her children to escape the Nazis.

She did not return until the liberation of northern Italy in April 1945, by which time Umberto had become Lieutenant-General of the Kingdom. Victor Emmanuel's abdication on May 9 1946 came too late to save the monarchy, though the result of the referendum held on its future a month later was a close one.

Had the new Queen been allowed to return sooner, her earlier links with newly significant political figures might have helped the cause. After the referendum she left the country with her children from Naples on board an Italian naval vessel. Umberto joined them later, and the family eventually settled at Cascais in Portugal.

She produced lives of the early dukes of Savoy, Amadeus VIII (1962) and Emmanuel Philibert (1994). In 1971 she published a sensitive account of her parents, Albert et Elisabeth: mes parents, based on her mother's diaries.

Her husband - and both her brothers - died in 1983, and she attended the King's funeral at the Savoyard monastery of Hautecombe. The Italian constitution of 1946 had banned former Italian kings, "their consorts and their male heirs" from their country. The Queen, helped by her stance as an anti-fascist, was now able to argue that a widow was no longer a consort and she was allowed back to Italy, though she did not settle there.

Her son Victor Emmanuel has made some headway towards clearing the parliamentary and constitutional hurdles that still stand in the way of his own return to Italy.

In the 1980s the Queen went to live with her youngest daughter and her family in Mexico, but latterly she returned to Europe, staying with her other children either in France or in Switzerland. A disciplined writer, she rose at 6 am and worked until noon. She loved concerts and hardly ever missed a performance conducted by Pierre Boulez.