Allusions To The Greek Myth Of Prometheus

250 Words | 1 Pages

Allusions to the Greek Myth of Prometheus allow insightful readers to withhold a better understanding of the story of Prometheus. First, from the poem “Prometheus” by Marin Sorescu we were given a piece that has far more meaning to the text then is depicted. “Whoever said I was chained” (Sorescu 1). Said the mighty Prometheus, which I believe portrays how free Prometheus feels due to the eagle’s presence and how itself has the freedom to soar in the sky and be free with itself. Next, from D'aulaires’ Book Of Greek Myths we read through a number of passages that gave us more understanding as to how Prometheus cares for his creations, the humans. “Prometheus could not bear to see his people suffer and he decided to steal fire, though he knew

Trickster Archetype

1071 Words | 3 Pages

All of these types of stories survived by being “performed in Africa, the West Indies, and the American South.” These tricksters cause disharmony, which is part of the audience’s enjoyment. The main characteristic of the trickster in these tales is “signifying,” the “ability to use cunning words to turn the powerful into dupes.” Usually, a trickster makes a contract with a dupe, but betrays him. He does this because he gets his strength by violating social boundaries. Other times, the trickster plays tricks and is caught, which leads to humiliation. Some of the stories in this section are “Why the Hare Runs Away,” “The Ant’s Burden,” and “Tricking All the Kings” In “Why the Hare Runs Away,” we know the trickster makes a contract when “it was decided” was said, and we know the trickster breaks that contract when we see “he refused.” The trickster is punished for breaking the contract by being captured by the other animals. In the story “The Ant’s Burden,” we see Anansi trying to make Kweku his dupe when “he wondered how he could fix the blame on someone else.” This tale also takes on the characteristic of a trickster’s contest because Anansi loses and, in return, is made the dupe, for which he “was condemned.” “Tricking All the Kings” is about outwitting a plantation master. Although the king seems to dominate at the beginning of the story, he is later made to be the dupe. We see him becoming the tricksters first dupe when Buh Nansi says “oh, Massa King, you mean to pitch me in that blue, blue sea…,” and we see the contract being made when the king says, “No, I wouldn’t, I’ll have you drowned.” In this story the trickster beats the dupe because the king couldn’t have done him a “better favor”

Analysis Of Prometheus

1328 Words | 3 Pages

It is in our human nature to generate new ideas, explore new possibilities and even push the boundaries of science in an attempt to make new discoveries. Prometheus, the creator of humanity is most well known for stealing fire from Zeus in order to help humans develop into a more intellectually advanced society. Prometheus loved humans so much that he was willing to suffer eternally so that they could have a better life on Earth. This shows that Prometheus was morally just in his decision to disobey Zeus because he only wanted to help the human race in their evolution into a more stable and advanced society. In my opinion, the main theme in the Prometheus myth is that scientific progress and discovery are good as long as the intentions behind

Frankenstein as the Modern Prometheus

819 Words | 2 Pages

Prometheus stole the fire from Zeus in order to help the mortals because he had befriended them and took pity upon them. At that time, the humans were in desperate need of help and Prometheus wanted to see them reach their full potential instead of dying off. Prometheus stole the fire and showed the humans how to use it because he was a very compassionate man and wanted to help. Prometheus is seen as a gentle titan, whereas Zeus is seen as a dark god. Prometheus was acting on what the future held, because he had the gift of foresight.

Comparing Relationships Between Gods and Men in Prometheus Bound and Job

2391 Words | 5 Pages

The first question which must be addressed is, "Why have these men been made to suffer?" To simply say that Zeus or God is displeased is not enough, and to say that Prometheus and Job have sinned is confusing. Most Western readers approach these works with a pre-conceived notion of sin which has been born out of the Judeo-Christian theological tradition a tradition which dictates that there are specific moral rules which must be followed, and to transgress them is to sin. While this interpretation of sin may be functional for a reading of Job, it is useless for understanding Prometheus Bound.

Good Behavior In Ancient Greece And Rome

650 Words | 2 Pages

In addition to this myth, the heroes of Greek myths and legends are rewarded for their services to mankind. For example, after the death of Heracles, the gods reward him by making him immortal and allowing him to live with them on Mount Olympus. Good behavior is only sometimes rewarded because the gods who enforce the system of reward and punishment focus more of their attention on people whom they can punish. There are far more Greek and Roman myths describing cautionary tales to dissuade people from practicing behaviors the society deems immoral or hubristic. For example, in the myth of Prometheus, Prometheus is severely punished for stealing fire and technical wisdom from the

Prometheus

1419 Words | 3 Pages

Prometheus, the Titan of Greek mythology, was considered to be the most important Titan ever in all the myths. He helped the human race tremendously in his efforts to sustain an easier lifestyle. Mankind had great respect for him because of his advantages and gifts or abilities he gave them. Also, his battle against Zeus as a result of his love for man was very much appreciated. Prometheus was one of the most interesting Greek mythology figures in his time. He was a very kind, loving, generous, and courteous god to mankind. This can be seen through many events in his life including a particular myth that the reader will acknowledge in this research paper.