The Republic of Texas battery (2nd previous page) was known as the best coastal defense work in Texas in May-1836. Perhaps for this very reason, and the new robust Texas Navy, the government of the Republic Of Texas first convened at Velasco after the Battle Of San Jacinto from May-Oct 1836. Ad interim president David G. Burnet and General Sam Houston, along with Santa Anna and his officers, were transported on the steamboat Yellowstone from Buffalo Bayou to encamp on Galveston Island on 5-May-1836. Santa Anna was then placed aboard the Independence, and on 8-May-1836 President Burnet and his Cabinet came aboard and made sail for Velasco. As Alex Dienst wrote “Velasco was the great seaport of the Republic at that time.” The wounded Sam Houston was transported in the opposite direction to New Orleans for medical care aboard the schooner Flora, accompanied by the war schooner Liberty. It is very likely that “the government” actually met at existing and modest houses, such as the Brown-Hoskins hotel/tavern (American Hotel) in Block 11 or others; the capital at Velasco is described briefly in an article in National Republic magazine (right). ​

​And, it was here that Santa Anna signed the Treaties Of Velasco on 14-May-1836, in the form of a Public Treaty and a Secret or Private Treaty. It is known that Santa Anna was held prisoner during this period at Velasco, along with Ramón Martínez Caro (his secretary) and Colonels Juan Nepomuceno Almonte and Gabriel Nuñez Ortega. Caro wrote afterwards “... we were lodged in a small room surrounded by sentinels”.

​

​In compliance with the treaties, Santa Anna was to be returned to Mexico, and indeed was put aboard the Invincible standing off of Velasco on 1-Jun-1836 for his return to Veracruz. However, hard feelings among the Texans, especially a group of 230 new volunteers under Gen. Thomas Jefferson Green who arrived on the steamer Ocean from New Orleans, delayed the departure, wanting to punish Santa Anna. Instead, Santa Anna was brought ashore first at Quintana for safekeeping, and then stayed at Velasco until 15-Jun-1836 when William H. Patton took him upstream to his family’s plantation (now the Varner-Hogg State Historical Site) on the steamer Laura for some weeks, until he was again transferred on 30-Jul-1836 to Orozimbo Plantation north of Columbia for several months. Finally, he went to Washington DC before returning to Mexico.