Street Warrior comes standard with Electric Choke, Vacuum Secondaries, and a new integrated 700R4/200R4 compatible throttle lever. Model 4160

Holley has been the world leader in carburetors for over 100 years. We are proud to announce the newest member of our carburetor family- the Street Warrior. The goal in designing the Street Warrior was to take all of those years of experience and build the ultimate performance street carburetor for your daily driver that would not break the bank.

Don't let the low price fool you. The Street Warrior uses the latest technology and quality products that Holley is known for. Constructed from aluminum and calibrated to run great right out of the box. The Street Warrior is a great replacement carburetor for your daily driver or your weekend cruiser.

Perfect replacement carburetor when your original style is no longer available. Replaces Holley, Edelbrock, Carter AFB, and Autolite style carburetors with 5 3/16" x 5 5/8" bolt pattern.

Features:

Performance upgrade for stock to mildly modified V-8 engines

Calibrated for excellent street performance right out of the box

Factory preset electric choke for easy startups

Vacuum secondaries for use on wide variety of vehicles. Compensate for all vehicle weights, gearing & transmissions to allow smooth opening of secondaries.

Single feed fuel inlet for easy installation

Integrated 700R4/200R4 transmission kick down cable mounting

Vibratory polished aluminum for good looks and long lasting shine

100% wet-flow tested by Holley technicians to assure it arrives ready to run!

Includes new rear bowl fuel inlet to allow for dual feed or custom

Adjustable needle & seats to accommodate varying fuel pressures

Upgraded to a 1 Year Warranty!

Compatible with GM, Chrysler, and Ford A/T kickdown linkage. Additional parts may be required.

Barrels: 4

Billet Color: None

Booster: Straight

Brand: Holley

Carburetor Use: Street

CFM: 600

Choke: Electric

Circuit: 2

Condition: New

Emission Code: 3

Finish: Shiny

Fuel: Gasoline

Fuel Inlet: Single

Marine Use: No

Material: Aluminum

Model: 4160

Primary Main Jet: 66

Primary Power Valve: 6.5

Primary Pump Nozzle Size: 31

Product Type: Carburetor

Secondaries: Vacuum

Supercharged Application: No

Throttle Bore: 1.563 inch

Warranty: Limited 1 Year Warranty

UPC: 090127420065