William S. Burroughs is one of the greatest writers of our times. His talent

has brought him fame, and along with it, many burdens. Daily, Burroughs is

swamped with fan mail, unexpected visitors and interview requests. And if

that wasn’t enough to keep him occupied, strange rumors have begun circulating

about him. Burroughs, who rarely grants interviews, speaks with Ron Whitehead

in an attempt to counter the public’s false speculation about him.

“His Swiftian vision of a processed, pre-pakeaged

life, of a kind of elctro-chemical totalitarianism, often

evokes the black laughter of hilarious horror.”

—Playboy

“Burroughs is the greatest satirical writer since

Jonathan Swift.”

—Jack Kerouac

“The only American writer possessed by genius.”

—Norman Mailer

“Burroughs shakes the reader as a dog shakes

a rat.”

—Anthony Burgess

“An integrity beyond corruption…Burroughs

convinces us he has seen things beyond description.”

—John Updike

“One of the most dazzling magicians of

our time.”

—John Rechy,

“The Ticket is Exploding”

“With suffering comes humility and with it

in the end, wisdom.”

—J. Swift

At 82, William Seward Burroughs II, El Hombre Invisible, Literary

Outlaw, Commandeur de l’Ordre de Arts et des Lettres, is rapidly becoming

the most respected, highly regarded writer in America, in the world.

“All at once I snapped my fingers a couple of times

and laughed. Hellfire and damnation! I suddenly

imagined I had discovered a new word! I sat up in

bed, and said: It is not in the language, I have

discovered it – Kuboaa. It has letters just like

a real word, by sweet Jesus, man, you have discovered

a word!…Kuboaa…of tremendous linguistic

significance. The word stood out clearly in front

of me in the dark.”

Burroughs? No. Knut Hamsun. In 1890, with the publication of

“Hunger,” the first purely psychological novel(yes I’m ready to argue), Hamsun

turned the literary world upside-down and spun it around. In 1959, 69 years

after Hamsun’s breakthrough, with the release of “Naked Lunch,” William S.

Burroughs, explorer in the most real mythological sense, whose search for The

Word has, does and will take him anywhere outside and inside himself, did what

only a small handful of “literari” have achieved in the history of writing:

He forever redirected the course of literature in a way that permanently

altered language, culture and seeing.

So, what the hell is Old Bull Lee up to? Retired and enjoying good

health, does he rest on his arse? No. He is busy working his arts off,

dreaming, seeing, reading and representing new and old visions on paper,

canvas, vinyl,tape, disk, CD-Rom, your brain and mine.

Dream long and dream hard enough

You will come to know

Dreaming can make it so

—William S. Burroughs

But rumors abound: He’s kept tied to his bed and forced to use a

chamber pot; he still takes heroin; he moved to central America (USA) because

land was cheap and he knows it’s about to become beachfront property since

East and West coasts willbe falling into oceans any day now; he’s dead; he

shoots obsessed, fatal-attraction European midnight visitors with a shotgun.

Come on people. Wake up. Sober down. William Burroughs is

harassed day and night by folks from around the world showing up, without

invitation, notice or warning, banging on doors and windows, camping in his

yard, trying to get a glimpse of the legend.

The man is 82. Let’s show respect for his privacy as we do for his

work, as we would expect and demand given the good fortune of being in his

position. He receives requests every day for interviews, visits, readings,

recordings and films. He does what he can, and always, always in the

friendliest manner. (And no, he hasn’t shot or threatened anyone.)

William’s latest books include “My Education: A Book of Dreams” and

“Ghost of Chance.” Recent audiowork includes “Naked Lunch,””X-Files CD,”

plus, he is now in studio recording “Junky” and enjoying it so much he may go

right into “Queer.”

Two historic Burroughs events are taking place this summer. The Los

Angeles County Museum of Art (you can contact them at 212-857-6522) is

premiering the exhibition “Ports of Entry: William S. Burroughs and the Arts”

on July 16 through October 6. The event, curated by Robert Sobieszek, is the

first-ever retrospective surveying Burroughs’ career, with 153 works,

beginning with his 1960s and early 1970s photocollages, scrapbooks, and his

collaborations with Brion Gysin on photomontage “cut-ups.” The exhibition

will also include Burroughs’ later shotgun art and recent abstract painting,

and will explore how his work has influenced today’s cultural landscape,

resulting in the absorption of his ideas and routines into newer art,

advertising and current popular culture.

The second event is The New Orleans Voices Without Restraint

INSOMNIACATHON at the Contemporary Arts Center and The Howlin’ Wolf Club, the

largest Beat gathering of the year, where Mayor Mark Morial, James Grauerholz,

Doug Brinkley, and others will speak with Burroughs over the phone. (For more

information contact Ron Whitehead at 502-568-4956.)

Yes, the ticket is exploding. The walls of the literary world, the

world of culture, are crumbling, and through the gaping holes strides the

drawling wordslinger with an attitude, William Seward Burroughs II.

William S. Burroughs: Hello?

Ron Whitehead: William?

WSB: Yes.

Whitehead: Ron Whitehead.

WSB: Well, well, Ron Whitehead.

Whitehead: How the hell are you?

WSB: How what?

Whitehead: How are you?

WSB: Well, I’m fine, thank you.

Whitehead: As you recall, I produced your “Published in Heaven: Remembering

Jack Kerouac poster and chapbook,” plus I sent you my “Calling the Toads” poem

& I’m right now producing the William S. Burroughs/Sonic Youth 7″ vinyl

recording for our audio series.

WSB: Oh, of course, yes, yes.

Whitehead: I just received letters from Rene in Amsterdam. He says that after

my reading at the Meer den Woorden Festival in Goes, Holland he started having

dreams in which you and I taught him how to save the world. I’m forwarding

the letters to you.

WSB: How old is he? I think I remember him. What does he look like?

Whitehead: Early 20s. Blond. Handsome. Friendly. Intelligent. Knows the

history of the Beats inside out. He writes from a mental hospital in

Amsterdam.

WSB: Hmm. Not sure. Perhaps.

Whitehead: Reason I’m calling is that Doug Brinkley has asked me to produce an

event in New Orleans in August. It will be the largest Beat gathering of the

year. RANT for the literary renaissance and The Majic Bus will present the

event, called Voices Without Restraint: 48-Hour Non-Stop Music & Poetry

INSOMNIACATHON. As part of the event, we’ll hold a City of New Orleans

Presentation Ceremony, dedicating to you the historic marker which will be

erected at your Algiers home, which was made famous by Jack Kerouac in “On the

Road.” And we’d like to have a live phone conversation with you during the

presentation.

WSB: Why certainly. Yes, yes. I’m honored.

Whitehead: Good. Just a few questions.

WSB: Fine. Shoot.

Whitehead: Why did you decide to settle in Algiers, which at that time was

home to various military bases, rather than in one of the traditional bohemian

neighborhoods?

WSB: Yes. Because it was a hell of a lot cheaper. Real estate there was the

cheapest. I got that house for $7,000 something.

Whitehead: Any memories of different New Orleans neighborhoods you visited,

music, riding the ferry?

WSB: The Quarter, strange plays…Didn’t get around too much.

Whitehead: The New Orleans Police have come under attack recently — imagine

that — for corruption. A cop hired executioners to kill a woman who signed a

brutality complaint against him. Louisiana police cars have “So no one will

have to fear” inscribed on their sides. Do you have any observations about

the New Orleans police, about the illegal search of your home there, or the

firearms they confiscated?

WSB: No. They never laid a finger on me, as far as any brutality goes. They

did lead me to believe that one of them was a federal agent when he wasn’t.

He was a city cop. So there was an illegal search. But I didn’t know it at

the time. The next day, I was arrested. There was someone with me I hardly

knew. He was just introduced to me. He had one joint on him. He’d thrown

out larger amounts but still had one, and they found it right away. Then the

next day they went in and took my car and I never got it back, though I wasn’t

convicted of anything. See, they can confiscate your property even though

you’re not convicted of anything. And that’s really scary sinister.

Whitehead: Both our political parties are looking like a bird with two right

wings.

WSB: Exactly.

Whitehead: The police are gaining more powers daily as our personal freedoms

are disappearing.

WSB: See, that’s what I say. The whole drug war is nothing but a pretext to

increase police power and personnel, and that, of course, is dead wrong. So

many created imagined drug offenses.

Whitehead: New Orleans has North America’s largest magic community. In

recent years you’ve spoken bluntly about your interest in magic. In New

Orleans did you encounter magic in any form?

WSB: No, I didn’t.

Whitehead: There may be irony in having a literary marker commemorate your

Algiers home, a place where you lived briefly, perhaps unhappily. Did you

produce any writing there?

WSB: Oh yes, quite a bit. And I wouldn’t say I was particularly unhappy

there.

Whitehead: So it wasn’t all that bad?

WSB: No, it wasn’t. Not at all.

Whitehead: Jack Kerouac devoted a large section of “On the Road,” on the New

Orleans visit.

WSB: Oh well, Kerouac was writing fiction. What he did when he wrote about

me…he made me out with Russian Countesses and Swiss accounts and other

things I didn’t have or didn’t happen and so on. Yet…some truth, some

fiction.

Whitehead: You have dramatically influenced music, literature, film, art,

advertising and culture in general. Are you intrigued by that influence? How

did you first become conscious of other people’s perception of you as icon?

WSB: Well, slowly of course. Over time. Reading the paper, magazines,

journals, that sort of thing.

Whitehead: The request for interviews becomes absurd after a while. This is

the first and last one I intend to do. I feel uncomfortable in the position

of interviewer.

WSB: Yes, it becomes absurd because interviewers generally ask the same

questions, say the same things.

Whitehead: Recently you’ve been barraged with interview requests, especially

in relation to the deaths of Timothy Leary and Jan Kerouac.

WSB: Yes, of course I knew Leary, but barely knew, didn’t really know Jan.

James knew her, was friends with her, but I didn’t.

Whitehead: Hunter S. Thompson, who I like so much, is, like me, from

Louisville and you’re from just up the road in St. Louis. I recently visited

Hunter at his home in Colorado. Hunter said he thought he was a pretty good

shot until he went shooting with you.

WSB: I’ll put it like this: Some days you’re good and some you aren’t.

Whitehead: You must have been good that day. Hunter was real impressed.

WSB: Well, he gave me a great pistol.

Whitehead: Like Hunter, some people would say that you’re a Southern

gentleman with a world literary reputation, but both you and Hunter have

escaped the Southern-writer label. Any comments?

WSB: I escaped the label because I didn’t and don’t write about the South.

Whitehead: Do you have a personal favorite of your own readings? I know

you’ve been in the studio recording “Junky.”

WSB: No, I don’t have any special favorite.

Whitehead: Other than Brion Gysin, is there anyone you miss the most?

WSB: When you get to be my age there are more and more people you have known

that you miss. Brion, Antony Balch, Ian Summerville are ones I think of right

away I was quite close to.

Whitehead: Diane di Prima is underrated, underappreciated in the world. Her

autobiography will be released by Viking Penguin in April ’97. I hope she’ll

finally receive credit that’s long overdue.

WSB: Yes, I hope so too.

Whitehead: You’ve had much to say about Samuel Beckett. Beckett’s mentor,

James Joyce, was an anarchist who devoted his life work to undermining and

deconstructing the dominant paradigm of patriarchy in government, religion,

family and literature. I’m doing research asking The Beats what influence

James Joyce had, if any, on their writing. How do you feel about Joyce?

WSB: Well he’s great, a very great writer. Any modern writer is bound to be

influenced by Joyce. Of course, by Beckett as well.

Whitehead: I had a long conversation with Allen Ginsberg about Bob Dylan.

Allen talked about his personal feelings towards Dylan and also about Dylan’s

work. Allen said he felt like Dylan would be remembered long after The Beats

and he added reasons why. This is a strong statement, especially coming from

Allen Ginsberg. Do you have any comments on this?

WSB: No, I don’t. Not in any cursory way. Of course, I’ve listened to and

know his music and met him a couple of times, but I don’t have any strong

statements to make.

Whitehead: John Giorno is giving me an out-take from The Best of Bill CD box

set he’s producing. As part of White Fields Press’ Published in Heaven

series, I’m producing a 7″ vinyl recording with you on one side and Sonic

Youth on the other. Lee Ranaldo has stopped by to visit you. How much are

you able to keep up with music today?

WSB: Some much more than others. I’ve worked with and am very good friends

with Patti Smith and Jim Carroll.

Whitehead: How do you feel about this historic marker?

WSB: Fine. Fine. It’s an honor like the French Commandeur de l’Ordre des

Arts et des Lettres. Commander of Arts and Letters. Commander of Arts and

Letters.