William S. Burroughs, 1914–1997

William S. Burroughs was a Beat Generation writer known for his startling, nontraditional accounts of drug culture, most famously in the book 'Naked Lunch.'

William Burroughs became one of the founding figures of the Beat Movement. An addict for years, he crafted books like Junky and Naked Lunch, which were harrowing, often grotesque looks at drug culture. He is cited as a major influence on countercultural figures in the world of music as well and worked on several recording projects.

School and Travels

Born on February 5, 1914, in St. Louis, Missouri, Burroughs was born to Laura Lee and Mortimer Burroughs. Burroughs was named after his famous grandfather, an inventor who was a pioneer in adding-machine technology.

Burroughs attended prep schools and later studied English literature at Harvard University, where he graduated in 1936. He traveled to Europe and met and married Ilse Klapper for the purpose of allowing her entry into the United States. The two ended the union upon their entry into the states.

Meeting Fellow Beats Ginsberg and Kerouac

Trying different career paths to no avail, Burroughs eventually traveled to New York and met writers Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac in the mid-1940s. The three would be heralded as starting the Beat Movement, an artistic outpouring of nontraditional, free expression.

During the mid-1940s, Burroughs and Kerouac collaborated on a novel about the murder of a friend—And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks—that was published decades later posthumously. Burroughs developed a relationship with Joan Vollmer during this time as well and they would live together as husband and wife starting in 1945. Burroughs was also open about his attraction to men, and he and Ginsberg had been lovers.

Burroughs had started to use opiates and descended into heroin addiction. He was also a gun enthusiast and, while living with his family in Mexico City in 1951, played a drunken game of target practice with Vollmer and accidentally shot her to death. He did not receive major prison time, yet would struggle with demons for years to come as a result of the killing.

Writing 'Junky' and 'Naked Lunch'

Burroughs published his first novel, Junky, in 1953 under the name William Lee. The work featured an unflinching, semi-autobiographical look at drug, or "junk," culture. He continued to travel and eventually ended up in Tangiers, strung out and running out of financial resources. He realized he would perish if he didn’t change his path and so traveled to London to receive apomorphine treatments, which he credits as curing his addiction.

With the help of Ginsberg and Kerouac, Burroughs wrote the novel Naked Lunch in Tangiers, which continued to follow the exploits of William Lee in a disturbing drug culture journey. The book featured nonlinear narrative forms with elements of sadomasochism, metamorphoses and satire. Published in 1959, the book wouldn’t be released in the United States until the 1960s due to a highly publicized governmental ban over its content, which pushed Burroughs into the spotlight. He became a figure both acclaimed and spurned.

Around the time of Lunch's release, inspired by artist Brion Gysin, Burroughs began to experiment with the cut-up technique, where random lines of text were cut from a page and rearranged to form new sentences, with the intention of freeing reader's minds from conventional, linear modes of thought. Using this technique with elements of satire and sci-fi, the 1960s saw Burroughs releasing novels like The Soft Machine (1961) and Nova Express (1964), which indicted consumerism and social repression, and the nonfiction work The Yage Letters (1963).

Musical Influence

Burroughs played with audio cut-ups as well via tape recordings. He released his first album in 1965, Call Me Burroughs, which featured his readings of text from Naked Lunch and The Soft Machine. Burroughs not only made waves in the literary world but became a huge influence for many musical artists of the day. The acts Soft Machine and Steely Dan took their names from the writer’s work and Burroughs went on to collaborate with artists of the avant-garde like Laurie Anderson, Sonic Youth and Genesis P-Orridge.

Burroughs continued his literary pursuits as well in the early 1970s, publishing The Wild Boys: A Book of the Dead (1971) and Exterminator! (1973) and penning a screenplay, The Last Words of Dutch Schulz. By the end of the decade, he worked on a book with Gysin that delved into their cut-up philosophy—The Third Mind (1978).

Burroughs would face family tragedy yet again as his son Billy Burroughs Jr., also a writer, succumbed to substance addiction and died from alcohol-related trauma in 1981.

In 1983, Burroughs was elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, and in 1984 was awarded the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by France. Jack Kerouac called Burroughs the "greatest satirical writer since Jonathan Swift," a reputation he owes to his "lifelong subversion" of the moral, political and economic systems of modern American society, articulated in often darkly humorous sardonicism. J. G. Ballard considered Burroughs to be "the most important writer to emerge since the Second World War," while Norman Mailer declared him "the only American writer who may be conceivably possessed by genius."

Death

Burroughs died in Lawrence, Kansas, in 1997.

The POETRY OF WILLIAM BURROUGHS:

An Ongoing Attempt to Collect the Poetry of William S. Burroughs:

William S. Burroughs is generally considered a novelist. To make the case that he was also a poet is neither revisionist nor perverse but absurd. After all, Burroughs paid about as much obeisance to genre or medium as he did to the law. His work consistently ignored the traditional boundaries between forms of creative production — to the point where, if you were really to collect Burroughs’ “poetry,” you would be hard-pressed to explain why you might leave out Naked Lunch. It may well be the most “poetic” text he ever wrote.

And what of the cut-up? Is it poetry, prose, or something else altogether? Oliver Harris has broached the question in his essay “‘Burroughs Is a Poet Too, Really’: The Poetics of Minutes to Go.” Harris writes that, in Minutes to Go, poetry “is not understood in terms of words on the page but as the ‘place’ reached by a particular use of chance operations on pre-existing words.” It is a method “to be grasped by doing,” not a “content to be understood by interpretation.” This insightful analysis could serve as an introduction to this somewhat quixotic attempt to collect the poetry of William Burroughs, and Oliver Harris has very graciously allowed RealityStudio to republish it.

Poems by William S. Burroughs

An extract from NAKED LUNCH (below)

Cut-Up Poems from Minutes to Go (1960)

Dead Whistle Stop Already End (Floating Bear 24, 1962)

Spain & 42 St. (Floating Bear 24, 1962)

Where Flesh Circulates (Floating Bear 24, 1962)

Cold Lost Marbles (1972)

My Legs Señor (1973)

Fear and the Monkey (Pearl 6, 1978)

Pistol Poem 2 (A William Burroughs Birthday Book, 1994)

Pistol Poem 3 (A William Burroughs Birthday Book, 1994)

Naked Lunch (an extract):

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

A waste of raw pink shame to the pastel blue horizon where vast iron mesas crash into the shattered sky, "It's all right." The God screams through you three thousand year rusty load....

Hail of crystal skulls shattered the greenhouse to slivers in the winter moon....

The American woman has left a whiff of poison behind in the dank St. Louis garden party. Pool covered with green slime in a ruined French garden. Huge pathic frog rises slowly from the water on a mud platform playing the clavichord.A Sollubi rushes into the bar and starts polishing The Saint's shoes with the oil on his nose....

The Saint kicks him petulantly in the mouth. The Sollubi screams, whirls around and shits on the Saint's pants. Then he dashes into the street. A pimp looks after him speculatively....

The Saint calls the manager: "Jesus, Al, what kinda creep joint you running here? My brand new fishskin Degagees..."

"I'm sorry, Saint. He slipped by me."

(The Sollubi are an untouchable caste in Arabia noted for their abject vileness. De luxe cafes are equipped with Sollubi who rim the guests while they eat -- holes in the seating benches being provided for this purpose. Citizens who want to be utterly humiliated and degraded -- so many people do, nowadays, hoping to jump the gun -- over themselves up for passive homosexual intercourse to an encampment of Sollubis.... Nothing like it, they tell me.... In fact, the Sollubi are subject to become wealthy and arrogant and lose their native vileness. What is origin of untouchable? Perhaps a fallen priest caste. In fact, untouchables perform a priestly function in taking on themselves all human vileness.)

A. J. strolls through the Market in black cape with a vulture perched on one shoulder. He stands by a table of agents.

"This you gotta hear. Boy in Los Angeles fifteen year old. Father decide it is time the boy have his first piece of ass. Boy is lying on the lawn reading comic books, father go out and say: 'Son, here's twenty dollars; I want you to go to a good whore and get a piece of ass off her.'

"So they drive to this plush jump joint, and the father say, 'All right, son. You're on your own. So ring the bell and when the woman come give her the twenty dollars and tell her you want a piece of ass.'

" 'Solid, pop.'

"So about fifteen minutes later the boy comes out:

" 'Well, son, did you get a piece of ass?'

" 'Yeah. This gash comes to the door, and I say I want a piece of ass and lay the double sawski on her. We go up to her trap, and she remove the dry goods. So I switch my blade and cut a big hunk off her ass, she raise a beef like I am reduce to pull off one shoe and beat her brains out. Then I hump her for kicks."

Only the laughing bones remain, flesh over the hills and far away with the dawn wind and a train whistle. We are not unaware of the problem, and the needs of our constituents are never out of our mind being their place of residence and who can break a ninety-nine year synapses lease?

Another installment in the adventures of Clem Snide the Private Ass Hole: "So I walk in the joint, and this female hustler sit at the bar, and I think, 'Oh God you're poule de luxe already.' I mean it's like I see the gash before. So I don't pay her no mind at first, then I dig she is rubbing her legs together and working her feet up behind her head shoves it down to give herself a douche job with a gadget sticks out of her nose the way a body can't help but notice."

Iris -- half Chinese and half Negro -- addicted to dihy-dro-oxy-heroin -- takes a shot every fifteen minutes to which end she leaves droppers and needles sticking out all over her. The needles rust in her dry flesh, which, here and there, has grown completely over a joint to form a smooth green brown wen. On the table in front of her is a samovar of tea and a twenty-pound hamper of brown sugar. No one has ever seen her eat anything else. It -is only just before a shot that she hears what anyone says or talks herself. Then she makes some flat, factual statement relative to her own person.

"My asshole is occluding."

"My cunt got terrible green juices."

Iris is one of Benway's projects. "The human body can run on sugar alone, God damn it.... I am aware that certain of my learned colleagues, who are attempting to belittle my genius work, claim that I put vitamins and proteins into Iris's sugar clandestinely.... I challenge these nameless assholes to crawl up out of their latrines and run a spot analysis on Iris's sugar and her tea. Iris is a wholesome American cunt. I deny categorically that she nourishes herself on semen. And let me take this opportunity to state that I am a reputable scientist, not a charlatan, a lunatic, or a pretended worker of miracles.... I never claimed that Iris could subsist exclusive on photosynthesis.... I did not say she could breathe in carbon dioxide and give off oxygen -- I confess I have been tempted to experiment being of course restrained by my medical ethics.... In short, the vile slanders of my creeping opponents will inevitably fall back onto them and come to roost like a homing stool pigeon."

Many an ill-starred actor has felt the icy blast of Slashtubitch's displeasure: "Get out of my studio, you cheap four-flushing ham! Did you think to pass a counterfeit orgasm on me! THE GREAT SLASHTU-BITCH! I could tell if you come by regard the beeg toe. Idiot! Mindless scum!! Insolent baggage!!! Go peddle thy ass and know that it takes sincerity and art, and devotion, to work for Slashtubitch. Not shoddy trickery, dubbed gasps, rubber turds and vials of milk concealed in the ear and shots of Yohimbine sneaked in the wings." ( Yohimbine, derived from the bark of a tree growing in Central Africa, is the safest and most efficient aphrodisiac. It operates by dilating the blood vessels on the surface of the skin, particularly in the genital area. )

Slashtubitch ejects his monocle. It sails out of sight, returns like a boomerang into his eye. He pirouettes and disappears in a blue mist, cold as liquid air...fadeout....

On Screen. Red-haired, green-eyed boy, white skin with a few freckles... kissing a thin brunette girl in slacks. Clothes and hair-do suggest existentialist bars of all the world cities. They are seated on low bed covered in white silk. The girl opens his pants with gentle fingers and pulls out his cock which is small and very hard. A drop of lubricant gleams at its tip like a pearl. She caresses the crown gently: "Strip, Johnny." He takes off his clothes with swift sure movements and stands naked before her, his cock pulsing. She makes a motion for him to turn around and he pirouettes across the floor parodying a model, hand on hip. She takes off her shirt.

Her breasts are high and small with erect nipples. She slips off her underpants. Her pubic hairs are black and shiny. He sits down beside her and reaches for her breast. She stops his hands.

"Darling, I want to rim you," she whispers.

"No. Not now."

"Please, I want to."

"Well, all right. I'll go wash my ass."

"No, I'll wash it."

"Aw shucks now, it ain't dirty."

"Yes it is. Come on now, Johnny boy."

She leads him into the bathroom. "All right, get down." He gets down on his knees and leans forward, with his chin on the bath mat. "Allah," he says. He looks back and grins at her. She washes his ass with soap and hot water sticking her finger up it.

"Does that hurt?"

"Noooooooooo."

"Come along, baby." She leads the way into the bedroom. He lies down on his back and throws his legs back over his head, clasping elbows behind his knees. She kneel down and caress the backs of his thighs, his balls, running her fingers down the perennial divide. She push his cheeks apart, lean down and begin licking the anus, moving her head in a slow circle. She push at the sides of the asshole, licking deeper and deeper. He close his eyes and squirm. She lick up the perennial divide. His small, tight balls.... A great pearl stands out on the tip of his circumcised cock. Her mouth closes over the crown. She sucks rhythmically up and down, pausing on the up stroke and moving her head around in a circle. Her hand plays gently with his balls, slide down and middle finger up his ass. As she suck down toward the root of his cock she tickle his prostate mockingly. He grin and fart. She is sucking his cock now in a frenzy. His body begins to contract, pulling up toward his chin. Each time the contraction is longer.

"Wheeeeeeee!" the boy yell, every muscle tense, his whole body strain to empty through his cock. She drinks his jissom which fills her mouth in great hot spurts. He lets his feet Hop back onto the bed. He arches his back and yawns. Mary is strapping on a rubber penis: "Steely Dan III from Yokohama," she says, caressing the shaft. Milk spurts across the room.

"Be sure that milk is pasteurized. Don't go giving me some kinda awful cow disease like anthrax or glanders or aftosa...."

"When I was a transvestite Liz in Chi used to work as an exterminator. Make advances to pretty boys for the thrill of being beaten as a man. Later I catch this one kid, overpower him with supersonic judo I learned from an old Lesbian Zen monk. I tie him up, strip off his clothes with a razor and fuck him with Steely Dan I. He is so relieved I don't castrate him literal he come all over my bedbug spray."

"What happen to Steely Dan II"

"He was torn in two by a bull dike. Most terrific vaginal grip I ever experienced. She could cave in a lead pipe. It was one of her parlor tricks."

"And Steely Dan II"

"Chewed to bits by a famished candiru in the Upper Baboonsasshole. And don't say 'Wheeeeeeee!' this time."

"Why not? It's real boyish."

"Barefoot boy, check thy bullheads with the madame."

He looks at the ceiling, hands behind his head, cock pulsing.

"So what shall I do? Can't shit with that dingus up me. I wonder is it possible to laugh and come at the same time? I recall, during the war, at the Jockey Club in Cairo, me and my asshole buddy, Lu, both gentlemen by act of Congress... nothing else could have done such a thing to either of us.... So we got laughing so hard we piss all over ourselves and the waiter say: 'You bloody hash-heads, get out of here!' I mean, if I can laugh the piss out of me I should be able to laugh out jissom. So tell me something real funny when I start coming. You can tell by certain premonitory quiverings of the prostate gland...."

She puts on a record, metallic cocaine be-bop. She greases the dingus, shoves the boy's legs over his head and works it up his ass with a series of corkscrew movements of her fluid hips. She moves in a slow circle, revolving on the axis of the shaft. She rubs her hard nipples across his chest. She kisses him on neck and chin and eyes. He runs his hands down her back to her buttocks, pulling her into his ass. She revolves faster, faster. His body jerks and writhes in convulsive spasms.

"Hurry up, please," she says. "The milk is getting cold."

He does not hear. She presses her mouth against his. Their faces run together. His sperm hits her breast with light, hot licks.

Mark is standing in the doorway. He wears a turtleneck black sweater. Cold, handsome, narcissistic face. Green eyes and black hair. He looks at Johnny with a slight sneer, his head on one side, hands on his jacket

Pistol Poem No. 2

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

Who Controls The Control Men

Who Controls The Men Control

Who Controls Control Men The

Who Controls Control The Men

Who Controls Men The Control

Who Controls Men Control The

Who The Control Men Controls

Who The Control Controls Men

Who The Men Controls Control

Who The Men Control Controls

Who The Controls Control Men

Who The Controls Men Control

Who Control Men Controls The

Who Control Men The Controls

Who Control Controls The Men

Who Control Controls Men The

Who Control The Men Controls

Who Control The Controls Men

Who Men Controls The Control

Who Men Controls Control The

Who Men The Control Controls

Who Men The Controls Control

Who Men Control Controls The

Who Men Control The Controls

Controls The Control Men Who

Controls The Control Who Men

Controls The Men Who Control

Controls The Men Control Who

Controls The Who Control Men

Controls The Who Men Control

Controls Control Men Who The

Controls Control Men The Who

Controls Control Who The Men

Controls Control Who Men The

Controls Control The Men Who

Controls Control The Who Men

Controls Men Who The Control

Controls Men Who Control The

Controls Men The Control Who

Controls Men The Who Control

Controls Men Control Who The

Controls Men Control The Who

Controls Who The Control Men

Controls Who The Men Control

Controls Who Control Men The

Controls Who Control The Men

Controls Who Men The Control

Controls Who Men Control The

The Control Men Who Controls

The Control Men Controls Who

The Control Who Controls Men

The Control Who Men Controls

The Control Controls Men Who

The Control Controls Who Men

The Men Who Controls Control

The Men Who Control Controls

The Men Controls Control Who

The Men Controls Who Control

The Men Control Who Controls

The Men Control Controls Who

The Who Controls Control Men

The Who Controls Men Control

The Who Control Men Controls

The Who Control Controls Men

The Who Men Controls Control

The Who Men Control Controls

The Controls Control Men Who

The Controls Control Who Men

The Controls Men Who Control

The Controls Men Control Who

The Controls Who Control Men

The Controls Who Men Control

Control Men Who Controls The

Control Men Who The Controls

Control Men Controls The Who

Control Men Controls Who The

Control Men The Who Controls

Control Men The Controls Who

Control Who Controls The Men

Control Who Controls Men The

Control Who The Men Controls

Control Who The Controls Men

Control Who Men Controls The

Control Who Men The Controls

Control Controls The Men Who

Control Controls The Who Men

Control Controls Men Who The

Control Controls Men The Who

Control Controls Who The Men

Control Controls Who Men The

Control The Men Who Controls

Control The Men Controls Who

Control The Who Controls Men

Control The Who Men Controls

Control The Controls Men Who

Control The Controls Who Men

Men Who Controls The Control

Men Who Controls Control The

Men Who The Control Controls

Men Who The Controls Control

Men Who Control Controls The

Men Who Control The Controls

Men Controls The Control Who

Men Controls The Who Control

Men Controls Control Who The

Men Controls Control The Who

Men Controls Who The Control

Men Controls Who Control The

Men The Control Who Controls

Men The Control Controls Who

Men The Who Controls Control

Men The Who Control Controls

Men The Controls Control Who

Men The Controls Who Control

Men Control Who Controls The

Men Control Who The Controls

Men Control Controls The Who

Men Control Controls Who The

Men Control The Who Controls

Men Control The Controls Who

3. Where Flesh Circulates

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

Its so hard to remember in the world - - Weren't you there? Dead so you

think of ports - - Couldn't reach flesh - - Might have to reach flesh from

anybody - -

And i will depart under the Red Masters

for strange dawn words of color exalting their

falling on my face impending attack satellite in a

Gold and perfumes of light city red stone

shadows brick terminal time wet dream flesh creakily the

the last feeble faces fountains play stale

spit from crumpled cloth Weimar youths on my face

bodies where flesh circulates Masters of color

exalting their dogs impending attack of light

unaware of the vagrant shadows on the Glass and Metal Streets

silver flying scanning patterns electric dogs

dark street life "Here he is now" staring out

from the dawn he strode toward the flesh jissom webs drifting

where identity scarred metal faces masturbating

"Who him?" spitting blood laugh on the iron afternoons

ejaculates wet dream flesh in red brick Terminal Time

red nitrous fumes under the orange gas flares

grey metal fall out on terminal cities

to the shrinking sky fading color sewage delta

caught in this dead whistle stop post card sky

dead rainbow flesh and copper pagodas flickered on the

in a city of red stone black skin work fish smell and

dead eyes in doorways red water words spitting blood laugh

sharp as water reeds fish syllables

stirring this Moroccan sunlight vagrant noon station

spent in the mirror dawn jissom webs drifting rainbow

speeded up from afternoon's slow ferris wheel flesh.

4. Fear and the Monkey

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

This text arranged in my New York loft, which is the converted locker room of an old YMCA. Guests have reported the presence of a ghost boy. So this is a Oui-Ja board poem taken from Dumb Instrument, a book of poems by Denton Welch, and spells and invocations from the Necronomicon, a highly secret magical text released in paperback. There is a pinch of Rimbaud, a dash of St-John Perse, an oblique reference to Toby Tyler with the Circus, and the death of his pet monkey.

Turgid itch and the perfume of death

On a whispering south wind

A smell of abyss and of nothingness

Dark Angel of the wanderers howls through the loft

With sick smelling sleep

Morning dream of a lost monkey

Born and muffled under old whimsies

With rose leaves in closed jars

Fear and the monkey

Sour taste of green fruit in the dawn

The air milky and spiced with the trade winds

White flesh was showing

His jeans were so old

Leg shadows by the sea

Morning light

On the sky light of a little shop

On the odor of cheap wine in the sailors' quarter

On the fountain sobbing in the police courtyards

On the statue of moldy stone

On the little boy whistling to stray dogs.

Wanderers cling to their fading home

A lost train whistle wan and muffled

In the loft night taste of water

Morning light on milky flesh

Turgid itch ghost hand

Sad as the death of monkeys

Thy father a falling star

Crystal bone into thin air

Night sky

Dispersal and emptiness.

5. Spain & 42 St.

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

Language like muttering pant smells running silver scanning

Passed down the Arab Street in the gutter patterns

Translucent medium from its like i talky you of a place

the vacuum of silent panic forgotten red mud flats

sharp fish syllables where is he now? he moved as sharp as water

assassins smile and drink he was caught reeds

broken into scanning patterns in the zoo of legs

dawn words falling fish talk the liquid typewriter spitting blood

where flesh circulates he strode toward flesh of red dusk laugh

purple gills stirring dead whistle stop Spain and 42 st.

its like reeds on the face circulates up through the dark excuses

where flesh identity dawn words falling stirring slow

gills of purple sleep he was caught in the zoo it is no death

where flesh circulates unbelief staring out from dawn skin

of Spain and 42 St.

6. Cold Lost Marbles

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

my ice skates on a wall

lustre of stumps washes his lavander horizon

he's got a handsome face of a lousy kid

rooming-houses dirty fingers

whistled in the shadow

"Wait for me at the detour."

river… snow… some one vague faded in a mirror

filigree of trade winds

clouds white as lace circling the pepper trees

the film is finished

memory died when their photos weather-worn points of

polluted water under the trees in the mist shadow of

boys by the daybreak in the peony fields cold lost

marbles in the room carnations three ampoules of

morphine little blue-eyes-twilight grins between his

legs yellow fingers blue stars erect boys of sleep

have frozen dreams for I am a teenager pass it on

flesh and bones withheld too long yes sir oui oui

Crapps' last map… lake… a canoe… rose tornado in

the harvest brass echo tropical jeers from Panama

City night fences dead fingers you are in your own body

around and maybe a boy skin spreads to something

else on Long Island the dogs are quiet.

7. My Legs Señor

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

attic room and window my ice skates on the wall

the Priest could see the bathroom pale yellow wood panels

toilet young legs shiny black leg hairs

"It is my legs señor."

lustre of stumps rinses his lavender horizen

feeling the boy groan and what it meant

face of a lousy kid on the doctor's table

I was the shadow of the waxing evening and strange window panes.

I was the smudge and whine of missed times in the reflected sky

points of polluted water under his lavender horizen window pane

smudge scrawled by some boy cold lost marbles in the room

the doctor's shabby table…his face…

boy skin spreads to something else.

"CHRIST WHAT'S INSIDE?" HE screams

flesh and bones rose tornado

"THAT HURTS"

I was the smudge and whine of shinny back leg hairs

silver paper in the wind frayed sounds of distant city.

8. Cut-Up Poems from Minutes to Go

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

at land coccus germs

by a bacilmouth Jersy phenicol bitoics

the um vast and varied that

specific target was the vast popul - - - -

the vast

cancers that surgery and Xrays C

In the United States the Americi

is considered well worth our feet. . .

Ociety racks up the score like

sons will become new cancer pee

a third of them. . .

Surgery & Radiation be saved

this leaves 225 000

resistant o rso widely

surgeons and radiologists

These individuals are marked foe. . .

"For these the

the opinion of Dr. Robert P

Dushinski with £ fluoro

he helped synthesize

cancer men

growth in some cases

is worth 12,000 dollars $$$$

cancer men. $

. . . these individuals are marked foe. . .

Cut up New Clues To Cancer Cures

The Saturday Evening Post

Oct. 31, 1959 Past Time

9. Dead Whistle Stop Already End

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

Ahab to his companion falling over there in any out from the dawn

skin staring stirring unbelief he strode towards a long

drink and looked into the the actors ourselves become

muzzle of Spain and 42 St. old banner illustrating

I was standing by the wax before dead whistle stop already

cross the red moon terminal time scarred end.

scanning patterns on my face me in your back, pal"

dawn words falling will say it all consists in irradiating

this dead whistle stop in the language before creation

he strode towards the actors in the city "Here he is now"

obsidian morning sniffing quivering need masturbating afternoons

spitting blood dead rainbow flesh he moved as sharp as

on the iron streets fish smell and dead eyes water reeds

scarred metal faces running into the mines liquid typewriter

flickered on field where flesh circulates red fish talk falling

he strode towards pant smell language like muttering

Spain and 42 st. running in the gutter where is he now?

the actors dead dawn word falling he was caught in the zoo

whistle stop already scanning patterns jissom webs drifting

slow ferris wheel running rainbow flesh over the White Subway

10. Pistol Poem No.3

by WILLIAM BURROUGHS

Power Is Often Very Quiet

Power Is Often Quiet Very

Power Is Very Quiet Often

Power Is Very Often Quiet

Power Is Quiet Often Very

Power Is Quiet Very Often

Power Often Very Quiet Is

Power Often Very Is Quiet

Power Often Quiet Is Very

Power Often Quiet Very Is

Power Often Is Very Quiet

Power Often Is Quiet Very

Power Very Quiet Is Often

Power Very Quiet Often Is

Power Very Is Often Quiet

Power Very Is Quiet Often

Power Very Often Quiet Is

Power Very Often Is Quiet

Power Quiet Is Often Very

Power Quiet Is Very Often