Starting on May 15, 2024, foreign cruise tour groups organized by Chinese travel agencies are offered a 15-day visa-free entry into China through Haikou, which enables the group tourists to explore 11 coastal areas, including Shanghai, Tianjin, Liaoning, Hebei, Shandong, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, and the capital city Beijing.

Sanya Facts

Chinese Name: 三亚 (sān yà )

Population: 614,647

Area: Land Area: 1,921 square kilometers (742 square miles); Sea Area: 3,500 square kilometers (1351 square miles)

Location: in the south of Hainan Province, southern China

Administrative Division: 4 districts (Haitang, Jiyang, Tianya, Yazhou)

Area Code: 0898

Zip Code: 572000

GDP (2019): CNY 67.786 billion (USD 9.825 billion)

Known as the “Hawaii of China”

Sanya is located in the south end of Hainan Island, adjacent to Lingshui County on the east, Ledong County on the west, Baoting County on the north and the South China Sea to the south. Sanya is the only city in China that can enjoy the tropical rainforest and ocean scenery at the same time. Surrounded by mountains on three sides, Sanya presents integrated beautiful sceneries of beaches, seas, mountains and rivers. Many hills also provide a commanding point for overlooking this city. Besides, the sea water is clear with high visibility and moderate water temperature, which is suitable for swimming all year round. Numerous egrets live in the evergreen mangroves on both sides of two rivers in the west and east of urban Sanya. All the above make Sanya a paradise for habitation, tourism and vacation.

Citizen from 59 qualifying nations is exempted from Chinese visa if he or she is received by a travel agencies in Hainan Province and has 30 days visa-free entry to Hainan.

For most travelers, Sanya is a noted tourist resort with mountains, rivers and the best seaview. The favorable climate is hot in summer but warm in the three other seasons so attracting large numbers of followers from both home and abroad every year. The whole city is related to the sea. Here you can enjoy a unique tropical oceanic landscape that is totally different from the other provinces of China. Sanya Bay, Dadonghai, Haitang Bay and Yalong Bay all golden seaboards of Sanya, are some of the first choices for visitors to spend their holidays. Instead of a busy and exhausting journey, you can relax totally here by strolling along the beaches and breathing the fresh air. If you are an enthusiast of exciting water activities, Wuzhizhou Island is your place to challenge the mysterious and changing sea. Additionally more than 20 ethnic groups including Han, Li, Miao, Hui inhabit there becoming a wonderful place to appreciate the various cultures of China. In Binglanggu Li & Miao Cultural Heritage Park and Yanoda Rainforest Cultural Tourism Zone, you can fully experience local ethnic customs.

See also: Top 10 Things to Do in Sanya

7 Most Beautiful Beaches in Sanya

Sanya Pictures Videos

Tianya Haijiao

Recommended Tours

Beach Travel in Haikou & Sanya: 5 days to the beautiful beach resorts

More China Tour Packages

Along with the developing economy of this region, this wonderful city has become much easier for visitors to reach where domestic and international flights can take you in the shortest time. A journey by train and ship will take you a little more time but give you more opportunity to enjoy the natural beauty around you.

See also

Sanya Phoenix International Airport

How to Travel between Haikou and Sanya

Top 6 China Family Holiday Destinations

See also: Best Time to Visit Sanya

Sanya Travel Tips

Tasting the local dishes is a must on your journey. Sanya never shirks in its efforts to entertain its guests with a variety of seafood and delicious tropical fruits all the year round. Both of the star-rated hotels and a number of roadside booths serve the freshest seafood. Shopping is also a must on your journey, so don't forget to choose some sea products and beautiful decorations for you or your friends and relatives back home. With good quality, star-rated hotels and reasonable hostels distributed everywhere in the city and waiting for you, there is no need to worry about accommodation.

Further Reading:

Top 10 China Destinations for First Time Travelers

China Honeymoon: 10 Best Destinations for Couples8 Major Cities in China for Enthusiastic Shoppers10 Most Beautiful Cities in China