Sanya is an important political, economic, cultural and foreign trade port in the southern part of Hainan, China, and also a famous coastal tourist city filled with tropical landscapes and local customs. Since Sanya is situated in the southernmost part of China, she has been called "the remotest cape of the earth" since ancient time.

The region of Sanya has a long history of human development. There were discoveries of cultural relics of the Old Stone Age. Ancient Persian tombs were found along the coast.

Sanya region was called Ahuya Prefecture in the western Han dynasty, later changed to Linzhen Prefecture in the Sui Dynasty, Zhen Zhou in the Tang dynasty, Ya Zhou in the Song Dynasty, Ya County in 1920 and Sanya City in 1984.

As the world famous tourism city, Sanya, has advantages on its air transportation, especially for the international ones.Phoenix Airport is 20 km northwest away from the city. Now, there are more than 30 national direct flights to Sanya including Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Shenyang, Wuhan, Qingdao, and 9 international airlines from Singapore, HongKong, Malasia, Thailand, Seoul, Tokyo and Osaka.There is a highway linking the airport and the city center. You can take a taxi or a bus to the city centre. In addition there are direct buses to Sanya Bay and Dadonghai at the airport.

Basic Information

Area Code: 0898

Zip Code: 572000

Area: Sanya has an area of 1,919 sq km

Geography: Situated at the southern-most tip of Hainan Island, Sanya lies in the southern valley of the Wuzhi Mountain range. Sanya has a population of about 450,000 and covers an area of about 1,900 sq km, with about 210 km of coastline highlighted by natural beaches, fresh sea breezes and crystal-clear waters. Sanya is located at 18° latitude and 108° longitude and adjoins Tongzha County to the north, Baoting and Lingshui counties to the northeast, and Ledong County to the northwest.

Population: Sanya has a population of 0.44 million.

Administrative Division: Sanya is a sub-provincial city. It has direct jurisdiction over 2 township-level districts and six towns.

Climate