Cross-Industry Group Presents Specification For Enhanced Television Programs

CableLabs, CNN, DIRECTV, Discovery, Disney, Intel, Microsoft/WebTV, NBC, NDTC Technology, NCI, PBS, Sony, Tribune and Warner Bros. Collaborate on Enhanced TV Proposal

July 28, 1998 -- A group of companies representing broadcast and cable networks; television stations; cable and satellite service providers; and the consumer electronics, PC and software industries today announced a draft specification for enhanced television programming. The authors of the specification are CableLabs; CNN; DIRECTV, Inc.; Discovery Communications, Inc. (DCI); The Walt Disney Company; Intel Corporation; Microsoft Corporation/WebTV Networks, Inc.; NBC Multimedia, Inc.; Network Computer, Inc. (NCI); NDTC Technology; Public Broadcasting Service (PBS); Sony Corporation; Tribune Company and Warner Bros.

The group, called the Advanced Television Enhancement Forum (ATVEF), has defined protocols for television programming enhanced with data, such as Internet content. The goal is to allow content creators to design enhanced programming that may be delivered over any form of transport (analog or digital TV, cable, or satellite) to all types of broadcast receivers that comply with the proposed specification.

Enhanced television offers new entertainment and commerce opportunities, such as: sports events with complementary information on players and teams, news with additional details and related stories, and ads that allow consumers to order merchandise with the click of a button.

A common specification should accelerate the creation and distribution of enhanced television programs and allow consumers to enjoy such programs cost-effectively and conveniently, regardless of which transport or broadcast receiver they use. Such a specification would also allow content providers and distributors to choose from a variety of enhanced television business models and delivery methods.

Other companies intending to work with the ATVEF to accelerate development of products and services include Cable and Wireless Communications, Digital Renaissance, E! Entertainment Television, The Fantastic Corporation, Hitachi Limited, Macromedia, Inc., Mixed Signals Technologies, National Geographic Ventures, Sharp Corporation, The Weather Channel and Wink Communications.

The draft specification is posted at the group's Web site, www.atvef.com, for public comment, and any company may voluntarily adopt the specification by completing the agreement on the Web site. The ATVEF is working with other industry groups and standards bodies to incorporate the specification as part of those bodies' standards, in order to provide a consistent international blueprint for enhanced products and services. Those bodies include: OpenCable, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC), World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE). The ATVEF intends to publish the final revision of the specification in the fourth quarter of 1998. The ATVEF anticipates the first compliant receivers and programming will be available in the first half of 1999.

About the Companies

CableLabs is a research and development consortium of cable television system operators representing the continents of North America and South America. CableLabs plans and funds research and development projects that will help cable companies take advantage of future opportunities and meet future challenges in the cable television industry. It also transfers relevant technologies to member companies and to the industry. In addition, CableLabs acts as a clearinghouse to provide information on current and prospective technological developments that are of interest to the cable industry. CableLabs maintains Web sites at www.cablelabs.com; www.cablemodem.com; www.cablenet.org; www.opencable.com; and www.packetcable.com.

The CNN News Group is one of the largest and most profitable electronic news and information companies in the world. The hub of the CNN News Group is the Cable News Network (CNN), distributed to 73 million U.S. households. Altogether, the CNN News Group is available to more than 800 million people worldwide with six cable and satellite television networks (CNN, Headline News, CNN International, CNNfn, CNN/SI and CNN en EspaÑol), three private, out-of-home networks, two radio networks, eight Web sites and CNN Newsource, the world's most extensively syndicated news service.

DIRECTV is the nation's leading digital television entertainment service with more than 3.8 million subscribers. Owners of a DIRECTV system, which consists of a digital set-top box and 18-inch satellite dish, have access to more than 200 channels of popular news, entertainment and family programming in digital programming and sound. Since its introduction in the marketplace in June 1994, the DIRECTV system has broadened the landscape of home entertainment and become the fastest-selling consumer electronics product in U.S. history. Visit DIRECTV on the World Wide Web at www.directv.com.

Discovery Communications, Inc. (DCI) is a privately held, diversified media company based in Bethesda, Maryland. DCI offers an array of globally distributed television, online and consumer products designed to help people explore their world and satisfy their natural curiosity. The company's ownership consists of four shareholders, Liberty Media Corp, a division of Tele-Communications, Inc (Nasdaq: LBTYA/LBTYB), Cox Communications (NYSE:COX), Advance/Newhouse Communications and John S. Hendricks, the company's founder, chairman and CEO. To find out more about DCI's quality products and services visit www.discovery.com on the World Wide Web.

The Walt Disney Company is a diversified, international family entertainment and media company whose operations include theme parks and resorts, filmed entertainment including motion pictures and television shows, home video products, records, consumer products, a cruise line, radio and television stations, broadcast and cable networks, publishing activities and professional sports enterprises. Disney owns ABC Inc. Founded in 1923 by Walter E. Disney and his brother Roy O. Disney, The Walt Disney Company generated revenues of $22.5 billion in 1997.

Founded in 1975, Microsoft is the worldwide leader in software for personal computers. The company offers a wide range of products and services for business and personal use, each designed with the mission of making it easier and more enjoyable for people to take advantage of the full power of personal computing every day.

NBC is a global media company with broadly diverse holdings. NBC owns and operates the NBC Television Network as well as 13 television stations. In the United States, NBC owns CNBC, operates MSNBC in partnership with Microsoft, and maintains equity interests in Arts & Entertainment, The History Channel, and Rainbow Programming Holdings, a leading media company with a wide array of entertainment and sports cable channels. Internationally, NBC owns and operates CNBC: A Service of NBC and Dow Jones in partnership with Dow Jones & Company in Europe and Asia. Together with National Geographic Television, NBC owns National Geographic Channels Worldwide (NGCW). In partnership with BSkyB, NGCW operates the National Geographic Channel in Europe. Its sister programming service, National Geographic Channel Asia, is jointly owned by NBC and National Geographic. NBC also operates NBC Europe in partnership with Deutsche Fernsehnachrichten Agentur. NBC is the network leader in interactive and new media businesses. Among its holdings are NBC.com, NBC Interactive Neighborhood, VideoSeeker and CNBC/Dow Jones Business Video. The company also has an equity stake in Snap!, the Internet portal service operated in partnership with CNET. NBC's enhanced broadcasting initiatives include Intel's Intercast technology, WebTV for Windows with Microsoft and Wink-enhanced programming with Wink Communications.

Network Computer, Inc. is an affiliate of Oracle Corp. and Netscape and is a leading provider of information appliance software. Founded in 1996, NCI brings its technology to homes, schools and businesses through its strategic worldwide alliances. NCI is based in Redwood Shores, Calif., and can be reached at (650) 631-4600. NCI's Web site is www.nc.com.

PBS, headquartered in Alexandria, Va., is a private, nonprofit media enterprise owned and operated by the nation's 350 public television stations. A trusted community resource, PBS uses the power of noncommercial television, the Internet and other media to enrich the lives of all Americans through quality programs and education services that inform, inspire and delight. Available to 99 percent of American homes with televisions and to an increasing number of digital multimedia households, PBS serves nearly 100 million people each week.

Sony Corporation is a leading manufacturer of audio, video, communications and information technology products for the consumer and professional markets. Its music, pictures and computer entertainment operations make Sony one of the most comprehensive entertainment companies in the world. Sony recorded consolidated annual sales of over $51 billion for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1998, and it employs 173,000 people worldwide. Sony's Homepage URL: www.sony.co.jp.

Tribune Company is a leading media company with operations in television and radio broadcasting, publishing, education and interactive ventures. It is an industry leader in venture partnerships with new-media companies. Tribune ranked No. 1 among its industry peers in Fortune magazine's 1998 list of America's most-admired companies and No. 2 among Broadcasting and Publishing companies in Business Week's 1998 industry rankings of the S&P 500.

WARNER BROS. is a global leader in the creation, production, distribution and marketing of all forms of entertainment and their attendant businesses. Warner Bros., a Time Warner Entertainment Company, stands at the forefront in every aspect of the entertainment industry from feature films to television, home video, animation, product licensing, retail stores and international theme parks.

* Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.