Full-color, step-by-step instructions demonstrate how to make the most of Macromedia Dreamweaver when formatting and styling text, creating Web-based forms and pages with frames, maintaining a Web site, and building database-driven sites

Fully updated for the latest version of Dreamweaver, coverage includes applying style sheets, using dynamic HTML, publishing a Web site, and using library items and templates to create robust Web sites

Features jargon-free instructions, more than 500 color screen shots, practical examples and advice, and a full measure of information that goes beyond the basics

No programming or HTML experience required-users learn to create Web pages without writing code

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

From the Back Cover:

Are you a visual learner? Do you prefer instructions that show you how to do something — and skip the long-winded explanations? If so, then this book is for you. Open it up and you'll find clear, step-by-step screen shots that show you how to tackle more than 120 Dreamweaver 8 tasks. Each task-based spread includes these great features to get you up and running on Dreamweaver 8 in no time:

Helpful sidebars that offer practical tips and tricks

Succinct explanations that walk you through step by step

Full-color screen shots that demonstrate each task

Two-page lessons that break big topics into bite-sized modules

Learn How To:

Create Web pages with frames

Format and style text

Work with images and multimedia

Publish and maintain a Web site

Connect information using hyperlinks

Configure a dynamic Web site

About the Author:

Janine Warner is a best-selling author, journalist, and Internet consultant. Since 1995, she’s written and coauthored 10 books about the Internet, including Creating Family Web Sites For Dummies and Dreamweaver 8 For Dummies.

A recognized Internet expert known for making technology fun and accessible, Janine has been a featured guest on technology news specials on ABC, NBC and ZDTV and has been interviewed on numerous radio programs in the United States and abroad. Her articles and columns have been published in a variety of publications, including The Miami Herald newspaper, Shape Magazine, and the Pulitzer Prize Winning Point Reyes Light.

Janine is a popular speaker at conferences and events throughout the US, and her fluency in Spanish has brought her many invitations to speak in Latin America and Spain. She also serves as a judge for the Arroba de Oro, a series of Internet award contests held throughout Latin America. Through her participation as a speaker at the award’s events, she helped to create an Internet literacy program for high school students in Central America.

Janine has served as a part-time faculty member at the University of Southern California Annenberg School for Communication and the University of Miami. She now serves as the Multimedia Program Manager for the Western Knight Center, a joint project of USC and UC Berkeley, funded by the Knight Foundation.

From 1998 to 2000, Janine worked fulltime for The Miami Herald, first as their Online Managing Editor and later as Director of New Media, managing a team of designers, programmers, and journalists who produced the online editions of The Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald, as well as Miami.com. She also served as Director of Latin American Operations for CNET Networks, an international technology media company.

An award-winning former reporter, she earned a degree in Journalism and Spanish from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and worked for several years in Northern California as a reporter and editor before becoming interested in the Internet in the mid-’90s. To learn more, visit www.JCWarner.com.

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.