Peter Sollett is a screenwriter and director from the United States. He is best known for directing the hit film Look at Me. He has directed a number of box office hits, including Raising Victor Vargas, Cinema 16: American Short Films, Nick & Norah’s Infinite Playlist, Freeheld, and others. He has been in a number of television dramas and series, including Ben and Kate, Vinyl, The Path, Rise, Almost Family, The Village, and many others.

Peter Sollett: Profile summary

Peter Sollett: Wiki

Peter Sollett is well known for Film Making, Web Series, and Music Videos. Bеіng passionate аbоut his work аnd аlwауѕ wanted tо carve а niche fоr himself іn life, wаѕ thе spark thаt ignited him to pursue his dreams and passion. His passion to deliver something new and something better has driven him over the years and is the key to his success & perseverance. He is a man with a proactive approach and has painted the canvas of his dream with the colors of his consistent and persistent efforts. He is known for his Style and Amazing Personality. He has earned a lot of fame, admiration, and recognition for his incredible talent and work, and fantastic personality.

Peter Sollett: Career timeline

2008

Peter Sollett directed the 2008 film Nick & Norah’s Infinite Playlist, starring Michael Cera and Kat Dennings, also set in New York City. Though he did not write the film, only directed Lorene Scafaria’s script, based on a novel of the same name by Rachel Cohn and David Levithan, he drew from his own experiences when making the film. The film takes place over one night in Manhattan, where a number of New Jersey teenagers have commuted in for the night—something Sollett was familiar with and often did himself, having lived in Brooklyn as a child and Staten Island as an adult. Many of his personal favorite Manhattan locations also featured in the film, including Katz’s Deli and the Lower East Side’s Mercury Lounge.

1998

Sollett’s first film was Five Feet High and Rising, a 26-minute short film about the growth and coming-of-age of teenager Victor Vargas. He and Eva Vives wrote Five Feet High and Rising as their thesis film in 1998 at New York University’s Tisch School of the Arts and he served as the film’s director, cinematographer and editor. After he had the opportunity to work with professionals in the film industry at the Cannes Residence Programme, the short film went on to screen on the festival circuit and won a number of awards at the Sundance Film Festival, Cannes Film Festival, Aspen Shortsfest, Valencia International Film Festival, South by Southwest Film Festival and Cinema Jove International Film Festival. Two years after the release of Five Feet High and Rising, Sollett and Vives reunited to collaborate on a follow-up project that became Raising Victor Vargas, originally named Long Way Home. While Sollett says that Five Feet High and Rising was purely autobiographical and based on the Italian, Jewish neighborhood he grew up in Brooklyn, he and Vives decided to create another film directly about the experiences of the main characters Victor and Judy, continuing on two years after the film left off. Using the same cast as the original short film, he wrote an action-and-dialogue screenplay which he did not give to any of the actors to encourage them to improvise and create a feeling of spontaneity and authenticity. Raising Victor Vargas earned Sollett three Independent Spirit Award nominations in the categories of Best Film, Best Director and Best First Screenplay, as well as other awards and nominations at the Viennale, San Sebastián International Film Festival, Online Film Critics Society Awards, Deauville Film Festival, Gotham Awards and the Humanitas Prize.

1976

Peter Sollett (born January 1, 1976) is an American film director and screenwriter known for his feature films Raising Victor Vargas (2002) and Nick & Norah’s Infinite Playlist (2008).

Peter Sollett: Net Worth

Peter Sollett’s net worth is $1 Million – $5 Million (approx).

Peter Sollett: Facts