Nuku Hiva Island

One of the three northern Marquesas. Capital of the Marquesas and Port of Entry. Population of nearly 3,000.

Mighty and majestic, Nuku Hiva in the northern Marquesas has been called the “I’le mystique” - the Mystical Island. It is the largest Marquesan island - 127 square miles - and second largest in French Polynesia after Tahiti. This choice cruising ground with its 8 magnificent harbors and the only coral reef in the archipelago is as varied as its inland landscapes of towering mountains, pine forests, dry plains, and high waterfalls. There is much to explore by sea and by land. We spent three months circumnavigating on Jacaranda and exploring on inland tours by car, hiking and horseback riding. Geographically and culturally Nuku Hiva feels as big and expansive as it is.

Nuku Hiva is also the most populated island (almost 3,000 people). As the administrative center of the Marquesas, the “capital” village of Taiohae is as cosmopolitan and urbane as it gets out here in this remote hinterland of the world. Taiohae Bay is a principal French Polynesian port of entry for visiting yachts, echoing its historical importance from the days of square riggers when it was, as Herman Melville wrote, the “only one at which ships are in the habit of touching”. It also remains a frequent stopover for today’s superyachts.

Its discovery in 1791 - a full 200 years after the discovery of the southern Marquesas - was by an American, Joseph Ingraham. Captain David Porter tried to own it for an uninterested U.S. in 1813. He named it Washington Island, the main harbor Massachusetts Bay, and called the village Madisonville. In 1842 it was claimed for France.

Step into Taipivai Valley after reading Herman Melville’s “Typee” (1846) (even with its many fictions and exaggerations), anchor in Anaho Bay with Robert Louis Stevenson’s chronicles aboard the Casco (1888), arrive with Jack London’s escapades on the Snark (1907), peruse the journals of Captain David Porter and colonial French authorities while sitting among their early buildings near the original site of Fort Madison (later Fort Collette) in Taiohae, examine the old engravings and drawings made by artists accompanying early explorers, study archeological interpretations while walking through the sacred sites at the excavated Kamuihei-Tahakia-Teiipoka complex, amble among the many pae paes (stone foundations) at the extensive ancient community of Pua accompanied by today’s resident descendants of the queen, hike beautiful King’s Valley along the once inhabited royal road river trail to the Vaipo waterfall, or be in Taiohae when a tall ship just happens to glide in like a time warp.....and you can easily be captivated and transported back in time with an uncontainable sense of marvel and fascination for this vanished civilization and what can be pieced together of its soul.

Lucien Kimitete is a name to know in contemporary Marquesan history. He was a Marquesan activist and politician who had a strong vision for protecting, restoring and promoting the civilization of his archipelago. As mayor of Nuku Hiva for 11 years, advisor to the French Polynesia territorial assembly, co-founder of the cultural association of Motu Haka and a leader of the autonomist opposition political party Fetia Api, he was charismatic and beloved. He preached a mode of independence: "We must never forget that the Marquesas are spoils of war for France, which has, for convenience, integrated Polynesia. If we were once colonized by France, today, the colonizer is Tahiti.” he said. He died in a mysterious plane accident when it disappeared over the Tuamotu Islands during the 2002 election campaign, essentially decapitating the Polynesian independence movement. We had dinner with Debora Kimetete, his widow and highly respected mover and shaker, and got an insider’s perspective on the contemporary political and cultural landscape. Perhaps tourism will be be one key to the future.

There is much of architectural significance here. Temehea, a restored waterfront tohua (ceremonial site) is an impressive sculpture garden with many new tiki statues by the most prominent contemporary stone masters. European buildings remaining from the French “ghetto” of the early colonial period dominate a corner of the Bay and scream “government authority”, especially the two-story porticoed administrative office and stone jail with its four cells (at the time there were two prisoners who wore orange pants and could let themselves in and out of their cells as long as they stayed on the property). There are remains of a hillside oven used for brickmaking when Fort Colette was built on the promontory overlooking the east side of the harbor (empty land given to the French on their arrival by the chief of the valley because it had no water). Notre-Dame Cathedral of the Marquesas Islands is made of stones from all six inhabited islands; and the lovely stone buildings of the city hall, artisan and food market cluster together with a clean, pleasing design.

We enjoyed strolling past the artisan center and the tourist office with friendly hellos from familiar smiling faces - past the spectacular archeological site of Tohua Peke, the homes of expert carvers like Damas Taupotini, the canoe club where the paddlers emerge with their outriggers each afternoon at 4 pm to row by Jacaranda, past Herman Melville’s monument (the only monument to a deserter) and the old cannon and anchor in the Monument to the Dead, ending on the opposite side of the Bay to visit Rose Corser. Rose is an institution among decades of yachties, arriving by sailboat with her husband 30 years ago and staying to open a pension, restaurant, and Enana Museum. Along the way is the easy accessibility of services like a few well-stocked grocery stores (Larson’s was a favorite), a fruit and vegetable market, ATM, Air Tahiti office, and a hardware store.

It was in Taiohae that I decided to get my Marquesan tattoo from a young artist named Moana. A Marquesan - both men and women - over the age of 18 without a tattoo is a rarity here and the aesthetic context is alluring. The art of tattooing almost disappeared with the arrival of the missionaries in the 1800's but is now experiencing a renaissance. The Marquesas are famous in today's French Polynesia for having the best tattoo artists and many of them have migrated to Tahiti where the demand is higher. But the Marquesan tattoo goes beyond body decoration - the designs have traditional meanings of protection from evil and tell a personal story of the individual's history, values, and ancestoral heritage.