Thomas “Tom” Bichsel, age 69 of Plain City, passed away in his home on Friday, July 1, 2022 while surrounded by his loving family after a lengthy battle with cancer. He was born September 2, 1952 in Dover, Ohio to the late Homer and Kathryn (Dickman) Bichsel.

Tom was a 1971 graduate of New Philadelphia High School. He graduated from Capital University in 1975 with a Bachelor’s Degree in Elementary Education while serving in the National Guard from 1972-1978. Later, Tom received his Master’s Degree in Education Administration from Ashland University. Tom spent many years teaching in South-Western City Schools. He was elected and proudly served on the Jonathan Alder School Board for 16 years and served on the School Board for Tolles Career and Technical Center for 6 years.

Tom was the founder of Jonathan Alder Soccer Association (JASA) which first brought soccer to Plain City. He was the first coach of the JA High School Soccer Program. He continued to serve on the JASA Board of Directors until his death, spending many hours driving his golf cart around the fields.

A lifelong Cleveland Indians and Browns fan, Tom’s hobbies included being an avid model railroader. His passion was playing with trains and sharing his love of trains with anyone who would listen, especially his grandchildren. Additionally, he found a love for rebuilding his 1975 Triumph Spitfire convertible. Following a dare by his children, he found a love for the stage by being the comedic relief in multiple productions with the Madison County Arts Council.

In addition to his parents, Tom is also preceded in death by his brother, Tim Bichsel. He is survived by his loving wife of 46 years, Lynnette (Smith) Bichsel, with whom he celebrated their anniversary on June 26; his devoted children, Jennifer (William) Ruhlen of Marysville, Sean (Patricia) Bichsel of Plain City; adored grandchildren, Parker Ruhlen, Carson Ruhlen, Grace Bichsel, Lilian Bichsel; sibling, Richard “Dick” (Doris) Bichsel; numerous nieces and nephews.