By the death of Baron Sir Ferdinand

Von Mueller, which occurred at Melbourne

on Friday night last, not only the

colony of Victoria but Australia

generally has lost one of the most

distinguished and best known of its

public men. There is no province of this

continent which is not indebted to the

deceased scientist's truly encyclopaedic

knowledge of plant life, and none more so

than the colony of Western Australia, in

whose flora he took a deep and lasting

interest. The Baron's first personal ac-

quaintance with the western part of this

continent dates back to 1856, when, as

naturalist to the expedition sent out by

the Duke of Newcastle under Mr. Augustus

Gregory, he explored some of the eastern

regions along Sturt's River from latitude

18 deg. to 22deg. 20min. south. Later, in

1867, he visited the Stirling Range and the

surrounding country and the vicinity of

King George's Sound, and in 1877 the

country from Champion Bay to Sharks Bay,

and also from Perth to Geographie Bay. The

results of these explorations are to be found

in many of the Baron's scientific works

which adorn the shelves of the public

libraries of these colonies. Some 14 years

ago, at the request of the then government

of this colony, the late scientist wrote a

monograph on the Forest Resources of

Western Australia, which did much to

bring the commercial woods of this

colony under favourable public notice.

Baron Von Muller was a wonderful

letter writer, and there is scarcely a

town or village in Western Australia

where his communications to private

correspondents did not find their way.

Their object was always the same

a desire to add to his vast store of informa-

tion, and to swell the proportions of his

collection of specimens by which Victoria

has been specially enriched. Up to the

last Sir Ferdinand Von Mueller manifested

his keen interest in Western Australia,

and only quite recently he cheerfully

undertook, at the request of the Registrar

General, to furnish the specific nomencla-

ture of our most popular flowers and plants

for the use of schools.

Sir Ferdinand von Mueller, K.C.M.G.

M.D., P.H.D., F.R.S., was born in Rostock,

on the Baltic Sea, in 1825. He studied in

Kiel, and went to South Australia to seek

a warmer clime against the effects of

hereditary phthisis. Having been engaged

previously for seven years in the investi-

gation of the plants of Schleswig and

Holstein, he followed the same pursuit

with arduour in Australia, and tra-

versed nearly all the settled districts of

the colony until 1852, when he accepted

the position of Government Botanist.

From 1853 to 1855 he travelled extensively

for botanic investigations, chiefly through

the colonial territory, instituting also many

geographic explorations in the then largely

untraversed Australian Alps. In 1855 and

1856 he accompanied, as naturalist, Mr. A.

C. Gregory during his seventeen months'

expedition through tropical Australia, and

returned to Melbourne to assume the

directorship of the Botanical Gardens,

which he soon raised to one of the leading,

amongst similar, institutions of the globe.

The first palm-house in Australia was built

by him in 1858 ; he was the first to raise the

great Victoria Regia water-lily in Victoria ;

he reared foreign forest trees by hundreds

of thousands, so as subsequently to be dis-

tributed through the colonial public botanic

institutions ; he brought numerous new

native resources before the great exhibi-

tions, of several of which, as far back as

1855, he was one of the local commissioners.

Meanwhile, he was engaged in writing ex-

tensive descriptive works on the plants of

Australia, amongst which his "Fragmenta

Phytographiæ Australæ was destined to

be a receptacle of definitions of all the new

plants which he himself or his correspond-

ents discovered. It was the first work

written in Latin in Australia. He issued

also an enlarged English edition of Wetts-

lein's " Organic Chemistry of Plants ;" also

two volumes, largely illustrated, on the

plants of Victoria ; publications on the

vegetable fossils of the gold-drifts, and a

volume on industrial plants ; and, irrespec-

tive of these, numerous smaller essays and

reports, a list of which was recently given

in an Australian scientific journal, amount-

ing to 152 publications. In 1863 he joined

Mr. Bentham in a full elaboration of the

universal flora of Australia, for which his

material was larger than all others since

Sir J. Banks's time. More than 100,000

specimens examined by him during seven-

teen successive years were transmitted

with notes to Mr. Bentham for the seven

volumes of this work, which is the first

universal flora of any of the great divisions

of the globe. His personal travels in

Australia for botanical researches, on horse-

back and on foot, amount to 27,000 miles.

Geographic pursuits have been fostered

by him incessantly, though, tram-

melled by official local duties, he

was, after 1856, prevented from sharing

in the great geographic enterprises.

A search for Dr. Leichhardt, under the

direction of a ladies' committee, and the

first two important expeditions of Mr. E.

Giles, were called forth by him, and his

return from the north coast principally

gave rise to the first camel expeditions in

Australia. Numerous Sovereigns bestowed

decorations on him, including the Com-

mander Order of St. Isabella of Spain and

of St. Iigo of Portugal. He was one of the

first three in Australia who received the

Order of St. Michael and St. George. On

the occasion of the celebration of the 25th

marriage day of the King of Wurtemberg

and the sister of the Czar, he was raised to

his hereditary rank. He was honorary or

corresponding member of about 200 scien-

tific unions, representing many branches of

knowledge. A number of geographic

features in Australia, including a river of

very great length in Queensland, a moun-

tain in Spitzbergen, a glacier in New Zea-

land, etc., bear his name. He initiated the

extension of the planting of eucalypti in

the countries on the Mediterranean Sea,

and in many other parts of the globe. The

number of useful plants from abroad intro-

duced by him into Australia is enormous,

and this, like all his other labours, whether

literary or horticultural, botanical, chemi-

cal, or geographical, has served not only

the colony of Victoria, but also all the

other settled portions of Australia.]

TELEGRAMS FROM SIR JOHN

FORREST.

On receipt of the news of the death of

Baron von Mueller, the Premier (Sir John

Forrest) forwarded the following telegrams

to the Premier of Victoria and Mr.

J. A Panton, C.M.G., Melbourne :-

" The Hon. the Premier, Melbourne, Vic-

toria. - On behalf of the Government and

people of Western Australia, I desire to

place on record our deep regret at the sad

news just received of the death of Baron

Sir Ferdinand Mueller. The late Baron's

name was honoured throughout this colony

in whose interests and the interests of

science he laboured for half a century. I

have asked Mr. Panton, C.M.G., the Police

Magistrate of Melbourne, to be present at

the funeral on behalf of this colony." " J.

Panton, Esq., C.M.G., Police Magistrate,

Melbourne. - This Government will be

much obliged if you will be present and re-

present this Government at the funeral of

the late Baron von Mueller. Please also

obtain a suitable floral wreath as a tribute

of high appreciation by the people of this

colony for his life-long work in the interests

of scientific research in Australia."