The risk management solutions giant, Det Norske Veritas and leading classification society, Germanischer Lloyd have announced that they are to merge, to form the DNV GL Group.

“The merger rests on a strong strategic rationale, and responds to the challenges of increased globalisation, rapid technological change and the need for sustainable development. Our customers will benefit from an increased service offering and global competence base as well as one of the densest networks,” said DNV’s Group CEO, Henrik O. Madsen, who has also been appointed as the CEO of newly formed group.

“The merger with DNV supports our long-term goal of being recognised as one of the most respected technical assurance and advisory companies in the world”, added GL Group CEO, Erik van der Noordaa.

DNV GL Group has stated its aim to strengthen its foothold in several areas of expertise, including the maritime segment, focusing on testing and certification services.

New DNV GL Group CEO, Henrik Madsen.

By combining the two international organisations, the new company has instantly propelled itself to the forefront of the world’s marine technical service providers.

Among those already active in the provision of technical services to the superyacht industry, two leading actors stand out – Genoa headquartered RINA Group and London’s Lloyd’s Register Group.

Between them they act as benchmarks for yachtbuilding quality, but when asked about the potential impact of the merger on the distribution of technical consultancy services, a spokesman for RINA told SuperyachtNews.com:

“RINA has no comment on the merger and does not expect it to impact RINA’s business.”

SuperyachtNews.com contacted Lloyd's Register but they were unavailable for comment.

The DNV HQ in Norway.

The group’s marine branch will be headquartered in Hamburg, a decision that pleased Guenter Herz, chairman of Germanischer Lloyd’s parent company Mayfair SE. “DNV is the partner of choice for GL”, Herz explained. “Besides DNV’s clear commitment to Hamburg our decision for this partnership is based on the complementary fit of DNV and GL as well as the joint ambition for innovation and quality of both companies.”

The DNV Foundation will hold 63.5 per cent, while Mayfair SE will hold 36.5 per cent of the shares of the group. The new company, with a combined turnover of some EUR 2.5 billion, will be headquartered and registered in Norway.

Related Links

Det Norske Veritas Website

Germanischer Lloyd Profile | Germanischer Lloyd Website

RINA Website