An Ibadan born lecturer at the University of Texas, Austin, USA, Professor of History, Toyin Falola yesterday appealed to Nigerians to preserve their national identities and traditions.

The professor of History gave the advice in his lecture themed: “Isese, Asa ati Esin: Cultural Bridges to Our Development and Modernity) delivered at the Mapo Hall, Ibadan, Oyo State capital in commemoration of the 90th birthday of the Olubadan of Ibadanland, His Imperial Majesty Oba Saliu Akanmu Adetunji, Aje Ogungunniso 1.

Prof Falola also urged Christians and Muslims to stop denigrating tradition to satisfy their religions, saying, “religion and tradition are not the same. Without separating tradition from religion, we stand the risk of losing tradition.”

“Our Christian and Muslim faithful should understand tradition. In Brasil, they do it. They have turned the idea of masquerade into a big festivity where they generate huge investment through tourism. I appeal to our Pentecostal worshippers not to denigrate our tradition with their religion. It was through the medium of our tradition that the colonialists were countered and encroachment by the West was stopped,” he said.

In his address, the Chairman of the occasion, Dr. Wale Babalakin (SAN), also urged Ibadan people to join hands and improve the wellbeing of Ibadanland.

Also in attendance at the lecture were Prof. Taoheed Adedoja (Chairman of the Olubadan birthday committee), Prof. Alan Odulana, Prof. Bolanle Awe (pioneer Director of Institute of African Studies and Commissioner for Education in the Old Oyo, who represented Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, who was the Chief Guest of Honour at the occasion), Prof. Kunle Akinyemi, Engr. Seyi Makinde, Prof. Moji Oyebola, Prof. Akinbola Morakinyo, Prof and Mrs Michael Afolayan, Dr. Tunji Olaopa of the Ibadan School of Government and Public Policy (ISGPP).

Others are the President General of the Central Council of Ibadan Indigenes (CCII) Chief Yemi Soladoye, Chief Lere Adigun, Iyaloja of Ibadanland Alhaja Iswat Abiola Ameringun, Princess Olaide Salawu, Alhaja Basirat Arisekola-Alao (widow of the late Aare Musulumi of Yorubaland), Chief Ajibola Ojo, the President of Isese Omo Oodua, Prof. Felix Kolawole Salako VC, Federal University of Agriculture Abeokuta (FUNAAB).