A star was born into the illustrious Babalakin clan in Gbongan town in present-day Ayedaade Local Government Area of Osun State precisely on July 1, 1960, in Ibadan, the capital of Oyo State. The newborn was christened by his father, an eminent jurist and former Supreme Court justice, Justice Bolarinwa Oyegoke Babalakin and Madam Ramotu Ibironke Babalakin as Bolanle Olawale Babalakin.

His parents were oblivious that the precious gift would turn out to impact positively on humanity and make his mark in the murky business terrain of business where he has emerged as one of the nation’s foremost and most successful personalities in the corporate world. Being educated him, his father ensured that the young boy became well exposed to the benefits of securing Western education and he did that by enrolling him at Sacred Heart Private School for his elementary education. Upon completion of his primary education, he (Wale Babalakin) secured admission into the prestigious Government College, also in Ibadan from where he proceeded to The Polytechnic, Ibadan and later the University of Lagos from where he bagged his law degree. He capped his academic journey at the Nigerian Law School, Lagos, Nigeria where he enrolled as a solicitor at the Supreme Court and a legal practitioner in the country. Not content with these academic accomplishments, he proceeded to Corpus Christi College at Cambridge University where he secured in post-graduate degrees. All these prepared him adequately for the positive roles that he would eventually play in the life of his motherland. Since completing his studies, Babalakin worked stridently to make a valuable impact in the legal profession like his much-beloved father but fate and destiny as well as his focus had some other plans for him.

He took the risk and ventured into business when he incorporated his company, Bi-Courtney Aviation Services Limited (BASL), the platform upon which he built the domestic terminal of the Lagos airport which he christened Murtala Muhammed Airport 2 (MMA2). For those in the know, the site was initially a ramshackle domestic terminal of the airport which was gutted by fire that razed the entire domestic structure in 2000 and over three years, the Federal Government was at a loss as to what it wanted to do with the re-construction of the facility. The responsible agency, the Federal Airports Authority of Nigeria (FAAN), was not ready to commit funds to rebuild the burnt terminal prompting the government to come up with experimenting with the public-private partnership (PPP) option and BASL took the risk to be used as the Guinea Pig for what later became very popular in the aviation industry. The task of building a world-class airport terminal fell on the reserve bidder, BASL, which, in 2003, was awarded the concession by the Federal Government, to develop, finance, manage and operate the terminal and ancillary assets under a Design-BuildOperate-Transfer (DBOT) arrangement. The project description included the airport terminal building, a multi-story car park, an apron, a four-star hotel and a conference centre.

What appeared to be a big risk then because of the fragile nature of doing business in Nigeria, particularly when it involves the deployment of public funds, has become an option for the government, as it relieved her of the burden of injecting scarce public funds into public infrastructure. The MMA2 was commissioned in 2007 and has since become the reference point in Nigeria’s aviation industry as it meets all the requirements for airport terminal development and has continued to win laurels as Nigeria’s finest domestic and regional airport terminal. The terminal can facilitate four million passengers per annum with its modern technological innovations, which include the Common Users Passenger Processing System (CUPPS), self-service check-in kiosks, Automated Access Gates and the Baggage Reconciliation System (BRS). MMA2 is the first and only terminal to deploy such in Nigeria, West and Central Africa.