Publish date: 2024-06-11

It's been Eleven years since fanatics had been stunned to be told beloved young actress Brittany Murphy, well-known from motion pictures like Clueless and Girl, Interrupted, had passed away suddenly in her Los Angeles home. Brittany Murphy was the sort of proficient actress, and we likely would have noticed her go on to make many more hit motion pictures if she were nonetheless alive nowadays. HBO's contemporary 2-part documentary What Happened, Brittany Murphy? took a deep dive into the actress's marriage and well being in her final months to take a look at to reply to questions that have been puzzling the public since her sudden loss of life in 2009. Though the documentary is handiest about two hours between its two parts, it packs a punch when it comes to unexpected revelations.

Related: Brittany Murphy's Documentary Reveals Her Shockingly Frail Physique At The Time Of Her Death

Though many had been already suspicious of her marriage to Simon Monjack and the keep watch over he held over her life, the documentary provides an inside of look at some of the more ordinary details of their courting. Brittany Murphy's failing health and frail physique had been already a purpose for fear round buddies and collaborators, but the extent of her illness, printed in the documentary, will be unexpected to even the most suspicious web sleuths who passed round theories about her cause of dying. Here are 7 disturbing details we discovered looking at What Happened, Brittany Murphy?

7 Her Marriage Was Reclusive And Bizarre

Brittany Murphy married her husband Simon Monjack quickly after meeting him and the pair quickly sequestered themselves from the international. He reportedly drove Brittany to units where she used to be operating but would wait shut via and she or he would spend her breaks with him in the automobile. Soon, they were virtually totally reclusive. Former People journalist Sara Hammel said, "Simon and Brittany were basically locked up in that house. They did these really weird photoshoots in the middle of the night where he would dress her like a doll. She became increasingly insecure about her appearance, increasingly paranoid about people being out to get her."

6 Simon Controlled Her Communication With The Outside World

Brittany's buddies reported that soon after her marriage started, her numbers had modified and they couldn't get involved with her. Sara Hammel said, "Simon had the landlines disconnected, so the only way you could reach Sharon or Brittany was through Simon." Alex Merkin, a director who had labored with Brittany in Across the Hall, stated, "I learned that she didn't have access to her own email address. I learned she had no access to her own phone, and if I wanted to reach her, I had to reach her through him [Simon]."

5 She Was Obsessive About Her Appearance

Brittany Murphy's good friend Kathy Najimy, also an actress, stated Brittany shared together with her her concerns over her weight and started shedding weight abruptly. "She said, 'That's what I've been told, if I want to be considered as a leading lady, I needed to lose a lot of weight,'" Kathy stated. Sara Hammel additionally said Simon Monjack encouraged Brittany to get increasingly plastic surgery, bringing up imperfections in her nose, chin, and tooth.

Related: Was Brittany Murphy Ever Really Eminem's Girlfriend?

4 Simon Got Her Fired From Her Last Job

Brittany Murphy had just begun filming in Puerto Rico for The Caller when she used to be impulsively fired only two days into filming. While details are murky, many round her assert that Simon had one thing to do with it. The assistant coronor, Ed Winter, mentioned, "We found that evidently Simon got involved. I don't know if he slapped somebody or hit somebody and she got fired."

Related: Twitter Attacks Perez Hilton For His Role In Brittany Murphy's Tragic Death

3 Brittany, Brittany's Mom Sharon, And Simon All Came Down With The Same Illness

While in Puerto Rico, Brittany, Simon, and Brittany's mother Sharon, who lived and traveled with the couple, all came down with flu-like symptoms. When they went again to Los Angeles after Brittany's firing, she started taking over-the-counter medicines for her sickness, which would eventually contribute to her loss of life. A pattern emerged of staying up past due and no longer getting enough relaxation, additional diminishing her immune device. Brittany's official cause of dying used to be untreated pneumonia, in addition to anemia and complications from her heavy use of gear and over-the-counter prescriptions.

2 Simon And Sharon's Relationship Raised Some Eyebrows

Simon Monjack and Brittany's mom Sharon persisted to live together after Brittany Murphy's death, a undeniable fact that struck a large number of other folks as suspicious. Ed Winter said, "There were several little indicators that something didn't feel right. Sharon was sitting on the couch and she'd cry a little bit. Then she'd stop and she'd talk to Simon or say something and then she'd start crying again." An interview they gave together with Larry King raised eyebrows from many who believed their relationship, while almost certainly not romantic, was odd, to mention the least.

1 Even Simon Monjack's Mother Admitted He Could Be Controlling

Linda Monjack was once interviewed in the docuseries and had some fascinating things to say about her son. "He had an IQ off the scale. He was able to charm anyone. From early childhood Simon had that ability to manipulate the environment to get what he wanted out of it." Of his marriage to Brittany Murphy, she said, "They were very much in love...but it's a very fine line…between controlling somebody and managing them to have the best career."

Next: The Cast Of The 90s Teen Classic 'Clueless': Ranked By Current Net Worth

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGiuoZmkYrWivM%2BepZ6cXZe%2FqsDTmqWyZZ2qv7G02Gaboqukqr%2Bjtc2gZJ2dpJa2rb%2BMoaysmpGjsW6%2FyKamp2WdpLurrcKkZg%3D%3D