Brittany Murphy's husband, Brit screenwriter Simon Monjack, has been thrust into the spotlight since his wife's shocking Dec. 20 death.

Below, what UsMagazine.com has learned about the 38-year-old Brit:

1. He's Been Friends With Brittany Since She Was 17 But they didn't wed until 2007 — after her two failed engagements to best-boy grip Joe Macaluso and talent agent Jeff Kwatinetz and a seven-month romance with Ashton Kutcher.

See what Ashton Kutcher said about Brittany Murphy's death

2. His nickname to some is "Conjack" He started out directing commercials and later went on to work as a director and screenwriter. But Vanity Fair points out "his most significant credit to date is contributing story material" to the 2006 Edie Sedgwick bio Factory Girl. The film's director George Hickenlooper has accused Monjack — dubbed "Conjack" by some associates who accuse him of shady business dealings — of improperly suing to get an executive producer credit on the film, which Hickenlooper alleges Monjack then used to scam his way into other productions. Hickenlooper recently blogged (according to VF): "He is a con man and a bad guy. When Brittany married him I warned her and warned her as did so many others. I only hope to God that this creep wasn't instrumental in her sad sad demise."

3. He was evicted According to New York's Daily News, there was a big income disparity between Murphy and Monjack. While she was paid $4 million for 2004's Little Black Book, he encountered numerous financial woes (he was once reportedly sued by a mortgage company for $470,000 and evicted from his residence).

4. He was "incoherent," hospitalized a month before Brittany's death In November, he was rushed to a L.A. hospital after reportedly becoming incoherent during a flight from Puerto Rico (where he was accused of causing problems on the set of one of Murphy's former films, which they denied). Murphy had said he was treated for asthma.

5. He frantically tried to save her life After Murphy was found "unresponsive" on her bathroom floor Dec. 20, Monjack, who was in bed, ran to the bathroom, according to notes from an investigator with the Los Angeles coroner's office. He "attempted to revive the decedent by placing her in the shower and running the water."

6. He initially didn't want an autopsy performed He has said it was because he "couldn't bear" the idea of his wife being cut open. (An autopsy was performed Monday, but toxicology results could take up to six weeks to be final.)

7. He insists they were in love "We found love," he told Access Hollywood Monday. "Brittany didn't get to where Brittany was with anyone controlling her."