A Scots mum has delighted social media with her novel Tartan Toast recipe idea.

Susan Bracken shared one of her favourite meals on the Facebook group Homemade Scottish Recipes and was surprised by the response.

Posting a picture of her tattie, lentil, vegetable and bacon soup with her tartan toast, fans of the page flocked to comment on her intriguing creation.

Susan, who is originally from Whitburn in West Lothian but moved to Morecambe over 30 years ago, explained that she had originally seen the recipe elsewhere but dubbed her version Tartan Toast as a fun link to her homeland.

She said: "It tastes like a delicious cheese on toast, and is also a fun dish to make for your kids."

Susan joked that though she knows others probably make a similar version, she thinks she is the first to have named it tartan toast.

The post has quickly gone down a storm online, with people commenting on how much they adore the Tartan Toast idea with several describing it as "next-level cheese on toast".

One user wrote: "I love the tartan toast I am going try that. The wean will love it."

While another added: "Tartan toast. So cute! Never seen something like this before."

With people asking how she makes it, Susan revealed that the recipe is quite simple.

She said: "It's just Red Leicester and Scottish Cheddar cut into squares, then you toast your bread, pop the squares on top then pop it all under the grill until the cheese melts."

For those of you looking to make your own here is an easy recipe based off of Susan's creation:

What you'll need (per person):

A couple of slices of Scottish cheddar cheese

A couple of slices of Red Leicester

Two slices of bread

How to make it:

Toast the bread first, then as you are waiting cut your slices of cheese up into small squares that will fit in a tartan pattern on your toast (roughly 2.5cm/1 inch by 2.5cm/1 inch).

Place your squares neatly on your toast in the tartan pattern with each type of cheese alternating and place under the grill until the cheese melts.

Other variants for this fun creation could include switching out one of the cheeses for sliced meat or even creating a sweeter version using different coloured chocolate spreads.