Saint Solomonia Yuryevna Saburova (Russian: Соломония Юрьевна Сабурова) (c. 1490 – 18 December 1542) was the first wife of Grand Prince Vasili III of Muscovy. She was canonized by the Russian Orthodox Church as Saint Sofia of Suzdal.

Life[]

Her father was Yury Konstantinovich Saburov, a nobleman who was elevated to boyar upon his daughter's marriage to the monarch. One of her relatives later became the wife of Ivan IV's son and heir, Ivan Ivanovich, and another lady of the Saburov-Godunov clan was Irina Feodorovna, the wife of the last Rurikid tsar, Feodor I. One other relative Boris Godunov reigned as Tsar Boris I of Russia.

Grand Princess[]

The marriage of Solomonia and Vasily III took place on September 4, 1505, in the presence of the groom's father, Ivan III. Metropolitan Simon blessed the newlyweds in the Dormition Cathedral of the Moscow Kremlin. After twenty years, the woman had only given birth to a baby girl, Roxana. Vasili understood perfectly well that if he died childless his brothers would inherit the throne. To preclude this scenario, they were jailed or banned from marrying until their child was born. In the long run, this led to the extinction of the Rurikid dynasty and the succession crisis known as the Time of Troubles.

Despite her resplendent beauty, exemplary morals, and mild-mannered character, Solomonia's inability to father an heir must have weighed on her relationship with Vasili, who turned to foreign doctors for help. In 1525, the grand prince decided to divorce Solomon with the approval of Metropolitan Daniel and the boyars, although Vassian Patrikeyev, Maxim Grek and some other ecclesiastical authorities declared the divorce illegal.

Later life[]

In November 1525 the marriage was canceled and Solomonia was forced to abandon her daughter and take the veil under the name of Sofia at the Moscow Nativity Monastery. It was then moved to the Intercession Monastery in Suzdal, one of the many votive churches commissioned by Vasili and his wife in pleading for the birth of an heir.

Sigismund von Herberstein states in his Notes on Moscow affairs that she was forcibly taken to the convent, while the Russian chronicles tend to emphasize Solomonia's submission to the sovereign's will. Solomonia was said to have given birth to a baby boy named George within the monastery walls. He died in Suzdal in 1542.