Special Events

Trinitas Foundation hosts several special fundraising events throughout the year. Join our community of patients, employees, local business leaders, and donors while supporting an important cause. You can also sponsor an event to help support patient care at Trinitas! Click on any of the event links below for more details.

You can also click here to contact Laura Ciraco or call (908) 994-8249.

Spring Gala

Thursday, May 2, 2024

The Venetian | Garfield, New Jersey

Thank you for your support!

View Details

Annual Golf and Spa Day

Save the Date!

Wednesday October 16, 2024

View Details

Running with Devils 5k Run and Walk

Coming Fall of 2024

Essex County’s South Mountain Recreation Complex

View Details

7th Annual Peace of Mind Event

Please join us for our Annual Peace of Mind event. Our theme for the evening is the Power of Resilience, and we have gathered a very special panel whose lives are a testament to this important virtue. These inspiring individuals have channeled their deepest sorrows and transformed their lives into remarkable examples of hope and service to others. Their empowering stories of love, loss and resilience hold valuable life lessons for all of us. We’ll supply the refreshments and tissues as we cry, laugh and cheer each of them in their personal victories!

Tuesday, March 5, 2024

The Park Savoy Estate | Florham Park, New Jersey

View Details

Do you have questions or need information?

You can reach our staff by calling the Foundation's offices directly at (908) 994-8249 or emailing us at TrinitasGiving@rwjbh.org

NOTICE OF FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY

By purchasing a ticket to the event, you agree to and understand that your person may be captured in photography, audio, and video recordings happening during the event.

By entering the event premises, you consent to interview(s), photography, audio recording, video recording and its/their release, publication, exhibition, or reproduction to be used for news, webcasts, promotional purposes, telecasts, advertising, inclusion on websites, social media, or any other purpose by Trinitas Foundation and its affiliates and representatives. Images, photos, and/or videos may be used to promote similar Trinitas Foundation events in the future, highlight the event and exhibit the capabilities of Trinitas Foundation. You release Trinitas Foundation, its officers and employees, and each and all persons involved from any liability connected with the taking, recording, digitizing, or publication and use of interviews, photographs, computer images, video and/or or sound recordings.

By entering the event premises, you waive all rights you may have to any claims for payment or royalties in connection with any use, exhibition, streaming, webcasting, televising, or other publication of these materials, regardless of the purpose or sponsoring of such use, exhibiting, broadcasting, webcasting, or other publication irrespective of whether a fee for admission or sponsorship is charged. You also waive any right to inspect or approve any photo, video, or audio recording taken by Trinitas Foundation or the person or entity designated to do so by Trinitas Foundation.

By purchasing a ticket, you have been fully informed of your consent, waiver of liability, and release before entering the event.