December 5, 2019 - El Camino Health celebrated the ribbon cutting for the Sobrato Pavilion on Sunday, November 17. The seven-story, 257,792 square-foot integrated medical office building is the first high-rise structure on the Mountain View campus. It will house the Taft Center for Clinical Research, Norma Melchor Heart & Vascular Institute, Peter C. Fung, MD Stroke Center, Advanced Care & Diagnostic Center (Women’s Heart and Wellness Center, Cardio-Oncology Center, Secondary Stroke Prevention Center, Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA) Center, and diagnostic imaging services), Women's Imaging Center, advanced respiratory care services, the Fogarty Institute for Innovation, endoscopy, outpatient laboratory, and physician offices.

John and Sue Sobrato, their family and friends, and major donors who named programs in the building gathered for a private lunch in the board room on the pavilion’s ground floor. El Camino Health Foundation President Andrew Cope toasted the couple and El Camino Hospital Board Secretary Julia Miller presented them with an original work of art representing the many Bay Area organizations the Sobrato family has supported with buildings that bear their name.

At 1:00 p.m. community members gathered outside the main entrance for the formal program and ribbon cutting. “The Sobrato Pavilion represents a bright future for El Camino Health – one that includes a center of advanced medicine,” CEO Dan Woods told the crowd, as he described the leading edge outpatient programs it will house.

Julia Miller introduced the main honoree. “When John Sobrato recognizes a need he takes action,” she said, noting “he has earned the number one spot for charitable giving for seven years by the Silicon Valley Business Journal.”

Sobrato spoke about his family’s commitment to provide opportunity to more local residents through philanthropic support for social service agencies, educational facilities, and hospitals. “By supporting the development of El Camino Health’s Mountain View campus, we are helping this hospital provide outstanding medical services to the residents of Silicon Valley, which in turn will help to build a healthier community for the long term. Sue and I are grateful to have been given the opportunity to provide the cornerstone gift for this wonderful new facility and we hope to encourage others in our community to fully support this wonderful institution.”

John and Sue Sobrato, Pamela and Ed Taft, Dr. Peter Fung, Dr. Thomas Fogarty, El Camino Hospital board members Gary Kalbach, Julia Miller and John Zoglin, Mountain View Mayor Lisa Matichak, and CEO Dan Woods cut the ribbon with a flourish. Then the crowd streamed into the impressive building for self-guided tours.