By Barbara Bellesi Zito

Who needs air conditioning when you can catch a breeze as you flip through the pages of a great book? OK, fine, AC is amazing, but so is reading by the pool or on the beach. Here are some of the books we’re saving for summer vacation.

“The Couples Trip” by Ulf Kvensler | Hanover Square Press

Anna, Henrik, and Milena are gearing up for their annual hiking expedition in the mountains of northern Sweden. But this year, the trip will be different. Anna and Henrik, who are a couple, have reluctantly agreed to Milena’s request for her boyfriend, Jacob, to join them. Soon, what should have been an invigorating outdoor adventure for the original trio of hikers turns into a nightmare in the wilderness.

>> Originally written in Swedish, this psychological thriller won the Swedish Academy of Crime Writers' Award for Best Debut of the Year.

“The St. Ambrose School for Girls” by Jessica Ward | Gallery Books

Brand-new St. Ambrose student Sarah Taylor knows she’s an outlier. For starters, she prefers her all-black wardrobe to her classmates’ designer duds. Besides, the only must-have accessory she needs is the bottle of lithium prescribed for her recent bipolar diagnosis. She’s an easy target for the uber-popular Greta Stanhope. Sarah tries hard not to let Greta get to her, and she finds support in her athletic roommate, Ellen “Strots” Strotsberry, and Nick, the gorgeous RA. But when someone dies, it’s going to take a lot more than sheer determination for Sarah to keep it together.

>> Billed as “’Heathers’ meets ‘The Secret History,’” this thriller is far from your typical coming-of-age story.

“You’ve Been Served” by Kristen Alicia | Entangled: Amara

Wait, aren’t you supposed to leave law school and become a chef, not the other way around? Well, that’s not how it happens for Simone Alexander. Following the super reliable advice of her Magic 8 Ball, she ditches her career as a California chef for life as a law student in snowy Michigan, where she quickly learns it’s not at all like how grad school is portrayed in some of her favorite rom-coms. For starters, there’s stiff competition and a professor who already hates her. Then, there’s her very cute and very obnoxious classmate Silas, who also happens to be her neighbor. But fate, however dubious, has brought Simone to this point, and she’s not going to let anything get in the way of her new career goals.

>> This charming debut novel is billed as a must-read for fans of “Legally Blonde” and “The Hating Game.”

“All the Right Notes” by Dominic Lim | Forever

Quito is a composer and piano player in New York City with dreams of Broadway stardom. His problem isn’t a lack of talent, but a lack of inspiration. He feels his well has run dry ever since he hooked up with handsome Emmett Aoki back in college, who has since gone on to Hollywood stardom. At the behest of his dad, Quito organizes a charity performance back in his hometown. The problem? He also needs to invite Emmett to perform in it. To his surprise, Emmett agrees—and even more surprisingly, Quito realizes there’s still quite a spark between the two of them. Will it ignite or turn out to be a complete dud?

>> BookRiot lists Lim’s debut on its list of 40 of the Most Anticipated Beach Reads of 2023.

“Everyone Here Is Lying” by Shari Lapena | Pamela Dorman Books

The Woolers seem like a nice family. But William’s been having an affair. When it ends abruptly one afternoon at a local motel, he returns home to brood. Instead of solitude, he finds his temperamental 9-year-old daughter Avery, who was supposed to be at school. Tempers flare, and later that day, Avery is declared missing. Neighbors and witnesses provide tips and information, but nothing is as it seems because, well—see the title of this book.

>> Lapena is a Canadian novelist known for her domestic thrillers, including “The Couple Next Door.”

“The Red Flags I've (Repeatedly) Ignored” by Brianna McCabe | Inspired Girl Introspections

Have you ever seen a proverbial “red flag” pop up in your life, but rather than run away from it, you’ve run right toward it? Brianna McCabe, professor and host of "The Red Room" podcast, feels your pain. She ignored her gut during much of her drama-packed 20s, which were a learning experience, to say the least. Rather than keep that wealth of knowledge to herself, she’s sharing it in this book that’s part self-help, part autobiography(ish). She shares with readers the missteps that led to heartache, but more importantly, how she learned to heal and trust herself. Consider it the inspirational book you need to channel your own inner strength.

Brianna told BELLA:

"For so long, I allowed those darker stories in my life to anchor me down. I was terrified to admit that I've made mistakes, traveled down paths I shouldn't have, and made decisions that, looking back on now, I now know better than to have put myself in those situations. I've hurt myself and others in the past, and it would genuinely haunt me at times. "But here's the thing: By not only acknowledging these stories but openly sharing them with others in my book and on my podcast, I've taken accountability. I've learned to grow, and most importantly, I've learned to heal. In a sense, I truly think I've been able to tap into this power that is me, and I finally feel free. And the thing is, I think we all have the ability to reach this level of power and liberation."