Poppy Montgomery has been pregnant for about 14 months.

Well, almost. Montgomery gave birth to her son Jackson, with boyfriend actor Adam Kaufman, in December. But her character Samantha Spade will welcome her new addition in the season finale of CBS’ “Without a Trace,” Thursday night at 10 on WBZ (Ch. 4).

“It’s been fantastic for me,” Montgomery said. “Never having had a baby, I didn’t realize the toll it takes on your body. You think before you have the baby that your body goes back to normal, but it doesn’t. I went back to work seven weeks after giving birth. (The story) gave my body a chance to settle without having to wear Spanx. Sometimes I walked around and I thought I was pregnant again. I’d forget. I really enjoyed wearing the belly.”

When the Australia native told producers of the hit series she was pregnant, they decided to write her pregnancy into the show and cast Kaufman as Brian Donovan, the father of Samantha’s baby.

“We love working together. I would work with him in anything.”

The pregnancy also has given viewers more insight into Samantha’s personal life.

“Samantha is such a commitment-phobe,” Montgomery said. “It is really a beautiful thing to explore that she has made a lifelong commitment to a child.”

Her series consistently deals with scary story lines about people who disappear; many of the cases don’t end well. “Becoming a parent has given the cases new meaning. I’m really aware and alert. I’ve always had a problem with the story lines involving children. Those kind of stories were really hard for me. Adam is always saying to me, ‘Baby, you play a cop on TV, you’re not one in real life.’ But it can’t not seep in.”

Sam’s onscreen pregnancy put her relationship with her boss and ex-love interest Jack (Anthony LaPaglia) back into the forefront of the show. In a recent episode, Jack secretly conducted a background check on Brian.

“Some things come out about Brian, and Jack and Sam have to deal with what Jack has done,” Montgomery said of tonight’s episode.

Montgomery roots for Jack and Sam to rekindle their romance.

“I really want them back together,” she said. “I think it’s a great love story. I would love to see them ride off into the sunset together at the end of the series. There’s so much drama between them. I would love to see them play that out. Anthony is one of my favorite people on the planet.”

Montgomery and the rest of the cast are busy filming episodes for the show’s seventh season and then will break for a summer hiatus. She’ll spend that time with Kaufman and Jackson and looks forward to returning to work.

“This is my family. As long as this show is on and they want me, I’m there. I don’t know what I’d do without seeing their faces every day.”