This is Poppy Montgomery's second child but her first with beau Shawn Sanford.

Poppy Montgomery is starting off the New Year with a big announcement - she and her boyfriend of more than a year Shawn Sanford are expecting a baby in the spring.

The 37-year-old actress, who plays Detective Carrie Wells on the CBS crime drama Unforgettable, is no stranger to parenting.

Baby joy! Poppy Montgomery announced on Friday that she and her boyfriend Shawn Sanford are happily expecting a child in the spring

Poppy definitely knows what to expect while she's expecting, as she also has a five-year-old son, Jackson, from her previous six-year relationship with actor Adam Kaufman.

'Shawn and I are thrilled and Jackson is so excited to be a big brother,' Poppy told PEOPLE.

Poppy loved every minute of Jackson's babyhood, and can't wait to relive all of those precious baby moments.

For the best part of Poppy's day is 'Coming home from work and putting my little one to bed,' the actress told Good Housekeeping of her son, Jackson.

It's baby No. 2 for Poppy! The Australian actress has a five-year-old son, Jackson, with former love Adam Kaufman; the busy mum was spotted with her toddler arriving in Sydney on April 14

'It's when we connect. He's growing up so fast, and I like the moments that remind me that he's still a baby.'

Exercise will also continue to be a priority.

'I work my butt off to stay in shape, especially after having had a baby,' Poppy added. 'I work out at least 90 minutes a day, seven days a week.

'At one point I was getting up at 4 A.M. to work out before Jackson woke up. Exercise makes me a better parent. I'm calmer and happier.'

City of love: Poppy and her baby daddy Shawn enjoyed a romantic trip to Paris in September and got to see the Chateau de Versailles

Unforgettable will be back for a second season on CBS this summer, and Poppy intends to work through her pregnancy as well.

The red-haired Australian's romance with Sanford, a Microsoft executive, has been going strong since they started late 2011.

In September, Poppy and Shawn were spotted enjoying a romantic stroll in Paris with arms linked and the happy couple couldn't stop smiling.

Working mum: Poppy will continue her role in the TV crime drama Unforgettable when it returns to CBS this summer

They took in the sights and picked up a few trinkets in the stores lining the boulevard, and even stopped to study some sidewalk paintings.

It took months of dating before Poppy felt brave enough to go public with the romance, which she did on June 12, 2012 at the Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards in Los Angeles.

Then a few days later, on June 27, they walked the red carpet together at the Australian in Film 8th Annual Breakthrough Awards.