Please join IOP Resident Fellow, Mayor Kostas Bakoyannis, for a conversation with Former Deputy Mayor of Paris Jean-Louis Missika about how designing public space is a major challenge for local governments.

GUEST: Jean-Louis Missika, Former Deputy Mayor of Paris in charge of urban planning, architecture, attractiveness, economic development and the greater Paris projects, LSE Visiting Senior Fellow, Editor of La Grande Conversation, Journal of Terra Nova, will join Resident Fellow, Mayor Kostas Bakoyannis, virtually for the March 27 session.

Jean-Louis Missika is Visiting Senior Fellow at the London School of Economics, and Editorial Director of the French Think Tank Terra Nova.

From 2008 to 2020, he was Deputy Mayor of Paris, first with mayor Bertrand Delanoë, in charge of innovation, research and universities, then with mayor Anne Hidalgo, in charge of urban planning, architecture, economic development, Greater Paris, and attractiveness.

Previously, he funded and managed a consulting firm specializing in media, information and communication technologies. He was a professor of sociology of the media at Sciences Po Paris.

He directed documentaries for television, including interviews with Raymond Aron (Le spectateur engagé, 1981) and with Cardinal Jean-Marie Lustiger (Le choix de Dieu, 1987). He has published numerous books: in 2022, with Henri Verdier, "Le business de la haine," published by Calmann Lévy, where he analyzes the role of social networks in the crisis of democracy ; in 2018, with Pierre Musseau, "Des robots dans la ville," published by Tallandier, about the impact of the emergence of autonomous vehicles for the organization and governance of cities; in 2006, "La fin de la télévision," published by Le Seuil, where he addresses the effects of the digital revolution on television and public space; and in 2007, "Parler pour gagner, sémiotique des discours de la campagne présidentielle de 2007" (in collaboration with Denis Bertrand and Alexandre Dézé), published by Presses de Sciences Po, where he studies the mutations and effects of the political rhetoric of presidential candidates. In 2019, he also published an online essay on the new Parisian Urbanism with Terra Nova.

He has been General Manager of BVA (Market Research), Deputy General Manager of Sofres (Market Research), and Editor-in-Chief of the journal Médiaspouvoirs. He was also vice-chairman of the board of ILIAD (the parent company of FREE) between 2004 and 2008. Between 1988 and 1991, Jean Louis Missika directed the Information Service of Prime Minister Michel Rocard

AUDIENCE: These conversations are open to members of the Harvard community. Please RSVP with a valid Harvard email address.