“What is Philosophy?” by Simon Blackburn

According to Simon Blackburn, philosophy can be different things depending on how it’s used, and it can be used many different ways. When used as a method, philosophy studies the same world as science, but uses rational arguments as proof rather than scientific observations. Although, when thought of as a subject matter rather than a method, philosophy becomes a specific area of study, trying to answer questions that have not yet been answered and concern humanity using the three foundational philosophical questions: what exists, what do we know, and what should we do. These are the basic questions philosophers use to prove their arguments. The third way to use philosophy, according to Blackburn, is …show more content…

He first disproves of the thought that philosophy studies only controversies to which the answer is impossible to know, and says that it will only matter, and have an effect on those who study philosophy for the purpose of gaining knowledge to connect the sciences for an understanding of the universe. Russell then compares a life without philosophy and a life with philosophy, the difference being that a life without philosophy is confined to only thinking of our world, while one who lives a philosophical life is free to think of the outer world, as well as beyond. He concludes by saying philosophy is not studies for the sake of answers, but for the sake of the questions themselves, in order to expand our knowledge of possibilities and intellectual imagination, in addition to understanding the capabilities and greatness of the …show more content…

In his work, he addressed what philosophy is in a way that made it applicable to many subjects and ways of thinking. I found it interesting all the ways philosophy could be applied, as a subject matter, method, or attitude, depending on how and what you would like to apply it to. I liked how Blackburn broke down the way of thinking philosophically into three basic questions that can be asked about any subject; What exists, what do we know, and what should be done. By using these questions one can think of the basic truths of the subject, which is described in the following quote. “To be philosophical is to continue to question the assumptions behind every claim until we come to our most basic beliefs about reality, and then to critically examine those beliefs.” By asking the three basic questions about a subject, one will eventually break it down into the simplest parts, question that, and build back up into more and more complex questions, which is what is meant by philosophical