1. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. 10/2/20151 © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Information Management & Governance With HP Software © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice.

2. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Data is an organization’s most strategic asset Monetize Differentiate Personalize Monitor Meter Optimize Predict …and more © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice.

3. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Monetize Differentiate Personalize Monitor Meter Optimize Predict …and more …and often its greatest risk Rules? Regulation? Control? Secure? Find? Defend? © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice.

4. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Volume Variety Velocity Veracity Can lead to sub-optimal business outcomes The Big Data challenge

5. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. What are legacy and dark data? •Legacy data tends to be: •Redundant - Duplicates and Copies •Obsolete - Old, beyond the retention policy •Trivial - Machine generated, no value Dark data tends to be: • Human readable • Unstructured • Unindexed • Unmanaged • Inactive • Orphaned

6. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. The Holy Grail: Weeding out the irrelevant… • Removing ROT based on Meta- data analysis • Consolidating duplicates in a Golden Repository • Auto-declaration of important items into a System of Record • Audit trails, Defensible actions Big Data Smart Data

7. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. …. While securing the relevant in a Compliant manner… Electronic Ledger Storage Law (Japan) 11MEDIS-DC (Japan) Canadian Electronic Evidence Act SEC 17a-4 (USA) HIPAA (USA) FDA 21 CRF Part 11 ISO 18501/18509 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (USA) AIPA (Italy) GDPdU & GoBS (Germany) BSI PD0008 (UK)Public Records Office (UK) NF Z 42-013 (France)Financial Services Authority (UK) Basel II Capital Accord Bulk Archives for Messaging Compliance Records Management for dossiers and regulatory long term storage

8. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. … And being able to find the needles in the hay stack. • eDiscovery for investigations • Legal Hold for retention extension • Universal Search for findability • Visualization and conceptualizing • Systems of Record for implementation of your file plan

9. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Information Management framework Access & Understand Leverage & Take Action Unstructured enterprise data repositories Structured enterprise data repositories Cloud-based repositories Data Mobile & social media Offline data repositories Address business & operational objectives Enterprise Content Management Enterprise Search & Collaboration Legacy Data Cleanup Legal HoldsInformation Archiving Records ManagementeDiscovery Address legal & compliance objectives Backup/Recovery Enterprise Security Address data management & security objectives Centralized Policy Engine Organize & Control Administer data in place or in a consolidated repository

10. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. HP’s Information Management Portfolio An end-to-end workflow portfolio Creation • HP Records Manager Identification • HP Control Point • HP Structured Data Manager Backup & Recovery • HP Data Protector • HP Livevault • HP Connected Archiving • HP Consolidated Archive • HP Records Manager Discovery • HP eDiscovery • HP Supervision • HP Legal Hold Destruction

11. © Copyright 2013 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Structuring the unstructured: Control Point

12. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Outcomes of Managing your information Dark Data &Legacy Data Inactive Unknown Orphaned Dealing with the past Continuous Information Governance

13. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Design structure Information management Stages 1. Identify and Index 2. Analyze 4. Reduce3. Organize 5. Manage/Migrate

14. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Becoming aware: A case study •Analysis for a customer of one file store •Total Indexed; 1,397,172 files, taking 1.2TB Disk Space •Index Size 1GB, Meta-data only

15. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. The State of Affairs • Over 500k files fall under ROT definition – 35% of files in total • Potential Disk Savings: 20%

16. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Obsolete – Level of Aged Files • 300GB data not accessed in 3 years • 160GB data not accessed in 5 years • 120k files not modified in 10 years • Oldest files dating back 25 years

17. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Item type in detail - Image Files • 550GB of image files • Also includes 165k jpg files, at 112 GB total disk space • TIF images taking 300GB storage space from 10,000 files

18. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Item type in detail - Image Files • Further analysis of image files reveal 60GB of ROT • Further, 180GB disk space utilised by less than 0.5% of files • Majority entered system in last three years, oldest files 25 years old

19. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. User breakdown in detail • Three “Power Users” collectively owning 500,000 documents • One user owning 200GB of disk space (15%) • Third highest user of disk space (100GB) has ownership of just 10,000 files

20. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Size breakdown in detail – Large Files • Over 25% (3,334) of large files owned by one user • Image and video make up a large subsection, covering half of all files – content based documents form majority of remainder • Almost a third not modified in 3 years

21. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. In Summary: • Large amounts of ROT consuming one third of all files • Large image files forming considerable chunk of disk space, consider moving to lower tier • Addition rate of files increasing at heavy rate year on year • Select users consuming large portion of disk space • Large amounts of very old, static data

22. © Copyright 2013 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. But what about Content?

23. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. First, we start training…. •Golden Documents and Templates •Free Text, Boolean and Combined queries •Metadata Enrichment, Eduction •The Result: Categories

24. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Tag with reason Actions File list or sample list Number and size of files Preparing for policy assignment Then we define policies, test them and sample the set

25. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. Ongoing Management & Migration •Merge valuable data into your System of Record. •Migrate cleaned data between repositories. •Manage Data in place. •Automatic management of new data.

26. © Copyright 2013 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice.26 Separating Record Identification from Filing Classification End-to-End Auto Declaration and Classification Email SharePoint Shared Drives ECM Systems Archives HP ControlPoint Selects the records based on declaration policies linked to IDOL categories HP Records Manager Allocates filing location based on classifications linked to IDOL categories and automatic folder creation rules Policy Categories Filing Categories Auto-Declaration Auto-Classification

27. © Copyright 2014 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. The Big, Integrated Picture Information Sources Integrated Information Governance Solutions Strategic Business Benefits Content Repositories Social Media Retired Applications Enterprise Databases  Insight in your data  Footprint Reduction  Application Acceleration  Managed Retention  Defensible Disposition  Findability  Compliance  Risk Reduction Unstructured Powered by IDOL 10 HP Consolidated Archive HP Structured Data Manager HP Records Manager Structured HP Control Point