Zagreb is the capital of Croatia and yet Croatia is most famous for cities like Dubrovnik and Split along its stunning Adriatic coastline.

I lived in Croatia for over a year and made multiple trips to Zagreb (including the time we got snowed into Zagreb for 3 days and couldn’t get back to our home in Split on the coast!) and I think it’s the most underrated city in Croatia.

Don’t get me wrong, if you’re heading to Croatia for a beach holiday then you might want to skip Zagreb. But if you’ve got time to explore more of Croatia, or if you fancy a city break, a Christmas market trip (Zagreb has one of the best Christmas markets in Europe) or if you’re Interrailing and stopping in Zagreb, this 2 days in Zagreb itinerary is for you!

Visit Mirogoj Cemetery

Perhaps a slightly morbid recommendation which isn’t for everyone but this is one of the most beautiful cemeteries I’ve ever seen.

You can take a bus here that takes 20 minutes from Trg bana Josipa Jelačića, walking is 45 minutes or a 7 minute taxi ride (Uber works well in Croatia).

National Geographic called it one of the most beautiful cemeteries in the world, thanks to the stunning architecture of the arcades and pavilions around the cemetery dating from the 1800s.

This isn’t a particularly old cemetery but being owned by the city (rather than the church), means there are lots of religious denominations buried here. This makes for a fascinating and beautiful mix of gravestones and tombs from Catholic, Protestant and LDS, to Muslim, Orthodox Jewish and non-religious burials.

The city was hit by a magnitude 5.5 earthquake in 2020 and the cemetery was one of the areas of the city which sustained significant damage, so there are still ongoing repair and restoration works.

It is a beautiful and unique place to visit in Zagreb but of course please be respectful of visiting the cemetery and those around you who might be visiting gravesides.

I’m a creature of habit and almost all the times we visited, we stayed at the Best Western Premier Hotel Astoria. It’s located one street back from Trg Kralja Tomislava so the location is perfect for walking around the city but almost being one street back from the square means it’s a much quieter street and we were never disrupted by noise. They also have limited car parking spaces so make sure you request one when you book.

For proximity to the airport, I’ve also stayed at Mövenpick Zagreb Hotel and Best Western Airport Stella.

I’ve also stayed at The Loop Hotel which is a bit further out from the city centre, but located close to a tram so it’s only around 15 minutes to reach the Old Town area. We stayed here because we needed free parking for our car. The hotel is industrial, minimal style, very nice, clean and modern but I didn’t love the location - if you only plan to visit Zagreb in 2 days then I’d go with a closer location.

Given the choice, I would pick Doma Zagreb ApartHotel over Loop Hotel as the vibe and price is similar but Doma Zagreb is much closer and within walking distance of the old town.

Hotel Le Premier and Esplanade Zagreb Hotel are two other great options within the city centre so the location and amenities are amazing!

Hi, I’m Helena!

A traveller and content creator from the UK and lover of outdoor adventures, bright colours and early sunrises!

My aim has always been to show people it’s possible to travel solo, travel on a budget and travel with a full-time job.

I hope this blog inspires those who think seeing the world is only possible with a huge budget and a big Instagram following.

Drop me a message or follow along on Instagram.

FOLLOW ME ON INSTAGRAM