Normal weather for Zagreb in November

It's cool in November in Zagreb with an average temperature of 12°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 6°C to a high of 16°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between 0°C and 8°C.

In November, there is an average of 147 mm of precipitation, spread over 15 days days. Of the total precipitation, about 2,0 cm falls as snow in November. The wind speed is around 3 Bft, mostly coming from the Southeast.

Looking for sun? November isn’t a good month to be in Zagreb. There’s too much chance of rain this month.

Check out the climate of Zagreb for all months and discover the best travel time

Zagreb in November

New York

Average Temperature

12°C 11°C

High Temp

16°C 15°C

Low Temp

6°C 7°C

Total Precipitation

147 mm 83 mm

Rainy Days

15 days 21 days

Total Snowfall

2,0 cm 0,1 cm

Snowy Days

2 days 1 day

The UV index is a maximum of 3 this month. That's a moderate value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn in about 30 minutes.

Find affordable trips to Zagreb

Daily Temperature in November in Zagreb

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in November in Zagreb, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of November. Based on historical data, this chart shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Precipitation in November in Zagreb

This chart shows the average daily precipitation in November for Zagreb, measured in millimeters over the past years. Precipitation is always measured as water, whether it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of November. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily Snowfall in November in Zagreb

This chart shows the average daily snowfall in November in Zagreb, measured in centimeters. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. The data is based on historical measurements and gives an idea of the average snowfall in November.

Daily UV Index in November in Zagreb

This chart shows the average daily UV index in November in Zagreb, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.