Planning a trip to Zagreb? Well, you need to look no further! Here, we have the perfect 2 days Zagreb itinerary for you which covers the best things to do in Zagreb and the most useful travel tips. Two days in Zagreb is the perfect time to see the city’s main sights without hurrying. However, if you’re travelling on a tight schedule, one day in Zagreb is enough given that most of Zagreb must see sights are out of bounds for close-up visits whilst renovations take place following the 2020 earthquake.

Zagreb is the capital and biggest city of Croatia with a population of about 800,000, located in the country’s northwestern region near River Sava and Medvednica mountain.

The city is often overlooked in favour of the country’s coastal towns and islands.

After many trips to Croatia, we finally got to visit Zagreb this summer. I have to say Zagreb was a pleasant surprise. We liked Zagreb for its charming architecture, manageable size which made it easy to explore on foot, friendly locals, small weirdly amusing museums and chilled vibe.

Visiting Zagreb was a lovely break from other places in Croatia that can get very busy during the summer.

We can attest, Zagreb is a fantastic tourist destination which makes for a perfect city break. It’s worth visiting for its varied and fascinating history and cultural heritage visible in the city’s architecture, museums, food and drink culture.

The city grew from a Roman settlement and over the centuries had many cultures presiding over it. Gothic, Neo-Renaissance, Grand Austro-Hungarian-inspired buildings, large open squares and parks dominate the centre while its outer parts, south of the Sava River, feature architecture representative of the Socialist era.

Zagreb’s strong coffee, beer and food culture echoes Eastern, Western and Mediterranean tones. Luckily, Zagreb is not an expensive city to eat out and has some really cool places to explore its culinary scene.

On top of that, Zagreb is famous for hosting some of the best festivals in Croatia. There is no doubt that the city’s month-long Zagreb Advent festival takes the lead, however, you’re sure to run into an exciting festival no matter what time of the year you visit Zagreb.

There is no better way than to plan your trip to Zagreb around one of the countless festivals hosted in the city throughout the year. They’re the perfect places to absorb the city’s vibrant culture.

Without any further delay, here is our suggested Zagreb 2 day itinerary.

Tip: Don’t take this Zagreb two-day itinerary as an absolute. This guide is there to give you a general idea of what to do in Zagreb in two days. By all means, amend the itinerary as you wish, focus on moving at your own pace and keeping things fun.

What to Do in Zagreb in 2 Days

Day 1 – Upper Town

NB – Most of Zagreb tourist attractions are located within two of the city’s 17 districts namely the Upper Town (Gornji Grad) and Lower Town (Donji Grad). The most practical way to explore Zagreb is to break up the two sections and divide your time to each area accordingly.

1. Take a Zagreb Walking Tour

Kick things off by taking a Zagreb Walking Tour. It’s the best introduction to Zagreb as it will give you a quick overview of the city’s unique history and culture from a local perspective. Zagreb local guides are witty, informative and excited to share the best spots to try be it local hangouts, food or drink.

Tours in Zagreb usually start from Ban Jelačić Square, Zagreb’s central square. They bring you along the Upper Town where the city’s famous landmarks such as Zagreb Cathedral, the red-tiled St Mark’s Church, the city’s vibrant Tkalčićeva Street and what is left of the old medieval fortifications are located.

Walking tours of varying themes, some free, are available in Zagreb covering areas such as the history of the city, the Croatian Homeland War, local street art, food and drink scene.

Zagreb Tours Worth Checking Out.

Free Spirit – Free Walking Tour of Old Town

Communism and Croatian Homeland War Tour – (Ideal if you wish to delve into Croatia’s time in Yugoslavia, the 90s Homeland War and World War 2 including the famous Grič Tunnel, a one-time civilian shelter.

Small Group Zagreb Walking Tour with Funicular Ride

Zagreb Street Art Private Walking Tour

Food Tour Zagreb (ideal if you’re keen to explore Zagreb’s diverse food scene.

Meet the Monuments and Sculptures of Zagreb Tour ( Explore Zagreb through the endless statues of great Croats found in its streets.

2. Explore Josip Jelačić Square

Josip Jelačić Square is the main square in Zagreb city centre, located just below the Upper Town. It’s a popular meeting place for locals, tourists and the city’s public transport system. The square is an ideal spot to use to orient yourself as many roads and trams pass across Jelačić Square.

Ban Jelačić Square dates back to the 17th century when it was first used as a marketplace. It got its name during the 19th century in honour of Ban Josip Jelačić, a military marshal who’s credited for making positive changes in the region. An equestrian statue dedicated to Jelačić is undoubtedly the square’s star attraction.

Over the years, the square has largely evolved into a public gathering place where social and cultural events take place. Among other things, the square is a top venue for the city’s famous Zagreb Advent, sporting celebrations and music concerts.

We were lucky to be in Zagreb during the Croatia and the Netherlands UEFA 2023 Nations League Finals as we got to watch the match on a big screen hosted at the square and enjoyed the party atmosphere though unfortunately, Croatia didn’t win.

Plan to spend some time at Jelačić Square as there is always some sort of entertaining event happening or else just take a wonder admiring the colourful elegant buildings, fountains and warm crowds that give the square its vibrant atmosphere.

3. Stop by Zagreb Cathedral

The twin Gothic towers of Zagreb Cathedral, also known as the Cathedral of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, have dominated the Croatian capital skyline for the last century. At 108 metres, the Cathedral is the second tallest structure in the country.

This Roman Cathedral church has seen its fair share of history. It was initially built during the early 13th century, however, has had numerous renovations due to mediaeval wars, fire and earthquake damage.

The Cathedral obtained its current Neo-Gothic style from restorative works led by German-born architect Herman Bolle following the Great Zagreb earthquake of 1880.

Unfortunately, Zagreb is vulnerable to earthquakes. The city was hit by another earthquake in 2020 causing damage to many of the historical buildings in the city including the Cathedral.

Currently, the Cathedral’s interior and immediate surroundings are off-limits to the public. We still suggest that you visit as we thought the Cathedral and its scaffolding, interestingly, continue to impress.

Additionally, Zagreb Cathedral is located at Kapitol which together with the adjacent Gradec, forms the city’s well-preserved old town known as the Upper Town (Gornji Grad).

This is a place not to miss whilst sightseeing in Zagreb as many architecturally charming buildings and cobblestone streets with mediaeval roots and baroque features can be found around the area.

4. Shop at Dolac Market

Dolac Market has existed since 1930 giving locals and visitors to the city a chance to shop for local fresh produce, meats, fish, flowers and various other products from the region.

The market is ideally located on an open square, just above the steps from Jelačić Square and a short walk from the Cathedral. It’s hard to miss as the stalls in the outer sections of Dolac Market are covered by unique vivid red umbrellas.

It really is one of the best places to visit in Zagreb to sample authentic Croatian products from the region and soak up the local atmosphere. We were delighted with the fresh and juicy cherries, peaches and strawberries we got at the market.

They were the perfect treats to quench thirst in Zagreb’s sweltering heat.

Don’t miss the meat, fish and cheese section, located indoors on a lower level, if they are your kind of thing.

Opens every day from 6.30 am to 2 pm.

5. Walk through the Stone Gate

The Stone Gate, known locally as Kamenita Vrata, is one of the few remaining traces of Zagreb’s fortification system from the 13th century still in use though it has had many restorative works.

Historically, Gradec existed as a separate settlement from Kaptol and was fortified with gates, walls and towers. However, as it grew and the threats of attacks declined, the defensive structures were pulled down leaving out the Stone Gate and the nearby Lostrak Tower.

The Stone Gate is considered a sacred place in Zagreb as well as being an important historical structure. It’s believed that a fire in 1731 pretty much destroyed the gate and buildings that were nearby except for an image of the Blessed Virgin Mary with Christ the Child.

This image is highly revered as a baroque gated altar devoted to the Virgin Mary and a small prayer space has been built in the gate’s passage. It’s an unusual place as quite a lot of people stop by to pray, light candles and make offerings.

6. Stop by St Mark’s Church

St. Mark’s Church is really gorgeous and lives up to the hype. Its colourful tiled roof is easily the most recognisable symbol of Zagreb.

The church is one of the oldest historical buildings in Zagreb with roots dating back to the early 13th century. Similar to other buildings from that era, St. Marks has had numerous reconstructions though it has retained some of its original Romanesque and Gothic features.

The church’s current form is credited to Herman Bolle’s last renovation works in 1880. Hermann Bollé adopted the Historicist style to create a tiled roof pattern depicting the coat of arms of Zagreb, Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Dalmatia and Slavonia.

St Mark’s Church’s Gothic south portal features detailed intricate carvings of biblical themes. It’s said to be one of the most valuable portals in Central Europe. Unfortunately, St. Mark’s is still undergoing renovations following the 2020 earthquake, so up-close visits are on hold.

However, the highlight of this church has always been its facade, so do stop by and check it out.

Tip: St Mark’s Church is located on St Mark’s Square in the Upper Town. It’s in the midst of some charming buildings in the city worth a quick look like Croatia’s Parliament and Government buildings and the Old City Hall.

7. Explore the Museum of Broken Relationships

Price: Adults €7, Students €5.50

The Museum of Broken Relationships is one of the absolute Zagreb sights to see. It’s up there for us on our list of the best experiences we had in Zagreb.

This unusual museum came about after two Zagreb artists who after their own relationship ended decided to create a space to exhibit personal items left behind when relationships fail.

It is a one-of-a-kind museum as its collection consists of objects contributed by people from around the world. Every object comes with a heart-touching story about the failed relationship.

The collection at the Museum of Broken Relationships evokes many emotions as it includes many different types of relationships. You’re guaranteed to laugh, feel sad and reminisce on your own past experiences.

It’s a small museum, but really packs a punch!

8. Take in the City Views from Lotrščak Tower

Price: Adults €3, Children €2

Take the challenge to go up Lotrščak Tower’s spiral staircase to enjoy a beautiful 360-degree view of Zagreb City.

Lotrščak Tower initially existed as a defensive tower built during the 13th century as part of the overall Gradec fortifications.

Like many other fortifications of that time, the tower has been repurposed and now functions as a museum with its deck providing an open viewing platform of the city’s skyline.

Some historic remnants have been preserved, in particular, the 19th-century Grič Cannon which to this day fires daily at 12 noon to mark midday.

9. Ride the Zagreb Funicular

Price: One Way €0,66

The Zagreb Funicular is one of the best things to see in Zagreb. Among other things, the quaint Funicular is the oldest mode of transport in Zagreb and the shortest cable ride in the world spanning just 66 metres.

A single ride takes just 64 seconds from Tomićeva Street station in Lower Town to Strossmayer Promenade.

It’s also an accessible means to move between the Upper and Lower towns as the two places are located at different elevations.

10. Stroll Strossmayer Promenade

Strossmayer Promenade for most Zagreb locals the most picturesque walkway in the city center. The promenade gets its name from a 19th-century Croatian Bishop and cultural proponent Josip Juraj Strossmayer.

It’s a short uphill promenade that stretches from Tomićeva Street in the Lower Town to the area around the Lotrščak Tower in the Upper Town offering an alternative travel route between the two districts.

The promenade’s upper part offers beautiful views of Zagreb city’s red roofs and Zagreb Cathedral twin towers. Wild chestnut trees, various forms of street art and sculptures, food stalls, cafes and restaurants add a special touch to the promenade’s ambience.

Strossmayer Promenade regularly hosts events and festivals all seasons, so check it out, especially if you’re lucky enough to be in town for Zagreb Advent.

11. Check the Museum of Selfie and Memories

Prices: Adults €8, Students €6, Family Card €20

The Museum of Selfie and Memories should take a top place on your list if you love posing and taking awesome pictures, especially for your Instagram.

It really is one of the coolest things to do in Zagreb for young adults, so if there are some among you don’t miss it.

I visited the museum with my son and his friend and we all had a blast posing and taking pictures behind varied props and backdrops of Croatian history and great Croatian inventors’ themes as well as modern culture.

It’s a small museum which offers a fun break from sightseeing.

Location: Pavla Radića St, just around the corner from Ban Jelačić Square.

Good to know

Zagreb’s Upper town is also home to two highly reviewed museums worth checking out namely Zagreb City Museum (suited if keen to learn how Zagreb has evolved over the centuries) and the Croatian Museum of Naive Art (suited if curious about Croatian naive art from the 20th century).

12. Stroll Tkalčićeva Street

Tkalčićeva Street is Zabreb’s most famous and vibrant pedestrian street in the Upper Town, a short walk from Jelačić Square and around the corner from Dolac Market.

In years past, Tkalčićeva St didn’t always exist as it is. During medieval times, the street was covered by a stream that divided Kapitol and Gradec. The stream sustained the city’s watermilling industry but came with bloody feuds.

Tkalčićeva St. emerged in the 19th century when the stream was covered and houses and businesses were built along it.

In its early years, the homes on Tkalčićeva St were mostly brothels that were publicly advertised though discreetly, by placing red lanterns outside. It’s believed that Tkalčićeva St. is the first Red Light District in Europe.

Nowadays, Tkalčićeva St. is an attractive street, full to the brim with colourful buildings (some of which give off some Alpine vibes) housing outdoor cafes perfect for people-watching, bars and pubs that are a hub for Zagreb nightlife as well as restaurants offering a wide variety of cuisines.

It’s quite a popular spot in Zagreb with both locals and tourists who come to enjoy its diverse offerings and lively atmosphere.

Zagreb is one of the few cities that have retained the tradition of lighting its gas lanterns in the Upper Town manually. Keep out for the lamplighters as you explore Tkalčićeva St. in the evenings, you might be lucky enough to witness one of the city’s treasured ancient radiations.

What to do in Zagreb Day 2 – Lower Town

1. Stroll through Zrinjevac Park

Zrinjevac Park (Nikola Šubić Zrinski Square) is one of Zagbreb’s series of connected parks and squares locally known as the “Green Horseshoe” due to their layout which takes the shape of the letter “u”.

Many of the city’s cultural institutions are located around the parks and squares, making combining sightseeing with spending time in relaxed beautifully decorated green spaces that bit easier.

Zrinjevac Park, located a short walking distance from Jelačić Square in the Lower Town, is in my view the most attractive of them all. The park is the first of the Green Horseshoe created during the 19th century by Croatian urban planner Milan Lenuci.

It’s best known for its gorgeous flower beds, green and lush lawns and tree-lined avenues. There is a charming 19th-century music pavilion that regularly hosts music performances, decorative sculptures and historic time and weather instruments.

Zrinjevac Park is a regular venue for festivals and various events of all seasons. If you’re lucky enough to be in Zagreb at Christmas, be sure to stop by as it becomes magical with all the festive decorations.

There are endless festivals in Zagreb. We were fortunate to be in Zagreb during the city’s first-ever Asian Street Food Festival held in Strossmayer Park, located directly across from Zrinjevac Park.

We got to indulge in some really good food whilst surrounded by beautiful parks, people and architecture.

Be sure to check out the parks in Zagreb as they are some of the best places to socialise in the city.

2. Check the Archeological Museum Zagreb

If you’re a lover of history, the Archaeological Museum Zagreb, located next to Zrinjevac Park, is worth a stop. Its highly regarded permanent collection covers prehistoric, Egyptian, Greek and Roman as well as mediaeval times.

Bear in mind the museum suffered damage in the last earthquake as a result many of its collection is currently not exhibited due to some ongoing restorations.

This museum is housed in a 19th-century palace which is really pretty and worth seeing, so do give it a quick look while in the area.

3. Visit the Mimara Museum

For art lovers or anyone who loves to explore, the Mimara Museum is not to be missed. It’s housed in a colossal neo-Renaissance-styled building located on Roosevelt Square in the Lower Town. The museum exhibits over 3,700 artworks from pre-historic times up to the 20th century donated by the Croatian art collector Ante Topić Mimara.

If you wish to visit, check the museum’s website beforehand as it’s closed for renovations due to the earthquake but is promised to be opened soon.

4. Visit the Croatian National Theatre

A trip to Zagreb without a visit to the iconic Croatian National Theatre, known locally as HNK Zagreb, is no visit at all. The theatre is probably the best landmark in the city representative of the city’s rich Austo-Hungarian-inspired heritage.

It’s located in the Lower Town on Republic of Croatia Square, one of the city’s largest and beautiful squares which form part of the city’s Green Horseshoe.

The colossal yellow-tinted neoclassical-style theatre was built by famous Viennese-based theatre architects Fellner and Helmer. It was officially opened in 1895 by Emperor Franz Josef of Austria during his first visit to the country.

The theatre has remained an important cultural institution in the country where you can enjoy top-quality opera, ballet, drama, musicals and more.

Take the theatre’s guided tour, among other things to see the 765-seat auditorium which is decorated with a splendid ceiling with hanging chandelier and golden walls.

If you appreciate sculpture art, don’t miss the “Well of Life” sculpture (1905) by the celebrated Croatian sculptor Ivan Meštrović, situated right in front of the theatre.

Looking for things to do in Zagreb at night? See a show! The theatre offers more than 220 performances every year.

5. Explore the Botanical Garden of Zagreb

Price: Adults €2, Students €1

Make a quick stop at the Botanical Garden of Zagreb if you have a fondness for nature and gardens. It’s one of the parks that make up the city’s Green Horseshoe, conveniently located near to Zagreb train station.

The Zagreb Botanical Garden was established in 1889 as an educational space for the Faculty of Science at the University of Zagreb and later opened to the public in 1891.

You have 5 hectares inhabited by over 10, 000 plant species from across the globe including some indigenous varieties to explore.

The plants are organised in themed gardens, with walkaways, bridges and lakes which makes for a relaxed stroll whilst taking in some inspiration for your own gardening activities back home.

6. Visit the Nikola Tesla Technical Museum

Price: Adults €4, Students €3

Add a trip to the Nikola Tesla Technical Museum if you’re looking for things to do in Zagreb for young adults or just love to discover.

The museum is located in the Lower Town, close to many of Zagreb’s attractions such as the Croatian National Theatre and Botanical Gardens. It’s housed in a 1949 timber exhibition hall which was originally built to host the Zagreb Fair.

Nikola Tesla is one of Croatia’s great inventors who made advances in the development of modern alternating electrical power systems.

The museum is dedicated to highlighting Tesla’s innovations and ideas as well as many other science and technological advances related to energy, transport and communication.

Exhibits to see at this museum include a Nikola Tesla Demonstration Cabinet where various scientific demonstrations are presented, a lifesize 20th-century mineral and oil model mine, historic vehicles including a 1924 tram, fire fighting and military transport.

Join the museum’s guided tour if you fancy an in-depth look at exciting science and technological innovations over the years.

7. Visit the Chocolate Museum Zagreb

Price: Adults €9, Children €6.50

The Chocolate Museum Zagreb is the perfect stop for a sweet adventure in Zagreb.

A 5-minute stroll from Ban Jelacic Square brings you to this little museum where you can delve into the history of chocolate over the different time periods from the ancient Mesoamericans all the way up to the present day.

Six chic periodic-themed rooms come with chocolate-related artefacts, informative displays, tasting spots with variations of chocolate to try, smell and touch and finish off with a chocolate praline-making demonstration.

A highlight of the museum is its ticket which comes with chocolate samples to devour as you stroll through the exhibition rooms.

8. Check out the Museum of Illusions

Price: Adults €9, Discounts for Students & Families

The Museum of Illusions Zagreb is a brainchild of two Zagreb locals that has spread to several cities both in Croatia and worldwide. It’s a small museum, located in the Lower Town along Zagbreb’s Illica’s street, the city’s long main street.

A visit to the Museum of Illusions Zagreb is one experience in Zagreb that is guaranteed to send excitement levels to the maximum. It’s one of the most fun and unique things to do in Zagreb which makes for an unforgettable experience, especially for families, groups or couples.

The museum’s collection of 70 interactive exhibits is designed to take your senses on a spin by creating fascinating optical illusions.

“The Anti-Gravity Room” exhibit at the museum creates an illusion that your body is defying gravity and moving at odd angles while the “Head on a Tray” creates an illusion that your body has separated from your head and is served on a tray.

Another highlight here is the “Mirror Room” which creates an illusion of an infinite number of yourself.

All the exhibits at the Museum of Illusions make for a perfect photo opportunity, so don’t miss it if this is your kind of fun.

Things to Do in Zagreb with More Time

There are plenty of other things to do in Zagreb if you’re in the city with more time. The following are very popular Zagreb attractions but a little bit further out of the city.

1. Explore Mirogoj Cemetery

Price: Free

Mirogoj Cemetery is often seen on many lists of Europe’s most beautiful cemeteries. It’s the city’s central cemetery located in the Upper Town, about 3km from the city centre.

The cemetery was designed by Herman Bole, the German architect behind the restoration of Zagreb Cathedral and St. Mark’s Church after the 1880 earthquake. It officially opened in 1879 as a city cemetery welcoming multi-denominational burials.

The cemetery is known for its neoclassical-styled long arcades, an impressive arched entrance surrounded by thick walls topped by green domes.

A stroll through the cemetery’s tree-lined avenues and arcades reveals endless tombs and mausoleums, some of which are quite remarkable and are final resting places for great Croatian citizens including the architect Herman Bole.

There are many monuments in honour of war victims throughout the country’s history, sculptures (some designed by Ivan Mestrovic) and various sepulchral pieces of art.

Choose to visit Mirogoj Cemetery with a guide to explore its fascinating history and its artistic treasures. If visiting alone, check out this guide by Zagreb’s Tourist Board for easy navigation.

Getting to Mirogoj Cemetery

Zagreb Bus line 106 leaves from Zagreb Cathedral to Mirogoj and the journey takes about 15 mins.

Opens: Daily 6 am to 8 pm (April to Oct), 7.30 to 6 pm (Nov – March)

2. Explore Maksimir Park

Price: Free

Marksimir Park is the oldest and largest park in Zagreb covering 316 hectares. The park was one of the first public parks when it opened in 1794 in all of south-eastern Europe. It’s located on the outskirts of Zagreb, but easy enough to reach by public transport.

This park is one of the top free things to do in Zagreb if you’re longing for some outdoor fun or just want to escape the hustle and bustle of the city.

It boasts large spaces of landscaped gardens ideal for relaxing with a picnic or a book, natural forested areas home to some wildlife, walking, running or cycling trails, five artificial lakes, a children’s playground and historic monuments and charming buildings.

It’s also home to the city’s zoo, Zagreb Zoo, which is located in the southern part of the park.

If you’re an animal lover or travelling with kids consider combining a stroll through Maksimir Park with a visit to Zagreb Zoo and explore its inhabitants which consist of over 7 000 animals of varying species from all over the world.

Plan your visit to Maksimir Park here.

3. Spend a day at Lake Jarun

We discovered Lake Jarun through our friendly tax driver who spoke so highly of it and couldn’t recommend it enough for us to add to our top list of things to do in Zagreb.

The lake, located 6 km from the city centre in the southwestern area of Zagreb, is a big hit with locals and tourists in the know. It’s a man-made lake connected to the Sava River which was initially developed to host the World Student Games in 1987.

Over the years, Jarun Lake has become a centre for outdoor activities and entertainment in Zagreb especially during the summer months.

The lake’s high-quality water is perfect for many water sports such as swimming, kayaking and rowing. Sporting fields, skate parks and walking trails are just as popular for sports enthusiasts.

And if you’re peckish, the lakesides are awash with food stalls, cafes, restaurants and bars. You can also, choose to pack for a barbeque or picnic if you’d rather focus on relaxing by the lake.

Jarun Lake is a venue for many festivals and its bars and nightclubs are some of the most popular in town, so if you’re in search of Zagreb nightlife, do check them out.

Getting to Jarun Lake

It’s easier to get to Jarun Lake by car (paid parking is available), Uber or taxi. Alternatively, get tram lines 5 and 7 from the city centre.

4. Visit Plitvice Lakes National Park

If you’ve got one day to spare in Zagreb, be sure to take a day trip to Plitvice Lakes National Park.

This spectacular natural wonder is located about 2 hours drive from Zagreb by car. It’s a bit of a trek but, it so definitely the day trip from Zagreb.

Plitvice Lakes National Park, a UNESCO Heritage Site since 1979, is truly amazing and has to be seen to be believed.

The park is spread across 30,000 hectares and features 16 interconnected cascading lakes and waterfalls of remarkably blue and green water surrounded by a stunning karst landscape and a dense lush forest.

A network of wooden trails of varying lengths and electric boats in the park offers an opportunity to navigate the park and admire its magical landscape.

Getting to Plitvice Lakes National Park

Hire a car in Zagreb and drive to Plitvice Lakes National Park if you can as it gives you the freedom to decide the length of your visit and options to make stops at other places of interest as you wish.

Check Discover Cars to compare your car hire options in Zagreb.

You can also opt to join a small group Plitvice Lakes Tour from Zagreb.

5. Take a Day trip to Lake Bled

Taking a day trip to Lake Bled in Slovenia from Zagreb was one of the highlights of our trip to Zagreb. We just can’t recommend it enough. It’s one of the most popular tourist destinations in Slovenia and rightfully so.

This glacial lake is located in the Julian Alps northwest of Slovenia next to Bled Town, about 50km from the country’s capital Ljubljana. It sits in a pretty location surrounded by mountains, stunning lush forest and on the foothills of the medieval Bled Castle.

The tear-shaped Bled Island with its charming Gothic Church of the Mother of God on the Lake and Tower in the middle of the magnificent turquoise lake make for a jaw-dropping vista.

There is so much fun to be had in Lake Bled from taking rides on a traditional pletna (rowing wooden boat) across the lake to Bled Island to taking scenic walks around the lake (the 6km long lap takes about 1.5 hrs) and hiking up to Bled Castle for even better views of the lake and the Alps in the distance.

If you prefer more time in the water the calm waters of Lake Bled are perfect for wild swimming, kayaking and stand-up paddle boarding. Just remember to bring along a swimsuit so you don’t miss out on fun.

If you do feel peckish, the Park Cafe at Hotel Bled on the banks of Lake Bled, is the perfect spot for a casual bite to eat and to try Lake Bled’s famous original Bled cream cake (kremšnita) whilst taking in spectacular views.

Tip: Start your day tour of Lake Bled early and squeeze in a visit to Vintgar Gorge. It’s a stunning 1.6 km gorge surrounded by picturesque rocky cliffs in Gorge, a municipality located about 4.5km from Bled Town.

We made the trip to Lake Bled with a rental car from Zagreb and the journey took about 2 hours each way.

Consider visiting Lake Bled with the many available small group tours from Zagreb if you’re travelling by public transport. Ljubljana and Lake Bled Tour from Zagreb

Zagreb Food and Drink Spots to Try (Upper Town)

Otto and Frank (Tkalčićeva Street) – visit for a really good breakfast and brunch.

Pod Zidom Bistro & Wine Bar (Pod Zidom St) – Visit this chic restaurant to enjoy delicious Croatian dishes made with fresh and high-quality produce paired with some really good local wines.

La Štruk (Skalinska St) – Single dish restaurant serving Štrukli (a Croatian dish popular in Zagreb consisting of a dough filled with cream cheese with either savoury or sweet additions and baked or boiled. They do it well and they have a really pretty patio, so don’t bother going elsewhere.

Oaza Joyful Kitchen (Pavla Radića St) – Visit to enjoy cheap vegan street food.

Valhalla Metal Bar (Radića Street) – Visit to explore Zabreb’s craft beer scene. They have an impressive craft beer selection as well as regular beers.

Food and Drink Spots to Try (Lower Town)

Heritage – Croatian Street Food & Shop (Petrinjska St) – A small restaurant to visit to enjoy a variety of affordable quality Croatian dishes. They stock Croatian specialities perfect to buy to bring home.

Vinodol (10 Nikole Tesle St)- A family-friendly restaurant ideal for enjoying traditional Croatian dishes given a modern twist.

In the Yard – Cogito Coffee – Delicious coffee, for us, is one of the best hidden gems in Zagreb.

Quahwa (Nikole Tesle St) – The coffee here is really good, and they do pastries as well.

Korica Zagreb (Preradovićeva St) – A small cute bakery with delicious pastries and coffee, perfect for breakfast.

Zagreb Travel Tips

Getting to Zagreb

Flying – Zagreb Airport (Franjo Tuđman Airport), located 15 km from the city centre is the best airport to fly into Zagreb. The airport has the most connections with other European cities with some direct international flights.

You’ve got a choice of a Shuttle bus (€8 35 -40 mins) to Zagreb Train Station or a local Public bus, line 290 (90c – 35mins). We took an Uber and paid €20 for the 30-minute ride.

Train – Zagreb is serviced by a train station which links it to many cities in Europe. See Zagreb train tips here.

Car Hire in Zagreb

If you’re looking to hire a car for your day trips, consider collecting the car in the city centre as you probably won’t need it to get around Zagreb.

DiscoverCars is handy for quickly comparing car hire prices.

Getting Around Zagreb

Whilst Zagreb is Croatia’s capital, its main centre where the historic parts of the city are located is relatively tiny. Most of Zagreb’s attractions are close to each other and easily reached on foot, so you shouldn’t need to drive.

Zagreb Funicular – provides a quick ride to move between the Upper and Lower areas of the city centre (1-minute ride – 0.66€).

Public Transport – Offered through an extensive tram and bus (ZET – Zagreb Electric Tram) system, connecting the city centre and residential neighbourhoods. It’s the most affordable means to get around in Zagreb.

Taxis – are widely available, metred and relatively cheap.

Where to stay in Zagreb

Booking.com and Airbnb are my favourite resources for booking hotels in Croatia. Here are some options worth checking out:

Esplanade Hotel – a 5-star historic hotel initially built for Orient Express passengers. It’s famous for hosting high-profile clients. It’s situated directly across from the central train station.

Best Western Premier Hotel Astoria – A mid-range Hotel located close to the Zagreb Train Station and about a 10-minute walk to Ban Jelačić Square. The hotel is housed in a 1932 building but its interior is modern and tastefully decorated.

Swanky Mint Hostel – Budget-friendly hostel with a bar and pool. It’s located just an 8-minute walk from the main square.

Enjoy Zagreb! Do get in touch if you need help. I will be glad to help!

Tip: Read on for the Best Places to Visit in Croatia on a Road Trip including the most useful travel tips.

Please Pin to Share – Things to in Zagreb Zagreb Travel Guide

This post contains affiliate links. We may earn a commission if you buy something using the links in our posts.