These statements reference differing stories of Irish American history and identity and more particularly what these mean for the present moment of a deeply divided United States. While asserting very different political perspectives these stories share a common mythical root: the story of immigrant hardship, of a downtrodden people fleeing famine, colonial oppression and religious persecution; that the Irish in America suffered historic injustices and trauma in their passage from home country to host and in making a new identity as Americans. The interpretation of the political and moral meanings of that passage sharply diverge, though, and signify a historical bifurcation. On the one hand, there is the progressive story of how the Irish learned from and remembered the injustices they encountered and used this as the lodestone of a liberal politics of empathy. On the other hand, there is the reactionary nationalist story that takes its historical compass from a closed history of immigrant victimization that distinguishes its descendants’ Americanness as authentic and earned. Today, these contesting histories are animated and mobilized as reactionary and progressive strands of Irish American culture and politics clash on the grounds of white privilege, immigration and what it means to be American in the era of Trump.

The origin stories of Irish America have been core narratives within the “making-of-America” discourse of the nation's founding and development and were especially potent in the cementing, in the mid-twentieth century, of the idea of the US as “a nation of immigrants” – an idea famously promoted by the Irish American President John F. Kennedy.Footnote 3 It was an idea widely taken up and channelled through the cultural politics of white ethnicity at a time when ingrained forms of structural racism were under assault by the civil rights movement. It is an idea that has done significant psychological as well as cultural and political work for white ethnics in the US for over half a century, glossing important elements of whiteness as a racial formation, mystifying its oppressive qualities and its particularistic claims to identity and values. Promotion of this ideal reflects and has informed the complex ways in which Irish Americans have reconciled their identities in the present with prejudice and discrimination in the past. The story of “how the Irish became white” has been popularly glossed as an ethnic achievement, periodically reclaiming otherness, while eliding the politics of racial power and privilege.Footnote 4 The story has fresh potency today at a time of renewed crisis in US race relations, when whiteness is reconstituting itself politically and culturally, and Irish identity has become a marker of this transitioning. As ethnonationalism surges through the mainstream of politics and culture, unsettling the hegemony of liberal whiteness, Irishness becomes a mobile register of white anger and angst. Perhaps the story we need to tell now is not how the Irish became white but how white folks in the US have become Irish.

In setting out to tell this story I am indebted to a generation of scholarship in Irish studies that has advanced understanding of how Irishness allows Americans to negotiate their racial and national status. Most notably and productively, Diane Negra has argued that Irishness in the US draws on a history of racial othering that colours it as an “enriched whiteness,” at once centred and liminal.Footnote 5 Writing in 2006, in the introduction to her edited collection The Irish in Us: Irishness, Performativity and Popular Culture, Negra argues that

Observing that “Irishness seems to move between a quasi-blackness and a politically insulated ethnic whiteness,” she argues the need to critically analyse and understand the “fraught racial status of Irishness.”Footnote 7 This is a topic that has been taken up within Irish studies scholarship, with attention to both its historical and its transnational dimensions, including focus on “the green Atlantic.”Footnote 8 This essay builds on this scholarship to contemporize our understanding of Irishness as a floating signifier of a racially marked and politicized whiteness at a time when the stakes of such signification have been raised.

This article combines ethnographic research with broader cultural analysis to consider how Irish American identity is taken up in the current (re)politicization of white racial identity in the US, and how it is implicated within broader dynamics of identity politics. We will look at three examples of the ways in which Irishness has been taken up in discourses around race and immigration: first, narratives of ethnic memory that promote particular perspectives on Irish and Irish America history in relation to current political and cultural issues; second, the myth of Irish slaves in the Americas that has been widely circulated among white nationalist communities since Trump's election and the differing responses to racial-justice protests by Irish and Irish American communities; and last, the claims to Irish identity by young white Americans today. To better understand the cultural and political meanings of Irishness as a particularized form of racial whiteness in the US, we will consider not only national but also transnational conditions of its formation and circulation, and in particular how these interact between Ireland and the US.