On December 20, 1661, indigenous members of the Zapotec Cofradía of Our Lady of Immaculate Conception gathered in their chapel in the Barrio San Diego of Ciudad Real (today San Cristóbal), Chiapas. By the mid seventeenth century, cofradías such as this one were ubiquitous across Chiapas and broader Spanish America and played a central role in religious life. These self-governing mixed-sex lay religious brotherhoods organized collective devotion to particular saints and provided members with mutual aid in sickness and in death. In Chiapas and other parts of Central America, they often helped fund basic liturgical costs as well.

Each year in December, members of the Cofradía of Our Lady of Immaculate Conception met to elect their officers, and that year they elected six men and six women. The male officials were listed first, in ranked order: one prioste (steward), one alcalde (mayor), one mayordomo (administrator) and his two assistants, and one unnamed male position assigned to an adjacent native (Mixtec) neighborhood of San Antonio. The records then listed the female officials, also in ranked order, beginning with the priora (prioress) “of the city” and her assistant. Four more female prioras were evenly divided, with two assigned to their own neighborhood of San Diego and two assigned to the Mixtec barrio of San Antonio.Footnote 1

From the surviving records it is unclear when the cofradía began electing women alongside men. But the manner in which the election was recorded in 1661, with no fanfare or explanation for the election of equal numbers of male and female officials, suggests the practice had been ongoing for at least some time. The record book ends in 1675 and subsequent books appear to be missing or destroyed. But a fragmentary record from 1777 indicates that elections of both men and women continued into the late colonial period, with few modifications.Footnote 2

The 1661 election of six female officials in the native cofradía of Ciudad Real appears as the earliest recorded case of formalized female cofradía leadership in Chiapas, but it certainly was not the last.Footnote 3 An analysis of surviving cofradía books from colonial Chiapas, approximately 200 in all, reveals that close to 50 cofradías elected female officials. Some embraced the practice intermittently, but well over half consistently elected women for decades or more, through the late colonial period and in many cases well into the nineteenth century. These cofradías were spread over 20 towns from diverse topographical and ethnolinguistic regions of Chiapas (see Figure 1). Indigenous cofradías were clearly at the forefront of this practice; however, election of female cofradía officers also became remarkably popular among ladino, Black, and even Spanish cofradías during the eighteenth century.

These findings challenge the common generalization that in colonial New Spain “cofradía officers were men.”Footnote 4 Or, as another scholar puts it more broadly, “Spanish custom and Christian doctrine excluded women from positions of authority.”Footnote 5 This perception reflects the scholarly tendency to focus on central Mexican regions where Spanish colonialism more effectively constrained women's participation in formalized leadership roles. There scholars have found only a select few native cofradías that formally elected female officers, mostly in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. Afro-Mexican cofradías picked up the practice in the seventeenth century, but over the eighteenth century both native and Afro-Mexican women largely retreat from view in the official cofradía records from central Mexico.Footnote 6 Meanwhile, Spanish cofradías in that region rejected the practice, apparently due to its close association with native and African communities.

By shifting focus beyond central Mexico, this article illustrates the diversity and dynamism of colonial gender relations and native women's roles and experiences. Scholars agree that Spanish colonialism undermined native women's status alongside that of the broader native population, and also in specifically gendered ways. While early modern Spanish and European societies viewed men as intellectually, physically, and morally superior to women, pre-Hispanic Mesoamerican societies combined female subordination with systems of gender complementarity and parallelism. Many creator deities were dual-gendered, or male and female deities acted together, as both male and female natures were necessary for creation. That cosmological complementarity was reflected in diverse ways across Mesoamerican societies—in kinship relations, labor systems, and religious, economic, and political institutions.

Pre-Columbian Mesoamerican women had access to property and inheritance rights and in central Mexico parallel leadership positions frequently existed in neighborhoods, palaces, temples, markets, and schools.Footnote 7 Some scholars go as far as to argue that Spanish colonialism fully dismantled gender parallelism and stripped native women of all traditional rights and privileges.Footnote 8 Susan Kellogg and others find less of an abrupt rupture and more of a steady yet “marked decline in status” for seventeenth-century native women in central Mexico, as gender complementarity and parallelism gave way to a “separate and unequal” model of gender relations.Footnote 9 Native women's relative power loss was more acute, given that noble, and eventually non-noble, native men found ample opportunities for formal political and religious leadership positions within Spanish colonialism as town council members, mayors, governors, Christian school masters, and lay leaders.

While native women undeniably lost power and privileges under Spanish colonialism, recent studies also show that many native women continued to claim informal political, economic, and religious authority within their communities.Footnote 10 Chiapas's cofradía records demonstrate that native women also systematically claimed formal elected positions of religious leadership in some regions of New Spain. Not just symbolic, these offices included significant responsibilities, such as management of finances, collecting alms, modeling Christian piety, coordinating devotions, tending to images and altars, and caring for the spiritual and physical well-being of fellow members. Formal cofradía offices allowed native women critical access to prestige, status, and authority within their communities. This was increasingly true over the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as native hierarchies shifted and officeholding (on town councils and cofradías) replaced noble lineage as the primary marker of elite status and role in local governance. Based on the generalization that women were barred from secular and religious officeholding, Catherine Komisaruk argues that this shifting of hierarchies marginalized noble native women across Central America.Footnote 11 But evidence from Chiapas reframes that perception. Through cofradía officeholding, native women in different parts of Chiapas established themselves as community leaders whose labors often overlapped with the work of town councils to ensure community well-being and survival. Rather than retreat over time, the practice of electing female cofradía officials appears to have expanded in late colonial Chiapas, both geographically and demographically, to the point that even elite Spanish cofradías were electing women by the late eighteenth century.