Charlie Chaplin Character information Birth name Charles Spencer Chaplin Jr. Nickname(s) Charlie Chaplin Born April 16, 1889 Died December 25, 1977 Physical description Hair Black Eyes Blue Based on Rap battle information Appeared in Mr. Bean vs. Charlie Chaplin Vs Mr. Bean Portrayed in Live-action Actor Zawesome Official vote(s) 12% (YouTube poll)

11.1% (Google Form)

11.55% (overall)

“It's the only actor bigger than the industry itself!”

— Charlie Chaplin

Charlie Chaplin battled Mr. Bean in Mr. Bean vs. Charlie Chaplin. He was portrayed by Zawesome.

Information on the Rapper[]

Charles Spencer "Charlie" Chaplin Jr. was an English actor and filmmaker famous for his comedy films in the silent movie era. Born in 1889, Charlie was raised in poverty, living with his mother Hannah and his brother Sydney while his father had left them when Charlie was two years old. From a young age, Charlie already performed on stage and worked professionally as a comedic performer to critical acclaim in his teenage years.

In January 1914, Chaplin began to work for Keystone studio in the film industry. After his first film, Chaplin developed the bumbling Tramp character that become synonymous with him to this day. Months later, Chaplin directed his first own film Caught in the Rain. The Tramp character and Chaplin's filmmaking reached a turning point in his 1915 film The Tramp and Chaplin subsequently became a global phenomenon. As a result of this, Chaplin was given more leeway with his films by the studios. By 1922, Chaplin was free to produce films on his own, producing classics such as The Gold Rush, City Lights, and Modern Times; the latter two notably was produced after sound films became popular.

In 1918, Chaplin married a 16-year-old actress Mildred Harris, because she claimed she was pregnant with Chaplin's child, and divorced her in 1920. This became the first out of his four marriage with younger women which, combined with his communist sympathies, became a major controversy in his life during the 1940s. Nevertheless, Chaplin produced The Great Dictator in 1940 and continued to produce films after he was banned from United States. By the 1960s, his reputation in America had improved and he was given an Honorary Award at the 1972 Oscars. He was knighted in 1975 and died from a stroke almost three years later.

Lyrics[]

Verse 1:[]

Let me break the silence, if you couldn't already tell

It's the only actor bigger than the industry itself

I'm a ladies man whilst you're a baby man-child

You're the face of "stranger danger" with that rapey damn smile

You got a lady friend that you sure want to charm a lot

But you could never slot your mini in her parking spot

The last woman you hit on was the Queen

I'll kick you off the set, I'm experienced with flicking Beans

Verse 2:[]

Was that film reel? 'Cause I see through your wrap

It's fitting a Bean's leaving nothing but hot gas

Pitiful, your comedy used to be universal

Now, you're only getting Snickers when you sell out for commercials

Rockin' the comedy and drama, this prodigy's got both

Your style's like your Olympic cameo: one note

You're only slapstick, a walking disaster, tragic

The fact that you're somehow still alive? Magic!

When I say action, I turn secretaries to actresses

While everyone around you falls victim to Rowan's accident

With a YouTube channel, movies panned, and 'toons, you're grasping fans

After thirty years, they should have left this bean canned

Trivia[]