A young Edinburgh student has tragically died after she fell from cliffs on Saturday May 4.

The woman, who is understood to be a Belgian medical student studying at a college in Edinburgh, travelled to the scenic tourist hotspot Cliffs of Moher in Co Clare with three of her friends.

It is believed that she lost her footing while visiting the cliffs before she fell to her death, CorkBeo reports.

READ MORE: Edinburgh mum and pal break world record by plunging 8000m in submarine

READ MORE: Man, 27, charged over alleged racial abuse during Ross County vs Hibs

"This is just a desperate tragedy, and sympathy goes out to this young woman's family and her friends who had to witness her fall," a source said last night (SUN).

The group the woman was with are believed to be all of different nationalities and not based in Ireland.

The alarm was raised at around 1.20pm on Saturday and a major search and rescue operation was mounted by watch officers at the Irish Coast Guard’s marine rescue coordination centre on Valentia Island in Kerry.

Sign up for Edinburgh Live newsletters for more headlines straight to your inbox

Members of the Doolin unit of the Coast Guard and Gardaí responded to the location while the Shannon-based search and rescue helicopter was also tasked.

Rescue 115 was already in the air and on its way to the Aran Islands for the training exercise when the crew was requested to proceed to the incident. The helicopter reached the search area within minutes.

The Aran Islands RNLI all-weather lifeboat was tasked to assist with the operation while units of Clare County Fire and Rescue Service from Ennistymon station were also dispatched to the scene.

Members of Clare Civil Defence’s drone team were requested to be ready to respond to assist with the search if needed but were later stood down.

A search of the area was carried out and a body was quickly located. The crew of the Aran Island lifeboat recovered the body from the water and transported the remains to Doolin Pier where local Coast Guard volunteers and Gardaí were waiting. The body was then taken to Doolin Coast Guard station where the woman was formally pronounced dead.

The body is expected to be transported by hearse to University Hospital Limerick where a post-mortem examination is expected to be carried out.

A Garda spokesperson confirmed: “Gardaí and emergency services conducted an operation following reports of an incident at the Cliffs Moher. The body of a woman, aged in her early 20s, was removed from the water by emergency services. Her body remains at the scene.”

Join Edinburgh Live's Whatsapp Community here and get the latest news sent straight to your messages.

The Cliffs of Moher stand 702ft (214m) at their highest point and around 390ft (120m) at their most southern end at Hags Head close to where today’s tragedy occurred.

In January 2019, a 26-year-old Indian national fell to his death while taking selfies at the world-famous tourist attraction.

In June 2007, a Hungarian man in his 20s died after he fell to his death at the Cliffs of Moher. It’s understood that the man, who had been visiting friends in Ireland for the summer, was taking photos at the time.