Search for

Added by 65 members

Combat

(2001)

(The first book in the Stephen Coonts' Combat series)

A collection of stories by Larry Bond, Dale Brown, Stephen Coonts and David Hagberg

As the world moves into the next millennium, the United States finds itself at the forefront of a new age, policing not only its own shores, but the rest of the world as well. Spearheading this are the men and women of America's armed forces, the "troops on the wall" who will go anywhere, anytime, and do whatever it takes to protect our nation and the rest of the free world.

Now, for the first time, Combat brings the best authors in military fiction together to reveal how war will be fought in the 21st century, from the down-and-dirty "groundpounders" of the U.S. Cavalry to the new frontiers of warfare--outer space and the internet. Ten authors whose novels define the military fiction genre have written all new short novels about the men and women willing to put their lives on the line for freedom:

Stephen Coonts tells of the unlikely partnership between an ex-Marine sniper and a female pilot who team up to kill the terrorists who murdered their parents.

Dale Brown takes us into the seldom-seen world of the military review board, and shows how the future career of an EB-52 Megafortress pilot can depend on a man he's never met.

Larry Bond explores the wild frontier of space warfare, where American forces fight a tenacious enemy that threatens every free nation on Earth.

Ralph Peters takes us to the Balkan States, where a US observer is captured by the very people he is there to help, and learns how far people will go for their idea of freedom.

Harold Coyle reports from the front lines of the information war, where cyberpunks are recruited to combat the growing swarm of hackers who orchestrate online terrorism around the world.

Dean Ing unites a private investigator, a bounty hunter, and an FBI agent who together uncover a shadow of terrorism that looms over America and threatens thousands of lives.

David Hagberg presents another riveting Kirk McGarvey adventure, in which rising tensions between China and Taiwan threaten to bring the US and the world to the brink of war.

R.J. Pineiro goes to the far reaches of space where a terrorist holds the world captive from a nuclear equipped space platform. To stop him, a pilot agrees to fly her space shuttle on a deadly mission from which she may never return.

James Cobb pits a lone US Armored Cavalry unit against an aggressive Algerian recon division in an attempt to protect a defenseless African nation.

Barrett Tillman takes a group of retired fighter jocks in for one last mission, battling enemy jets over the skies of California.

Genre: Thriller

Visitors also looked at these books

Used availability for Dale Brown's Combat

Search for

About Fantastic Fiction Information for Authors