Roberta Taylor, famed for her portrayal of Irene Raymond on EastEnders, has passed away at the age of 76.

The actress, also celebrated for her role as Inspector Gina Gold in ITV's The Bill, is survived by her husband, actor Peter Guinness, her son Elliott, a granddaughter, and two stepbrothers. Her final significant appearance on television was in the detective comedy series Shakespeare and Hathaway.

Taylor joined the cast of EastEnders in 1997 and made her exit in 2000. She entered the show as the head of the Hills family, coming to see her estranged children Sarah (played by Daniela Denby-Ashe) and Tony (portrayed by Mark Homer).

Over the years, Roberta's character experienced numerous plotlines and romantic entanglements, notably with Terry Raymond (played by Gavin Richards).

Following the announcement of her passing on Tuesday, an outpouring of condolences and memories appeared on social media. Details of her death reveal that Roberta battled with the lung condition emphysema and succumbed to complications on July 6 after a fall some months prior led to an infection, reports the Mirror.

Her health deteriorated further when she developed pneumonia.

In the wake of her passing, heartfelt tributes have been shared, including one from actor Nicholas Pegg who posted: "Beautiful, brilliant Roberta Taylor. Adored by millions for her roles in The Bill and EastEnders. Outstanding in Shakespeare, Inspector Morse, and all points in between. A mighty raconteur, a demon at Scrabble, and a dear friend. Thoughts are with her family and her beloved Pete."

EastEnders' story producer Kyri Zindilis shared a touching tribute: "Devastated to hear this I adored Irene Raymond. We have this picture printed out and up on the wall in the Story Department, and it always makes me smile. RIP Roberta Taylor."

Meanwhile, Stuart Antony, her former The Bill co-star, expressed his sorrow: "Sad to hear lovely Roberta Taylor has passed away. She was a joy to work with and always great fun when I saw her - RIP x".

Reflecting on her departure from Albert Square in 2000, Roberta spoke to the Mirror about her intense experience: "I was always thinking, 'When can I learn my lines? ' I gave over much of my life to the show and if I was to carry on at such a pace I'd have to continue to put my life on hold."

She also delved into her character's complexities and her relationship with her on-screen husband: "I didn't want to do things at half-cock [...] I had a lot of fun playing Irene, and Gavin, who plays my screen husband Terry, and I got on brilliantly. Irene was a complicated lady. I never knew what was going to happen next, but that's what life is like. We worked hard at our characters. People thought we were comical but actually there was a lot of sarcasm."