AFTER the untimely death of model Anna Nicole Smith, her dating life intrigued fans.

But one man stands out due to his involvement with multiple legal disputes, a child and a paternity battle - Howard K Stern.

Who is Howard K Stern?

Howard K Stern is an attorney from Los Angeles, California.

Born on November 29, 1968, he attended school at UCLA, the University of California Berkeley, and later went to law school at the UCLA School of Law.

He gained fame after dating model and Playboy cover girl Anna Nicole Smith in the early 2000s.

When did Howard K Stern meet Anna Nicole Smith?

Howard and Anna Nicole met after the death of Anna's billionaire tycoon husband J. Howard Marshall.

She hired him as legal counsel while she sued his sons for part of his estate, after she was left out.

The two became close and he even appeared on her reality show between 2002 and 2004.

He made headlines after her death while embroiled in a bitter paternity battle with Larry Birkhead over Anna's daughter Dannielynn.

He eventually lost custody after Birkhead was revealed to be the father.

What is Howard K Stern's net worth?

Howard is estimated to be worth $500,000 as of 2023.

In addition to being a lawyer in Los Angeles, Howard also ran a talent agency called Hot Smoochie Lips.

His net worth is thought to have increased after "marrying" Anna Nicole in September 2006, only a few months before she would die.

Where is Howard K Stern now?

As of May 2023, Howard still resides in Los Angeles, where he practices law at the Public Defender's Office.

He's stayed out of the spotlight after years of accusations related to Anna Nicole's death, of which many claim he provided the drugs.

Howard was charged with conspiracy to prescribe, administer, and dispense controlled substances to an addict.

He was later acquitted of all charges.

Is Howard K Stern married and does he have children?

Howard and Anna Nicole were never legally married, though they did have an intimate ring exchanging ceremony in the Bahamas in 2006.

Since Anna Nicole's death, he's remained under the radar and does not have any children, after the paternity debacle with Larry Birkhead.

He appears to have remained unmarried since her death, and if he has married, it's remained private.