Jennifer Lopez's ex-husband Marc Anthony, 54, has married for the fourth time to a 23-year-old model.

The musician's new wife is a former Miss Universe contestant Nadia Ferreira and the pair got engaged eight-months ago.

David Beckham was his best man and stood by his side as he married his bride.

The pair said I do at a star-studded ceremony at the Perez Art Museum in Miami on Saturday.

Unsurprisingly, J-Lo wasn't at the wedding, but neither were the twins that she shares with Marc.

Their wedding was officiated by the mayor of Miami Francis X. Suarez and guests also included Salma Hayek, and Romeo Santos.

Nadia was a vision in white as she wore a gown by Galia Lahav, while Marc looked sharp in a Christian Dior suit.

Hola described her dress as having a "design with a romantic flair, beautiful lace details and a long and voluminous tail."

Marc's two sons Cristian, 21, and Ryan, 19, who he shares with his ex-wife Dayanara Torres were present for their dad's big day.

Marc and Nadia celebrated their engagement at Sexy Fish in Miami.

They broke the news by sharing a snap of a huge diamond ring on Instagram.

The sparkler had a rectangular diamond at the centre and was framed by two small rocks either side.

Nadia wrote in the caption: "Engagement Partyyyyy!!! @marcanthony."

She was crowned Miss Paraguay in 2021 and was runner-up in the Miss Universe Pageant, falling just behind India's Harnaaz Sandhu.

As her ex husband was getting married, Jennifer spent the day with Ben's blended family.

They were joined by Ben's children Serafina, 14 and Samuel, 10 as well as Jennifer's daughter Emme, 14.

Do you enjoy reading about celebrities? Sign up for all the best celeb news from the Mirror here.

Jennifer wore a pair of wide-legged jeans with a white crop top.

She added a fluffy jacket and shaded her eyes with a pair of lightly-tinted aviator sunglasses.

Ben looked stylish in a pair of beige jeans, a woollen zip up jumper in the same colour and a light brown sheepskin-lined jacket.

Do you have a story to sell? Get in touch with us at webcelebs@mirror.co.uk or call us direct 0207 29 33033.