Jennifer Lopez has tied the knot 4 times, and regardless that she’s these days wed to Ben Affleck, her longest marriage used to be to Marc Anthony. The couple were pals for years earlier than tying the knot in 2004. They welcomed twins, son Max and daughter Emme, in 2008, but in the end parted tactics in 2014.

Despite their divorce, studies have mentioned that Jen and Marc take care of a pleasant relationship and their cut up used to be amicable. But issues might have gotten extra complicated that Ben is back in the image. JLo and Ben virtually married within the early 2000s earlier than calling off their marriage ceremony, most effective to reconcile in 2021.

RELATED: Jennifer Lopez Had To Interject Ellen DeGeneres When The Host Started Talking About Her Dating Younger Men

While Ben and Jen are only newlyweds, having tied the knot last 12 months, there have been various reports of marital strife already, and her ex-husband Marc Anthony’s opinion on their marriage would possibly not bode smartly for the long run. Here’s what we know.

Marc Anthony Was Originally Supportive Of JLo & Ben’s Relationship

When Jennifer and Ben first reconciled their relationship in 2021, there was hypothesis that her ex-husband Marc Anthony would possibly have conflicting feelings.

However, when it used to be reported that JLo was shifting with their children to be closer to Ben the similar year, assets said Marc Anthony not only didn’t care, he was happy to see Jen transfer on. “Marc simply desires Jennifer to feel free. He doesn’t care who she is with or the place she is living,” a source told Hollywood Life.

“He’s tremendous with her spending more time in L.A. and so they’ll have an arrangement for the kids that works,” they went on. “They make stronger every other’s wants and needs and make it work.”

RELATED: Ben Affleck Stuns With Jennifer Lopez At ‘The Flash’ Premiere Amid His Donald Trump Accusations

They added that Marc and Jen care for a detailed relationship, in spite of divorcing a decade in the past, and a new romance received’t change that.

“They’re very close and act like the most productive of friends,” the insider persisted. “They are a family unit for the whole thing. They have this sort of wholesome, open relationship and tell every other a lot. He looks at this as though Ben makes her satisfied, then she should be with Ben.”

They concluded, “He wants her to live a lifestyles that brings her happiness and he truly signifies that. All exes should be like them!”

But Now Marc Is Doubtful JLo’s Marriage To Ben Will Make It

Ben and Jen went on to tie the knot in 2022 in multiple ceremonies, including an enormous marriage ceremony on Ben’s Georgia assets. Even more, after nearly two years of house searching, the newlyweds after all went in on a $60 million mansion together with a dark past.

Although Ben and JLo seem extra serious about their relationship than ever, they’ve been plagued by means of reviews of marital strife. And it’s it appears no longer most effective enthusiasts who are wondering if their marriage will survive. According to a contemporary document, Marc could also be skeptical that their relationship will remaining.

"Marc heard too much about how Ben became moody and out of control for him to think it was a great idea to get back with him all these years later," a source told Radar Online in November.

The source’s allegations seem to contradict previous studies that claimed Marc had no problem with Jennifer and Ben’s romance. Perhaps now that he’s since them in combination for a couple of years, Marc is wondering whether Ben and Jen are excellent for each and every other.

Marc Just Had A New Baby, While Ben & JLO Go Through Marital Problems

It’s no longer only Ben and Jen who’re making big strikes of their non-public existence. Marc Anthony has additionally had so much going on. Not handiest did he marry former Miss Universe Paraguay winner Nadia Ferreira in January, however they recently welcomed their first child together. This now makes Marc a father-of-seven.

Marc introduced their baby’s arrival with a sweet put up on Father’s Day. “God's timing is at all times perfect,” he captioned a photograph appearing himself maintaining the baby. So a ways, few details are known about Marc and Nadia’s child, together with the identify and gender.

Sources say that Marc never had any plans to have extra children, but assembly his current spouse changed his opinion. “If you had requested him a couple of years ago, Marc by no means imagined he’d grow to be a father again,” a source told Us Weekly.

RELATED: The One Movie Jennifer Lopez Didn't Actually Sing In And Was Faking

While Marc is also open to expanding his family, apparently that his ex-wife doesn’t really feel the same way. Reports counsel Ben and Jen are each on the same page about now not having more youngsters.

“They do not want any new children – they are both previous that phase of their lives,” a source told Hollywood Life last year.

“JLo’s connection with his children makes Ben much more sure that this is destiny,” they added. “They are actually making an attempt to make this a combined family and Jennifer Garner unearths this to be wonderful.

While Jen has her twins, Ben stocks 3 children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner. They had been married from 2004 to 2018. Reports have mentioned that Lopez and Garner have struggled to get along, but JLo recently became determined to improve their relationship to help save her marriage.

Given Marc’s alleged feelings in opposition to Ben, JLo may additionally want to work on improving the relationship between her ex and husband, if she needs co-parenting to proceed going easily.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGihnqaenrOmvoylpqmdqqh6psSMoaysmpGjsW65wKuaZpmeqbWwuthmqZ6kkam2sLrSoaCpZaeewal5wZ6lZpmWm7mmr8pmmqGZnpyypXs%3D