FANS were stunned to learn of Peter Fonda's death on August 16, with reports claiming that the actor died from respiratory failure caused by his lung cancer.

The Oscar-nominated Hollywood star entertained millions with movies such as Easy Rider, Wild Hogs and Ghost Rider - but was he actually related to Jane Fonda? We have the scoop...

How did Peter Fonda die?

The Hollywood icon died at the age of 79 on August 17, following an ongoing battle with lung cancer.

He passed away in the early hours of the morning at his Los Angeles home, TMZ reveals, while surrounded by family.

And according to his sister Jane Fonda, Peter "went out laughing".

In an official statement, she said: "I am very sad. He was my sweet-hearted baby brother. The talker of the family.

"I have had beautiful alone time with him these last days. He went out laughing."

His family also released a statement saying: “It is with deep sorrow that we share the news that Peter Fonda has passed away.

“In one of the saddest moments of our lives, we are not able to find the appropriate words to express the pain in our hearts.

"While we mourn the loss of this sweet and gracious man, we also wish for all to celebrate his indomitable spirit and love of life.

"In honor of Peter, please raise a glass to freedom," the statement added.

The official cause of death was determined to have been a respiratory failure due to his lung cancer, with sources noting that the movie star had been in and out of the hospital quite frequently prior to his shock passing.

Who is in Peter's famous family?

Peter was born into the famous Fonda family.

He is the son of Henry Fonda, whose career spanned five decades before his death in 1982.

Peter is also the younger brother of the world-famous actress Jane Fonda.

He is also the father of Bridget and Justin Fonda, who are both actors.

How old was he when he played Easy Rider?

Peter was just 29 when he starred in Easy Rider; the movie that would go on to change his entire career.

The motion picture depicts a story of two bikers heading from Los Angeles to New Orleans, and along their way, meet a man who bridges a counter-culture gap they certainly aren't aware of.

Peter's character Wyatt and his friend Billy are freewheeling motorcyclists, and after succeeding in their mission to smuggle drugs from Mexico to Los Angeles, they manage to sell their haul for an enormous amount of money.

The two are then faced with the challenge of making it to New Orleans before the Mardi Gras festival commences.

Peter and Wyatt stop in Arizona before reaching Mexico City, where the pair are arrested for "parading without a permit" and consequently placed in jail.

Their journey in getting to New Orleans becomes even more problematic as new obstacles arise, with key themes in the film focusing its attention on the rising hippie movement during the 1960s, the growing rise of drug use, and communal lifestyle.

It's also said that Peter was handling real drugs in scenes that displayed the use of marijuana and other substances.

Who was Peter Fonda?

Peter Henry Fonda, 78, born February 23, 1940 was an American actor.

He was best known for the 1969 film Easy Rider, which he was nominated for an Oscar.

Peter was also nominated for Best Actor for Ulee's Gold (1997), which he won the Golden Globe for.

He also won the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor for Passion of Ayn Rand (1999).

What did Peter say about Barron Trump?

Melania Trump called in the Secret Service after Peter said her son Barron, 12, should be "ripped from his mother's arms and put in a cage with paedos".

The Hollywood star has since deleted the tweet and apologised, saying he was upset about children being separated from their parents on the US-Mexico border.

"Like many Americans, I am very impassioned and distraught over the situation with children separated from their families at the border, but I went way too far.

"It was wrong and I should not have done it. I immediately regretted it and sincerely apologise to the family for what I said and any hurt my words have caused."

Who are Peter's ex-wives and was he still married?

Peter had tied the knot with his long term companion Margaret 'Parky' Devogelaere in a romantic beach-side ceremony in Hawaii in 2011.

Peter had been married twice before - in 1961 to Susan Brewer with whom he had two children including actress Bridget.