Easy Rider star Peter Fonda has died at the age of 79.

His family said in a statement that Fonda died on Friday morning at his home in Los Angeles. The official cause of death was respiratory failure due to lung cancer.

Born into Hollywood royalty as Henry Fonda's only son, Peter Fonda carved his own path with his non-conformist tendencies and earned an Oscar nomination for co-writing Easy Rider, the 1969 counterculture classic.

He never won an Oscar but would later be nominated for best actor in Ulee's Gold.

His sister Jane Fonda said in a statement she was "very sad".

"As we grieve, we ask that you respect our privacy."

Fonda was born in New York in 1940 and was just 10 years old when his mother Frances Ford Seymour died.

Fonda had an estranged relationship with his father, but said that they grew closer over the years before Henry Fonda died in 1982.

Although Peter never achieved the status of his father or even his older sister Jane Fonda, the impact of Easy Rider, which just celebrated its 50th anniversary, was enough to cement his place in popular culture.

Fonda collaborated with another struggling young actor, Dennis Hopper, on the script about two weed-smoking, drug-slinging bikers on a trip through the Southwest and Deep South.

On the way, Fonda and Hopper befriend a drunken young lawyer — Jack Nicholson in a breakout role — but raise the ire of Southern rednecks and are murdered before they can return home.

Fonda's character Wyatt wore a stars-and-stripes helmet and rode a motorcycle called Captain America, re-purposing traditional images for the counterculture.

Fonda produced Easy Rider and Hopper directed it for a meagre $US380,000.

It went on to gross $US40 million worldwide, a substantial sum for its time.

The film was a hit at Cannes, netted a best-screenplay Oscar nomination for Fonda, Hopper and Terry Southern, and has since been listed on the American Film Institute's ranking of the top 100 American films.

Loading...

The establishment gave its official blessing in 1998 when Easy Rider was included in the United States National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Fonda remained prolific for the rest of his life, with performances as the heel in Steven Soderbergh's The Limey, from 1999, and in James Mangold's 2007 update of 3:10 to Yuma.

Fonda is survived by his third wife Margaret DeVogelaere, his daughter actress Bridget Fonda, and son Justin, both from his first marriage to Susan Brewer.