CORRECTION: Peter Fonda was part of an iconic Hollywood family that includes his late father Henry Fonda, sister Jane Fonda and daughter Bridget Fonda. An earlier version of this article misidentified Bridget.

Counterculture icon and actor Peter Fonda died on Friday morning at his home in Los Angeles at 79 from respiratory failure due to lung cancer.

Fonda was a member of one of Hollywood's iconic families that includes his late father Henry Fonda, sister Jane Fonda and daughter Bridget Fonda.

Peter Fonda is best remembered for his role as Wyatt in the 1969 film "Easy Rider," about two hippies who make a drug deal and make a motorcycle trip across country. Recently, he appeared in films such as "You Can't Say No" in 2018 and "The Most Hated Woman In America" in 2017.

Fonda presented actor Gary Oldman with the Desert Palm Achievement Award for his performance in "The Darkest Hour" in 2018. The Palm Springs International Film Society shared the news of Fonda's death on Facebook.

"We are sorry to hear the news of the passing of actor Peter Fonda today," the statement said.

Fonda received a star on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars Oct. 22, 2000. It is located at 301 N. Palm Canyon Drive.

According to a statement from the actor's family, issued by the family's longtime publicist Melody Korenbrot, Fonda died at 11:05 a.m. Friday at his home, surrounded by family. The official cause of death was respiratory failure due to lung cancer.

“In one of the saddest moments of our lives, we are not able to find the appropriate words to express the pain in our hearts. As we grieve, we ask that you respect our privacy," the statement added.

And, while we mourn the loss of this sweet and gracious man, we also wish for all to celebrate his indomitable spirit and love of life. In honor of Peter, please raise a glass to freedom."

Although not as well known as his father and sister, Peter Fonda was best known for 1969’s groundbreaking counterculture classic "Easy Rider." Fonda produced, co-wrote and co-starred in the movie along with Dennis Hopper, who directed the film.

Fonda played Wyatt, who rode his chopper alongside Hopper's Billy, as the two motorcyclists traveled through the nation's southwest and Deep South with money from a large cocaine deal. Fonda's Wyatt wore a stars-and-stripes helmet matching his gas tank and called his motorcycle “Captain America,” re-purposing traditional images.

USA Today contributed to this report.

Desert Sun reporter Brian Blueskye covers arts and entertainment. He can be reached at brian.blueskye@desertsun.com or (760) 778-4617.