A contemporary Christian music singer blessed with a powerful, stirring, and earnest voice that matches the surging, aspirational nature of her music, Meredith Andrews maintains a career as a recording artist and worship leader. As Long as It Takes and Worth It All, the albums that made her career thanks to such songs as "Open Up the Heavens" and "Not for a Moment (After All)," arrived in the early 2010s, bringing along with them a pair of Dove Awards. Andrews continued to work steadily after her success was established, taking the time to look back at her career with the live album Heaven's Frequency in 2024. A native of Wilson, North Carolina, Meredith Andrews began singing at the age of six. An alumna of Wilson Christian Academy, Andrews began a professional musical career after her stint at Liberty University. She released her debut solo album, Mesmerized, in 2005. She received her first Dove Award nomination in 2008 for her sophomore outing, The Invitation, and took home the award for Praise & Worship Album of the Year in 2010 for As Long as It Takes. Her fourth studio album, Worth It All, followed in 2013 and cracked the Billboard 200. Later that year, she issued a reverent Christmas EP titled Behold the Savior, and her fifth full-length outing, Deeper, arrived in early 2016. Andrews released a second collection of Christmas songs, Receive Our King, in October 2017. After releasing "A Million Saints" in 2018, she issued the live Faith and Wonder EP in 2019, following it with an EP of alternate versions of A Million Saints in 2020. She rounded out 2020 singing on "Beautiful (Acoustic)" by Dan Bremnes. The Spanish-language Abrenos Los Cielos appeared in 2021, then she released a series of singles that ran from 2022's "Never Known a Love" through 2023's "God of the Living; among these tunes was "Make Room," which featured Sarah Reeves and Chris McClarney, and "Psalm 23 (I Am Not Alone)" with Phil King. Early in 2024, "The Lamb, the Lion, the King" and "Always Do" singles set up the release of Heaven's Frequency, her first album for Curb.

&copy James Christopher Monger /TiVo