KENTWOOD -- Singer-songwriter Meredith Andrews left Haiti just three days before the Jan. 12 earthquake.

"I was helping at an orphanage near the border of the Dominican Republic," said Andrews, 27. "So the news of the tragedy really hit close to home."

It wasn't the first trip there for Andrews, who works in one of several volunteer groups establishing a food program and a school.

The facility in the city Ouanaminthe is far enough from the ravaged capital of Port au Prince that it suffered no structural damage. Andrews learned that a memorable young boy she had befriended also was OK.

She said the HIV-positive youngster is a loving child who never complained. The song "What It Means to Love" from her forthcoming album was written for him.

"It changed me being around him, and the song says that's the way it is when the gospel takes root in our hearts -- our lives are forever changed."

The new CD ("As Long As It Takes," to be released March 2), is Andrews' sophomore recording. A worship leader at the huge Harvest Bible Chapel in suburban Chicago for nearly four years, the album is more guitar-oriented than her first. But it continues her worship-based lyrical approach.

"It's a vertical perspective as if I were talking to God," she said. "And a few of these songs we've used in our church."

Andrews' calling card is her song "You're Not Alone," from her debut CD. The tune, nominated for a Gospel Music Association Dove Award as 2009 worship song of the year, is a musical setting of God's promise of never-ending love.

It's a song she wrote several years ago while pondering a career move. But it has meant much more to listeners.

"Just two nights ago a lady who is struggling with cancer told me how that song is helping her to get through," Andrews said.

The Wilson, N.C. native began piano lessons at age 8 and started singing backup in her church youth band at 12. She sang Southern gospel music with her mother in area churches.

Andrews studied worship arts at Liberty University in Virginia and led the praise band at the school's chapel services. That brought the opportunity at Harvest Bible Chapel in Rolling Meadows, Ill., where she is a part-time staffer in addition to her recording/performing career.

Andrews toured with Christian music veteran Michael W. Smith last fall and is one of dozens of artists who, with Smith, recently recorded "Come Together Now," an anthem that will funnel its proceeds to charities such as the Red Cross and Samaritan's Purse for work in Haiti.

Andrews has been touring with Bebo Norman, a veteran with numerous Christian radio hits, including "Pull Me Out" from his self-titled CD.