Christian recording artist, Meredith Andrews, has been a friend of mine for over a decade. We had so much fun connecting we kinda forgot you were listening. Meredith is one of the most down to earth people I know. She openly shares her relationship with God and all she is learning. Today we talk about the beauty in the hidden seasons. We’ve both been there. You may not think someone with such a public ministry would feel hidden. I’m so glad she shares about what she is learning. One thing is … even through it doesn’t seem productive or fruitful, God has a purpose for the wilderness. We also talk about how she met her husband, how she is inspired to write new songs and how she balances her busy career and family.

A little more about Meredith – In 2011, she won two Dove Awards, “Worship Song of the Year” for “How Great Is the Love” and “Praise and Worship album of the Year” for As Long As It Takes. She has 5 studio albums. On a regular basis, Andrews leads worship at major women’s and worship leader conferences across the U.S., and has toured with Matt Maher, Natalie Grant, Big Daddy Weave, Vertical Church, Phil Wickham, and Michael W. Smith, among others.

I hope you enjoy this conversation and are inspired to love God with all your heart. Here we go!

LISTEN AND SUBSCRIBE VIA ITUNESLISTEN AND SUBSCRIBE VIA GOOGLE PLAY

IN THIS EPISODE YOU’LL LEARN

How she met her husband Jacob Sooter

The background on her storybook wedding

How she balances a busy career and 3 kids

How she gets inspired to write songs – and why she likes co-writing with other artists

Our thoughts on how to be still and know that He is God

How to rest and let God breathe into the new thing He is doing

Why we shouldn’t skip over the hidden season and the beauty in it

The secret to doing something in partnership with God

What Meredith is learning about what God thinks about the meditations of her heart

SHOW NOTES

Meredith’s website

Meredith’s iTunes

Meredith’s Facebook Page

Meredith’s Instagram

Meredith’s YouTube

Meredith’s Twitter

Meredith’s Pandora

Song – You’re Not Alone

Find Jill on social media:

Website: www.jillmonaco.com

Facebook: www.facebook.com/jillmonacoministries

Instagram: www.instagram.com/jillmonaco

Twitter: www.twitter.com/jillmonaco

One last thing …. Producing this show does take resources. So if you would like to hear more conversations, please consider supporting this program of the ministry. Just click the button below and you’ll be led to a donate page. All gifts are tax-deductible. Thanks so much!