Troy is a city in Oakland County, Michigan. As the northern suburb of the Detroit metro station, it is located about 9.7 km north of the city. At the 2010 census, its population was 80,980, making it the county's most populous city and the 13th most populous municipality in the state. It was organized in 1827 as Troy Township and parts of it were incorporated into the cities of Birmingham, Clawson and Royal Oak. The last part of the city of Troy was incorporated in 1955 as the present city of Troy.

Troy has become a business and shopping centre in the region with numerous office centres and the stylish Somerset Collection Mall. In 2008, Troy ranked 22nd on CNN Money's list of the nation's best places to live based on criteria such as quality of life, education, economic strength and recreational opportunities. In 2011, Troy was ranked by WalletHub.com as the safest city in Michigan and the 19th safest city in the US. That same year, it ranked fourth among the most affordable US cities, with a median household income of $79,000.

Troy Historic Village is an interactive historical museum that documents the various stages of the Trojan Rise from the first settlers to the city it is today. The museum is located on the corner of Livernois Road and Wattles Road, next to the Old Town Hall.

Starting as tree trunks and clay structures used by the first settlers in the 18th century, the schoolhouse, the estate, the general store, the smithy, the parish church and the old town hall serve today as a general museum. The village is open all year round, with ten original, complete buildings that visitors can enter to see how they functioned in the past. The buildings are decorated and full of artifacts from the past. Each structure is original and has been moved from its original location to the museum and is intact.

Many schools in the area plan excursions to the museum, and the church is available for weddings. In the summer of 2005, on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the city, a 1.2 m high ceramic beaver statue was erected in various locations throughout the city. A pavilion in the middle of the square hosted parties, bands and annual parties during this period. Troy is home to two of the largest Protestant churches in the United States, the Kensington Community Church and the Woodside Bible Church. The Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of the United States and Metropolis of Detroit is located in Troy.

In 2003, Troy was named Michigan Sportstown by the magazine Sports Illustrated for having the best community sports program in Michigan. In addition to Detroit News and Detroit Free Press, regional newspapers in southeastern Michigan, Troy is also served by The Daily Tribune, The Observer, The Eccentric , The Troy Beacon, which appears Thursday - The Troy Times, The Troy Somerset Gazette and The Troy Patch. The eccentric newspaper edition of Troy was discontinued in 2009.

The parks of the city of Troy include a variety of amenities with a mix of open spaces, forests, rivers and lakes, as well as leisure facilities. Here you can find football fields, ball diamonds, disc golf courses, shore fishing, outdoor sports equipment, tennis courts, basketball courts, natural and paved trails, play structures, swings, skate parks, picnic areas and gazebos. Troy has a vibrant restaurant scene with many restaurants located along 16 miles of roads, especially Big Beaver Road.

Troy is home to the Somerset Collection and the Troy-Oakland Mall. Troy has the highest cumulative property value in Michigan, after Detroit. Troy is a thriving business centre in the automotive and financial sectors and home to a number of large companies. The Somerset Collection is the most popular shopping centre in the city.

Bank of America has a large operations center in Troy. At the top of Troy is the tallest building in the city, the PNC Financial Services office. The planners propose the "Pavilion in Troy" project, in which the city-designed Square Boulevard would be lined with upscale shops, restaurants, offices, theaters and condominiums.

Frank Nursery & Crafts, a 14 states arts and crafts chain, is headquartered in Troy and was acquired by General Host Corporation in 1983. Arbor Drugs, which has its headquarter in Troy, was acquired in 1998 for an estimated $14.8 billion by CVS Corporation. CVS is now the largest drugstore chain in the Detroit market. In 2012 Mahindra and Mahindras opened a technical centre in Troy.

The company filed for bankruptcy in 2004 and went bankrupt. Genicom was a production and repair company in the 1980s. Kmart was headquartered in Troy until it was purchased by Sears in 2005 and moved to the former headquarters of Sears in Hoffman Estates, Illinois. Its massive headquarters remained, but it was to be demolished to create a neat square boulevard of upscale shops, restaurants, offices, theatres and condominiums that would collapse as a result of the recession.

List of Neighborhood Parks:

Beach Road Park Beaver Trail Park Brinston Park Phillip J. Huber Park Milverton Park North Glen Park Redwood Park Robinwood Park Schroeder Park Sylan Geln Lake Park List of Community Parks:

Boulan Park Firefighters Park Donald J. Flynn Park Jaycee Park Raintree Park Restaurants

Major companies

Altair Engineering Anchor Bay Entertainment Bank of America (major center) Behr America Canadian National Railway (Traded as Grand Trunk Western) Champion Homes CredentialCheck Dayco Delphi DuPont Automotive Entertainment Publications Flagstar Bank iCONMA LLC Inteva Products J. D. Power and Associates Kelly Services The Kresge Foundation Magna Powertrain Mahindra & Mahindra Meritor Molina Healthcare North American Bancard Olga's Kitchen Plastic Omnium Plex Systems Rexair RHK Technology, Inc. Saleen Special Vehicles SAE International Sonic Alert Specter Werkes/Sports SRG Global STANLEY Black and Decker Syntel ThyssenKrupp USA Tyler Technologies ViSalus The Woodbridge Company (US Headquarters) Ziebart HTC Global Services