TROY, Mich., Jan. 14, 2013 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Syntel, Inc. (Nasdaq:SYNT), a global information technology services and Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) firm, today announced it has signed a joint delivery partnership with Hatha Systems, a leading provider of international standards based application modernization and sustainment solutions.

Under the terms of the partnership, Syntel will leverage Hatha Systems' Knowledge Refinery® solution to strengthen its legacy modernization capabilities, as well as implement and adopt new modernization techniques for use in ongoing application development and maintenance projects.

According to Syntel CEO and President, Prashant Ranade, legacy modernization is a key focus area for clients with large legacy portfolios.

"Many of our clients are looking to upgrade their legacy IT platforms to flexible modern systems in order to improve customer service and business performance, as well as reduce legacy system costs," said Ranade. "By implementing solutions from Hatha Systems, we are able to offer our clients a robust, automated approach to legacy system modernization that is unique in the marketplace."

"We are pleased to welcome Syntel as a Hatha Systems implementation partner," said Rama Moorthy, CEO of Hatha Systems. "Syntel has a strong track record of delivering value and business performance to their clients, and we feel that our Knowledge Refinery® modernization solution will complement their existing suite of legacy system offerings."

About Hatha Systems

Hatha Systems is an innovative small business enterprise that brings extensive knowledge, multi-disciplinary experience and expertise in technology innovation to the modernization and sustainment (e.g. maintenance, compliance and security) of software systems. The company is focused on providing this innovation on a foundation of open standards, delivering solutions that deliver accuracy, speed, and cost reduction through our automated extraction and analysis solutions to its clients. To learn more about Hatha Systems, visit us at www.hathasystems.com

About Syntel

Syntel (Nasdaq:SYNT) is a leading global provider of integrated information technology and Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) solutions spanning the entire lifecycle of business and information systems and processes. The Company is driven by its mission to create new opportunities for clients by harnessing the passion, talent and innovation of Syntel employees worldwide. Syntel leverages dedicated Centers of Excellence, a flexible Global Delivery Model, and a strong track record of building collaborative client partnerships to create sustainable business advantage for Global 2000 organizations. Syntel is assessed at SEI CMMi Level 5, and is ISO 27001 and ISO 9001:2008 certified. As of September 30, 2012, Syntel employed more than 20,000 people worldwide. To learn more, visit us at: www.syntelinc.com.

Safe Harbor Provision

This news release includes forward-looking statements, including those with respect to the future level of business for Syntel, Inc. These statements are necessarily subject to risk and uncertainty. Actual results could differ materially from those projected in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain risk factors set forth in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2012 or from other factors not currently anticipated.