TROY, Mich., May 2, 2011 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Syntel, Inc. (Nasdaq:SYNT), a global information technology services and Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) company, today announced that Ashok Balasubramanian, Head of Syntel's Cloud Computing Center of Excellence (CoE), has been named to TechAmerica Foundation's Commission on the Leadership Opportunity in U.S. Deployment of the Cloud, also known as CLOUD².

The purpose of the CLOUD² commission is to provide the Obama Administration with recommendations on how government can better deploy cloud technologies, as well as to propose public policies that will help leverage cloud-based innovation and drive economic growth.

Mr. Balasubramanian leads Syntel's Cloud Computing CoE, a dedicated R&D group tasked with developing cloud-based technology solutions that enable companies to reduce cost structures and increase flexibility in the face of dynamic market conditions.

In this role, he oversees Syntel's suite of cloud computing services, which include Portfolio Analysis and Cloud Strategy, Cloud Migration, Re-architecture and Testing, Private and Hybrid Cloud Development and Management as well as PaaS and SaaS Development.

"I am honored to be chosen to serve on this important commission," said Balasubramanian. "Cloud Computing has the potential to revolutionize the way we communicate, do business, and interact with the world around us.

"I look forward to working with the other commissioners to develop robust strategies to leverage Cloud technologies to drive the next wave of innovation and economic growth."

For more information about Syntel's Cloud Computing services, visit .

About Syntel

Syntel (Nasdaq:SYNT) is a leading global provider of integrated information technology and Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) solutions spanning the entire lifecycle of business and information systems and processes. The Company is driven by its mission to create new opportunities for clients by harnessing the passion, talent and innovation of Syntel employees worldwide. Syntel leverages dedicated Centers of Excellence, a flexible Global Delivery Model, and a strong track record of building collaborative client partnerships to create sustainable business advantage for Global 2000 organizations. Syntel is assessed at SEI CMMi Level 5, and is ISO 27001 and ISO 9001:2000 certified. As of March 31, 2011, Syntel employed more than 17,600 people worldwide. To learn more, visit us at: .

Safe Harbor Provision

This news release includes forward-looking statements, including those with respect to the future level of business for Syntel, Inc. These statements are necessarily subject to risk and uncertainty. Actual results could differ materially from those projected in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain risk factors set forth in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2010 or from other factors not currently anticipated.

CONTACT: Jon Luebke - Syntel 248-619-3503 jon_luebke@syntelinc.com