Atos Hungary Ltd.

Atos is a global leader in digital transformation with over 110,000 employees in 73 countries and annual revenue of over € 11 billion. The Group is the Worldwide Information Technology Partner for the Olympic & Paralympic Games and operates under the brands Atos, Atos|Syntel, and Unify. Atos is a SE (Societas Europaea), listed on the CAC40 Paris stock index.

We have been present in Hungary since 1990. We support our clients meeting the digital transformation challenges with a wide variety of services and product portfolio ranging from consulting, system- and software development to operation. Leveraging our global and local expertise and partner eco-system Atos Hungary will deliver real business value today that will meet future digital requirements for sustainable and long-term goals.

CERTH

The Centre for Research and Technology-Hellas (CERTH), founded in 2000 in Greece, is listed among the TOP-20 E.U. research institutions with the highest participation in competitive research grants. It is a legal entity governed by private law with non-profit status, supervised by the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT) of the Greek Ministry of Development and Investments. CERTH consists of five institutes in various research fields. The Information Technology Institute (ITI) is one of the leading Institutions in Greece in the fields of Informatics, Telematics, and Telecommunications. It is active in many research domains such as Security and Surveillance, Image and Signal Processing, Computer & Cognitive Vision, Virtual and Augmented Reality, Multimedia, Energy, Cloud Computing, IoT, and Big Data Analytics. CERTH/ITI has participated in more than 300 research projects funded by the European Commission (FP5-FP6-FP7 & H2020) and more than 200 research projects funded by Greek National Research Programmes.

Kaspersky Lab SL

We are a global company, with a global vision and a focus on international markets. We operate in 200 countries and territories and have 34 offices in more than 30 countries. Our team consists of more than 4,000 highly qualified specialists.

We believe in a tomorrow where technology improves all of our lives.

In the modern world, cybersecurity is about more than just protecting devices, but developing an ecosystem where everything connected through technology is immune to cyber threats. That’s why we provide cybersecurity technology that people can trust, and our business focus has evolved towards the wider concept of “cyber-immunity”.

We are forever innovating, delivering protection that’s effective, usable and accessible. We pride ourselves on developing world-leading security that keeps us, and every one of our 400 million users protected by our technologies, and 250,000 corporate clients, one step ahead of potential threats.

QuanTag IT Solutions GmbH

QuanTag IT Solutions GmbH, founded and located in Germany, has been providing customer- and business-specific software solutions as well as consulting services since 2000 with strong focus on IT security related technologies and projects. Furthermore, the company is also developing its own products in the area of secure communication and authentication technologies.

The main fields of activities are including:

(I) Software Development: Analysis, assessment and enhancement of existing IT architectures and solutions; Individual software development for PC/desktop, embedded und mobile systems; Operations and support,

(II) IT, Mobile and Embedded Security: Smart Card and PKI related technologies; Authentication and authorization standards/frameworks; Mobile payment, Transit and ticketing; Secure communication solutions (VoIP-based) and secure cloud storage; eSIM/eUICC related technologies; Automotive security solutions; Blockchain-based use cases and wallets; Over-the-Air (OTA) solutions,

(III) Consulting and

(IV) Project Management.

Budapest University of Technology and Economics

The Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BME), founded in 1782, is the leading university of technology in Hungary and one of the oldest technology institutes in the world. More than 110 departments and institutes operate within the structure of eight faculties. About 1100 lecturers, 400 researchers and other degree holders, and numerous invited lecturers and practising expert specialists participate in education and research at BME.

The Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics (VIK) has been committed to performing high quality and internationally recognized research activities in the fields of theoretical and applied engineering, electromagnetics, electron devices, electronic technologies, power engineering, theoretical and applied computer science, information theory, automation and applied informatics, measurement and information systems, control theory and engineering, communication theory, telecommunications and media informatics, networked systems and services.

Netcompany-Intrasoft

Netcompany-Intrasoft is a leading European IT Solutions and Services Group with strong international presence and expertise, offering innovative and added-value solutions of the highest quality to a wide range of international and national public and private organizations. As of November 2021, Netcompany-Intrasoft became a member of the Netcompany Group, a Denmark located IT company founded in 2000. Netcompany is the fastest growing and most successful IT services company in the Nordics, owning vast technology experience and deep industry-specific knowledge, creating innovative solutions tailored to meet business goals.

Netcompany-Intrasoft employs more than 2,800 highly skilled professionals, representing over 50 different nationalities and mastering more than 30 languages. With headquarters in Luxembourg, Netcompany-Intrasoft operates through its operational branches, subsidiaries and offices in 13 countries: Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Denmark, Greece, Jordan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Romania, RSA, UK, UAE and USA.

More than 500 organizations in over 70 countries worldwide (Institutions and Agencies of the European Union, National Government Organizations, Public Agencies, Financial Institutions, Telecommunication Organizations, and Private Enterprises) have chosen the company’s services and solutions to fulfill their business needs.

Netcompany-Intrasoft’s expertise and strength lies in its proven capacity and successful track record in undertaking and delivering, complex, mission – critical projects. Netcompany-Intrasoft’s professionals have developed the ability to combine their technical expertise with thorough understanding of each customer’s individual business needs.

Franhofer FOKUS

Fraunhofer FOKUS is an internationally renowned research institute in the area of information and communication technology. Emphasis is on applied research to facilitate digital transformation. Fraunhofer FOKUS supports commercial enterprises and public administration in shaping the digital transformation through research services ranging from requirements analysis to consulting, feasibility studies, technology development right up to prototypes and pilots and covers the main areas that are necessary for the development of ICT based infrastructures in networked environments.

FOKUS is part of a worldwide competence network of excellent research partners and innovative enterprises with access to all scientific and economic areas. Fraunhofer FOKUS is active in major international standardization bodies and implements interoperable, domain specific but also cross domain solutions. The foundation for this are state-of-the-art labs and simulation environments in which complex technological and organizational applications based on the latest technologies can be implemented, tested and certified.

Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics

The Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics of the Polish Academy of Sciences, abbreviated IITIS-PAN in Polish, is a publicly funded and long-established research institute whose scientific activity is broadly concentrated in the area of Information Technology. The Institute is also involved in training at the advanced research level both for technical and scientific staff. It initiates and participates in national, European or international projects aimed at the development of science and technology, as well as the innovative commercial sector. The Institute takes part in the realization of the Polish Academy of Sciences’ mission of advancement, promotion, integration and dissemination of Polish science and contributes to national and international education and national culture in the field of science and technology. IITIS-PAN currently participates or leads three EU Projects and is involved in numerous national research projects as well as doctoral training. Its areas of strength include Computer Vision, Multimedia Systems, Quantum Informatics, Computer Systems and Networks, and Performance Modeling of Systems.

SafePay Systems Ltd.

SafePay is a consultancy and IT integrator-developer company with focus on mobile payment services, smart cards, e-comm solutions and IoT security. The company developed the core technology for the largest Hungarian mobile payment service, iCheque, and developed similar complex secure services like a ticketing and access control platform, an end-to-end smart retail solution, as well as an airline ticket exchange platform. Recently SafePay participated in the design and development of a remote authentication service platform and the development of an IoT gateway. As member of the Global Platform, SafePay contributed to the initial draft for the Consumer Centric chip card management model, which later became a specification. The company owns several patents related to mobile payments, chip card management and IoT security.

Technische Universität Berlin

Technical University of Berlin – Chair for Security in Telecommunications (SECT) SECT focuses on security-related research, considering both theoretical foundations and practical system construction. With its substantial knowledge (in the theory) and more than 10 years of industry experience in the commercial construction of secure systems at its disposal, SECT has undertaken a number of research projects aimed at improving security of modern world communications. Under the leadership of Prof. Dr. Jean-Pierre Seifert, scientists working in the areas of access control, encryption, security of online transactions, management of privacy, anonymity and identity, as well as system security are searching for solutions for designing secure communications and network infrastructure. Based on this research, Prof. Seifert wants to drive forward the development of theories and methods that will enable the design of secure and reliable information and communication systems. SECT will therefore contribute with its comprehensive and proven experience in the construction of next generation highly secured systems.

Fundacion Tecnalia Research & Innovation

Legally a Foundation, TECNALIA is a private, non-profit applied research centre of international excellence, largest R+D+i entity in Spain, 5th in Europe, with 1.300 employees (280 PhDs), from 30 countries, an income of 108M€ in 2019, 483 patents and promoted more than 30 spin-off companies. As an equal opportunity employer, current ratio of female/male employees is 43/57. Actively participates in governing bodies of PPPs and JTIs (EEB, FOF, SPIRE, ARTEMIS). Key agent in the ERA-European Research Area, very active in H2020 participating in 301 projects, 62 as coordinator (at May 2020). Member of EARTO and EUROTECH, has also key alliances through EUROTECH, EARTO, JIIP, and ERANET AERTO. Member of the main EU partnerships Steering Board, such as BDVA, ECSO, ECSEL, AI Alliance, FoF, EEB, EGVI, SPIRE, KIC EIT Manuf., addresses 6 divisions: Industry and Transport, Building Technologies, Energy and Environment, ICT, Lab Services, and Health. At IOTAC, the Automated Driving team offers scientific expertise on advanced highly automated driving cooperative systems for sustainable mobility in urban connected environments.

Airbus

AIRBUS Defence and Space are the “System House” Business Unit within AIRBUS group. As such, ADS are in charge of designing and developing integrated systems for the customers. These large systems integrate products and systems from the group (including airborne and space-borne platforms) and from a large panel of associated partners, including numerous SMEs.

The Integrated Systems Line of Business (CIS) within ADS provides fully-integrated modular solutions and services in order to minimise risk exposure in the areas of surveillance, Borders Security, population protection, infrastructure security, responses to emergencies and international reaction operations. CIS are currently developing large integrated systems for border security (blue and green borders), in Europe and all around the world. In the domain of information systems and Augmented Reality, ADS has developed solutions to enable the end-users to access to large volumes of information through comprehensive GUIs The Military Aircraft Line of Business provides manned and unmanned mission systems for large area surveillance. These complete systems can be easily integrated in larger information systems through standardised interfaces.