Abraham, who is 5 feet 10 inches tall with salt and pepper hair, has serious Wall Street cred. He notched a 30-year hedge-fund career trading futures, starting at the groundbreaking Commodities Corp., launching pad for the likes of Paul Tudor Jones, Louis Moore Bacon, and Caxton Associates’ Bruce Kovner. By 2000, relying on a couple of dozen homegrown trading futures algorithms, he was generating some 5 percent of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s electronic trading volume. His hedge fund, Abraham Trading Co., racked up a 21.8 percent annualized return from 1988 through 2008. At the start of that year, he co-founded the Pickens-Abraham Foundation with fellow Texan T. Boone Pickens, the late oilman and corporate raider, and began managing half of the portfolio, dubbed Fortress, with a conservative, risk-sensitive approach. Abraham is on a quest: to convince endowments and foundations, some of which must by law distribute 5 percent of their assets annually, that they face an existential risk due to stock price volatility, known as beta in Wall Street argot. The Abraham Fortress Fund is simple on its face. Cherry-picking ten of the best hedge funds Abraham can find, he combines a 35 percent alternative position with 45 percent stocks and 20 percent bonds. Fortress has a $100,000 minimum and charges 0.65 percent as a fee, excluding the hedge funds’ charges. Abraham’s great-grandfather, Nahim, an immigrant from what is now Lebanon, arrived in Canadian. Texas 1913 and began selling clothes and other gear to local cattle ranchers. It was the start of the Abraham business dynasty. Nahim’s son Malouf, known as “Oofie,” who was Salem’s grandfather, had an entrepreneurial streak, expanding into land, cattle trading, and oil and gas leasing. Oofie became rich, was elected mayor of Canadian, and later won a seat in the Texas House of Representatives. Salem’s father, also named Malouf, went into medicine, working as an allergist and marrying Salem’s mother, Therese, a registered nurse who also briefly served as town mayor. A middle child, between brothers Eddie and Jason, Salem stood out as both a math prodigy and the family troublemaker. His high school sweetheart, Ruth Ann Dennis, a year younger than him, whom he would go on to marry and with whom he would raise eight children, five girls and three boys, now ages 17 to 28. From Canadian it was on to the University of Notre Dame in South Bend, Indiana, home of the Fighting Irish. A chance encounter with Jerry Parker, a famed commodities trader and founder of Chesapeake Capital Corp., would get him going.