Advocacy Links

Contact Your Elected Officials

A complete list of elected officials is available through the following link: Elected Officials

San Diego County Advocacy Organizations

San Diegans for Healthcare Coverage

Consumer Center for Health Education and Advocacy

The Consumer Center for Health Education & Advocacy (CCHEA) helps low-income residents of San Diego county navigate through the maze of today's health care system. CCHEA helps people get the health care they need. CCHEA is a project of the Legal Aid Society of San Diego.

Legal Aid Society of San Diego

Legal Aid is available to low income individuals & disadvantaged communities for a variety of legal problems, including consumer, family disputes, welfare and health benefits, immigration and poverty law issues such as landlord/tenant disputes, disability support and family benefits payments. Federal Poverty Income Guidelines determine eligibility for free legal services.

Community Health Improvement Project

The Community Health Improvement Partners (CHIP) is a collaboration of San Diego health care systems, hospitals, community clinics, insurers, physicians, universities, community based organizations and the County of San Diego who work to meet CHIP’s mission to improve the health of all San Diegans through needs assessment, advocacy, education, and programs best accomplished collectively.

Center on Policy Initiatives

The Center on Policy Initiatives is a nonprofit research and advocacy center dedicated to the interests of working people in the San Diego region. Through research, community organizing and public education, we seek policy changes that promote economic justice and strengthen the middle class.

San Diego Organizing Project

The San Diego Organizing Project (SDOP) is a faith-based community organization which has united people throughout the county since 1979. As a result, a powerful voice has emerged that is responding to community concerns and creating a future of hope for all of San Diego.

Mid-City CAN

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN) is a unique collaboration comprised of schools, businesses, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, youth, parents, ethnic and cultural groups, civic associations and faith-based institutions, working together to meet its mission to create a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing.

Statewide Advocacy Organizations

Insuring the Uninsured Project

Insure the Uninsured Project (ITUP) identifies, assists, and promotes new approaches to expand health care and coverage for California’s uninsured. ITUP conducts research on the uninsured, producing reports and data on health care, insurance coverage, and health reform. ITUP offers technical assistance and consulting services to clinics, counties, health plans, and other interested parties. ITUP is a nonprofit organization funded by The California Wellness Foundation, The California Endowment, the Blue Shield of California Foundation, and the LA Care Health Plan. Other grantors include the California HealthCare Foundation.

Health Access California

HEALTH ACCESS CALIFORNIA is the statewide health care consumer advocacy coalition, advocating for the goal of quality, affordable health care for all Californians. HEALTH ACCESS FOUNDATION undertakes community organizing and education, applied research, and policy analysis, and advocates for reform to benefit health care consumers, both insured and uninsured.

California Health Advocates

California Health Advocates is a non-profit organization dedicated to Medicare advocacy and education for Californians. Our website provides accurate and unbiased information about Medicare benefits and long-term care for people who live in California.

California Center for Public Health Advocacy

The California Center for Public Health Advocacy (CCPHA) is a nonpartisan nonprofit organization that raises awareness about critical public health issues and mobilizes communities to promote the establishment of effective state and local health policies.

Small Business Majority

Small Business Majority is an advocacy group founded and run by small business owners to focus on solving the biggest problems facing small businesses today.

Small Business California

Small Business California is a proactive, non-partisan business advocacy organization whose only agenda is the well being of California small businesses. Working for all California small businesses for a better business environment, SB-Cal is responsive to the needs of California small business owners.

National Advocacy Organizations

Families USA

Families USA is a national nonprofit, non-partisan organization dedicated to the achievement of high-quality, affordable health care for all Americans. Working at the national, state, and community levels, we have earned a national reputation as an effective voice for health care consumers for 25 years.

Healthcare for America Now

Health Care for America Now (HCAN) is a national coalition of more than 1,000 groups in 50 states representing 30 million people. We work to promote, defend, implement and improve the Affordable Care Act (ACA) at the state and federal levels, protect Medicare and Medicaid, increase corporate accountability and confront forces that seek to take away critical services. We believe in creating jobs, not cutting programs people depend on.

PICO National Network

PICO is a national network of faith-based community organizations working to create innovative solutions to problems facing urban, suburban and rural communities. Since 1972 PICO has successfully worked to increase access to health care, improve public schools, make neighborhoods safer, build affordable housing, redevelop communities and revitalize democracy.