Due to a copyright dispute between

and former manager Lin Weizhe , the group name " Soda Green " can no longer be used. In July 2020, Wu Qingfeng and his five members dismantled "Soda Green" into " Yudingshi ", and released the album " Chidang Ghost Story ".

Wu Qingfeng and others have been suing Lin Weizhe Music Company for possession of the registered trademark "Sodagreen", but the latest news came out in the second trial on May 17: Wu Qingfeng and others lost the lawsuit.

Regarding this, Wu Qingfeng and the members said through Universal Music: "The more biased the verdict, the stronger our belief in getting the group name back. Trademark law cannot continue to ignore the rights of artists and creators. We will appeal to the end and get it back. Our group name is 'Soda Green'."

During the first trial, Wu Qingfeng and the members said that "Sodagreen" was composed by the lead singer Wu Qingfeng, combining "soda" (corresponding to the bubble feeling of taste) and "green" (corresponding to the visual feeling). Colors) are connected together, and the Chinese, English and text positions are specially arranged to form a creation in the form of handwriting. Before establishing a management relationship with Lin Weizhe, they used "Sodagreen" as their stage name and became famous. This is a well-known fact, and they requested Lin Weizhe to return the trademark. However, 6 people lost the case in the first instance.

During the second trial, the six people claimed that "Sodagreen" was jointly conceived and named by them. Their continuous investment of time and effort made "Sodagreen" equivalent to the six people, forming an inseparable relationship. After

formed a group in 2003, it signed a contract with Lin Weizhe's company in 2004. After the contract was terminated in 2018, Lin Weizhe should return the trademarks entrusted by the six people to manage. Moreover, "Sodagreen" belongs to the name and personality rights of the six persons, and the other party is not allowed to extend this right indefinitely.

Lin Weizhe countered that it has been more than ten years since the registration of the "Sodagreen" trademark was announced, and he has applied for and maintained it himself. Moreover, the registration of the trademark has exceeded the statutory five-year period for assessment, and there is no further dispute that the trademark cannot be registered or should be revoked. Reason. Lin Weizhe emphasized that the brokerage contracts of the six people had nothing to do with the registered trademark and requested that the appeal be dismissed.

The court pointed out that the names of the six members were He Jingyang, Shi Junwei, Wu Qingfeng, Xie Xinyi, Gong Yuqi, Liu Jiakai, and no one was called "Sodagreen", and the creation of this group name Who exactly is the perpetrator? The six people's opinions changed again and again. At first it was said to be a personal creation by Wu Qingfeng, but later it was changed to a joint creation by Wu Qingfeng and Shi Junwei. In the second trial, it was changed to a joint creation by six people. In addition, since the band was founded in 2001, the members of the band have changed continuously, and the argument that the six people share the right to name is obviously not acceptable. Therefore, Wu Qingfeng and other six people still lost the second trial, but they can still appeal.