Next week, Sodagreen will be in Hong Kong for two gigs, playing for at least two hours in a set that includes all the hits from their three albums, such as Little Love Song and Incomparable Beauty.

The group started off like any other college band. They formed about seven years ago in the hills south of Taipei on the campus of National Chengchi University, a school that's produced an uncanny string of crossover talent, including singer-songwriter stars Sandee Chan and Cheer Chen. As early as 2003, they were spotted by producer Lin Wei-zhe while on stage during their first stab at the Indie Rock Awards. The band's first album came out in 2005.

Since releasing their third and best-received album, Incomparable Beauty, about six months ago, Sodagreen have undergone a quantum shift in terms of fame. Last November, they became the first 'indie artist' - the term 'small-label artist' feels much better in describing them - to fill the island capital's largest indoor concert venue, the 10,500-seat Taipei Arena.

A couple of months later, they went on to sell out eight nights in a row at the city's main underground rock pub, a 500-person capacity club called The Wall. Over the past six weeks, they've toured Taiwanese colleges, playing a show a week to crowds numbering in the low thousands.

Sodagreen's music is a viscous mix of rock and pop love ballads, performed live by its six members - Wu Qing-feng on vocals, He and Liou Jia-kai on guitars, Shie Shin-yi on bass, Gong Yu-chi on keyboards and violin, and Shih Jyun-wei on drums - plus a four-person string section. The magnetism originates with their tight, poppy musical hooks and vocals as well as Wu's songwriting. His voice, which can hit some high registers, maintains a quirky timbre and yet is clear as a bell. At times, it's even piercing.

Although the band don't acknowledge any influences, their rock side carries a substantial British influence. Gong's keyboards and violin often echo Coldplay, especially when serving as intros to love ballads.

The group's biggest recent hit, Incomparable Beauty, is a piano ballad wrapped around a chart-friendly, rock'n'roll core. Its chorus of 'Hey-yeah, hey-yeah' could date anywhere from the early Beatles to Oasis, and the melody is sincere, penetrating and impossible to get out of your head - the stuff of good pop.

A naive, possibly even platonic love song, Incomparable Beauty was written for another young and popular Taiwanese singer, Deserts Chang. Once 'when Qing-feng was feeling depressed, Deserts sent him a text message, saying 'You're a beautiful butterfly',' writes He.

The text became the song's central metaphor, denoting the miracle of what one person can represent to another, an 'incomparable beauty'. After its release last autumn, radio play in Taiwan was seemingly endless.

Though often sweet and light, Sodagreen's lyrics and music are never syrupy, and in that they stray from more standard strains of Taiwanese pop.

The band have so far retained some humility as well as an amateurish charm. Last weekend as a show at National Taiwan Education University was winding to a close, He reminded the crowd: 'We're here playing this concert tonight, and afterwards we can go home and have a good night's sleep. But don't forget there are workers who had to come early this morning to build the stage, and they'll have to stay late at night taking it down.'

Seldom does a sound company get such heartfelt thanks, and if it indicates gratitude on the part of He and Sodagreen, it also indicates a sense of, 'I can't believe all this is happening to me'.

Sodagreen are still new pop stars. They still don't know better than to play for five hours straight as they did out of sheer excitement at their ground-breaking show at Taipei Arena. And they keep their ticket prices cheap - on their recent college tour, tickets cost around US$10 (HK$78), which is what you'd pay to hear a totally unknown band in a tiny Taipei venue.

But fame may change things. Last year, Sodagreen won their first awards - best band and best composer - at Taiwan's Grammy equivalent, the Golden Melodies. This year, they're nominated in six categories, and they're starting to get the same kind of media attention as the other stars who walk the red carpet. This includes sponsorship.

Concerts now also include guest appearances and the palaver of TV variety shows, with stage chatter dragging on for up to half an hour. The gab is mostly led by vocalist Wu, who has not only grown more effusively effeminate over time, he's also gone in for red eye makeup, retro-goth fashion and mini-sermons against downloading.

Sodagreen, Jun 12-13, 8.30pm, Hitec, 1 Trademart Drive, Kowloon Bay, HK$290-HK$420, HK Ticketing