Edward W. Hazen Foundation Welcomes Isabel Sousa-Rodriguez As New Program Officer

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Welcomes Isabel Sousa- Rodriguez As New Program Officer The Edward W. Hazen Foundation is pleased to announce that Isabel ...

Arlene Rodriguez Selected for Noyes Foundation Board

... Smith Noyes Foundation is happy to announce that Arlene Rodriguez has been voted onto their board for a six-year ... a short list of eight from which five were interviewed. Rodriguez is the Senior Director of...

Russell Sage Foundation Author/Grantee Edward Wolff Cited in NY Times Article About Record-setting Bull Market and Uneven Wealth Distribution

Russell Sage Foundation Author/Grantee Edward Wolff Cited in NY Times Article About Record-setting ... retain the crown. Russell Sage Foundation Author/Grantee Edward Wolff Cited in NY Times Article About Record-...

Grantmaking Equity Hour: Deepening Your Practice - A New Series for Programming Staff

Are you or your colleagues searching for ways to dive deeper into grantmaking practice conversations? Philanthropy New York is pleased to announce a new series, Grantmaking Equity Hour: Deepening Your Practice , launching in June!

The New York Women’s Foundation and PwC Launch “Radical Generosity at Work”

Radical Generosity at Work will engage employees by offering a simple and direct way to become philanthropists that impact communities where they live and work.

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Announces Plans to Spend Down

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Announces Plans to Spend Down The Edward W. Hazen Foundation in New York City has announced ... by students, parents, and community-based groups... Edward W. Hazen...

Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Warns Against Education Tax Credit

Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Warns Against Education ... even after the state has cut their state tax bill.... Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Warns Against Education ...

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Welcomes New Board Members

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Welcomes New Board Members NEW ... moment both for the foundation and the country... Edward W. Hazen Foundation Welcomes New Board Members ...

David Rockefeller Fund announces Lourdes J. Rodriguez, Dr.PH as Chief Executive Officer

David Rockefeller Fund announces Lourdes J. Rodriguez , Dr.PH as Chief Executive Officer NEW YORK, NY - ... 's Board of Directors is pleased to announce Lourdes J. Rodriguez , DrPH as the family foundation...

PhilTV This Week Jan 20

Featuring: Milbank Memorial Fund, Open Society Foundations, Mastercard, Ford, Blaustein, Levy and Overbrook Foundations

20 Issues, to Be Specific

The term “policy work” is so vague that it can seem a bit mysterious to some funders. We know that private foundations are legally prohibited from engaging in lobbying or partisan politics, and we sometimes generalize, erroneously, that all funders...

Ambassador Edward P. Djerejian Returns to Carnegie Corporation of New York Board of Trustees

Ambassador Edward P. Djerejian Returns to Carnegie Corporation of New ... of New York’s trustees announced today that Ambassador Edward P. Djerejian will return to the foundation’s board ... from 2013 to 2107...

OpEd: CEO Lori Bezahler on Edward W. Hazen Foundation’s Decision to Empty Its Coffers

OpEd: CEO Lori Bezahler on Edward W. Hazen Foundation’s Decision to Empty Its Coffers ... of this movement moment... OpEd: CEO Lori Bezahler on Edward W. Hazen Foundation’s Decision to Empty Its Coffers ...

Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Lori Bezahler Writes Op-Ed on Activism Led by Young People of Color for The Nation

Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Lori Bezahler Writes ... or arrested in school than their white peers... Edward W. Hazen Foundation President Lori Bezahler Writes ...

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Fast Tracks $2.8 Million in Grants to Support Grantees Responding to COVID-19 Pandemic in Communities of Color

Edward W. Hazen Foundation Fast Tracks $2.8 Million in Grants ... Pandemic in Communities of Color NEW YORK - Today, the Edward W. Hazen Foundation, a private foundation supporting ... Together Organizing for...

Gates Commits $20 Million to Women's Groups

The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will give $20 million during the next three years to strengthen women’s groups worldwide, Ms. Gates said Wednesday during an event in New York.