Following recent modifications and refurbishments at Newhaven Marine Station by Network Rail, the site is now ready for welcoming an increase in rail freight capacity. Subsequently, supporting a low-carbon economy by removing the need for heavy goods vehicles (HGVs) on local roads.

The work, carried out in corporation with Brett Aggregates and the Newhaven Port Authority, is a key enabler for the construction industry and will see the area open again after years of inactivity.

On June 18th the first DB cargo freight train and 66113 loco entered the Newhaven Marine Aggregates Terminal. The terminal will serve the busy construction industry, mainly London, with aggregate sand and gravel.

Transporting freight by rail removes HGVs traffic not only from the local area, but on major transportation routes across the country. One freight train can carry as much cargo as 76 HGVs, so moving heavy freight by rail is an important element of sustainable transport and reducing environmental impact at both a local and national level.

Andy Saunders, Delivery Director, Freight and National Passenger Operators (FNPO), said: "The successful completion of the Newhaven terminal is a great example of collaborative working between Network Rail and partners from the freight and construction industries in order to grow the amount of freight our customers can transport by rail."

Shaun King, Sussex Route Director, said: “The local communities we serve are vital to our success, so I am really proud of our team who worked hard on this important project to ensure the delivery of local benefits. The Newhaven terminal will create jobs, remove vehicles from our roads as well as contribute to our growing rail freight network.”

Roger Neary, Head of Sales at DB Cargo UK, said: “The construction sector is seen by Government as a key enabler to economic regeneration post-Covid 19, so services like this have an increasingly important role to play in the future of our country.

“We have a long-established relationship with Brett Aggregates and delivering the first train into the newly-refurbished station was a great honour for us. We look forward to working with all those involved to develop further rail freight solutions in the future.”