Earthen Vessel 1900:

The Late Walter Samuel Turner, Of West Brighton

Walter Samuel Turner was born at Gestingthorpe, Essex, on January 13th, 1842. He was not favoured with any spiritual advantages at home, but God, who had chose him in eternity, began to deal with him in grace when was he quite young. We are unable to give any detailed account of his early experiences, nor are we sure by whom, when, or where he was baptised, but at about 20 years of age we find him a member of the Strict Baptist Church worshipping at Pentside Chapel, Dover. To this town he had been lead in the province of God to improve himself in his secular trade—that of a shoemaker. Mr. Potter was the pastor of the Church at the time our brother united with it. A few year after this he returned to his native country, and commenced a business at Pebmarsh. Shortly after he married one of the members of the Church at Dover, who made him a devoted and invaluable wife.

For a year or two things went well, but soon a dark cloud gathered over him—his health failed, and the local doctor gave no hope of his recovery from the disease—consumption—which had seized upon him. After many long months of weakness, he disposed of his little business, his wife returned to her parents at Brighton, and he went into the Brompton Hospital for Consumption. It had been deeply impressed on his mind to go to Brampton, accompanied with a persuasion that he would derive benefit from the treatment. Contrary to the expressed conviction of the doctor who had attended him, he began to recover, and after three months’ sojourn he joined his wife at Brighton, and gradually gained strength until after two years enforced idleness, he was sufficiently restored to commence a small business again. This illness was made a great blessing to him in bringing him into nearer communion with his Lord.

Together with his wife he united with the Church at Ebenezer, Richmond Street, at that time under the pastoral care of Mr. Israel Atkinson. He became a teacher in the Sunday School, and began to feel much exercise of spirit in relation to the ministry. In the beginning of 1873, he preached his first sermon at a little Chapel in the village of Poynings, at the foot of the Dyke Hills, a place where not a few have commenced their ministry, among them Mr. E. Mitchell, of Chadwell Street, and Mr. H. Dadswell, of Courland Grove Clapham. Mr. Turner’s ministry was from the first very acceptable, and he was soon fully engaged in the small Causes in the neighbourhood of Brighton. In 1874, he received and accepted a call to the pastorate of the Strict Baptist Church at Uckfield. His labours here only continued for two or three years. His health, never robust, again failed, and he was laid aside for about eight months. Recovered strength enabled him to resume his loved work, and in 1879, he accepted the pastorate of a small Church at Fishersgate, Portslade, which had been founded by the late Mr. J. S. Anderson, of New Cross, at the time when he was employed as a missionary to the navies who were excavating for the Basin at Portslade. Having resigned the pastorate at Fishersgate, he received an invitation to supply the Church at Haddington Street, Hove (West Brighton), in 1886, and afterwards accepted the pastorate (recognition services being held on August 30th, 1887) in which office he continued until his death on January 15th of the present year, having completed his 58th year of travel in the wilderness two days before.

Beside the long illnesses mentioned, he had another of considerable length during his pastorate at Fishersgate, and many shorter ones while at West Brighton. He continued in his business during the whole of his ministry, which was constantly discharged under great physical weakness. In 1894, he lost a dear daughter in her 22nd year from consumption, after a two years’ illness, and in 1896, a son aged 25 after a similar illness. On October 23rd, 1897, his beloved wife was taken home, worn out by her wifely and motherly cares. He continued to preach occasionally until June, 1899, and presided at his own anniversary on August 30th. But it was becoming evident that the frail tabernacle must soon come down. A cancer in the stomach developed itself, and after many weeks of weakness, weariness, and pain, borne with the most exemplary patience, the ransomed spirit was released.

“I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction,” might be applied to the case of our departed brother. Through thirty-five years of heavy trials, with but short intervals, he passed. It was out of the fire and into the water, followed again and again by the same process, right on to the end. These exercises gave a very mellow flavour to his ministry, and made it precious to the tried family of God. He was a lover of the truth, and abode firmly by the old landmarks. Quiet and unassuming in his manner, with a deep experience, both of the depravity and helplessness of human nature, and the rich, free sovereign love, and inviolable faithfulness of God, he was highly esteemed as a “man of God” by those who knew him. His end was perfect peace, not a ruffle to disturb his mind, conscious almost to the last minute, he fell asleep like a tired worn out child in its mother’s arms. He was beloved by the little flock to whom he ministered, who did everything possible for his comfort and support. The language the Apostle uses with respect to the Macedonian Churches may be applied to the Church at Paddington Street. “To their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond their power they were willing of themselves.” Our brother has left one son, and four daughters—the youngest fifteen—to mourn the loss of a most affectionate father.