Jan Peter Balkenende

Ambassador

Jan Peter Balkenende was Prime Minister and Minister of General Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In that capacity, he also served as Chair of the Innovation Platform. Before becoming Prime Minister, he published a number of books and articles on a range of subjects, including innovation, development cooperation, European integration, public-private partnerships, social security, government finance, poverty, economic growth, confidence in the economy and the role of the business sector in society. Jan Peter Balkenende received five honorary doctorates from universities in Hungary, Japan, South Korea and the United States.

Tjark Tjin-A-Tsoi

Ambassador

Tjark Tjin-a-Tsoi is CEO and chairman of the Executive Board of TNO (Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research). Before that, he was chairman of the Executive Board and CEO of Sanquin. From 2014 to 2020, he was director general of the Central Bureau of Statistics. Previously, he served, among others, as general director of the Netherlands Forensic Institute and as director of Competition Supervision at the Netherlands Competition Authority. Before that, he held positions at Ernst & Young, Rabobank and Shell, among others. He holds a PhD in theoretical physics from the University of Amsterdam. Current ancillary positions include: member of the Supervisory Board of the Vrije Universiteit (VU), member of the 'Raad van Nesteliers' (Advisory Council) of the Royal Military Police and member of the Supervisory Board of the National Opera & Ballet.

Stijn Horck

Stijn Horck is a PhD candidate at the Research Centre for Education and the Labour market (ROA) at the University of Maastricht. He obtained a joint Master's degree in European Health Economics and Management at the Erasmus University Rotterdam, Universitá di Bologna, Management Center Innsbruck and the Universitetet i Oslo. During his master, he has worked as a research assistant at the University of Oxford, contributing to a research project focussing on the implementation of healthcare innovations. His research is focussed on the 'yield' of innovation failures in the healthcare sector.