A people's artist of Ukraine, the artistic director of the A.B. Solovianenko Donetsk state academic Opera and Ballet Theatre. Vadim Pisarev was born in Donetsk, Ukraine and he graduated from the Kiev state choreographic school. He was trained at the Bolshoi Theater, Moscow, under teachers R. Struchkova and A. Messere, and at the Maryinsky Theater (Kirov ballet), St. Petersburg under teachers L. Kolpakova and V. Semenov.

In 1983 he got Gold medal of the All-Ukrainian competition of ballet dancers (Kiev). 1984 – the Gold medal of the All-USSR competition of ballet dancers (Moscow) and Silver medal of the competition of ballet dancers (Helsinki). 1984 – the Bronze medal of the international competition of ballet dancers (Paris). 1985 – the Gold medal of the international competition of ballet dancers (Moscow). 1986 – the Gold medal of the international competition of ballet dancers (Jackson, the USA). In 1986 Vadim Pisarev was awarded the title of the People's artist of Ukraine. In 1990 he was awarded a prize of the Moscow public – "The best dancer of the USSR", Moscow. In 1994 he became the founder and the director of the International festival "The World Ballet Stars" in Donetsk. During 17 years in the festival Donetsk was visited by more than 450 outstanding ballet dancers from 30 countries of the world. Over 70 famous choreographers presented their productions.

In 1995 Vadim Pisarev was awarded a prize of UNESCO "The Best dancer of the world“ and became the professor of honor of the Donetsk state University. In 1998 V. Pisarev was awarded the Theatre Union of Ukraine prize "Triumph". He was awarded the “Order of merit”, III grade and II grade. 1999 – Vadim Pisarev was awarded the Kazakhstan "Prize of Traditions“ and he won the All-Ukrainian prize "Recognition". In 2001 V. Pisarev was awarded the Commander's Cross – Order of Saint Stanislaus, III grade. In 2003 he was awarded by the Cabinet Council of Ukraine the honorary diploma "For Significant Personal Contribution to the Development of National Culture and Art, and High Professionalism".