If there is one gold medalist in Calgary during the Winter Olympics who differs from all others, it is Vadim Pisarev of the Soviet Union. The 23-year-old Mr. Pisarev has won his unusually large collection of gold medals at international ballet competitions - in 1986 in Jackson, Miss.; in 1985 in Moscow; in 1984 in Helsinki and Paris. Americans saw his dazzling pyrotechnics last fall when he toured nationally with the Moscow Ballet.

Given this exposure, it is no surprise that he has been one of the top attractions here at the Olympic Arts Festival, where he danced as a guest star this weekend with the Alberta Ballet Company in ''The Snow Maiden.'' Like several other productions - including James Kudelka's new ''Concerto Grosso'' earlier for the Joffrey Ballet performances - the Alberta premiere was commissioned by the Olympic Arts Festival.

The festival is a wide-ranging series of surprises. There is the usual mix of international fare. Yet unlike the 1984 Olympic Arts Festival in Los Angeles, the Canadian organizers, under Michael Tabbitt's direction, have focused on the Olympic charter, which calls for the host country to showcase primarily its own national talent in the arts festival.

To a new arrival, the festival's most striking aspect is its integration of Canadian and foreign participants. One hears that a big hit was the performance in which a Canadian group of Ukrainian folk dancers, the Shumka Dancers, was accompanied by a visiting Soviet group of Ukrainian folk musicians from Kiev.

Mr. Pisarev is also from the Ukraine, a graduate of the Kiev Ballet school and the star of the Don State Theater of Opera and Ballet in his native city, Donetsk. Nowhere was the national-international link exemplified more vividly than in the fact that the young dancer was invited to spend seven weeks with the Alberta Ballet Company in Edmonton and Calgary. Brydon Paige, the company's artistic director, did not choreograph ''The Snow Maiden'' until Mr. Pisarev arrived, accompanied at Mr. Paige's request by a Soviet ballet teacher. The surprise was that she was half American, named Ulamai Marjorie Scott. Born in Moscow of a black American father and a Russian mother, Miss Scott danced in the Bolshoi Ballet through the 1960's and is married to the former Bolshoi principal Yuri Papko.

Mr. Pisarev had never seen a ballet version of ''The Snow Maiden'' although he knew the Russian fairy tale upon which it is based. At the close of Friday night's performance at the Jubilee Auditorium he kissed his local partner, Mariane Beausejour, as both exchanged large bouquets. Afterward, in an interview, he expressed thanks to Mr. Paige and the company for its ''family feeling'' and the opportunity to be involved in a new ballet.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.