In a tour of Optima Living’s most recent seniors’ living community in Alberta, Jordan Walker, MLA for Sherwood Park, had an opportunity to see what this development will mean for the communities of Sherwood Park, Strathcona County and surrounding areas.

“I am so grateful to have toured Aster Gardens today,” he said during the tour on Wednesday, August 26. “I have seen firsthand how the designers and engineers of this seniors active living community have gone above and beyond to ensure the residents will feel at home in this beautiful space. They have thought of everything that will make the difference to a senior.”

Scheduled to open early next year, Aster Gardens offers a variety of inclusive and dynamic lifestyle choices.

The Aster Gardens leadership team of Optima Living Principal Ali Shivji and Community Leasing Coordinator Linda Portsmouth led the tour, and pointed out some of the unique features that set Aster Gardens apart. The rooftop garden provides a beautiful setting to walk or sit and enjoy the outdoors. The Memory Care neighbourhood offers a stimulating and enjoyable environment and residents have many different options for being active and involved either on site or in the local community.

During the tour, Jordan saw firsthand work done by the designers and engineers to ensure residents will feel at home in this active seniors’ living community.

“I was amazed at the thoughtful details such as raising the electrical outlets so that they are easily accessible for someone with mobility issues, also ensuring each suite’s airflow and heating system is self-contained to help protect our vulnerable seniors,” said Walker. “Thank you Aster Gardens for investing in Sherwood Park and taking such good care of our seniors.”

As part of Optima Living’s commitment to the larger seniors’ community in Sherwood Park and area, it has initiated strategic partnerships and outreach with leaders and experts in seniors care and healthy living.

One of those partnerships is with Dr. Adrian Wagg, Director of the University of Alberta division of geriatric medicine. Under Dr. Wagg’s direction, a series of informative seminars have been produced that cover common topics related to healthy aging and address questions from seniors and their caretakers. All of the seminars are available on the Optima Living YouTube Channel.

Other innovative projects and partnerships are in the planning stages and will be announced later in the year.

Seniors interested in knowing more about Aster Gardens may take a virtual tour of the new development. You can also schedule a safe and socially-distanced in-person tour. For further information, contact Linda Portsmouth at (780) 902-7837 or [email protected].