The Grand Opening celebration will be held in the Aster Gardens parking lot located at 7 Bower Drive, Sherwood Park, Alberta. This special community event will feature activities and entertainment for all ages, including face painting, food trucks, live music and more!

In attendance at the celebration will be Strathcona County Mayor Rod Frank and Sherwood Park MLA Jordan Walker, and MLA Nate Glubish, along with the Optima Living leadership. Each will speak about the significance of Aster Gardens in the local community.

Aster Gardens has been a crown jewel in Sherwood Park. In addition to the investment and job creation it has provided during the pandemic, it has provided seniors an amazing choice to live their best life.

Aster Gardens was a recipient of the Best Design Award in 2021 Senior Housing News Architecture & Design Awards.

About Aster Gardens

As one of Optima Living’s seniors’ communities in Alberta, Aster Gardens is a 153-suite residence designed for people able to live fully independent lives. In addition to world-class independent living for seniors, Aster Gardens offers the North Star Memory Care Program for people with cognitive concerns. North Star is rooted in person-centred care and developed in collaboration with the University of Alberta and the University of Manitoba.

The Aster Gardens name comes from the aster flower, which is native to Sherwood Park. Asters are daisy-like perennial flowers with starry-shaped heads. They provide a symphony of colour in shades of pink, purple, blue, and white. They bring delightful colour to the garden in late summer and autumn when many summer blooms are fading. The blue aster is known to grace the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. A sturdy and robust plant, asters thrive in a variety of conditions, even in challenging soils and rock gardens.

For a seniors’ residence, a name featuring aster carries the meaningful subtext of perennial hardiness combined with a wild, vibrant beauty that reaches its peak late in the season.

The nature of the flower also stays true to Aster Gardens itself, which has grown and thrived during a challenging season for all.

For more information about Aster Gardens, contact Linda Portsmouth: [email protected].