Our perspective

Aster Gardens allows Strathcona County and Sherwood Park seniors to settle in the area they love, while maintaining an excellent quality of life. The best overall quality of this community is its state-of-the-art senior living in all aspects, from independent living to memory care. The most up-to-date technology is used here, ensuring seniors’ personal convenience, protection, and safety. Seniors who move into this community will maintain a healthy lifestyle, living with others who share similar values and history. Pesky daily tasks are taken care of by someone else and you’ll find a community where you can instead focus on an active daily life.

Aster Gardens brings everything current and contemporary in retirement living to the Sherwood Park area of Edmonton. This answers the need for senior care in Strathcona County, but it also brings a truly innovative, fully contemporary approach to senior living. Seniors looking for high quality care no longer need to leave the area.

The community is a joint venture between Optima, Synergy Wellness Centre and Pangman Development Corporation who saw a need for a seniors’ community that creates a meaningful quality of life for seniors. The community brings Optima’s high standards to the area. Among other features of the community, there is a bistro, a pool, a pub and other luxurious amenities.

The beautiful construction of the building and the adaption of the very latest technology here really offsets this community. Some of that has been developed in concert with the Universities of Alberta and Manitoba, exclusively for Optima and Aster Gardens. Top-of-the-line technology is found across the board here, perhaps most noteworthy in the memory care neighbourhood, where people continue to live their best lives thanks to the tools and technology used here, like the Mind Triggers app.

More of what people say about this community

We've collected reviews and testimonials from around the web that are relevant to you: those from residents and their loved ones.

Kevin Wiens, family member

When I moved my Dad into Aster Gardens almost 2.5 years ago, I told him it was time to live his best life now. It is such a beautiful facility with so many wonderful residents and caring staff. I’m grateful for the time he spent there.

Marilyn Maclean, senior

Circumstances provided us with the opportunity for a short term stay of six weeks. We were impressed with the facility, staff & residents. It was a great experience. It would be our choice for full time senior living.

Aaron Caranahan, family member

Always very clean and follow great covid protocols! The receptionist Sarah is always very happy and helpful!