Aster Homes For Sale

Included below are homes for sale and real estate in Aster, AB.

Located within the Meadows Community area, Aster is a newer neighbourhood in southeast Edmonton. Named after the aster flower, native to the Alberta area, Aster neighbourhood is a development that offers plenty of green spaces, multi-use trails and homes located within walking distance of essential amenities. Homes for sale in the area feature various design styles. These include single-family front attached garage, single-family rear lane, townhome rear lane and duplex front attached garage. Residents can fulfill their shopping needs, with Tamarack Common Shopping Mall situated to the north, just across the street. Along 17th street, residents can access several restaurants and bank services while Save-On-Foods, Shoppers Drug Mart and more services are just a few minutes away, just off 23 Avenue. Aster is positioned in a convenient location, with residents having easy access to Anthony Henday Drive, which provides quick commutes to other parts of the city.

And, for your convenience, feel free to register for a free account to receive email alerts whenever new Aster listings come on the market that match your specific criteria.

Aster History

Aster neighbourhood was officially given its name on April 30, 2014. The neighbourhood was originally identified as neighbourhood 5 within The Meadows Area Structure Plan (ASP). Aster is bounded on the west by 17 Street, north by 23 Avenue NW, and east and south by Anthony Henday Drive.

Aster Recreational Activities

Sports enthusiasts in Aster are lucky to be close to the Meadows Community Recreation Centre. The facility features an aquatic centre with a whirlpool, leisure pool, and waterslide, a fitness centre with all sorts of equipment, a gymnasium, an indoor playground, sports fields and a whole lot more. Also, the development of Aster incorporates lots of green spaces, parks and trails. This means residents will be able to explore the outdoors without leaving the neighbourhood. Other parks close to the Aster neighbourhood include Bisset Park, Meadows District Park, Silver Berry Park, Laurel Community Playground, and Laurel Crossing Community Park.

Living in Aster means having access to several restaurants serving some of the best dishes in southeast Edmonton. Just across the street along 23 Avenue, Bollywood Indian Cuisine is a new restaurant serving exceptional Indian delicacies. Also nearby is Tim Hortons, a Canadian chain offering custom premium-blend coffee served with pastries and paninis. Over at Tamarack Common, Browns Socialhouse Tamarack is a popular place offering brews, cocktails, sushi, burgers and much more.

Aster House Prices

The average house price in 2021 for a house in Aster is around $287,000, the lowest price is around $270,000, and the highest price is around $305,000.

Aster Schools

Children in Aster attend schools situated close to the area. These include Mary Hanley Catholic Elementary School, Pollard Meadows Elementary School, Svend Hansen School (k-6), Holy Trinity Catholic High School and Father Michael Troy Catholic Junior High School.