Our Perspective

How we see Aster Gardens

Aster Gardens allows Strathcona County and Sherwood Park seniors to settle in the area they love, while maintaining an excellent quality of life. The best overall quality of this community is its state-of-the-art senior living in all aspects, from independent living to memory care. The most up-to-date technology is used here, ensuring seniors’ personal convenience, protection, and safety. Seniors who move into this community will maintain a healthy lifestyle, living with others who share similar values and history. Pesky daily tasks are taken care of by someone else and you’ll find a community where you can instead focus on an active daily life.

Aster Gardens brings everything current and contemporary in retirement living to the Sherwood Park area of Edmonton. This answers the need for senior care in Strathcona County, but it also brings a truly innovative, fully contemporary approach to senior living. Seniors looking for high quality care no longer need to leave the area.

The community is a joint venture between Optima, Synergy Wellness Centre and Pangman Development Corporation who saw a need for a seniors’ community that creates a meaningful quality of life for seniors. The community brings Optima’s high standards to the area. Among other features of the community, there is a bistro, a pool, a pub and other luxurious amenities.

The beautiful construction of the building and the adaption of the very latest technology here really offsets this community. Some of that has been developed in concert with the Universities of Alberta and Manitoba, exclusively for Optima and Aster Gardens. Top-of-the-line technology is found across the board here, perhaps most noteworthy in the memory care neighbourhood, where people continue to live their best lives thanks to the tools and technology used here, like the Mind Triggers app.

Community’s Perspective

How Aster Gardens sees itself

Who are you as a community?

Aster Gardens is an innovative seniors’ living community, built to promote active lifestyles and meet the specific tastes and needs of its residents. The building and all of its amenities were designed from the point of view of a resident, ensuring it will provide them with what they want, when they want it. We have two Memory Care neighbourhoods, offering state-of-the-art memory care in partnership with the University of Alberta. Aster Gardens is designed with you in mind.

Opened in: 2021

A member of Optima Living

What do you do differently or uniquely well?

Aster Gardens, a Sherwood Park community hub, is where active seniors thrive. We are an innovative seniors’ living community, built to promote active lifestyles and meet the specific tastes and needs of its residents. The building and all of its amenities were designed from the point of view of a resident, ensuring it will provide them with what they want, when they want it.

Entertaining guests, engaging with the community, or booking tee times and restaurant reservations with our concierge are easy at Aster Gardens: Designed with you in mind.

What supports do you offer residents as they adjust to life there?

At Aster Gardens, residents have both the freedom to live how they want and the support they need. Red Seal Chefs cook according to specific tastes, on-site doctors provide ‘round-the-clock care, and our team of trained support staff makes sure all requirements are met. And if our residents’ needs change, we’ll change to meet them. Our Supportive care model allows residents to get the care they need in the privacy of their apartments, without changes to their routine.

How are residents supported if their needs change?

Aster Gardens has not responded to this question yet.

Under what conditions would you advise someone against choosing your community?

Aster Gardens has not responded to this question yet.

What might residents find surprising about your community?

Aster Gardens is where home and community come together. An active and enriched lifestyle means embracing community, making friends, keeping social engagements, and living life to the fullest.

We give meticulous consideration to the care available to our residents, enabling all to live with peace of mind. Our residences, our amenities, and even our care models were designed with you in mind. In the health-conscious world we live in, no corners can be cut.

How will your community change in the next five years?

Aster Gardens has not responded to this question yet.

What five facts about your community should people know?

We work individually with every resident to ensure that they receive the level of care and support that they require to be truly safe and comfortable.

Three apartment sizes are available at Aster Gardens, so you can enjoy as much space as you like.

At Aster Gardens, we refer to care aides, resident care attendants, support workers, and caregivers as care partners.

We want to ensure you live in a space which fosters inclusiveness and social engagement, promotes meaningful relationships, and enhances quality of life.

We are here to promote your independence, create and maintain relationships, and provide a care service centred around you.

General Manager's Message

Sianeah Goe

My name is Sianeah Goe, the General Manager of Aster Gardens, an Optima Living community, designed with you in mind. Aster Gardens offers a lifestyle of freedom and choice, where you can keep active in the gym, have fun in our pub, or on our rooftop putting green. Express your creativity in the art studio, read in the library, or relax in the salon, spa and patio. Our concierge books tea times, reserves tables, tickets, and more. Meals are served in multiple dining areas with standard meal times.

At Aster Gardens, you truly can live your best life. We put careful thought into every aspect of our community. Right down to our art collection displayed on our walls are sourced from our local artists. Optima Living's North Star, "Let us welcome you home," speaks to our underlying principles and the experience of seniors living in our community. When residents are home, they have told us that they feel safe, respected and welcomed. For all of us who work here, that is what we are most proud of. We welcome you to your new home, filled with fun, family and friendship, offering independent living, assisted living, memory care, hospice and palliative care.

http://www.instagram.com/reel/Cs4DeiFp63V/?igshid=MzRlODBiNWFlZA%3D%3D

COVID-19 Information

Maya Angelou once said, “Try to be a rainbow in someone else’s cloud.” It feels like it is a rather apt reminder as we continue to navigate the pandemic. While we remember to wash our hands, protect ourselves, and respect others, there are also ways in which we can focus on bringing hope and laughter to our community. Let us live with hope and zest for life even while enduring the challenges set before us. We must continue to stay focused on best practises, express gratitude to the caregivers and frontline workers, and above all continue to live in hope and look for ways to “be a rainbow in someone else’s cloud.”

Alberta remains under a state of public health emergency. New Public Health restrictions came into effect starting September 16th to reduce the spread and protect our health care system. Businesses participating in the Restrictions Exemption Program will require patrons or clients to be vaccinated or to show a recent negative test result. Recently, British Columbia announced that it will mandate that all healthcare workers be vaccinated for COVID-19 by October 31st, 2021. British Columbia also announced a Vaccination Passport System, and starting October 12th, all visitors to long-term care and assisted-living facilities will need to show proof they have received at least one dose.

Read the most recent COVID-19 updates from Aster Gardens

Currently accepting move-ins. Request suite details.