There are five large stills from Pratibha Parmar's Nina's Heavenly Delights on the website of distributor Verve Pictures Ltd.. Verve Pictures is scheduled to release the movie theatrically in the U.K. on September 29th.

The screenplay for Nina's Heavenly Delights was written by Andrea Gibb, based on a story by Parmar. The movie stars Laura Fraser as Lisa Mackinlay, Shelley Conn as Nina Shah, Art Malik as Raj Khanna, Ronny Jhutti as Bobbi, Veena Sood as Suman Shah, Atta Yaqub as Kary Shah, Zoe Henretty as Priya Shah, Raji James as Sanjay Khanna, Elaine C. Smith as Auntie Mamie, Rita Wolf as Auntie Tumi, Kathleen McDermott as Janice, Kulvinder Ghir as the TV presenter, Hritika Thaker as young Nina, Kavita Dass as the Bollywood Bowl child, Tariq Mullan as Ravi, Adam Sinc as Fish, Francisco Bosch as Shriv, Umar Ahmed as Ghandi, Raad Rawi as Mohan, Gillian J. Anderson as Bollywood dancer #1, Lynne Anderson as Bollywood dancer #2, Rebecca Green as Bollywood dancer #3, Lynsey Hatfield as Bollywood dancer #4, and Maggs McMahon as Bollywood dancer #5.

Here's a synopsis for Nina's Heavenly Delights from the production: "Nina's Heavenly Delights is a surprising love story where Scottish humour meets Bollywood spectacle! It follows the mixed fortunes of a Glaswegian family, the Shahs, and their award-winning Indian restaurant, The New Taj. ¶ The story is told through the eyes of Nina Shah, a young Scottish-Asian woman engaged in her own highly personal identity crisis. Nina had left home under a cloud after a row with her father, but when he dies suddenly, Nina is forced to return. Her return reunites her with her childhood friend Bobbi, a wannabe Bollywood drag queen, and brings her face to face with Lisa, a charismatic young woman who now owns half the restaurant. ¶ Then Nina discovers her father's secret - The New Taj has been selected for The Best of the West Curry Competition. In the turbulent days that follow, Nina (helped by Lisa) embarks on a personal mission to win the trophy for the third time. But Nina's feelings are thrown into turmoil when she realises that she is falling in love. ¶ Can her feelings ever be reciprocated? And, if they are, what will this mean for Nina and her family?"

Here's a synopsis for Nina's Heavenly Delights from the website of international sales agent Fortissimo Film Sales B.V.: "Nina Shah is a feisty young Indo-Scottish woman with an identity crisis. Nina previously left home under a cloud after a row with her father. When her father dies suddenly, Nina is forced to return and run the family-owned curry house. This reunites her with her childhood friend Bobbi, a Bollywood drag queen, and brings her face to face with Lisa, a charismatic young woman to whom Nina's father sold 50% of the restaurant. ¶ Nina embarks on a personal mission to win the 'Best of the West' curry competition, a highly coveted prize in the world of Indian cuisine. But Nina's feelings are thrown into turmoil when she realises that she is falling in love... with Lisa! Can she win both prizes?"

Those who are interested in Nina's Heavenly Delights may also wish to read the ScreenAnarchy articles on Baz Taylor's Take 3 Girls - starring Karen David - and Jag Mundhra's Backwaters - starring Sandra Teles.