Renault is a French multinational automobile company founded in 1899 by Louis Renault

For more than 120 years of its existence, the company has produced many cars, trucks, buses and specialized equipment. Today, Renault is one of the leading automobile companies in the world with production of cars in various countries of the world, including France, Spain, Korea, Colombia and others.

One of the key directions of Renault’s development is innovation and preservation of the environment

The company is actively working on the development of electric cars and hybrid cars, which allows reducing harmful emissions into the atmosphere. In 2020, Renault announced the launch of a new series of electric vehicles, which will become production models in 2025.

It is also known for its cooperation with other automotive companies and technology manufacturers. The company actively works with Nissan, Mitsubishi and Daimler, jointly developing new technologies and car models. In addition, Renault was one of the first car manufacturers to use the Android Auto system to connect smartphones to the car and use applications.

One of the company’s successes is the Renault Clio passenger car

It was introduced in 1990. For more than 30 years of its existence, Clio has become one of the most popular passenger cars in Europe and other regions of the world. It has been awarded numerous prestigious awards, such as the “European Car of the Year” in 1991.

In addition to passenger cars, it also produces trucks and buses. The most popular truck model is the Renault Master, and the company’s line of buses includes city buses, intercity buses, and school buses.

In 2019, it had a profit from car sales of about 55 billion euros

The company is working to expand its global presence, focusing on developing markets in India, Iran and China.

Renault is also known for its active participation in sports competitions, in particular in Formula 1. The company was a sponsor of the Red Bull Racing team from 2007 to 2018 and currently cooperates with the Alpine F1 Team.

In the world of the automotive industry, Renault is a recognized leader in many aspects, in particular in the field of electric cars and hybrid cars. The company continues to work on the development of new technologies and car models to ensure its place in the market in the future.