Paessler AG, an IT, OT, and IoT monitoring solutions provider based in Nuremberg, Germany, has announced the successful acquisition of ITPS Group.

ITPS Group has subsidiaries in Switzerland, the Czech Republic, and Romania and business activities in India.

This strategic development comes in the run-up to IT-SA 2023. It marks another step in Paessler's ambition to offer its customers a diversified range of individual features for any infrastructure and monitoring objective.

ITPS, known for its software products, CORP-IT, has established itself in the IT industry through innovative solutions. Based in Frauenfeld, Switzerland, the company was founded by Thomas Wächter, an entrepreneur from Baden, Germany.

Before this strategic development, ITPS was a valued Paessler Alliance Partner & Paessler Gold Partner for many years.

Three of the central solutions of ITPS, which are now being further developed and marketed under the Paessler umbrella, are PRTG SLA Reporter, PRTG Data Exporter and PRTG Database Observer.

Improved reporting capabilities for service level agreements (SLA), based on historical status data, characterise the SLA Reporter extension for PRTG. Customers can benefit from creating granular SLA reports showing uptime/downtime values and root causes for outages. Moreover, data is stored in an MS SQL database, facilitating integration with third-party tools, and stakeholders can be quickly informed about SLA compliance.

The PRTG Data Exporter extension is a desktop application that allows better work with metrics, monitoring data from PRTG and integrating it into a database management system. Customers can combine data from multiple PRTG servers into one database and make data accessible to external tools. It supports MS SQL and MySQL and enables integration with tools like Microsoft Power BI or Grafana.

Moreover, the PRTG Database Observer extension adds new database types, such as SAP HANA and IBM DB2, to the database monitoring capabilities of PRTG. It enables detailed monitoring of additional relational database systems and provides predefined SQL queries from database experts. Users can easily manage questions and test them in a dedicated Windows application.

Thomas Wächter, Founder of ITPS AG, says: "Our collaboration with Paessler has always been characterised by mutual trust and innovation."

"With this acquisition, we are looking confidently to a future in which we can jointly offer our customers even greater added value. It is a significant step that combines the strengths of both companies and concretises our vision for the future of monitoring."

Starting in the fourth quarter of 2023, ITPS products will be sold under the Paessler brand, further diversifying Paessler's product portfolio of IT, OT, and IoT monitoring solutions.

Helmut Binder, CEO of Paessler AG, says: "By integrating ITPS' advanced product enhancements and innovative technologies into our direct product portfolio, we can offer our customers an even more comprehensive network monitoring solution."

"This step illustrates our commitment to being at the forefront of technological developments and continuously increasing the added value for our customers."