Nuremberg, Germany – May 3, 2023 – Paessler AG, the IT monitoring specialist best known for the monitoring software Paessler PRTG, acquires Qbilon GmbH, a company that provides a platform for automatically capturing, analyzing and optimizing hybrid IT landscapes.

The acquisition is in line with Paessler’s long-term growth plans to provide the best possible IT, OT, and IoT monitoring solutions to its customers and to further enlarge its footprint, especially in the large-scale enterprise segment, with new product offerings.

Qbilon was founded in 2019 by four computer science research fellows at the University of Augsburg and retains its headquarters in Augsburg, Germany. A number of well-known companies from the automotive, utility and manufacturing industries, including KTR Systems, are currently using qbilonULTIMATE to analyze, optimize and govern their IT landscapes.

Through the acquisition, Paessler will add IT transparency solutions to its extensive portfolio of service offerings. This involves exploiting, combining and analyzing data sets within a customer's entire IT landscape, bringing additional value from architecture management and cost management to IT governance and security aspects. Qbilon offers integration with a wide range of data sources, including, for example, cloud platforms like AWS or Azure, IT monitoring and management solutions, like Paessler PRTG or Dynatrace, and virtualization tools like vSphere. Customers can also import generic data, like CSV or JSON, for easy integration of legacy information. For companies this means full transparency of their complete IT environment and more resilience in their IT operations, with a choice of cloud or on-premises solutions.

“As our first ever acquisition, today marks an exciting milestone in our history and future,” said Helmut Binder, CEO of Paessler. “We are passionate about giving customers the visibility they need of their IT landscapes to optimize resources, and Qbilon is a natural fit with both our culture and what we are aiming to achieve. Both companies will benefit from mutual synergies in development & technology, sales and marketing as well as in operational areas. We will work closely together to expand our offering to existing and new customers, and I’m excited about the possibilities that may arise from this collaboration. I’m very happy to welcome the Qbilon team to the Paessler family.”

“We provide companies with comprehensive knowledge about their IT landscapes – complete, automatic and easy to understand, resulting in significantly less workload, lower costs and increased security,” said Dr. Melanie Langermeier, CEO of Qbilon. “Making the decision to join the Paessler group makes a lot of sense given the natural fit between our IT transparency tools as well as the network insights and intelligence that Paessler provides to its customers. We are looking forward to providing our joint customers with comprehensive knowledge about their IT landscapes to help drive efficiencies and save resources.”