Luton Airport was forced to suspend flights because of a defect in the runway caused by high temperatures - with the heatwave gripping the UK set to get worse.

The airport said on Monday: "Following today's high temperatures, a surface defect was identified on the runway."

All incoming and outgoing flights were suspended shortly after 3pm on Monday.

Departures were given the green light at 5.40pm with arrivals restarting shortly after 6pm.

Sky News understands that some flights were diverted to nearby airports, with Biggin Hill among them, according to the Flight Radar website.

The RAF also halted flights in and out of its largest air base in the UK, Brize Norton, on Monday because the "runway has melted", according to a military source.

Amid warnings that lives are at risk, a national emergency has been declared by the UK Health Security Agency and the Met Office has issued its first-ever red warning for extreme heat.

The heatwave is set to peak on Tuesday, after Monday saw maximums of 38.1C (100.5F) at Santon Downham, Suffolk, and an overnight high of 26C (78.8F) in Emley Moor, West Yorkshire.

The disruption taking place led the government on Monday to hold another emergency Cobra meeting to discuss the response to the heat, with Cabinet Office minister Kit Malthouse taking the chair amid criticism from opposition politicians who have said Boris Johnson has "clocked off" by not taking a lead on the issue.

On Sky News on Tuesday, Transport Secretary Grant Shapps admitted: "A lot of our infrastructure is just not built for these types of temperatures," adding that it will take "decades to replace" the UK's transport network in order to cope with rising levels of mercury.

Find out the five-day forecast where you live

Travel delays as tracks 'bend and buckle'

Around the country, people are being urged to avoid all non-essential travel and warned of major disruption to journeys by train and car.

Kevin Groves from Network Rail says speed restrictions covering much of the network were due to come into force from midday on Monday, due to the risk of tracks buckling in the heat.

The network tweeted that the extreme heat is causing the overhead line equipment that powers electric trains to sag.

It added that the hottest railway track reached 62C on Monday.

Network Rail tweeted: "Our hottest rail recorded yesterday was 62C, in Suffolk! Rail temperature can be about 20C higher than air temperature, causing it to expand, bend and break."

Rail users have been warned of delays, cancellations and changes to train services amid the extreme heat.

In London, on the Transport for London network, parts of the Overground, Metropolitan and Hammersmith and City lines were suspended on Monday due to the heat, with severe delays affecting large parts of the rest of the infrastructure under its umbrella.

TFL has urged people in the capital not to travel on its network on Tuesday, with temperatures of well over 30C reported on the Tube.

Reduced services are running on most long-distance rail services, including LNER, East Midlands Railway and Lumo and Scotrail and Transport for Wales are also reporting delays and changes.

Avanti West Coast, which operates between Euston and Scotland, via the West Midlands, has suspended ticket sales for Tuesday.

Meanwhile, motorists have been advised to try to make their journeys outside the hottest periods of the day, particularly if they have older cars.

It was a warning that appeared to have been heeded as figures published by location technology firm TomTom showed the level of road congestion at 9am on Tuesday was lower in several cities than at the same time last week.

In Birmingham, congestion levels fell from 48% on 12 July to 32% on Tuesday, while in Bristol, congestion levels were down from 46% to 42% and in London, levels dropped from 60% to 44%.

But amid the high temperatures, there was a risk that motorists could continue to be affected if wildfires break out, as they have done in London where drivers on the A114 Bush Road near the A106/A12 Green Man junction were disrupted by smoke from a verge fire.

Hospital appointments cancelled

Some hospitals have taken the decision to cancel routine appointments and surgeries due to the risk to both patients and staff due to the predicted extreme heat.

With ambulance wait times already on the rise, there have been warnings that things will only worsen as the heatwave goes on, with patients potentially stuck in hot vehicles for hours while waiting for hospital admission.

The NHS's top doctor said on Monday that while the overwhelming majority of NHS services continue to run, the situation was being monitored closely.

NHS Medical Director Professor Sir Stephen Powis said: "Thanks to the hard work and innovation of NHS staff the overwhelming majority of NHS services are continuing to run despite the unprecedented heatwave.

"We know that some people, particularly the elderly or vulnerable, may have been unable to attend appointments because of the hot weather or disruption to other services, such as public transport.

"With tomorrow set to be as hot, if not hotter, than today, we are monitoring the situation closely and people should take simple, common sense steps to stay well such as drinking enough and staying out of the sun."

London Ambulance Service (LAS) reported that while there was a slightly lower than predicted number of emergency calls yesterday (6,600), there was a small uptick in the number of calls for fainting and heat exposure.

Emergency services have urged people to be careful when trying to stay cool after a 14-year-old boy went missing and was feared dead in the Thames and four others have drowned during the heatwave.

School closures and sports days cancelled

Some schools in several counties, including Nottinghamshire and Hampshire, have confirmed they will close, and the NEU teaching union has said it will support headteachers taking that decision.

Some 53 schools in Buckinghamshire have closed and reverted to remote learning.

In Norfolk, North Wootton Academy near King's Lynn has closed due to a low water supply.

Many others are taking contingency measures, with PE lessons cancelled and pupils being allowed to leave early.

School sports days scheduled to take place during the hot weather are also being postponed or cancelled.

Some schools have said they will arrange staffing to keep sites open for parents unable to find alternative childcare at short notice.

Shadow education secretary Bridget Phillipson said children should still go to school.

"I am sure that headteachers will be doing everything they possibly can to make sure their schools are kept as cool as possible, that children are kept out of the hot sun and are kept indoors as much as possible," she told Sky News.

"I think children have missed out quite a lot already in terms of their education, and it's right for them to be there."

Some southern nurseries will be restricting their hours on the hottest days following Public Health England's guidelines for supporting children in Early Years.

The majority of UK schools are set to break up for the summer holidays later in the week.

Some shops and salons around the country have also advised they will be closing or shutting early.

At Leicester market, Sky's Midlands Correspondent Lisa Dowd has been told market traders have taken an "emergency holiday" as it is too hot for them to work.

Michael Skinner from Vicki's Fresh Fruits said it was like a "greenhouse" under the market's cover yesterday - where temperatures in the Leicestershire hit record highs.

Farm animals under stress

Farms are also being affected with the owner of Coyton Barton Farm Rupert Shinner telling Sky soaring temperatures are putting stress on both his animals and winter feed stock as grass die-back eats into the farm's cold weather fodder store.

The Supreme Court in London has been closed to visitors because of an air-conditioning fault during the high temperatures.

Unprecedented weather conditions have led to many weekend events - including dog shows and summer fetes - being called off, as well as larger scale events at the start of the week.

The British Horseracing Authority (BHA) called off five meetings - scheduled fixtures at Beverley and Windsor on Monday and all-weather cards at Chelmsford and Wolverhampton on Tuesday, along with Southwell's jumps fixture.

Meanwhile, water companies have been seeing "unprecedented peak demand" during the extreme heat.

Householders are being asked to "carefully consider" their water usage, and not to waste it in the high temperatures.

Water UK said the "most intense demand" was across the south of England but that "pretty much all companies are seeing elevated demand at the moment".