Rizon Jet Airport – Biggin Hill

Founded in 2006, Qatar-based Rizon Jet is renowned for providing exceptional flying experiences for the most discerning business traveller. When the company commissioned the design and build of a brand new terminal facility in the UK, the materials used had to meet these same exacting standards. Appointed to deliver the complete flooring application, Zircon Flooring specified a series of market-leading solutions from global building products manufacturer, Sika. To establish a UK base to accommodate its international clientele from Europe and the Middle East, Rizon Jet chose London Biggin Hill Airport as the perfect location. The stunning new two-level FBO (fixed base operator) and VIP Terminal, designed to represent the very best in Arabic and European style, includes a 4,300m2 hangar facility, including workshops, battery rooms and kitchens.

Working with main contractor Civils Contracting, Zircon Flooring, one of the UK’s leading resin flooring specialists, was appointed to install approximately 5,000m2 of hard wearing and slip resistant flooring surfaces. To achieve this, the company specified a wide range of market proven flooring products from Sika.

Before the application, Zircon Flooring cleaned and prepared all of the new floors with comprehensive shot blasting and surface grinding to create a flat, smooth surface for a more efficient application. For the 3,000m2 main hangar floor, which will accommodate aircraft up to BBJ (Boeing Business Jet) and ACJ (Airbus Corporate Jetliner) size, Zircon Flooring specified the application of Sikafloor 81 Epocem and Sikafloor 263. Sikafloor 81 Epocem is a 3-component epoxy modified cementitious self smoothening floor topping and temporary moisture barrier. Used as a 2mm thick damp proof membrane, this was then topped with a 3mm layer of Sikafloor 263 to create the 5mm resin finish. Sikafloor 263 offers exceptional durability, abrasion and chemical resistance and is easily cleaned and maintained – ideal for a busy aircraft hangar. To create clearly distinguishable areas in contrast to the light grey floor of the main hangar, Zircon marked out designated walkways using Sikafloor 264 and a matt finish Sikafloor 304, applying a darker grey surface with green outline to signify the safe walkway areas. Sikafloor 264 was also used to provide resistant flooring for the back of house areas, which include a private office space, lounge area and an innovatively designed children’s play area. In the areas of the hangar where maintenance work would be carried out the flooring was required to have an a smooth finish. To achieve this, Zircon Flooring applied Sikafloor 263 SL. A three part, high-build coloured epoxy resin, it provides a liquid proof, gloss finish to the floor and also offers good levels of chemical and mechanical resistance. To complete the interior’s stunning aesthetic, all floor joints were sealed using Sikaflex Pro3 WF and column bases grouted with Sika Armorex Armorcrete. The Sikafloor system is part of Sika’s Ecoline range of resin based flooring products. Produced from next generation low allergy resin, reducing the risk of applicator sensitivity, they are CE marked for performance. Now complete, the new Rizon Jet terminal facility provides vital fueling, ground handling and maintenance services for the company’s growing fleet of aircraft. Thanks to Zircon’s high quality application and the comprehensive range of Sika flooring products, the hangar will help Biggin Hill in its aim to establish itself as the leading private jet airport for London