Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are characterised by large wings typically covered by scales, as testified by the name of the order (after the ancient greek lepís - scale and pterón – wing). Scales can contain pigments or generate structural colours, thereby producing colour patterns across the entire wing. Wing colour patterns are involved in thermoregulation (Dufour et al., 2018; Heidrich et al., 2018), sexual selection (Kemp, 2007), and anti-predator defences, such as crypsis (Cook et al., 2012; Endler, 1984; Webster et al., 2009), masquerade (Skelhorn et al., 2010; Stoddard, 2012), disruptive coloration, and deflection of predator attacks (Vallin et al., 2011). Another type of anti-predator defence in Lepidoptera involving wing colour pattern is aposematism, where the presence of secondary defences is advertised by the means of bright and contrasted colour patterns. Because of the positive frequency-dependent selection incurred on aposematic signals (Greenwood and Cotton, 1989, Chouteau et al., 2016), aposematic species often engage in Müllerian mimetic interactions, whereby species exposed to the same suite of predators converge on the same colour pattern and form mimicry ‘rings’ (Müller, 1879). Co-mimetic species (species that share a common aposematic colour pattern) are often distantly related, implying multiple independent evolution of the same colour pattern. Among such co-mimetic lepidopteran species, several studies using visual modelling have shown that analogous colour patches (i. e. those occupying a similar position in the wing and harbouring similar colour) cannot be discriminated by birds, believed to be the main predators (Bybee et al., 2012; Llaurens et al., 2014; Su et al., 2015; Thurman and Seymoure, 2016). Therefore, mimicry selects for convergent (when a trait in different species evolves towards the same value) or advergent (when a trait of a given species evolves towards the trait value in another species) colourations, as perceived by predators.

Surprisingly, although most aposematic Lepidoptera species harbour brightly coloured patterns, some unpalatable (due to the presence of chemical compounds in their body), aposematic species exhibit transparent wing patches (McClure et al., 2019). In those species, wing colour pattern typically consists of a mosaic of brightly coloured elements and transparent patches. Notably, in tropical America, many mimicry rings comprise such transparent species (Beccaloni, 1997; Elias et al., 2008; Willmott et al., 2017). Mimicry among species harbouring transparent patches raises the question of selection for convergence in optical properties, as perceived by predators, in those transparent patches.

A related question is whether transparency in co-mimetic species is achieved by the means of similar structural changes in wings and scales. Previous studies on a handful of species (most of which are not aposematic) have revealed several, non-mutually exclusive means to achieve transparency, through scale modification or scale shedding, with the effect of reducing the total coverage of the chitin membrane by scales. Scales can fall upon adult emergence (Yoshida et al., 1996); they can have a reduced size (Dushkina et al., 2017; Goodwyn et al., 2009) and even resemble bristle (Binetti et al., 2009; Hernández-Chavarría et al., 2004; Goodwyn et al., 2009; Siddique et al., 2015); they can be either flat on the membrane (Goodwyn et al., 2009) or erected (Dushkina et al., 2017; Goodwyn et al., 2009), which also reduces effective membrane coverage by scales. Reducing scale density could also make wings transparent to some extent (Goodwyn et al., 2009). Recently, Gomez et al., 2021 reported that some Lepidoptera achieve transparency with transparent scales. In addition to scale modifications, the presence of nanostructures on the surface of the wing membrane may enhance transparency through the reduction of light reflection, by generating a gradient of refractive index between the chitin-made membrane and the air allowing better penetration of light through the membrane (Binetti et al., 2009; Siddique et al., 2015; Yoshida et al., 1997). Yet, so far, no study has compared the microstructures (scales) and nanostructures present in transparent patches across co-mimetic species. Furthermore, the diversity of structures described above may lead to a large range of transparency efficiencies. Exploring the link between structural features and optical properties can shed light on whether and how different structures might achieve similar degrees of transparency in the context of mimicry.