1. Order: Lepidoptera Prepared by Dr. S. Sumaiya

2. Lepidoptera Lepido - scale; ptera - wings. Moths, Butterflies, Skippers Characters  Body, wings, appendages, are densely clothed with overlapping scales, which give colour, rigidity and strength.  They insulate the body and smoothen air flow over the body.  Mouthparts in adults are of siphoning type.  Mandibles are absent.  The galea of maxillae are greatly elongated and are held together by interlocking hooks and spines.  The suctorial proboscis is coiled up like a watch spring and kept beneath the head when not in use.  Wings are membranous and are covered with overlapping pigmented scales.  Forewings are larger than hind wings. Cross veins are few.  Wings are coupled by either frenate or amplexiform type of wing coupling.

3.  Larvae are polypod-eruciform type.  Mouthparts are adapted for chewing with strong mandibles.  A group of lateral ocelli is found on either side of the head.  The antenna is short and three segmented.  There are three pairs of five segmented thoracic legs ending in claws.  Two to five pairs of fleshy unsegmented prolegs are found in the abdomen.  At the bottom of the proleg, crochets are present.  Pupa is generally obtect.  It is either naked or enclosed in a cocoon made out of soil, frass, silk or larval hairs. Lepidoptera Lepido - scale; ptera - wings. Moths, Butterflies, Skippers

4. Classification Sub order: Ditrysia (97%), Monotrysia  BUTTERFLY FAMILIES  1. NYMPHALIDAE (Brush footed or four footed butterflies)  Forelegs are short, functionless, hairy and folded on thorax.  Fore tibia is short and covered with long hairs.  Larva is with many processes or spines on the body.  e.g. Castor butterfly : Ergolis merione.  It is a defoliator.

5. 2. LYCAENIDAE (Blues, Coppers, Hair streaks)  Compound eyes are white rimmed.  Antennae are with white rings.  Upper wing surface is either metallic blue or coppery.  Lower wing surface is lighter in colour.  Hindwings is often with delicate hair like prolongations and two or three black spots.  Larvae are flattened with retractile head.  e.g. Pomegranate fruit borer : Virachola isocrates.

6. 3. PAPILIONIDAE (Swallow tails)  They are often large and brightly coloured.  Prothoracic legs have tibial epiphysis.  In many species hindwings has tail like prolongation.  Amplexiform type of wing coupling is present.  Larval body is either smooth or with tubercles.  Retractile osmeteria are present on the prothoracic tergum of the caterpillar  e.g. Citrus butterfly , Papilio demoleus.

7. 4. PIERIDAE (whites or Sulphurs)  They are white or yellow or orange coloured with black markings.  Larva is green, elongate and covered with find hairs.  Larval body segments have annulets.  e.g. Daincha caterpillar, Eurema hecabe.

8. 5. SATYRIDAE (Browns, Meadow - browns)  They are dull brown or blackish in colour.  Wings are with eye like spots both on the upper and lower surface.  e.g. Rice horned caterpillar, Melanitis ismene.

9. MOTH FAMILIES 6. ARCTIIDAE (Tiger moths)  Wings are conspicuously spotted or banded.  They are nocturnal and attracted to light.  Larva is either sparsely hairy or densely hairy (wooly bear).  e.g. Black hairy caterpillar, Estigmene lactinea.

10. 7. BOMBYCIDAE (Silk worm moths)  Antenna is bipectinate.  Larvae is either with tuft of hairs or glabrous with medio dorsal horn on the eighth abdominal segment.  Pupation occurs in dense silken cocoon.  e.g. Mulberry silk worm, Bombyx mori an important source of natural silk.

11. 8. COCHLIDIDAE (Slug caterpillar)  They are medium sized moths with stoutly built body.  Larva resembles the slug.  Larva is thick, short, fleshy and stout.  Larval head is small and retractile.  Thorocic legs are minute. Abdominal segmentation is indistinct.  Prolegs are absent.  Poisonous urticating hairs are present on the body.  Pupal cocoon is hemispherical with urticating hairs.  e.g. Castor slug caterpillar Parasa lepida.

12. 9. CRAMBIDAE (Grass moths)  Labial palps are extended.  Forewings are narrow and elongated.  At rest they are wrapped around the body.  Larva bores into root, stem or crown of graminaceous plants.  e.g. Sorghum stem borer, Chilo partellus

13. 10. GELECHIIDAE  Forewings trapezoidal and narrower than hindwings.  Caterpillars bore into the seeds, tubers, and leaves.  e.g. Cotton pink boll worm, Pectinophora gossypiella.

14. 11. GEOMETRIDAE (Loopers)  Both pairs of wings are angular and thin.  Larva is naked and elongate.  It shows protective resemblance to twings or stems.  Only two pairs of prolegs are present in sixth and tenth abdominal segments.  It walks by drawing the posterior part of the body close to the thorax, the body forming a loop.  It is also called inch worm, measuring worm and earth measurer.  e.g. Tea looper, Biston suppressaria.

15. 12.LYMANTRIDAE (Tussock moths)  Antenna is bipectinate  Legs are clothed with wooly hairs.  Female is provided with a tuft of anal hairs.  Larvae is densely hairy.  e.g. Castor hairy caterpillar, Euproctis fraterna.

16. 13. NOCTUIDAE (Noctua moths)  They are medium sized, stoutly built moths.  They are nocturnal and attracted to light.  Labial palp is well developed.  Crochets on the larval prolegs are all of one size and arranged in semi-circle.  Some larvae are semiloopers.  They have either three or four pairs of prolegs.  Larvae attack the plants during night.  Larvae of some species remain concealed beneath the surface of the ground or litter on the surface during day and feed on plants during night.  e.g. Tobocco cut worm, Spodoptera litura.

17. 14. PTEROPHORIDAE (Plume moths)  They are small lightly built months  Forewings are elongate with two to four clefts or fissures.  Hindwings have three divisions  Legs are long, slender and armed with prominent tibial spurs.  e.g. Redgram plume moth, Exelastis atomosa.

18. 15. PYRAUSTIDAE  Proboscis is vestigial in many species.  Libial palp is snout like.  Larval habit varies.  It may live among aquatic plants and bore into the stem or remain in silken web among spun up plants parts.  Some larvae are aquatic and gill breathing.  e.g. Rice stem borer, Scirpophaga incertulas.

19. 16. SATURNIIDAE (Moon months, giant silk worm moths)  They are large sized moths.  Antenna is bipectinate.  Transparent eye spots are present near the Centre of each wing.  The spots are either circular or crescent shaped.  Larva is stout and smooth with scoli.  Cocoon is dense and firm.  e.g. Tussor silk worm, Antheraea paphia yields silk

20. 17. SPHINGIDAE (Hawk moths, Sphinx moths, Horn worms)  They are large sized stoutly built moths.  Antenna is thick towards middle and hooked at the tip.  Proboscis is very long.  Forewings are elongated and pointed with very oblique outer margin.  Hindwings are reduced in width fitting into the indented margin of forewings.  They are powerful fliers.

21.  Larva is smooth with a mid-dorsal horn (anal horn) on the eighth abdominal segment.  Pupation takes place in earthern cells.  In many species the proboscis is enclosed in a separate sheath.  e.g. Death's head moth, Acherontia styx is a defoliator on gingelly.  Markings present on the thorax of the adult moth resemble human skull. 17. SPHINGIDAE (Hawk moths, Sphinx moths, Horn worms)