Al Jefferson(notes) needs the ball. He needs the ball on the low left block, some space and room to move. He would prefer it -- and this goes for both teammates and potential double-teamers on the other side -- if you left him alone.

Al Jefferson might be more of a center than a power forward, which is cool -- this league can always use centers that aren't awful. But he also has a devil of a time guarding centers. And power forwards, while we're at it. And a combo featuring Jefferson and Paul Millsap(notes), despite its ability to score and rebound, smacks awfully heavily of the failed combo we saw in Minnesota with Jefferson and Kevin Love(notes).

Al Jefferson is not the best screen-setter in the world, a result of too many offensive fouls picked up during his early years with the Boston Celtics. So he's a bit hesitant and, as a result, whiffs a ton. This doesn't exactly bode well for the Utah Jazz, who (as you may have heard) like to rely on the screen-and-roll quite a bit.

Al Jefferson was recently traded to the Utah Jazz, by the way. And despite all the worries posted above, the Jazz and their fans should be absolutely giddy with the move. Why? Because they just picked up Al Jefferson for absolutely nothing. And if you have a chance to go after Al Jefferson for absolutely nothing, you go after that. Such a deal.

So Al's going to be with the Utah Jazz next season, and one can't help but give the Jazz and their ownership loads and loads of credit. They play in Salt Lake City and despite that big arena full of fans and the NBA's revenue sharing system, this isn't a team in New York or Los Angeles. And yet, here the Jazz are, about to pay the luxury tax again. A fine power forward in Millsap already on board, and yet the Jazz still go out and use a trade exception and future draft picks to grab Al Jefferson. Another guy making eight figures next season.

How Al fits is another story. As mentioned above, he's not the typical screen-and-roll presence you usually see in a Jazz uniform. He's almost better served as an undersized center, where all he has to do is set a screen off the ball to free a wing player on his way to the low post. In Jazzland, the power forwards are expected to be up top or on the elbow extended, ready to get in the way of the opposing point guard. Al really hasn't ever had to do that.

This shouldn't prevent him from trying, though. Really, the first 60 games of next season should be used to disappoint onlookers and worm his way into getting comfortable with the system. Seriously, tick off the fans, Al. Step out of your comfort zone, set screens, try and develop a sense of chemistry and timing with Deron Williams(notes), and sometimes have to sit with two fouls and nine minutes left to go in the first quarter.

Why? Because the Jazz already have Millsap, who knows how to work this. And they also boast Andrei Kirilenko(notes), who plays better at power forward, and is probably bashing his head against the wall right now wondering what he has to do to earn back those power forward minutes he worked so well with during 2003-04.

The Jazz have room to tide you over, especially if it means you having the faith to toss everything out and try to work inside their system. And while the Jazz traded for you to play like Al Jefferson, and while what you've given teams on the court hasn't led to your miserable career win/loss record, that doesn't mean you shouldn't take a chance and try to submit to a system that could make you and your teammates bigger than the sum of their collective talents. A finely honed sense of rhythm and chemistry with teammates in May will be well worth all the groans from October to March.

It takes a massive leap of faith, trust in your own abilities and trust in the mugs that observe this game. Because while Al Jefferson could be quite successful heading to that low block and working as usual, he and his team could be incredibly successful if he finds a way to work up top, flash away from the ball, make Deron Williams more dangerous and in turn open up myriad offensive opportunities for his teammates.

That's what the two-man game does, after all. At its best, it makes for great options for five guys at a time, even if just one guy touches the ball for the entire play.

The Jazz just traded for Al Jefferson, and they only had to give up one fringe big man, some future draft picks and ask that the team's ownership group pay a whole lot of money for the roster as currently established. It's a fantastic move, even if the guy struggles to start the season.

And the Timberwolves? Analysis? They're a mess. They got Kosta Koufos(notes) in the deal, and he might be worth taking a look at, but they've completely wasted all the assets they've had come through Minnesota over the last few years. Al Jefferson and Kevin Love couldn't play together, but this was the best deal possible? And this is when you make the deal? For a trade exception and picks? Such a waste.

Al Jefferson? Don't waste this. You have 82 games to work through before you hit the playoffs for the second time in your career, your first postseason trip as a starter. Work with Deron Williams and Jerry Sloan to be the guy that pushes this team over the top.