FYI

Al Jefferson, Utah Jazz. There will be other star free agents, of course, but I’m not sure any have a value quite as difficult to peg. Jefferson has added to his game on the edges. He’s a solid one-on-one post defender now, having held opponents to 39 percent shooting on post-up plays last season (per Synergy Sports), and he has gotten better at passing to cutters from the high and low post. But he’s still the same Big Al in the macro sense — a low-post guy who needs the ball, shoots a ton, hits half his shots, earns very few fouls shots and struggles as badly as any big man in the league in guarding the pick-and-roll. Jefferson has value; Utah would not have made the postseason or ranked among the league’s top-10 offenses without him. But it’s hard to see any team playing Jefferson 35 minutes a game cracking the championship conversation in a pick-and-roll league — unless Jefferson makes a leap on defense as he approaches free agency. Will Utah pay the 27-year-old Jefferson, even with Paul Millsap (a better player) also entering free agency and four recent lottery picks set for big raises over the next few years? And if Utah’s out, what’s the market for Jefferson?

What do you guys think? Accurate?

The part about Milsap being the better player is accurate. The rest, I dunno. He's a great fit in a team that just wants to get better, not so much in a team that wants to go all the way. Not sure which one Utah is ATM.

Yeah I tend to agree. It's also what Prokhorov said in an interview "It's easy to build a good team, but hard to build a Championship team".

I think Jefferson serves a role of mentoring our young guys (Favors & Kanter) and selling tickets while these guys develop but I don't really see him as our centre piece going forward... (unless he lessen his price tag and/or improves that pick & roll defense).

If Utah re-signs him then we will forever know we are comfortable being "ok", and not willing to take this team to the next level.

I'm not a big fan of big Al, but if he improves that PnR defense and improves his passes, I do see him as a decent pair with Favors. Favors seem to complement Al nicely with his athleticism.

Having said that I'm not willing to pay more than $8-9m for him, and I'm sure there'll be other teams willing to pay him $12m+ at least.

Coaching can help Al. Zone concepts will really help hide his deficiencies and keep him closer to the rim where he is better. Corbs has to use some zone or we will keep seeing the same ol' LOLZPNR.

Keep Jeff in the key and see better D. You can't expect him to ride PGs for 10 feet and then hope he gets back. Also when in man he has to have better rotations behind him. Al got a lot of blame last year for plays that were not on him. Yes he sucks at transferring in between areas but there are strengths to be built upon. A lot is actually on Al himself developing a better understanding of where he is supposed to be under various circumstances. If somebody can convince him that we will win if he plays smarter on D this stuff would get a ton better.

Al will also look a lot better defensively with better defensive players around him. Mo Williams, Marvin, Foye, should be far and away superior to the efforts provided by Bell, CJ and Howard.

Coaching can help Al. Zone concepts will really help hide his deficiencies and keep him closer to the rim where he is better. Corbs has to use some zone or we will keep seeing the same ol' LOLZPNR.

I'm to the point where I'm convinced Al has learned everything he's capable of learning about basketball. The fact that passing out of the double/triple team to an open man continues to be a difficult concept for him to grasp leads me to believe his BB IQ is on the low side.

It is dead on. Great blurb that pretty much echos what I and others on this site have been saying about Al.

I agree that the blurb is dead on. I disagree that it's what people have been saying. Here. According to many on Jazzfanz, Al's value is easy to peg. He has no value and plays no defense. All he does is steal Favors' minutes and the Jazz should try to trade him for a second-round pick and waive him if that doesn't work out.

I'm to the point where I'm convinced Al has learned everything he's capable of learning about basketball. The fact that passing out of the double/triple team to an open man continues to be a difficult concept for him to grasp leads me to believe his BB IQ is on the low side.

Couldn't agree more with this. And I'll add that his IQ may be too limited to understand where he's suppose to go on the pick and roll defense.

It is interesting to think who would go after Al in the offseason! The one team I can see doing it is Chicago! They could amnesty Boozer and then sing Al for cheaper then they had boozer for!!

There are a lot of rumors that Dallas wants him. I don't know if that has changed but I think they also have money this off season.

The writer lost all credibility when he said Millsap is better than Jefferson. Millsap is good because Jefferson puts him on his back.

Poor Paul he was terrible before AJ became a Jazz man. Paul is an overall better player who has more dimensions to his game than Jefferson. Paul generally was the guy taking the last shot because he can score inside and out while Jefferson is a better post up guy. The margin is really small but overall Paul is slightly better and he is cheaper.

Poor Paul he was terrible before AJ became a Jazz man. Paul is an overall better player who has more dimensions to his game than Jefferson. Paul generally was the guy taking the last shot because he can score inside and out while Jefferson is a better post up guy. The margin is really small but overall Paul is slightly better and he is cheaper.

Yes, that's why Millsap is one of the most eratic scoring power forwards in the game. He needs someone like Jefferson to create his shots for him.

I don't even see how this is even a discussion. Al's game has been dissected 57 ways to Sunday. It has been determined and ruled that his game is not conducive to winning basketball. He just a stat stuffer.

Who cares whether or not Millsap is better. Its not the point. As long as Al is our starting center, the offense will be ran through him and we won't win jack ****. We'll be perennial early playoff exits.

The fact that Jazz brass continue on with this experiment, is just disturbing. Every year Al is on the team, is just another wasted year.

If we end up re-signing Al, I'll take a long vacation from the Jazz. I got better **** to do than watch that garbage.