Subtitle : The prosecutor, Kelly Siegler who appeared in the series ‘Cold Justice’.

Source : Variety

Kelly Siegler: biography, family, education

Siegler was born Kelly Renee on October 12, 1962, in Blessing, Texas, United States. She was born as the second child to her parents, Billy and Evelyn Jalufka. She grew up with her older brother, Blly Jr., and a younger sister, Lea. Her father worked as a justice of the peace, a position he held for two terms, and also owned a barbershop. However, at the age of thirteen, her parents divorced after that in 1999, she lost her mother to cancer, and her father also died in 2019.

As for his education, he attended and graduated from Tidehaven High School. He then went on to join the study of International Business at the University of Texas and graduated in 1984. Later, in 1987, he earned his Juris Doctorate from South Texas College of Law.

Kelly Siegler: career and life achievements

Immediately after graduation, Prosecutor Siegler began her practice in Harris County. During her time with the county, she worked in different divisions; Major criminals, identity theft, consumer fraud and major fraud. She worked there for 22 years and was also in charge of Special Crimes. So, in 2008, she retired from the county and after that, she started appearing on the TV show ‘Cold Justice’.

Before that, he appeared in the documentary ‘American Justice’. After three years of the documentary, he worked as a prosecutor in the American crime reality show ‘Cold Justice’. The show follows the team of investigators and the former Harris County Prosecutor as they reopen unsolved murder cases with the consent and help of local authorities.

Subtitle : Kelly Siegler from the reality TV show ‘Cold Justice’.

Source : Oxygen

One of the most prominent cases in the series includes the case of Susan Wright. The lady who was accused of stabbing her husband 193 times and claimed that she was in her own defense. To prove to the jury that Susan Wright murdered her husband. Siegler brought a bed into court and showed the jury the entire crime scene. Ultimately, Susan was found guilty and sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Throughout his career, he has worked 68 murder cases even though he has never lost any of the cases. Also, the number could increase because she is concentrating on her job and successfully working to punish the right person who committed crimes.

Kelly Siegler: personal life and husband

Siegler, in addition to his successful career, also enjoys his successful married life. She married Samuel Lewis Siegler in 1988. Samuel is a medical doctor by profession and works as a primary care physician. The couple had welcomed two adorable daughters: Samantha and Kesley.

In addition, he had hidden most of his personal life from the media. Only a little information about them is known, however, she keeps posting photos of her daughters on her social media account. Aside from her jobs, there is no information about her involvement in violence or controversies.

Kelly Siegler: Net Worth and Social Media Profiles

Talking about his earnings, currently, he is earning a good income from appearing on the TV show ‘Cold Justice’ along with his jobs. Furthermore, he has a net worth estimated to be around $1 million. Previously, he was a county prosecutor in the states of Texas.