Buried: Harding Tomb, Marion, Ohio

Twenty-ninth President - 1921-1923

Born: November 2, 1865, in Corsica, Ohio

Died: 7:30 p.m. on August 2, 1923, in San Francisco, California

Age at death: 57

Cause of death: Heart attack

Final words: “That’s good. Go on, read some more.”

Admission to Harding Tomb: Free

Warren Harding’s administration lasted just over two years. His election to the presidency was the first in which women were allowed to vote nationwide. He was also the first president to ride in a car to his inauguration. A popular chief executive, he and his wife Florence hosted frequent parties at the White House, complete with alcohol then forbidden by the eighteenth amendment.

The couple was on a tour of the western states in the summer of 1923 when the president, already suffering from exhaustion, fell ill. Mrs. Harding stayed at his bedside in San Francisco’s Palace Hotel. She read him an article from the Saturday Evening Post that portrayed him in a favorable light. President Harding, deeply concerned over several brewing scandals involving members of his administration, must have been surprised. Pleased to hear some good publicity, he asked her to read on. It was his last request. Moments later, he died of a heart attack.

The president’s doctor first suspected food poisoning. Others blamed “apoplexy,” the term then used to describe a stroke. One journalist even accused Florence Harding of poisoning her husband as punishment for his extramarital affairs. Nothing sinister was ever proven.

Vice President Calvin Coolidge was vacationing at his father’s home in Plymouth Notch, Vermont, when he got the news in the middle of the night. Coolidge’s father, a notary public, swore in his son as the thirtieth president of the United States in the sitting room of the family home.

The nation was stunned. Special edition newspapers were snatched up while the ink was still wet. Thousands turned out to see the funeral train that brought Harding’s body back to the East Room of the White House. Public mourning continued at the Capitol, where thirty thousand citizens passed by his coffin, resting on the same catafalque used for Abraham Lincoln.

The third president from Ohio to die in office was taken back to his father’s home in Marion, Ohio. Nearly all of the town’s residents paid their respects. Harding’s body was placed in a temporary vault at Marion Cemetery while public funds were raised to construct a monument in his honor. His wife lived just one year more.

School children donated their pennies to fund construction of the Harding Memorial

Warren and Florence Harding are buried together at the Harding Tomb

In 1927, the bodies of Warren and Florence Harding were moved to the newly constructed Harding Memorial. It was dedicated in 1931 by President Herbert Hoover.

Touring Warren G. Harding’s Tomb at the Harding Memorial

The Harding Memorial is located in a ten-acre landscaped park in Marion, Ohio, on State Route 423. The Harding Tomb is at the corner of State Route 423 and Vernon Heights Boulevard in Marion. Vernon Heights is about 1.5 miles west of U.S. Route 23 off of State Route 95 in Marion County.

The Harding Tomb is open year-round during daylight hours. Admission is free.

For additional information

Harding Tomb

Vernon Heights Boulevard

Marion, OH 43302

Phone: (740) 387-9630

www.ohiohistory.org/places/hardtomb

“Unfortunately, he received the worst possible

treatment from a quack named

Charles Sawyer…”

—Richard Norton Smith

On June 20, 1923, Harding and his party of sixty-five left Washington’s Union Station for what the beleaguered president called a “Voyage of Understanding.” Traveling through the isolationist Midwest, Harding showed genuine courage in advocating U.S. membership in the World Court. “I want America to play her part in helping to abolish war,” he told an audience in Salt Lake City.

But the trip had a somber subtext, one invisible to the large and enthusiastic crowds that turned out to greet the popular chief executive. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover never forgot the round-the-clock bridge games with which the president distracted himself.

“If you knew of a great scandal in our administration,” Harding asked Hoover, “would you for the good of the country and the party expose it publicly or would you bury it?”

“Publish it,” said Hoover, “and at least get credit for integrity on your side.”

Pressing for details, Hoover heard vague talk of “irregularities” in the Justice Department, where a close associate of Attorney General Henry Daugherty had recently committed suicide. As the grueling trip proceeded, Harding’s health visibly deteriorated. Unfortunately, he received the worst possible treatment from a quack named Charles Sawyer, an old Marion acquaintance favored by the First Lady. It was “Doc” Sawyer, for example, who blamed the president’s collapse in Alaska on some tainted crabmeat.

By the time he arrived in San Francisco on July 29, Harding was at death’s door, his enlarged heart, already taxed by pneumonia, put under intolerable strain by a deadly combination of stimulants and purgatives prescribed by Doc Sawyer.

The Harding Tomb, one of five presidential gravesites in Ohio, contains exhibits detailing Harding’s life

August 2, a sultry Thursday in the nation’s capital. A few minutes after 10 p.m., Mrs. Harding’s favorite astrologer, a former vaudevillian and Coney Island palm reader reborn as Madame Marsha, held court in a Dupont Circle townhouse. Asked by newspapermen about reports thatHarding was suffering from food poisoning, Madame Marsha quietly replied, “The president is dead.”

And so he was, having succumbed to a massive coronary a few minutes earlier in his San Francisco hotel room. Returning to the White House, Florence Harding sat by her husband’s open casket for a post-midnight monologue with the rouged corpse. “No one can hurt you now, Warren,” she told him, thereby putting the seal on the creepiest administration in American history.

—RNS