An unprecedented outpouring of grief poured from Jacksonville -- and the nation -- over the unexpected death of President Warren G. Harding.

Death had taken the chief executive Aug. 2 in San Francisco, "victim of a stroke of apoplexy which struck him down in his weakened condition after an illness of one week."

Shock and sadness transcended the party line. The deep-dyed Democrat city mourned the nation's fallen leader.

Mayor John T. Alsop extended the city's sympathy in a telegram to the widow. The City Council wired its condolence.

"Jacksonville, so fortunate to be first to greet him on occasions past, had developed an affection of a depth which now accentuates the mourning of its citizens," wired George H. Baldwin, president of the Jacksonville Chamber of Commerce.

Without word or outward effort Jacksonville's leaders did what they did best in that time of parades and celebrations and great gatherings in public places: In a nonce a great public tribute was arranged for the fallen leader.

Flags flew at half-staff in the interval. Businesses and offices closed. The churches were filled. The following Saturday full 5,000 assembled in front of the Windsor Hotel to bid farewell to a man for whom they had never voted.

"A loving husband, a loyal friend, a good companion, an honest executive, a wise counselor, a faithful Baptist -- a true American," eulogized W.L.C. Mahon, pastor of the Main Street Baptist Church and principal speaker.

The Florida Times-Union said the striking moment of the ceremony -- perhaps in city memory -- came as the Rev. Van Winder Shields, rector of St. Johns Episcopal Church, began his oratory: Big Jim, the municipal whistle, sounded for a full two minutes to mark the exact moment the late president was interred.

Also on Aug. 4, 1923

National Guard troops from throughout Florida assembled at Camp Johnston south of the city for two weeks instruction ordered by Adjutant Gen. J. Clifford R. Foster. The camp was commanded by Col. Raymond C. Turck of Jacksonville.

Opposition mounted to the City Commission's unilateral decision to close Riverside Avenue to automobile traffic. A.J. Mitchell led a large delegation before the City Council to protest the closing, which followed safety complaints by the Jacksonville Motor Club.

Bill Foley was a Times-Union reporter, editor and columnist for more than 40 years. He’s best known for his quirky columns about Jacksonville and Northeast Florida’s history. He wrote this series of Millennium Moments columns in 1999 leading up to the year 2000. Foley died in 2001 at age 62.