RYANIn 1999, Ryan began working with new collaborator, Anji Bee, under the shortened moniker of Lovespirals. Their initial mp3.com-exclusive release, Ecstatic EP, was in the StarVox Magazine Top 10 Staff Favorites of 2001, where they claimed Lovespirals and Claire Voyant’s “triphop-influenced grooves” were “Goth’s Next Big Thing.” Ryan and Anji had remixed “Bittersweet,” for Claire Voyant’s Time Again: A Collection of Remixes in April 2000, though it was erroneously credited to Love Spirals Downwards. The duo’s first Projekt Records release was the cover song “Aspenglow,” for the Excelsis 3 ~ A Prelude released in 2001. It was also included on the 2002 Hot Topic Holiday comp, ‘A Dark Noel: The Very Best of Excelsis.‘. Their debut album, Windblown Kiss, was released by Projekt in 2002, shortly after the duo headlined the opening night of ProjektFest 2002. Subsequent albums Free and Easy, Long Way From Home, Future Past, and Life Goes On appeared on their own Chillcuts label. Lovespirals have also released a number of digital-only EPs, remix collections, and singles on various labels, including the dance chart topping Damien.S VS Lovespirals “This Truth” single released by Loverush Digital in 2009.

SUZANNE

Suzanne Perry formed a band called Melodyguild in 2002 with Matt Gleason and John West of the The Von Trapps, and Nicholas Pallos of The Battle of Lake Erie. After playing several shows in the Los Angeles area, West was replaced by The Von Trapps founder, Rodney Rodriguez, in 2003. Rodriguez had appeared on Love Spirals Downwards’ last album (“Alicia”) and final concert. In 2004, Melodyguild released a cover of Danny Elfman’s “Sally’s Song” from ‘The Nightmare Before Christmas,’ on the Projekt Records Holiday Single 2. This recording was created with bandmate Pallos and Cris Miller of Silver Screen. In mid-2008, Projekt released the Melodyguild 4-song EP, Aitu, which had been recorded back in 2003 with the original band lineup of Perry, Gleason, West, and Pallos. In addition to her work with Melodyguild, Suzanne has collaborated with Bay Area artist, Falling You, on a number of songs — including “An Angel, Ameliorate,” “Champagne,” and “Until the Stars Align” — for albums released between 2006 and 2017. Suzanne also collaborated with Utah artist, Sleepthief, on a song called “Empyrean” which appeared first in 2010 on a various artist compilation called ‘Beauty 2: Music That Touches The Soul,’ and was included on the 2015 expanded version of his album, Labyrinthine Heart. In 2013, Suzanne performed a few songs live with Seattle band, Golden Gardens, notably at the Brickbat Mansion Boat Cruise hosted by longtime friend of the band, DJ Wednesday.

JENNIFER