Cupid’s arrow has found a new target: the Love Is Blind pods.

The dating experiment is returning for Season 6 on Valentine’s Day, Feb. 14, with co-hosts Nick and Vanessa Lachey. A fresh group of singles is arriving — and they’re all set to meet their soulmates sight unseen and embark on the journey of a lifetime. Will it end at the altar? Or during a fight in Mexico about makeup? Only time will tell, as this new pod squad discovers whether their physical connections in the real world can match the emotional bonds they formed in the pods. But whether each of them finds love with someone else or deep down within themselves, life will surely never be the same.

Before you uncork a bottle of wine Milton-style and pour it into your own gold goblet, read below for everything you need to know about Season 6, as we inch closer to the premiere. And just remember, if you get impatient — love is always worth the wait.

When is the Love Is Blind Season 6 release date?

Starting Feb. 14, new episodes of Love Is Blind will roll out each following Wednesday, chronicling the singles’ journeys to love.

Week 1 (Wednesday, Feb. 14): Episodes 1–6

Week 2 (Wednesday, Feb. 21): Episodes 7–9

Week 3 (Wednesday, Feb. 28): Episodes 10–11

Week 4 (Wednesday, March 6): Episode 12 (finale)

When is the Love Is Blind Season 6 reunion?

You didn’t think we’d miss out on wading through this season’s mess, did you? The couples and singles (keep watching to find out who’s who) will get together for the first time since the finale to hash out all of the drama. Co-hosted by Nick and Vanessa Lachey, the reunion will launch Wed, March 13th at 9pm ET / 6pm PT, bringing together the pod squad and some special guests for a surely unforgettable event.

Where can I see the Season 6 cast reunion looks?

The pod squad goes full glam in a first peek at their reunion looks below.

AD Smith

Images: Greg Gayne/Netflix

Clay Gravesende

Jessica Vestal

Jimmy Presnell

Chelsea Blackwell

Trevor Sova

Kenneth Gorham

Brittany Mills

Johnny McIntyre

Amy Cortés

Jeramey Lutinski

Sarah Ann Bick

Nick and Vanessa Lachey

Where can I watch the Love Is Blind Season 6 trailer?

Check out the trailer at the top of this article to get your first look at all the twists, turns, and shocking revelations to come this season. Then, take a look at the second trailer below for even more of a tease.

Who are the singles entering the pods?

A brand-new pod squad is about to capture your attention (and dominate your group chats), when 30 eligible singles step into the experiment to risk it all for love. Ranging from 25 to 37 years old, this new group is ready to be loved for who they are — and not for what they look like on the outside.

This season’s cast includes two flight attendants, a middle school principal, a salesman with a DJ side hustle, and a former three-sport athlete turned makeup artist. Can’t keep track of them all? Check out our complete guide to this season’s singles, where they spill about their dating histories and deal-breakers, and why they’re ready to find a soulmate. And only if you’re ready, you can check out the bottom of the cast guide, where we’ve listed the couples who make it out of the pods and run down a bit of their journey thus far.

Remind me: How do the pods work ?

Does each pod have a bathroom? Are they soundproof? What are those fridges stocked with? You asked, and we (well, the Lacheys, rather) answered. For any question you have about what exactly goes down inside those four walls, check out our complete Love Is Blind pod explainer featuring a behind-the-scenes tour with the co-hosts.

Where does this season take place?

This season will follow a new set of singles who are all based in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Where are last season’s couples now?

Sure, a new season is upon us, but that doesn’t mean we’ve forgotten about the singles and couples who’ve come before. So, what are Milton and Lydia up to? Have Izzy and Stacy rebounded after their breakup at the altar? Did Taylor switch up her makeup routine because of JP’s comments? To catch up with the Season 5 pod squad, take a walk down memory lane with our status update — and find out everything that’s gone down since the reunion.

Has Love Is Blind been renewed for Season 7?