Our first significant lake-effect snow event of the season is upon us. Heavy snow coming off the Great Lakes will continue to impact parts of Western and Central New York through Wednesday morning.

A strong west-northwesterly flow over the Great Lakes is providing the right ingredients for a continued lake-effect snow event expected to last into Wednesday.

With significant accumulations possible across parts of Western and Central New York, Lake Effect Snow Warnings and Winter Weather Advisories are in effect for the areas expected to be impacted the most through early Wednesday morning.

Those heading anywhere in or around these areas will need to pay close attention to the latest forecasts. Heavy snow bands streaming off the lakes, combined with gusty winds, will make for hazardous travel conditions over the next days.

With lake-effect, it all comes down to wind direction and residence time of the cold air over the lakes. Winds shifting to the northwest Tuesday have brought multiple bands, rather than a single intense band of snow off Lake Erie, with the heaviest accumulations where the wind rises over the Chautauqua Ridge.

Snowfall rates between 1 to 2 inches an hour are possible within the strongest bands.

The focal point for this lake-effect band will continue to stay south of Buffalo. The wind direction will keep it sitting across parts of southern Erie, Wyoming, Chautauqua and Cattaraugus counties through Tuesday night.

Most in the warned counties should be prepared for an additional 6 to 12 (locally higher) inches of snow by early Wednesday.

Over a multi-day stretch, that is manageable. However, blowing and drifting snow will make for poor visibility and tough travel at times.

Off of Lake Ontario, the band will settle into the Syracuse metro on Tuesday. With snow rates of 1 to 2 inches per hour, travel will be tough at times.

Don't be surprised to hear rumbles of thunder near the lake shore, too. This band will also clip northeastern Monroe, Wayne and Cayuga counties.

Lake Effect Snow Warnings will remain in effect Tuesday for many counties east and southeast of Lake Ontario.

Snow piling up in these areas is not uncommon, especially over the Tug Hill Plateau, where totals could get as high as 2 feet in spots by midday on Wednesday.

The rest of the area will likely see somewhere between 6 to 12 inches (locally higher amounts) of snow, though.

The band will shift southward across Central New York later on Tuesday into Tuesday night before shifting northward again on Wednesday.

The evening commute in and around Central New York, including the city of Syracuse, will be difficult as heavy snow causing slick travel in spots.

Be prepared for conditions to change rapidly within and near the lake-effect bands.

The Spectrum weather team will bring you updates regarding the exact placement of both lake-effect bands and the impacts they are bringing. You can see those updates every 10 minutes on your TV screen or following our social media accounts.