Multi-talented Detroit musician Paul Randolph, aka 'Randolph', comes from a musical family. As a result, he began honing his musical skills at a very young age. Born in Philadelphia, PA he and his family relocated to Sao Paulo, Brazil when he was six years old. Settling in Detroit during his early teen years, he graduated from Central Michigan University with a degree in Marketing - continuing to perform music while working at a variety of other jobs. Randolph eventually put all of his focus into his music. A versatile musician who plays guitar as well as percussion, the bass is the instrument that Randolph 'fell in love with'. Randolph has performed with such greats as Fela drummer Tony Allen, Odetta, Dennis Coffey and Johnny Johnson, to name a few. He was lead vocalist and bassist for the Detroit-based New Orleans-style funk and blues band Mudpuppy. After his stint with Mudpuppy, he went on to perform and record with Amp Fiddler, Carl Craig, iSoul8, As One, Catz n Dogz, Makoto, Tettory Bad, Zed Bias, and currently, the Berlin-based, Jazzanova Live. Randolph's music has been categorized into many different genres, pop, rock, neo soul, jazz, funk, blues, and electronic. His first solo CD, 'This Is What It Is' was released on Kenny Dixon, Jr.'s Mahogani Music imprint in 2004. Although a bit secretive about his latest projects, Randolph has had releases between 2012 and 2016 which include, 'Chips n Chitlins' with legendary dub step producer Zed Bias of Manchester, UK; Kiko Navarro, 'Captain of Her Heart'; Jazzanova,'Funkhaus Sessions'; Isoul8, 'Stay Stay Stay' and 'Waves of Love'; DJ Kawasaki 'Where Would We Be'; Boddhi Satva 'Soldier'; and Mikael Delta 'This Is The Place'. Randolph has completed a new solo album to be released in March of 2017 'In The Company Of Others' on Mahogani Music, additional 2017 releases include a collaboration he both wrote and produced for Kathy Kosins and her executive producer Kamau Kenyatta for Membran Records 'Could You Be Me'. He was featured in the March 2015 edition of Rolling Stone Italy, and 2 documentaries o