LONDON — American author Harry Harrison, whose space-age spoofs delighted generations of science fiction fans, has died at 87 in southern England, a friend said Wednesday.

Irish sci-fi writer Michael Carroll said by phone that he learned of Mr. Harrison’s death from the author’s daughter, Moira, earlier in the day.

Mr. Harrison was a prolific writer whose works ranged from tongue-in-cheek intergalactic action romps to dystopian fantasies, with detours through children’s stories and shambolic crime capers. Carroll said most of the works delivered a stream of sly humor with a big bucket of action.

‘‘Imagine ‘Pirates of the Caribbean’ or ‘Raiders of the Lost Ark,’ and picture them as science fiction novels,’’ he said. ‘‘They’re rip-roaring adventures, but they’re stories with a lot of heart.’’

Mr. Harrison was best known for his ‘‘The Stainless Steel Rat’’ series, starring the free-spirited antihero Slippery Jim DiGrIz, a quick-witted conman who travels the universe swindling humans, aliens, and robots alike. His 1966 work, ‘‘Make Room! Make Room!’’ — a sci-fi take on the horrors of overpopulation — inspired the 1973 film ‘‘Soylent Green’’ starring Charlton Heston.

Born in Stamford, Conn., in 1925, Mr. Harrison served in the US Army Air Corps during World War II.

One of science fiction’s leading writers, he turned out more than 70 books and short stories. Among them were ‘‘Bill, the Galactic Hero’’ a sendup of Robert Heinlein’s hard-edged ‘‘Starship Troopers,’’ and ‘‘The Technicolor Time Machine,’’ which took aim at Hollywood. Other works included anthologies, collections, and children’s stories — including one particularly goofy tale about an intergalactic guerilla force of mutant pigs.

Mr. Harrison’s publisher, Tom Doherty, described him as an illustrator, an anthologist, a critic, and a friend.

“In ‘Make Room! Make Room!’ he made us consider the consequences of over-population and overconsumption of the world’s resources,’’ Doherty said in a statement.

‘‘He believed science fiction was important, that it caused people to think about our world and what it could become.’’