Harrison has had a long and diverse career. He was actually an artist at EC Comics in the 1950’s, illustrating under the pen name 'Wade Kaempfert'. In the 50s and 60s he wrote the Flash Gordon syndicated newspaper strip. His novel “Make Room! Make Room!” was the basis for the 1973 classic Sci-Fi film, Soylent Green, starring Charlton Heston. Harrison is a master of humorous Sci-Fi. His most famous creation is James Bolivar diGriz, AKA The Stainless Steel Rat. Thief and con-man, The Stainless Steel rat has appeared in eleven novels. Similar in vein is Harrison’s satirical “Bill, the Galactic Hero” series. Harrison is the perfect writer for those who like their Sci-Fi fun and adventurous. He’s a member of the Sci-Fi Hall of Fame and a SFWA Grand Master.

You might already know something about Harry Harrison, and you'll probably already have read some of his stories, but I hope by exploring this site that you'll discover something new and go on to enjoy reading more of Harry's books and short stories.

Each section of the site covers an individual novel or series, and almost all of them contain sample chapters so that you can 'try out' a book before going off to the library or book store.

Author

In a professional writing career spanning almost fifty years, Harry Harrison has created many popular works. At the beginning he gained popularity in John W. Campbell's Astounding / Analog magazine with the Deathworld novels and similar intelligent action-adventure stories. During the 1970s and 80s his most popular creation was The Stainless Steel Rat, whose adventures outsold the author's other novels almost two-to-one. Into the 1990s, and the West of Eden trilogy marked a new phase in Harrison's career, that of heavily-researched alternate history stories, of which the Stars and Stripes trilogy is the latest.

But in addition to these well-known works, there is a broad range of material - both in terms of content and style - deserving of attention.

Although primarily known as a science fiction writer, Harry Harrison has written in other genres too: his 1980 novel The QEII is Missing is a thriller in which the famous liner is found adrift with its passengers and crew all missing; and Skyfall (1976) is a disaster novel in which a nuclear-powered space station is doomed to crash to earth. The author's work in the mystery genre includes two novels - Montezuma's Revenge and Queen Victoria's Revenge - featuring Tony Hawkin, a museum-worker and Native American drafted in to help out the FBI. Harrison also 'ghosted' a Saint novel, Vendetta for the Saint (1964), which was published under Leslie Charteris' name.

Harry Harrison's science fiction falls into various categories too: there are the science-based adventure stories of his 'Campbell period' and their descendants the latest alternate history sagas; there are the serious 'theme' stories of In Our Hands, the Stars and Make Room! Make Room!; the satire of Bill, the Galactic Hero; the parody of Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers, and the humorous adventures of the Stainless Steel Rat series and The Technicolor Time Machine.

Soldier and Pacifist

Harry Harrison was drafted when he graduated high school in 1943, at the age of 18, and served four years in the Army Air Corps. He worked on secret military computers, as an armourer and gunnery instructor, and finally - promoted to sergeant - became a Military Policeman. During his time in the army, Harrison proved himself an excellent shot, and was awarded the Sharpshooter medal.

His wartime experiences left Harrison with an enduring loathing of military life and practices. These same experiences and loathing find their way into many of his stories: he feels deeply uneasy about the pro-military stance of much popular science fiction, and regards it as his job to redress the balance and "destroy the military" in his stories.

In 1967, Judith Merrill and Kate Wilhelm polled over 150 sf writers to ask whether they were for or against the United States' involvement in Vietnam, and the results were published in several sf magazines. Harry Harrison, needless to say, was one of the eighty-two who were against US involvement in Vietnam. Elsewhere he has said: "Vietnam was one of the biggest sins America ever committed."

Traveller

Editor Charles Monteith once described Harry Harrison as "the most peripatetic fellow I know," and with good reason. Harrison's travels began in earnest when he began his career as freelance writer in 1956; he and wife Joan - with their baby son Todd - left New York in their battered Ford Anglia and drove south; they settled in Cuautla, a little market town south of Mexico City. A year later they moved to London, taking advantage of a cheap flight for fans attending the first World Science Fiction Convention to be held outside of the United States. They took up residence in Bromley, Kent, after meeting a fan at the convention who lived there, then moved on to a Pakistani rooming house in London because they had met Pakistani friends of Hans Stefan Santesson. After England came Italy, and the island of Capri, south of Naples. A brief return to New York in 1959 for the birth of their daughter, Moira, was followed by a move to Copenhagen, Denmark, chosen because they had a friend there whom they had met in Mexico: they went for a visit and stayed for six years.

Returning to England in 1965, the Harrisons spent a year in Sutton, Surrey, before travelling back across the Atlantic on a cargo ship with their VW bus. After a stop-over in New York, they drove across America once more to take up residence in San Diego, California, not too far from the Mexican border. This remained their home for seven years, until the mid-seventies, when Mr and Mrs Harrison returned to England, intending to buy a house there. But when the purchase fell through, the Harrisons paid a brief visit to the Republic of Ireland: they took up residence there in 1975, first in County Wicklow and later Dublin, which remains their permanent home.

While America, England, Italy, Denmark, and Ireland have all been home to Harry Harrison, his travels have taken him much further afield, including Russia, Yugoslavia, Brazil, China and Japan. His experiences in these countries have provided authentic locations for many of his stories, and his knowledge, and enjoyment, of different languages have allowed for countless linguistic puns in the naming of planets, alien races, and characters in his novels.

Perhaps it is the scope of these travels which results in the international popularity of Harry Harrison's work: his stories have been published in more than thirty languages, including Esperanto, which Harrison, of course, speaks like a native...

Esperantist

Harry Harrison learned to read and write Esperanto while in the army during the Second World War, accepting the challenge of a book titled Learn Esperanto in 17 Easy Lessons as a way of escaping the boredom of military life. Returning to New York, and civilian life, after the war, Harrison joined a local society and learned how to speak Esperanto as well as read it.

Harrison has made many friends during his travels around the world, seeking out local Esperanto groups in the places he has visited, and he has also addressed such groups as a speaker.

At science fiction conventions and in his novels - particularly the Stainless Steel Rat series, where Esperanto is literally the universal language - Harrison has continued to promote Esperanto. His efforts were recognised in 1985 when he was elected honorary patron of the Universal Esperanto Association, an honour he shared with only eight others - linguists, scientists, and the president of the Swedish parliament.

Comics Artist and Writer

Harry Harrison began his post-war career as a commercial artist providing illustrations for books, jackets, non-fiction books, and sf magazines including Worlds Beyond and Galaxy Science Fiction. He also illustrated comic books in partnership with Wally Wood: together they produced hundreds of pages of romance for Fox Comics, before moving on to EC Comics, where they started on romance titles such as Rangeland Romance, and then progressed to EC's detective and horror comics. Eventually they worked on Weird Science, which Harrison is credited with initially suggesting to the publisher.

Harrison began editing comics, then, when the US comics industry went into decline, he moved on to art direction, including a stint on Picture Week. He edited a number of magazines - for which he also wrote a great deal of content, including 'true life' adventures and an 'agony aunt' column. In later years Harrison would go on to edit sf magazines including Impulse / Science Fantasy; Amazing Stories and Fantastic.

When he became a freelance writer in 1956, Harrison continued to work in the comics field, writing syndicated comic strips. He wrote The Saint and Flash Gordon. In Britain he wrote a number of comics, including Jeff Hawke; Rick Random - Space Detective; and Merlo the Magician for Boy's World. The latter comic also featured an adaptation of Deathworld under the title The Angry Planet.

More recently, several of Harrison's books and stories have been adapted into comic books, The Stainless Steel Rat series, the Deathworld trilogy, and Bill, the Galactic Hero among them.