BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT

CONTRACT MANAGEMENT

Determine Review

Product Snapshot

Product Pricing

Contact vendor directly for pricing information.

Technology

Platform is a SaaS solution and requires no additional hardware for installation.

Customer Focus

Vendor works with midsize to multi-national companies across multiple industries.

Select Customers

Contact vendor directly for case studies.

About Determine

Determine is source-to-pay and contract management software that includes sourcing, supplier management, contract management and procure-to-pay applications. The platform enables users to implement industry best practices, works as a single source of unified data and links company-wide solutions and workflows.

The software supports supplier management through supplier onboarding, risk and performance management, sourcing processes including project management and RFx management, and is equipped with einvoicing capabilities. Additionally, the platform encompasses CLM activities including an authoring and clause library, negotiation management tools, and clause and risk management functionality.

About the Company

Determine Inc was founded in 1996 and is headquartered in Carmel, Indiana.

Determine Key Features

Invoice management tools including AP automation, no PO invoices, and travel and expense management

Financial management tools such as budget management, financial tracking and cost allocation

Business apps including asset management, inventory management and custom apps

Spend analytics, procurement analytics and custom analytics

Procurement tools include purchase requisition, catalog management and purchase orders

Business-Software.com is your go-to source for business software reviews, free software comparison reports and all of your software needs. Our business software reviews cover top-rated business accounting software solutions, the top 20 ERP software and leading CRM software applications for small, midsize and enterprise companies alike. Browse our software reports for CMS solutions, top HR software and more to meet all of your business software management needs. Use our free business software product search to start your search!

© Copyright 2024 Business-Software.com. All Rights Reserved.