SAN MATEO, CA--(Marketwired - Feb 25, 2014) - Selectica, Inc. (NASDAQ: SLTC), a leading provider of software that streamlines contract processes and accelerates sales cycles, today announced they have retained Genesis Select for investor relations services.

Genesis Select will provide Selectica with the communications framework necessary to develop a comprehensive investor relations outreach program, as well as provide ongoing assistance to the Company in building relationships within the institutional investment community with the goals of raising awareness and maximizing shareholder value.

"Genesis Select impressed us with their knowledge of the SaaS space and their experience helping micro-cap companies build awareness on Wall Street," said Blaine Mathieu, President and Chief Executive Officer of Selectica. "Our recent equity raise allows us to accelerate investment in our core technologies and continued channel development. Near term, we are focused on providing the highest level of service to our existing customers, building future cross-sell opportunities, and ramping our sales team to further drive our contract management and configuration solutions into the market. Genesis Select will be instrumental in raising our profile with institutional investors as we execute on our plan."

Genesis Select Corporation, founded in 1998 by Budd Zuckerman, a former institutional capital markets professional, is headquartered in Boulder, Colorado. The Genesis team provides targeted exposure and vital communications for public companies with the aim of improving the effectiveness of their communication with Wall Street and expanding their visibility within the institutional investment community.

"We are delighted to work with Selectica, an up-and-coming player in the SaaS market with a state of the art product set," stated Budd Zuckerman, founder and President of Genesis Select. "We believe the company is well positioned for growth in the exciting contract management solutions and configuration software spaces, which are projected to grow up to 20% annually for the next few years. With the recent equity raise, a new and strong management team in place as well as a solid roster of Fortune 500 customers, Selectica is poised to further grow their pipeline and expand their business."

About Selectica, Inc.

Selectica, Inc. (NASDAQ: SLTC) is a leading provider of enterprise contract management and configuration solutions. Since 1996 Selectica has been helping global customers actively manage contracts throughout the sales, procurement and legal life cycle. Selectica's Contract Management software drives value by helping organizations manage contracts profitably, effectively accelerating revenue opportunities, and minimizing risk through compliance. Our patented technology, delivered through the cloud, enables customers in industries including high-tech, telecommunications, manufacturing, healthcare and financial services to accelerate and streamline contract management and sales processes.

Supporting Resources

Selectica blog

Selectica on Facebook

Selectica on Twitter

Selectica customer case studies

Selectica guides & misc. resources

Forward-Looking Statements

Certain statements in this release and elsewhere by Selectica are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements may include, without limitation, statements regarding business outlook, assessment of market conditions, anticipated financial and operating results, strategies, product and channel development, future plans, contingencies and contemplated transactions of the company. Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause or contribute to actual results of company operations, or the performance or achievements of the company or industry results, to differ materially from those expressed, or implied by the forward-looking statements. In addition to any such risks, uncertainties and other factors discussed elsewhere herein, risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause or contribute to actual results differing materially from those expressed or implied for the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, fluctuations in demand for Selectica's products and services; risks of losing key personnel or customers, protection of the company's intellectual property, government policies and regulations, including, but not limited to those affecting the company's industry. Selectica undertakes no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Additional risk factors concerning the company can be found in the company's most recent Form 10-K, as supplemented in the company's most recent Form 10-Q, each as filed by the company with the Securities and Exchange Commission.