This product is no longer available

This product has been renamed or acquired by another company. You can find the new product offering at Determine.

CONTRACT MANAGEMENT

– Selectica CLM Review

Product Snapshot

Technology

Selectica CLM is a SaaS solution and requires no additional hardware for installation.

Customer Focus

Selectica works with mid-sized and enterprise clients.

Select Customers

,

View Vendor's Product Page

About Selectica CLM

Selectica Contract Lifecycle Management Software streamlines the entire contracting process so that you can easily find, create, sign and track your contracts. Creating contracts is easy in this system, because it’s as simple as answering some questions, choosing a template and adding pre-set clauses from a library. For negotiations, Selectica CLM tracks each change in Word and enables clients to sign with electronic signatures. After the contract is finalized, you can easily pull it up through the program’s robust search engine and filtering tools. Lastly, the program helps you enforce contract compliance by automatically sending messages when obligations, deadlines, and the like are not met.

About Selectica

Selectica was founded in 1996 and is headquartered in San Mateo, CA. The company launched its IPO in 2000 and is on NASDAQ as SLTC. Selectica’s programs are used by companies globally and are responsible for closing billions of dollars each year.

Selectica CLM Key Features

Contract management system

Creates contracts easily through a creation wizard, pre-set clauses, and form templates

Robust search and filtering tools help you go through your contract archive

Tracks each contract wording change in Word

Online signatures

Automatically generates alerts for contract obligation issues

Reports monitor contract fulfillment statuses

Accessible by mobile device

Integrates with most ERP, CRM, SRM, and BI systems

Business-Software.com is your go-to source for business software reviews, free software comparison reports and all of your software needs. Our business software reviews cover top-rated business accounting software solutions, the top 20 ERP software and leading CRM software applications for small, midsize and enterprise companies alike. Browse our software reports for CMS solutions, top HR software and more to meet all of your business software management needs. Use our free business software product search to start your search!

© Copyright 2024 Business-Software.com. All Rights Reserved.