The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen [CUHK(SZ)] is a new, independent university established in March 2014. Founded through a Memorandum of Understanding between The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Shenzhen University and the Shenzhen Municipal Government, the new University is a research-orientated, forward-thinking, non-profit making University, which places emphasis on cross-disciplinary teaching and research. The establishment of CUHK(SZ) is an initiative to help nurture future generations of university graduates who are international in outlook, learned in the disciplines they follow, upright in their character, and committed to serving the needs of society.

CUHK(SZ) will draw upon CUHK’s traditions of academic excellence and no effort will be spared to ensure that the teaching quality at CUHK(SZ) is on a par with that of the CUHK, so that it will become a preferred research university located in Shenzhen, firmly rooted in China, and endowed with a global vision. Students will be provided with an education experience distinguished by a flexible credit unit system, a college system, whole person general education, bilingualism as well as multiculturalism. With the mission of advancing creation, preservation, application and dissemination of knowledge through the pursuit of excellence in teaching, research and public service; and the vision of establishing as a first-class research university regionally, nationally and internationally, CUHK(SZ) will provide world-class educational opportunities to students in the PRD Region and nurture talents for Shenzhen, the PRD Region and China as a whole.

There are three schools in CUHK(SZ), namely the School of Management and Economics, the School of Science and Engineering, and the School of Humanities and Social Science. The Senate of CUHK is responsible for the assessment and approval of the academic programmes. CUHK(SZ) will first introduce three undergraduate degree programmes in fall 2014, including Marketing and Communication, Global Business Studies, and Economics, and later phase in various programmes in Science and Engineering, Management and Economics, and Humanities and Social Science, including Materials Science and Engineering, Finance, Urban Studies as well as other innovative and inter-disciplinary subjects. The postgraduate degree programme plans have also been completed. The recruitment for both undergraduate and postgraduate students will commence in 2014.

Located in a picturesque site to the south of the Universiade Park in Longgang District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, the campus of CUHK(SZ) occupies an area of around 100 hectares (1 million square metres) with a buildable area of around 500,000 square metres. The green pastures, the rolling hills and the serene lake offer stunning views and a quiet learning environment. The initial phase (55,000 square metres) of campus construction was completed in March of 2014, whilst the phase 1 (300,000 square metres) construction is expected to be completed in 2016.

We warmly welcome top talents worldwide to join CUHK(SZ)! For more details, please refer to our website of www.cuhk.edu.cn

Open Position

Category

Position

Hiring Unit

Academic

Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor

(Ref# 1415/001/2)

School of Management and Economics

Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor

(Ref# 1415/002/1)

School of Science and Engineering

Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor

(Ref# 1415/003/1)

School of Science and Engineering

Lecturer/ Assistant Lecturer – English Language

(Ref # 1415/016/01)

School of Humanities and Social Science

Administrative & Professional

Communications and Public Relations Manager

(Ref # 1415/006/01)

Communications and Public Relations Office

Assistant Librarian

(Ref # 1415/011/01)

Library

Executive & Technical

IT Services Officer

(Ref # 1415/007/01)

IT Services Office

Library Assistant

(Ref # 1415/012/01)

Library

Executive Assistant for President’s Office

(Ref # 1415/013/01)

President’s Office

Post Specification ↑

Academic Posts

1. Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor – The School of Management and Economics(Ref# 1415/001/2)

Junior applicants should have (i) a PhD degree (by the time of reporting duty) in relatedfields, such as Accountancy, Economics, Finance, Management, Marketing, Operations Management, and Management Information Systems; and (ii) high potential in teaching and research. Candidates for Associate and Full Professor posts are expected to have demonstrated academic leadership and strong commitment to the highest standard of excellence. Appointments will normally be made on contract basis for up to three years initially, leading to longer-term

appointment or tenure later subject to mutual agreement. Exceptionally, appointment with tenure can be offered forthwith to candidates of proven ability.

2. Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor – School of Science and Engineering(Ref# 1415/002/1)

Junior applicants should have (i) a PhD degree (by the time of reporting duty) in related fields, such as statistics, numerical linear algebra, data mining, optimization, machine learning, computer systems; and (ii) high potential in teaching and research. Candidates for Associate and Full Professor posts are expected to have demonstrated academic leadership and strong commitment to the highest standards of excellence. Appointments will normally be made on contract basis for up to three years initially, leading to longer-term appointment or tenure later subject to mutual agreement. Exceptionally, appointment with tenure can be offered forthwith to candidates of proven ability.

3. Professor /Associate Professor/Assistant Professor – School of Science and Engineering(Ref# 1415/003/1)

Junior applicants should have (i) a PhD degree (by the time of reporting duty) in related fields, such as electronic circuits and devices, computer engineering, computer vision, energy systems, electromagnetic fields, digital /image processing, wireless communications etc.; and (ii) high potential in teaching and research. Candidates for Associate and Full Professor posts are expected to have demonstrated academic leadership and strong commitment to the highest standards of excellence. Appointments will normally be made on contract basis for up to three years initially, leading to longer-term appointment or tenure later subject to mutual agreement. Exceptionally, appointment with tenure can be offered forthwith to candidates of proven ability.

4. Lecturer/ Assistant Lecturer – English Language (Ref # 1415/016/01)

Applicants should have (i) a higher degree, at least to Master level, in English language teaching or applied linguistics, with training (at least at Bachelor level) in English language and/or education and (ii) proven record of teaching excellence, and relevant experience in teaching EAP, ESP and content-based courses at tertiary level.

The appointee will be responsible for (a) teaching University English language courses; (b) designing e-learning materials; and (c) assisting in curriculum development and administrative assignments.

Administrative and Professional Post ↑

1.Assistant Librarian (Ref # 1415/011/01)

Applicants should have (i) a bachelor degree in library science or computer science or above; (ii) Minimum 5 years of work experience in an academic library with a proven record as a team leader or head of a department; a full understanding of the operation of an academic library, and a familiarity with requirements and procedures of every position (iii) rich working experience in an institution where English is spoken; (iv) good command of at least one development language and has the experience of having developed a project which is now mature and in use; experience in the management of Unix-like operating system, and is familiar with at least one script language; Familiarity with basic applications of commonly used databases, such as Mysql, Sqlserver or Oracle; good knowledge of front-end design and open source content management system and the ability of implementation; ability to use or develop software to analyze MARC data; (v) outstanding interpersonal communication skills.

Duties include (a) assisting Librarian with management of daily operations of the library, particularly in the application and implementation of technologies for desirable library services; (b) managing the IT support team and provides comprehensive support to all departments of the library, including software development and hardware maintenance; (c) coordinating and balancing the demands for IT support and resources from different departments of the library and delivers effective and efficient solutions and methods for implementations; (d) coordinating IT support services between the library and different departments of the university and helps with the integration of library services into technology-based management platform of the university; being responsible for the maintenance of the management system and other systems for the operation of the library ; (e) being responsible for the maintenance of all technological systems, equipments and facilities for public services, such as computer workstations and AV equipments; (f) being responsible for the operation and maintenance of the servers for

local resource databases and concerned services; being responsible for the secondary development of software based on applying systems of the library; being responsible for the development of software specific for the library operation; being responsible for the construction of the multi-functional library website and its maintenance and (g) completing other assignments as stipulated by the management.

2. Communications and Public Relations Manager (Ref # 1415/006/01)

Applicants should have (i) a Bachelor degree, a higher degree would be an advantage; (ii) at least 3 years relevant working experience in public relations, journalism, external affairs or related fields; (iii) excellent coordination capability and crisis management ability; (iv) rich experience in internet/print media, all kinds of media distribution & the pros and cons of respective-coverage; connections to media networks will be highly preferable; (v) knowledge of Chinese and overseas higher education sector operations, especially in Shenzhen and the Pearl River Delta area; (vi) good command of both written and spoken English and Chinese.

Duties include (a) formulating and executing public relations and communications strategic plans; (b) conducting press releases and answering questions from the media and the public; (c) building, developing and maintaining public relations; (d) acquiring and analyzing published news and data; managing the strategy of public relations and monitoring its effectiveness; providing analysis reports ; (e) building and maintaining the university's brand and image; (f) taking proactive practices ; playing leading role of crisis management; and (g) completing other assignments as stipulated by the management.

Executive and Technical Post ↑

1. IT Services Officer (Ref # 1415/007/01)

Applicants should have (i) a Bachelor degree, a higher degree would be an advantage; (ii) at least eight years’post©\qualification relevant experience, preferably in tertiary institutions; of which, at least five years’ relevant postqualification hands-on experience, and at least three years’ management experience; (iii) demonstration of results in planning, developing and implementing technical user services; (iv) knowledge of a variety of audio-visual and/or computing technologies as well as related methodologies and standards; (v) proven ability to work collaboratively with faculty, staff and students; (vi) the ability to work both independently and as a team; (vi) ability to communicate both in written and spoken English and Chinese; (vii) experience in working in a multi-cultural environment would be an advantage.

Duties include (i) assisting the Director of Information Technology Services in planning as well as developing and implementing related IT policies, standards, regulations and procedures in User Services which covers classroom and PC support in additional to Help Desk services; The ITSC Help Desk serves as a single-point of entry for all IT services which provides tier one support for students and staff members; (ii)leading and managing User Services in particular to provide friendly and high-level of services to support research, teaching and learning as well as administration; (iii)providing and organizing training; (iv) performing any other duties as assigned by the supervisor.

2. Library Assistant (Ref # 1415/012/01)

Applicants should have (i) a bachelor degree or above in Library Science or other majors in Social Sciences and Humanities, Business and Management, or Science and Technology; (ii) good communication skill in English (iii) Library work experience; (iv) good communication skills to help create a welcoming environment with user-focused services; (v) desire and ability to be engaged and collaborative in a team work environment.

Duties include (a) a variety of work in circulation, cataloging, reference and IT support; (b) completing other assignments as stipulated by the management.

3. Executive Assistant for President’s Office (Ref # 1415/013/01)

Applicants should have (i) a Master’s degree or above in Chinese Literature, History and/or related; (ii) 5 years relevant work experience (iii) excellent writing skills in Chinese and presentation skill; (iv) excellent communication skills in both English and Chinese; (v) knowledge of Chinese and overseas higher education sector operations, especially in Shenzhen and the Pearl River Delta area.

Duties include (a) being responsible for drafting and completing various documents and memorandum; (b) assisting external liaison affairs (c) completing other assignments as stipulated by the management.

Salary and Fringe Benefits ↑

Salary will be highly competitive and commensurate with qualifications and experience. Appointments will be made under the establishment of CUHK (SZ), and statutory benefits will be provided according to prevailing labor laws of the Chinese mainland.

Application Procedure ↑

We warmly welcome top talents worldwide to join CUHK (SZ). Please refer to our website of www.cuhk.edu.cn and send your full curriculum vitae with names of three referees by email to hr@cuhk.edu.cn.

Please mark ‘Application – Confidential’ and the post applied on the cover.