Introducing CUHK (SZ)

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (“University”) is established in accordance with the Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Chinese-foreign Cooperation in Running Schools upon approval of the Ministry of Education. It inherits the educational philosophy and academic systems of The Chinese University of Hong Kong. It is intended to evolve into a world class research university with strong Chinese cultural influence. It is committed to nurturing high end talent with global perspective, Chinese tradition and social responsibility. At present, the University has programmes in science, engineering, economic management, and humanities and social science. Its long term goal is to recruit 11,000 domestic and international students, 7,500 of whom will be undergraduate students and 3,500 Masters or PhD students. The University is located at 2001, Longxiang Boulevard, Longgang District, Shenzhen, to the south of the Dayun Park and to the north of Longxiang Boulevard, occupying about one million square meters. The President is responsible for the management of the University under the leadership of the Governing Board, a system that is in line with international practice. This is a positive step towards a modern university system with Chinese features. The University hires first class teaching staff from around the world and those teachers that have been employed are mostly renowned professors and scholars from world class universities, including several Nobel Prize laureates and academicians. The University is featured with an international learning environment, a bilingual teaching pedagogy, a collegiate system, general education courses, multidisciplinary programmes and a student-centered educational philosophy. The University stresses the importance of academic links and global perspective. Currently we have concluded agreements with more than 50 prestigious universities to jointly nurture undergraduate and post-graduate students. In response to the call of the nation and the Pearl River Delta region for emerging and strategic industries, the University is planning to form a world class expert team and to forge a platform for international technology innovation in robotics and intelligent manufacturing, big data, new energy, and finance and logistics. Up to now, more than 3,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students are studying at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Undergraduate programmes include Finance, Professional Accountancy, Global Business Studies, Marketing and Communication, Economics, Statistics, Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering, Electronic Information Engineering, New Energy Science and Engineer, Bioinformatics, and Translation. Postgraduate programs include Financial Engineering, Data Science, Finance, Economics, Accounting, Translation and Interpreting Studies, Simultaneous Interpreting and Supply Chain and Logistics Management. The University is now already offering one doctoral programme in Computer and Information Engineering.

Mission & Vision

To advance the creation, preservation, application and dissemination of knowledge through the pursuit of excellence in teaching, research and public service in a diverse range of disciplines, thereby serving the needs and enhancing the well-being of the citizens of the Pearl River Delta, China as a whole, and the wider world community. To be acknowledged regionally, nationally and internationally as a first-class research university whose bilingual and global dimensions of teaching and learning, scholarly output and contribution to the community consistently meet standards of excellence.

Emblem & Motto

The emblem of CUHK is the mythical Chinese bird feng (鳳) which has been regarded as the Bird of the South since the Han dynasty. It is a symbol of nobility, beauty, loyalty and majesty. The University colours of CUHK are purple and gold, representing devotion and loyalty, and perseverance and resolution, respectively. The motto of CUHK is '博文約禮' or 'Through learning and temperance to virtue'. These words of Confucius have long been considered a principal precept of his teaching. It is recorded in the Analects of Confucius that the Master says, 'The superior man, extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is right.' (Legge's version of the Four Books) In choosing '博文約禮' as its motto, CUHK is laying equal emphasis on the intellectual and moral aspects of education.