On the morning of December 16, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), awarded the First Honorary Fellowship to the following four outstanding individuals in recognition of their remarkable achievements in their respective professional fields and their significant contributions to the university and society: Mr. Deng Xueqin, President of Genzon Group and Chairman of Kexing Biopharm; Prof. Liu Zunyi, former President of the Chinese University of Hong Kong; Mr. Lai Haimin, Chairman of Horoy Group; Mr. Yang Xiangbo, former Chairman of the Board of Suibao Group.

The Honorary Fellowship Presentation Ceremony was presided over by Prof. Luo Zhiquan, Vice President of CUHK-Shenzhen. At the ceremony, Lin Chengchuan, Hou Shuozhao, Zhao Pusong and Zhang Qiying of CUHK-Shenzhen, read out the award motivations of the four Honorary Fellows, and Prof. Xu Yangsheng, President of CUHK-Shenzhen, handed over the certificates and commemorative plaques. Representatives of CUHK-Shenzhen's supervisors, faculties, and students, as well as relatives and friends of the four Honorary Fellows, attended the ceremony.

The award motivation read out during the ceremony recalled some of Deng's greatest achievements: With a strong desire for a "commercial civilization", he founded the Genzon Group in 2003 and made significant progress in the field. In 2008, he acquired Shenzhen Kexing Biotech Co., Ltd. (now Kexing Biopharm Co., Ltd.), the first modern biopharmaceutical enterprise in China. He was one of the first council members of CUHK-Shenzhen when it was first established in 2014 and in that same year he provided generous donations to establish the "Genzon Scholarship" to provide academically outstanding students from poor backgrounds with financial aid. Since 2016, he has made significant donations, creating a solid foundation for holistic education and the sustainable development of the university. In recognition of his support, CUHK-Shenzhen decided to name one of its colleges the "Diligentia College" (as Mr. Deng's first name, Xueqin, means "diligent in learning" or "study diligently"). Mr. Deng is deeply rooted in Shenzhen. This is where he studied and started his own business, and now he is giving back to society. His integrity, concentration, and impartiality have made him a model of his time and the backbone of the business community.

Prof. Xu Yangsheng, President of CUHK-Shenzhen, awarding the certificate and commemorative plaque to Mr. Deng Xueqin.

In his speech, Prof. Xu Yangsheng, President of CUHK-Shenzhen, expressed his sincere gratitude and congratulations to the Honorary Fellows, "The four Honorary Fellows are great examples of lifelong learning. To always remember their achievements, their names will be forever engraved on the copper wall of our library, allowing generations of scholars to walk in their footsteps and make further contributions to the nation, society, and science." Prof. Xu continued to say, "Seven years ago, we founded the university on a barren grassland with several abandoned factories. Today, thanks to the substantial support of the central government, the HKSAR Government, the Guangdong Provincial Government, and government authorities at all levels in Shenzhen, as well as the efforts from all parts of society in Shenzhen and Hong Kong, we now have seven schools and four colleges, with nearly 9,000 students and more than 400 world-class scholars, including five Nobel Laureates. I hope that our students and teachers will always remember those who helped them when they were in trouble and that they can do the same and reach out to a friend in need. This is the message we want to send and the reason why we are gathered here today, holding this Honorary Fellowship Presentation Ceremony."