Martijn van de Griendt (Eindhoven, 1970) is a documentary photographer and filmmaker from Haarlem. He takes photos for newspapers, magazines and works for communication and advertising agencies. In addition, he mainly works on his own long-term projects, which he usually presents in book form.

In March 2017, his first documentary Maria I Need Your Lovin' was broadcast by IKON on NPO 2Doc.

​

When he was fourteen, Martijn got his first camera and started taking the so-called snapshots. The real interest in reportage and documentary photography arises at the School of Journalism in Utrecht. After graduating from the School of Journalism in 1993, he went to the KABK in The Hague. (graduated 1997).

​

Van de Griendt records our rapidly changing Western society in thematic series. He also makes portraits of pop artists for music magazine OOR, among others.

He has been photographing young people all over the world for over 25 years. You can say that this has now become a 'specialty'. In 2014, the series resulted in a solo exhibition in the Rotterdam Kunsthal, including the accompanying photo book: Forever Young. The exhibition received four stars and a very favorable review in the Volkskrant: 'Numerous photographers strive to perpetuate youth culture; rarely succeeds in transcending the superficiality. Martijn van de Griendt succeeds in this. Besides exuberant and colorful his work is serious and respectful.'

He has now made nine photo books, including Hassan & Hoessein (2005) (about Moroccan-Dutch twins), All! (behind the scenes of the Dutch life song, 2006). The photo book I am seventeen (May 2016, on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of We are 17 by Johan van der Keuken). And the book Maria I Need Your Lovin' (March 2017) which came out at the same time as the documentary of the same name.

He was also the initiator of the photo book Brood about Herman Brood, a visual tribute by 59 photographers to the deceased rock hero (2001).

His work has been frequently shown in all kinds of exhibitions and exhibitions. A number of times, among others, at the Naarden Photo Festival, in the Rotterdam Kunsthal, in Galerie Pennings (Eindhoven), at the SBK (Amsterdam), in the Verkadefabriek (Den Bosch) and at the international photo festival BredaPhoto.