Obituary For John Frank Miller

John Frank Miller was born February 27, 1946, in Brownsville, Tennessee. He was the third of four children born to the union of Aubrey and Amye Bell Bowles Miller. John Frank or “John” as he preferred to be called in later years, made his earthly transition on Wednesday, May 18, 2022. His final hours were spent attending the 8th grade graduation ceremony of his granddaughter, Baili Price, at Maxine Smith Steam Academy. He enjoyed the beautiful outdoor ceremony with family and friends, while watching Baili receive her awards. After the ceremony, he took time out to visit with one of his lifelong friends, Howard Wrister, before making his heavenly transition.

John Frank accepted Christ at an early age while attending Pleasant Hill Baptist Church on Tillman Street in Memphis, Tennessee, under the spiritual leadership of Rev. U. L. Allen.

In 1964, John Frank became a proud graduate from the beloved Lester High School where he played point guard on the basketball team. It was during his high school years that he also developed his love for the game of golf. On January 31, 1968, he was drafted into the United States Army. While serving a tour of duty in Vietnam, he sustained shell fragment wounds and was awarded the National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Campaign Medal with 3 Campaign Stars and a Purple Heart. John Frank Miller received an honorable discharge January 30, 1970.

After honorably serving his country, John Frank returned home and married his high school sweetheart, Carol LaJuan Morris, May 9, 1970. It was to that union that the two of them were blessed with the birth of their only daughter, Lori LaJuan Miller, in 1973. Both John and Carol were devoted parents to their daughter and cherished the years watching her grow into a respectful young woman.

John worked as a mail carrier before leaving Memphis in 1977, for Tulsa, Oklahoma. He relocated to San Diego, California, in May, 1980. It was there that he met and married his second wife, Rosalina Landicho, on September 4, 1982. They relocated to Altadena, California, in 1983. John was employed with the Veterans Administration for over twenty years. John made California his home until 2004, enjoying those years until the loss of his wife, Rose.

In 2004, John moved back to Memphis to be with his mother until her death. John made a new home in Memphis reuniting with his daughter, Lori, and with the birth of his only grandchild, Baili Alexandria Price, July 8, 2007. Baili was the light of his world and his new reason for living until his death.

John was preceded in death by his beloved parents, Aubrey and Amye Miller; his brother, Charles T. Miller (Betty – Jackie), and his sister, Shirley White.

John leaves to cherish his memory his only daughter, Lori Miller; one granddaughter, Baili Price; one brother, Larry Miller, Sr. (Shirley); his former wife, Carol Miller; and a host of nephews, grand-nephews, grand-nieces, cousins, other family members and lifelong friends.

The family will receive friends Friday, May 27, 2022 from 11:30am until funeral service at 1:00pm, both services will be held at R. S. Lewis & Sons Funeral Home, 2944 Walnut Grove Rd. Memphis, TN 38111

Internment will be in West Tennessee Veterans Cemetery

Send flowers to the service of John Frank Miller