Mission

The Geneva School seeks to provide students in grades K4–12 an extraordinary education, by means of an integrated curriculum, pedagogy, and culture, both distinctly classical and distinctively Christian, that pursues goodness, truth, and beauty in all spheres of life, while viewing these spheres as elements of a divinely ordered whole. Further, Geneva seeks to instill in students a desire to love beauty, think deeply, and pursue Christ’s calling.

Accreditation & Membership

The Geneva School is accredited by the Florida Council of Independent Schools, is a charter member of The Association of Classical & Christian Schools, and is also a member of the Society for Classical Learning.

School & Community

The Geneva School, established in 1993, is a coeducational, college-preparatory day school with a K4–12 student body of 685 (265 in 7th–12th). The school campus is located in Casselberry, in suburban Orlando.

Faculty

The Geneva School seeks master teachers who have a passion for learning and who have advanced academic credentials and experience. Of the 39 faculty serving the upper school, 37 are degreed and 2 are professionals in their field (photography and AV arts/stagecraft) with many years of experience, 23 have earned one or more master’s degrees, and 5 have earned their doctorate.

Admission

Admission to The Geneva School is selective. The admission committee’s evaluation of each applicant is based on academic records, teacher recommendations, standardized test scores, pre-admission assessments, and student interviews. The Geneva School admits students of any race, color, and national or ethnic origin.

Rhetoric (with Senior Thesis)

Rhetoric is the art of leading souls with words, and it requires the ability to see the available means of persuasion in any given situation. In a four-year sequence of classes, Geneva students pursue this art through study of classical and contemporary speeches and arguments of all kinds, as well as through their own public speaking, in and out of the classroom. As they grow in the skills and habits of reasoning well and speaking well, they are encouraged to use their words in ways that lead to human flourishing and that are faithful to scripture and the historic Christian tradition.

The culmination of the students’ rhetorical education is the senior thesis project, in which each senior composes an extensive, carefully researched argument on a topic of contemporary significance. After working through a number of drafts of their paper with the help of a faculty advisor, the student delivers it orally in the form of a classical oration and defends it before faculty, peers, and community.