The Geneva School is about casting a vision for building living cathedrals. Our goal is to cast a vision before each one of our students concerning the true and proper ends for which they are being privileged with a Christian and classical education. Our goal for each one is not so short-sighted as to be only about grades and test scores and transcripts, regardless of how significant they are in attaining the ultimate goal. Our goals for them include being a responsible servant leader in the Kingdom of God. We aspire for them to attain wisdom and scholarship by cultivating the virtues of faith, hope, and love conjoined to goodness, truth, and beauty. We trust that each student will maximize his and her academic capabilities as well as their artistic, athletic, and leadership skills. We intend to educate and lead souls; our fervent desire is to see students grow into the image of Christ, and to bear the fruit of the Spirit, including love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.

The Geneva School seeks to provide students in grades K4–12 an extraordinary education, by means of an integrated curriculum, pedagogy and culture, both distinctly classical and distinctively Christian, that pursues goodness, truth, and beauty in all spheres of life, while viewing these spheres as elements of a divinely ordered whole. Further, Geneva seeks to instill in students a desire to love beauty, think deeply, and pursue Christ’s calling.

The Geneva School seeks to become an educational institution of scholastic and cultural gravitas, of extraordinary and exemplary virtuous scholars, a formidable force in the expansion and enrichment of Christ’s kingdom, in the life both of the individual and of the world. The Geneva School seeks to instill in the educational community it cultivates an enduring love of learning, a commitment to serve others, and a dedication to the pursuit of religious truth, moral goodness, and aesthetic beauty, forged from historical models of orthodox Christianity.

The Geneva School exists because students need an education that orders their loves and renews their minds in preparation for service in the Kingdom of God. That is to say, we believe that education is about Christian formation from the ground up. A robust academic program is essential to a formative Christian education, and Geneva’s creative appropriation of the classical liberal arts delivers well on that score. Our vision, however, extends well beyond academics. A Geneva education is an education for life. Since a flourishing human life is as much intellectual as it is social, spiritual, physical, and practical, we seek to provide an education that finds a harmony of the academic, spiritual, social, and athletic aspects of a student’s learning experience.

When we think about academics we often have in mind a palette of subjects like mathematics, science, history, and literature. While these subjects are central to our academic curriculum, perhaps it will be surprising to find that physical education and the fine and performing arts are also academic areas of study at Geneva, not merely extra-curricular activities. The creative, the intellectual, and the athletic are integral parts of our academic curriculum.

The organization of the academic information included here reflects the structure of the school itself. In the tradition of the great schools in the liberal arts tradition, Geneva is organized into three schools, each bearing the name of one of the the liberal arts of language that features prominently in the grades housed in that school. The Grammar School includes grades K4–6, the Dialectic School grades 7–8, and the Rhetoric School grades 9–12. Although the language arts are highlighted somewhat by the names of the school, make no mistake, the mathematical arts, as well as the fine and performing arts, join them to form the fabric of the curriculum.

Our teachers seek to embody the truths that they present not only through teaching that engages all the senses, but also through lives that demonstrate their own commitment to and love for their students, each other, and the God they seek to serve. Subjects are integrated historically, thematically, and developmentally, while always flowing from or leading to the truths of Scripture. The curriculum from K4–12 is vibrant and life-affirming, fostering dialogue between and among the students, teachers, and administrators. The aim of this curriculum is to cultivate a love of learning.

A goal of The Geneva School is to educate the whole child: mind, body, and soul. We recognize there is a great kingdom calling on every life, and take seriously the opportunity to shape a child for his or her calling. The Geneva School not only aims to equip students for college, but also to instill in them a life-long love of learning and delight in God’s truth that will enable them flourish in life and their chosen vocation.