Geneva Business School, an international private institution registered and located in the Canton of Geneva, offers undergraduate, graduate and doctorate programs in Business Administration and Finance with a strong focus on international and geopolitical components.

Geneva Business School is celebrating over 25 years of cutting-edge, Swiss-quality education. Since its creation in 1995, the school has developed from a single campus to state-of-the-art campuses in Geneva, Barcelona, and Madrid, with plans to expand even further. During that time, the professionally active faculty has guided Bachelor’s, Master’s, MBA and DBA students both inside the classroom and at off-campus events, providing a 360º learning experience that fully prepares students for the modern job market.

With a commitment to evolving with modern educational demands, Geneva Business School is expanding its campus network, integrating new technology in its classrooms, and designing new courses to meet the needs of current and future students.

Professor Francis Kahn, the esteemed Founder of Geneva Business School, has been instrumental in shaping the institution’s history. His journey, which began in the classrooms as a teacher, led him to establish the University of Finance, marking a significant milestone in his career. The pinnacle of his journey is the 25-year development of Geneva Business School, a testament to his commitment to educational excellence. This period has seen the institution transform into a leading educational powerhouse, known for its Swiss-quality education and innovative curriculum. Kahn’s leadership and dedication have been pivotal in the school’s continuous growth and success.

At Geneva Business School, we are celebrating over 25 years of cutting-edge, Swiss-quality education. Since our creation in 1995, we have developed from a single campus to state-of-the-art campuses in Geneva, Barcelona, and Madrid, with plans to expand even further.

During that time, our professionally active faculty have guided Bachelor’s, Master’s, MBA and DBA students both inside the classroom and at off-campus events, providing a 360º learning experience that fully prepares students for the modern job market.

With a commitment to evolving with modern educational demands, we are expanding our campus network, integrating new technology in our classrooms, and designing new courses to meet the needs of our current and future students.