Rank Description Leutnant Unlike other houses, the grade of Leutnant is not a true officer in the normal sense as they have not yet been given a command. They are normally addressed by their function in the unit ("MechWarrior", "Pilot", etc.) rather than by rank. Most will remain at this rank for their careers. The more ambitious and competent officers will be given temporary commands of their lance or platoon as a means to test their leadership skills. Leutnants wear a Spear Point similar to that of a Staff Sergeant, but with the innermost triangle blackened. First Leutnant Once a Leutnant has shown the requisite leadership skills to advance, they are given a commission to First Leutnant and given command of a lance or platoon. This rank is denoted by a horizontal blue bar above the Leutnant's Spear Point. Hauptmann Hauptmann, or Captain, is normally a company commander. Hauptmanns are usually the highest rank that will see combat on a day-to-day basis. The rank is denoted by blackening the inner two triangles of the Leutnant Spear Point. Kommandant Kommandants are the commanders of a battalion. The rank is denoted by adding a horizontal blue bar above the Hauptmann rank. Hauptmann Kommandant This rank is reserved for senior battalion officers within a regiment. The Hauptmann-Kommandant often acts as a liaison between the regimental commanders and the regimental forces, ensuring that commanders are aware of tactical and strategic information while insuring that the regiment carries out the regimental commander orders. The rank is denoted by an all-black Spear Point. Rank Description Leutnant Colonel This rank is generally reserved for a regiment's second-in-command. They are tasked with insuring that the regiment is properly supplied and supported. In difficult battle scenarios, Leutnant-Colonels may be given direct command of critical unit deployments. The insignia is a single silver pip, an elongated diamond-shaped piece of metal. In the navy, this rank is called Leutnant-Kaptain. Colonel Colonels are commanders of regiments and must be expert not only in strategy and tactics but also in logistics and supply management. Colonels of 'Mech regiments defend entire worlds. The rank is denoted by two silver pips. In the navy, this rank is called Kaptain. Leutnant General These officers act as aides to the military commanders for one of the four military districts within the Commonwealth. It is the lowest rank at which an officer can assume command of an entire service branch, such as Military Intelligence. The rank is denoted by adding a third silver pip beneath the two pips, forming a "T". In the navy, this rank is called Leutnant-Kommodore. Hauptmann General Officers of this rank are usually the commanders of one of the four military districts of the Lyran Commonwealth. Their responsibilities include defense of the civilian, industrial, and agricultural targets against enemy attack. It is also their responsibility to blunt major enemy offensives long enough to rally theater-wide defenses or counteroffensives. The rank is denoted by four silver pips forming what is called the First Steiner Cross. In the navy, this rank is called Kommodore. Kommandant General This rank is given to the aide of a Margrave in one of the military districts. They are responsible for ensuring that all units in the theater are well supplied. They also command all of the reserve and garrison units on planets in the theater. The rank is called the Second Steiner Cross, which is denoted by adding a black pearl to the center of the First Steiner Cross. In the navy, this rank is called Hauptmann-Kommodore. General Officers holding this rank are responsible for major theaters of operation along the Lyran border. They also hold the title of Margrave, a political title related to the theater and not the individual. Officers of this rank wear the Third Steiner Cross, which is similar to the Second Steiner Cross with the addition of an "orbit", or silver disc, beneath the pearl in the center of the cross. In the navy, this rank is called Admiral. General of the Armies This is the highest rank in the LCAF other than Archon. Officers holding this rank are responsible for planning major operations within and without the Commonwealth. They form the LCAF High Command and are some of the military's most experienced and respected officers. The rank is denoted by the Fourth Steiner Cross, which differs from the Third in that it adds a second "orbit" of obsidian under the silver orbit. In the navy, this rank is called Fleet Admiral. Archon The Archon is the commander of the LCAF and usually plays an active role in its actions. The rank is denoted by the Final Steiner Cross, which is distinct from the other senior officers by dividing the four pips of the cross into halves and filling the space between them with gold. In certain situations where the Archon is unable to make vital military decisions, a Pro Tem may be selected. The Pro Tem is authorized to wear the Final Steiner Cross to denote that they act with the authority of the Archon.