Braille Institute Coachella Valley hosts a Holiday Pop Up Shop

Palm Desert, CA Braille Institute Coachella Valley will offer a 1-day Holiday Pop Up Shop on Monday, December 11 from 1 – 3 pm at the Braille Institute Coachella Valley…

City Of Palm Desert Celebrates 50 Years With A Very Special Party In The Park

Palm Desert, CA The City of Palm Desert is excited to announce the celebration of its 50th anniversary with a very special day-long event, The Party in the Park, from…

At El Paseo, Tommy Bahama Home Store Showcases Lifestyle Furniture Collections

(Tommy Bahama Store, El Paseo Palm Desert) Palm Desert, CA Located directly across from the Gardens Mall on El Paseo, at 73-540 El Paseo Dr., the Tommy Bahama Home store…

City Of Palm Desert To Donate “Recreation Liberates” Sculpture By Jos Gomolka

Palm Desert, CA The City of Palm Desert announced its intention to donate the iconic sculpture “Recreation Liberates” by renowned artist Jos Gomolka. This magnificent glass sculpture, which has graced…

Breakfast Republic Takes Flight in Palm Desert: Local Brunch Spot Lands its First Desert Location

(Breakfast Republic, Palm Desert Location) Palm Desert, CA Breakfast Republic, the cherished San Diego-born brunch spot, is making waves in Palm Desert with the opening of its first desert location.…

City Of Palm Desert Seeks Inaugural Poet Laureate

Palm Desert, CA The City of Palm Desert is now accepting nominations for the position of Palm Desert Poet Laureate for the inaugural 2023-2024 term. The Poet Laureate will be…

Burner: The Exhibition Makes Palm Desert Stop on North American Tour: Artist KEF! to Accompany Collection

Palm Desert, CA Palm Desert’s premier contemporary art space, presents, in a limited engagement presentation, Burner: A Group Exhibition of International Street Artists. This Collection featuring works from globally renowned street artists Dalek,…

Ice Skating in the Desert? It Starts Today at Berger Foundation Iceplex

Palm Desert, CA Just in time for the holidays, the new Berger Foundation Iceplex at Acrisure Arena has opened to residents and visitors in the Coachella Valley. The Ice Skating…

Justin and Hailey Bieber Spotted at Keedy’s Fountain & Grill in Palm Desert

(Justin and Hailey Bieber posing with Keedy's Fountain & Grill Staff) Palm Desert, CA The Coachella Valley continues to be a place where many celebrities escape the hustle and bustle…