Ann Teresa (Marihart) Haugen, 72 of Palm Desert, CA, formerly of Graceville, MN passed away on September 2nd, 2021. A celebration of life for Ann was held at Monterey Country Club on Thursday September 9th, 2021. Funeral services will be Saturday, September 17, 2022, at 11:00 a.m. at Holy Rosary Catholic Church in Graceville, MN, followed by a burial in the St. Patrick Cemetery in Collis, MN.

Ann Teresa Marihart was born on October 17, 1948, to Evelyn Rose (Rausch) and John Leo Marihart.

Ann described growing up in a farming community in far western Minnesota "as a kind of place where you really get to know people". Ann and her family lived about 10 miles from of Graceville, MN, where she went to school. The town of Collis was about five miles east. In Collis, the family worshiped at St. Patrick's Church. The town also had a general store, gas pumps and about a dozen houses.

Ann had several interests as a child: The love of cats - there were usually several cats underfoot around the farm. They were all spoiled; they hung around the house waiting for scraps instead of hunting for mice. Reading - on the upstairs landing there were shelves full of books. And making things - with her sister Carolyn. They would make snow forts in the winter with rooms and hallways that led to each. Played house a lot, in all seasons. When the variety store in town didn't have any new paper doll books, she would make her paper dolls and outfits for them.

From kindergarten through to 8th grade, Ann attended parochial school at Holy Rosary in Graceville. There wasn't a Catholic high school so the twelve 8th graders from her class attended Graceville High School. Ann was in the Honor Society, in the Future Homemakers Club and worked on the school paper. After graduation, Ann when on to study business at North Dakota State School of Science in Wahpeton, ND.

Ann's daughter, Jennie was born shortly before her 20th birthday. She worked hard and long hours to make ends meet as a divorced mother. Ann was grateful that she could provide a secure happy environment for Jennie and herself.

Ann met Greg Haugen in the Winter of 1972. They met at a party, neither of them knew the hosts, but had come with friends. Ann and Greg married on November 2, 1974, at St. Stephen's Catholic Church in Minneapolis MN. Shortly after marriage, she, Jennie, and Greg moved to Ambler, PA, and purchased their first home. After three short years in Pennsylvania, they moved to Glen Ellyn, IL, where they spent 31 years and raised their three children: Jennie, Eric and Daniel.

While in Illinois, Ann worked for Ball Seed (George Ball Horticulture) in West Chicago, IL; eventually retiring after 30 years of service. Upon retirement, Ann and Greg relocated to Palm Desert, CA, in 2008. Ann would comment that their desert home in Monterey Country Club was her favorite house. She loved designing the interior.

When she was not volunteering at several non-profits in the Desert (including Barbara Sinatra Children's Center), Ann's favorite pastimes included reading, cooking, decorating her home, going to book club and breakfast with her girlfriends, and most of all - spending time with her kids and grandkids.

Ann is survived by her husband of 46 years, Gregory P. Haugen; daughter, Jennie (Paul) Rayner of Palm Desert, CA; sons: Eric (Ashley) Haugen of New York, NY; and Daniel (Susan) Haugen of Columbus, OH; grandchildren: Blake Ann Haugen and Luke Michael Haugen of Columbus, OH; and Kennedy Ara Haugen of New York, NY; siblings: Carolyn (Leroy) Jans of Montevideo, MN; David (Deborah) Marihart of Dumont, MN; Dale (Joann) Marihart of Dumont, MN; Stephen (Kathy) Marihart of Dawson, MN; Roy (Jan) Marihart of Dawson, MN; and 20 nephews and nieces.

Ann was preceded in death by her parents.