Palm Desert may have been one man’s vision, but it took an extended family and more than a few wealthy friends to make it happen.

What was to become Palm Desert was first discovered by Randall Henderson, publisher of the “Desert Magazine.” While exploring the desert, Randall and his business partner found a desert cove protected by the Santa Rosa Mountains. They both agreed that the cove would be a great location for their magazine, then located in El Centro.

World War II got in the way and Randall left to serve his country. He and his brother Clifford, both Army aviators, ran into each other in North Africa. Cliff had a vision of an upscale, postwar, planned community. He asked that if Randall should get back to the States first, that he scout around for a location for that vision.

Cliff was hospitalized for desert fever that he had contracted in North Africa and returned to the U.S. On release from the hospital, an Army doctor suggested he recover in the dry climate of the California desert.

Comedian ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, whom Cliff had befriended previously, suggested that he come stay at Bergen’s ranch located between Indio and Palm Springs. Exhausted, Cliff headed for the Coachella Valley. In a very short time, he regained his strength and became a believer in the benefits of living in the desert.

By this time, Randall had returned from the war and moved his publishing business to the cove location he had found previously. Randall recommended that Cliff build his planned community in that same area, not far from Bergen’s ranch. Cliff took his brother’s advice and launched his vision of a community destined to become Palm Desert.

Cliff had a lot of experience as a promoter. He headed up the development of Mines Field, the municipal airport that would become LAX after World War II. He left to promote the growth of aviation through the National Air Races. The National Air Races introduced the public to aviation and spurred advances in aviation technology.

Cliff’s organizational skills and his natural talent for showmanship served the National Air Races well. Attendance swelled, along with the prize money. With war on the horizon, the races were curtailed in 1939.

He was no stranger to real estate development either. Cliff and his brother Phil developed the art deco icon Pan-Pacific Auditorium in LA, for which investors received a healthy return. He repeated his magic with the Pasadena Winter Garden Project, and again with the Pan-Coast Properties, which included the historic Santa Ynez Inn. Palm Desert was next.

READ MORE: Melba Bennett and the gardens of Palm Springs

READ MORE: The history of usually dry and sometimes stormy weather in Palm Springs

READ MORE: The McCallum Adobe Museum is bringing 6 never-before-seen exhibits

Cliff bought several parcels of land south of the Indio Highway (Highway 111) and across the road from Palm Village, including the site of what had been a vehicle pool for General Patton’s Desert Training Center. He was careful to conceal his intentions to develop the land into an upscale community. He quietly amassed 1622 acres.

Cliff formed the Palm Desert Corporation in March 1945. Investors included his old friend Edgar Bergen, Leonard Firestone of Firestone Tires, and other well-heeled friends and acquaintances.

The first order of business was to dig wells and develop the other infrastructure the fledgling community would need. Cliff wanted everything First Class. He predicted that “One day this will be the smartest address on the American Desert.”

Cliff had the vision, raised the money and made it all work, but he had lots of help. Randall had found the site and moved his publishing business there to become the first commercial enterprise in Palm Desert. Randall helped develop the concept of Palm Desert, but he never promoted it in his magazine or participated in its development.

Cliff’s brother-in-law, Tommy Tomson, came to California to break into the movies. When that didn’t work out, he became a self-taught landscape architect. Tomson did the landscape designs for the Santa Anita Racetrack, the Los Angeles Union Station, and the Pan-Pacific Auditorium for brother-in-law Cliff. He did the landscape design for the homes of countless Hollywood big names, as well.

Tomson helped Cliff found Palm Desert by creating the overall site plan and street layout, as well as the landscape design for many of the businesses and residences.

Two other brothers, Phil and Carl Henderson helped found Palm Desert. Phil had worked with Cliff on several other projects but died from heart problems in 1946. Cliff considered him not only a brother and business partner but his best friend. Carl was the “born salesman” and did the legwork of selling the lots to make the whole thing a reality. In 1951, it did become a reality when Palm Desert absorbed nearby Palm Village and officially incorporated as a city.