Palm Desert is a gorgeous city with a population of around 50,000 residents and it’s located just a 14-mile drive away from nearby Palm Springs. They have so many things going for them and the city is a great choice for retirees and growing families. If you’re thinking about making the move to this beautiful city, then have a look at some of the pros and cons of living in Palm Desert.

Moving to Palm Desert

Pro: The Great Location

Palm Desert is situated in the Coachella Valley and it’s surrounded by metro cities that are full of opportunities. The city is perfect for anyone who enjoys living in a more residential area and commuting to the big city for work. Palm Desert is a 28-minute drive to nearby Palm Springs, a 26-minute drive to the festival city of Coachella, and just over 2 hours from the big city of Los Angeles.

Con: The “Snowbird” Effect

Due to the location, the weather, and the nearby activities, Palm Desert is a major town for retirees who are looking to visit during the winter months. These “snowbirds” give the town a 31,000 person boost every summer which is good for the local economy but many residents complain about the tourists. They are often unfamiliar with the local laws, they bring in too much traffic into downtown Palm Desert and the crowding makes it difficult for locals to enjoy the beaches.

Pro: The Nearby Activities

Palm Desert is located in a great spot that’s surrounded by family-friendly things to do. Some of the best activities include the Palm Desert Aquatic Center, The Living Desert Zoo, and Gardens along with a large number of golf courses and country clubs. Downtown Palm Desert also has some great shopping and food spots to bring friends and family to.

The city has 37 golf courses total to keep up with the high demand from golfers that want to experience the gorgeous scenery. If you don’t find any of the golf courses in the city to your liking then there’s no need to worry with another 63 to choose from within a 20-mile radius of Palm Desert. The town is a golfers paradise and if you enjoy hitting a few balls then you’ll love Palm Desert.

Con: The Extreme Temperatures

Some people enjoy warmer temperatures but when it starts to reach extreme heat levels then it can become uncomfortable for everyone. The temperatures in Palm Desert reach higher levels than many other areas and summers can see an average high of 106°F and an average low of only 76°F. Winter months are typical for California with higher temperatures (with an average high of 72°F and an average low of 44°F) and a slim to zero chance for a White Christmas.

Pro: The Great Shopping

Palm Desert is home to some of the best shopping in the area and it’s the perfect place for a daytime shopping expedition. They have big box stores where you can get everything you need along with smaller shops where you can get the perfect gift. Let’s have a look at some Palm Desert shopping spots.

The Gardens on El Paseo

This beautiful open-air shopping district is full of luxury stores for you to enjoy. This is a great spot for high-end shopping with stores like Gucci, Louis Vuitton, and Sephora along with many other lavish shopping boutiques. If you’re looking for something a little more opulent for your Palm Desert shopping experience then check out The Garden.

The Shops at Palm Desert

This is the city's biggest indoor shopping mall and it features nearly 100 stores and restaurants for you to consider. The mall has stores like Bath & Body Works, Macy’s, and JCPenny plus many other stores. The mall also features a movie theater so you can take a break from your shopping and catch a great movie at the same time.

College of the Desert Street Fair

This is the best place to find unique and handmade items from local merchants and it’s one of the coolest things to do in Palm Desert. It happens every weekend at the College of the Desert campus and you can find everything from vintage clothes to artisan jewelry. IF you’re looking to buy a gift for someone special then the College of the Desert street fair is the best place to find it.

Con: The Cost of Living

This one is only considered a con because the cost of living is above the national average. The cost of living index sits at 100 so anything higher means that it is more expensive than most places in America while anything lower means it’s less expensive.

The cost of living number for Palm Desert CA sits at 122 which means it’s above average but not as much as many other places that are nearby. To give you an example, the cost of living number on average for the entire state of California is 149, for San Diego, it’s 160 and for Los Angeles, it’s a whopping 173. Palm Desert is far less expensive than much of California but it’s still higher than the rest of the country.

Pro: The Fantastic Schools

Palm Desert has some of the best schools in the area which is very important for anyone with school-aged kids in their family. The schools are highly rated and they have both public and private schools available. Let’s take a quick look at some of the best schools in Palm Desert

Palm Desert High School

74-910 Aztec rd

Palm Desert, CA 92260

This high school educates around 2,100 students in grades 9-12 and they have a student-to-teacher ratio of 27 to 1. The school offers AP and Gifted Program classes and they have an average graduation rate of 97%. They have been ranked by the school rating website niche.com as the #196 Best Public High School Teachers in California along with being ranked #281 Best Public High Schools in California.

George Washington Charter School

45-768 Portola ave

Palm Desert, CA 92260

This is a public charter school that has around 800 students in grades k-5. The school has a student-to-teacher ratio of 26 to 1 and the school offers a program for gifted students. The school has been ranked by the school rating website niche.com as the #73 Best Charter Elementary Schools in California along with being ranked #185 Best Public Elementary School Teachers in California.

Con: The Food Options

Residents in Palm Desert enjoy hanging out in the downtown Palm Desert area but they don’t enjoy the food selection. Most of the restaurants and food options in the town are chain restaurants and it’s difficult to find something unique. There are a few smaller restaurants that are one of a kind but due to a large number of retirees in the area, most of the restaurants are catered to their wants and taste buds.

Pro: The Beautiful Parks and Nature

There are plenty of parks all around the city for the public to enjoy including multiple splash pads and dog parks. The city has a total of 14 different parks plus they are also home to the Coachella Valley National Wildlife Refuge and the Living Desert Zoo and garden which is full of amazing exhibits. There are also many different trails nearby from beginner level to advanced hiker so you can enjoy the gorgeous California scenery while you get some exercise.

Con: The Tourist Based Economy

If you’re considering moving to Palm Valley to start your own business then beware of what the economy can be like for tourist towns. These towns depend on the influx of visitors in the summer months to give the economy a boost and they often plan and rely on that influx. In times like these with travel being restricted and discouraged, some towns have found that they haven’t been able to recover from the economic loss.

Tourist-based economies are great for some businesses and many have been able to survive the losses from the pandemic but there are plenty that have had to close. Choosing a business that relies on visitors can be a good thing but it’s not the best idea in uncertain times like these. If you are thinking of opening a retail business or restaurant then it’s best to look for a surrounding town that has a steadier economy throughout the year.

Things You Should Know

The city has a large abundance of golf courses and retirees but it still has a thriving economy that does well for most of the year. There are plenty of homes available in the area and the median home value is in the upper 500k price range. The city has a great location but the temperatures can be overwhelming for some people.

Palm Desert has so many amazing features and attributes but there are also a few downsides to living in the city. While some of the living in Palm Desert pros and cons may sway you to either side, you should still do more research into the area you’re looking for specifically so you can find out what it’s like for yourself. Living in Palm Desert is a great idea for anyone who’s looking to retire, looking for a place that is great for golfing or anyone that enjoys the beautiful sunshine.

The Wasserman Real Estate Group is a team of determined and passionate industry professionals, who will help you navigate the real estate market in Palm Springs and surrounding communities. Wasserman Real Estate Group is dedicated to find you the perfect home!