The 75th Primetime Emmy Awards were scheduled for September 18, but the writers' and actors' strikes caused a postponement to January 15, 2024.

With the ceremony now imminent, let's take a look at how the betting odds have shaken out.

Let's break down the key categories for the 2023 Primetime Emmy Awards.

*All odds courtesy of DraftKings as of January 14, 2024.

Odds to win Outstanding Drama Series

Favorite to win Outstanding Drama Series

Succession has won this award in two of the three years it's been nominated during its run. It will almost assuredly make it a third after its triumphant fourth — and final — season. It's almost a shame for Better Call Saul, which, like its lead actor Bob Odenkirk, has never claimed the top prize during its run. In another year, maybe The White Lotus or The Last of Us could be a surprise challenger, but it's not worth overthinking it. Succession is the television show of 2023 and nothing will stand in it or creator Jesse Armstrong's way. Unfortunately for bettors, there's no value in taking it at -2,000.

Odds to win Outstanding Comedy Series

Favorite to win Outstanding Comedy Series

Up until fairly recently, Ted Lasso was the betting favorite. Then, The Bear cleaned up at the Golden Globes. While some people online questioned whether or not The Bear was in the right category (in fairness, it's one of those shows that — like Succession — could conceivably fit in either drama or comedy), its momentum is legitimate and was the show I was backing in this category from the outset. It's not a lock, but the tide has definitely shifted.

Odds to win Outstanding Lead Actor (Drama)

Favorite to win Outstanding Lead Actor (Drama)

With Succession wrapping up its final season to near-universal acclaim, a lot of the attention went to its male leads, particularly Culkin and Strong. Culkin especially emerged as a favorite as a grieving, rich failson on a power trip during election season only to prove to be in way over his head. But could eldest boy Strong earn his second victory in the category?

With a bevy of options from Succession — including Brian Cox as patriarch Logan Roy — it could, in theory, split voting, opening the door for someone like Odenkirk, who has never won for his role as Jimmy McGill in Better Call Saul despite four nominations. Still, Culkin has seen his odds shorten as the months have gone on and is now a significant favorite, especially after claiming the Golden Globe.

Odds to win Outstanding Lead Actress (Drama)

Favorite to win Outstanding Lead Actress (Drama)

Where lead actor is a toss-up, lead actress might as well be written in blood. Snook is taking this for her incredible job as Shiv Roy. And while it will be ostensibly for her performance throughout the series' final season, it will also be a recognition of how great she's been throughout the show. It's not her first Emmy nomination for portraying Shiv but, like Culkin, she had previously been recognized as a supporting actress.

There's simply no value in grabbing an underdog even if Lynskey and Ramsey were terrific in their pulpy programs. It will be a shock if Snook loses.

Odds to win Outstanding Lead Actor (Comedy)

Favorite to win Outstanding Lead Actor (Comedy)

It looks like there is finally a challenger to Sudeikis' Ted Lasso-led supremacy. Sudeikis has won this award two years running and fellow nominee Bill Hader won twice in a row for his role as hitman-turned-actor Barry Berkman in 2018 and 2019. But Jeremy Allen White appears primed to take his first trophy in the category as Carmy Beratto in The Bear.

White is the core figure in an incredible ensemble in the FX show. In season two, White is intense and sometimes off-putting as a world-class chef trying to make a go of opening a restaurant in the place where his deceased brother used to run his spot in Chicago. He manages to also be charming and sympathetic in the face of his shortcomings, making it a relatable and human performance. Don't expect an upset.

Odds to win Outstanding Lead Actress (Comedy)

Favorite to win Outstanding Lead Actress (Comedy)

Jean Smart won back-to-back trophies in this category for Hacks but isn't on the docket this time around. Brunson is nominated for a second straight year and had gone from even money to the -500 favorite over the last several months before settling back in at -165. Brosnahan won as Miriam "Midge" Maisel back in 2018 and this is her fifth time nominated for The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel.

Ortega has a massive fanbase and Wednesday was a very popular Netflix phenomenon while both Applegate and Lyonne have received raves for their respective roles.

Pages related to this topic