The 75th Primetime Emmy Awards were held on January 16, 2024, in Los Angeles. The awards ceremony was delayed nearly four months due to the SAG-AFTRA strike. The awards ceremony was telecast from the Peacock Theater in Downtown Los Angeles, California. 'The Bear' and 'Succession' have won the most awards at the 75th Emmy Awards.

Emmy Awards are awarded in 16 categories by the International Academy of Television Arts & Sciences.

The 75th edition of the Emmys, organized by the National Academy of Television Arts & Sciences, took place at the Peacock Theater in Los Angeles. Comedian and actor Anthony Anderson hosted the show.

'The Bear' won six awards:

The comedy series 'The Bear' dominated the award show. For this, Ayo Edebiri won his first Emmy Award. Ayo was awarded the title of Best Supporting Actress.

"The Bear" won Emmy Awards for Best Comedy as well as Best Actor, Best Director, Best Writer and Supporting Actor and Actress categories.

Quinta Brunson won an Emmy for lead actress for 'Abbott Elementary'.

Matthew McConaughey won the Emmy Award for the drama series 'Succession', the actor's second Emmy Award.

"Succession" has won the Emmy Award 2024 for Best Drama and has won six awards in total.

List of 75th Emmy Awards winners:

Lead Actor Comedy Series: Jeremy Allen (The Bear)

Quinta Brunson of "Abbott Elementary" won the Emmy for Best Actress in a Comedy Series.

Best Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series: Steven Yeun (Beef)

Best Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series: Ali Wong (Beef)

Best Supporting Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series: Paul Walter (Black Bird)

Supporting Actor (Drama Series): Matthew Macfadyen (Succession)

Supporting Actress (Drama Series): Jennifer Coolidge (The White Lotus)

Best Supporting Actress (Comedy Series): Ayo Edebiri (The Bear)

Supporting Actor Comedy Series: Ebon Moss-Bachrach (The Bear)

Emmy 2024: Christopher Storer (The Bear) wins Comedy Series Directing.

Outstanding Supporting Actress Anthology Series or Movie: Niecy Nash Betts

Best Limited or Anthology Series: Beef

Best Writing for Comedy Series: The Bear

Best Writing Drama Series: Succession

Best Writing for a Limited or Anthology Series: Beef

Best Directing (Limited Series): Lee Sung Jin (Beef)

Best Talk Series: The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (Comedy Central).

Lee Sung Jin received the Emmy for Outstanding Directing in a Limited Series for "Beef."