From the looks of it, AOL has taken a page from Steve Ballmer's playbook. The recently bullish web portal has snapped up yet another startup this week, bringing the weekly count to two, and the yearly count to five. However, instead of making yet another ad acquisition, the struggling web portal has purchased the Israeli question and answer service, Yedda.

Although Yedda has grown in prominence (raising $2.5 million in a recent round of funding) it will be interesting to see how it is eventually incorporated into AOL. As it stands, details of the deal have not been released, save for the fact that the startup will become a wholly owned subsidiary of AOL, and eventually incorporate its service across the portal.

It's odd to see an embattled company go on a shopping spree like this, but there may be light at the end of the tunnel. If Yedda's semantic search resources are allocated effectively, AOL could easily construct a Q&A service that could rival Yahoo Answers. However, a large portion of that strategy could be scuttled depending on how Time Warner's new CEO plans to overhaul the beleaguered web portal. Either way, we're not sure that this is the best time for AOL to be spending money.

[Press Release]

See Also:

Will Time Warner's New CEO Boot AOL?

AOL to Make Another Ad Acquisition -- Quigo

AOL's Growth Plan Spawns Hindi, Tamil Language Portals

AOL Cuts 2000 Jobs to Rally Ad Ambitions

At 25, Metafilter Feels Like a Time Capsule From Another Internet

After a quarter century the community-driven site hasn’t changed much. And don’t ask it to license its archive to AI.

YouTube’s Rulings on Gaza War Videos Spark Internal Backlash

Insiders have shared YouTube’s playbook for handling the Gaza crisis. They argue that it shows inconsistent enforcement.

Activists Disrupt Amazon Conference Over $1.2 Billion Contract With Israel

Members of the activist group No Tech for Apartheid interrupted a senior Amazon executive's speech at a conference in Washington, DC, on Wednesday over the company's Project Nimbus cloud contract.

OpenAI Wants AI to Help Humans Train AI

Having humans rate a language model’s outputs produced clever chatbots. OpenAI says adding AI to the loop could help make them even smarter and more reliable.

The Metaverse Was Supposed to Be Your New Office. You’re Still on Zoom

Tech founders painted a vision of employees clocking into virtual workplaces. But the adoption of VR at work has been slow.

The Architect of Russia’s Google Is Back

Yandex cofounder Arkady Volozh fought off sanctions and kicked anti-war squatters out of his Amsterdam townhouse. Now he is ready to reveal his new AI company in the Netherlands. But can Europe forget his past?

The EU Is Coming for X’s Paid Blue Checks

Elon Musk’s paid blue-check system on X deceives users and can be abused by malicious actors, the European Union said today.

Tiny Texas Village Seeks Billion-Dollar Bitcoin Miner to Pave Potholes, Scare Dogs Away

In a roundabout bid to win public opinion (and a juicy tax abatement,) Riot Platforms is preparing for its prized bitcoin mine to be annexed by a minuscule village in rural Texas.