Don't know if you have anything equivalent in your area, but we have Sloss Furnaces down here. Sloss is a former blast furnace site smack in the middle of downtown that has been turned into a museum/ working metal arts center. They have classes on blacksmithing, welding, molding, pouring iron, etc... I got a couple of chances to participate in running the cupola, from firing it cold, to manning the blower, hauling charges up the ladder, keeping the tueres poked clean, hauling a ladle of hot iron, dropping the charge, the whole deal. The art metal folks are a hoot and you learn an awful lot, hands-on. I have built a cupola shell, but have not yet put in the refractory. Those guys ran two 55gal drums welded end-to end and could flat crank out the iron.

I have had an aluminum furnace for years, just a 20gal garbage can lined with refractory. Load it with charcoal, stick a little blower in the side and it'll melt 20lbs of aluminum in 20 mins.

TDMidget

What you say about the scale of a blast furnace is certainly true for a modern blast furnace, but not for an early one !

Two weeks back I visited the Batsto historic site: History

The blast furnace at Batsto was an early blast furnace built of stone, about 30 feet high. (Still too big for a backyard !)

Waterwheel-driven forced air blast, at first cold blast and later hot blast.

Fuel was charcoal, locally produced. Flux was seashells from the nearby Jersey shore, which in those days included ancestral shell heaps left by Native Americans.

The ore was "Bog Iron Ore", a form of limonite which, incredibly, is produced by biological action in the local bogs. The ore beds actually replenish themselves over a period of decades!

Unfortunately, nothing remains of the Batsto furnace itself except an archeological site.

There are ruins of other furnaces of this size range, and some not too much larger, in several places in NJ and NY. NJ has a reconstructed furnace at Allaire State Park and ruins at Long Pond Iron Works. There are traces of other bog iron furnaces in the south Jersey pine barrens. NY has a well-preserved, somewhat larger stone furnace at Arden, NY (visible from the NY State Thruway, I-87) and ruins of furnaces in Beekman, NY (Clove Furnace) and Harriman State Park. I am certain that there must be many others, as there are veins of good iron ore in many places in the Ramapo Mountains, the Taconic Mountains, and other places in NY/NJ. (And that's not counting that incredible biologic-origin bog iron ore!)

A modern blast furnace is indeed huge, but prior to the industrial revolution, they weren't all that large.

Getting back to the Original Poster's search for information on personal furnaces, I'm not all that sure it's a "practical" thing to do. Look how well Terry Harper does by sending his patterns to the Odd Duck Foundry. Note that John Oder makes patterns which are founded by others. (See his Greaves-Klusman thread in the Heavy Iron.) The best approach might be to learn patternmaking and hire out the foundry work. One cannot specialize in everything; one simply does not have the time!

Not that it would not be fun......

John Ruth

I have built and used several casting furnaces. I use propane to fire them, my current furnace can melt 40lbs of iron or bronze. Melting aluminum and bronze is no problem but melting iron is much harder. The amount of fuel required to melt iron is not cost effective. You can have things cast for you much cheaper and they will be of much higher quality. If you just want to say you have done it thats cool. (that is why I have my furnace) Melting 300lbs will require a huge amount of fuel and time, not to mention pouring will take overhead cranes. I have poured 500lbs at a commercial foundry when I was in college and it was like standing on the face of the sun. I cant imagine doing that in a shop that is not doing that everyday. You dont melt hundreds of pounds of metal on a whim.

I don't think that there is any question but that if operated for days, continuously, a "blast furnace" makes the most of it's fuel, if we are talking BTU's per pound of molten iron produced, while the common crucible directs the blast around the iron, utilizing only that heat that migrates through the crucibles walls, BUT, unless you are casting window weights, iron soldiers or even skillets, it needs to be refined in a crucible, even if it was broken up lathes and mills that provided the raw material.

By it's nature a layered heat of iron, coke and limestone, contaminates the melt, that's why Bessemer got rich and we still know his name. I still haven't figured out how burning all the carbon out, then dumping some more back in makes crucible steel but some things are just unknowable....

So, if it's prudent to refine the cupola iron to create acceptable quality iron, it is most cost effective to start with the crucible, unless your only source of iron is the side of a red hill. I don't know about you, but refined iron scrap, engine blocks, heads etc. is all around me and none of my dirt is red.

I actually started a small cupola, 8' foot tall, especially nice wind belt with 2 tuyers.... before I woke up from the wet dream and started thinking. My local coke, (the hard and black kind) supplier quit importing from PA. which was the alarm bell, fortunately, hadn't lined it yet.

Bob

An aside, Google mapping: "Peterson Lumber And Sawmill, E Avenue, Hesperia, CA. 92345", is the locale of the decidedly nice, decidedly odd proprietor of that everything-including-coke yard, (he built an ark there too, early '60's but the flood hasn't hit our 3,200' elev. desert, yet) and still lives just inside the main gate, closest of the long brown mobile units. I stopped by the other day, hadn't seen him in 25 or so years, the gate usually locked. Must be 85, alone.....

We walked around, looked at the large crucible furnace in a straight line back from his mobile, through the large water tank, those are 55 gal blue plastic drums around it, it's "tin mans hat" lid @ 3 o'clock. Probably has a couple dozen silicon carbide and graphite crucibles in a wide range of sizes and condition, mostly bad. Some old furnaces too, all scattered around.....

I know where I'm headed at about 35 days and nights into a hard rain..... soon's the LA basin turns into a 3,000' deep bay. Takin' my goats.... and wife .... might bring the widder-woman for Peterson...

See The Principles of Iron Founding by Richard Modenke, 1917. Richard is the only hairy eared molder I know of that went off and got himself educated to the Doctoral level, and was secretary of AFS for 14 years. In this book he claims to have personally poured 250,000 tons of iron castings in his career.

He may know what he is talking about.

At any rate, in this book, you can learn that the iron was not purified simply because any cupola man worth his salt got the bulk of the "crap" to pass off in the slag out the slag notch. That classy iron lathe bed was the result - direct from the cupola.

Bessemer brings up a different subject - the one of making steel, in bulk, cheaply. Molten iron was the feedstock for one of these converters. The Bessemer was quickly replaced by the open hearth.

A great book currently on the market is American Iron - 1607-1900 by a Mr. Gordon.

Yes John, it's well documented that good grade iron can be had, in great quantities from cupola's well tended with applied knowledge. Supplied the Industrial Revolution.

My bias is because the two I've witnessed and several that I've read about, (all amateur, like the OP, some university sponsored), produced nothing more refined than slag with perhaps trace iron, other than a couple of lucky shots, that produced some low grade sponge iron. Documented in a BBS show, where the hero had brought along a crucible furnace and refined the sponge cake into an iron pot, still not gray iron I'd use for a lathe bed though.

I think that we later-day sand crabs suffer mostly from the bee hive coke ovens being abandoned, coal and charcoal poor substitutes that give up before the required temps are met. Coke was a pain to produce, mucking about in the water-quenched mess to get it out of the ovens by hand. Being the preferred fuel, it must have had some worthwhile traits.

Bob

I built and used a coal-fired furnace to melt aluminum to make some castings a few years ago.

Made a melting-pot out of 8" sch 10 Stainless-steel pipe from the scrapyard, would hold a hundred pounds of aluminum.

Made a long shank out of 1" black pipe, one end hung from a small tackle-block operated by my wife, and I lifted and swung the other end to move crucible from furnace pit to pouring floor.

The furnace was two brick-lined holes in the ground, one for the pot (crucible) and one for the fuel, connected underground, so that I could refuel without disturbing the melting (but I did not need to. About 50 lb of coal did the whole melt.).

I blew air DOWN through the fuel with an ancient Babbitt-bearing Champion blower driven by a bicycle, and it took two hours pedalling from cold start to melt the 100 lb. I had to charge in stages, since the full 100 lb of broken-up scrap would not fit in the pot at once.

I measured the melt temp with a type J thermocouple,which I was told would not work at the 1400deg F pouring temp, but it worked fine. Read it with a digital VOM, and a calibration chart from CRC's Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. I used type J instead of the recommended K because I found a spool of the J at, you guessed it, the scrapyard. It was interesting to watch steady rise in temp up to about 1100 F, then steady temp until charge was all melted at around 1300, then temp began to rise again.

I can sketch the whole thing, if you want to consider anything so primitive and laborious. I did it that way because I had committed myself to producing several castings for an absurdly low price, so I did not want to buy anything for the job