It all started at a kitchen table.

After spending years working together in public service, Mark Fisk and Dianne Byrum launched a communications firm to bring their aggressive, disciplined and focused approach to communications. Though the firm started at Mark’s kitchen table, Byrum & Fisk has grown to serve over 300 clients across Michigan, the Midwest and around the United States over the last decade.

We work with clients in sectors including clean energy, agriculture, health care, education, real estate, nonprofit and more. Our approach to strategic communications has boosted student enrollment in declining school districts, won campaigns and ballot initiatives and helped pass legislation that makes a positive difference in communities and across the state. We have also helped our clients build relationships with the people who matter most: their employees, customers and stakeholders.

Many of our clients have been with us since the very beginning, which is something we’re proud of. We value our clients and care deeply about their success.

We’re a different kind of firm.

At Byrum & Fisk, we reject cookie-cutter approaches. We know that every cause, issue, business, challenge and election is unique and different. That’s why you need a different approach.

Our background working on political campaigns forms a culture of intensity that we bring to all communications efforts. We approach every project like a campaign. We identify what a “win” would look like for our client and develop a strategy that guides the path to winning results.

Whether you’re a school district looking to generate more funding through a bond proposal, or you’re a technology firm looking to strengthen relationships with investors, we create a customized plan designed to help you achieve that “win.”

We protect the Great Lakes. We fight for kids. We support strong communities. We champion clean energy. We drive change. We speak ag. We take health seriously.

When you need a communications firm that shares your values, Byrum & Fisk will work hard to make sure your message reaches the right people.

Let’s talk. We’d love to hear from you.