In recent years, the US has led the way on female-led serial drama. Just look at Big Little Lies, Little Fires Everywhere or The Morning Show. But the tide is turning. This year, the success of programmes like I May Destroy You and I Hate Suzie have proven that we can do it just as well as our cousins across the pond, and now the UK’s reputation is sure to improve even further with the news that Sienna Miller is taking the lead in a tense new series.

Sienna, best known for roles in The Girl, Factory Girl, American Woman and Alfie, has signed up to play Sophie in a Netflix adaptation of Anatomy of a Scandal. The novel, written by Sarah Vaughan, became an international bestseller on its release in 2018, following Sophie, a happy wife and mother of two whose life changes overnight.

According to its official materials, ‘Anatomy of a Scandal centres on a high-profile marriage that begins to unravel when the husband is accused of a terrible crime. Sophie is sure her husband, James, is innocent and desperately hopes to protect her precious family from the lies which might ruin them. Kate is the barrister who will prosecute the case - she is equally certain that James is guilty and determined he will pay for his crimes.’

Kate will be played by Michelle Dockery, best known for playing Lady Mary in Downton Abbey. James, the charistmatic junior minister at the centre of the case, will be played by Homeland’s Rupert Friend.

A release date has not yet been confirmed, but it will run on Netflix for six, one-hour episodes. Filming in London, Jessica Jones director S. J. Clarkson will take the helm, with David E. Kelley of Big Little Lies and Melissa James Gibson of The Americans teaming up as show runners.

We can’t wait.

Gallery

Films, TV Shows And Books If You Love Sally Rooney's Normal People

1 of 12

Before Sunrise

If you're interested in young, smart, attractive students falling in love, then Richard Linklater's Before Sunrise is essential viewing. Julie Delpy delivers one of the most charming on-screen performances ever – and it will make you wistful for European minibreaks.

2 of 12

Like Crazy

Anton Yelchin and Felicity Jones star in this heartbreaking story of an American boy and a British girl torn apart by immigration issues.

3 of 12

Sing Street

Pivotal moments against the backdrop of Dublin? May we please recommend Sing Street – about a young boy moved to a new school in the 80s, who decides to start his own band. Your full heart can thank us later.

4 of 12

CREDIT: u00a9 Sony Entertainment

Call Me By Your Name

When it comes to a love that shapes a life, the romance between Elio and Oliver one dreamy summer surely comes to mind.

5 of 12

Frank

Alongside Hettie Macdonald, Lenny Abrahamson is the man directing the show that pulled at our every heartstring. You may have seen his huge hit, Room (also a book adaptation), but we also recommend Frank. Just don't expect longing looks across college greens…

6 of 12

Anne Griffin, When All Is Said

A slightly older protagonist, but this book sees Maurice Hannigan, at 84, sitting at a bar and giving five toasts to the people who have formed his life. Will Connell one day sit at a bar thinking of Marianne? We can't go there right now.

7 of 12

Louise O’Neill, Asking For It

Another young Irish writer, Louise O'Neill's books tackle a host of issues, starting in a YA format, but gripping for anyone to read. Asking For It tackles issues of consent and rape while Only Ever Yours uses a dystopian setting to make you reflect on the ways we think about female bodies.

8 of 12

One Day, David Nicholls

A couple, entwined in will-they won't-theyness throughout their lives? Look no further than One Day. Don't be put off by the memory of the film. Dive back in to this book (if you've read it before) for bittersweet tears aplenty.

9 of 12

Euphoria

When it comes to complicated relationships at school, Connell and Marianne have nothing on these guys. But the show is also interested in themes of consent, bodies and the lasting effects of childhood and adolescent scars. Just with a LOT more terrifying social media...Watch on Netflix.

10 of 12

Love

Well obviously it's about love, tick. But it also tackles what happens when two seemingly incompatible characters try to give it a go.Watch on Netflix.

11 of 12

After Life

If it's bittersweet love you're looking for, the sweet pleasure/pain can be found in Ricky Gervais' After Life, about a man coming to terms with the death of his terminally ill wife.Watch on Netflix.

12 of 12

Modern Love

All love is here, so take your pick. This series, based around The New York Times column, is about all aspects of relationships and the one-off episodes feature a cast that would rival the biggest blockbuster. The actual column and podcastare worth checking out too. Watch on Amazon Prime.