Barry Allen, Distinguished University Professor of Philosophy at McMaster University and a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, is the author of Empiricisms: Experience and Experiment from Antiquity to the Anthropocene; Truth in Philosophy; Knowledge and Civilization; Art and Technology in Human Experience; Knowledge in Chinese Tradition; and Striking Beauty: A Philosophical Look at the Asian Martial Arts.

Yuri Andrukhovych has received the Erich-Maria Remarque Peace Prize, the Leipzig Book Award for European Understanding, the Hannah Arendt Prize for Political Thought, the Angelus Central European Literary Award, the Vilenica International Literary Prize, the Herder Prize, and the Goethe Medal. His books include poetry collections (The Sky and Squares; Downtown; Exotic Birds and Plants; Songs for a Dead Rooster), novels (Recreations; The Moscoviad; Perverzion; Twelve Rings; Lovers of Justice; The Secret), a cycle of short stories (On the Left, Where the Heart Is), and essay collections (Disorientation on Location; The Devil’s Hiding in the Cheese), which have been translated into twenty languages. He has published as well literary translations from German, Polish, Russian, and English (including Shakespeare’s Hamlet) into Ukrainian. John Hennessy, senior lecturer in English at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, is the author of two collections of poems and (with Ostap Kin) has translated Serhiy Zhadan’s A New Orthography, which received the Derek Walcott Prize for Poetry. He is a recipient of Poetry magazine’s John Frederick Nims Award for Poetry in Translation and is poetry editor of The Common.

David Bellos, an officer of the French National Order of Arts and Letters, is the Pyne Professor of French Literature and professor of comparative literature at Princeton University, where he founded and for many years directed the Program in Translation and Intercultural Communication. His books include Georges Perec: A Life in Words, for which he received the Prix Goncourt de la Biographie; The Novel of the Century: The Extraordinary Adventure of “Les Misérables,” for which he received the American Library in Paris Book Award; Is That a Fish in Your Ear?: Translation and the Meaning of Everything; Romain Gary: A Tall Story; Jacques Tati: His Life and Art; Balzac Criticism in France, 1850–1900; and a translation of works by Ismail Kadare, for which he received the Man Booker International Prize.

William M. Chace is president emeritus of Emory University and honorary professor emeritus of English at Stanford University. His books include One Hundred Semesters; Lionel Trilling: Criticism and Politics; and The Political Identities of Ezra Pound and T. S. Eliot.

Thibault De Meyer's PhD dissertation at the University of Liège is titled “Le bestiaire de Brunelleschi. Le perspectivisme et sa réinvention en éthologie.”

Caryl Emerson is A. Watson Armour III University Professor emerita of Slavic and comparative literatures at Princeton University. Her books include The First Hundred Years of Mikhail Bakhtin and (with Gary Saul Morson) Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics; The Life of Musorgsky; Boris Gudonov: Transpositions of a Russian Theme; and All the Same Words Don’t Go Away: Essays on Authors, Heroes, Aesthetics, and Stage Adaptations from the Russian Tradition.

Nicholas Gaskill is associate professor of American Literature at the University of Oxford. He is the author of Chromographia: American Literature and the Modernization of Color (2018) and coeditor (with A. J. Nocek) of The Lure of Whitehead (2014). He is currently writing a history of intensity as an aesthetic category and a study of pragmatist efforts in aesthetic education across literature, art, and philosophy.

Simon Goldhill is professor of Greek literature and culture at Cambridge University; director of the Cambridge Center for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences, and Humanities; and a fellow of King’s College. He is also a fellow of the British Academy. His many books include Language, Sexuality, Narrative: The “Oresteia”; Sophocles and the Language of Tragedy; Reading Greek Tragedy; Love, Sex, and Tragedy; How to Stage Greek Tragedy Today; Who Needs Greek?; The Temple of Jerusalem; Jerusalem: City of Longing; Victorian Culture and Classical Antiquity; The Poet’s Voice; The Invention of Prose;and Foucault’s Virginity.