Sylvia Wynter

A leading humanities scholar reflects on her life, her scholarship on anti-colonialism, and her time on the Stanford faculty.

Myra Strober

The career journey of Stanford's pioneering labor economist and memories of founding the Center for Research on Women.

Thomas Angell

One of the earlier interviews in the collections is that of Thomas Angell, a Stanford alum (1915-16 AB Greek) and the son of Frank Angell, Stanford’s first professor of psychology.

Paul Berg

Biochemist Paul Berg speaks his early life and education, coming to Stanford in 1959 in the new Department of Biochemistry, the founding of the Beckman Center, the Nobel Prize, and more.

Deans of H&S in Conversation

Five former deans of Humanities and Sciences reflect on leading Stanford's largest school.

John Etchemendy

John W. Etchemendy speaks about his research and teaching career in the Stanford Department of Philosophy, his service as an associate dean in the School of Humanities and Sciences, and his tenure as the provost of the university from 2000 to 2017.

Victor Fuchs

Reflections on a life, teaching, and studying health economics and health care reform from a pioneer in the field.

John Hennessy

John L. Hennessy, a Turing Award-winning computer scientist and entrepreneur who served as president of Stanford University from 2000 to 2016, reflects on his family background and education, his research and teaching contributions, and his leadership as

Robert Hofstadter

Robert Hofstadter on early experiments with electron scattering in atomic nuclei, the body of work for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1961.

Angeline Myra Keen

One woman’s unusual path to tenure in the sciences and insights into the lives of early women faculty.

Lorry Lokey

Lorry I. Lokey, a pioneer in the news service business, discusses the founding and growth of Business Wire, and the sale of the company to Warren Buffet. He also reflects on the impact of his Stanford education and his work on The Stanford Daily.

Patricia Ryan Madson

Patricia Ryan Madson on teaching improvisation and acting, the creation of the Stanford Improvisors, and her portrayal of Jane Stanford.

Nel Noddings

An interview with Graduate School of Education Professor Emerita Nel Noddings, a philosopher and educational researcher best known for her ethics of care theory .

Nathan Oliveira

Memories of a leading artist in the figurative movement and a professor of art at Stanford for 32 years