1991

The vision of Dalhalla was awakened during Pentecost in 1991. Margareta Dellefors, a former opera singer and radio producer who had long been searching for a summer festival venue, and Åsa Nyman, the former cultural director of Rättvik, “discovered” the abandoned limestone quarry. The location was ideal, far from any settlements and well shielded from disruptive noise from traffic and industry. The site itself was an experience for the eyes and ears, resembling a stage, Valhalla, drawn from Wagner’s world, in Dalarna – hence the name Dalhalla.

1995

The audience capacity was expanded to 2600 seats. Parking lots adjacent to the quarry were completed, and a protected walkway down to the audience area was finished. The official inauguration of Dalhalla took place on June 21, 1995, with a grand opera concert. Swedish Television broadcasted the concert, and Dalhalla became known throughout the country. Foreign press also covered the event.

During the summer, a few events were held, some by renting the venue to artists who independently organized concerts.

1996

The association “Friends of Dalhalla” formed a subsidiary, Dalhalla Production AB, which took over responsibility for the operations. Dalhalla’s first CEO was hired.

The first trial performance of opera, featuring short scenes from Wagner’s “Ring of the Nibelung,” took place. The performance was a great success, even internationally. The number of programs during the summer was expanded.

1998

Håkan Ivarson was hired part-time as CEO and combined the role (for 3 years) with continuing as County Music Director for Music in Dalarna (MiD). Administration was expanded in collaboration with MiD, including a joint finance and marketing department. The first international opera collaboration, with the Latvian National Opera in Riga and “Nabucco,” was carried out. Dalhalla celebrated its 5th anniversary with an opera concert featuring Håkan Hagegård and others. The company Clas Ohlson celebrated 80 years with, among other things, a joint event in Dalhalla. The first concert with Rhapsody in Rock was held, and the high demand for tickets led to the concert being doubled. A large portion of visitors had to park their cars at Kullsberg’s limestone quarry and then take a bus back and forth from the arena.

1999

Dalhalla Opera Festival was initiated, featuring five different productions: Masquerade, Nabucco, Turandot, Wagner’s Ring in a compact version, and an opera concert with the Royal Opera. Dalhalla presented a children’s opera for the first time: “Pelle Svanslös” (Peter-No-Tail). World-renowned tenor José Cura visited Dalhalla.

The season comprised 28 different events. During the autumn, Dalhalla’s stage and artist area were renovated, and on New Year’s Eve 1999, the new millennium was celebrated with a grand event in Dalhalla, including performances by a figure skating group with several ice numbers on the polished surface of Dalhalla Lake.

2001

Håkan Ivarson left his position as county music director to become CEO full-time at Dalhalla. The synergy with MiD in administration ceased, and instead, Dalhalla invested in its own administration.

The collaboration with Savonlinna continued with the performance of “Macbeth,” and the Estonian National Opera made its debut with “La Traviata.” The demand for Rhapsody in Rock increased each year, and during the summer, 8 concerts were held to sold-out crowds!

2007

The Friends of Dalhalla association formed a new company, Dalhalla Förvaltning AB (DFAB), to broaden ownership of the arena. The municipalities around Lake Siljan, Dalarna County Council, and four private stakeholders became new shareholders in the arena company DFAB, which leases the arena to Dalhalla AB (formerly Dalhalla Production AB).

The Estonian National Opera performed “Carmen” and “Rigoletto.” A magic show was presented for the first time featuring Joe Labero, and Björn Skifs held 3 nearly sold-out concerts in a collaboration between Dalhalla AB and Music at Siljan.

2008

On May 17th, 25 cm of snow fell in Dalhalla! The fabric roof over the stage, newly installed for the season and unable to bear the snow load, risked collapsing and potentially damaging the stage area. Quick action with snow removal saved the situation… The DFAB board immediately began work to find a new roof structure capable of withstanding snow and thus being in place year-round. Dalhalla Opera presented “Madame Butterfly,” “Otello,” and “Carmina Burana.”

Rhapsody in Rock, which had performed concerts in Dalhalla for nearly every season, held its 50th sold-out concert, meaning over 200,000 visitors experienced Robert Wells in Dalhalla! For this outstanding achievement, Wells received a small copper plaque from Dalhalla with an engraved inscription.

2009 – A Milestone

With increased public funding and other project grants, Dalhalla could finally produce its own opera, the first since 1999. Mozart’s “The Magic Flute” was performed to fully utilize the arena’s capabilities, with several different stages outside the stage area and spectacular effects. The endeavor was a greater success than expected, with over 15,000 visitors attending 4 performances. An amazing attendance record for an opera at Dalhalla!

A new permanent stage roof replaced the old sailcloth before the season, creating entirely new technical possibilities for the various events. Dalhalla can now also plan events at times other than the summer months, and on December 12th of this year, the premiere of the Christmas Concert with Christmas Market took place.

2014

Attendance record – 60,000 people visited Dalhalla during the summer, a 50% increase compared to recent years. ChorusNight with 300 choir singers kicked off the season, magnificent and beautiful. Led Zeppelin legend Robert Plant, with The Sensational Space Shifters, mixed Led Zeppelin hits and new songs. The Beach Boys skillfully surfed through decades of hits. “Chess in Concert” by Benny Andersson, Tim Rice, and Björn Ulvaeus, a world-famous and 30-year anniversary concert, was exclusively arranged for Dalhalla. Scorpions had their only Sweden performance, and the new standing section was used for the first time. For the sixth consecutive year, Malena Ernman held two concerts to full audiences. 13,500 people came to see Diggiloo and Björn Skifs. On July 23, Dalhalla celebrated its 20th anniversary. World tenor José Carreras, along with the Stockholm Concert Orchestra, performed gems from opera, operetta, and musicals – magical! Kraftwerk’s 3-D show was fully realized. Tomas Ledin and Höga Kusten Kapellet were in top form. P-Floyd once again proved their mastery of captivating audiences. A three-hour music experience with lighting and technical effects never seen before at Dalhalla. First Aid Kit performed for the first time ever in Dalarna, in front of a sold-out Dalhalla. Season finale with the traditional Fireworks Concert. Janne Åström, Louise Hoffsten, and Magnus Tingsek created a lovely atmosphere. DalaSinfoniettan accompanied skillfully under the direction of conductor Jonas Nydesjö. Fireworks soloist Eje Berglund set off a magnificent fireworks display to the tunes of Chess.

2015

55,000 people attended Dalhalla for a concert during the summer, an increase compared to the previous season’s attendance numbers. With an average of 3,235 people per concert, it’s now a new attendance record at Dalhalla.

Some highlights of the summer:

Caroline af Ugglas with guest artists opened the season with 1300 choir singers on stage, a unique performance with so many singers. Carola, as always, delivered a high-quality concert. 14,000 people came over three days to see the immensely popular Malena Ernman, setting a attendance record for a single concert. Roxette ended their Sweden tour with a professional performance in front of a full house. For the first time, Into The Valley, a two-day electronic music festival, was held. The festival also attracted a large number of foreign visitors and was incredibly well-received. Season finale with the traditional Fireworks Concert. Nina Persson, Linnea Henriksson, and Magnus Carlson created a magical atmosphere, and DalaSinfoniettan accompanied skillfully under the direction of conductor Jonas Nydesjö. Fireworks master, Eje Berglund, fired off a magnificent fireworks display.

2016

Another fantastic season at Dalhalla has concluded, setting a new attendance record. 70,000 people visited Dalhalla this summer. This is an increase of 30,000 people since 2012 when the arena was visited by 40,000 people.

On September 10th, the season ended with the traditional Fireworks Concert. Carola, Eric Gadd, and Magnus Tingsek, as this year’s guest artists, provided a fine and musical backdrop together with the Stockholm Concert Orchestra under the direction of conductor Jonas Nydesjö. Neil Young, with his only Sweden performance in Dalhalla, delivered almost three hours of magic in front of a full house.

On July 18th, ZZ TOP held one of their two only Sweden performances in Dalhalla. Nearly 5,400 people came to see the concert, setting yet another attendance record for Dalhalla for a single concert.

Other highlights of the summer’s program include Mando Diao, who stood on Dalhalla’s stage for the first time. A concert they tailored entirely for the arena. 4800 people came to see hugely popular and beloved Jill Johnson. P-Floyd with their fantastic and spectacular 10-year anniversary show didn’t hold back. The Tallest Man On Earth, a highly anticipated booking, delivered a fantastic concert.

2017

Another Dalhalla season has concluded, setting a new attendance record. Polar Prize winner Sting opened the season with another fantastic concert and also set a new attendance record, with 5,483 people coming to experience Sting’s only concert in Sweden. A new attendance record was then set by Takida and Stiftelsen, a magnificent concert evening that attracted 5653 people. The average attendance has increased significantly, showing a high demand. The combination of the artist, the unique arena, and the acoustics make Dalhalla a natural choice for a concert during the summer. A total of 74,000 people visited Dalhalla this summer.

On September 2nd, the season ended with the traditional Fireworks Concert. Ola Salo, Måns Zelmerlöw, and Linnea Olsson, as this year’s guest artists, provided a beautiful, grand, and musical backdrop together with DalaSinfoniettan under the direction of conductor Jonas Nydesjö. Other highlights of the summer’s program include Laleh, who completely captivated the audience. Malena Ernman and Helen Sjöholm in a perfect combination. Jerry Williams at his absolute best. Emmylou Harris, who created a warm and lovely atmosphere. Pet Shop Boys delivered a spectacular concert of the highest quality throughout.

2020

Covid-19 has the world in a stranglehold, and strict restrictions make it difficult to hold events. Travel restrictions are introduced, the maximum number of people in the audience during the summer is 50, and everyone is encouraged to maintain social distance. Creative ideas are born, and Dalhalla creates new events, inviting both Hemester and Dalhalla scenery.

During Hemester in Dalhalla, a limited number of visitors are allowed to drive down with their own motorhomes and stay overnight in the limestone quarry. It’s an exclusive evening with a three-course dinner in the restaurant and the opportunity to visit the artist’s house and swim in the turquoise water, something that only the artists usually get to do. It becomes very popular! In August, Dalhalla scenery is held for the first time, an intimate concert where the audience meets the artist on Dalhalla’s stage. The concerts with only 50 attendees feature artists such as Robert Wells, Malena Ernman, Magnus Carlsson, and Petter, and the last date is as late as November.

2022

The first season after all restrictions from the corona pandemic are lifted starts with a bang, with a sold-out arena and brilliant sunshine when the rock legends Judas Priest take the stage on June 11th. Ticket buyers have been waiting since 2019 to attend a concert as all performances have been postponed, but now they can finally be held! A total of 116,000 people visit Dalhalla this season, of which 12,000 see the musical Kristina från Duvemåla. Robert Plant & Alison Krauss’ music fits perfectly with the backdrop of the limestone quarry, Diggiloo creates joy during two summer evenings in mid-July, and The Ark puts on a fantastic performance despite heavy rain. On July 1st, Dalhalla’s glamping premieres, allowing visitors to stay overnight, sleep in glamping tents with hotel standards, and enjoy breakfast delivered directly to the tent. The new VIP area is inaugurated with a new sail roof, new furniture, and a more cozy environment. During the season, the motorhome parking are redesigned and expanded to accommodate over 200 motorhomes or caravans. Weeping Willows and friends end the season on September 17th during a magical evening when fires light up Dalhalla in the autumn darkness.

2023

The season started in May with a concert performed by the cultural and music schools in Dalarna, where nearly 400 students took the stage. Bon Iver then visited Dalhalla and performed a magical concert, their only performance in Sweden, to a full arena. The season was topped by several sold-out concerts, including two evenings with Gyllene Tider and one evening with Benjamin Ingrosso, which was also recorded by TV4. KISS held their last performances in Sweden at Dalhalla on July 12th and 13th, setting a new attendance record with 6156 people on the first night. In total, over 12,300 people saw KISS at Dalhalla.

Other highlights during the summer included Johan Glans performing stand-up on Dalhalla’s stage and Carola making an entrance in high heels on a SUP board. Kite visited the arena in September and offered an unforgettable concert both musically and visually. Fond reunions included Robert Wells celebrating 25 years with Rhapsody in Rock and P-Floyd’s spectacular show for their 30th anniversary.

Dalhalla’s food court has been renovated, with the old tents replaced by containers, which is both better for the staff and gives a nicer impression of the entire Dalhalla. Glamping is also expanded for the season, and there are now 30 glamping tents.

In total, 129,000 people visited Dalhalla in 2023, the highest attendance to date.