First Half starts.1'Offside - Almere City FC. Jochem Ritmeester van de Kamp with a pass, however Rajiv van La Parra is in offside.3'Offside - Almere City FC. Peer Koopmeiners with a pass, however Rajiv van La Parra is in offside.6'Fouled by Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior6'Hamdi Akujobi - Almere City FC - won a free kick on the right wing.7'Fouled by Manel Royo - Almere City FC7'Siebe Horemans - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.9'Fouled by Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior9'Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - won a free kick in attack.9'Offside - Almere City FC. Thomas Robinet with a pass, however Rajiv van La Parra is in offside.12'Fouled by Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior12'Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - won a free kick in defence.13'Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior - receive yellow card for a foul.16'Shot blocked. Couhaib Driouech - Excelsior - shot with right foot from the left side of the box is blocked. Assist - Redouan El Yaakoubi.16'New attacking attempt. Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior - shot with right foot from the left side of the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.19'Fouled by Cisse Sandra - Excelsior19'Théo Barbet - Almere City FC - won a free kick in defence.20'Hand ball by Théo Barbet - Almere City FC24'Shot blocked. Nikolas Agrafiotis - Excelsior - shot with left foot from the centre of the box is blocked. Assist - Cisse Sandra.24'Corner - Excelsior. Conceded by Théo Barbet.25'Missed chance. Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior - shot with the head from the centre of the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Couhaib Driouech with a cross.26'Fouled by Peer Koopmeiners - Almere City FC26'Julian Baas - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.26'Derensili Sanches Fernandes - Excelsior - won a free kick in attack.26'Fouled by Stije Resink - Almere City FC26'Stije Resink - Almere City FC - receive yellow card for a foul.30'Fouled by Jochem Ritmeester van de Kamp - Almere City FC30'Sven Nieuwpoort - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.31'Missed chance. Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - shot with left foot from the left side of the box is close, but missed. Assist - Peer Koopmeiners.32'Shot blocked. Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box is blocked. Assist - Stije Resink.32'Corner - Almere City FC. Conceded by Casper Widell.32'Casper Widell - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.32'Fouled by Jochem Ritmeester van de Kamp - Almere City FC33'Corner - Almere City FC. Conceded by Casper Widell.34'Missed chance. Peer Koopmeiners - Almere City FC - shot with left foot from outside the box is high and wide to the left after corner.37'Missed chance. Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box is very close to the goal. Assist - Manel Royo with a cross.39'Hand ball by Hamdi Akujobi - Almere City FC40'Offside - Excelsior. Arthur Zagre with a pass, however Couhaib Driouech is in offside.41'New attacking attempt. Couhaib Driouech - Excelsior - shot with right foot from a diffucult position on the left is saved in the left corner. Assist - Nikolas Agrafiotis.41'Corner - Excelsior. Conceded by Nordin Bakker.41'Missed chance. Casper Widell - Excelsior - shot with the head from few metres is high and wide to the right. Assist - Julian Baas with a cross after corner.42'Delay in match - injury Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC43'Delay over. They are ready to continue.45'Fouled by Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC45'Redouan El Yaakoubi - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.45'Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC - receive yellow card.45+2'First Half ended - Excelsior 0, Almere City FC 0.45'Second Half starts Excelsior 0, Almere City FC 0.45'Substitution - Excelsior. Richie Omorowa for Derensili Sanches Fernandes.47'Couhaib Driouech - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.47'Fouled by Sherel Floranus - Almere City FC50'Missed chance. Stije Resink - Almere City FC - shot with left foot from outside the box is high and wide to the left. Assist - Thomas Robinet.52'Corner - Excelsior. Conceded by Sherel Floranus.53'Substitution - Almere City FC. Lance Duijvestijn for Jochem Ritmeester van de Kamp.57'Missed chance. Couhaib Driouech - Excelsior - shot with right foot from outside the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Arthur Zagre.58'Fouled by Sven Nieuwpoort - Excelsior58'Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC - won a free kick on the right wing.59'Missed chance. Lance Duijvestijn - Almere City FC - shot with the head from the centre of the box missed to the left. Assist - Hamdi Akujobi with a cross.60'Shot blocked. Stije Resink - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from outside the box is blocked. Assist - Hamdi Akujobi.62'New attacking attempt. Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal. Assist - Théo Barbet with a through ball.62'New attacking attempt. Lance Duijvestijn - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box is saved in the top centre of the goal.62'Corner - Almere City FC. Conceded by Stijn van Gassel.62'Missed chance. Damian van Bruggen - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box missed to the left. Assist - Théo Barbet after corner.62'Missed chance. Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - shot with left foot inside of six yard box - left side goes high. Assist - Damian van Bruggen after corner.63'Missed chance. Nikolas Agrafiotis - Excelsior - shot with left foot from the centre of the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Arthur Zagre.64'Missed chance. Thomas Robinet - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from the centre of the box goes high.66'Fouled by Arthur Zagre - Excelsior66'Hamdi Akujobi - Almere City FC - won a free kick on the right wing.66'Arthur Zagre - Excelsior - receive yellow card for a foul.66'Delay in match - injury Hamdi Akujobi - Almere City FC67'Delay over. They are ready to continue.68'Fouled by Sven Nieuwpoort - Excelsior68'Rajiv van La Parra - Almere City FC - won a free kick in attack.69'New attacking attempt. Manel Royo - Almere City FC - shot with left foot from outside the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.70'Missed chance. Peer Koopmeiners - Almere City FC - shot with right foot from outside the box is high and wide to the right. Assist - Stije Resink.71'Substitution - Excelsior. Troy Parrott for Couhaib Driouech.71'Substitution - Excelsior. Oscar Uddenäs for Nikolas Agrafiotis.73'Corner - Almere City FC. Conceded by Arthur Zagre.75'Corner - Almere City FC. Conceded by Julian Baas.78'Fouled by Damian van Bruggen - Almere City FC78'Troy Parrott - Excelsior - won a free kick on the right wing.79'Substitution - Almere City FC. Yann Kitala for Thomas Robinet.79'Substitution - Almere City FC. Yoann Cathline for Rajiv van La Parra.80'Substitution - Excelsior. Serano Seymor for Sven Nieuwpoort.80'Substitution - Excelsior. Kian Fitz-Jim for Julian Baas.81'Fouled by Peer Koopmeiners - Almere City FC81'Kian Fitz-Jim - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.83'Hand ball by Manel Royo - Almere City FC83'Manel Royo - Almere City FC - receive yellow card for hand ball.83'Missed chance. Arthur Zagre - Excelsior - shot with left foot from outside the box is close, but missed. Assist - Richie Omorowa.86'Fouled by Hamdi Akujobi - Almere City FC86'Troy Parrott - Excelsior - won a free kick in defence.87'Substitution - Almere City FC. Loïc Mbe Soh for Hamdi Akujobi.87'Substitution - Almere City FC. Christopher Mamengi for Théo Barbet.88'Shot blocked. Troy Parrott - Excelsior - shot with right foot from the right side of the box is blocked. Assist - Siebe Horemans.88'Corner - Excelsior. Conceded by Christopher Mamengi.90+5'Missed chance. Sherel Floranus - Almere City FC - shot with left foot from outside the box missed. Assist - Lance Duijvestijn.90+5'Second Half ended - Excelsior 0, Almere City FC 0.Thats all. Game finished - Excelsior 0, Almere City FC 0.