9:00 – 10:15 am Panels + Conversations + Case Studies + User Experience Workshops + Ask The Experts

So You’ve Found Success as a Blogger… Now What? with Heather Spohr. Morgan Shanahan, Katherine Stone and Jill Smokler

You’ve set goals for yourself and you’ve achieved them. Now what? Do you move into other mediums (television, books, etc). Do you sell your site? Do you take your success and turn it into a job elsewhere? This panel will explore the different ways you can capitalize on your blog’s success.

Balancing Personal Life and Professional Endeavors: Or (The Unexpected Virtue of You’re Not a Brand, You’re a Person) with Julie Cole, Elayna Fernandez, Rebecca Woolf and Jessica Shyba

It’s well known that in today’s digital world, a strong personal brand can be very important for a professional brand. That’s been well covered. This discussion will explore how to balance a creative personal life with demanding jobs, all while attempting to be a good, present, guilt-free parent. No big deal.

The Publishing Experience: What’s New, What Works, What’s Next with Jessica Lahey, Gabrielle Blair, Katie Workman, Bill Braine and Doug French

Four individuals will talk about their experiences of transforming from an online publisher, into a published author… as well as transitioning a blog fan base into book buyers. They’ll also discuss the new book industry and how it is affected by new media as well as their unique experiences in the publishing world.

A Conversation with Brands: What They Are Looking For In a Content Partner with Eileen Gittins, Scott McKee, Lindsy Delco and Amanda Schreyer

Join in a morning conversation with leaders from four top brands as they talk about best practices, trends, and current programs in working with influencers as a part of their overall marketing strategy. Hear their first-hand perspectives on working with influencers and how that fits into their larger picture for their company’s marketing goals, as well as tips on how to find your brand match as well as how to best work with their brand or other brands with similar philosophies.

UX WORKSHOPS

Content Planning & Mapping: How do you find, plan and deliver relevant topics in a information-saturated world? with Liz ODonnell and Emma Waverman

We are flooded with content and information, and yet there are more and more people writing each day. How do you find topics that resonate with your readership? How do you find your voice and put a spin on your chosen topic? One way to do it: content mapping. Bloggers are pretty well-schooled on the importance of editorial calendars, but content maps are much more effective in delivering your message, your reach, your target readers, as well as sharing your unique offerings and POV to improve your search results.

Building a Solid Media Kit with Stacie Haight Connerty

A great media kit is one of the most essential tools’ in the monetizing blogger’s arsenal. This workshop will share what brands and agencies look for in media kits, and teach you how to create one that sells you and your blog.

Taking the Leap into TV and On-Camera Contributing with Meredith Sinclair, Lizzie Bermundez and Wendy Sachs

More and more bloggers and social media influencers are being called upon to share their expertise and creative content in front of the camera for television segments, satellite media tours, video-based web series, and advertising campaigns. But making the leap from blogger to on-camera expert can be a daunting and unfamiliar road bricked with questions about transparency, authenticity, payment, pitching, FTC regulations, media relationships, and more. This workshop will cover the process in detail and give specific steps you can take right now, if TV and on-camera contributing is on your “to-try” list.

Never Be Boring! How to Dull-Proof Your Video Content with Jessi Sanfilippo, Jenni Chiu

Demand for video is in such high volume, that smart bloggers are quickly hopping on the video train. However, much of the new content being created lacks the dynamics needed to truly engage the viewer. You can’t feel someone’s energy when they’re not sitting across from you, so that energy needs to be “created” with tools and video technique. Video is a chance to magnify your personality to reach people across the world. It doesn’t matter if you’re shooting vlogs, DIY videos, or storytelling, grabbing and holding the attention of your viewers is paramount. We’ll talk about that as well as how to develop a consistent & unique video presence and portfolio.

Adobe Photoshop Elements: Photo-editing Bootcamp

ATTENDEES MUST HAVE PRE-REGISTERED FOR THIS CLASS.

Join Bob Gager, Adobe Group Product Manager and host of the “Ask Bob” YouTube tutorial series, for an Adobe Photoshop Elements photo-editing bootcamp.

10:00 – 11:00 am Dove Self-Esteem Workshop (The Dove #BeautyStory Lounge)

Join Dove and the Boys & Girls Club of Greater Phoenix for inspiring self-esteem workshops led by empowering Dove Global Self-Esteem Ambassador, Jess Weiner.

10:15 – 10:45 am Snack Break, sponsored by PediaSure

10:45 am – 12:00 pm Panels + Conversations + Case Studies + User Experience Workshops + Ask The Experts

Beyond the Blog: Instagram & Pinterest – Creative Outlets, Community Growth & Revenue Streams with Ilana Wiles, Rachel Faucett, Kim Stoegbauer, Alexandra Evjen and Emily Meyer

The social media landscape is always changing and people need to know how to maintain their influence on new platforms. But you also can’t do everything well. Hear from individuals doing big things on Instagram, Pinterest and Facebook to widen their audiences and opportunities.

Consciously Incorporating Diversity Into Your Life, Work, Worldview with Ann Imig, Vikki Reich, Taya Dunn Johnson, Ana Flores and Sheila Dowd

While we assume most communities and organizations desire a diverse membership, many are lacking the tools/knowledge in how to make progress toward that goal. Many of us need more experience even talking about diversity and inclusion–not to mention knowing what the difference is between an “open door” invitation and a meaningful invitation that makes people feel truly welcome. We’ll talk about key ways to look at, open up and possibly rethink consious inclusion.

Collaboration is King: How Partnering and Lifting Others Results in Blog, Website and Business Success with Jyl Pattee, Anna Fadar, Isabel Kallman and Liz Gumbinner

Collaboration is critical in running a successful blog/site/business. This case study group will share best practices on how to collaborate including where to find partners, what a partnership might look like, and how it could benefit all involved… this includes bloggers and brands working together. Whether its partnering to build traffic or trading services, it’s important to have an abundance mentality. There is more than enough to go around, and let’s all help each other get opportunities and shine.

A Conversation with Daphne Oz: Modern Parenting, Balancing Acts and Other Lessons Learned, presented by Lansinoh

Daphne Oz is joining Lansinoh at Mom 2.0 to talk about her life as a new mom. Hear first-hand how the New York Times best-selling author and television host is balancing parenting with work responsibilities, and what #ThisMomKnows about leaning in. Visit the Lansinoh booth on Thursday, April 30 for your chance to win an exclusive interview with Daphne! Daphne Oz, Katie Raml

UX WORKSHOPS

7 Habits of Highly Successful Writers with Rebecca Dube

It all starts with your words… and your words can change the world. Learn how to craft your stories into compelling narratives, how to be your own best editor, how to pitch effectively, how to apply the 1 percent rule for dealing with criticism and more. With nearly two decades of experience as a professional journalist, writer and editor at The Associated Press, the TODAY show and other national media outlets, Rebecca Dube can help you take your writing to the next level of awesomeness.

Creating Your Own eCourse with Melissa Culbertson

E-courses can be a very lucrative way to bring in a substantial amount of blog income. However, it can feel like a daunting task when you’ve never created an e-course before. Many bloggers are looking to expand the ways they monetize their blogs beyond sponsored posts and ads. E-courses can bring in thousands of dollars a month as well as help position a blogger as an expert in their course topic.

Defining Your Creative Process: Platform, Publication & Promotion with Charlie Capen and Andy Herald

Platform, publication, promotion. Artists, writers and creative people usually suffer in one of these three areas. Humorists Andy Herald and Charlie Capen will help you identify and tackle these common pitfalls.

The Ask: Knowing Your Worth In This Space and Getting Paid Accordingly with Titania Jordan and Roo Powell

Brands have budgets. Your words, photos, digital space, insights, and time have value. Let’s have an honest conversation about how to maximize your earnings (and when it’s okay to not).

An Interactive Blog Audit with Amy Mascott, Leticia Barr

In this workshop, participants will have a chance to actually look at their blog, talk about what is working and what isn’t and make changes right there and then. Whether bloggers are new to the space or have been in the space for years, everyone can benefit from a step back and a second set of eyes on their blog. As a group, we will look at participant blogs, make changes, and hopefully really give everyone feedback they can use to lift their work to the next level.

ASK THE EXPERTS

(Visit the Knowledge Bar)

MEDIA OPPORTUNITIES

(Ironwood)

12:00 – 1:00 pm Lunch

1:00 -2:00 pm Dove Self-Esteem Workshop (The Dove #BeautyStory Lounge)

Join Dove and the Boys & Girls Club of Greater Phoenix for inspiring self-esteem workshops led by empowering Dove Global Self-Esteem Ambassador, Jess Weiner.

1:30 – 3:00 pm Panels + Conversations + Case Studies + User Experience Workshops + Ask The Experts

How to Continue Creating Great Content While Making A Great Living (At the Same Time): A Realistic Look at Social Media Trends, Influencer Marketing & The Future of Content with Heather Armstrong, Barbara Jones, Dina Freeman, Carolyn Sklar and John Pacini

The process of creating unique, quality content and making a great living (and a great life) are not mutally exclusive. Not at all. In fact, you really can’t have one without the other. This panel of experts will talk about the current realities of influencer marketing and where we see online content going..and growing. You won’t want to miss what’s next.

How to Go Viral: Expert Advice + A Pitch Session with BuzzFeed Morgan Shanahan, Mike Spohr

How To Be Furiously Happy: A Conversation with Jennifer Lawson with Jennifer Lawson and Laura Mayes

We will discusss finding your voice, dealing with criticism, horse racing, umbrellas, fettuccine recipes, little bits of cutout paper you can’t get out of the three-hole punch, some other problems, the weather, orange juice as a verb, Prince songs, the philosophical ramifications of failure and success, taxidermy, and doing things.

UX WORKSHOP

Adobe Photoshop Elements (Willow) ATTENDEES MUST HAVE PRE-REGISTERED FOR THIS CLASS. Join Bob Gager, Adobe Group Product Manager and host of the “Ask Bob” YouTube tutorial series, for an Adobe Photoshop Elements photo-editing bootcamp.