Italian film-maker Marco Ferreri (11 May 1928 – 9 May 1997) made over 100 very personal films over his long, and often controversial career, but is probably best-known for his 1973 satire La Grande Bouffe and 1981’s Tales of Ordinary Madness based on the work of US outsider poet Charles Bukowski (two of my cult film faves). Now one of Ferreri’s earliest films, 1964’s The Ape Woman (AKA La Donna Scimmia), is in my sights after getting a 4K restoration release on Blu-ray.

The Ape Woman is inspired by the true story of 19th-century carnival performer Julia Pastrana, an indigenous woman from Mexico with hypertrichosis, a condition that meant hair covered her entire body. Like Joseph Merrick (The Elephant Man), she was exploited as a freak by her manager. She died, aged just 25, from postpartum complications following the birth of her son (who only survived three days). But her story didn’t end there, for her corpse and the body of her baby were taxidermically preserved and ended up being displayed in museums, circuses and amusement parks around the world for over a century.

Ferreri’s film is set in contemporary (1960’s) Naples and sees Annie Girardot playing Maria, a shy convent novitiate whose condition attracts the attention of Ugo Tognazzi’s wannabe entrepreneur, Antonio. Persuaded with the promise of marriage and money to be made, Maria leaves the convent and moves into a ramshackle backstreet warehouse where she begins to ‘perform’ as a captive wild African ape that Antonio found in the jungle.

At first, Maria feels ashamed but soon becomes more self-assured, while the selfish Antonio begins to feel real love for his wife – especially so when a professor tries to buy her virginity and a famous impresario turns their act into an exotic striptease. But tragedy strikes when Maria falls pregnant, then dies.

Ferreri originally closed his drama with Antonio recovering the bodies of his wife and child from a museum and then putting them on display in a makeshift tent. Deemed too dark and challenging at the time, producer Carlo Ponti had another ending filmed, in which Maria’s hair falls out after giving birth, and she goes on to become a normal wife and mother, while Antonio gets a regular job. It was this ending that scored the film a Palme d’Or nomination. CultFilm’s Blu-ray includes both (which were restored in 4K for the 2017 Venice Film Festival). I must say I do prefer Ferreri’s stark take as it really underscores his anarchic vision.

I thought this might be a tough watch, but Girardot’s performance is captivating as is her character’s journey and development. Tognazzi also brings much depth to the misogynistic Antonio, who starts off cruel and calculating and ends up being just very sad. There’s also a couple of stand-out scenes, particularly so when Maria is forced to sing while being paraded through the streets on her wedding day and the couple’s cringe-worthy Parisian striptease.

If you are not familiar with Ferreri’s work, then the documentary that’s included here is very illuminating. As is the story that the film is based on, which has had me check out whatever happened to Julia Pastrana. Seems she got a much-belated burial in 2012 near her Mexican hometown, Sinaloa de Leyva, after spending decades in storage in Oslo University in Norway.

Available on Blu-ray and digital on-demand from CultFilms

SPECIAL FEATURES

• Full HD 1080p from 4K restoration

• 2.0 dual-mono LPCM Original Italian audio

• Two separate endings: Marco Ferreri’s director’s version and producer Carlo Ponti’s version

• Documentary on Marco Ferreri featuring Gerard Depardieu, Philippe Noiret, Christopher Lambert and Ornella Muti

• New, improved English subtitles

Order direct from CultFilms: https://cultfilms.co.uk/product/the-ape-woman

From Arrow Video comes Italian provocateur Marco Ferreri’s scandalous satire La Grande Bouffe, presented in a new 2K transfer on Blu-ray and DVD.

Reviled on its release for its perversity, decadence and attack on the bourgeoisie, 1973’s La Grande Bouffe went on to win the prestigious FIPRESCI prize after its controversial screening at the Cannes Film Festival that same year.

Four friends – Marcello Mastroianni (Fellini’s 8½), Michel Piccoli (Belle de Jour), Ugo Tognazzi (Barbarella) and Philippe Noiret (Cinema Paradiso) – retreat to a country mansion where they determine to eat themselves to death whilst engaging in group sex with prostitutes and a local school teacher (Andréa Ferréol, The Tin Drum), who seems to be up for anything…

This slideshow requires JavaScript.

Better known as Blow Out, this dark lurid satire, whose message is we are slaves to our appetites (whatever they may be), is just as repulsive and shocking as it was on its original release. Watching the reputed actors wallowing in the film’s excess and fart-filled chaos is sure to give many indigestion, but it remains very much a 1970s French arthouse curio and visual feast. If this doesn’t put you off rich French cuisine, then I’d be really surprised.

Arrow’s new edition (a first for Blu-ray in the UK) comes loaded with a host of new extra features, including a 1975 French television profile of Marco Ferreri, behind-the-scenes footage of the making of La Grande Bouffe, a Cannes news report, trailer, and a collector’s booklet.