HOUMA — Who is Galliano businessman Gary Chouest?

That’s the question some in New Orleans are trying to answer as reports say the Edison Chouest Offshore president is poised to take over the Hornets NBA franchise from George Shinn, who has owned the team since its inception in Charlotte in 1988.

The Courier turned to members of the offshore oil-and-gas industry for insight about Chouest as businessman and what qualities he could bring as owner of the New Orleans team if the deal goes through.

That research paints a picture of a highly successful maritime executive and generous political and charitable donor. But Chouest and his family usually avoid the spotlight and seldom allow much disclosure about how they operate. A spokesman for the company did not return calls for this story.

“He’s a very rare combination of someone who is very quiet, but when they speak they know exactly what they want,” said Ken Wells, president of the Offshore Marine Service Association, a trade group. “Someone who is as quiet as Gary Chouest, when they speak, they speak volumes.”

Whoever takes over the Hornets must continue to build support for the team while working with limited resources, said Michael Ozanian, national editor who covers the business of sports at Forbes.

With a small market and fewer corporate sponsors than most major cities, the Hornets are valued at $267 million, ranked 28th among the NBA’s 30 teams.

“It’s not an easy market to have an NBA team,” Ozanian said. “He’s got a very delicate balance. He doesn’t have much room for error.”

Part of the challenge will be getting players out into the community and continuing to build on the loyalty the Hornets have garnered since arriving in New Orleans in 2002. A local voice may help do that, Ozanian said.

In the one interview he’s given since he bought into the team in 2007, Chouest characterized his investment as one in the state. He’s also a longtime basketball fan himself. His son Ross Chouest played for South Lafourche High School’s basketball team, which won the 5A state championship in 1998. Ross Chouest went on to play at Georgia Tech and LSU.

“I want to do something for our community and south Louisiana. … It’s up to the people who live off the land to invest in it,” he said, according to a transcript on the team’s website. “I’m sure that we’re going to be a success in New Orleans, so I don’t have a lot of concerns about the long-term viability. I know that this will work.”

Chouest is no stranger to tough business challenges. His father, Edison Chouest Sr., was a shrimper who started a boat company serving oil rigs with a single shrimp boat, The Holiday, purchased for $38,000 in 1960.

Edison Chouest Offshore now operates worldwide with more than 7,000 employees, a fleet of more than 150 boats and 100 affiliated companies. Those other operations include shipyards in Houma, Larose, Gulfport, Tampa and Brazil. The company has built some of the world’s most-advanced research vessels for the U.S. government, as well as boats equipped to handle the icy and treacherous conditions of Alaskan waters for Royal Dutch Shell.

Gary Chouest, as well as his brothers, Laney and Edison Jr., worked in the growing business as young men. It was initially run from the kitchen table of a brick house just off of Bayou Lafourche, according to an interview from spokesman Lonnie Thibodeaux given on the 2008 death of Edison Chouest Sr.

The company started its first shipyard, North American Shipbuilding, in 1974, and practices its goal of directly overseeing every facet of the business.

“They totally control the process: design, build, own and operate,” Thibodeaux said, an unusual setup for the maritime industry. “They never, never wavered on that principle.”

The company has been family-owned and privately held since its inception, so concrete figures on its sales and operations are hard to come by. Forbes says it has no estimate of the business’ worth or of Chouest’s wealth.

But according to Pierre Conner of Capital One Southcoast, a New Orleans investment firm that follows the oilfield-service business, Edison Chouest is the largest provider of new-generation offshore support vessels in the Gulf of Mexico, with nearly 40 percent of the market.

“Early on, they differentiated themselves by working with Shell, providing for a very large, demanding customer,” Conner said. “They used that footprint to leverage into international markets. They are now one of the largest players.”

While the company doesn’t disclose its earnings, many of its peers are publicly traded. In 2009, New-Orleans based Tidewater had $1.3 billion in revenue, Hornbeck Offshore of Covington had $385 million, and Gulf Mark Offshore of Houston had $389 million.

Edison Chouest companies are “known for being very savvy, known for being very quick to figure out where the industry is headed,” said Wells, the head of the offshore group, said of the company. “They’re particularly adept at is training and meeting the needs of their crews. They have always understood the value of getting the right people, putting them in the right jobs and giving them enough responsibility to do their jobs.”

Edison Chouest is Lafourche Parish’s largest taxpayer, with assets valued at $51.34 million in 2008. The company operates two large offshore terminals, C-Port and C-Port 2, at Port Fourchon, where its boats restock and reload. It also has private-jet hangars at both the South Lafourche and Houma-Terrebonne airports.

Ted Falgout, former director of Port Fourchon, worked with the Chouests for decades. Even when it came to the minute details of his boat company, Gary Chouest always had a thorough understanding. “He has the mental capacity to stay with the details of such a large organization.”

The company is also experienced at navigating the halls of government and using incentives to its benefit. The Chouests are major supporters of Gov. Bobby Jindal, and from 2007 to 2008 Chouest’s businesses and closest family members contributed at least 18 donations totalling $85,000 to his campaigns.

At the time, news reports also pointed out that Chouest’s LaShip shipyard, which promises to create 1,000 jobs in the Houma-Thibodaux area, was the first economic-development project to benefit from the governor’s help in his administration.

Built on land donated to the Port of Terrebonne, state money has helped build public infrastructure that is leased back by LaShip. The project has so far received a total of $26.9 million in grants for bulkhead work and issued $25 million in Gulf Opportunity Zone hurricane-recovery bonds. The Port Commission is trying to negotiate additional state money to help build a $26.5 million dry dock.

Edison Chouest was Louisiana’s top federal political donor for the past two election cycles, contributing $352,350 to political candidates and causes in 2008 and $180,100 so far in 2010, according to OpenSecrets.org, a Web site that tracks federal campaign-contribution and lobbying information.

The company has also used Washington lobbyists since at least 2002. In 2009, they spent $286,200, according to the site.

The family is a frequent donor to local civic and industry groups. Some recent examples are $100,000 in 2009 to build an outdoor pavilion at the Larose Civic Center and $100,000 in 2008 to a fund at Nicholls State University’s College of Business Administration.

“He’s a man who believes in his community, his region and his state,” said Jane Arnette, executive director of the South Central Industrial Association.

When honored with that group’s top award, Chouest sent his daughter, Dionne Chouest, to accept it on his behalf.

At the time, she told The Courier that her father was often asked why the company stays in Galliano when it could move anyplace.

“He said, ‘Why would I move?’ ” when his roots are here. The Cajun work ethic is strong, and the people are friendly,” Dionne Chouest said. “My dad’s capitalized on that.”

Staff Writer Kathrine Schmidt can be reached at 857-2204 or kathrine.schmidt@houmatoday.com.