Book Review: The Left Hand of Darkness

Insightful, thought-provoking, and revolutionary, The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin is a powerful science fiction novel. Published in 1969, the themes embraced in the story were likely taboo when the book was first released, particularly on the topic of gender fluidity. In comparison, this classic is extremely relevant in today’s society, and many could benefit from reading it.

The novel tells the story of Genly Ai, a lone emissary sent to the planet Winter (Gethen) to persuade the planet to join the Ekumen, a loose confederation of planets involved in trade and communication. Genly Ai must convince King Argaven XV and the planet’s leaders to form an alliance with Ekumen, but he faces many challenges along the way.

In order to accomplish his mission, Genly Ai must set out to learn more about the planet and its nations, all while forming a strategy to win over King Argaven, with the help of his friend (Estraven). Throughout the story, Le Guin includes vivid descriptions of the world of Winter and Genly Ai’s journey. The reader will feel completely immersed in the story, as her writing is truly captivating.

There are many themes in The Left Hand of Darkness, but perhaps one of the most interesting is that of politics in a society where gender is fluid and irrelevant. There are also themes of loyalty/trust, warfare, language and communication, and love (for one’s planet, friends, and family).

Recently, I discovered that this book is a part of a series by Le Guin, called The Hainish Cycle. Although, it is clear that these books can be read as standalone novels (which I felt was especially true with The Left Hand of Darkness, I did not realize it was in a series).

For fear of giving the story’s plot away (if I get into more details about the novel and the complexities of the relationship between Genly Ai and Estraven), I am going to keep this review short. I’ll end with saying that this book is definitely worth the read — I highly recommend it! I was given The Left Hand of Darkness as a gift from my brother and I am forever grateful, as it is a story that will stay with its reader, long after finishing the book.