It’s that time of the year, where you turn on the radio and might hear some holiday music.

Some stations will sprinkle songs into their daily lineup — especially around Christmas Eve and Christmas Day — while others go all out and turn their station into 24/7 holiday music.

Here’s a roundup of where you can find Christmas music playing 24/7 in the New York/New Jersey/Philadelphia region, and ways to update your playlist with holiday tunes.

Radio stations in the N.J., N.Y., and Pa. regions playing non-stop Christmas music

102.7 WNEW - New York: If you’re in North or Central Jersey, you can listen to non-stop Christmas classics 24/7 by tuning in or you can listen anywhere for free online on Audacy.

106.7 WLTW - New York: If you’re in North or Central Jersey, you can tune in to non-stop Christmas classics on this station or listen online from anywhere with an internet connection here.

101.1 WBEB - Philadelphia: If you’re in in South Jersey, you can listen to non-stop Christmas classics 24/7 by tuning in or you can listen anywhere for free online on Audacy.

102.3 WSUS- Sussex, N.J.: If you’re in North Jersey, you can tune in to non-stop Christmas classics on this station or listen online from anywhere with an internet connection here.

STAR 99.1 - Somerset, N.J.: If you’re in North or Central Jersey, you can tune in to non-stop Christmas classics on this station or listen online from anywhere with an internet connection here.

Magic 98.3 WMGQ- New Brunswick, N.J.- If you’re anywhere in New Jersey, you can tune in to non-stop Christmas classics on this station or listen online from anywhere with an internet connection here.

Christmas radio stations on SiriusXM

For those interested in satellite radio options, Sirius XM released a list of 17 holiday channels in November that are dedicated to playing holiday tunes and Christmas music:

‘70s/’80s Holidays - Christmas and holiday songs from the 1970s and 1980s. (Online only)

Acoustic Christmas - New and classic acoustic holiday songs from Jack Johnson, Sia, George Ezra, Train, Norah Jones, Maroon 5, Jason Mraz, The Lumineers and more. (Channel 6, beginning Dec. 24)

Christmas Spirit - Ad-free music from contemporary Christian artists. (Channel 63, beginning Dec. 7)

Country Christmas - Features music from generations of country artists including Garth Brooks, Carrie Underwood and George Strait. (Channel 58, beginning Dec. 7)

Hallmark Channel Radio - Music and carols from some favorite stars from the Hallmark Channel. (Channel 104, beginning Nov. 23)

Holiday Chill-Out - Contemporary holiday music from Kaskade, Lost Frequencies, DJ Style and more. (Online only)

Holiday Instrumentals - String, piano and orchestra versions of favorite holiday songs. (Online only)

Holiday Pops - Classic carols and favorites performed by the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, Luciano Pavarotti, New York Philharmonic, King’s College Choir, Boston Pops and Thomas Hampson. (Channel 76, beginning Dec. 24)

Holiday Soul - Soul and Motown holiday music from the 1960s and 1970s as well as R&B from the 1980s to current including Aretha Franklin, the Temptations, James Brown, Lou Rawls, Smokey Robinson, Dionne Warwick, The Jackson 5, The Four Tops, the Supremes, John Legend, Boyz II Men and more. (Channel 49, beginning Dec. 7)

Holiday Traditions - Music from the 1940′s through the 1960′s by artists such as Nat King Cole, Bing Crosby, Andy Williams, and Ray Coniff (Channel 71, beginning Nov. 23)

Holly - Contemporary holiday hits with songs by Mariah Carey, Michael Bublé, Kelly Clarkson, Pentatonix, Rod Stewart, Trans Siberian Orchestra, Chicago, Josh Groban, Madonna, Bruce Springsteen, Idina Menzel and more. (Channel 105, beginning Nov. 23)

Jazz Holidays - Christmas favorites from jazz legends and contemporary jazz artists. (Online only)

Jolly Christmas - Upbeat hits from The Chipmunks, Gene Autry, Mariah Carey, Jose Feliciano and more. (Online only)

The Mannheim Steamroller Channel - Features more than three decades of the group’s songs with a blend of symphonic, new age and rock. (Channel 510)

Navidad - Latin holiday music featuring artists including Ricky Martin, Gloria Estefan, José Feliciano, Tito El Bambino, Marco Antonio Solís and Fania All-Stars. (Channel 787, beginning Nov. 23)

Rockin’ Xmas - Classic Christmas songs “that rock, including hits, rarities, live tracks and humorous tunes.” (Online only)

Our journalism needs your support. Please subscribe today to NJ.com

Katherine Rodriguez can be reached at krodriguez@njadvancemedia.com. Have a tip? Tell us at nj.com/tips.