TURNPIKE traffic, 10:30 in the morning. There's a car fire at Exit 18, and rubberneckers are backing up in the southbound lanes. The radio pops and snorts, and then, as the signal comes into focus, it begins to snarl.

"Ray in Chester, you're on New Jersey 101.5." Topic A this morning on 101.5 FM in Trenton, the state's top-rated talk station, is the recent killing of a Monmouth County schoolteacher; the suspect is a 17-year-old who was caught driving her car the next day.

I think this little dirtbag just hit the jackpot," Ray tells Dennis Malloy, the station's host from 10 to noon. "Whereas before he probably had no chance to amount to anything in life, afraid of his own shadow, he's now got the opportunity to get a college education, watch cable TV all night in an air-conditioned cell, have conjugal visits, get married to some loser woman with an infatuation for prisoners . . . He'll never see the death penalty, and if I had the chance I'd do it myself!"

"All right, Ray, thank you. I think you're 100 percent right."

Not all radio in New Jersey is anywhere near this angry and raw. But much of it is just as vital. From one end of the dial (WBGO at 88.3 FM, the region's premier jazz station) to the other (WJDM at 1660, a pioneer of the newly expanded AM band), broadcasters blanket the state with a hugely varied quilt of sound, some of it professional and polished, some of it automated and bland, some of it quirky and specialized, some of it folksy or silly or just plain weird.

Radio in New Jersey is a $150 million business, with more than 80 stations from Cape May to Newton. They exist in the shadows of the nation's largest and fourth-largest radio markets, New York and Philadelphia, and for the most part they get along by carving out a niche -- not just a particular format, like talk or gospel or rock, but a particular audience, like Haitians or fundamentalist Christians or Bergen County adults over 45.

"The F.C.C. in its great wisdom allowed all these little stations to drop in wherever they'd fit on the dial, without any regard for economics," said Art Camiolo, president of Allur Communications, which owns three stations in Atlantic and Cape May Counties. "You have to have a niche if you're going to be successful, and smaller stations just can't survive all by themselves."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.