EXCLUSIVE: A new take on the classic Hollywood Squares game show is headed to VH1. The network has teamed with Jesse Collins Entertainment and Kevin Hart‘s Hartbeat on Celebrity Squares, a modern twist on the classic format featuring Black pop culture trivia.

Hosted by actor and comedian DC Young Fly, “the series will bring cultural icons together for 20 fun and spontaneous half-hour episodes,” per VH1. Celebrity guests include Babyface, Bobby Brown, Tiffany Haddish, Kirk Franklin, Bresha Webb, Luenell, Taye Diggs and more. Celebrity Squares premieres at 8 p.m. Tuesday, October 17, on VH1.

Celebrity Squares will bring two contestants together to play Tic-Tac-Toe, banking cash and prizes along the way. The player with the most money in their bank at the end of the game will move on to the bonus round for a chance to win a $10,000 cash prize.

“We’re thrilled to announce our partnership with Hartbeat and Jesse Collins Entertainment for this exciting new project,” said Tiffany Lea Williams, EVP Unscripted Programming and Development of BET. “This show offers a fresh interpretation of the iconic Hollywood Squares format, with a focus on celebrating black pop culture. With DC Young Fly’s laugh-out-loud humor, it promises to deliver a fun and exhilarating viewing experience. We look forward to bringing it to our audience.”

“DC Young Fly is an extraordinary comedian and we are thrilled to team up with him once again to lead this project,” stated Bryan Smiley, Chief Content Officer of Hartbeat. “We look forward to continuing our partnership with BET and Jesse Collins Entertainment as we bring an exciting, fresh spin to this iconic game show format.”

“It was a pleasure to work with Hartbeat, BET and DC Young Fly again,” said Dionne Harmon, President, Jesse Collins Entertainment. “We hope the audience enjoys watching this series as much as we enjoyed making it.”

Additional celebrity guests include: Affion Crockett, Alesha Renee, Amanda Seales, Amin Joseph, Ashley Darby, B Simone, Big Freedia, Bobby Lytes, Brandee Evans, Brian Jordan Jr., Carl Anthony Payne, Chico Bean, Christian Keyes, Crystal Hayslett, D-Nice, Deon Cole, Desi Banks, Devale Ellis, Earthquake, Eva Marcille, Evelyn Lozada, Flau’Jae Johnson, Funny Marco, Jasmin Brown, Jason Lee, Jess Hilarious, Kamillion, K Michelle, Karlous Miller, Karrueche, Kel Mitchell, Kendra G, Keshia Knight-Pulliam, Kevin Frazier, Kevonstage, KJ Smith, Kym Whitley, Lance Gross, Lil Duval, Lil Fizz, Loni Love, Malcolm Barrett, Mark Tallman, Marlo Hampton, Moniece, Na’im Lynn, Nene Leaks, Niena Drake, Pretty Vee, Princess Love, Ray J, Safaree, Saucy Santana, Skyh Black, Shay Johnson, Sinqua Walls, Spice, Spice Adams, Sukihana, Tamar Braxton, Tami Roman, Terrance J, Tisha Campbell, Tommy Davidson, Yandy Smith-Harris and Zellswag.

Celebrity Squares is executive produced by Kevin Hart, Bryan Smiley and Thai Randolph for Hartbeat and Jesse Collins, Dionne Harmon, Madison Merritt and Elaine Metaxas for Jesse Collins Entertainment. Nile Evans serves as showrunner. Tiffany Lea Williams, Angela Aguilera, Mimi Blanchard and Raye Dowell serve as executives for BET.

DC Young Fly recently starred in the New Line/SpringHill feature House Party. Upcoming he can be seen in a supporting role in the Amazon film Candy Cane Lane opposite Eddie Murphy, set to be released at the end of the year. He is repped by Innovative Artists and Fox Rothschild.