STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Described as "The Real Housewives on steroids" by its creator, a new show about Staten Island women involved in the mob lifestyle may become the latest hit on TV.

Premiering April 17 at 8 p.m. on VH1, "Mob Wives" follows four friends at a crossroads, struggling with their identities and families as they start over while their husbands or fathers do time for alleged mob-related activities.

The cast features: Karen Gravano, daughter of Mafia turncoat Salvatore (Sammy the Bull) Gravano; Drita D'avanzo, whose husband Lee is in prison for bank robbery; Renee Graziano, daughter of Anthony Graziano, an alleged high-ranking member of La Cosa Nostra, and Carla Facciolo, whose husband Joey Ferragamo was convicted of stock fraud.

"I want everyone to know that these women are just like anyone else, like any other single mom out there," said Jennifer Graziano of JustJenn Productions, the show's creator and executive producer. "The show to me is really about the struggles, trials and tribulations these women go through and hopefully conquer throughout the season."

Ms. Graziano, who grew up in New Springville and then moved to Huguenot, originally wrote a scripted drama based on her life and friends. But when reality TV started gaining momentum, she changed the show's format figuring it was an easier way to get into television.

Picking the cast was simple. Renee Graziano is her older sister and she's known the other women for years. All come from similar situations and each has a loved on in jail.

"I want people to watch, and in particular women to watch, and say to themselves, 'ladies, you can do it by yourself, you can do it without a man,'" the producer commented.

Ms. Gravano, who grew up in Graniteville, is perhaps best known since her father helped take down John Gotti and the Gambino crime family when she was a teen-ager. He was placed in witness protection in Arizona, where she joined him several years later after no longer feeling welcome in New York.

Her father was busted in 2000 for running a multimillion-dollar Ecstasy ring and sentenced to 20 years in prison — a situation that landed Ms. Gravano with three years probation for her alleged role in the scheme.

"For me, I hope people take away from the show that there is an after-affect of this lifestyle," Ms. Gravano said. "People think the lifestyle is all glitz and glamour, but there's heartache for families whose members go to prison."

The show follows Ms. Gravano's return to the Island after spending 12 years in Arizona. One reason she came back was to pen a book about her life as well as confront her past and move forward.

While in Arizona, she came to terms with "who I am as Karen Gravano, not Sammy the Bull's daughter," she said, noting that the move back to the Island is temporary for now.

"I feel like the decisions I made in life and the mistakes I made make me who I am today," she said. "I made my mistakes, I learned from them and want to move past them. That's what I'm trying to do."

Another of the show's stars looking to push forward is Mrs. D'avanzo, whose husband is the alleged leader of a Bonanno and Colombo crime family farm team. With her husband in jail for the second time, she's left raising their two girls.

Mrs. D'avanzo is an unlikely fit for the mob lifestyle, having grown up in a strict Albanian household within the Todt Hill Houses. The high school soccer star — then known as Drita Selmani — was on her way to college and was invited to play for the Women's National Soccer Team when she started dating "street guys" and gave it all up.

"I want to show that it's not the right road to take," the Tottenville resident said. "I had the world in my hands. I live that story of could've, would've, should've."