NEW YORK - April 8, 2005 - Gameloft, a leading developer and publisher of video games for mobile phones, announced today that its title, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Chaos Theory, is now available for gamers worldwide.

Sam Fisher is back and his enemies have evolved with him. Armed with better weapons and ready for knife fights in close quarters, he will need all his stealth skills to infiltrate a Peruvian army base, slink behind transparent Japanese folding screens, and negotiate an underground train station. The magnificent backgrounds and interactive settings, where water levels rise, rain falls, and trains pass, complement the action packed gameplay.

On the day of its release, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Chaos Theory was made available to Gameloft's 130 operating partners, as well as 150 affiliates. Seven hundred different versions were developed in Gameloft's internal studios to accommodate 180 mobile phone models and 5 languages. The game is available today in 65 countries worldwide.

In conjunction with this announcement, Gameloft reports that the Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell series has sold more than 3 million units.

Released in November 2002 and inspired by Ubisoft's infiltration game for PC and console, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell for mobile phones became an instant hit and was a huge success, essentially revolutionizing the mobile game genre. As the first action/infiltration game on this platform, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell set the standard for the mobile genre with its intuitive gameplay and easy access, offering players different game modes to suit their tastes and abilities.

In March 2003, it was followed by Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Pandora Tomorrow. The game's realistic infiltration atmosphere and gameplay mechanics inspired comparisons to games for mobile consoles. IGN, one of the most trafficked gaming sites, rated the game 10 out of 10.

"The Tom Clancy Splinter Cell series showed millions of people that mobile games are a quality form of entertainment available anywhere right on your mobile phone," said Michel Guillemot, president of Gameloft. "As a leader in the industry, Gameloft has everything it takes to tap the growth of a potentially huge market."

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Chaos Theory was released on March 31st, 2005 in conjunction with the game for Nokia N-Gage, also developed by Gameloft, and the versions for Xbox, GameCube and PC, developed and published by Ubisoft.

About Gameloft

Gameloft is a leading international publisher and developer of video games for mobile phones. Established in 1999, it has emerged as one of the top innovators in its field. The company creates games for mobile handsets equipped with Java, Brew or Symbian technology. The total number of mobile handsets with this technology is anticipated to exceed one billion units in 2007.

Partnership agreements with leading licensors and sports personalities such as Ubisoft Entertainment, Universal Pictures, Paramount Studios, Dreamworks, Vans, Derek Jeter, Vijay Singh and Geoff Rowley allow Gameloft to form strong relationships with international brands. In addition to the partnerships, Gameloft owns and operates titles such as Block Breaker Deluxe, Asphalt: Urban GT and Siberian Strike.

Through agreements with major telephone wireless carriers, handset manufacturers, specialized distributors and its online shop, Gameloft has a distribution network in over 65 countries.

Gameloft has worldwide offices in New York, San Francisco, Montreal, Paris, London, Düsseldorf, Milan, Barcelona, Beijing, Tokyo and Hong Kong. Gameloft is listed on Euronext Paris (ISIN: FR0000079600, Bloomberg: GFT FP, Reuters: GFT.PA)

For more information visit www.gameloft.com.

Press Contact:

Sanette Chao

Communications Manager

Gameloft

45 W. 25th Street, 9th Floor

New York, NY 10010

212.994.2495

schao@gameloft.com

® 2001 Gameloft - All rights reserved - Gameloft and Gameloft logo are registered trademarks of Gameloft S.A. - All rights reserved.