HICKORY, N.C. – Lenoir-Rhyne Athletics announces a partnership with WHKY to broadcast home and road football games. WHKY is the premier media outlet in Hickory and will serve as the flagship station for Bears Athletics.

"This partnership is a tremendous opportunity for LR Athletics," said Vice President for Athletics Kim Pate. "LR and WHKY have both served the greater metro Hickory area for generations and the opportunity to partner together to make LR football broadcasts available to the entire Unifour area will strengthen our ties to the community while allowing us to showcase the incredible brand of football played between the bricks. I can't thank Tom and Linda Long as well as Frank Harlow, Jason Savage, and Tommy Glover for making this happen. I look forward to seeing this partnership grow to not only benefit LR and WHKY, but the Hickory Community."

"WHKY, 1290 AM and 102.3 FM, is thrilled to partner with LR to bring local college football to both our over the air and online listeners," said Linda Long, WHKY station manager.

"It is so good to be back in partnership with Lenoir-Rhyne. We are very thankful to be working with Kim Pate, Justin Hay and the incredible athletic communication staff at LR. Partnering with Lenoir-Rhyne is a vital part of WHKY's continued commitment to our community," said Jason Savage '99, WHKY Sports Director.

WHKY is slated to bring 10 of the 11 regular season football games to the air waves and online streaming in 2023. Fans can tune their radio dials to 1290 AM or 102.3 FM or log on to WHKY.com to pull up the games.

WHKY Talk Radio broadcast on both 1290AM with 50,000 wats and on 102.3 FM to fully cover the Greater Metro Area and also has the only local live morning talk show, "First Talk with Hal Row". WHKY also airs Fox News Radio, the North Carolina News Network, NASCAR races and Fox Sports Radio to fully reach and fill the needs of the local market. The station has the only full time local news staff dedicated to providing extensive local news, weather and sports.

To advertise with WHKY contact Tommy Glover or visit https://whky.com/advertise/.