The parent company of WHKY-TV announced plans to sell the television station to a Louisiana-based ministry led by evangelist Jimmy Swaggart.

The company expects the sale between Long Communications LLC and the Family Worship Center Church will close some time in the second quarter, according to a post on the station’s website Wednesday.

The new owners plan to use a new call sign for the TV station, but “any changes in operations and programming of the TV station will be announced at a later date,” according to the post.

Long Communications intends to keep all the current employees and to continue running the radio station under the WHKY call sign while also producing online content, the post said.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

Station Manager Jeff Long declined to comment more on the deal Wednesday, but indicated he would be willing to say more next week.

WHKY was founded as a radio station in 1940 by Jeff Long’s grandfather Ed Long. The Long family later expanded their operations to include the TV station.

WHKY-TV, which is the oldest independently-owned TV station in North Carolina, marked its 55th anniversary on Tuesday.

Family Worship Center Church is the home of the Jimmy Swaggart Ministry in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and is adjacent to the campus of the Jimmy Swaggart Bible College, according to Google maps.

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Kevin Griffin

Reporter

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today