Hickory, North Carolina, June 7, 2024

WHKY Talk Radio is pleased to announce that the WHKY News is returning to television. Starting June 10, 2024, the WHKY News will be broadcast over-the-air on channel 14.2. The T.V. broadcasts had been absent from the airwaves since WHKY-TV was sold in April of 2023, though WHKY Talk Radio has continuously remained under local ownership. In addition to the over-the-air broadcasts, WHKY’s video newscasts will continue to be available through the station’s website (whky.com) and the WHKY YouTube channel.

The WHKY News is a 30-minute program focused on local news and events from Catawba, Alexander, Burke, Caldwell, Iredell, and Lincoln counties. It will air on channel 14.2 every weekday at 5:30 p.m. and 10 p.m. WHKY, located in Hickory, North Carolina, will also be broadcast in the Atlanta area on WGBP channel 66.2. In addition, future plans call for the WHKY News to be streamed through ROKU.

The WHKY News is comprised of four segments: Top Stories, The Crime Report, Local Sports, and Community Focus, which deals primarily with arts & entertainment news along with local non-profit and community service organizations. The show is anchored by news director Ralph Mangum and features daily reports by Rob Eastwood and Arianna Mack. Local Sports coverage is hosted by sports director Jason Savage. The show regularly features guests from the Hickory area and surrounding communities.

Since 1940, WHKY Talk Radio (now broadcast on 1290 AM and 102.3 FM) has operated under local ownership and management. The radio station is kicking off a yearlong celebration of its 85th anniversary, culminating with the anniversary milestone on June 10, 2025. The station was founded in Hickory on June 10, 1940 by Edmund S. Long and has continued to flourish under the leadership of the Long family. Edmund Long was followed by his son, Tom Long, Sr., who passed away in February of 2017, and by his daughter Roberta “Susie” Long, who passed away in March of 2024. Tom Long, Sr. was followed by his sons, Jeff Long (now retired) and current general manager Tom Long, Jr., along with his wife, Linda Long, who is station manager.

Tom Long, Jr. said, “We are excited to get WHKY news back on TV. It remains a priority for WHKY to bring listeners and viewers local programming. Stay tuned!”