On Monday, WHKY News is returning to television more than a year after its last broadcast.

WHKY News will air on channel 14.2 every weekday at 5:30 p.m. and 10 p.m., a press release from WHKY said. The 30-minute program is focused on local news and events from Catawba, Alexander, Burke, Caldwell, Iredell and Lincoln counties.

WHKY News will be comprised of four segments: top stories, the crime report, local sports and community focus, which will focus primarily on arts and entertainment news along with local nonprofit and community service organizations.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

The show will be anchored by News Director Ralph Mangum and will feature daily reports by Rob Eastwood and Arianna Mack.

Local sports coverage will be hosted by Sports Director Jason Savage. The show will regularly feature guests from the Hickory area and surrounding communities.

WHKY-TV was sold in April of 2023 to a Louisiana-based ministry led by evangelist Jimmy Swaggart, according to a Hickory Daily Record article from 2023.

T.V. broadcasts have been absent since the sale. However, WHKY Talk Radio remained under local ownership and continues to air. The station was founded in Hickory on June 10, 1940 by Edmund S. Long and has remained under the management of the Long family.

Tom Long Jr., WHKY Talk Radio general manager, said, “We are excited to get WHKY news back on TV. It remains a priority for WHKY to bring listeners and viewers local programming.”

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Kathryn DeHart

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today