Tamil superstar Kamal Haasan on Friday released a statement appreciating all the winners of the 69th National Film Awards . Kamal, who is a four-time National Award winner, especially praised the achievements of the talents in South Indian cinema, who are shaping and influencing movies at the national level.

"I am very happy that Kadaisi Vivasayi has been named the Best Tamil film. And the late Nallandi, who gave an excellent performance in it, received a special mention. I give my love and congratulations to director-producer M. Manikandan and actor Vijay Sethupathi," Kamal said in his statement.

ALSO READ: National Awards 2023: PC Sreeram questions the politics behind ignoring Jai Bhim, criticizes The Kashmir Files

Besides Kadaisi Vivasayi, playback singer Shreya Ghoshal bagged the 'Best Singer' award for singing Maayava Thooyava in Iravin Nizhal. While Tamil cinema fans were disappointed, the Telugu cinema made quite a splash by taking home the biggest awards of this edition.

Telugu superstar Allu Arjun's Best Actor win for his performance in director Sukumar's Pushpa: The Rise was a special moment for the entire Telugu film industry. "I extended my wishes to Allu Arjun, who has created history by becoming the first Telugu actor to win the National Award," added Kamal.

South Indian cinema is on a roll!

The Indian 2 star also extended his congratulations to R Madhavan, whose movie Rocketry: The Nambi Effect won the Best Feature Film award, composer Devi Sri Prasad, director SS Rajamouli, the cast and crew of RRR, and Shreya Ghoshal for winning the top honours.

Allu Arjun in and as Pushpa

While fans of Tamil and Telugu movies seem to be fighting on social media over the awards, Kamal has a different take on it. Instead of dividing the winners on a linguistic basis, his letter sends a message of brotherhood as he expressed delight over the growth of South Indian cinema.

ALSO READ: 69th National Film Awards: Disappointment for Tamil cinema as acclaimed films didn't receive recognition

"The South Indian film industry's mastery over the craft of filmmaking has reached new heights and that's very evident in the winners' list of the National Film Awards. Let this triumph continue," he added.