Kamal Haasan is a storehouse of talents without any doubt. He is not just a commendable actor, but also an ace director, dancer, lyricist and screenwriter. He is also a multiple National Award winner and has won 19 Filmfare awards for his films in Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Hindi. He continued to win the Filmfare awards till 1999.

The actor, however, never got any Filmfare Awards after 2000. Surprisingly, Kamal Haasan himself took that decision. He reportedly wrote a letter to the award organisers to not nominate him in any category and give him this prize henceforth. Not many details are out in the public domain that why Kamal Haasan took this decision. A Times of India report, however, stated, “He urged the committee to appreciate young talents in the industry.”

Kamal Haasan is known for films like Nayagan, Mahanadi, Chachi 420, and others. In his illustrious career, Chachi 420 deserves special mention. It is because besides essaying and excelling in his dual role, he also directed this film. The film gained a staggering success at the box office. As per reports, Kamal Haasan produced this film for Rs 4.50 crore. Chachi 420 ended up earning 5 times more than the budgetary cost at the box office. It earned Rs 20 crore globally and remains one of the most loved films on OTT and television. This film was released on December 19, 1997.

As of now, Kamal Haasan is eagerly anticipating the release of his film Indian 2, directed by S Shankar. Rakul Preet Singh, Kajal Aggarwal, and others have also acted in this movie. Interestingly, the shooting of Indian 2 is going at a brisk pace in the same studio where Rajinikanth is shooting for Thalaivar 170. Lyca Productions, the production house of both films, tweeted the news along with pictures of both actors.

The 2 unparalleled LEGENDS of Indian Cinema ‘Ulaganayagan’ @ikamalhaasan & ‘Superstar’ @rajinikanth sharing a lighter moment while shooting for their respective films Indian-2 & Thalaivar170 in the same studio after 21 years! And we @LycaProductions are super happy & proud to be producing both films! #Indian2 #Thalaivar170 (sic).”

This film is currently in the post-production stage and is expected to release at the cinemas in April 2024.