I was born and raised in South Portland, ME. My family and my wife's family still live in South Portland. We have deep family roots here. I was raised by a single mom. I have a brother and a sister. I have had a love of music for as long as I can remember. As a boy I used to sing Elvis Presley songs to entertain my family. When I was in High School I performed Musical Theatre at South Portland High School. I also love doing Karaoke with friends and family. About three years ago I started busking during the summers in the Old Port area of Portland, on Exchange Street. You can still find me there when I'm not performing somewhere. This allowed me to make some extra cash and at the same time hone my craft. This in turn led me to try out for American Idol. Sadly, I didn't make it but it did not discourage my passion for music and singing. Busking then led to owners/managers of nearby establishments inviting me to sing at their places. I tried playing some open mic nights to build up my repertoire of songs. This led to the more occasional gigs and then regular gigs around the Portland area. I feel very blessed to do this and I work very hard playing and writing music everyday. These days I continue to try and keep the dream alive of being a full-time entertainer.

Please come join me at one of my Live Performances and say hello! You can find the list of upcoming performances by clicking on the EVENTS tab at the top or bottom of this page. New dates and locations are added all the time so come back and check the site often.

- Chris -

Like so many other musicians I think it is hard to pinpoint one specific artist as my main influence. Some artists I admire for their song writing skills, others their vocals and some their ability to make a guitar "sing". Artists I love are; Chris Stapleton, Elvis Presley, Rascal Flatt's, Stevie Ray Vaughn, Dixie Chicks, Lee Brice, Brooks & Dunn and many others.

My other major influence of course would be my mother. Yep I'm a mama's boy and proud of it. Without her I would not be where I am today. The debt of gratitude I owe her goes beyond words because words are not enough to explain how much she means to me.

I have so many things that inspire me, family, friends, life in general, especially the love of music.

Seeing people connect with a song I'm singing and playing. The emotion in their eyes, albeit joy or sadness. To see someone hear one of my songs and feel such a deep connection to it, brings me a great sense of gratification.

I am also uplifted by other musicians, who have yet to make a name for themselves. They have a pure love of music and such perseverance it amazes me everyday.