Ladevci Map — Satellite Images of Ladevci

original name: Lađevci

geographical location: Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, Europe

geographical coordinates: 43° 49' 2" North, 20° 36' 40" East

detailed map of Ladevci and near places

Welcome to the Ladevci google satellite map! This place is situated in Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, its geographical coordinates are 43° 49' 2" North, 20° 36' 40" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Lađevci. See Ladevci photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Ladevci in Serbia and Montenegro. Ladevci hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Ladevci or add new placemark for Ladevci.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Ladevci hotel reservations

Book hotel in Ladevci online and save money

Ladevci hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Serbia and Montenegro »

Ladevci hotels – sortable list of all Ladevci hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Ladevci hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Ladevci, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Ladevci, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Ladevci hotels map

The location of each Ladevci hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Ladevci hotel map is available where all hotels in Ladevci are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Ladevci hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Ladevci hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Ladevci hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Ladevci hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Ladevci

Hotel Royal *** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 11 km)

Hotel Botika **** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 12 km)

Hotel Turist **** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 12 km)

Hotel Crystal **** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 12 km)

Hotel Djerdan *** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 14 km)

Hotel Tehnograd *** (in Kraljevo, distanced approximately 14 km)

Hotel Euro Gaj ** (in Vuckovica, distanced approximately 19 km)

more Ladevci hotels »

Ladevci car rental

Compare Ladevci car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Ladevci rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Ladevci car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Ladevci — we will do it for you!

Car hire Ladevci and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Ladevci the city centre. Compare Ladevci car rental offers by various suppliers.

Tuzla - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 170 km)

Tuzla car rental (distanced approximately 170 km)

Sarajevo car rental (distanced approximately 180 km)

Sarajevo - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 180 km)

Sarajevo - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 180 km)

more offers and Ladevci car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Ladevci

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Ladevci »

Overview of flights to and from Serbia and Montenegro »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Ladevci. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Ladevci and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Ladevci are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Uzice Ponikve Airport (distanced approximately 74 km) – airport hotels

Belgrade Airport (distanced approximately 110 km) – airport hotels

Zabljak Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Pristina Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Camp Bondsteel Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Ladevci 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Ladevci in Serbia and Montenegro

You can also dive right into Ladevci on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Ladevci 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Ladevci, Serbia and Montenegro in Google Earth »

Get more out of Ladevci map

Add placemark to Ladevci

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Ladevci map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Ladevci google map link options

link to us:

small Ladevci google map image link

medium Ladevci google map image link

large Ladevci google map image link