Lingza Map — Satellite Images of Lingza

original name: Lingza

geographical location: Bomi, Xizang Zizhiqu (Tibet), China, Asia

geographical coordinates: 29° 58' 0" North, 96° 4' 0" East

detailed map of Lingza and near places

Welcome to the Lingza google satellite map! This place is situated in Bomi, Xizang Zizhiqu (Tibet), China, its geographical coordinates are 29° 58' 0" North, 96° 4' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Lingza. See Lingza photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Lingza in China. Lingza hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Lingza or add new placemark for Lingza.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Lingza hotel reservations

Book hotel in Lingza online and save money

Lingza hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in China »

Lingza hotels – sortable list of all Lingza hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Lingza hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Lingza, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Lingza, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Lingza hotels map

The location of each Lingza hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Lingza hotel map is available where all hotels in Lingza are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Lingza hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Lingza hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Lingza hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Lingza hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Lingza

Zang Bo Hotel *** (in Pula, distanced approximately 170 km)

Songtsam Lodges - Songtsam Ben Zi Lan Hotel **** (in Benzilan, distanced approximately 370 km)

Songtsam Retreat At Shangri-La ***** (in Zhongxin, distanced approximately 420 km)

Songtsam Lodges - Songtsam Shangri-la (Lv Gu) Hotel ***** (in Liangmei, distanced approximately 420 km)

Shiner Hotel Shangri-La **** (in Liangmei, distanced approximately 430 km)

Shangrila Tibetan Family Inn *** (in Liangmei, distanced approximately 430 km)

Eight-Symbole Lotus (in Liangmei, distanced approximately 430 km)

more Lingza hotels »

Lingza car rental

Compare Lingza car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Lingza rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Lingza car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Lingza — we will do it for you!

Car hire Lingza and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Lingza the city centre. Compare Lingza car rental offers by various suppliers.

Goa car rental (distanced approximately 360 km)

Bhubaneshwar car rental (distanced approximately 600 km)

Chengdu car rental (distanced approximately 770 km)

Kolkata - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 1 100 km)

Kolkata car rental (distanced approximately 1 100 km)

more offers and Lingza car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Lingza

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Lingza »

Overview of flights to and from China »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Lingza. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Lingza and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Lingza are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Bangda Airport (distanced approximately 120 km) – airport hotels

Passighat Airport (distanced approximately 220 km) – airport hotels

Tezu Airport (distanced approximately 230 km) – airport hotels

Along Airport (distanced approximately 230 km) – airport hotels

Dibrugarh Mohanbari Airport (distanced approximately 290 km) – airport hotels

Lingza 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Lingza in China

You can also dive right into Lingza on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Lingza 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Lingza, China in Google Earth »

Get more out of Lingza map

Add placemark to Lingza

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Lingza map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Lingza google map link options

link to us:

small Lingza google map image link

medium Lingza google map image link

large Lingza google map image link