HAVERLING, N.Y. (WENY) -- The Keuka Lake Players is bringing a Disney classic to life with its upcoming production of “Mary Poppins.”

Based on the children's books by P. L. Travers and the 1964 Disney film of the same name, “Mary Poppins” tells the story of a magical nanny who visits a dysfunctional family in London and employs her unique brand of lifestyle to improve the family's dynamic.

Playing the "practically perfect” leading lady in the Keuka Lake Players’ production is Christina Morgan, who was thrilled to bring the story to life.

“It's one of my all-time favorites,” she said. “My siblings can attest that I used to torture everybody all the time with that movie growing up, and I love it. It is one of the happiest moments for me, so I am just enjoying every minute.”

Growing up, Morgan related to the character of Mary Poppins, and knew she was destined to play the role.

“I'm naturally a bubbly, happy personality, so it kind of fits very well with who I am as a person,” she said. “So, it's just so much fun to make it my own...and sing and have fun.”

Starring alongside Morgan is Kirsten Roloson, who plays Mary Poppins’ close friend Bert. As a woman, stepping into the shoes of a traditionally male character was a daunting task for Roloson.

“It's been a little interesting, just kind of adjusting things to a female range,” she said. “But honestly, it has been great. I get to be kind of the slightly crazy friendly uncle who drops in to give good words of advice.”

Throughout her time playing the famous chimney sweep, however, Roloson embraced a valuable lesson along the way.

“I really love one of the songs that's not in the movie,” she said. “There's a line in it that says something like, ‘You'll find a way of just being Mr. Banks.’ So, [there is] the message [that] you don't have to be perfect. You can just be you because you are perfect.”

As for Morgan, she hopes audience members will embrace the central theme of the story.

“I think [audiences should take away] the positive message [of] anything can happen,” she said.

The Keuka Lake Players will present Disney’s “Mary Poppins” at Haverling High School on Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m. Tickets are available both online and at the door.