Mary Poppins is a 1964 American musical fantasy film directed by Robert Stevenson and produced by Walt Disney, with songs written and composed by the Sherman Brothers. The screenplay is by Bill Walsh and Don DaGradi, based on P. L. Travers's book series Mary Poppins. The film, which combines live-action and animation, stars Julie Andrews in her feature film debut as Mary Poppins, who visits a dysfunctional family in London and employs her unique brand of lifestyle to improve the family's dynamic. Dick Van Dyke, David Tomlinson, and Glynis Johns are featured in supporting roles. The film was shot entirely at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank, California, using painted London background scenes.[6]

Mary Poppins was released on August 27, 1964, to critical acclaim. It received a total of 13 Academy Awards nominations, including Best Picture – a record for any film released by Walt Disney Studios – and won five: Best Actress for Andrews, Best Film Editing, Best Original Music Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Original Song for "Chim Chim Cher-ee". In 2013, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library Of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[7] Mary Poppins is considered Walt Disney's crowning live-action achievement, and is the only one of his films which earned a Best Picture nomination during his lifetime.[6]

A sequel, Mary Poppins Returns, was released on December 19, 2018.

Plot[]

In Edwardian London, 1910, Bert entertains a crowd as a one-man band when he senses a change in the wind.

Afterwards, he directly addresses the audience and gives them a tour of Cherry Tree Lane, stopping outside the Banks family's home. George Banks returns home to learn from his wife, Winifred, that Katie Nanna has left their service after their children, Jane and Michael, have run away, "For the fourth time this month," ("The Life I Lead"). They are returned shortly after by Constable Jones, who reveals the children were chasing a lost kite. The children ask their father to help build a better kite, but he dismisses them. Taking it upon himself to hire a new nanny, Mr. Banks advertises for a stern, no-nonsense nanny. To contrast, Jane and Michael present their own advertisement for a kinder, sweeter nanny. Winifred tries to keep the peace. Mr. Banks rips up the letter and throws the scraps in the fireplace, but the remains of the advertisement magically float up and out into the air.

The next day, a number of elderly, sour-faced nannies wait outside the Banks' home, but a strong gust of wind blows them away, and Jane and Michael witness a young nanny descending from the sky using her umbrella. Presenting herself to Mr. Banks, Mary Poppins calmly produces the children's restored advertisement and agrees with its requests but promises the astonished banker she will be firm with his children. As Mr. Banks puzzles over the advertisement's return, Mary Poppins hires herself, and she convinces him it was originally his idea. She meets the children and helps them magically tidy their nursery by snapping, before heading out for a walk in the park ("A Spoonful Of Sugar").

Outside, they meet Bert, working as a screever; Mary Poppins uses her magic to transport the group into one of his drawings. While the children ride on a carousel, Mary Poppins and Bert go on a leisurely stroll. Together, they sing "Jolly Holiday", and Bert flirts with Mary Poppins. After the duo meets up with the children, Mary Poppins enchants the carousel horses; they rescue a fox from a fox hunt followed by a horse race which Mary wins. Describing her victory, Mary Poppins uses the nonsense word "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious." The outing is ended when a thunderstorm dissolves Bert's drawings, returning the group to London.

The next day, the four meet odd Uncle Albert, who has floated up in the air because of his uncontrollable laughter; they join him for a tea party on the ceiling and tell jokes ("I Love To Laugh"). Afterward, Mr. Banks becomes annoyed by the household's cheery atmosphere, and he threatens to fire Mary Poppins, but she manipulates him into taking the children to his workplace, the bank, the next day ("Feed The Birds"). Mr. Banks does so, and the children meet Mr. Dawes Sr. and his son. Mr. Dawes aggressively urges Michael to invest his tuppence in the bank, ultimately snatching the coins from Michael. ("Fidelity Fiduciary Bank") Michael demands them back; other customers overhear the conflict, and they all begin demanding their own money back, causing a bank run.

Jane and Michael flee the bank, getting lost in the East End until they run into Bert, now working as a chimney sweep, who escorts them home. The three and Mary Poppins venture onto the rooftops, where they have a song-and-dance number with other chimney sweeps, which spills out into the Banks' home ("Step In Time"). An enraged Mr. Banks returns and receives a phone call from his employers. He speaks with Bert, and Bert tells him he should spend more time with his children before they grow up ("A Man Has Dreams"). Jane and Michael give their father Michael's tuppence in the hope to make amends.

Mr. Banks walks through London to the bank, where he is given a humiliating cashiering and is dismissed. Looking to the tuppence for words, he blurts out "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious," tells a joke, and happily heads home. Dawes Sr. mulls over the joke and, finally understanding it, floats up into the air, laughing.

The next day, the wind changes, meaning Mary Poppins must leave. A happier Mr. Banks is found at home, having fixed his children's kite, and takes the family out to fly it. In the park, the Banks family meets Mr. Dawes Jr, who reveals his father died laughing from the joke ("Let's Go Fly A Kite"). Although initially sorry, Mr. Banks soon becomes happy for him since Mr. Dawes Jr. had never seen his father happier in his life and re-employs Mr. Banks as a junior partner. With her work done, Mary Poppins flies away; Bert bids her farewell, telling her not to stay away too long.

Cast[]

Julie Andrews as Mary Poppins, a magical and loving woman who descends from the clouds in response to the Banks children's advertisement for a nanny. She is firm in her use of authority but gentle and kind as well, a major departure from the original books, in which the character was strict and pompous.[10]

Dick Van Dyke as Bert, a cockney jack-of-all-trades and Mary Poppins's closest friend, who is completely accustomed to her magic. Their playful interactions imply that they have known each other for a long time and that this kind of story has repeated itself many times. Bert has at least four jobs throughout the film: a one-man band, a pavement chalk artist, a chimney sweep, and a kite seller Van Dyke also portrays Mr. Dawes Sr., the old director of the bank where Mr. Banks works. During the film's end titles, "Navckid Keyd", an anagram of Dick Van Dyke, is first credited as playing the role before the letters unscramble to reveal Van Dyke's name.

David Tomlinson as George Banks, Mary Poppins' employer and father of Jane and Michael. He works at the Dawes Tomes Mousley Grubbs Fidelity Fiduciary Bank in London. He is a driven and disciplined man.

Glynis Johns as Winifred Banks, the easily distracted wife of George Banks and the mother of Jane and Michael. She is depicted as a member of Emmeline Pankhurst's "Votes For Women" suffragette movement. Mrs. Banks was originally named Cynthia, but this was changed to the more English-sounding Winifred per Travers.[citation needed]

Hermione Baddeley as Ellen, the maid of the Banks residence.

Karen Dotrice as Jane Banks, daughter of Mr and Mrs Banks and Michael’s older sister.

Matthew Garber as Michael Banks, son of Mr and Mrs Banks and Jane’s younger brother.

Elsa Lanchester as Katie Nanna, the disgruntled nanny who quits the Banks family.

Arthur Treacher as Constable Jones, a police officer.

Reginald Owen as Admiral Boom, the Banks' eccentric neighbor and a naval officer. He has his first mate, Mr. Binnacle, fire a cannon from his roof every 8 a.m. and 6 p.m.

Ed Wynn as Uncle Albert, a jolly gentleman who suffers from an unknown condition where he floats in the air during fits of uncontrollable laughter. Although he likes having company over, he becomes very sad and cries when his guests have to leave (he falls back to the ground, since it is the inversion of laughing).

Reta Shaw as Mrs. Brill, the cook of the Banks residence.

Don Barclay as Mr. Binnacle, Admiral Boom's first mate.

Marjorie Bennett as Miss Lark, owner of the dog named Andrew, who frequently runs away.

Arthur Malet as Mr. Dawes Jr., the director's son and member of the board.

Jane Darwell as the "Bird Woman", an old woman who sells breadcrumbs for the pigeons on the steps of St Paul's Cathedral.

Marjorie Eaton as Miss Persimmon.

James Logan as a doorman who chases after the children in the bank.

Alma Lawton as Mrs. Corry, an old shopkeeper of a gingerbread shop and mother of two daughters.

Betty Lou Gerson as Old Crone (uncredited).

Kay E. Kuter as Man in Bank (uncredited).

Doris Lloyd as Depositor (uncredited).

Queenie Leonard as Depositor (uncredited)

Julie Andrews as Robin, Female Pearly

Marc Breaux as Cow

Daws Butler as Penguin Waiter, Turtles

Peter Ellenshaw as Penguin Waiter

Paul Frees as Barnyard Horse

Bill Lee as Ram

Sean McClory as Bloodhound, Reporter #4

Dallas McKennon as Fox, Bloodhound, Penguin Waiter, Horse, Carousel Guard

Alan Napier as Huntsman, Reporter #3, Bloodhound

Marni Nixon as Geese

J. Pat O'Malley as Bloodhound, Hunting Horse, Master of Hounds, Pearly Drummer, Penguin Waiter, Photographer, Reporter #2

George Pelling as Bloodhound, Reporter #1

Thurl Ravenscroft as Hog

Richard M. Sherman as Penguin Waiter, Male Pearly

Robert B. Sherman as the "Bird Woman", Pearly Banjo Player

David Tomlinson as Penguin Waiter, Jockey, Race Track Stewards, Mr. Binnacle, Mary Poppins' Parrot Umbrella[11]

Ginny Tyler as the Lambs

Home video release[]

Music[]

Main article: Mary Poppins (soundtrack)

The film's music features music and lyrics by Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman. The Shermans took inspiration from Edwardian British music hall music.[28] Irwin Kostal arranged and conducted the film's score. Buena Vista Records released the original motion picture soundtrack in 1964 on LP and reel-to-reel tape.[29]

Deleted songs[]

A number of other songs were written for the film by the Sherman Brothers and either rejected or cut for time. Richard Sherman, on the 2004 DVD release, indicated that more than 30 songs were written at various stages of the film's development. No cast recordings of any of these songs have been released to the public, only demos or later performances done by the songwriters — with the exception of the rooftop reprise of "Chim Chim Cher-ee" and the "smoke staircase yodel" mentioned below.

"The Chimpanzoo", was originally to follow "I Love To Laugh" during the Uncle Albert "ceiling tea party" sequence, but it was dropped from the soundtrack just before Julie Andrews and company were to record it. The fast-paced number was not unveiled to the public until Richard Sherman, aided by recently uncovered storyboards, performed it on the 2004 DVD edition. The re-creation suggests it was to have been another sequence combining animation and live action.

"Practically Perfect" was intended to introduce Mary but instead the melody of the piece was used for "Sister Suffragette" (used to introduce Mrs. Banks). A different song with the same name was written for the stage musical.

"The Eyes Of Love", a romantic ballad intended for Bert and Mary, but according to Richard Sherman, Andrews suggested privately to Disney that this song was unsuitable. In response, "A Spoonful Of Sugar" was written.

"Mary Poppins Melody" was to be performed when Mary introduces herself to the children. Elements of the song later became part of "Stay Awake". The melody was the basis for a couple of other songs that were ultimately cut from the film.

"A Name's A Name". Heard on a recording taken of a meeting between the Sherman Brothers and Travers, this song was originally intended for the nursery scene that later became "A Spoonful Of Sugar". The melody was reused for "Mary Poppins Melody".

"You Think, You Blink" was a short piece that Bert was to sing just before entering the chalk painting (and starting the "Jolly Holiday" sequence). In the film, Dick Van Dyke simply recites the lyric instead of singing it.

"West Wind" was a short ballad to be sung by Mary. The song was later retitled "Mon Amour Perdu" and used in the later Disney film, Big Red.

"The Right Side" was to be sung by Mary to Michael after he gets out of bed cranky. It was recycled for the Disney Channel television series Welcome To Pooh Corner as Winnie The Pooh's personal theme song.

"Measure Up" was to accompany the scene in which Mary takes the tape measure to Jane and Michael.

"Admiral Boom" was to be the theme song for the cannon-firing neighbor of the Banks Residence, but it was cut by Walt Disney as being unnecessary. The melody of the song remains in the film, and the bombastic theme is heard whenever Boom appears onscreen. One line from this song ("The whole world takes its time from Greenwich, but Greenwich, they say, takes its time from Admiral Boom!") is spoken by Bert early in the film.

"Sticks, Paper And Strings" was an early version of "Let's Go Fly A Kite."

"Lead The Righteous Life", an intentionally poorly written hymn, was to have been sung by Katie Nanna (Elsa Lanchester) along with Jane and Michael prior to Mary Poppins' arrival. The melody was later reused for a similar song in The Happiest Millionaire

"The Pearly Song" was not deleted perse, but was instead incorporated into "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious".

The Compass Sequence, a precursor to "Jolly Holiday", was to be a multiple-song sequence. A number of possible musical components have been identified:

"South Sea Island Symphony"

"Chinese Festival Song"

"Tim-Buc-Too" – elements of this were reused for "The Chimpanzoo" which was also cut

"Tiki Town" – the melody was reused for "The Chimpanzoo"

"North Pole Polka"

"Land Of Sand" – later rewritten as "Trust In Me" for the animated version of The Jungle Book

"The Beautiful Briny" – later used in Bedknobs And Broomsticks

"East Is East" – another variation on the unused "Mary Poppins Melody".

Deleted scores and music[]