Chris Coghill is probably best known for his role as Tony King in EastEnders, which he played between 2008 and 2009.

The character was introduced as Bianca Butcher's partner, but Tony soon turned out to be a predatory paedophile who had been grooming his step-daughter Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty).

The heartbreaking storyline was the catalyst for years of trouble and torment for Whitney, whose character was just 16 when Tony was sent to jail for his crimes. However, Whitney has had to revisit her triggering past as of late, due to her and partner Zack Hudson's journey to adopting a child.

Away from EastEnders, Chris - who also has notable credits in other shows like Casualty, Waterloo Road and The Bill - has landed further TV roles, including the BBC One drama Moving On, and Line of Duty.

But away from acting, what does the 28 year old's life look like? From his famous ex wife to his equally famous current partner, here's everything we know about Chris Coghill...

What happened to Chris after EastEnders?

While directly after his EastEnders stint, Chris noted that the character of Tony did impact his career somewhat, he did reveal that it's a storyline he's glad he was involved in.

Speaking to The Sun, he said: "As a direct result of that storyline, about 10 people said, ‘That happened to me’, and went to the police and there have been quite a few convictions. Being an actor doesn’t really change people’s lives but without being a w****r, that did. And I’m proud of that."

Who is Chris' famous ex wife?

Chris met TV chef Lisa Faulkner during their stint on the BBC Three sitcom Burn It. After hitting it off, the couple went on to get married in April 2005, as well as adopt a daughter together.

It was revealed that Lisa went through three rounds of IVF before the former couple decided to adopt. Apparently, they had just six weeks to get ready for their daughter's arrival. After meeting their adopted child, Billie-May, Lisa shared that they were "matched."

She also described adopting a child as the "most incredible feeling."

Unfortunately, Lisa and Chris ended up splitting in 2011, and the TV chef went on to tie the knot with MasterChef judge John Torode after appearing as a contestant on the cooking show in 2019.

Who is Chris' famous partner?

After his split from Lisa, Chris went on to marry fellow actor Rosalind Halsread. She has starred in an array of successful shows, including Shakespeare & Hathaway, Andor, Private Investigators, and The Trial of Christine Keeler.

Both Chris and Rosalind have kept their romance very private, and to this day, no details of their wedding have been revealed.

Chris is a doting father

Thanks to a few pics on his gram, it's clear to see that Chris and his daughter, Billie, have a great relationship.

From attending Wilderness Festival together to heading to a Stone Roses show (fans noted Chris passed his parenting exams with flying colours for that one), it's lovely to see the father daughter duo sharing the same interests.