Police drama The Bay continue on ITV tonight, with actor Chris Coghill returning as Alex Kirby, the brother of Beth Metcalf who died in a house fire as her husband and children watched helplessly in the first episode of the fourth series.

Tonight, as the Metcalf children struggle to come to terms with their loss, CCTV evidence leads to a major development in the case. Meanwhile, Karen and Jenn attempt to secure a new home for the Metcalf family when an unexpected arrival at a fundraising event causes old tensions to resurface.

But what do we know about Chris Coghill? The actor has appeared in many other TV programmes, from Shamesless to Cold Feet and even Line of Duty. Here we look at his career and personal life.

Chris Coghill's controversial EastEnders role

Coghill appeared as a controversial character in EastEnders playing Tony King, Bianca Jackson's boyfriend, in 2008. Over the course of three months, it emerged that the character had been having a relationship with Bianca's stepdaughter Whitney Dean for three years, starting when Whitney was just 12.

He was also seen 'grooming' Lauren Branning. The harrowing storyline ended in Tony's arrest. After leaving the BBC soap, Coghill said the storyline had deeply affected him.

He explained he was struggling to find new roles as the character was so despised.

Chris Coghill's famous ex wife and her new famous husband

Coghill was previously married to actress and TV chef Lisa Faulkner. They wed in April 2005 after meeting on the set of Burn It, a drama they had both worked on following the lives of three twenty-somethings in Salford.

The couple have an adopted daughter. They separated in 2011 and Lisa then married Australian chef John Torode.

John and Lisa met when she was a contestant on Celebrity MasterChef in 2010, but did not start dating until 2015 when John wrote Lisa a letter asking her out. In 2019, the couple were given weekend cooking show John And Lisa's Weekend Kitchen on Sunday.

Lisa has had roles in Brookside, EastEnders and Spooks among other shows. She joined EastEnders in 2017 as Fi Browning, a businesswoman who was later revealed to be Sophie Wilmott-Brown, the daughter of Kathy Beale's rapist James Willmott-Brown.