Chris Coghill is arguably best known for portraying paedophile Tony King in EastEnders in 2008, but he's also starred in numerous other hit shows, including Casualty, The Bill and Waterloo Road.

The actor, 48, played Tony, boyfriend to Bianca Butcher (Patsy Palmer), in EastEnders for three months and during his brief time in Walford he groomed step-daughter Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty) and started a relationship with her.

The heartbreaking storyline sparked the beginning of years of trouble for Whitney and now, 14 years later, she's had to revisit her past as she and partner Zack Hudson (James Farrah) begin the process to adopting a child.

As Tony's time on Albert Square is revisited, here we take a look into what actor Chris has been up to since leaving EastEnders...

Chris, who hails from Prestwich, final EastEnders appearance was in 2009, when Tony stood trail and was sentenced to prison. The character then committed suicide off-screen. After EastEnders, Chris went on to star in guest roles in The Royal, Hollyoaks Later, Silent Witness, Line of Duty and Casualty, along with other TV shows.

He previously spoke about how playing Tony had impacted his acting career, telling The Sun: "EastEnders killed my career a bit. I play wrong 'uns in everything! When I got the script for this I was like, 'Oh, he’s really nice, let’s look at the next episode. Oh, he's still really nice, and the next one – oh, gosh he’s still really nice!'"

He added: "As a direct result of that storyline, about 10 people said, 'That happened to me', and went to the police and there have been quite a few convictions. Being an actor doesn’t really change people’s lives but without being a w****r, that did. And I’m proud of that."

Away from acting, Chris is married to actress Rosalind Halsread, who has starred in Andor, Shakespeare & Hathaway: Private Investigators, and The Trial of Christine Keeler. The pair keep their romance entirely private and have not publicly mentioned their marriage.

Prior to marrying Rosalind, Chris was married to actress Lisa Faulkner, 51, from 2005 until 2011. The couple met on the set of Burn It and tied the knot at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park, London. Lisa and Chris adopted a daughter, Billie-May, together, following three rounds of failed IVF.

Following the couple's split in 2011, Lisa went on to marry MasterChef judge John Torode in 2019, after starring on the celebrity edition of the show and winning.

Chris most recently appeared on our screens in hit ITV drama series The Bay. He appeared in three episodes of the fourth series, which aired earlier this year, as Alex Kirby.