Actor Chris Coghill has had a long wait to see his debut movie Spike Island hit the big screen, but it was treated to a red carpet premiere in his home city last night.

The Shameless star penned his coming of age film four years ago, but was celebrating its national release from Friday surrounded by his soap pals and some familiar Madchester faces.

None of the Roses were able to come along to The Cornerhouse, but Rowetta from Happy Mondays, Badly Drawn Boy Damon Gough, Looking For Eric’s Steve Evets and photographer Kevin Cummins all turned out to the Oxford Road screening.

Corrie names were out in force and Antony Cotton told The Diary he couldn’t be happier to see his friend’s film finished.

“I saw a really early draft of this before it became a film,” he said. “If I could draw somebody that looks like Manchester and Salford, I’d draw Chris!

“I was around through all of that Madchester era, I used to work on the door at the Haçienda, and it was a very special time.”

Misfits actress Antonia Thomas, who plays Lisa, said being in the film had made her fall in love with the Roses.

“I was sort of a fan before but by the end I loved them,” she told Diary. “I went to Heaton Park and it was great to see an older crowd really going for it.”

The film, which got a surprise secret screening in its spiritual home of Widnes, where Spike Island took place, on Monday night, focuses on fictitious indie band Shadowcaster, staffed by Elliott Tittensor, Nico Mirallegro, Adam Long, Jordan Murphy and Oliver Heald, as they plot to sneak in to The Stone Roses’ seminal gig.

But the five actors became such firm pals on set that they say they’d like to play together as a band again – as long as they had time for a little more practice.

“I play guitar and I’m the only one who didn’t have to learn,” Adam exclusively told The Diary.

“We played at the wrap party. In my head it was the best thing ever, but I think it was a bit patchy!”

Elliott explains why: “Best of it was I was in the toilet when everyone was going on stage. I was still pulling up my pants as I was trying to get on!

“We’ve been mucking about like we’re a real band. I personally felt like this is the group it was going to end up being – it just had a really good energy. Without that unity, it’s just different people saying their lines.”

Director Mat Whitecross and producer Fiona Neilson sent the boys off on holidays together to turn them into a proper gang. And even though the film is done, the full band still popped into city centre music shop HMV to sign autographs together for their fans before the screen-ing.

Speaking about his reasons for making the film, Chris said: “I didn’t get to go to Spike Island – and I’ve been less than happy for 23 years!

“I did get to see them on the Second Coming tour, but Reni had left by then. They were still brilliant, but obviously not having see that original line up upset me forever.

“Then they announced the reunion at Heaton Park, where I grew up, it was like they’d done it all for me!”