INDIANAPOLIS, May 26—It was not yet noon, but the Indiana sky was blazing when Pancho Carter limped into his garage on Gasoline Alley today “already three hours behind.”

His car, like the 32 other starters in Sunday's Indianapolis 500, wasn't going anywhere for two days, but Carter, a 27‐year‐old racing driver who must hear time's winged chariot rushing near, had an appointment across town in a few minutes, others to follow, and then a sprint‐car race tonight.

“I wish I could squeeze in 36 hours each day,” he said, quickly finding a seat next to his Lightning‐Cosworth.

By most medical standards, Carter should not be racing—either tonight, where if he's lucky he can make $800, or on Sunday, where if he's lucky he can earn a quarter‐million dollars.

Injured in Phoenix

Five months ago, in a practice session in Phoenix, a suspension arm broke on his Indy car and he crashed into a guard rail going about 160 miles an hour. The car was split lengthwise; Carter somehow survived—with two broken legs, two broken arms, his pel vis broken in three places and his tailbone broken.

The broken tailbone also affected nerve endings, and Carter still has neither feeling in his right leg nor the ability to press the accelerator pedal with his right toes. A special block has been built onto the floor of his cockpit, enabling him to press down the accelerator with his right heel.

“It's nothing,” said Carter, the only Indy driver this year who had to prove he could get out of his car before officials would let him get in it.

Before Tom Binford, the safety‐conscious chief steward, allowed the Carter on the 2½‐mile track, he went to the driver's garage, made him sit in his car, and then timed his unaided exit. The steward wanted to make sure Carter would not be trapped in the car in case of another accident. Carter pulled himself up fast enough to satisfy Binford, but the chief steward made him do it again. This time, Carter got out “twice as fast.”

Carter Never Had Doubts

Carter, the son of an 11‐time Indianapolis competitor, Duane Carter Sr., never had any doubt he would return to racing. Racing drivers never do.

“The first thing he said when he was conscious,” reported his wife, Carla, “was he'd be back racing.”

“There hasn't been a racing driver worth his salt who hasn't been upside down in his life,” Johnny Rutherford, the often‐injured, two‐time Indianapolis 500 winner, was saying the other day in his garage.

Carter is a legitimate contender here. He was one of six men to reach 200 miles an hour in practice, but transmission problems in the Bob Fletcher car prevented him from attempting to qualify the first day. Then, just trying to make the field, he qualified at 196.829 m.p.h. and will start from the star‐studded seventh row—along with A. J. Foyt, the only four‐time winner in Indianapolis history, and Bobby Unser, a two‐time winner.

Five months ago, Carter was in trac tion in a Phoenix hospital where doctors predicted he would have to remain six months. What would he have said if someone had told him then that he would start in the Indianapolis 500 on the same row at Foyt and Unser?

“Probably,” he said.

They were torturous months, physically but not mentally. “There was no reason for me to lose my confidence,” said Carter. “The accident wasn't my fault. Something broke in the car. But just to get out of bed and take a shower finished me for the day. I had to eat a big breakfast to have the energy to take a shower.”

He returned to the races last month in a sprint car at the Indianapolis Fair Grounds. Gary Bettenhausen welcomed him back by joking that he was going to start a petition among the other drivers saying that Carter wasn't ready. Carter won that night and then took another sprint‐car race the next day at Winchester, Ind.

In his first Indy‐car outing since the accident, Carter took his Lightning around the Indianapolis motor speedway earlier this month at 193 m.p.h. His crew was amazed.

“Why should you be surprised?” he told them. “I'm a racing driver.”

After his 200‐m.p.h. lap in practice last week, Dick King, president of the United States Auto Club, and Art Meyers, Binford's right‐hand man, told Carter:

“Well, that proves it—you're not ready to race again.”

“It's funny,” said Carter. “But everybody who wants me to do well jokes about it. The skeptics said I couldn't race again. I think I proved I can.”