Feb 15, 2010

"He (Carter) was really impressed with the winged Midgets and told us he would like to return," said owner Tim Bertrand.

In the not too distant future you will be able to insure that your offspring come fully loaded with the decoded racecar-driver genome sequencing, for now we'll have to go about it the old fashion way. That's how USAC Open Wheel Divisions driver Cole Carter came about his knack for racing - he inherited it. Cole is a third generation racer, his father is Duane "Pancho" Carter, Jr.

Bertrand Motorsports and Cole Carter team for winning combo

Born in Racine, Wisconsin, Pancho was a Sprint and Midget racer and is most noted for his participation in CART Races. Pancho is also the son of IndyCar racer Duane Carter. The story goes that Pancho was born while his parents were on the way to a race at the Milwaukee Mile.

"My father owns my USAC Midget, and we co-own the USAC Sprint car together," explains Cole. "He is at most of my races when he's not at the IndyCar Series events that he works as a driver development coach for Panther Racing. I also spot at the oval IRL races for Luczo Dragon Racing. He plays a big role with the team because of his years of experience, and he is a great attribute for me to have as a driver."

From the driver's point of view, the season went reasonably well, according Cole. "Last season went relatively well. We didn't run that many races compared to our competition, but we finished in the Top Ten in half of the races we ran," says Cole. Carter Racing concentrated on the portion of the USAC schedules, in both Sprints and Midgets, which were close to Indianapolis. They also competed in as many local Sprint shows as possible.

"Although the season had its low points and DNF's, we consistently were in contention for local Indiana sprint wins, and in the hunt for the USAC shows. In addition to driving the Carter Racing entries, I also ran three races aboard the Tim Bertrand, Bertrand Motorsports K&N sponsored NEMA Midget, finishing in the top five at the World Series at Thompson International Speedway and runner up at the Boston Louie Seymour Memorial at Seekonk Speedway."

"The cars ran well last year, except for a few motor issues," continues Cole. "The new Maxim Sprint chassis was fast all season, no matter where we went. The Midget side of things was where the motor issues arose. Although the K&N oil filters we used did their job, the sensitive nature of the four-cylinder saw some engine failures on larger tracks. Still, at Iowa Speedway, we managed a sixth place finish on the 7/8th mile track."

Cole sees his relationship with K&N growing nicely. "Their products are second to none, and they are a company focused on racing and performance in a big way. I'm happy to be with them for a second season and look to do bigger and better things in the future. Currently we are using the Sprint Air Filters, Pre-Chargers, and the K&N Oil Filters."

For 2010, the Carter Racing season is shaping up pretty much the same as last year. They will compete again in USAC Sprint and Midget races, along with a few select races with Bertrand Motorsports in the NEMA Series. "I'm also looking to run for some other Sprint teams in the 2010 season," adds Cole.

Find K&N products for your vehicle using the K&N application search then use the K&N dealer search to find a K&N dealer in your part of the world.