1. In what year was Plankalkül designed? In what year was that design published?

= Plankalkül was designed by Konrad Zuse in 1945 but it isn’t published until 1972.

2. Mention an interesting feature of Zuse’s programs.

= An interesting features of Zuse’s programs was the inclusion of mathematical expressions showing the current relationships between program variables. These expressions stated what would be true during execution at the points in the code where they appeared.

3. What does Plankalkül mean?

= Konrad Zuse’s language Plankalkül means program calculus because it is used to solve a wide variety of problems by writing algorithms in the language.

4. Speedcoding was invented to overcome two significant shortcomings of the computer hardware of the early 1950s. What were they?

= The two significant shortcomings of the computer hardware are Pseudoinstructions and novel facility of automatically incrementing address registers.

5. What is the number of bits in a single word of the UNIVAC I’s memory? How are the bits grouped?

= The words of the UNIVAC I’s memory had 72 bits, grouped as 12 six-bit bytes.

6. What hardware capability that first appeared in the IBM 704 computer strongly affected the evolution of programming languages? Explain why?

= The hardware capability that first appeared in the IBM 704 are indexing and floating-point instructions in hardware because processor of that time took too many time in software floating-point processing, the overhead of interpretation and the simulation of indexing were relatively insignificant. Many programmers of that time never used interpretive systems, preferring the efficiency of hand-coded machine (or assembly) language

7. Who developed Speedcoding system for the IBM 701?

= The Speedcoding system was developed by John Backus for the IBM 701. The Speedcoding interpreter effectively converted the 701 to a virtual three-address floating-point calculator.

8. Who developed Short Code? Why is Short Code called automatic programming?

= Short Code was developed by John Mauchly in 1949 for the BINAC computer, which was one of the first successful stored-program electronic computers.

9. Under what environmental consideration was FORTRAN developed? Which is the first version of FORTRAN?

= The environmental consideration in which FORTRAN was developed was as follows: (1) Computers had small memories and were slow and relatively unreliable; (2) the primary use of computers was for scientific computations; (3) there were no existing efficient and effective ways to program computers; (4) because of the high cost of computers compared to the cost of programmers, speed of the generated object code was the primary goal of the first FORTRAN compilers.

10. What was the most significant feature added to FORTRAN I to get FORTRAN II?

= the significant feature added to FORTRANS I to get FORTRAN II is the independent compilation of subroutines.

11. What control flow statements were added to FORTRAN IV to get FORTRAN 77?

= the logical loop control statements.

12. Which version of FORTRAN was the first to have any sort of dynamic variables?

= The first to have any sort of dynamic variables is FORTRAN 90 because it has dynamic arrays, records, pointers, a multiple selection statements, and modules.

13. Which version of FORTRAN was the first to have character string handling?

= the first FORTRAN to have character string handling is FORTRAN 77.

14. Why were linguists interested in artificial intelligence in the late 1950s?

= It were linguists interested in artificial intelligence because linguistics were concerned with natural language processing.

15. What are the different data types and structures in Common LISP?

= The different data types and structures in Common LISP are records, arrays, complex numbers, and character strings. It also has a form of packages for modularizing collections of functions and data providing access control.

16. In what way are Scheme and Common LISP opposites of each other?

= Scheme lacks on portability but LISP doesn’t. That’s why they are different.

17. What dialect of LISP is used for introductory programming courses at some universities?

= Scheme

18. What two professional organizations together designed ALGOL 60?

= They are GAMM (a German acronym for Society for Applied Mathematics and Mechanics) and ACM (Association for Computing Machinery).

19. What was the goal for developing C?

= to provide a language in which programs could be organized as they could be organized in SIMULA 67—that is, with classes and inheritance.

20. What were the significant modifications to ALGOL 58 to produce ALGOL 60?

= Block structure introduced- method of designing code that segments scopes of variables and control statement, passing parameters by value or name allowed, recursive procedures allowed, stack dynamic arrays allowed, can create user defined data types, uses reserved keywords.

21. What language was designed to describe the syntax of ALGOL 60?

= In ALGOL 60, it uses BNF (Backus-Naur form) to describe the syntax that was introduced by Backus.

22. On what language was COBOL based?

= COBOL was based on FLOW-MATIC language. FLOW-MATIC was being implemented in 1957.

23. In what year did the COBOL design process begin?

= the COBOL design process began in 1959 but it was first named CBL (Common Business Language).

24. What data structure that appeared in COBOL originated with Plankalkül?

= Hierarchical data structures (records).

25. What organization was most responsible for the early success of COBOL (in term of extent of use)?

= DoD (Department of Defense) because it was published by the Government Printing Office in April 1960.

26. Which data type does the original BASIC language support?

= The original Dartmouth BASIC supported only numeric and string data types. There was no integer type. All numeric variables were floating-point. Strings were dynamic length. Arrays of both numbers and strings were supported, as well as matrices (two dimensional arrays).

27. Why was BASIC an important language in the early 1980s?

= It was an important language because it provided a simple way of building graphical user interfaces (GUIs).

28. PL/I was designed to replace what two languages?

= It was designed to replace COBOL and FORTRAN IV.

29. For what new line of computers was PL/I designed?

= It is designed for the IBM System/360 line of computers.

30. What features of SIMULA 67 are now important parts of some object-oriented languages?

= the features are data abstraction. SIMULA 67 is an extension of ALGOL 60, taking both block structure and the control statements from that language. To provide support for coroutines in SIMLULA 67, the class constrict was developed. This was an important development because the concept of data abstraction began with it. Furthermore, data abstraction provides the foundation for object-oriented programming.

31. What innovation of data structuring was introduced in ALGOL 68 but is often credited to Pascal?

= User defined data types. User defined data types are valuable because they allow the user to design data abstractions that fit particular problems very closely.

32. What design criterion was used extensively in ALGOL 68?

= Orthogonality. ALGOL 68 includes a significant number of features that had not been previously used. Its use of orthogonality, which some may argue was overdone, was nevertheless revolutionary.

33. What language introduced the case statement?

= Case statements. ALGOL-W was the With and Hoarse version of ALGOL 60. it was implemented at Stanford University and was used primarily as ans instructional vehicle, but only at a few universities. The primary contributions of ALGOL-W were the value-result method of passing parameters and the case statement for multiple selection.

34. What operators in C were modeled on similar operators in ALGOL 68?

= For and switch statements, in its assigning operators, and in its treatment of pointers.

35. What are two characteristics of C that make it less safe than Pascal?

= Pointers and C has this capability via the ANSI C setjmp and longjmp.

36. Why is Prolog called a non procedural language?

= It is called a non procedural language because it doesn’t require writing traditional programming logic.

37. What are the two kinds of statements that populate a Prolog database?

= The database of Prolog program consists of two kinds of statements: facts and rules.

38. What is the primary application area for which Ada was designed?

= Embedded system. The Ada language was developed for the Department of Defense (DoD), so the state of their computing environment was instrumental in determining its form. By 1974, over half of the applications of computers in DoD were embedded systems. An embedded system is one in which the computer hardware is embedded in the device it controls or for which it provides services.

39. What are the concurrent program units of Ada called?

= Concurrent execution of special program units, named tasks, using the rendezvous mechanism.

40. What C++ construct provides support for abstract data types?

= Packages in the C++ language provide the means for encapsulating data objects, specifications for data types and procedures.

42. What three concepts are the basis for object-oriented programming?

= classes, objects, and methods.

43. Why does C++ include the features of Ada that are known to be unsafe?

= A second-important goal was that there should be little or no performance penalty to C. A third goal of C with Classes was that it could be used for every application for which C could be used, so virtually none of the features of C would be removed, not even those considered to be unsafe.

44. From what language does Objective-C borrow its syntax for method calls?

= Smaltalk

45. What programming paradigm that nearly all recently designed languages support is not supported by Go?

= Does not support traditional object-oriented programming, as it has no form of inheritance

46. What is the primary application for Objective-C?

= MacOS/iOS – iPhone

47. What language designer worked on both C and Go?

= Ken Thomson

48. What do the Ada and COBOL languages have in common?

= Both were popularized by the Department of Defense.

49. What as the first application for Java?

= A programming language for embedded consumer electronic devices.

50. What characteristic of Java is most evident in Java Script?

= Similar syntax.

51. How does the typing system of PHP and Java Script differ from that of Java?

= The dynamic nature of its strings and arrays, and its use of dynamic typing.

52. What array structure is included in C# but not in C, C++ or Java?

= rectangular arrays.

53. What two languages was the original version of Perl meant to replace?

= ksh and awk. Perl language was originally a combination of ksh and awk.

54. For what application area is Java Script most widely used?

= Java Script is most widely used in web

55. What is the relationship between Java Script and PHP , in term of their use?

= They both complement each other. PHP or any server-side language is mandatory for client-server interaction while Javascript is optional and not required. You could easily build a site using PHP & HTML but all the pretty things and effects which make your site attractive are provided by JavaScript along with CSS.

56. PHP’s primary data structure is a combination of what two data structures from other languages?

= PHP’s arrays are a combination of JAvaScript’s arrays and Perl’s hashes.

57. What data types does Java support?

= The data types in Java are divided into two categories: Primitive data types (integer data types and floating data types) and reference data types (array, class, interface).

58. What characteristic does C++ shares with .NET?

= provide access to the functionality of the .NET Framework. C++ and .NET both doesn’t support multiple inheritance.

59. What characteristic of Ruby’s arithmetic operators makes them unique among those of other languages?

= Ruby supports a rich set of operators, as you’d expect from a modern language. Most operators are actually method calls.

60. How does Java provide storage deallocation?

= Java does not allow explicit deallocation of storage. There is no explicit deallocation operator (such as “delete”). Since storage cannot be explicitly deallocated, you cannot have a dangling reference in Java.

61. Is Lua normally compiled, purely interpreted or impurely interpreted?

= purely interpreted.

63. What deficiency of the switch statement of C is addressed with the changes made by C# to that statements?

= There is no simplicity branch at the end of the selectable segments of code, which has cost enumerable programming errors.

64. What is the primary platform on which C# is used?

= .NET. The purpose of C# is to provide a language for component-based software development, specifically for such development in the .NET Framework. In this environment, components from a variety of languages can be easily combined to form systems.

65. What are the inputs to an XSLT processor?

= An XML data document and XSLT document.

66. What is the output of an XSLT processor?

= XML document

67. What element of the JSTL is related to a subprogram?

= Servlet, JSP.

68. To what is a JSP document converted by a JSP processor?

= A servlet

69. Where are .jsp files executed?