Book :

Concept of Programming Language (tenth edition)

by : Robert W. Sebesta

Review Question

1. In what year was Plankalkul designed? In what year was that design published?

Between 1943 and 1945. This was first published in 1948.

3. What does Plankankul mean?

is a computer language designed for engineering purposes by Konrad Zuse. It was the first high-level non-von Neumann programming language to be designed for a computer.

10. What was the most significant feature added to Fortran I to get Fortran II?

The most important being the independent compilation of subroutines.

11. What control flow statements were added to Fortran II to get Fortran 77?

Character string handling, logical loop control statements, and an “if” with an optional “else” clause.

12. Which version of Fortran was the first to have any sort of dynamic variables?

Fortran 90.

13. Which version of Fortran was the first to have charecter string handling?

Fortran 77.

14. Why were linguists interested inartificial intelligence in the late 1950s?

Linguists were concerned with natural langage processing, such as psychology and mathematics. Psychologists were interested in modeling human information storage and retrieval, Mathematicians were interested in mechanizing certain intelligent processes, such as theorem proving.

15. What are the different data types and structures in Common LISP?

Common LISP has a large number of data types and structures, including records, arrays, complex number, and character strings. It also has a form of packages for modularizing collection of function and data providing access control.

16. In what way are scheme and Common LISP opposites of each other?

In its sizes, complexity, adn scoping(scheme: static scoping, Common LISP: both dynamic and static scoping).

18. What two professional organizations together designed ALGOL 60?

GAMM and ACM(Association for Computing Machinery).

19. What was the goal for developing C?

C has adequate control statements and data-sructuring facilities to allow its use in many application areas. It alse has a rich set of operators that provide a high degree of expressiveness.

20. What were the significant modifications to ALGOL 58 to produce ALGOL 60?

The concept of block structure was introduced, two different means of passing parameters to subprograms were allowed, procedures were allowed to be recursive, stack-dynamic arrays were allowed.

21. What language was designed to describe the syntax of ALGOL 60?

COBOL.

22. On what language was COBOL based?

Common Business Language (CBL).

23. In what year did the COBOL design process begin?

1959.

24. What data structure that appeared in COBOL originated with Plankalkul?

Hierarchical data structure (records).

25. What organization was most responsible for the early success of COBOL?

Department of Defense (DoD).

33. What language introduced the “case” statement?

ALGOL-W.

Problem Set

1. What features of Fortran IV do you think would have had the greatest influence on Java if the Java designer had been familiar with Fortran?

Because Fortran IV was added character string handling, logical loop control statements, and an “if” with an optional “else” caluse.

7. LISP began as a pure functional language buat gradually acquired more and more imperative features. Why?

Because LISP completely dominated AI applications for a quarter century. Many contemporary implementations are compiled, and the resulting code is much faster than running the source code on a interpreter. In addition to its success in AI, LISP pioneered functional programming, which has proven to a lively area of research in programming languages.

9. Why, in your opinion, did Fortran allow names that began with I, J, K, L, M and N as implicitly integer type?

The choice of the letters for this convention was based on the fact that at that time scientists and engineers used letters as variables subscripts, usually i, j, and k, and then Fortran’s designers threw in the three additional letters.

10. Outline the major developments in ALGOL 60.

The concept of block structure was introduced, two different means of passing parameters to subprograms were allowed, procedures were allowed to be recursive, stack-dynamic arrays were allowed.

13. What is the primary reason why reason why C became more widely used than Fortran?

Because C is well suited for a wide variety of applications and its flexibility.

25. Give a brief general description of the Java servlet.

A servlet is a Java programming language class that is used to extend the capabilities of servers that host applications accessed by means of a request-response programming model. Although servlets can respond to any type of request, they are commonly used to extend the applications hosted by web servers.