We live in the Age of Google. For the past two years, Google has been the yardstick by which business and technology success is measured, not to mention the answer to a lot of prayers. Google marked the first sign of a tech resurgence, served up the first ice-melting IPO of the postbust era, and became the first tech company to rewrite the dictionary since Xerox. For all this and no doubt more, the Mountain View, California, search engine started in 1998 by Sergey Brin and Larry Page deserves its moment in the sun.

Still, the adulation must rankle the folks at a certain company just down the road in Silicon Valley - another search engine founded by two precocious Stanford grads with a cute name, colorful logo, and simple homepage. The indignity is all the greater when you consider Yahoo!’s numbers: 165 million registered users, 345 million unique visitors a month, $49 billion market cap, and a 62 percent increase in revenue last quarter, bringing 2004 total revenue to $3.6 billion. Yahoo! makes more money and has more patents, services, and users than Google; it even has its own yodel. Given its recent blowout financial results and the expected continued explosion of online advertising, Yahoo! may very well be the most valuable business on the Web. And yet, as Jerry Yang and David Filo’s startup celebrates its 10th anniversary March 2, Yahoo! is the biggest consumer Internet company you may almost never think about.

Of course, back in 2000, Yahoo! was riding high, and upstart Google was hoping to be the next Yahoo! But then came the dotcom implosion, with Yahoo! firing hundreds of employees and seeing its stock price drop from $119 to $4. Now, even though Yahoo!’s back, it seems consigned to Google’s shadow. The top four business magazines, according to Lexis-Nexis, wrote almost 40 percent more articles about Google last year. Of the stories that mentioned both companies, 95 percent were focused on Google.

Maybe that’s because it’s just not easy to say what Yahoo! is. It’s a chat room, a news service, a travel agent, an auction house, and a financial portal, not to mention an ISP and a fantasy sports league. It doles out health information along with music videos and movie trailers. Yahoo! is about everything, so it’s forgivable to think it may stand for nothing. Is the company offering specialty services or mass appeal? Is it narrow and wide or shallow and deep? It’s hard to get a crisp answer even from top brass. “Actually, we are both horizontal and vertical,” COO Dan Rosensweig says, rather unhelpfully.

Chair and CEO Terry Semel is Exhibit A in the Yahoo! hall of mirrors. He’s one of the most successful tech executives in the Valley, but he blanches at technology and lives in Los Angeles. Every Friday at 6 pm, a private plane waits for him at the San Jose Jet Center to whisk him back to his Bel Air mansion. The former chair and co-CEO at Warner Bros., Semel is unapologetic about his routine. &147;It’s great,&148; he says. “When I’m in Silicon Valley, I focus on technology and business. When I’m home on the weekends, I spend time with my kids.”

Semel has revived one of the great Internet brands using a classic tool of old-world business, M&A, and simply by giving the customers what they want. He has spent more than $3 billion acquiring Web companies like Inktomi and Overture. And even as these deals were taking place, Semel was lining his executive row with dead-tree media types - including Rosensweig, from Ziff-Davis, and Madison Avenue veteran Wenda Harris Millard, who runs sales - and entering into partnerships with big media players such as NBC and Comcast.

Semel manages in the manner of an old-time movie mogul - media-wary, secretive, distant. He’s the Lew Wasserman of the Web. “Yahoo! has the best business model on the Internet,” Semel says. “But this isn’t about getting your picture in a magazine. You do your real talking with your performance - and your consistency over time.”

Google is a classic example of succeeding through focus and execution. Yahoo!’s model, by comparison, is anything but classic. The company’s offerings are so broad that it isn’t considered the go-to site for any particular service or feature. So why is it still in business, much less a colossus? The answer lies in three rules that Yahoo! follows:

Don’t limit yourself. When Semel came on board, he famously admitted to not using email. So he’s not the biggest geek in the room. But he understood an important difference about doing business on the Web. As an Internet company, it’s possible to continually add products and services based on market demand without worrying about shelf space or distribution. “Yahoo! has the technical capability to build most anything,” Semel says, pointing to recent additions like video search, desktop search, and RSS reading. And with $840 million in profits last year - $314 million of which came from selling Google stock - the company has the cash to buy anything it chooses not to build. Semel also figured out that Yahoo! didn’t have to offer the best services, because each becomes more valuable in concert. This effect is only amplified by broadband. Broadband users stay on Yahoo! 16 percent longer than dialup users, according to comScore Media Metrix.

Be first. Because they’re only a click away from countless distractions, Web users are, at least in theory, incredibly mobile. But they’re also creatures of habit; they settle in quickly and become comfortable, whether online or off. Once you take the time to set yourself up on a site, change can be difficult - you have to notify your address book, copy your stock portfolio into a new table, reload your travel destinations. This pain-in-the-ass factor saved Yahoo! from disaster.

First-mover advantage is usually a fallacy. Newcomers with greater funding and flexibility crush pioneers. But Yahoo! benefited from amassing millions of users early in the Web’s history and executing just well enough for them to stick around. And now those users find themselves a part of Semel’s Internet Pleasantville filled with shops, theaters, TV stations, schools, and newspapers. Why would they leave?

Be pragmatic. Google defines itself by its technology. Brin and Page wake up every morning thinking about how a new algorithm or another rack of servers can be put to use to solve a particular problem. But Yahoo! isn’t out to save the world. “I wake up every morning thinking about what our customers want,” Semel says. Google invents for markets that don’t exist; Yahoo! goes after markets it wants to own. If that means a state-of-the-art search engine, so be it. More often it’ll mean a new discussion group about Brad Pitt’s happy trail or an expanded section dedicated to Chinese astrology. In short, while Google was busy becoming what Yahoo! used to be, Yahoo! has become what AOL should have been.

Born in Brooklyn and made in Hollywood, Terry Semel has become the invisible kingpin of the Internet. When he does make a public appearance, he can seem uncomfortable and out of place - even in his own company’s slick cafeteria. Unlike many of his peers, he doesn’t live to hear himself talk. He eyes a tape recorder suspiciously and speaks carefully. And yet he brings an unusual combination of skills that have propelled Yahoo! to success.

For one thing, he has a Rolodex full of contacts in the media world. And he knows how to hire - whether that means bringing on managers who are better than him at talking to Wall Street and the press or technologists who have a better grasp on what’s happening in Yahoo!’s back rooms. But most of all, Semel’s tough. “Terry’s a Brooklynite at heart,” Rosensweig says. “He expects a new fight every day.”

His latest fight has been with Google. There’s no love lost between the two companies, especially since Yahoo! dumped Google as its search technology provider in favor of Inktomi shortly after Google filed to go public last spring. And while the fight may seem one-sided when judged solely by media attention, there’s some evidence that Yahoo! is actually gaining ground in Google’s core business. A recent survey by research firm Keynote Systems found that the number of users who consider Yahoo! their primary search engine increased by more than 20 percent in the past year. And more than 81 percent of Yahoo! users said they plan to keep using the site. A comScore Media Metrix study puts it even more bluntly. In the second half of 2004, Yahoo! increased its share of the search market from 27 percent to 32 percent, while Google dropped from 37 percent to 35 percent - putting the two companies in a virtual dead heat. These findings, along with the fundamentally different approaches to business, would seem to point to an epic clash between Yahoo! and Google.

But it ain’t gonna happen. Yahoo! and Google are headed in different directions. Google is on its way to Redmond to battle Microsoft later this decade, while Yahoo! is going Hollywood. Late last year, the company announced the opening of a new entertainment division, run by former ABC television exec Lloyd Braun. The division, based in Santa Monica, California, incorporates the company’s movies and music services along with games, news, sports, and finance.

What does Yahoo! have to offer Hollywood? It’s a new distribution channel. Semel imagines Yahoo! delivering rich content to any Web-enabled device at any time, a vision that could make Yahoo! the obvious next step in Hollywood’s Internet strategy. “I can easily see using my credit card to pay Yahoo! to watch a first-run movie on my computer in five years,” says UBS Warburg analyst Ben Schachter.

Semel doesn’t just want to deliver movies. He’s intent on making Yahoo! more personal. Customizing the site down to the neighborhood level will make it more appealing to users and indispensable to advertisers. “If you are looking for a plumber or a pizza parlor, you don’t want one 3,000 miles away,” Semel says. “You want your search to be customized just for you.”

As a 10-year-old Yahoo! looks to the decade ahead, there are powerful forces driving the business. Technological change and further customization will be constants. But there’s another factor that excites cofounder Jerry Yang enough to keep him coming into the office every day: the network effect. “All those things we talked about in the early days of the Internet are just now starting to come true,” he says. “Access isn’t sufficient. It’s not enough to search. You also have to find - and then share with others. That’s where this company is going and I want to be there to see it.”

But what motivation can Semel, the mastermind behind Yahoo!’s turnaround, find to keep making that 700-mile commute every week? Simple. If he can keep Yahoo! rolling on its present course, he’ll go down as the studio-exec-gone-tech who built the long-imagined bridge between Silicon Valley and Hollywood.

Contributing editor Michael S. Malone (msmalone@aol.com) wrote about Google’s quiet period in issue 12.03.