Open Source Software Driving Innovations in Web Experience

MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. – November 9, 2004 – The Mozilla Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to preserving choice and promoting innovation on the Internet, today announced the worldwide availability of the Mozilla Firefox 1.0 web browser. Development of Firefox has been driven by a desire for a more robust, user-friendly and trustworthy web experience. Mozilla Firefox 1.0 arrives on the heels of last month’s highly successful Preview Release that over eight million people downloaded, contributing significantly to the final phase of its open source development.

Today’s announcement marks the worldwide launch of Mozilla Firefox-with immediate availability for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux-as a free download from mozilla.org and by CD from the Mozilla Store. Firefox is now available in over a dozen languages, with many more on the way.

“We are delighted to be announcing this major milestone for the Mozilla Foundation and for the Firefox browser, which has been made possible thanks to the tireless effort of hundreds of community volunteers and developers around the world,” commented Mitchell Baker, president of the Mozilla Foundation. “Now millions more will be able to enjoy a better web experience.”

Award-winning Web Experience

The Mozilla Firefox browser has already garnered rave reviews and awards for its stability, trustworthiness and innovative features.

Pop-up Blocking – Firefox includes an integrated pop-up blocker that lets users-not websites-decide when they will view pop-ups. Mozilla continues to set the standard in assisting users avoid annoying pop-ups.

Online Fraud Protection – Firefox helps users protect themselves against online fraud such as “phishing” (attempts to trick users into giving away their passwords) and “spoofing” (fraudulent sites masquerading as popular, trusted sites) by clearly displaying the true identity of secure sites.

Faster, Easier, More Accessible Search – Firefox tightly integrates support for leading search services into the toolbar, including Google search, Yahoo!, eBay, Amazon, Dictionary.com, Creative Commons, and more. The new Firefox Start Page also provides access to Firefox information, resources and application tips, coupled with an integrated Google search box.

More Efficient Browsing – Firefox’s innovative Tabbed Browsing allows many web pages to load within the same window, improving the speed and utility of web browsing. Firefox also introduces Live Bookmarks, which allows users to easily glance through the latest news and blog headlines.

Extensible with Hundreds of Add-ons – More than 100 extensions are available for Firefox today, including the A9.com, Google, and Yahoo! toolbars, which make Firefox even more customizable and convenient to use.

Easy Migration – With Firefox it’s easy to switch from Internet Explorer and other browsers. Firefox imports your existing bookmarks, passwords, cookies, and other data.

Firefox has received numerous endorsements and industry awards including Laptop Magazine‘s Editor’s Choice Award, Best in Show at Linux World Fall 2004, Best Open Source Solution at Linux World Fall 2004, and first place in Maximum PC‘s Softy Awards for 2004.

Extensive Support Network

With thousands of technology contributors and advocates engaged in the development, documentation, testing and marketing of Mozilla Firefox, a rich ecosystem of support resources and tools is available. Online documentation, tutorials, FAQs and links to commercial support partners are available online at http://www.mozilla.org/. Independent news, commentary and community support is available from mozillaZine at http://www.mozillazine.org/.

Getting Firefox

Mozilla Firefox 1.0 can be downloaded for free or purchased in a CD-ROM Edition with Firefox Guidebook from the Mozilla Foundation at http://www.mozilla.org.