Introduction

The capital of the Bahmani Kingdom was established in Gulbarga, which reached a strong position under the maintenance of Mahmmad Gawan. The educational sectors were also developed in Mathematics and Islamic theology in the rulership of Mahmmad Gawan. Bahmani Sultanate was the first independent Islamic kingdom that was integrated into five states for ruling over the entire Sultanate strongly. This often includes the development of architecture and literature for increasing fruitfulness across the kingdom. The most popular Gulbarga Fort was established based on an encircling structure with a 30-foot dense moat.

Overview on the capital of Bahmani Kingdom

The capital of Bahmani Kingdom was established at Gulbarga which was famous for several monuments during the period of 1347 to 1526 AD. This was also famous for the architectural talent to implement the design of Gulbarga Fort, and Jami Masjid with a wide range of moats. The growth of architectural features in the capital of Bahmani kingdom makes it strong to develop the entire Sultanate. Bahmani kingdom was fragmented into several sultanates which were governed by several independent dynasties that caused civil war among the kings. This was the major reason for the breakup of the Bahmani Kingdom. The entire Bahmani Kingdom was integrated into five independent states as Bijapur, Bidar, Ahmadnagar, Golkonda, and Berar.

Literature and architectural development during the Bahmani period

Bahmani capital was well structured by architectural features and literature development. This included the development of several monuments such as Gulbarga Fort, Mosques, and madrasas. The encircling structure of Gulbarga Fort was armed with 15 towers and cannons which provide an eye view as a bird to the entire area. The college was established at Bidar during the period of Mahmmad Gawan in the architectural style of Persian by the provided endowments. The universities of Khorasan and Samarkand were established based on the funds provided by Mahmmad Gawan. The administrative reforms were established for increasing the control power of the Sultan over provinces and novels. The royal soldiers were well trained for proving patrol across the entire Bahmani Sultanate. The Madrasa which was established in the period of Mahmmad Gawan included the library, lecture halls, residential houses, and a mosque that stands as the specimen of the Brahmani architecture.

Overall analysis on Bahmani sultanate

Bahmani Sultanate followed Islamic tradition to develop strong rulership with a cooperative relationship with nearest kingdoms. This was useful for importing and exporting to the neighborhood kingdoms. Bahmani Sultanate reached a good structure position with literature development and architectural features in the period of Mahmmad Gawan. The political culture was also maintained in a periodic manner for providing equal judgments to the common people in the Bahmani kingdom. The training to the royal soldiers was provided to make a strong troop fight against the enemy kingdoms. The capital of the Bahmnai kingdom was famous for its several architectural designs based on the Persian style.

Rules structure imposed by the Bahmani Kingdom

The Bahmani Kingdom followed a strict rule structure that included loyalty among the soldiers of the Sultanate. All the soldiers were prepared to build a hill and woods fort during the war period which helped to make a depot of weapons and required items. The army team of Bahmani Kingdom was influenced by the entering of Hindus in the Sultanate. The development of hill and wood forts in several sites across the Bahmani Kingdom helped to guard against the foreign invasion. This also included that the Bahmani Kingdom was flushed with loyal and prosperous people. The Bahmani Kingdom was integrated into the several states that developed civil war among the dynasties which was the major reason for the destruction of the Bahmani Sultanate. Equal judgment to each of the people improved the fruitfulness of the entire Kingdom for developing loyalty to the king.

Monetary policies of Bahmani Sultanates

The currency system in the Bahmani Kingdom was founded during the period of 1350 to 1687 AD. The first issue that was faced by the exertions while implementing the design of coins was associated with the use of appropriate materials. The currency system of the Bahmani Sultanate was limited within the circulation of the Bahmani territory. The issues made a huge effect on commercial taxes and agriculture which were assessed gradually. The gold coins issued by Vijayanagar were circulated across the entire Bahmani Kingdom for resolving the issues.

Conclusion

The Bahmani Kingdom was made as a strong kingdom that contributed to culture, politics, literature, and architecture during the time of Medieval India. The architectural features were also developed that helped to establish several monuments. The strength of empires was also improved with a strong soldier troop that provided powerful guards against foreign invasion. The capital of the Bahmani Kingdom was structured by a strong moat 30 feet dense that increased the strength of empires with constant struggle.