Action star Liam Neeson has gone through a lot of changes since the 2003 release. Professionally, he has continued to appear on the silver screen in movies like The Taken franchise, The Grey, Cold Pursuit, The Marksman, Widows, Men in Black: International and Made in Italy. He has also continued to star in the Star Wars franchise.

Neeson lost his wife, actress Natasha Richardson, after a skiing accident in 2009. And like his Love Actually character Daniel, he has raised their two sons alone.

But despite it all, Neeson has remained positive and has continued to talk very highly about Love Actually.

"We've all lived lives," the actor said in a 2017 interview with Entertainment Weekly. "Some of us have died. Oh, my dear old friend Alan Rickman, God rest him. Some have gotten divorced. I've lost my wife. And, oh, sure, plenty of times I've thought about this film and my own life. Love Actually, that's the way it is. That's the tapestry of life."

Fun fact: He wanted to be in Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999) so badly that he did not even bother reading the script to see if it was good. He just knew it would be.

Best known for his brilliant performance as Professor Severus Snape in the Harry Potter films, Alan Rickman is nothing short of a silver screen icon. As well as the Harry Potter films and Love Actually, Rickman has also starred in Die Hard, Galaxy Quest, Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves, and Sense and Sensibility. In 2022, Henry Holt and Co. released his authorized biography called Madly, Deeply: The Diaries of Alan Rickman, which contained his personal diary entries from 1993-2016, and the forward was written by co-star Emma Thompson.

He was also awarded the Golden Globe, Emmy, and Screen Actors Guild awards for his role as Rasputin in the 1996 television movie Rasputin: Dark Servant of Destiny.

Sadly, in 2016, Rickman died from cancer at age 69. The final film he worked on before his death was Alice Through the Looking Glass, which was dedicated to him.

Fun fact: Despite being author J.K. Rowling's first choice to play Severus Snape in the Harry Potter films, he was only given the role after Tim Roth (the studio's choice) backed out to star in Planet of the Apes (2001).

By the time Love Actually came out in 2003, Hugh Grant already had quite the roster of films on his résumé, including Sense and Sensibility, Notting Hill, and Bridget Jones's Diary. The actor has since become an action star, starring in The Grey, Cold Pursuit and The Marksman. He also appeared in Widows, Men in Black: International and Made in Italy.

In 2018, Grant married TV producer Anna Elisabet Eberstein, and they share three children together. Grant also shares two children with Tinglan Hong.

Fun fact: Grant revealed he was reluctant to do that iconic dance scene — but said he is now proud he did it and was glad he was able to pull it off.

Two-time Oscar-nominated actress Keira Knightley has made quite a name for herself since Love Actually. Known for her historical fiction and fantasy roles in films like Pride & Prejudice, Pirates of the Caribbean, Anna Karenina, The Nutcracker and the Four Realms, and Star Wars: Episode I alongside Nesson. Yes, Knightly has certainly done it all.

But she still has a soft spot for Love Actually, telling Entertainment Weekly, "I don't think any of us expected it to become a phenomenon...But it took on this wonderful following, and now it's almost bigger in America than anywhere else."

She is married to James Righton, and they have two children.

Fun Fact: Her birth name was going to be "Kiera," but her mother made a typo on the birth certificate.

When Golden Globe winner Bill Nighy took on the role of washed-up rocker Billy Mack, no one expected him to have a hit song in Christmas Is All Around. But he did, and post-Love Actually, Nighy has starred in Pirates of the Caribbean, Rango, Emma, Arthur Christmas and The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel. He also took his acting skills to the stage, starring in Skylight in both London's West End and on Broadway and later appearing in Castlevania.

Fact: He has Dupuytren's Contracture, a condition that causes the ring and little fingers of each hand to be permanently bent inwards towards the palm.

After starring in Love Actually, Chiwetel Ejiofor had some guest-starring roles in box office hits like Inside Man and Children of Men, as well as some indie films like Dirty Pretty Things and Kinky Boots. Then, in 2013, he starred in 12 Years a Slave, earning him an Academy Award nomination. In 2016, he joined the Marvel Cinematic Universe in Doctor Strange as Mordo. Some of his other notable tiles include The Martian, the live action Lion King and Sherlock Gnomes.

Fun fact: He was awarded the Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2008 Queen's Birthday Honors List and the Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2015 Queen's Birthday Honors List for his services to drama.