Quick history: Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia (1/2)

President Hácha was in the end forced to sign that the Czech lands are going under protection of the Reich. It’s very ironic that in the end the Czech state got protection from the country that could be considered its greatest enemy. Perhaps it won’t surprise you that this became one of the darkest times in Czech history…

Previously: The Second Republic and the Munich Agreement

On March 15 at 6 o'clock in the morning German troops crossed Munich-ordered borders of what was left from Czechoslovakia. The train in which president Hácha travelled back to Prague was purposely delayed so Hitler was the first one in the Prague Castle.

On this day also Gestapo started its work. They confiscated important documents and arrested German exiles.

Hitler at the gates of the Castle with his soldiers. Second picture: Occupation went without resistance. Only 300 soldiers from III. battalion of Silesian regiment stood up against them in Místek. After Germans lost 8 men, Czech soldiers in Čajankovy barracks capitulated after order from their government.

Next day Hitler officially announced Protektorat Böhmen und Mähren and Czech territory became part of German Reich.

For thousand years Czech-Moravian lands belonged to the living space of German nation. Violence and irrationality broke them wilfully from their old historic surroundings and connected them to into an artificial body of Czech-Slovakia, which formed the focus of constant unrest….

Decree by Führer and Reich Chancellor about establishment of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia.

Emil Hácha became a state president but couldn’t do anything without trust of the Fürer. The real power had the Reichsprotektor - the first was Konstantin von Neurath. The new Prime Minister became General Alois Eliáš (who participated in the Resistance). The secretary General was Karl Herman Frank.

The Czechoslovak Army was immediately dissolved (only 3000 of them stayed as a government guard). Germans after the occupation acquired large amount of military material. They sold part of it to their allies and the latest weapon arsenal included in their own units. Significant valuation enjoyed especially Czechoslovak tanks.

Reichsprotektor Konstantin von Neurath. Later he was for his alleged "benevolence" and especially the inability to destroy the resistance replaced by Reinhrad Heydrich. Second picture: Czechoslovak soldiers handing over their tanks. When the Reich attacked France, one third of their tanks was originally from Czechoslovak army.

In the fall of 1939 Nazis made ​​it clear that they will not allow any signs of resistance or criticism of the new order. The society mood was grim and influenced by other events of the World War II: quick defeat of Poland, Hitler-Stalin pact and the inactivity of the French and British armies.

First significant resistance was anti-German pilgrimage to Říp Mountain on 30th April 1939, attended by 60,000 people. This action was followed by anti-German appearances in Prague near St. Vitus Cathedral, at the tomb of František Palacký ("Fater of the Nation") and during the transportation of the body of K. H. Mácha to the Vyšehrad cemetery.

Karel Hynek Mácha's second funeral. He died in 1836 and was a founder of modern Czech poetry. Mácha was more appreciated after his death than during his life. His supposedly "unpatriotic" poetry was not fully appreciated in his time. Typical Protectorate announcement: first in German and then in Czech (often full of grammatical mistakes).

Many pilgrimages were performed until they were banned. The last big ones were manifestations during the celebration of the anniversary of the burning of Jan Hus (the biggest on St. Vavřineček near Domažlice with 100,000 people).

On 28th October 1939 (anniversary of the creation of Czechoslovakia) was held a mass demonstration in Prague and many other Czech and Moravian cities. The demonstration was brutally dispersed by the Gestapo - labourer Václav Sedláček was killed and a student Jan Opletal died few days later in hospital. Opletal’s funeral on November 15 turned into another demonstration.

During the night from 16th to 17th November Czech students in Prague, Brno and Příbram were arrested by the Gestapo and the SS, then transported into barracks near Prague, where nine leaders of student organizations were executed. 1200 arrested students were after this transported to the concentration camp, from where most of them were released in late 1942 and the rest in January 1943. 35 of these students didn't survive.

After this all Czech universities were closed and their buildings were given to Gestapo, SS and Wehrmacht.

Jan Opletal (1915-1938), was a student on Medical Faculty of the Charles University in Prague. The mass attendance during his funeral became a silent demonstration against the occupants.

After these events November 17 became the International Student's day. Hitler after hearing about the situation in Protectorate felt certain regret that he didn't treat Czechs the way he did with Poles.

Economic consequences of the occupation:

Receivership: Companies were controlled by all kinds of unions which demanded specific output and sortiment. Thanks to this Nazis fully supervised production of Czech arms companies. Some enterprises were forcibly merged into one. Businesses was gradually dominated by German capital.

Agriculture faced similar treatment as business. In terms of long-term goals Germans gradually sought to empower Czech soil and colonize the occupied space. Czechs from certain areas were evicted and replaced by Germans. In total over five hundred thousand hectares of agricultural land was usurped this way.

Forced labour for the Reich - in the first half of 1939 these jobs were offered to Czechs but over time have been set up employment offices, job records and the work began to be mandatory. The work conditions were often poor. Total number of Czechs that went through forced labour in Germany can be around 650,000.

Československá koruna (Czechoslovak currency) was right from the beginning completely degraded. Germany robbed the Czech state during the occupation thanks to the financial machinations of 43 tons of pure currency gold.

Food stamps were introduced and their rations gradually declined. Prices on the black market have grown in dizzying speed - in 6 years over more than 2000 %.

Other unpopular steps were accepted like bilingual signs, confiscation of bells, renaming of streets, preferring everything German, limiting cultural and social life and many more. The Nuremberg Laws came into force, followed by property arization, deportation of the Jewish population and then allocation of their houses and flats to Germans from the Reich.