Djelfa in English dictionary

Djelfa

Sample sentences with "Djelfa"

Declension Stem

A gun, a camera that spies use, Djelfa Oilfields

The Working Group also notes that the Government has informed it that on # ovember # the Djelfa court ordered the release of the above-mentioned person and that this order was carried out on the same day

The Working Group also notes that the Government has informed it that on 24 November 2004 the Djelfa court ordered the release of the above‐mentioned person and that this order was carried out on the same day.

Hafnaoui Ghoul, a journalist for el-Youm daily and a member of the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH), spent half of 2004 in prison on defamation charges related to articles alleging corruption and mismanagement by local officials in his native region of Djelfa.

There are significant regional disparities in access to education, some Wilayas such as Djelfa and Mila being particularly disadvantaged;

Hafnaoui Ghoul, a journalist and human rights activist with the Djelfa branch of the Algerian League for the Defence of Human Rights, faced four separate judicial proceedings for defamation and contempt after five Djelfa governorate officials complained about articles he had published in Wasat newspaper about mismanagement and corruption.

Its capital is Djelfa.

Deldoul may refer to: Deldoul, Adrar, a municipality or commune of Adrar province, Algeria Deldoul, Djelfa, a municipality or commune of Djelfa province, Algeria

(ae) Saad Abdelaziz, allegedly arrested on 29 May 1994 in Djelfa by the police;

Terror strikes Djelfa.

One also finds among the engravings of the Djelfa region hounds and horses of various epochs.

(a) Nadji Serrar, allegedly arrested on 17 September 1996 in Messaâd, Djelfa by the military;

No, he had seen no party of six horsemen riding from the direction of Djelfa.

On November 27, 2003, in Messad, Djelfa Province, Algeria, a well-known poet and member of the extended Royal Saudi family was killed and four others were injured in an apparent terrorist attack, according to press reports.

The province with the lowest rate of illiteracy was Algiers Province at 11.6%, while the province with the highest rate was Djelfa Province at 35.5%.

Enrolment rates are well below the national average in the wilayas in the south and in the highlands: it is # per cent in Djelfa # per cent in Médéa # per cent in Tamanrasset ( # per cent for girls # per cent for boys), and # per cent in Ghardaia ( # per cent for girls # per cent for boys

(q) Boubakeur Lasbet, allegedly arrested on 27 October 1992 in the Wilaya of Djelfa by the police;

(ag) Berrabah Sassi, allegedly arrested on 15 February 1995 in Djelfa by police officers;

The town of Djelfa has been traditionally an important market and trade centre for the Ouled Naïl, especially for their cattle.

(m) Lakhdar Nouidjem, allegedly arrested on 29 October 1996 in Fiadh el Batma, Wilaya of Djelfa by gendarmes.

Authors