,

Smith College is a female-only college that allows students to individualize their specific academic program. The college aims to give its students the ability to think and speak for themselves and to take initiative in their educational pathways. Smith College prepares its students for leadership in the global community through rigorous academics, hands-on experiences and research opportunities.

Overall Smith College Acceptance Rate

Overall Smith College Acceptance Rate

38%

Smith College seeks students who are willing to speak up in class, contribute their thoughts and ideas to classroom discussions, and challenge their own thinking. The ideal student will be motivated, determined and curious. Students who have completed a rigorous academic preparation program and who have pursued academic interests in greater depth will also be sought by the college.

Accepted Applicants Profile

SAT Scores: 1240 - 1480

ACT Scores: 28 - 32

Average GPA: 4

How Hard Is It to Get into Smith College

Applicant Selectivity: Moderately Selective

The selectivity of applicants for undergraduate admissions to Smith is considered moderately selective. Many accepted applicants score in the mid-range on the SAT or ACT exam, as well as having a solid high school GPA and number of college prep courses.

How Does Smith College Compare to Other Liberal Arts Colleges in MA

The acceptance rate for Smith College is thirty-three percent lower than the national average of all colleges which is around 57%.

Admissions Requirements

General Recommendations & Requirements for Admissions

Prospective applicants should complete either the Coalition Application or the Common Application, including a Smith Writing Supplement.

Students should request a Secondary School Report, including an official transcript with the following coursework completed:

4 years of English, composition and literature

3 years of Foreign Language, or two years each of two languages

3 years of Mathematics

3 years of Lab Science

3 years of History

A midyear report must also be submitted with updated coursework and grades. Applicants must send in a Counselor Recommendation and two Teacher Evaluation Forms.

The submission of SAT and ACT scores is optional. An admissions interview is recommended.

Number of Applicants, Percent Admitted, and Enrolled Students

Total Men Women Applicants: 5006 0% 100% Admitted: 38 0% 38% Enrolled: 32 0% 32%

Average Standardized Test Scores

SAT Section Score Range Critical Reading 620 - 740 Math 620 - 740 Total Score: 1240 - 1480

ACT Section Score Range Composite Score: 28 - 32

Academic Performance

High School Academic Performance of Students Enrolled at Smith