Smith College

Smith College is an all-female liberal arts institution in western Massachusetts and the largest all-women’s college in the country. The biggest school among the Seven Sisters Colleges, Smith offers degrees and certificates in over 50 areas of study and also features a coeducational program at the graduate level. Additionally, Smith is part of the Five Colleges consortium which permits students to take classes and participate in student exchanges at nearby Mount Holyoke, Amherst, Hampshire, and UMass. For new students, Smith’s First Year Experience program schedules a number of exclusive social experiences on and off campus as well as trips to Boston.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Private

Not for Profit

Women’s College

Need Aware

This school may consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Suburb or town

0

100

30%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineEarly Decision Acceptance is binding so student must attend college if accepted.November 15January 15Fall Regular DecisionJanuary 15May 1Spring Regular DecisionNovember 15OtherJanuary 1February 15

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

15%

Out-Of-State Students

82%

20%

Submitting ACT

34%

Submitting SAT

Average ACT Composite: 32

0

36

Average SAT Composite: 1415

0

1600

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Doctorate

Total Number of Students

2,924

Total Number of Undergrads

2,566

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

2-19 Students

69%

20-39 Students

24%

40-99 Students

5%

0

100

83%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

89%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

9:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$28,422

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$58,768

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$58,768

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$20,340

Books and Supplies

$800

Aid & Grants

0

100

100%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

21%

Average Aid Per Year

$47,538

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

21%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$2,921

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$45,208

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

46%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$5,219

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$18,000

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$181

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Organizations

120

Size of Town

Suburb or town

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

Yes

On Campus Women's Center

Yes

Housing

0

100

95%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

Yes

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Pioneers

Varsity Athletics Association

NCAA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Not applicable

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

Yes

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

New York

Boston

Springfield

San Francisco

Washington

Employed

6 mos. after graduation

70%

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$51,100

What Students Are Saying

An academic challenge that pushes you to perfection. A social challenge that make or break you. A tradition of great women.

Katherine class of 2014

Smith is what you make it. There are all sorts of opportunities to be artsy, athletic, musical, outdoorsy, and whatever else suits you, without losing the opportunity to focus on academics. With such a variety of people and programs, everyone can find their niche here.

Sally from Lawrence, KS

Smith has a beautiful campus and downtown, faculty that (for the most part) treat you with respect, and an incredibly diverse student body. It is very liberal (and not just in the liberal arts sense) and most students are comfortable voicing their discord with current issues and sometimes even Smith's administration. Overall, I absolutely love it! Smith's small, women's* college atmosphere make it an ideal place to spend my four years.

Laura from Windsor, CA

Smith College is a well-rounded, academic and exciting college, that allows Smithies to explore and cultivate their interests while opening doors to the work world. Smithies are driven, enthusiastic students, and the environment at Smith never fails to bring out the best in them. Smith women are known for their presence and influence in the world, something Smith College steadfastly supports.

Megan from Stafford Springs, CT

Smith has awesome opportunities especially if you are into the sciences. Like doing research with a professor, professor's being flexible about waitlist and also classes that just are not that large.

Also, the students are awesome too (they are all a bunch of geeks).

Ramlah from Brooklyn, NY

The college campus is really beautiful with a lot of natural scenery. The students tend to be affluent young women with strenuous academic goals and there is a large LGBTQ presence on campus in addition to other social activism movements. The classes are rigorous regardless of your department but you can always find help if you ask for it.

Bronx, NY

Similar Colleges

Bryn Mawr, PA

Providence, RI

Amherst, MA

Boston, MA

Cambridge, MA

South Hadley, MA

Wellesley, MA

New York, NY

New York, NY

Ithaca, NY

New York, NY

Poughkeepsie, NY

See All