Kevin and Perry Go Large stars Harry Enfiled as Kevin, based on his comedy sketch idea Kevin the Teenager, and comedian Kathy Burke as his downtrodden pal Perry.

But one other person who featured in the famous film, was none other than EastEnders favourite Steve McFadden, best known for playing Phil Mitchell on the soap.

The film was released in 2000 and has since gained a cult following due to its crude humour and iconic soundtrack which includes songs from Jamiroquai, Fatboy Slim, The Clash, Groove Armada, Nightmares on Wax and Tiesto.

DJ Judge Jules also created the track that Kevin and Perry are trying to promote and was released as a single, staying in the UK Top 40 charts for four weeks in 2000, reaching 16th. The film was also the top grossing film at the British box office over Easter weekend in 2000 and reached the number one film in the UK.

The British Film Institute reviewed the gross-out comedy film and said: “Kevin and Perry Go Largeis an amiable roll through vomit, poo and erections, public-humiliation and hating-your-parents gags, working through the most obvious permutations and a scatter of clever ones."

"Fans of Harry Enfield and Kathy Burke's characters get pretty much what they are after. "

Kevin and Perry, two frustrated teenagers who are desperate to lose their virginity, travel to the Spanish party island of Ibiza to show off their musical ‘talents’ in an attempt to get famous.

The boys meet Eye Ball Paul, played by Rhys Ifans, who plays their track in a club and sky rockets them to popularity.

Whilst the boys are in Amnesia, a popular nightclub in Ibiza, Steve McFadden made an appearance. The scene begins with Kevin and Perry attempting to enter Amnesia whilst Kevin’s parents stand back and watch.

His dad turns to his mum and says: “Come on, lets go in,” to which she replies: “Don’t be so silly.”

His dad says: “They’ll never see us with all those people,” whilst the boys march off into the club.

After a couple of shots showing Kevin and Perry behind the decks watching the dancers, DJs and strobe lights, the camera cuts back to Kevin’s parents at the door.

Steve McFadden plays an unimpressed doorman who charges the entry to Amnesia. Kevin’s dad says: “How much? You’ve got to be joking me!” after hearing the price of a ticket.

Steve replies: “No concessions for senior citizens,” before taking the money out of his pocket.

The appearance came alongside his EastEnders stint after joining the soap in 1990, but fans were certainly happy to see the tough and rugged Phil Mitchel on their screens for a slightly different appearance.