KEVIN AND PERRY OFFICIAL

The feature film “Kevin and Perry Go Large” was the classic cult movie that spanned the generations, resonating globally amongst clubbers for its soundtrack, humour and performances from Harry Enfield and Kathy Burke with references to Ibiza’s rave culture with everlasting popularity. Two sullen teenagers known for disrespecting their parents, travel to Ibiza with a dream to become world-famous DJs.

Kevin and Perry Official, professional entertainers Dean Taylor and Lea Jenkins have been working worldwide mimicking and cosplaying the iconic fictional ravers with their uncannily resemblance and capturing their humour and dance moves with impeccable detail for over twenty years.

Their viral video at the Hardwick Live festival was seen by over 11 million with over 100,000 comments and was featured by The Independent, Mirror, Daily Star, NME, Mixmag, The Sun, DJmag and LADbible.

Comedian Kathy Burke applauded the couple who paid homage to one of her famous roles, Writing and sharing her praise on Twitter, Burke said:

“If I wasn’t so much older and wider I’d swear this was me! Lovely stuff.”

Following on from their sold out shows at Amnesia in Ibiza celebrating the 20th anniversary with there fellow superstar DJ’s Judge Jules and Seb Fontaine they have been taking the club and events scene by storm. Djing there mash up of mash up set !!!! With there bangin rincing choons. They bring the Balearic, House pumpin buzz…. playing old school Trance, Euphoria and bangin Ibiza dance anthems and the classic iconic hit Big Girl by Precocious Brats (better known as All I Wanna Do Is Do It).

The comical celebrity characters with there meeting and greeting, mixing and mingling, photos, selfies and videos, will create a whole lot of fun… nostalgia… and will make the event and party one to remember, impressing and amusing you in equal measure.

BUT KEVIN WOULD SAY “I AM NOT YOUR SLAVE’ !!! AND PERRY WOULD LOVE JAM SANDWICHES

ON THE RIDER !!!

THANK YOU MRS PATTERSON

Superstar DJS