OFTC — Nearly 80 Oconee Fall Line Technical College (OFTC) credit and High School Equivalency (HSE) graduates were honored during the College’s 2023 Fall Commencement Ceremony & HSE Graduation held on the Sandersville Campus, Thursday, September 28.

Graduates received degrees, diplomas and technical certificates of credit in a variety of high-demand fields like Medical Assisting, Automotive Technology, Early Childhood Care and Education, Respiratory, Criminal Justice Technology, Air Conditioning Technology, high school equivalency diplomas, and more.

“We cannot tell you enough how excited we are to watch you walk across the stage to receive your credential tonight,” shared OFTC President Erica Harden as she addressed the graduates. “Your hard work, determination, and perseverance is the reason you are here today and it’s inspiring.”

“We are so proud of you, and we hope you always know that OFTC is family,” she added. “We wish you all the best as you enter this new chapter of your life and career. We know you are prepared to do great things.”

Felicia Ailster, Executive Director of Financial Aid at Georgia Gwinnett Technical College served as keynote speaker and addressed the graduates, applauding them for their hard work and dedication in accomplishing their goals.

Many of you have faced challenges,” Ailster said. “You have demonstrated courage, determination, and a fierce spirit that brought you here to this day. You’re an inspiration to all of us.”

Acknowledging their skills, Ailster encouraged the graduates to maintain high standards of character and integrity. “As you move forward, remember that your education is a powerful tool and it’s how you use those tools that matters.”

“The skills you’ve learned here will open doors for you,” she said, “but your character and integrity will determine where those doors lead.”

OFTC offers a first-class education that’s close to home and affordable. The college’s eight-week minimester begins October 16 and students interested in starting classes with OFTC can enroll now. The minimester allows students an opportunity to complete a course with the same quality of instruction but on a shorter schedule. Students can choose from a variety of courses, including online formats, to stay on course.

To learn more about the 130+ programs of study or how to enroll for a minimester course, visit the College’s website, OFTC.edu.

To view additional photos from the 2023 Fall Commencement Ceremony, visit OFTC’s social media pages on Facebook.

Fall 2023 Credit Graduates

Fall 2023 High School Equivalency Graduates

Christena Bennerson, Baldwin

Christina Kirkpatrick, Johnson

Bryce Brooks, Laurens

Jackson Payne, Laurens

Jordyn Street, Laurens