Verification is a process used to verify that information reported on the FAFSA is accurate. Students may be selected either by the Department of Education or by the school.

Some of the main reasons for being chosen for verification are:

Application is randomly selected.

FAFSA has incomplete data.

Data on the FAFSA appears to contradict itself.

FAFSA application has estimated information on it.

The Financial Aid Office will review your FAFSA application. Once it is determined what documents and forms are needed, the Financial Aid Office will send an email or text requesting certain documents and forms. Some documents and forms that may be requested are:

Dependent or Independent Verification Worksheet

IRS Tax Return Transcript – If you use the IRS Data Retrieval option when completing the FAFSA and make no changes to the tax information, a tax transcript will not be required.

Marriage License

Social Security/Disability Benefit Statement

Child Support Received or Paid Information

Alien Registration Card

Final Divorce Decree

Other forms and documents

The types of documents required will vary from student to student. Not all students selected for verification will have to submit the same documents.

Once all documents are received, the Financial Aid Office will compare the required documents to the FAFSA. If errors are found, corrections will be made. Once the verification process is complete, an award letter will be sent to the student notifying them of the type of financial aid they are eligible to receive. Financial Aid cannot be disbursed until the verification process is complete.

Oconee Fall Line Technical College (OFTC) participates in the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program which includes the Direct Subsidized and Direct Unsubsidized Student Loans. To a lesser extent, private loans are also processed for students on an as needed basis. To comply with the 2008 Higher Education Opportunity Act (enacted August 14, 2008) OFTC adopts the following Student Loan Code of Conduct to serve as the formal guiding principles in insuring the integrity of the student aid process and ethical conduct of OFTC employees in regard to student loan practices.

1. Revenue Sharing

The term “revenue-sharing arrangement” means an arrangement between an institution and a lender which – (i) a lender provides or issues a loan that is made, insured, or guaranteed to students under the Higher Education Act attending the institution or to the families of such students; and (ii) the institution recommends the lender or the loan products of the lender and in exchange, the lender pays a fee or provides other material beneﬁts, including revenue or proﬁt sharing, to the institution, an oﬃcer or employee of the instititution. OFTC and its employees will not enter into any type of revenue-sharing arrangement with any lender, guarantor or servicer. OFTC does not provide students a preferred lender list from which to select a lender for a private student loan. All loans are processed without regard to lender or mode of transmission (i.e., electronic or paper). OFTC will neither recommend a private loan lender nor accept material beneﬁts including revenue or proﬁt sharing to the institution, an oﬃcer, or an employee of the institution or an agent.

2. Gifts

Employees of the Oﬃces of Student Financial Aid and the Bursar’s Oﬃce and Student Accounts are prohibited from soliciting or accepting any gifts from a lender, guarantor, or servicer of education loans.

Gifts include any gratuity, favor, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan or other item. This includes a gifts of services, transportation, lodging, or meals, whether provided in kind, by purchase of a ticket, payment in advance, or reimbursement after the expense has incurred.

Gifts to family members of a OFTC employee are considered to be a gift to the employee if the gift is given with the knowledge and acquiescence of the employee and there is reason to believe the gift was given because of the oﬃcial position of that employee.

3. Contracting Arrangements

Employees of the Oﬃces of Student Financial Aid and the Bursar’s Oﬃce and Student Accounts shall not accept from any lender or aﬃliate of any lender any fee, payment, or other ﬁnancial beneﬁt (including opportunity to purchase stock) as compensation for any consulting arrangement or other contract to provide services to a lender or on behalf of a lender relating to education loans.

4. Preferred Lender Status

OFTC participates in the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program which provides student and parent loans through the U.S. Department of Education. Lenders in the private student loan industry will not be given a preferred status. OFTC will not produce a preferred lender list that gives any lender an advantage in securing business from OFTC students.

5. Interaction with Borrowers

OFTC will not assign a borrower’s private student loan to a particular lender; all decisions will be made by the borrower in his/her independent review of borrower benefits and lender services. Further, OFTC will not refuse to certify, or delay certification of, any loan based on the borrower’s selection of a particular lender or guaranty agency.

6. Opportunity Pool Loan

OFTC will not request or accept from any lender any offer of funds to be used for private education loans (defined in section 140 of the Truth in Lending Act) including funds for an opportunity pool loan in exchange for OFTC providing concessions or promises regarding providing the lender with a specified number of loans made, insured or guaranteed; a specified loan volume of such loans; or a preferred lender arrangement for such loans.

7. Staffing Assistance

OFTC will not request or accept from any lender, guarantor, or servicer of student loans any assistance with call center staffing or financial aid office staffing.

8. Advisory Board Compensation

Employees of the Offices of Student Financial Aid and the Bursar’s Office and Student Accounts who serve on an advisory board, commission, or group established by a lender, guarantor, or group of lenders or guarantors, are prohibited from receiving anything of value from the lender, guarantor, or group of lenders or guarantors, except that the employee may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in serving on such advisory board, commission, or group.

Students must maintain a cumulative GPA of 2.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale that includes all credit courses appearing on the academic transcript. If a student’s cumulative GPA falls below the minimum, his/her financial aid is subject to Financial Aid suspension. Also, the Department of Education requires that students complete 67% of all attempted classes.

Students will be placed on FA warning the term after failing either criteria. If the student does not meet financial aid standards during the warning term, he/she will be placed on suspension.

Students have the right to appeal a finding that they are not making satisfactory progress if they feel that there are extenuating circumstances which have prevented them from meeting the specified requirements. Any student on suspension may file an appeal with the Financial Aid Appeals Committee. Appeals for Satisfactory Academic Progress must be based on specific extenuating circumstances. Documentation supporting the extenuating circumstance must be submitted with the appeal. If the appeal is granted, the student will be placed on Financial Aid Warning and/or given an academic plan to ensure success for the following and subsequent terms. If a student is given an academic plan, it is the student’s responsibility to check on status by contacting the Financial Aid Office after grades are posted each term. The deadline for submitting an appeal is 10 days from the date the student was notified of suspension.

Professional judgment is the ability of a financial aid administrator to recalculate the student’s financial aid eligibility due to special or unusual circumstances. The FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid) only requests certain information, which may not show the student’s/parents entire financial situation. The financial aid administrator, under federal law, has the authority to take these special or unusual circumstances into consideration and make changes to the student’s financial aid application.

Special circumstances are situations that may occur that are not addressed in the application process. Some common special circumstances that may occur are:

Separation from employment due to layoff, termination or disability

Excessive non-reimbursed medical and/or dental expenses

Reduction of untaxed income source such as child support, disability benefits, etc.

Separation or divorce which occurred after applying for financial aid

Death of parent or spouse which occurred after applying for financial aid

In order to start the Professional Judgment process, a request must come from the student. Once the student has requested that Professional Judgment be performed, the student is given an OFTC Professional Judgment Appeal Form. This form has instructions and a list of documents that must be presented to the Financial Aid Office before the Professional Judgment Appeal can be completed.

The student must complete and submit the FAFSA, the Verification Worksheet, tax transcripts for student and parents (if dependent), Professional Judgment Appeal Form, and documents that support the appeal. On the Professional Judgment Appeal Form, the student must provide income earned from different sources up till then and projected total income for the entire year.

Verification will first be performed on the application. If needed, corrections may be made to the application. Once the correction has come back from the Department of Education, the Financial Aid Administrator will review the supportive documents. The Financial Aid Administrator will make any necessary adjustments to the application using the information provided by the student. All documentation will be taken into consideration.

Once adjustments are made to the application the Financial Aid Administrator will make the final decision. The decision is final and cannot be appealed.