When working with small children, work is never routine. With new activities and challenges, every day has the potential to be a new learning experience.

Industrial Systems is the backbone of industry, and upon graduation students will have the technical skills necessary to become electricians, industrial technicians, or maintenance technicians.

Respiratory Therapists work with doctors and nurses to help manage and improve breathing in the body of patients of all ages, from infants to the elderly.

Medical Assistants are often responsible for important administrative duties and clinical tasks that assist and support the doctor and other medical staff.

Commercial Truck Drivers are the backbone of American commerce and the work they do literally impacts the entire country.

OFTC –When Timoy Ellis decided to return to college in his thirties, he knew he wanted a local campus close to home. He was interested in the healthcare field and decided to pursue a career in respiratory therapy through Oconee Fall Line Technical College (OFTC). “Respiratory was a way for me to obtain a career […]

Dublin, Ga., (OFTC) — Oconee Fall Line Technical College’s (OFTC) Pharmacy Technology class of 2024 recently received a 100% first-time pass rate on the Pharmacy Technician Certification Exam (PTCE) which allows them to officially be recognized as Certified Pharmacy Technicians (CPhT). With the average National pass-rate at about 70%, the 100% pass-rate by these students […]

Due to impending weather conditions related to Hurricane Debby, all campuses of OFTC will close today at 4:00 pm, be closed Tuesday, and reopen Wednesday morning. We expect heavy rain and squally conditions later today, overnight tonight, and tomorrow. All southern counties in our SDA are under a Tropical Storm Warning or Watch, and the […]

Dublin, Ga., (OFTC) — Oconee Fall Line Technical College (OFTC) Chief of Safety, Security and Facilities of 10 years, Marc Rogers, was recently sworn in as the college’s first Chief of Police, Friday, July 26 on the College’s Dublin Campus by Judge Judson ‘Jud’ Green IV of the Eighth Judicial Administrative District of Georgia. Prior […]