Rolf Scherenberg was a German general in the Wehrmacht during World War II. He was a recipient of the Knight’s Cross of the Iron Cross of Nazi Germany.

Rolf Scherenberg was born on May 27, 1897, in Berlin, Berlin, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 52° 31’ 28” North latitude and 13° 24’ 38” East longitude, with an altitude of 74 meters above sea level. Rolf Scherenberg passed away at the age of 64 in 1961.

Astrologically, Rolf Scherenberg falls under the Sun sign of Gemini, with Virgo as his Ascendant, Aries as his Moon sign, and Taurus as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Gemini Moon Aries Mercury Taurus Venus Taurus Mars Leo Jupiter Virgo Saturn Scorpio Uranus Scorpio Neptune Gemini Pluto Gemini Ceres Taurus Chiron Scorpio Eros Gemini Hygiea Gemini Juno Cancer Pallas Aries Vesta Cancer Ascendant Virgo Black Moon Lilith Taurus Midheaven Gemini North Node Aquarius South Node Leo Part of Fortune Cancer Vertex Aquarius

Sunin Gemini6° 22’ 0”

The Gemini Sun in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and lighthearted. You are curious and creative. You enjoy learning new things and need continual […] Read more »

Moonin Aries21° 26’ 14”

The Moon in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are intense and can be passionate and optimistic. Your moods drive […] Read more »

Mercuryin Taurus27° 15’ 33”

Taurus Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you observant and intelligent. You learn best when you can apply facts to things you value. Yet you […] Read more »

Venusin Taurus1° 29’ 7”

Taurus Venus in the Natal Chart makes you attractive and flirtatious. You quickly get the attention of admirers and can be gentle and affectionate. You […] Read more »

Marsin Leo5° 6’ 11”

Leo Mars in the Natal Chart makes you expressive and confident in your unique and individualistic style. You are sincere and can be loving and […] Read more »

Jupiterin Virgo1° 39’ 17”

Virgo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you confident in your beliefs. You are a leader or spokesperson who helps others find security and health. […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio26° 47’ 6”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Scorpio26° 37’ 43”

Uranus in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher mission. You are focused and obsessed with rebelling against the status […] Read more »

Neptunein Gemini19° 28’ 44”

Gemini Neptune in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation with a desire to find unity through communication. You are part of […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini13° 3’ 33”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Taurus23° 14’ 48”

Ceres in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are down to earth and practical. You find reasonable ways to express love and show others […] Read more »

Chironin Scorpio8° 55’ 15”

Chiron in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to gain the power and perspective to conquer your past traumas. Your desire for healing […] Read more »

Erosin Gemini5° 57’ 22”

Eros in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for excitement and enthusiasm. You are passionate about your ideas and aroused by conversations […] Read more »

Hygieain Gemini3° 24’ 6”

Hygiea in Gemini in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective. You understand the importance of mental and physical health. You advocate for hygiene […] Read more »

Junoin Cancer28° 48’ 53”

Juno in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates you are a homebody committed to marriage and love. You are a provider who nurtures others and […] Read more »

Pallasin Aries17° 16’ 7”

Pallas in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate, and you have a dramatic and zealous approach to sharing your message. You can be […] Read more »

Vestain Cancer20° 49’ 25”

Vesta in Cancer in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and nurturing. You can be emotional and use your gifts to comfort others. You are […] Read more »

Ascendantin Virgo11° 42’ 10”

Virgo Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you thoughtful and discerning. You have an intellectual and analytical personality. You may have a bookish appearance and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus18° 45’ 15”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Gemini5° 34’ 56”

The Gemini Midheaven in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and imaginative. You are curious and need change and variety in your career. Your […] Read more »

North Nodein Aquarius9° 23’ 20”

Aquarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you rebellious. You break from tradition, and your destiny involves leading others in grassroots campaigns. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Leo9° 23’ 20”

Leo South Node in the Natal Chart makes you born with passion and desire to succeed. You are confident in your abilities and have a […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Cancer26° 46’ 24”

Cancer Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and comforting. You are nurturing and can be loving and sensitive. You are […] Read more »

Vertexin Aquarius19° 22’ 36”

Aquarius Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about helping others. You are a humanitarian with a gift for anticipating breakthroughs in society. You […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Eighth House Mercury Ninth House Venus Ninth House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Twelfth House Saturn Third House Uranus Third House Neptune Tenth House Pluto Tenth House Ceres Ninth House Chiron Third House Eros Tenth House Hygiea Ninth House Juno Eleventh House Pallas Eighth House Vesta Eleventh House Black Moon Lilith Ninth House North Node Fifth House South Node Eleventh House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 15 major aspects, alongside 11 minor aspects, as well as 4 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mercury Opposite Saturn Venus Trine Jupiter Saturn Conjunct Uranus Sun Sextile Mars Mercury Opposite Uranus Moon Sextile Neptune Mercury Square Jupiter Venus Square Mars Sun Square Jupiter Venus Quincunx Saturn Venus Quincunx Uranus Jupiter Square Saturn Jupiter Square Uranus Neptune Conjunct Pluto Sun Conjunct Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Rolf Scherenberg’s life journey.

Mercury Opposite Saturnorb: 0°

When Mercury is opposite Saturn in a Natal Chart, the person experiencing this opposition will usually be intelligent, but they may not always come across […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Uranusorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct Uranus in a chart can make a person seem highly energetic. They will have a side of them that is practical and grounded […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Marsorb: 1°

The Sun sextile Mars in a Natal Chart blends passion and focus. You are adventurous and bold. Your ego and ambitions are aligned. You enjoy […] Read more »

Mercury Opposite Uranusorb: 1°

Mercury opposite Uranus in a chart can create intellect and confusion. Someone with this aspect in their chart will be highly intelligent, but they won’t […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Neptuneorb: 2°

You are likely sensitive and intuitive if you’ve got the Moon sextile Neptune in your Natal Chart. Even if you aren’t the most loud or […] Read more »

Mercury Square Jupiterorb: 4°

Mercury square Jupiter in a Natal Chart can create the desire to succeed but an inability to follow through and do the necessary work. Someone […] Read more »

Sun Square Jupiterorb: 5°

The Sun square Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you stifle your unique and independent nature. You crave freedom, but you may be grandiose. You […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Saturnorb: 5°

Venus quincunx Saturn in a chart typically creates difficulty expressing emotions, especially feelings of love and affection for others. There is a strong desire for […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Uranusorb: 5°

Venus quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone might have commitment issues, even though they often want to have a relationship and eventually […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Plutoorb: 6°

Neptune conjunct Pluto in a chart typically creates the energy for intense evolution. This transformative aspect can connect someone to the unconscious mind and allow […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Plutoorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Pluto in your Natal Chart can make you powerful and authoritative. You can be a natural leader who uses your penetrating and […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Conjunct Eros Mercury Sextile Part of Fortune Mars Sextile Midheaven Saturn Trine Part of Fortune Uranus Trine Part of Fortune Neptune Trine Vertex Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Square Vesta Mars Sextile Eros Pluto Square Ascendant Jupiter Square Hygiea

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Rolf Scherenberg’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Conjunct Erosorb: 0°

The Sun conjunct Eros in your Natal Chart can make you open and transparent about your sexuality. You can be expressive and assertive about your […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Square North Node Chiron Square South Node Eros Conjunct Midheaven Black Moon Lilith Square Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Rolf Scherenberg’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.