In lieu of an abstract, here is a brief excerpt of the content:

I IDEOLOGY, FILM PRACTICE, AND THE MARKET rebel without a cause? China’s New Urban Generation and Postsocialist Filmmaking yingjin zhang I n this chapter I seek to remap the varied landscape of postsocialist Chinese ﬁlmmaking since the early 1990s by focusing on the new Urban Generation . In particular I undertake a close reading of Guan Hu’s (b. 1967) debut feature Dirt (Toufa luanle, 1994), a little-known ﬁlm that is symptomatic of this generation’s existential crisis. In addressing issues such as alienation, nostalgia, and rebellion, Dirt provides an entry point to explore this new generation’s formative years in the mid-1990s, which coincided with a phase of sea change in China’s recent history of postsocialism. At the beginning of the 1990s, Chinese ﬁlm production fell into three major categories. First, the state-subsidized and propagandist leitmotif ﬁlms (zhuxuanl ü dianying) were to become an increasingly visible presence. Second, the art ﬁlms (yishu dianying)—less avant-garde than a few years before—were reduced to a shrinking minority in quantity more than in quality. And third, the entertainment (yulepian) or commercial ﬁlms (shangye dianying), of numerous genres and varied production values, constituted a dominant majority . By the end of the decade, as exempliﬁed by the 1999 season celebrating the ﬁftieth anniversary of the People’s Republic of China, both art ﬁlms and entertainment ﬁlms moved closer to o≈cial ideology, while leitmotif ﬁlms 50 ∞ yingjin zhang gradually acquired commercial features and successfully recruited several leading art ﬁlm directors. The result is a new alliance of art, politics, and capital—a powerful new force that has redirected much of the creative energy to the market and at least temporarily compelled ‘‘underground’’ or ‘‘independent ’’ directors to try ﬁlmmaking inside the studio system.∞ As I elaborate in the conclusion to this essay, co-optation and complicity prevailed in the postsocialist ﬁlmmaking of the late 1990s, and the events of 2000–2002 have presented alternatives to an even newer group of ﬁlmmakers. postsocialism (and post-tiananmen): the varied landscape of filmmaking Schematically, in the current scholarship in English the following four concepts of postsocialism can be di√erentiated: postsocialism as a label of historical periodization; postsocialism as a structure of feelings; postsocialism as a set of aesthetic practices; and postsocialism as a regime of political economy . Paul Pickowicz, the ﬁrst scholar to connect postsocialism with Chinese cinema, takes for his work hints from Fredric Jameson’s theory of postmodernism and constructs a parallel system in modern China. If the ‘‘modern ’’ refers to ‘‘postfeudal, bourgeois culture that developed in capitalist societies in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe,’’ and the ‘‘modernist’’ refers to ‘‘avant-garde . . . culture that arose in the West in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,’’≤ then the modernist framework for a study of post-Mao China is neither useful nor productive but simply misleading, especially in light of the long history of delegitimizing modernism in socialist China. For the same reason, Pickowicz strongly resists the postmodernist framework on a historicist ground: ‘‘The postmodern framework refers primarily to postindustrial contexts. Postmodernism, that is, presupposes advanced capitalism.’’≥ In lieu of postmodernism, Pickowicz endorses the use of postsocialism as ‘‘the ideological counterpart of postmodernism.’’∂ For him, since ‘‘postsocialism presupposes socialism,’’ this new framework illuminates Chinese culture in the 1980s, which ‘‘contained the vestiges of late imperial culture, the remnants of the modern or bourgeois culture of the Republican era, the residue of traditional socialist culture, and elements of both modernism and postmodernism.’’∑ After proposing postsocialism as a periodizing label referring ‘‘in large part Rebel without a Cause? ∞ 51 to a negative, dystopian cultural condition that prevails in late socialist societies ,’’ Pickowicz further deﬁnes postsocialism in China as a ‘‘popular perception ’’ and ‘‘an alienated . . . mode of thought and behavior’’ that certainly predate the death of Mao.∏ Postsocialism, in this deﬁnition, appears to be a structure of feelings that remained repressed in the Mao years but has found vocal articulation in the post-Mao era, with alienation and disillusion as its two thematic foci. In a study of Huang Jianxin’s ﬁrst urban trilogy, Pickowicz regards Black Cannon Incident (Heipao shijian, 1985) as a postsocialist critique of the Leninist political system, Dislocation (Cuowei, 1986) as a parody that links postsocialism to a theater of the absurd, and Transmigration (Lunhui, 1988) as a story of individual resignation and anomie in the postsocialist society. Elsewhere, Pickowicz uses The Troubleshooters (Wanzhu, 1988; dir. Mi Jiashan) and The Price of Frenzy (Fengkuang de daijia, 1988...