When I first heard about The Bronze Buckaroo, the singing black cowboy, I envisioned someone who looked like Sherrif Bart (Clevon Little) from Blazing Saddles. I thought this individual would be a dark brown African American male but I was wrong. At first glance, I was certain that Herbert Jeffrey was white and I thought to myself "You have got to be kidding." This man was not bronze but what people considered to be "high yellow" which is what I have been called many times. The old saying that one drop of black blood deems a person as black was obviously true.

The actor's name was Herb Jeffries but he was sometimes billed as Herbert Jeffrey, or "Herbert Jeffries" Sensational Singing Cowboy."He was born Umberto Alexander Valentino on September 24, 1913 to a mother who was hailed from Ireland and a father who was "mixed race." Let us assume for a moment that Jeffries dad had one black parent and one white parent. Since his mother was born in Ireland this would indicate that the actor was three quarters white and only one-quarter black.

Not that any of that should make a difference as he was born in America and was American. The point I am making is that Jeffries should have been the least likely actor to be considered for a role as a "black" cowboy named "The Bronze Cowboy." A male actor whose complexion was darker would have been more appropriate. Back in the day African Americans were probably happy to see one of their own on the screen and not concerned with his skin color. Today we can look back in hindsight and discuss what could have, should have,and would have been.

Herb Jeffries was a talented man who graced both television and movie screens. He was also a popular music and jazz singer as well as a songwriter, who was known for his baritone voice. Sadly Jeffries name is not as well known as Gene Autry, Audie Murphy, or Roy Rogers simply based on his ethnicity. His being light-complexioned may have opened doors in the entertainment world but he has not received the recognition of other singing cowboys.

As mentioned earlier, Jeffries starred in low-budget "race" Western feature films that were aimed at black audiences. White movie goers would not have heard of him because his films were not mainstream. Jeffries starred in Harlem on the Prairie (1937), Two-Gun Man from Harlem (1938), Rhythm Rodeo (1938), The Bronze Buckaroo (1939) and Harlem Rides the Range (1939). He also had roles in several other television shows and movies.

For those who were not aware of it there were actual African American cowboys but the culture of their day and in subsequent years attempted to cancel them out. Thanks to the Internet we can now read the history on various issues that was not taught in American History books. There really were Bronze Cowboys as you will read about by clicking on the above link and taking note of the following photo.

Jeffries got his start in show business at the urging of Louis Armstrong, who encouraged him to move from Detroit to Chicago. He was married 4 times and had 5 children. One of his wives was the exotic dancer Tempest Storm. Jeffries is an unsung hero who was able to gain fame during a time when it was limited regarding people of color. This history cannot be changed but we can learn from it and grow. Jeffries and others of his day paved the way for many who are enjoying fame and fortune today without all the obstacles that once were in the way.