There are several categories into which Laurence Leamer's Fantastic: The Life of Arnold Schwarzenegger might fall: popular culture, the movie industry, American politics, the media in all its manifestations.

But the most accurate genre would probably be self-help. As with Benjamin Franklin, Arnold Schwarzenegger's life is a fascinating tutorial in how a working-class boy transformed himself through intelligence, observation, work, imagination and natural gifts into an internationally famous figure.

And since this is not an autobiography but an unauthorized biography, Fantastic also includes a fair helping of Schwarzenegger's faults. Among them: a periodically cruel sense of humor at other's expense, an unbridled appetite for psychological warfare, and a penchant for risqu gestures and comments, both sexual and political.

Fantastic, however, is neither a mean-spirited hatchet job nor a sugary puff piece. It is a compelling, three-dimensional look at a remarkable human being in terms of his energy, his ability to focus on goals, his long friendships and his astute manipulation of his own image as a global movie star and as a powerful politician.

Because of his previous books, The Kennedy Men,and, most notably, TheKennedy Women, Leamer was able to interview Schwarzenegger, wife Maria Shriver and many of their friends and associates.

Without getting too enmeshed in armchair psychiatry, Leamer examines the bodybuilder-turned-actor-turned-governor's difficult childhood in the small Austrian village of Thal. His policeman father was unusually harsh, an angry drunk who favored Arnold's older brother. His mother was devoted to her sons, and many credit Schwarzenegger's best qualities to her influence.

Fantastic traces Schwarzenegger's involvement with the insular, weird world of bodybuilding, first in Austria, then Munich, then in the USA, and chronicles his ability to find mentors among leaders in the sport.

With the 1977 documentary Pumping Iron, Schwarzenegger expanded his horizons beyond the gym to Hollywood. While he realized he would never become a great actor, his charisma and remarkable body enabled him to set his mind on becoming a star. The most interesting sections of Fantastic detail his work on films such as Conan the Barbarian, The Terminator series and Total Recall.

Leamer also describes Schwarzenegger's skillful accumulation of real estate and his close association with publicist Charlotte Parker. (The daughter of Holocaust survivors, Parker is but one of Schwarzenegger's many Jewish friends and colleagues.)

Another compelling aspect of the book looks at Schwarzenegger's relationship with women. He is clearly a man with appetites, one might say. But according to Leamer, Schwarzenegger's relationship with the devoted but high-strung Maria Shriver was and remains a love match.

However, Fantastic is not fantastic all the time. Leamer could have used a heavier editing job. There is simply too much information on bodybuilding, Sly Stallone, action flicks and California politics.

In the end, though, Fantastic is a chronicle of that most American of qualities: self-invention. It looks at the USA, with its considerable strengths and undeniable contradictions, through the prism of an Austrian carpenter's apprentice-turned-bodybuilder who arrived in Los Angeles with no money and a heavy accent in 1968 and now presides as the state's governor.

Truly fantastic.