Hey Sumo-lings,

This is Will from Rize. My cofounder, Macgill, and I started this project because we’re passionate about using data to continually improve and build healthier work habits. We've been working quite hard for the past year and we are super excited to share Rize with you.

The transition to working permanently from home has been a sudden change for a lot of people. Consequently, 89% of people in a Harvard Business Review study mentioned their work-life was getting worse, and 85% said their well-being had declined.

Our goal with Rize is to combat these effects and give you the insights to help you be more efficient with your time while working, improve your ability to focus, and prevent burnout—think of it as a fitness tracker, but for work. It's a tool we built specifically for you, not your company and not your manager.

Rize works as a time tracker and uses your activity on the computer to pull out a lot of beneficial information for you like how well-focused you are throughout your day, if you have too many meetings, or if you aren't taking enough breaks. Additionally, we have features that can help you gain back control like notifications to let you know if you're overworking, a daily email report, and a slick dashboard to see what distracts you throughout the day.

As part of the deal, we're offering a lifetime deal for only a fraction of our 1-year subscription cost. We'd love your feedback and support!

----

1. What do you hope to accomplish with Rize?

We feel a very strong personal connection to this project. The goal of continuously improving ourselves through quantifiable metrics and self-reflection is something that aligns deeply with our core values. We really hope to work on Rize for the long-term.

2. How does Rize track my activity?

Rize is a macOS app that automatically captures time spent on your desktop's focused window. For websites, it will connect and request the current URL to help categorize any time spent in browsers.

For meetings, Rize allows you to integrate your Google Calendar to capture time in meetings even if your focused window is not the video call. This is helpful if you are presenting or multi-tasking.

3. What platforms does Rize support?

Rize is currently only available for macOS (Mojave 10.14.6 or later) and automatically tracks your activity in Google Chrome, Safari, Brave Browser, and Microsoft Edge. Rize tracks time spent on Firefox but is unable to categorize any activity within the browser. Support for Windows and Linux will be coming soon.

4. How does Rize protect my data?

Your data is hosted on Amazon Web Services, protected both physically and electronically. Your data is only accessible through your personal password-protected account, and any data is encrypted at rest and in transit. Our database generates backups of our data at least twice a day for redundancy. Our team has engineering experience from top technology companies like Twitter and Periscope.