Introduction.

Hello, firstly thank you for checking out the thread. My names Jamie Moore and I'm the project lead for GoldenWolfGames current project Rize. Okay then lets give you a real brief introduction to Rize. Rize was originally planned to be a Single-Player and Multiplayer first person shooter, around a month and half ago our team took the decision to delay development on Rize and go back to the planning board. After countless long days discussing the direction we'd like to take Rize, we all agreed that our dream direction would be to create a Online Multiplayer only game. After more long days planning/thinking we came to the decision that our ideal route would be the Free to Play (F2P) route. Now let me tell you about our all new Free to Play Rize.

What is Rize?

Rize is a Free to Play (F2P) Online Multiplayer team objective based game which consists of online competitive and co-operative gameplay. Set in a post-apocalyptic world. The Competitive side of things consists of two survivor factions, The Marines and The Scars, who must battle it out to become the surviving faction. Based in a first person view point, the two conflicting teams must battle not only each other, but Zombie NPC’s (Non Playable Characters). Each survivor faction has a set of classes which has its own strong and weak points, but every class is a vital role to the game. As Rize will be a Multiplayer only game, we will be putting all of our efforts into making a fluent, unique and enjoyable experience for all players. We will be supporting Rize bringing out new features and content for several years, meaning Rize will become a more diverse world over time.

The background story of Rize.

Rise is based in the near future after an infection has killed off a vast amount of the human population. The government tried to hide it, but because the outbreak spread very quickly the government lost control and everyone was left to fend for themselves. Most of which became very weak because of a lack of a food source, which made them venture the streets to find any type of a food source, which led most to be out in the open and unable to fend for themselves against the Infected. Any survivors that survived through the first year did so by grouping together, Local church groups, friends, family or even any group they could find. Really in the end it didn't matter, the only thing what mattered was surviving. The key to surviving was the power in numbers, but remaining small enough to be safe.

At first all of the groups got on with their lives with no trouble using anything they could find to keep safe, trying to help each other’s groups survive through until the infestation was gone. But that was before the winter came, local food supplies dried up, water sources froze over and wild life migrated. That's when all the fighting between groups started, everyone blames another group for making the first move but since then they are all guilty of sabotaging and stealing from each other.

The harsh three years these groups have managed to survive together has built a sense of pride and loyalty within the groups and a deep sense of hatred towards one another. They no longer live side by side peacefully, given the chance they will slit each other's throats and leave their corpse naked in the streets.

Most of the survivors are now believed to have some sort of resistance to the infection. When the virus first became airborne it was still young and killed many victims without reanimation, so most survivors will survive small cuts and scrapes obtained during a confrontation with the infected. However the infected are extremely hungry and the ones that have survived are ruthless killers and have learned how to quickly incapacitate humans. More often than not if an infected is close enough to scrape you, you won’t!

Why have we chosen the Free to Play route?

The decision to go the Free to Play route was solely down to the fact that we wanted to create a Online Multiplayer only game. we're passionate about bringing Rize to the biggest audience possible and Free to Play opens up a bigger possible audience than a paid game. We understand there's alot of down sides to it but we're willing to take the risk, We're not in to developing games for the money, we're simply passionate about creating awesome games for the players to enjoy.

The Free to Play route also allows us to release a core game while frequently adding new features and content over time, it allows us to change parts of the game that the players don't like. We strive to turn Rize into a Unique and enjoyable game which thousands will play over and over again.

What are we looking for?

At this moment in time all of our positions will be Royalty based. We're hoping to turn your position into a fully paid position by the end of development. For you this will be a great opportunity to get on board a well organised Development Team, to gain that vital experience needed to further yourself in the Gaming Industry and to also help you become a better Developer.

Unreal Script Programmer

Character Modeller

3D Animator

Level Designer

3D Environment Artist

Concept art.

Please ask for concept art inside of your pm/email, as I'm having a bit of trouble uploading them to this thread.

How to apply.

Please Note: We will need to see your online portfolio/website or images of previous work.

As we are currently having some issues with receiving emails via our GoldenWolfGames email address we're only going to accept applicants via:

Skype: improdz

PM on this forum.

Reply on this thread.

FAQ (questions asked via this forum, Epic Forums and any other website Rize may be present on which we feel are relevant for everyone to read)

What will be included when Rize is launched?

We'll be adding information on this soon, so keep an eye out.

Are these position Paid?

At this moment in time they are not paid, they are Royalty based.

Will i need to sign a NDA?

Yes you will be required to sign a NDA.

Questions.

If you have any questions please post them in this thread and we'll be happy to answer them as soon as possible. If you'd rather do it in private then please PM me. All questions we feel are relevant will be added to FAQ section.

Thank you for your time.