Effortlessly optimize your time.

Rize's AI productivity coach analyzes your activity to advise you in real-time on when to focus, when to take breaks, and when you're getting off track.

Currently available on macOS and Windows.

Improve your focus.

Rize provides you with the tools to deepen your ability to focus including app & website blocking, focus music, a more flexible Pomodoro timer, and in-depth, personalized metrics.

Drill down into the quality of your focus time to see how much you are context switching and which apps or websites are most distracting.

Who is Rize for?

Rize is for anyone who greatly values their time and wants to improve their overall productivity. Some use cases include:

Marketing managers who need to manage their time between multiple concurrent projects, teams, and deadlines.

Software developers and designers who need to prioritize focus time and minimize distractions to deliver high quality work.

Startup founders and entrepreneurs who need to validate how they spend their time so that they are prioritizing the right things.

How does Rize track my activity?

Rize is a macOS and Windows app that automatically captures time spent on your desktop's focused window. For websites, it will connect and request the current url to help categorize any time spent in browsers.

For meetings, Rize allows you to integrate your Google or Outlook Calendar to capture time in meetings even if your focused window is not the video call. This is helpful if you are presenting or multi-tasking.

What platforms does Rize support?

Rize is currently available for macOS (Mojave 10.14.6 or later) and Windows (Windows 10 or later). Support for Linux will be coming soon.

On macOS, Rize supports all major browsers including Google Chrome, Safari, Brave Browser, Microsoft Edge, Arc, SigmaOS, Mighty and many more.

Rize tracks time spent on unsupported browsers, but is unable to categorize any activity by URL within the browser.

How does Rize protect my data?

Your data is hosted on Amazon Web Services, protected both physically and electronically. Your data is only accessible through your personal password-protected account, and any data is encrypted at rest and in transit. Our database generates backups of our data at least twice a day for redundancy.

Our team has engineering experience from top technology companies like Twitter and Periscope. Security is not an afterthought for us; we design, develop, and ship code with security as a top consideration.

How much does Rize cost?

In addition to the free tier, the paid tier of Rize costs $9.99 per month when billed annually and $16.99 per month when billed monthly. Both include a 7-day free trial with full access to the product. You can cancel your account at any time.

What happens when I stop paying for my subscription?

If you decide to stop paying for Rize, you can retain access to your account and export past data. However, any new activity going forward will not be tracked.

Who is building Rize?

Rize was created by Will Goto and Macgill Davis. Together, they previously cofounded and ran a VC-backed startup for 3 years with over $3.1 million in funding.

Will has a background in front-end software engineering and design with work experience at Twitter, Periscope, and numerous early stage startups.

Macgill focuses primarily on back-end software engineering with work experience at Twitter and Peer. Previously, he cofounded and sold a company called GuideHire in Boston.

What do you hope to accomplish?

We aim to build the first ever "fitness app for your productivity." A tool that enables you to your productivity and focus, so you can achieve more in less time.

‍

We feel a very strong personal connection to this project. The goal of continuously improving ourselves through quantifiable metrics and self-reflection is something that aligns deeply with our core values. We really hope to work on Rize for the long-term.

Do you have a referral program?

Yes. After signing up, you can share your referral code to give your friends one free month of Rize. You will also receive one free month of Rize for each friend that becomes a subscriber.

For those with considerable audiences, we have an ambassador program where you can earn 20% of any recurring subscription payments from your referrals.