Rize Reviews

Rize Reviews

5.0 out of 5 stars. 2 Reviews and Ratings Write a Review

Get Quote

Need help deciding?

Talk to one of our software experts for free. They will help you select the best software for your business.

Get A Quote

First Name *

Last Name *

Business E-mail *

z

Phone *

Company *

Job Title *

I understand by clicking on "GET QUOTE" below I am agreeing to the Slashdot Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy which describe how we use and share your data. I agree to receive quotes and related information from Slashdot.org and our partners via phone calls and e-mail to the contact information I entered above. I understand that I can withdraw my consent at anytime. Please refer to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy or Contact Us for more details.

JavaScript is required for this form.

Submitting...

Alternatives

Rize Description

Rize is a service that does everything for you to get positive reviews and attract more customers. Rize provides custom review response writing services to help businesses save time and effort. This tool allows you to quickly solicit feedback from customers via email, text message or in-store kiosk. You can even print "review us" cards! The tool integrates seamlessly with Every review site and focuses on sites that are most important to your business and your industry. Online reviews are critical for your business' online reputation, regardless of whether you receive positive or adverse brand feedback. Rize Review's review service allows you to show search engines and your target audience that you are committed to customer satisfaction. It is done by real humans with years of experience in online reputation management. Customers will trust you if it is easy. Are you ready to be a leader in your industry? Register now for a risk-free trial to manage your online reputation.

Pricing

Pricing Starts At:

$199/month

Pricing Information:

For the next 30 days we're offering a 1 Month Free Trial

Free Trial:

Yes

Integrations

Company Details

Company:

Rize Reviews

Year Founded:

2017

Headquarters:

United States

Website:

rizereviews.com

Update This Listing

Recommended Products

All-in-one Student &amp; Learning Management System

More than a Student Information and Learning Management System to the Education life cycle.

A robust student and learning management system offering a holistic approach to education. Classter is a modular, cloud-based management solution that provides all key features required for the effective administration of any academic institution: K12, University and Academies!

Classter is a global pioneer in the field of Education Technology, offering an all-in-one Cloud-based SaaS that bundles: Student Information System (SIS), School Management System (SMS) & Learning Management System (LMS). The platform offers an end-to-end and modular information management solution that can be used by any educational institution. Fully integrated with Office 365, Google G-Suite and other 3rd party systems: from ERP and government databases to SMS services and BI tools. More than 200 academic institutions from all educational stages trust Classter to bring their people, operations and data together in one place.

Product Details

Platforms

SaaS

Type of Training

Documentation

Live Online

Webinars

In Person

Customer Support

Phone Support

Rize Features and Options

Reputation Management Software

Campaign Management

Gamification

Response Management

Review Generation

Review Monitoring

Sentiment Analysis

Social Media Metrics

Social Media Monitoring

White Label

Review Management Software

Campaign Management

Dashboard

Negative Feedback Management

Response Management

Review Monitoring

Review Notification

Review Request

Sentiment Analysis

Social Sharing

White Label

Customer Experience Software

Action Management

Analytics

Customer Segmentation

Dashboard

Feedback Management

Knowledge Management

Multi-Channel Collection

Sentiment Analysis

Survey Management

Text Analysis

Trend Analysis

Local Marketing Software

Advertising Management

CRM

Email Marketing

Feedback Management

Live Chat

NAP Management (Name/Address/Phone)

Online Listings Management

PR Management

Reporting / Analytics

Review Management

SEO Management

Social Media Management

Store Locator

Website Management

Brand Management Software

Approval Process Control

Artwork Management

Asset Management

Change Management

Fulfillment Distribution

Project Management

Rize Lists

Rize User Reviews

Write a Review

Features

Design

Ease

Pricing

Support

Likelihood to Recommend to Others

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Rize rocks

Summary: Overall Rize is really cool. They know that reviews are instrumental in getting your business out there. They are a real help.

Positive: I like that Rize integrates with every review software that there is. It's absolutely an amazing tool to have. Rize is truly innovative.

Negative: Theres nothing to dislike about Rize. They don't discriminate. Whether the reviews are positive or negative they are posted.

Read More...

Features

Design

Ease

Pricing

Support

Likelihood to Recommend to Others

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Great product and easy to use

Summary: We have been using this product for our company as well as for many of our clients and it works great and has helped us and our client greatly increase our reviews across the internet.

Positive: Great product and easy to use for us and our clients. It is very easy to setup and then add emails to submit for reviews to our clients.

Negative: The only con is that sometimes the emails that get sent out from the system end up in Spam.

Read More...