Heart of Midlothian live scores, players, season schedule and today’s results are available on Sofascore.

Heart of Midlothian next match

Heart of Midlothian will play the next match against Viktoria Plzeň on Aug 22, 2024, 5:00:00 PM UTC in UEFA Europa League.

When the match starts, you will be able to follow Viktoria Plzeň vs Heart of Midlothian live score, standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics.

We may have video highlights with goals and news for some Heart of Midlothian matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.

Heart of Midlothian previous match

Heart of Midlothian previous match was against Falkirk FC in Scottish League Cup, the match ended with result 2 - 0 (Falkirk FC won the match).

Heart of Midlothian fixtures tab is showing the last 100 football matches with statistics and win/draw/lose icons.

There are also all Heart of Midlothian scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.

Heart of Midlothian performance and form graph is a Sofascore unique algorithm that we are generating from the team's last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own knowledge.

This graph may help predict future Heart of Midlothian matches.

Current Heart of Midlothian players

Forward: Lawrence Shankland, Kenneth Vargas, Yutaro Oda, Blair Spittal, Liam Boyce, Barrie McKay, Alan Forrest, Musa Drammeh, James Wilson Midfielder: Yan Dhanda, Cameron Devlin, Beni Baningime, Malachi Boateng, Calem Nieuwenhof, Jorge Grant, James Penrice, Macaulay Tait, Finlay Pollock Defender: Andrés Salazar, Kye Rowles, Gerald Taylor, Nathaniel Atkinson, Daniel Oyegoke, Stephen Kingsley, Frankie Kent, Craig Halkett Goalkeeper: Zander Clark, Craig Gordon, Ryan Fulton

The current Heart of Midlothian roster, stats and player performance can be found on this page.

There are also statistics for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals scored, number of cards and much more.

Heart of Midlothian top scorers list is updated live during every match.

You can click on players from the roster above and see available personal information such as nationality, date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc.