David Brin is a scientist, tech speaker/consultant, and author. His novels about our survival and opportunities in the near future include EARTH and Existence. A film by Kevin Costner was based on his book, The Postman. His 16 novels, including NY Times Bestsellers and Hugo Award winners, have been translated into more than twenty languages. EARTH foreshadowed global warming, cyberwarfare and the world wide web.

Speaking and advising about how science, technology and evolving values will affect our onrushing future, David has keynoted for IBM, Google, GE, Procter & Gamble, SAP, Microsoft, Qualcomm, Price-Waterhouse, the Mauldin Group and Casey Research, all the way to think-tanks, Homeland Security and the CIA. An advisor to NASA's Innovative & Advanced Concepts program, David appears frequently on shows such as Nova and The Universe and Life After People. His first non-fiction book, The Transparent Society: Will Technology Make Us Choose Between Freedom and Privacy? , won the Freedom of Speech Award of the American Library Association. His second, Vivid Tomorrows: Science Fiction and Hollywood (2021), explores the messages and clichés and memes that often go unnoticed, but help society shift under the influence of S.F. films.

With degrees from Caltech and the University of California-San Diego, Dr. Brin serves on advisory panels ranging from astronomy, NASA innovative concepts, nanotech, and SETI to national defense and technological ethics.

Visit his website davidbrin.com for more information.

Brin achieved international note with his famed book The Transparent Society: Will Technology Make Us Choose Between Privacy and Freedom? Hence David is often asked to speak of consult on matters security, privacy and the age of intrusive surveillance in our lives. As cameras get smaller, cheaper and more mobile — and new threats crowd in all around — is Big Brother on the horizon? Or will new technologies empower private citizens in unexpected ways? Against the popular trend of panic and secrecy, Brin urges calm, candor and openness, all the way to testifying in the U.S. Senate.

Because he has achieved success in several arts and sciences, David Brin is often asked how to spot opportunities and trends, and best take advantage of them... plus how to catch the mistakes we always kick ourselves for missing. He points out some of the ways we're already doing this... and a few tricks to enhance the trend. He also provides groups with Corporate Creativity Exercises designed to spur creative thinking, by challenging CTOs and others to work together in an ad hoc team, analyzing a major problem and fleshing out a solution in just 48 hours.