Though I would argue that the later film is far superior, Without Pity and Black Gravel have a lot in common terms of their portrayals of post-WWII Europe. Both films depict worlds full of Americans and the English language, shot through with desperation, and built upon an ever-shifting foundation of criminality. Women are either prostitutes or about to become them, servicemen are often deserters who want nothing more than to go home, and those with the most power are nothing more than the most successful criminals (for the moment). As in Black Gravel, no one in Without Pity is happy or safe, and only a precious few are foolish enough to believe in their ability to survive, let alone escape.…

Part of the Composed by Nino Rota collection.

Django Reinhardt took his band to Milan in late 1948 on the promise of a two month contract at the Astoria nightclub. Once in Milan Django was just as likely to play poker than guitar. Also: he didn’t always bring his guitar to the gig. The 2 month gig evaporated in 11 days and the band moved onto Rome.

In Rome they literally stumbled into the Jicky Club and immediately turned it into the hottest ticket in town. Movie stars, Vatican priests, models, everybody lined up to see the Romani jazz sensation set the night on fire.

The reverberations in the Italian music industry of Django and his star violinist Stephan Grappelli’s…

Any film that's about pure love being tainted by a cruel world has me in the chokehold. There is nothing that gets me on the edge of my seat fighting back tears as two lovers who desperately want to be together but the outside world is opposed to their love.

It's a recently executed melodramatic tragedy. Filled with noir-style lighting, heavy contrast with lights and shadows, and obscuring faces, the outside world is so dark and menacing as opposed to the internal, romantic world between our two leads.

The usage of the song Brazil helps heighten the sense of escapism. To leave the harsh fascist world behind so that you can feel your basic human emotions. In the scene with…