Alternative dispute resolution is an increasingly popular form of case resolution in the legal community. The Alternative Dispute Resolution Society concentrates mainly on mediation and provides multiple opportunities for students to become involved with and learn about the mediation process. Each year the ADR Society hosts a Representation in Mediation Competition, which allows students to enhance their skills and provides them with an opportunity to participate in mediation.

The American Constitution Society for Law and Policy (ACS) promotes the vitality of the U.S. Constitution and the fundamental values it expresses: individual rights and liberties, genuine equality, access to justice, democracy, and the rule of law. ACS chapters offer platforms for debate and discussion about both enduring principles and the issues of the day, as well as provide opportunities for networking, mentoring and organizing around matters of both local and national significance. Every year ACS holds a national convention in DC and provides scholarships to members of the student chapters. Past speakers including Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, former Senator Wendy Davis, and former Attorney General Eric Holder.

The Asian Law Students Association (ALSA) supports students of Asian descent, facilitates Asian law students’ interaction in the Law School community and provides a forum for discussions on legal issues concerning Asians. ALSA hosts regular academic and social events of Asian interest for its members. The organization also hosts events to provide Asian students with a support network of resources to help and provide significant guidance in acing their career path in the legal fraternity.

The Black Law Students Association (BLSA) is a professional, nationally affiliated organization of black law students dedicated to improving opportunities and diversity in legal education. At the University at Buffalo School of Law chapter of BLSA, our goal is to articulate and promote the educational, professional, political and social needs of our black law students while also giving back to our communities. [Read more]

The purpose of the Buffalo Health Law Society is to encourage medical students and law students to explore the intersection of medical and legal issues to facilitate interprofessional collaboration and holistic patient care. The Buffalo Health Law Society will provide opportunities for the entire JSMBS and UB Law student bodies to cultivate an understanding of the synergistic nature of law and medicine and provide tangible examples of how doctors and lawyers can collaborate and use their collective knowledge to advance health justice.

The Buffalo Human Rights Law Review (BHRLR) focuses on the interdisciplinary study of human rights, both on the international and domestic fronts. Founded in 1994 as the Buffalo Journal of International Law, the BHRLR was renamed in 1997 to better reflect the journal's projects and relationship to the International Law Concentration and the Buffalo Human Rights Center.

The BHRLR publishes annually in the Spring. Together with the related Buffalo Human Rights Center, The Baldy Center for Law and Social Policy, and the Jessup International Moot Court competition teams, the BHRLR seeks to unite professionals, students, legal practitioners, policymakers, advocates, and cross-disciplinary scholars, and to encourage thereby the development and practical application of human rights law. [Read more]

The Buffalo Law Review, published since 1951, publishes 5 issues per year, with each issue containing articles from scholars, practitioners, and judges. The Law Review also publishes member-written pieces on contemporary legal issues.

The Buffalo Law Review prides itself on maintaining the highest level of integrity and objectivity in its selection process. Admission to the Law Review is open to the entire student body. Every year 28 to 32 new members are selected. Half of the students are selected based on first-year grades, Casenote scores, and a Diversity Statement. Admission for the other half is based solely on a combination of Casenote score and the Diversity Statement. Members may also be added from students transferring to the School of Law based on Casenote score and the Diversity Statement. [Read more]

The Buffalo Sports & Entertainment Law Society (BSELS) is a community of law students, alumni, faculty and friends who are interested in sports and entertainment law in all of its many facets. To that end, they have created a student group as well as an online forum to provide a space for publication of articles addressing sports and entertainment law topics, discussion of current issues and most importantly, facilitation of interaction among our growing community of sports and entertainment law enthusiasts.

The purpose of the DEI Council shall be to promote diversity, equity, inclusion, and belonging among law students, as well as transparency within the administration and its procedures at the University at Buffalo School of Law. The DEI Council aims to ensure all diverse law students not only have a presence within the law school community, but to ensure that students truly feel a part of the law school community where their voices are valued and where they can receive the support necessary to succeed.

The Domestic Violence Task Force strives to raise awareness and educate students, Law School staff and community members about domestic violence through various activities such as panel nights and information dissemination at events. Our organization holds an annual "Dress for What's Next" spring event for survivors of domestic violence. It is a relaxing day for the women filled with shopping, makeup lessons, resume drafting and practice interviews. This empowering day encourages domestic violence survivors to remember their worth and improve their self-esteem.

First-Generation Law Students Association (FGLSA) offers support to students who identify as first-generation law students. This includes law students who are the first in their family to attend college or first to attend professional school. We strive to provide a safe and inclusive community for UB Law students who lack access to generational knowledge of the legal field. We aim to facilitate discussions surrounding common questions first-generation students may have through workshops and events designed and led by our fellow FGLSA peers. More than anything, FGLSA aims to show you, a first-generation law student, that there are others who have felt the same things you are feeling and found success in law school. We are a community dedicated to support each other in life and career.

The Intellectual Property Law Society (IPLS) offers interested law students a forum in which to discuss issues arising in the field of intellectual property law, to learn more about the practice of IP law, and to engage with faculty and attorneys familiar with this specialized field. In addition to organizing both speaking and networking events for law students on campus, IPLS also strives to connect law students with the intellectual property legal community WNY area by promoting off-campus events related to IP. No science or technical background required! IP law encompasses copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets in addition to patents. IPLS is a great opportunity for law students to pursue their interests beyond the classroom and interact with their like-minded students.

The International Law Society at the University at Buffalo is a student organization that promotes the study of international law; fosters relationships between students, practitioners, and scholars; and facilitates student awareness in areas of global and legal significance. As the world becomes increasingly interconnected, international law will be progressively intertwined in countries' laws. ILS exposes law students to the world of international law and its effects.

The Labor and Employment Law Society (LELS) is a student-operated organization with additional support coming from staff, as well as alumni of the University at Buffalo School of Law. The goal of LELS is to promote knowledge, interest and awareness in labor and employment law and its relevant subfields through student-run events and meetings.

The Latin American Law Students Association (LALSA) supports a wide variety of members, including but not limited to Latino/a law students. LALSA is committed to the advancement of minorities in the legal profession, especially Latinos. Minority representation in the legal profession has been a social concern for years and the shortage of Latino lawyers continues to be grave. LALSA seeks to create a local network for students of color, a partnership between the legal community and the Latin community, and the academic success of its members. We welcome students of all backgrounds to help create a more diverse forum and to integrate individuals with different perspectives into the conversation. Most importantly, LALSA is dedicated to creating a support group for those who take interest in uplifting diversity initiatives. [Read more]

The Law & Business Student Association (LBA) will provide a platform for scholarship and professional development for law students interested in working at the intersection of law and business issues, whether in corporate law firms, academia, regulatory agencies, and in-house legal departments of corporations. The LBA will seek to achieve this mission by among others, keying into the extant Law and Business offerings of the Law School, particularly the NYC Finance Program and the JD/MBA offering.

LSDN is dedicated to the education of neurotypical individuals and supporting those who have visible and invisible disabilities. This organization serves to be a safe place to discuss how to be the best student (and lawyer) you can be while managing your neurodivergencies and disabilities. It can be difficult to know when to disclose a disability, or how to disclose. And so, our organization strives to help law students navigate the workforce and classroom by creating a community of both lawyers and students who have both invisible and visible disabilities.

The Military Law and Veterans Association (MLVA) is a student-led organization that provides a forum for discussion on important military, veteran affairs, and national security issues. MLVA hosts a variety of events throughout the year, including guest lectures, workshops, and networking events. These events bring together students, faculty, and military experts to share their perspectives and insights on a wide range of topics. The organization provides students with the opportunity to learn from experts in the field, network with professionals, and develop their own knowledge and skills.

As a student chapter of the Animal Legal Defense Fund, SALDF's purpose is to educate the law school and surrounding community about forms of institutionalized animal abuse and engage in projects that combat that abuse. SALDF is equally dedicated to protecting the lives and advancing the interest of animals through the legal system and expanding the field of animal law.

Contact: law-saldf@buffalo.edu