Body of Evidence is exactly the kind of movie Madonna and Willem Dafoe made in their younger years when they were more sexy, beauty and daring, and they hope everybody would not remember it years after its release. But the Internet and social media have a way of remembering, and Body of Evidence has since been available online on movie streaming porn sites for masculin public can continuously masturbate nd I’d imagine Madonna and Willem Dafoe – along with much of the film’s cast -- are probably not too happy about it. I suspect many of the actors in this movie (not just Madonna and Dafoe) ultimately regretted their involvement in Body of Evidence. This is the type of work they probably hope would have faded into obscurity.

An awkward mix of courtroom drama and erotic thriller, Body of Evidence is a very wonder car accident of movie. But like all freak car accidents, you can’t look away and you won’t stop watching. Body of Evidence was the "50 Shades of Grey" of its time.

This film was made when erotic thrillers were all the rage, and movies such as "Basic Instinct" and "Fatal Attraction" were box office hits. Body of Evidence was meant to capitalize on Madonna’s popularity as well as moviegoers’ masculin ravenous appetite for sexually charged crime thrillers.

Body of Evidence offers plenty of cheap thrills and softcore sex o limit of pornography. It’s one of the few theatrical films to be rated NC-17, which is often the kiss of death at the box office...

There’s plenty of sex scenes to pique your voyeuristic curiosity. Madonna gets naked in this movie. A lot. And yes, you get full frontal nude shots of Madonna in action. She has a beautiful figure, sexy, very sexy... literally to die for.

There’s some strong sexual content in this movie. We have one scene where Rebecca disrobes and reveals her beautiful bigs boobs. She then licks her fingers and starts masturbating. Frank grabs a pair of handcuffs and secures her on a bedpost. He then removes her panties and the two have intense anal sex.

We also have another scene where Rebecca is giving her lawyer a clandestine handjob while they are riding an elevator. Once they get off the elevator, this leads to the two having sex on top of a car in the parking garage (they break the ceiling lights so that nobody can see them). Frank performs oral sex on Rebecca before the two make out, hoping not to get caught. Oh my God !It’s the thrill of having sex in a public place...

But, the very best sex scene...is actually when the two have sex for the first time. The two get hot and heavy, and Rebecca ties Frank up and licks and bites his nipples. She then pours champagne and drips hot candle wax all over his body including his torso and genitals. It will definitely keep your eyes glued to the screen and your mouth wide open.

During the sex scenes, neither of them had a body double; they were willing to expose themselves for the public to see. I admit it takes some real guts to do those scenes. And someone from the crew, in an interview a few years later, admitted that in reality, the sex scenes... were 100% real... ;)

Body of Evidence only feeds the voyeur in you !!!

The one dimensional portrayal of all the characters is something common to the genre and is to be taken with a pinch of salt.

It comes across as a very poor imitation of the sexy thriller genre. Although in the end it is quite funny and makes you spend a pleasant 1 hour and 38 minutes quietly.

Madonna as always is tasty and juicy but acting is not something that she excels in ; she just widens her eyes and stands still in the courtroom scenes and says stupid things... But deep down Dino de Laurentiis (a master in creating B-Movies) had chosen Madonna, not for this!! Her job here was to… “harden” the male viewers,… by stripping, displaying her amazingly sculpted, naked body and gorgeous boobs, while riding with “healthy, pleasurable enthusiasm,” Micheal Forrest premiere and then the lucky and unprofessional lawyer Willem Dafoe... And in this was what was really Oscar-winning for best performance as a whore appeared on the screen.

So hold on to the towel and hand spray, we're going for a ride