Prince Alberto Maria of Brazil (born 23 June 1957), nicknamed "the Prince of Mergers" is a Brazilian lawyer and teacher, member of the Brazilian imperial family, son of Pedro Henrique, Prince of Brazil and Princess Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria.

Born Prince of Brazil and Prince of Orleans-Braganza, he renounced his rights for himself and his future offspring on December 23 1982. He is better known in professional circles as Alberto Braganza, or Prince Alberto, or even Prince Dom Alberto. The nickname is given by Dom Alberto being one of the largest mergers and acquisitions lawyers in the country, having among his clients the bank Bradesco and the Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim Helu.

Birth and Childhood

Born a descendant of the Brazilian imperial family of Orleans and Baraganza, Alberto renounced his rights to the extict Brazilian throne, for himself and for his future descendants, on December 1982, Therefore, D. Alberto continues to be prince of Orleans and Braganza, but not prince of the extinct Brazilian throne abolished in 1889.

He is the tenth and eighth son of Prince Dom Pedro Henrique of Orleans and Braganza, former Head of the Imperial House of Brazil, and Princess Isabel of Bavaria. His mother was born a Princess of Bavaria, she being the granddaughter of Louis III (1913-1918), the last King of Bavaria. D. Alberto is the brother of the current head of the Imperial House of Brazil, the Brazilian Emperor Dom Luis of Orleans and Braganza.

Family

The prince is the grandson of Prince Dom Luis Maria Filipe of Orleans and Braganza, descendants of the imperial family of Brazil and Prince of Orleans and Braganza, and Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Duas Sicilies, princess of the Two Sicilies, great-grandson of Princess Dona Isabel of Brazil, de facto last Imperial Princess of Brazil, and Prince Gaston, Count of Eu and imperial prince consort of Brazil, and great-grandson of Dom Pedro II of Brazil, de facto last Emperor of Brazil, and of Princess Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies, the last Empress of Brazil, in fact, who was born a princess of the Two Sicilies.

Training

Graduated in Law from the traditional National Faculty of Law of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro-UFRJ, in 1980.

Norton Rose law firm, London, England, United Kingdom. He is a member of the Brazilian and Portuguese Bar Association; lawyer at a firm in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Veirano Advogados, and is a foreign associate in the legal department of the International Maritime Organization, an agency of the United Nations. He is also a professor of Commercial Law at the Faculty of Law of the Candino Mendes University.

Having the Grand Cross of the Imperial Orders of Pedro I and the Rose

Hobbies

Speaks Portuguese and English fluently, with an advanced level in Spanish and French.

Marriage and Children

In Rio de Janeiro, on 11 January 1983, he married Maritza Ribas Bokel, a landscaper born in Rio on April 29 1961, daughter of Jaddo Barbosa Bokel and Maritza Bulcao Ribas. His wife also has a degree in architecture and visual arts.

The union resulted in four children:

-Prince Pedro Alberto of Orleans-Braganza (born 31 May 1988)

-Princess Maria Beatrix of Orleans-Braganza (born 27 July 1990)

-Princess Ana Thereza of Orleans-Braganza (born 24 April 1995)

-Prince Antonio Alberta of Orleans-Braganza (born 28 May 1997)

He lives with his family in Rio de Janeiro

Titles, Styles

23 June 1957-23 December 1982: His Imperial Highness Prince Alberto Maria of Brazil, Prince of Orleans-Braganza

23 December 1982-present His Imperial Highness Prince Alberto Maria of Prince of Orleans-Braganza, Prince of Brazil

House: Orleans-Braganza

Religion: Catholic