Strictly Come Dancing star Greg Wise is well known for being married to Oscar-winning actress Emma Thompson.

They met on the set of their 1995 film Sense and Sensibility, but were both in relationships so their bond didn't progress past friendship.

In an incredibly complicated love square of our finest British actors, Emma was married to Kenneth Branagh - who was rumoured to have had an affair with Helena Bonham-Carter, leading to their divorce.

Meanwhile, Greg was in a relationship with Titanic actress Kate Winslet.

A psychic friend had told him he would meet his wife on the set of his first big film - and he presumed this must have been about Kate, who played Emma's sister.

"Everyone else on the film set was married," he explained to the Express.

"So I thought, 'It has to be Winslet.' I asked her out. We went to Glastonbury festival together. But it was the wrong call."

Do you enjoy reading about celebrities? Sign up for all the best celeb news from the Mirror here .

It was actually Kate who then pointed out what fantastic chemistry Greg had with Emma.

"She pointed out that we were right for each other and told me that Emma’s marriage was over," he said.

Greg and Emma tied the knot in 2003, while Kate has been married to her third husband Edward Abel Smith since 2012, and the trio are thought to still be good friends despite their unusual situation.

In 1999, Emma and Greg welcomed daughter Gaia, and four years later they informally adopted Tindyebwa Agaba, a Rwandan orphan and former child soldier.

Tindyebwa graduated with two degrees and speak eight languages, and he is now a humanitarian who works with a specialist arm of the Metropolitan Police, helping refugees just like him.

Greg said of the Met Police role: "Tindy is just about to start a job there and he’s doing some very interesting things for them – an adjunct of the work he was doing in war zones.

"Helping struggling people, working with victims of trafficking and radicalisation… that kind of thing.

"It’s a very rewarding thing to have happened."

Tindy's biological father died of AIDs when he was just nine, and when he was 12, soldiers with machine guns stormed his village to kidnap its children.

He was rounded up along with nine other children and marched across unfamiliar bush for days.

His next memory is of arriving at a prison camp where he would remain for three years – to be radicalised, brainwashed and trained as a child soldier.

Aged 16, having finally escaped Rwanda, thanks to the kindness of a charity worker at Care International, he boarded a flight for London to claim asylum.

But he ended up living a difficult life, sleeping rough on the streets around London’s Trafalgar Square.

He met Emma when she offered him help at a Refugee Council event, before tracking him down again and inviting him round for a Christmas Eve dinner.

That dinner turned into regular stays at her £15million house in West Hampstead, North London, where he was given his own room, and that turned to whole weekends, and whole weeks.

In the end, Emma and Greg adopted him "informally" – as by then, Tindy was enough to make his own legal decisions, and he moved in with the family permanently.

Speaking about the reasons they decided to informally adopt Tindy, Emma has previously said: "Sometimes being friends is not enough.

"You need family. I think we don’t talk enough about the happiness that it gives you to find new connections with strangers and people who aren’t familiar to you."

Speaking ahead of his Strictly debut, Greg explained he has a touching reason for taking part - his sister Clare, who died of cancer in 2016, aged 51.

"I was asked and I thought, 'No, I absolutely can’t do it'," Greg said during a press webinar.

"And then I thought about it. Almost exactly five years to the day my sister died will be the first day we do our routines on this and my sis was a real disco diva.

"She was the dancer in the family and she left this world in a glitterball coffin, and as this show is all glittery and diva-y and disco-y, I thought I had to do it for her."

Do you have a story to share? Email webfeatures@trinitymirror.com