Home Deals Country State/Province City Photo Article Hotspots

Currency Timezone Airport Airline

Travel > States/Provinces

Sarawak in Malaysia - Basic Information

Basic facts and profile information about Sarawak in Malaysia: city name, UN code, country, latitude, longitude, altitude, time zone, etc.

Name: Sarawak Subdivision Name: State ISO 3166-2 Code: 13 - Subdivision code assigned in ISO 3166-2. Cities:Ba Kelalan

Batu Lintang, Sarawak

Long Akah

Long Banga

Mulu

Complete list of cities in this state/province. Country: Malaysia - Country or territory where this city is located.

MY - ISO2 code of the country. Currency: RM - MYR (Malaysian Ringgit) - Currency used in this country. Telephone Code: +60 - Telephone dialing in code for this country.

Related Topics

Search State/Province Database by Key Word

Looking for the list of provinces in Canada? Use our search engine on the ISO 3166-2 database which contrains over 4,400 entries of states, provinces, districts or other subdivisions of all countries in the world.

Time Zones and World Clock - Current local date and time of world's major cities and time zone information.

Top Travel Deals - Hand-selected top travel deals available from the Hotwire Group's Travel Ticker service.

Travel Hotspots - Best places in the world to visit: Hawaii, Rome, Paris...

Travel Articles - Collection of travel articles, guides, and tips.

Currency Exchanges - Free currency converter using latest foreign exchange (forex) market rates.

Travel Photo Gallery - Photographs taken on travels to most beautiful places around the world like Grand Canyon, Hawaii.

Countries of the World - Currencies, time zones and phone codes of all countries and territories.

States/Provinces of All Countries - Basic information for states or provinces of all countries or territories.

Cities Around the World - Basic information for over 80,000 cities around the world with search interface .

Airports Around the World - Airport names and codes for over 6,600 airports around the world with search interface.

Airlines Around the World - Airline names and codes for over 6,200 airlines around the world with search interface.