The Walt Disney Company said on Thursday that it had bought Tapulous, a start-up company that makes music-based games for the iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch.

Tapulous, based in Palo Alto, Calif., is one of the more successful companies creating games for Apple’s touch-screen mobile devices.

With the number of downloads through Apple’s App Store topping five billion, many companies see mobile applications as a promising business. Big companies like IAC/InterActiveCorp, Amazon.com and now Disney have bought start-ups that have track records in the market.

“We have been very successful on the iPhone,” said Bart Decrem, chief executive and co-founder of Tapulous. “We have been thinking, ‘How do we position ourselves to succeed?’ And after several conversations with Disney, we could see that we have a shared vision of the future and the iPhone as a mobile platform.”

Disney said Mr. Decrem and Andrew Lacy, the co-founder and chief operating officer of Tapulous, would lead its mobile business. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.

“Tapulous is going to be at the center of Disney’s mobile strategy,” Mr. Decrem said.

The company’s flagship game, Tap Tap Revenge, which is patterned after popular music rhythm games like Rock Band, challenges players to keep up with colored orbs as they zoom past to the beat of the music. The game was released free in 2008 and quickly climbed the charts of Apple’s application store.

That prompted the company to begin releasing games with packages of tunes by popular musicians. For example, players can buy a set of songs by the teenage star Justin Bieber or Lady Gaga for $3.99. The success of those series helped push Tapulous into profitability and amass more than 30 million users, according to the company.

Steve Wadsworth, president of Disney Interactive Media Group, said that for the time being Tapulous would continue to focus on music rhythm games, “although we will certainly want to look for opportunities to leverage the assets that Disney has.”

News of the deal was first reported by the blog TechCrunch.

The sale to Disney is another indication of the staying power of the iPhone and iPod Touch as powerful gaming devices, said Charles S. Golvin, an analyst with Forrester Research.

“The iPhone and iPod Touch are now critical gaming platforms,” Mr. Golvin said. “Disney is strengthening the bench for its mobile gaming strategy.”

The acquisition also signals a deeper dive by Disney into the mobile and social game industry. In June, Disney invested in Playdom, an online game company that makes popular games for the iPhone and Facebook, including the game Mobsters.

Disney has already had some success with phone apps, including a game with an “Alice in Wonderland” theme and a puzzle game called Jelly Car 2.