Troup County is named for George M Troup, who was a Governor of Georgia.

Surrounding County Courthouses:

N – Heard County and Coweta County

E – Meriweather County

S –Harris County

W – Chambers County, Alabama and Randolph County, Alabama

Created: June 9, 1825

County Seat:

LaGrange 1825 – present

County Government Service Center – LaGrange

Location: 100 Ridley Avenue / Broad Street

Built: 2004 – 2005

Style: Modern

Architect: Judson S Bryant Associates

Contractor: Botson Cook Construction Company

Description: The building faces north and is a three story red colored brick, concrete and glass structure. The building is located on landscaped grounds in the center of LaGrange. The north front has a portico with seven white colored columns. The building is finished with red colored brick with areas of white colored stone and dark brown colored brick. Along the south side there are white colored columns. In the interior, the main hallway runs north-south. The first story has the County Magistrate Court and Commissioners Board Room. The second story has two courtrooms and the third story has two County Superior Court courtrooms.The courthouse houses the County Superior Court, County State Court, County Probate Court and County Magistrate Court of the 6th Judicial District. The building is named as the Troup County Government Service Center. To the south is the Old County Jail built by Will L Landrum in 1892 and which houses the Art Museum.

County Courthouse – LaGrange

Location: 150 Ridley Avenue / Harrison Street

Built: 1939 – 1940

Style: Art Deco

Architect: William J J Chase

Contractor: A J Honeycutt Company Inc.

Description: The building faces west and is a two story gray colored marble and concrete structure. The building is located on landscaped grounds in the center of LaGrange on the north side of the Troup County Government Center. The west front has a projecting center section with glass entrance extending to the second story. The roof line is flat. In the interior are marble walls and stairs. On the second story is the large courtroom which has marble walls and a high ceiling. The courthouse houses the County Juvenile Court of the 6th Judicial District.

See: The architect, William J J Chase also designed courthouses in Carroll County, Coffee County,Cook County, Mitchell County, Oconee County, Polk County, Rockdale County, Seminole County and Ware County.

See: The 6th Judicial District includes Butts County, Carroll County, Clayton County, Coweta County, Fayette County, Heard County, Henry County, Lamar County, Meriwether County, Monroe County, Pike County, Spalding County and Upson County.

History: The county was created in 1825 and LaGrange was selected as the county seat. The first courthouse was built by Benjamin Cameron in 1830. The second courthouse was designed by Andrew J Bryan and constructed by C C Totherow & Company in 1902. The building burned in 1936. The third courthouse was constructed in 1939 to 1940 and is still standing. The fourth and present courthouse was constructed in 2004 to 2005.

County Government Service Center – LaGrange

County Superior Court courtroom

County Courthouse – LaGrange

County Juvenile Court courtroom

Old Couty Jail – LaGrange

Photos taken 2010, 2020 and 2024