Prince Mikasa, who passed away on Oct. 27 at age 100, left his mark on the lives of many with his friendly manner and devotion to his academic career. He was also a big lover of haiku, having published books containing works he and his wife, Princess Yuriko, composed.

For many years Prince Mikasa enjoyed composing haiku along with Princess Yuriko, 93, and the couple published two books containing their poems. Haiku poet Shugyo Takaha, 86, chairman of the Association of Haiku Poets and a Mainichi Shimbun haiku forum selector who lectured Prince Mikasa on haiku composition for roughly six years starting in 2006, praised the late Prince's skills and lamented his death. "His poems are elegant and he was very observant." Takaha said. "I wish I could have read more of his haiku. It's very unfortunate."

Prince Mikasa and Princess Yuriko started haiku composition together in 1948. The couple were instructed by poet Tatsuko Hoshino and other experts. They published their first book, "Hatsuyuki" (First snow of the season), in 1957.

From October 2006, the Prince received coaching on haiku from Takaha almost every month at his residence. When Takaha asked Prince Mikasa about the meaning of his haiku, he would bring out documents and explain them in detail. Takaha recalls that the Prince was a scholar.

Takaha used to mark a red circle on pieces he thought were good. He pleasantly recalls one time when he asked the Prince if he had any questions or concerns, and the Prince replied jokingly, "I want more circles."

In October 2011, Takaha recommended that Prince Mikasa and Princess Yuriko publish a haiku book for their 70th wedding anniversary. The book, titled "Yuniji" (Evening rainbow), included 300 haiku composed by the couple (150 each) and was published in 2012. Many of Prince Mikasa's haiku in the book are about his home and family. There are also some war-themed pieces, as Prince Mikasa took part in the Pacific War as an officer of the Imperial Japanese Army.

Takaha instructed Prince Mikasa until he was hospitalized in 2012. He said he sometimes strolled through the garden of Akasaka Estate with the couple guiding him as they searched for inspiration for haiku.

"They gave me a warm welcome and it's a precious memory for me (to have spent time with Prince Mikasa)," Takaha recalled of his relationship with the Prince. "I'll reread 'Yuniji' to remember Prince Mikasa's friendly character."

Shigeru Kamada, professor emeritus of Islamic philosophy at the University of Tokyo and the previous chairman of the Society for Near Eastern Studies, launched in 1954 at the suggestion of Prince Mikasa, mourned the Prince's death. "I heard he was not feeling well, but it's still very sad," he said.

Kamada remembers Prince Mikasa participating in the society's meetings not so much as a member of the Imperial Family but as a historian. Even when he was challenged by other scholars about his articles at an end-of-year gathering some 30 years ago, Prince Mikasa smiled and engaged in the discussion.

"He appeared to be enjoying having discussions with everyone else without concern for his status," Kamada said.

When the society marked its 60th anniversary in 2014, Prince Mikasa sent a message by fax to the organization. Kamada was informed later by the staff at his residence that the Prince cared about the society and wrote the message after reading different academic documents.

"He was concerned about the society even at his advanced age," Kamada recalled.

Based on his experience in the Pacific War, Prince Mikasa saw the importance of studying history and became a research student at the University of Tokyo's Faculty of Letters. Social anthropologist Chie Nakane, professor emeritus at the university, came to know the Prince as a student there.

"He was a really serious researcher. I was worried about him after he was hospitalized," Nakane said, mourning the loss.

She recalled the earlier days when she first met Prince Mikasa, saying, "I thought he was a regular guy, but when he entered the classroom our teacher gave him the deepest bow. I later learned that he was a member of the Imperial Family."

Nakane said she would discuss lectures with Prince Mikasa and exchange notes with him. She became a longtime friend of the Prince and was invited to his residence and villa. "I think because he exercised, he was a fit person," she recalls.