On Nov. 3, 1936, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt was re-elected in a landslide over his Republican challenger, Kansas Governor Alfred M. “Alf” Landon. The president won over 60 percent of the popular vote and 523 of the 531 electoral votes, losing only Maine and Vermont.

President Roosevelt had taken office in 1933, three and a half years after the stock market crash and the start of the Great Depression. Many Americans were struggling. The president outlined what was called a “New Deal” that would introduce work relief programs a series of economic and agricultural reforms designed to spur economic recovery. The New Deal provided immediate relief, but it was largely unsuccessful in stimulating the economy.

The majority of Americans supported the New Deal, though the president did face criticism both from business leaders and from populists who believed that his reforms did not go far enough in aiding the poor. When the 1936 election season began, the New Deal was its central issue.

Republicans considered a strategy The New York Times described as “a frontal assault on the New Deal with an outstanding Eastern candidate,” but instead “decided to swallow half of the New Deal in the platform and nominate a nationally unknown candidate who would provide a powerful personal contrast to the forceful personality of the President.”

Gov. Landon proved no match for President Roosevelt. Also, Democrats, who already held the majority of seats in both the House and Senate, gained even more in the election.

President Roosevelt’s second term achieved fewer successes than his first. Most notably, his plan to “pack” the Supreme Court with his supporters failed and Republican victories in the 1938 congressional elections made it more difficult to pass New Deal legislation. Still, the president won an unprecedented third term in another landslide.

Roosevelt’s third and fourth terms were marked by U.S. entry into World War II following the Pearl Harbor attack on Dec. 7, 1941, which he famously declared to be “a date which will live in infamy.” President Roosevelt is considered to have served ably as a war president despite suffering from a number of health ailments, including polio. He died on April 12, 1945 of a cerebral hemorrhage, and was succeed by Harry Truman.

Connect to Today:

Franklin Roosevelt is the only U.S. president to serve more than two terms. Established by the two-term presidencies of founding fathers George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and James Monroe, it was simply tradition to decline running for a third term. In 1947, two years after the President Roosevelt’s death, Congress passed what would become the 22nd Amendment, which imposed an official two-term limit.

There has been little momentum for presidential term limits to be overturned, though President Ronald Reagan did speak out against term limits. However, there has been debate over term limits for other elected positions. In 2008, New York City overturned its two-term mayoral limit, thus allowing Michael Bloomberg to run for a third term, which he won.

What are some of the arguments for and against term limits for political offices? If a constitutional amendment did not set a limit of two terms, could you imagine a U.S. president remaining in office for more than eight years today? Why or why not?

Learn more about what happened in history on November 3»