Paul Haarhuis

On 19-2-1966 Paul Haarhuis was born in Eindhoven, Netherlands. He made his 10 million dollar fortune with Davis cup & Fed cup. The tennis player & coach is married to Anja Spijker, his starsign is Pisces and he is now 58 years of age.

Paul Haarhuis Facts & Wiki

Where does Paul Haarhuis live? And how much money does Paul Haarhuis earn?

Birth Date 19-2-1966 Heritage/origin Dutch Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Residence He lives together in a house in Netherlands.

Paul Haarhuis Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 10 million Euro Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Colleagues Jevgenyij Alekszandrovics Kafelnyikov & Richard Krajicek

Houses

Currently no houses listed.

Cars

Currently no cars listed.

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Paul Haarhuis: Wife, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Paul Haarhuis dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married Sexuality Straight Current Wife of Paul Haarhuis Anja Spijker Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Has any kids? Yes, father of: Tom

Will the marriage of Dutch tennis player & coach Paul Haarhuis and current Wife, Anja Spijker survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Tom (Son)

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This tennis player & coach originating from Eindhoven, Netherlands has a athletic body & long face type.

Hair color Light brown Eye Color Blue Height 188 cm Weight 82 kilo Feet size N/A Does Paul Haarhuis smoke? Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does Paul Haarhuis have a tattoo? No

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

Does Paul Haarhuis have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Paul Haarhuis!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.