TV Shows featuring Martin Clunes, listed alphabetically with photos when available. All of the TV programs that had Martin Clunes in the cast are featured here. Martin Clunes may have had a prominent role in these shows, but this list also includes shows where Martin Clunes had a guest starring role or cameo appearance. You can find additional information about these Martin Clunes shows as well, such as who else starred on the show and who created it.

Shows here include everything from Men Behaving Badly to Harry Enfield's Television Programme.

This list answers the questions, "What shows has Martin Clunes been on?" and "What are the best Martin Clunes TV shows?"

If you're a TV junkie, this list is the perfect resource for finding some new Martin Clunes shows that you haven't already seen. If you're going to waste time watching television you might as well do it while watching shows starring Martin Clunes. {#nodes}

Working in television has given Martin Clunes the opportunity to work with other great actors, including Michael Fassbender and Anna Gunn.

All at No 20

Carol Hawkins, Martin Clunes, Maureen Lipman

Premiered : 1986

All at No 20 is a British sitcom that aired on ITV from 1986 to 1987. Starring Maureen Lipman, it was written by Richard Ommanney, Ian Davidson, Peter Vincent and Alex Shearer. It was made for the ITV network by Thames Television and ran for two series. After the second series was slated by critics, a planned third series was cancelled.

Bonjour la Classe

Martin Clunes, Nigel Planer, Peter Woodthorpe

Premiered : 1993

Bonjour la Classe is a British television comedy series broadcast on BBC1 in 1993. Created and written by Paul Smith and Terry Kyan, the series centered on Laurence Didcott, a new French teacher at prestigious Mansion School. Didcott discovers a prevailing attitude at Mansion, among staff, benefactors and even students and parents, that places what's best for the school ahead of pupils' education and well-being. The scenes at the school were shot in the winter of 1992.

Doc Martin

Martin Clunes, Caroline Catz, Ian McNeice

Premiered : September 2, 2004

An eminent surgeon develops a phobia to blood and has to retrain as a GP.

Harry Enfield, Paul Whitehouse, Kathy Burke

Premiered : 1990

Harry Enfield and Chums was a British sketch show starring Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse. It first broadcast on BBC Two in 1990 in the 9 pm slot on Thursdays nights which became the traditional time for alternative comedy on television. Enfield was already an established name due to his 'Loadsamoney' character, but the series gave greater presence to his frequent collaborators Paul Whitehouse and Kathy Burke – so much so that, in 1994, the show was retitled Harry Enfield and Chums.

Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie, Robert Daws

Premiered : April 22, 1990

Jeeves and Wooster is a British comedy-drama series adapted by Clive Exton from P.G. Wodehouse's "Jeeves" stories. The series was a collaboration between Brian Eastman of Picture Partnership Productions and Granada Television. It aired on the ITV network from 1990 to 1993, with the last series nominated for a British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series. It starred Hugh Laurie as Bertie Wooster, a young gentleman with a "distinctive blend of airy nonchalance and refined gormlessness", and Stephen Fry as Jeeves, his improbably well-informed and talented valet. Wooster is a bachelor, a minor aristocrat and member of the idle rich. He and his friends, who are mainly members of The Drones Club, are extricated from all manner of societal misadventures by the indispensable valet Jeeves. The stories are set in the United Kingdom and the United States in the 1930s. When Fry and Laurie began the series they were already a popular double act due to regular appearances on Channel 4's Friday Night Live and their own show A Bit of Fry & Laurie.

Islands of Britain

Martin Clunes

Premiered : 2009

Islands of Britain is a 2009 documentary series, filmed over the summers of 2008 and 2009, hosted by Martin Clunes, which visited a number of the islands that lie off the coast of Great Britain.