DETROIT -- The Detroit Pistons are already moving on without Ben Wallace.

A day after losing Wallace to the Chicago Bulls, the Pistons reached an agreement with free-agent center Nazr Mohammed on Tuesday, a person within the NBA told The Associated Press.

The person, who spoke on condition of anonymity because NBA free agents can't officially sign contracts until July 12, said the team and Mohammed made an oral pact on a five-year contract -- with the final year being an option -- that will pay him about $5 million next season.

Mohammed started in 30 of 80 games last season for the San Antonio Spurs, averaging 6.2 points and 5.2 rebounds. The 6-foot-10, 250-pound center will likely replace Wallace in the starting lineup, allowing Rasheed Wallace to remain as a power forward.

Mohammed, who turns 29 on Sept. 5, probably will not be able to rebound, block shots and provide energy like Ben Wallace did -- but he will cost about $9 million less next season.

The Bulls wooed Wallace away Monday night, according to the person within the league, for a four-year deal reportedly worth $60 million -- about $10 million more than the Pistons were willing to pay the four-time Defensive Player of the Year.

Joe Dumars, the Pistons' president of basketball operations, said late last week that his top priority was to re-sign Wallace. But Wallace said he was disappointed with the Pistons' offer.

"We tried to work out a couple of deals," he told The Detroit News. "But there was nothing that Joe felt would work."

Mohammed has bounced around the league during his career, which started when he was dealt by the Utah Jazz after they drafted him with the 29th overall pick in 1998 out of Kentucky.

He spent his first two-plus seasons with the Philadelphia 76ers, who traded him in 2001 to Atlanta. The Hawks dealt him three years later to the New York Knicks, who traded him to San Antonio at the 2005 trading deadline.

Mohammed's career averages are 7.1 points, 5.7 rebounds and 0.6 blocks.

Harpring to stay with Jazz

SALT LAKE CITY -- Matt Harpring is staying with the Utah Jazz, agreeing to a multiyear deal with the team Tuesday.

Terms of the deal, which can't be formally completed until July 12, were not announced. Kevin O'Connor, Jazz vice president of basketball operations, said he couldn't discuss the deal because of league rules.

O'Connor has been focused on getting Harpring, a restricted free agent when he signed with Utah in August 2002, to stay in Utah. Harpring has averaged 14.9 points with the Jazz and his grit and versatility have made him a favorite of coach Jerry Sloan.

Piatkowski to sign with Suns

PHOENIX -- The Phoenix Suns have agreed to a two-year contract with free-agent forward Eric Piatkowski.

The 35-year-old forward won't officially become a Sun until the NBA signing period opens on July 12, but the team and Piatkowski have a deal, sports agent Jeff Austin said.

Austin would not discuss financial terms of the contract.

The 6-foot-7 Piatkowski played from 1994-2003 with the Los Angeles Clippers and had career lows for games played (20), minutes per game (7.9) and 3-point shooting percentage (.273) last season in Chicago. He missed 20 games with a foot injury.

Celtics sign draft pick Rondo

BOSTON -- The Boston Celtics signed first-round draft pick Rajon Rondo on Tuesday.

The 21st overall pick, Rondo was selected by Phoenix and traded to Boston on draft night. The Celtics did not disclose terms of the contract.

The 6-foot-1 guard entered the draft after his sophomore season at Kentucky, when he averaged 11 points, six rebounds and nearly five assists per game.

Kings deaftee Douby signs

SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- The Sacramento Kings signed first-round draft pick Quincy Douby on Monday.

Douby was the 19th overall selection last week after averaging 25.4 points and 4.3 rebounds per game at Rutgers last season. The 6-foot-3 Brooklyn native, who will play on the Kings' summer-league team in Las Vegas this week, will make just over $1 million next season, according to the league's rookie salary scale.