Bookmark It's Just Sports or subscribe to our RSS feed.

IJS contributor Brian Beebe will break down the Pistons each week for us.

A 17-word or less recap on each piston game last week

- Tuesday -- Charlotte 88, Detroit 76. It’s not a good thing when Nazr Mohammed scores more than any of Detroit’s post players.

- Wednesday -- Toronto 94, Detroit 64. Pistons hit rock-bottom. Season-lows in points scored, FG%, and watchability

- Sunday -- Toronto 102, Detroit 95. Gordon, Hamilton and Prince back in uniform … but not enough to overcome Chris Bosh’s 25 & 16.

17 words or less previewing each Piston game this coming week

- Tuesday -- New York, 7:30. Both teams enter the game with 11-19 records, having arrived there in completely different ways.

- Thursday -- Chicago, 3:00. Bulls

, having the 2nd-worst offense in the Eastern Conference.

TWIP (This Week In Pistons) notes, thoughts & asides

For all of the good feelings surrounding the return of Tey-Tey, Rip and Ben Gordon against Toronto on Sunday, one thing is clear at this point in this season -- the Pistons are not a good team. I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but the D is 3-13 on the road this season.

and look specifically at the road records of the Eastern Conference teams. Look at the disparity between the top and bottom teams in road records, and look at how many of the bottom teams are clumped together from 1-5 road wins this season.

Ten of the 15 Eastern Conference teams fall into that category. The five teams that sit outside that group? Boston, Cleveland, Orlando, Atlanta, Miami. Not surprisingly, those are the five best teams in the East. It’s no coincidence -- you win on the road in the NBA, you are a successful team.

Now, no other team has suffered the injuries that this team has this season and so it should be interesting to see what the roster does when it gets back to a consistent rotation, but if this crew is to be considered a playoff team, they need to get a consistent 48 minutes on the road, beginning next week in a Texas back-to-back.

There are definitely nights during an 82-game season that are a struggle for players to give maximum effort. But this week’s pair of home games certainly could be considered must-wins for this Pistons team. Coming off a pair of awful weeks, this group must find itself quickly if they are to make a run for the playoffs, and that begins against a Knicks team which doesn’t exactly pride itself on tough defense.

This week's favorite line from the movie "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation" relatable to the Pistons

:

“That’s the gift that keeps on giving the whole year ,” Cousin Eddie (played by Randy Quaid)

Suddenly Charlie Villanueva is looking extra-poor. His last four games -- 18 points, 16 rebounds, 6-31 from the floor (0-9 from three). Not exactly what the Pistons were looking for from one of their prized free-agent acquisitions during their most trying stretch of the season.

Regardless of how quickly the perimeter players can figure it out together, this team will only go as far as this collection of post players can take them. Jerebko was fantastic during the third quarter of the Raptors game on Sunday, but it hardly makes sense that the Pistons should be receiving more consistent play from a 2nd round rookie rather than Charlie V. If Villanueva isn’t healthy, have him sit and just go small, which certainly could happen against the Knicks on Tuesday.

Random statline from a game last week that made me think … what happened last week to the Pistons?

Seriously, if Nazr is putting up 12 points in 18 minutes, then this team’s screen-roll and interior defense has got to be looked at. Now, with S Jax and Gerald Wallace patrolling the paint, Boris Diaw and Nazr Mohammed get to roam a bit more freely, but that effort on the defensive end against the Bobcats certainly should have been better.