Soft cover. Condition: Very Good. 1st Edition. First edition, first printing # X-1539 of the fourth novel in the Skylark series. Originally published in 1965 in Galaxy Magazine. This is the first book format. Light edge wear. Light reading crease next to the spine on the rear cover. In very good condition.

Soft cover. Condition: Very Good. Jack Gaughan (illustrator). 1st Edition. First edition. Prior owner's stamp at bottom of title page, light tanning, otherwise like new. No creases or folds, appears unread. Pyramid mass paperback, Pyramid #X-1539, 1st printing Nov. 1966 (stated), 238 pages, cover art by Jack Gaughan. 12mo (7" x 4.25") Nominated, 1966 Hugo Award. First serialized in Worlds of If magazine June 1965 - Sept. 1965; first book publication is this Pyramid paperback edition. 4th book in series, preceded by The Skylark of Space, Skylark Three, and Skylark of Valeron.

Mass Market Paperback. Condition: Good. Jack Gaughan (illustrator). First Edition 1st Printing. Light Creasing on Front, Rear Covers, Spine; Front, Rear Covers, Spine Moderately Chipped; Spine Slightly Cocked; Light Moisture Damage (Staining); Edges Lightly Soiled; Slight Yellowing Due to Age. A galactic double-cross and interstellar war--the smashing climax of the great Skylark series. BOOK NUMBER: X-1539. SYNOPSIS: My Ally The Enemy. Dick Seaton and Marc DuQuesne are the deadliest enemies in the Universe--their feud has blazed among the stars and changed the history of a thousand planets. But now a threat from outside the Galaxy drives them into a dangerous alliance as hordes of strange races drive to a collision with mankind! Seaton and DuQuesne fight and slave side by side to fend off the invasion--as Seaton keeps constant, perilous watch for DuQuesne's inevitable double-cross! The climax of one of the most famous science-fiction series ever written. Skylark DuQuesne is 'Doc' Smith's widest-ranging and most thrilling tale of high adventure among the far stars. Size: 12mo - over 6¾" - 7¾" tall.