maggie...@webtv.net wrote in message

<21117-39...@storefull-153.iap.bryant.webtv.net>...

>Can anyone explain how Universal Music Group has been organized since

>the MCA/Polygram merger? What labels are still in existence and which

>have been eliminated?

I'm not sure if UMG knows which labels are still around! Actually, most of

the "old" label names are still in use, but they are more symbolic than

anything else. For example, Sheryl Crow and Sting still are on A&M Records,

but there is no separate A&M Records corporate structure anymore. And there

is still a Motown Records (Brian McKnight is on the label), but it, too, has

no meaning except as a name.

I think that all the labels were consolidated into several groups. The

pop/rock/R&B were divided into three units:

-- "Island Def Jam" (Def Jam, Del Soul, Island, Rounder, Capricorn)

-- "Interscope Geffen A&M" (Dreamworks, Outpost, Almo Sounds, DGC, A&M)

-- "Universal Motown" (Motown, Republic, Universal, MCA)

The rest are:

-- Universal Classics (classical. Labels: Decca, Deutsche Grammophon,

Philips). For the first time ever, the releases on Decca overseas are also

on Decca in the USA, and the old "London" label is no more as "Decca" has

more international cachet.

-- Verve Music Group (jazz. Labels: Verve, GRP, Impulse!)

-- UMG Nashville (labels: MCA Nashville and Mercury)

-- Universal Music Enterprises (the back catalog division. Labels: Hip-O,

Universal Special Markets)

Varese Sarabande/Varese Vintage still seems to be quasi-independent (it

operates separately but is distributed by UMG).

>

>Is Mercury Records still around? Is it strictly a country music label

>now?

>

Mercury (in the US anyway) seems to be 100 percent country now: Shania

Twain, Eric Heatherly, Kathy Mattea, Terri Clark, Shane Minor... Those

non-country artists who were on Mercury (Ringo Starr, Hanson) are now on

Island, I think. Also, most of Mercury's 45s come out as part of the MCA

Nashville numbering system (first six digits of the nine-digit number are

088 172).

If you care more, do a search on "Universal Music Group" on Yahoo and go to

the corporate site.

Tim Neely

Goldmine magazine

maggie...@webtv.net wrote in message

<5311-39...@storefull-154.iap.bryant.webtv.net>...

>It's interesting how some labels that were relatively small and hadn't

>been around that long before the merger seem to be highly emhasized now,

>while others have fallen in stature.

I think a lot had to do with which company heads didn't bail out at the time

of the merger! UMG paid Chris Blackwell a lot of money for Island, so they

weren't about to make that label name disappear. Interscope, which started

the 1990s as a boutique label in the Atlantic/Atco family, is the biggest

surprise to me, considering how its association with "gangsta rap" in the

middle of the 90s made it a hot potato for awhile, bouncing from one

distributor to another. But Jimmy Iovine stayed around for the merger, so

he got to keep his label. :)

>

>I'm surprised with what happened to Mercury. Mercury was traditionally

>Polygram's flagship (pop/rock/r&b, as well as country) label in the U.S.

It was founded in 1945 and by 1950 was already considered a "major label."

As it was based in Chicago, it always had a cross-section of music

(everything from jazz to blues -- there was a big CD box set with nothing

but Mercury blues records at one point). Frankie Laine's success helped put

it on the map, and Patti Page's kept it there.

In the early 1970s it was bought by Polydor, the big German record company.

At first the new company, which originally comprised Mercury, Philips and

Vertigo in the US, was called "Phonogram." Once German Polydor bought (and

folded) MGM Records, it became "PolyGram." For a while, it appeared as if

Mercury was going to become a country label in the very early 1980s -- the

non-C&W releases on the label trickled to a precious few. But the

consolidation of all the PolyGram labels around 1983 (that's when the goofy

six- to nine-digit catalog numbers started) helped make Mercury a major

across-the-board player again.

>As recently as the late '80s/early '90s Mercury had a sizable

>non-country artist roster (John Mellencamp, Def Leppard, Bon Jovi, ABC,

>Kiss, Rush, Van Morrison, Tears For Fears, Kool & The Gang, Cinderella,

>the Scorpions, Swing Out Sister....). Obviously, a lot of those artists

>have disappeared from the scene and/or left the label.

Mellencamp is now on Columbia. Both Cinderella and Scorpions I think are on

CMC International, home for most of the 1980s metal or hard-rock artists

that stopped selling for the big boys. I think Def Leppard's material is now

on its own Bludgeon Riffola label, which UMG distributes. Kiss is on the

reactivated Casablanca label. Rush, last I noticed, was on Atlantic (that's

where the band went in 1989). Van Morrison is, I think, with Virgin.

>

>I guess Mercury wasn't able to react to the changes of the '90s

>pop/rock/r&b fields very well,

That seems correct. Other than holdovers from the 1980s, I can't think of

too many big non-country Mercury artists of the 1990s except Hanson.

and UMG figured they already had too many

>labels in those fields, so they decided to have Mercury concentrate on

>country only.

In 1995, there was a box set called "50 Years of Country Music on Mercury."

And Shania was (still is) selling absurdly high numbers of CDs. Having

Mercury be a country label is not that surprising -- I think it would have

evolved that way anyway, much as Dot Records did in the 1970s and (for the

most part) US Decca in the early 1970s.

Tim Neely

Goldmine magazine

My understanding of the history of the Polygram labels is like this

(picked up from various things I've read and heard and my experiences

collecting records; this may not all be totally accurate):

Polygram was formed in the early/mid 1960s when two large German-based

record companies, Polydor and Phonogram, merged. The new company called

itself "Polygram", combining the names of its two consituent companies

(POLYdor + phonoGRAM = POLYGRAM).

Right around the same time, Polygram (or one of its corporate

predecessors) bought U.S.-based Mercury Records. Over the next few

years, Polygram introduced some of its European imprints like Phillips

and Fontana in the U.S., as what amounted to subsidiaries of Mercury.

Both of these labels were gone from the U.S. by the early/mid '70s.

Fontana made a brief comeback in the U.S. around the end of the

'80s/beginning of the '90s, once agian as an affilate of Mercury.

The Polydor label was launched in the U.S. in 1969. I'm not sure what

its status is today, but I don't think U.S. Polydor ever approached U.S.

Mercury in size or importance during the '70s,'80s, or early '90s.

Vertigo was another of the Polygram "family" of labels. Although it

seems to have been a fairly important label in the U.K., Canada, and

elsewhere, the Vertigo name was never used much in the US, and I don't

know much about the label's history outside the US. There were a couple

of attempts to launch it here under Mercury distribution, once in the

mid-'70s and again around 1990. Most of the artists who were on Vertigo

in the UK and Canada were on Mercury in the US.

Around 1974, Polydor took over US distribution for MGM Records, a label

which had seen better days at that point. Around 1977, MGM sold its

non-soundtrack operations (including the back catalog) to Polydor.

MGM's soundtrack operations continued--albeit just barely--until about

1982 or 1983, and continued to be distributed by Polydor. After the MGM

label shut down, MGM's relationship with Polydor ended, and some of the

soundtrack material was later issued on other labels.

Around 1981, Polydor took control of RSO Records, which it had been

distributing for several years. RSO was operated as a subsidiary of

Polydor for a couple of years, then was folded into Polydor around 1983

or 1984.

Also around 1981, Mercury bought the Casablanca label, which was reeling

from the loss of its most important executive (Neil Bogart, who had left

to found Boardwalk Records, and passed away soon after) and most

important artist (Donna Summer, who defected to Geffen Records).

Casablanca had earlier taken control of 20th Century Records, so Mercury

acquired the rights to that label's catalog as well. Casablanca was

operated as a subsidiary of Mercury for a couple of years, then folded

into Mercury around 1983 or 1984 (although I have seen a few Casablanca

releases that came out later than that; I'm not sure what the story was

there).

In another transaction that also took place around '81, Polygram bought

"UK Decca"/ London. It is my understanding that Decca/ London was not

considered to be under Mercury or Polydor but was a separate division of

Polygram. London had very little pop/rock/r&b presence in the US during

the '80s (the company didn't own the rights to the name "Decca" in the

U.S. at the time, so all of its U.S. releases were under the London

name) and I think Polydor may have actually handled its U.S.

distribution for a while.

In the early '80s, Mercury distributed Dee-Lite Records (best known as

the home of Kool & The Gang) and Riva Records (best known as the home of

John Cougar Mellencamp). By the latter half of the decade both of these

artists had moved to Mercury (taking their back catalogs with them) and

their original labels apparently no longer existed. I don't know much

about these labels and what happened to them or exactly what their

relationship with Mercury was.

During the last several years before the Universal merger, Polygram

seemed to be pursing an agressive expansion policy, taking over several

other labels, including U.S.-based A&M (1989?) and Motown (early/mid

'90s?) and British-based Island (1990?).

In article <3662-39A...@storefull-153.iap.bryant.webtv.net>,

<maggie...@webtv.net> wrote:

> My understanding of the history of the Polygram labels is like this

> (picked up from various things I've read and heard and my experiences

> collecting records; this may not all be totally accurate):

>

> Polygram was formed in the early/mid 1960s when two large German-based

> record companies, Polydor and Phonogram, merged. The new company called

> itself "Polygram", combining the names of its two consituent companies

> (POLYdor + phonoGRAM = POLYGRAM).

>

> Right around the same time, Polygram (or one of its corporate

> predecessors) bought U.S.-based Mercury Records. Over the next few

> years, Polygram introduced some of its European imprints like Phillips

> and Fontana in the U.S., as what amounted to subsidiaries of Mercury.

> Both of these labels were gone from the U.S. by the early/mid '70s.

> Fontana made a brief comeback in the U.S. around the end of the

> '80s/beginning of the '90s, once agian as an affilate of Mercury.

Mercury was U.S.-owned until the early '70s, when Philips N.V. of the

Netherlands bought it and combined it with Philips and Fontana to form

Phonogram. The Phonogram-Polydor merger that formed PolyGram was in the

mid-'70s, not mid-'60s. In the '60s, Mercury distributed Philips and

Fontana under license from Philips.

Before Polydor launched as a U.S. label in 1969, it licensed recordings

to various U.S. labels. The Beatles' "My Bonnie," recorded for Polydor

and produced by Bert Kaempfert (who also recorded for Polydor), was

licensed to U.S. Decca (at the time, no relation to U.K. Decca). By

1964, Polydor was licensing stuff to Atlantic, which is how The

Beatles' version of "Ain't She Sweet" wound up on Atco.

In England, Robert Stigwood's Reaction and RSO labels were distributed

by Polydor, which is how The Bee Gees and Cream wound up on Atco in the

U.S. When Stigwood formed RSO, it was distributed in the U.S. by

Atlantic for several years until he switched it to PolyGram

distribution just in time for the "Saturday Night Fever" and "Grease"

soundtracks.

Meanwhile, MGM Records was the U.S. distributor for Polydor's classical

labels, Deutsche Grammophon Gesellschaft (DGG) and Archiv. Just as

Philips eventually bought its U.S. distributor (Mercury), Polydor

eventually bought its U.S. distributor (MGM). Polydor also merged with

U.K. Decca (London Records in the U.S.) in the mid-'70s. The U.S. Decca

label was eventually folded into MCA Records, which was bought by

Seagram (the distillery). When Seagram bought PolyGram in 1998, this

brought the U.S. and U.K. Decca labels back together under the

Universal Music umbrella, so artists can once again be on Decca

worldwide.

And now, the whole mess (including Universal Studios as well as

Universal Music) has just been sold to Viviendi S.A. of France.