This is a great sounding song. He mentions historical figures by first name…I think John Lennon, Jerry Garcia, Vincent Van Gogh are among them and includes more…I love the guitar sound. I would recommend checking them out. Thanks to Hanspostcard for pointing them out.

This is a local band out of Pittsburgh that formed in the mid 80s at Indiana University of Pennsylvania where most of them were enrolled. They started out as a cover band and soon began playing original songs.

They were on their own label while making their first albums and then MCA took notice. They signed with them in 1996 but MCA started to pay more attention to their label mate Blink – 182 and didn’t push The Clarks. They signed with Razor & Tie after MCA and achieved success locally but not nationally.

The Clarks who play Power Pop have released 12 studio and live CDs selling nearly quarter of a million copies. they have built a fan base from over 20 years of performances an they sell out 7,500 seat venues in Pittsburgh and venues in the East coast and Mid-West.

This song was on the Let It Go album released in 2000.

It originally appeared on singer Scott Blasey’s 1999 solo album, Shine, but was then reworked by the entire band for its appearance on this album.

Dave Marsh Rock Critic: “They’ve got first-rate songs, they play together the way only bands who’ve truly lived with each other’s chops can, they can sing, and as far as I can tell, at the end of the story, they get the girl. What more do you want?”

Born Too Late

Vincent will you teach me how to paint

Teresa will I ever be a saint

John I really think your songs are great

I was born too late

William will you teach me how to write

Cassius will you show me how to fight

Thomas A. I think I see the light

I was born tonight

I’ve had a hard time leaving this town

I’ve been losing everything that I’ve found

I’m gonna search the sky, kiss the ground

Build it up and tear it back down

I’ve had a hard time leaving this place

I’ve been counting all the lines on my face

I’m gonna curse the sky, hit the ground

What goes up comes tumbling down

Jimi show me how you play that thing

Elvis will I ever be a king

and Jerry all the joy and love you bring

I was born to sing

Martin Luther King show me the way

Jesus Buddha teach me how to pray

Christopher I think I see the bay

I was born today

…