To stand for election to Dáil Éireann, a person must be a citizen of Ireland and at least 21 years of age by polling day. A person may nominate himself or herself as a candidate or, with his or her consent, may be nominated by a person who is registered as an elector in the constituency concerned. A candidate not in possession of a certificate of political affiliation (confirmation that a person is a candidate of a political party registered in the register of political parties) must have their nomination completed using either of the following options: (i) by way of assents, requiring the completion of statutory declarations by 30 assentors registered in the relevant Dáil constituency, or (ii) by way of the candidate, or someone on his or her behalf, lodging a deposit of €500 with the returning officer. The latest time for receiving nominations is 12 noon on Friday 15 November 2019. Candidates may withdraw their nominations up to 12 noon on Saturday 16 November 2019.

People who are eligible to vote at the bye-elections but who are not registered still have time to apply for entry in the supplement to the register of electors to be published before polling day. To be eligible for inclusion in the supplement a person must be 18 years of age or over on or before polling day and must be ordinarily resident in the constituency where the bye-election is being held. For inclusion in the supplement to the register, a person completes the relevant application form (RFA2), which can be downloaded from Check the register or can be obtained from City, County or City and County Councils. Application forms will need to be received by the registration authority for the area in which the applicant is resident not later than Tuesday 12 November 2019.

An application for inclusion in the supplement to the Register must be signed by the applicant in the presence of a member of the Garda Síochána from the applicant’s local Garda station who must first be satisfied as to the person’s identity before signing, dating and stamping the form. The Garda may request photographic or other identification. Where the applicant establishes in writing that he or she is unable to progress the application in this way, the form can be signed by the applicant in the presence of an official of the registration authority who is satisfied as to his or her identity. Again, photographic or other identification may be required. If neither option is viable due to physical illness or physical disability, the application form must be accompanied by a medical certificate.

If a person is eligible to vote by post, or is unable to vote in person due to a physical illness or physical disability and is resident in a hospital, nursing home or similar institution, and they are not on the Postal Voters List or Special Voters List, they can apply for inclusion in the supplement to these lists. Application forms are available from registration authorities who will advise people of the appropriate arrangements for the completion of the relevant form. Completed forms must be received by the registration authority not later than Saturday 9 November 2019.