Incumbency is a huge advantage in Irish elections, meaning the same people tend to be returned again and again once they hold a seat. That is, unless the electorate takes a sudden dislike to either them personally, or their party.

But the unprecedented number of seasoned politicians who are packing it in at the end of this Government’s life cycle means the name-recognition factor won’t be at play to the same extent in many constituencies.

In many areas where Dáil seats are being vacated, political novices will have just as good a chance as fresh party nominees of being elected.

The Independent vote in Ireland is long established and has become more pronounced since the turn of the century, as faith ebbed in established parties and mainstream alternatives. It is currently hovering at just under 20pc in most opinion polls – this percentage would see Independents elected in a five-seat constituency, and could even get a person elected in a three or four-seater, given Ireland’s system of proportional representation.

Here are places where it might be tempting to throw your hat in the ring – bearing in mind that “being known” is less important in urban areas than in the countryside.

1) Dublin Bay North

It’s a five-seater, but three of those seats are being vacated. Former Fine Gael chairman and ex-minister Richard Bruton is retiring. So too is veteran TD Seán Haughey of Fianna Fáil. Those are two cases of massive name recognition that will no longer apply. Aodhán Ó Ríordáin’s seat will also be up for grabs because he now serves as an MEP for Dublin.

The only sitting TDs to run here will be Denise Mitchell of Sinn Féin and Cian O’Callaghan of the Social Democrats. Ms Mitchell got the highest vote in the country in 2020, but this indicates that the constituency has a high level of volatility and an ­anti-establishment factor, music to the ears of any Independent.

Finian McGrath, who made it to the Cabinet as a super junior, is a recent Independent in this area.

​2) Wexford

Again, a five-seater with real possibilities. Two sitting TDs are not standing again – former Labour Party leader Brendan Howlin and former Fine Gael party chair Paul Kehoe. There’s a Fianna Fáil seat (James Browne), another for Sinn Féin (Johnny Mythen), with the fifth filled by an Independent, Verona Murphy.

Three of those elected are from Enniscorthy, while Ms Murphy is from New Ross. There seems scope for a candidate based in Gorey, or even in Wexford town, formerly represented by Mr Howlin.

Mick Wallace demonstrated that an Independent with anti-establishment appeal can take Wexford by storm. But, having lost his MEP seat, will he stand again for the Dáil?

​3) Clare

Opportunities here. The four-seater is losing Michael McNamara, who has been elected to the European Parliament. But he was elected as an Independent, so there is an opportunity to succeed him.

Meanwhile, Violet-Anne Wynne is now an Independent; although elected for Sinn Féin in 2020, she left the party in February 2022.

Certain to run is Cathal Crowe of Fianna Fáil, but there remain questions over the candidacy of Joe Carey of Fine Gael, who suffered serious ill health in recent times. All in all, a political unknown could make a real impact here.

​4) Louth

A five-seater where a new arrival could stage a breakthrough. Veteran Fine Gael TD Fergus O’Dowd is standing down. His former party colleague, Peter Fitzpatrick, is now an Independent – but has the advantage of being based in Dundalk, while the others elected last time out were all based in Drogheda.

One of them was Imelda Munster of Sinn Féin, a very effective TD. Sinn Féin has another sitting TD, Ruairí Ó Murchú, also a good performer, who will almost certainly be re-elected. But the local and European elections seem to suggest Sinn Féin won’t have enough gas in the tank to get two elected next time out. Ged Nash of Labour will always find a way, but only had half a quota last time out before landing a seat. Could be a happy hunting ground for a populist.

​5) Cork East

Like Cork South-Central, Cork East is losing two of its four TDs next time out. Seán Sherlock of the Labour Party is calling it a day and the party hasn’t the strength to hold the seat. Similarly, David Stanton of Fine Gael is retiring. The two other seats are held by Pat Buckley (Sinn Féin) and young James O’Connor (Fianna Fáil). It’s a conservative constituency, but you never know.