From Dusk Till Dawn is a 1996 action horror film directed by Robert Rodriguez from a screenplay by Quentin Tarantino. The film stars George Clooney and Quentin Tarantino as Seth and Richard Gekko, bank-robbing brothers who kidnap a family as they make their escape across the border into Mexico. When they stop at a remote Mexican strip bar, the brothers and the family find themselves having to battle supernatural forces who inhabit the establishment. The film would spawn two direct-to-video films: a 1999 sequel and a 2000 prequel as well as a television series remake that premiered in the US on the El Rey Network in 2014.

The following weapons were used in the film From Dusk Till Dawn:

Handguns

Astra Terminator

Seth Gecko (George Clooney) carries an Astra Terminator with a 3 inch full lug barrel and Pachmayr compact grips. It is also briefly handled by Jacob (Harvey Keitel), who threatens to kill himself if the others don't promise to kill him when he "turns". It is also later picked up and fired by both Scott (Ernest Liu) and Kate Fuller (Juliette Lewis).

Norinco M1911A1

Richard Gecko (Quentin Tarantino) carries a a Norinco M1911A1 with a nickel finish as his weapon of choice throughout the film.

Smith & Wesson Model 66

The liquor store clerk Pete Bottoms (John Hawkes) pulls a Smith & Wesson Model 66 from his safe and shoots Richie (Quentin Tarantino) through the hand with it.

Colt Revolver

In the script it says that the Texas Ranger Earl McGraw (Michael Parks) uses a Colt, he never has the chance to draw it. Although other incarnations of McGraw carry a Single Action Army, his revolver in the film has the "shoulder" of a double action model.

Shotguns

Winchester Model 1912

Jacob Fuller (Harvey Keitel) finds a Winchester Model 1912 shotgun under the bar. The barrel and stock have been cut down, and the forearm has been replaced with a Butler Creek tactical synthetic loop fore-grip. Jacob puts a baseball bat through the loop to turn it into a vampire-repellant cross.

Mossberg 500

One of Carlos' thugs, Manny (Mike Moroff), wields a full-sized Mossberg 500 with a regular magazine tube, barrel ribbing and wood furniture.

Winchester 1300 Defender

Carlos' (Cheech Marin) other thug, Danny (Cristos) uses a Winchester 1300 Defender with a pistol grip and an extended magazine tube.

Other

Codpiece Revolver