Mugen Senshi Valis II

PC Engine CD version box's front

Developer(s):

Shin-Nihon Laser Soft (PC Engine)

Renovation Game (PC-88, PC-98, MSX2)

Bandai (Mobile Phone version only)

Publisher(s):

Telenet japan (PC Engine CD), NEC (Turbografx-CD)

Renovation Game (MSX,Sharp X68000,PC88/PC98)

Laser Soft (Mega Drive), Renovation Products (Genesis)

Hudson Soft (PSN)

Platform(s)-Release date(s):

PC Engine CD 1989-06-23, TurboGrafx-16 CD 1990-05-23

PC-88 1989-07-08

MSX2, PC-98 1989-08-05

X68000 1989-11-18

PC (Valis Complete)- 2006, 2011

Vodafone - 2007

Play Station Network (PCE) - 2011

Genre(s):

Action/Platform

Mugen Senshi Valis II (夢幻戦士ヴァリスⅡ, Mugen Senshi Varisu ni), also known as Valis II, is the second main game from the Valis series. The game tells the events that happened after the first Valis game, revealing more reasons about why Yuuko was chosen to fight for the three worlds.

Story[]

PC Engine CD/TurboGrafx-16 CD version[]

Some time after the death of Rogles and Yuuko returned to her home in the human world, Vanity is tormented once again by a war between the new candidate to the dark world throne, Megas, Rogles's younger brother; and the resistance formed by the survivor soldiers from Rogles's army. For that reason, Reiko (already dead) appears as an illusion to tell Yuuko to go to the mentioned world and then to inform her about Megas. As result of the war, the human world becomes endangered as Yuuko fights against Rogles generals who want the power of the Valis sword to end with Megas's menace. After beating them, Yuuko goes to Valia's castle only to fight Megas's Army and a dead Valia who was apparently killed by Megas himself. In the mid of the dramatic situation, after this, the servants of the castle tell Yuuko that she is one of Valia's daughters and that her younger sister, Valna, lived in the castle with Valia while Yuuko was send to the human world. Seeing the gravity of the situation, they give Yuuko a new sword and armor: the Leethus sword and the Leethus armor. She goes to Megas's domains fighting more of his generals to finally infiltrate in his technological tower base and reaches the emperor.

After his defeat, Megas tells Yuuko that he, contrary to Rogles's resistance, wanted to destroy the Valis sword because he was afraid that its power would make him fall like it did with his brother Rogles. He starts to relate the story of how he became the dark emperor is. He was going to inherit the darkworld throne long ago from the hands of his father, Kaiza. But Rogles got jealous and made a scheme to kill Megas so he could became the darkworld's next king. Megas survived but had to replace many of his body parts with machinery. Later he discovered that the one behind that conspiracy wasn't Rogles but Kaiza himself who, when discovered by Megas, banished him to a dimensional abyss from where he remained a long time growing a hatred for his brother and his father. That's why he wanted to finish Rogles army's remains and dominate Vecanti.

After Megas dies in her hands, Yuuko goes to Vecanti once again to be sure that her sister is safe and then returns to the human world once again, not before knowing that Valna is decided to fight by her side from there on.

MSX2, PC-88/98 and Sharp X68000 versions[]

The action takes place some time after the death of Rogles. Yuuko returned to her home world Reality, yet she dreams of her dead friend, Reiko, telling her about the Dream world being endangered once more. After a nightmare of a demon trapping her in his hands, Yuuko awakes and sees her city being attacked by the remains of Rogles's army.

After defeating their commander, Zaluga, he tells Yuuko that they were there seeking revenge for the death of their master and to take the Valis sword so they could use it and the phantasm jewels to defeat the new menace on Dream World, known as the cruel king Megas, who appeared in Yuuko's dreams. Encouraged by Valia, Yuuko goes to the dream world facing many obstacles as Megas starts a scheme to capture Valia with his most powerful weapon, the Vecanta Canon. Valia wants to help Yuuko as she starts to get more and more damaged, but her servants warns her about the danger of being captured by Megas if she appears outside Vanity castle.

Megas then sends Haizen to take the last phantasm jewel from the last of Rogles's generals, Gaias, who dies after fighting Yuuko making it easier for Haizen to steal his Phantasm jewelry just before he could give it to the Valis warrior. Megas tries to intimidate Yuuko in the moment as she goes to chase Haizen for the Phantasm jewel, but after killing him, she finds out that the jewel is already on Megas's power. Yuuko falls totally weakened and Valia goes to help her.

Megas approaches about the situation and uses the jewel to activate his Vecanta canon to capture Valia. She resists but Megas uses his canon to maximum power making his own castle to explode killing many of his servants, but he finally succeeded on kidnapping Valia. Yuuko, now healed by Valia, goes to Megas's hideout to rescue her only to find Megas about to kill Valia. Terrorified, Yuuko takes of her armor and leaves her sword following Megas's tasks to free Valia, but he finally kills the queen of Vanity and tries to kill Yuuko also. Yuuko shouts desperately as someone cuts Megas's hand and rescues her and the now dead Valia.

This person reveals itself as Reiko whose spirit materialized in the Dream world. As Yuuko cries over Valia's corpse, Reiko cheers up her to end with Megas once for all. Yuuko then uses the Phantasm jewelry to transform her Valis armor on the Hyper armor and goes after Megas. After fighting him and defeating him, Megas stays perplex as he can't believe being defeated by a young woman, Yuuko tells him that she has the power of love and true friends by her side, thing that Megas doesn't has. Furious, Megas states that while there are humans in the Real world, there will be hate and dark emotions, and he can return someday. He explodes afterwards.

After this, Valia's spirit appears to congratulate Yuuko and then Valna appears with Valia's servants to introduce herself to Yuuko, also feeling prideful for having a brave sister. Later, Reiko decides to part ways not before having Yuuko's gratitude for her help and support as a friend. In the end, Yuuko returns to the city and watches the night in the panoramic view of the city.

Gameplay[]

The console and computer versions of the game were developed by different staff so the gameplay of first version, the PC Engine CD one, vastly differs from the computer version (PC-88, PC-98, MSX2 and X68000).

PCE CD and TG16 CD version[]

The gameplay is that of a regular action-platform game. Yuuko can collect spells as items with limited number of uses. Items are obtained directly in stages or by destroying enemies. This version also haves a score system. The score can be increased by collecting score crystals. For every 10000 points you collect, you can get an extra life. The objective is to travel the stage battling enemies and jumping obstacles until the player reaches the boss of the stage. The final stage has auto-scrolling.

Spell list[]

Sand clock: Paralyses enemies on screen for a few seconds. Number of uses: 1

Protect: Generates up to 2 energy balls to rotate around Yuuko, hitting nearby enemies. Number of uses: 4

Integral: Makes Yuuko invulnerable for a short period of time. Number of uses: 1

Thunder: Inflicts damage on all enemies on screen. Number of uses: 3

Miscellaneous[]

Blue crystal: score item, earning you 1000 points. By reaching 100.000 the player gets an extra life.

Shield: Improves Yuuko's defence.

Big Heart: Extends Yuuko's HP bar.

Red heart: Recovers 1/4 of Yuuko's HP bar.

Blue heart: Recovers 1/2 of Yuuko's HP bar.

Yuuko's face: Grants the player one extra life.

MSX2, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions[]

The MSX, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions' gameplay varies in the sense that Yuuko is now terribly fast, making it hard to control when enemies come to you, But has many improvements in turn. In the pause menu you can change Yuuko's suit to many others unlocked along the game. It also has a spell MP energy bar system like its predecessor.

Suits/Armor[]

Armor Max HP Damage Jewel points Pajamas 0 -00% 0 Sailor 10 -00% 75 Blazer 12 -00% 75 Valis Suit 15 -00% 75 Offense 45 -00% 75 Defense 45 -50% 75 Reiko type 30 -00% 75 Hyper suit 72 -50% 75

Spell list[]

Diff: Paralyzes enemies on screen for some seconds. Some enemies can still fire shots when frozen. MP cost: 5 points

Protect: Makes 2 energy balls to rotate around Yuuko hitting the enemies. MP cost: 10 points.

Integral: Makes Yuuko invulnerable for a short time. MP cost: 15 points.

Crash: Destroys any enemies on screen. MP cost: 20 points.

Other items[]

Jump item: It helps Yuuko to fly in some parts of the game.

Recover item: It only appears before you fight a boss. It helps Yuuko by recovering her HP.

Red jewel: Recovers 5 MP points from Yuuko's counter.

Blue jewel: Recovers 10 MP points from Yuuko's counter.

Valis attack system[]

Both versions have in common the Valis attack power-up system.

Power-ups[]

Normal shot: the normal standard shot that Yuuko has as default weapon. The more power-ups from it you collect, the more shots you can fire in a round.

Wave shot: fires a sonic wave shot. The shot becomes wider with every power-up you collect. It can also block enemy projectiles (though not those fired by bosses)

Double shot: fires two shots, one forward and one in diagonal-up forward. For every power-up you collect, you can fire one more time the pair of shots in a round.

Homing shot: fires a projectile that hits the nearest enemy on the screen. For every power-up you collect, you can fire one more shot in a round.

Versions[]

The first version was launched for the PC Engine CD in Japan on 1989-06-23, which as translated and released for the TurboGrafx-16 CD on 1990-05-23 in America.

The computer version for PC-88 was launched on 1989-07-08 in Japan, followed by the PC-98 and MSX2 versions on 1989-08-05. The Sharp X68000 version was released months after them on 1989-11-18.

Unlike its predecessor and its successor, for reasons unknown, Valis II was never released for the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis. For this platform, instead, Telenet Japan created a parody of this game named Valis SD/Syd of Valis with the same characters but with a Super Deformed parody style and music.

The PCE CD/TG-16 CD version was included in the Valis Complete and Valis Complete Plus compilations in 2006 and 2011 and re-launched on March 16th of that same year for PlayStation Network.

The game was remade by Bandai for mobile phones in 2007 being the second one for this platform. It also includes a wide variety of suits for Yuuko as it did in the first game remake for the mobile phones.

Differences[]

In the MSX2, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions the story has some differences with the PCE CD/TG16 CD in the events.

Some characters from Megas' army are different in both versions.

Level structure and enemies are also changed.

The PCE CD/TG16 CD version lacks the suit variety that Yuuko had in the MSX and PC88/98 versions.

The items in the MSX2, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions are more limited than the PCE CD/TG16 CD versions.

In the the PCE CD/TG16 CD version, Yuuko starts with the normal shot as the default weapon.

The MSX and PCE CD/TG16 CD versions have voice support.

When losing in the MSX2, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions, the player has to start from the begging of the level. In the PCE CD/TG16 CD version, the player can have more than one life and can start from the last checkpoint passed.

In the MSX, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions, the spells are obtained by defeating bosses. In the PCE CD/TG16 CD version, they are obtained by collecting them as items and have limited uses.

The MSX, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98 versions show the material for mature audiences featuring gore and nudity all in a dark environment.

The character designs are different between the old (MSX2, Sharp X68000 and PC88/98) versions and the new one (PCE CD/TG16 CD).

Reception[]

The home computer releases for Valis II (MSX2, X68000, PC-88/98), as well as the PC Engine CD-ROM²/TurboGrafx-CD version, all received positive reviews.

Scripts[]

Main Article: Valis II/Script

Gallery[]

Console version[]

Computer version[]

Trivia[]

This is the first game of the series to have versions with voice support (PC Engine, PC-88 and Sharp X68000).

Unlike its predecessor and successor, for reasons unknown, this game was not released on the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis.

Sprites in the PCE-CD/TGCD version of this game have the less quantity of animation frames than any other game in the series.

By using an input code on the pause menu in the PCE-CD/TGCD version, the player can select any weapon and/or spell it wants.

This is the shortest game from the main series, having only six stages.

This game marks the first appearance of the Valis armor's ultimate form.

Many scenes from this game were used on Yuko's flashback in Valis IV.

This is the first game from the series to feature a description from the bosses status before you fight them. This wasn't repeated until the Super Famicom/SNES version of Valis IV.

This is the first game where the Leethus sword appears (although its name isn't mentioned), but there isn't an explanation about why Valia's servants gave Yuko the sword and it's also unknown how Glames obtains it in Valis III.

[]