Valis II is an action-adventure game developed by Telenet Japan, Laser Soft and Reno. It came out on 23-06-1989. It was published by Sunsoft. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. You can play Valis II on Genesis. It was scored by Tenpei Sato.

Realms of the Haunting is an action-adventure game developed by Gremlin Interactive. It came out on 31-12-1996. Blue Moon Red Owl published the game. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. Realms of the Haunting is available on PC, Linux and macOS. The game is sold via GOG and Steam.

Golden Axe is an action-arcade game developed by SEGA and Digital Eclipse. It came out on 30-11-2006. It was published by SEGA. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". You can play Golden Axe on PlayStation 3, iOS, PC and Xbox 360. You can purchase the game on PlayStation Store, App Store, Steam and Nintendo eShop. It was scored by Jeroen Godfried Tel and You Takada.

Dragon Forge is an indie, action, adventure and RPG game developed by Legend Studio. It was originally released in 2022. Legend Studio published the game. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. You can play Dragon Forge on Linux, macOS and PC. You can purchase the game on Steam.

Earthworm Jim is an action, arcade and platformer game developed by Gameloft and Shiny Entertainment. It came out on 02-08-1994. It was published by SEGA. Earthworm Jim has a Metascore of 72, based on professional reviews. Most rawgers rated the game as "Exceptional". Earthworm Jim is available on Linux, macOS, PC and Game Gear. The game is sold via GOG, Steam, Epic Games Store and Nintendo eShop. David Luehmanh produced the game. Tommy Tallarico scored the game.

Incredipede is an indie, action, adventure and simulation game developed by Northway Games and Colin Northway with art by Thomas Shahan. It came out on 24-10-2012. It was published by Northway Games. Incredipede has a Metascore of 74, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. Incredipede is available on Android, macOS, Linux and PC. The game is sold via GOG, Steam, Google Play and App Store.

RED is an action, adventure, RPG and puzzle game developed by 貓蛋, STILILA and storyk21674. It was originally released in 2017. It was published by Ｌｅｍｏｎ Ｂａｌｍ. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. RED is available on PC and Android. The game is sold via Steam and Google Play.

Moo Lander is an indie, action, adventure and platformer game developed by The Sixth Hammer. It was originally released in 2022. The Sixth Hammer published the game. Moo Lander is available on PC and Nintendo Switch. The game is sold via GOG, itch.io and Steam.

Garten of Banban 4 is a casual action-adventure game developed by Euphoric Brothers. It came out on 11-08-2023. It was published by Euphoric Brothers. You can play Garten of Banban 4 on PC. You can purchase the game on Steam.

Youropa is an indie action-adventure game developed by frecle ApS. It was originally released in 2018. It was published by frecle ApS. Youropa has a Metascore of 74, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. You can play Youropa on Nintendo Switch and PC. You can purchase the game on Steam.

Night Gate is an indie, action, adventure and RPG game developed by DangerousBob Studio. It was originally released in 2022. It was published by DangerousBob Studio. Night Gate is available on PC. The game is sold via Steam.