,

ETCIO

Updated On Nov 2, 2016 at 04:58 PM IST

Bangalore: Francisco Partners and Elliott Management on Tuesday said they have completed the acquisition of Dell Software Group and announced the formation of two separate companies including – Quest and SonicWall.

With this, SonicWall commenced its new business identity and operations as an independent security vendor.

Dell Software Group had acquired SonicWall in 2012 but after a stint of close to five years, Dell decided to sell-off SonicWall and Quest Software to private equity investors Francisco Partners and Elliott Management in June this year.

The primary reason for Dell to sell-off SonicWall and Quest Software, according to industry experts was company’s own acquisition plan of EMC, which cost CEO Michael Dell a whooping $67 billion from company’s balance sheet.

However for SonicWall -- it’s a start of a new life as an independent security vendor. Being in the industry for past 25 years, SonicWall has successfully created its own niche in the firewall and network security space focused on small and medium enterprises and businesses.

SonicWall’s new management named cybersecurity industry veteran Bill Conner as company’s president and CEO, while Jeff Hawn was named CEO of Quest.

Prior to this appointment, Conner spent close to a year at Silent Circle - a global private communication service provider based in Switzerland. In a long career of over 30 years, Conner has worked with AT&T, Nortel, Entrust and also founded FWC Consulting.

“Like any veteran of the cybersecurity field, I’ve known SonicWall by its sterling reputation since the company’s early days as a business network security solution provider.”

“Today, it’s a great privilege to find myself at the helm of this world-class team during not only one of the most exciting times in the business’ 25-year history, but also the most complex and critical cybersecurity landscape the world has ever seen,” Conner wrote in a blog post.

He said that being an independent company would allow more focus on relationships with customers and channel partners and in serving markets of all sizes with specific strengths in large distributed environments, campus education, retail, financial, healthcare and government institutions.

Certainly under the leadership of Conner, SonicWall is expected to grow and expand its business, which could mean company will have to face a strong competition from other security vendors.

In the current state, the security segment is appears bit overcrowded with as many as 25 large, mid-size and small players including Symantec, RSA, F-Secure, Trend Micro, McAfee, IBM Security, Palo Alto Networks, A10 Networks, Cisco, Fortinet, FireEye and more.

Given this situation, SonicWall’s new journey as an independent security vendor is unlikely to be easy going ahead however the advantage in its favour is the brand name that has been around for over two decades now and did flourished when it was part of Dell.

By ,

ETCIO

Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals

Subscribe to our newsletter to get latest insights & analysis.

Download ETCIO App

Get Realtime updates

Save your favourite articles