By ANTHONY SPAULDING

aspaulding@njherald.com

For the last five years, the Sussex Skyhawks have flown south for the winter after a long season in the Can-Am League.

However, the professional baseball team will not return to Sussex County in 2011 after being deemed inoperable Monday when the league finalized its schedule for the year.

"Sussex is no more," said Skyhawks manager Ed Ott, who received the news from the Can-Am League shortly after 4 p.m. Monday. "I was hoping we would be able to come back this year and things would be able to work out where a team would still be in existence there."

The Skyhawks' existence officially ended when the Can-Am admitted the Rockland Boulders, a new expansion franchise from Ramapo, N.Y., into the league as part of an eight-team circuit. In addition, the league replaced the Skyhawks with the New York Federals, a road team run by the New York State League, so it can have eight baseball clubs competing in the upcoming season.

Can-Am League President Dan Moushon said the state of the Skyhawks, who were put up for sale by owner Floyd Hall Enterprises after not resigning a stadium lease with Millenium Sports Management, was the reason for their termination.

"The previous ownership group was not going to come back to operate," Moushon said. "We would like to be in Sussex, but there was a situation with the lease involved there. It came a point in January where we needed to move forward."

Floyd Hall and Millenium Sports tried to find prospective buyers for both the Skyhawks and Skylands Park since the 2010 season ended, according to a note on the team's official Facebook page that was published on Dec. 22. However, the note said there were "several weeks of unfruitful lease negotiations" between Millenium Sports and the buyers.

Ott said it was "disappointing" to not see Millenium Sports get a deal done.

"They weren't willing to make a compromise at all," Ott said. "Evidently, they're not that worried about having a baseball franchise in there."

After watching the Skyhawks play the last two seasons, the owners may of had a good reason not to worry.

Sussex have posted a combined 73-112 record in the last two years, going 38-56 in 2009 and 35-56 in 2010 while missing the playoffs both times. In the five-year history of the franchise, the Skyhawks had only one winning season, coming in 2008 when the team finished 52-42 while winning the Can-Am League championship.

With the Skyhawks gone, the Can-Am League's current franchises are the Brockton Rox, New Jersey Jackals, Newark Bears, New York Federals, Pittsfield Colonials, Quebec Capitales, the Rockland Boulders and Worcester Tornadoes. Former players such as Joe Persichina said they will miss playing baseball in Sussex County.

"It was a fun place to play while we played there," said Persichina, who started at second base for the Skyhawks in 2010. "We had some good fans turn out. It's just too bad."

Despite the bad news, Persichina and the 10 remaining players on the team will be put on waivers on Wednesday. If no one claims them, they will be considered free agents in the league. Pitcher Tim Stringer, who had been on the club since 2009, echoed the same sentiments as Persichina.

"The organization was pretty good to us," Stringer said. "I can't say I had too many complaints. It was a good experience."