By ANTHONY SPAULDING

aspaulding@njherald.com

On Aug. 29, the Sussex Skyhawks played their last home game of the 2010 baseball season. It may have been the final day of professional baseball in Sussex County.

The owners of the Skyhawks have been seeking a buyer for the franchise for the 2011 season, according to the team's official Facebook page on Wednesday.

"The Sussex Skyhawks are for sale," stated the team's note, which was posted on the social-networking website at 1:27 a.m Wednesday. "As it stands now, there is no lease for 2011 at Skylands Park... There is a possibility that someone buys the team, and signs a lease with Millenium Sports (Management) to play at Skylands Park, but if the season were to start tomorrow, the Skyhawks would go inactive."

From the time the season officially ended on Sept. 6, there have been "several weeks of unfruitful lease negotiations" between Millenium Sports and a few prospective buyers, according to the note. In addition, the note said Floyd Hall, whose Floyd Hall Enterprises owns the Skyhawks, is "looking to unload the 'Hawks from his portfolio, to once again focus on the (New Jersey) Jackals."

With next season up in the air, Skyhawks general manager Ben Wittkowski traded or released most of the squad's players for "cash or future considerations," the team said in the note. Currently, the Skyhawks have 10 players on the roster for the 2011 season. A phone message left for Wittkowski was not immediately returned.

"The reality is that the Can-Am League cannot operate with seven teams," the Skyhawks said. "An eighth team will need to join, or one team leave, to maintain an even number."

The Can-Am League's current lineup includes the Skyhawks, Brockton Rox, New Jersey Jackals, Newark Bears, Pittsfield Colonials, Quebec Capitales and Worcester Tornadoes.

Also, the note said a ballpark is supposedly being constructed in Rockland County, N.Y., "with the intentions of housing a Can-Am franchise" this season. But it said the progress of the stadium and the franchise were "unclear."

If the New York team is created, Skyhawks manager Ed Ott said the Skyhawks could still play in the league even though they will not have a home.

"So if New York comes in, probably what they're gonna have to do is make the Skyhawks a traveling team," Ott said. "That way, the seven owners of the league will pick up the cost of having the ballclub being run."

Ott said Can-Am has used a travel team in years past in order to keep the league running. Moreover, Ott said the cost of the possible travel team will not be as big as people think.

"The simple reason is every one of the seven teams will get that many more home games because the team is on the road at all times," Ott said. "They will get a lot of their money back due to having home games, their fans, concession stands and whatever."

In the meantime, the team said Floyd Hall Enterprises will continue to look for a buyer before the Can-Am League announces its schedule for next season, which will come after the new year. But if the team does not find a buyer, Ott said it will be tough to see the franchise go.

"It's a shame because a lot of players are gonna be out of a job," Ott said.