SUSSEX COUNTY — When it was first built in a farmfield in rural Sussex County, Skylands Park was dubbed the "Field of Dreams," based on the popular Kevin Costner movie.

At the time, it was as if the 1989 movie with its signature line "build it and they will come" had come to life.

The fans came in droves when the ballpark opened in 1994 — setting new New York-Penn League records — to watch the New Jersey Cardinals, a Class A minor league team affiliated with Major League Baseball, and possibly get a glimpse of a budding young star.

Today, the future of Skylands Park remains uncertain — the owners of the Skyhawks have not renewed their lease after a five-year stint, possibly leaving Sussex County without professional baseball this summer for the first time since the Cardinals came to town.

On Feb. 3, the township will hold a tax sale on the ballpark to recoup the $31,000 of unpaid fourth-quarter 2010 property taxes. Meanwhile, Millennium Sports, the ballpark’s owners, continue to search for a new tenant to replace the departed Skyhawks.

"Attendance was never what we hoped it would be. We never led the league in attendance, but we were never at the bottom. We never achieved our goal of about 2,500, which we thought was possible. That just never really happened," said Larry Hall, president of the Floyd Hall Enterprises, of Little Falls, which owns the Skyhawks.

"Even 200 or 300 more would’ve helped," said Hall, whose firm also owns the New Jersey Jackals, a Can-Am team that plays its home games at Yogi Berra Stadium at Montclair State University.

At the tax sale, the township will seek an investor to buy a lien on the ballpark property. The investor will put up the $31,000 to pay the back taxes, which the township will receive a year or two later. If, and when, the ballpark is sold, the investor would gets his or her $31,000 back — plus some hefty interest.

Millennium Sports, which also owns the 28 acres surrounding the ballpark, pays $121,500 annually in taxes to Frankford Township. The ballpark is assessed at $6.7 million, according to tax records.

Frankford Township Committeeman Sam Castimore, a veterinarian who runs his office on Route 206 near Skylands Park, said if the ballpark is lost for good, the loss of tax revenue from the township’s largest taxpayer would have an immense impact on the township’s finances.

"We’re going to have to spend less and encourage the state to allow more commercial ratables. We desperately need more commercial ratables," he said. "When you have 25 ratables and you lose one, you can survive. But one minus one is a big hit. This is a big hit for a rural area like us."

Castimore would not rule out the possibility of future municipal employee layoffs because of the loss of tax revenue.

"The money is going to have to be made up someplace. They (the employees) are going to be needing career guidance," he said.

Irene Wilson of Hardyston, who regularly made several trips per year to Skylands Park to watch the Skyhawks with her husband and eight children, said she will sorely miss the Skyhawks.

"That’s such a shame. Going to the games was always very enjoyable and affordable. It was the best entertainment value around here," said Wilson, who eldest son, Paul, worked in the concessions stands at the ballpark for several years following his graduation from Pope John XXIII Regional High School in Sparta.

Kevin Kelly, an attorney who represents the ballpark owners, Millennium Sports Management Inc., said other minor league teams are interested in moving to Skylands Park, and negotiations are under way. There is a possibility of a major league-affiliated team returning to the ballpark, he said.

College and high school baseball teams, as well as some recreational teams, will continue to be played this summer at Skylands Park, which is home to the New Jersey Stags, a semi-pro football team, in the fall.

"Other teams have expressed an interest in coming and there’s an opportunity to do a lot more events there," said Kelly, adding that Floyd Hall Enterprises stopped paying rent in September and its lease was subsequently terminated.

"This is not a doom-and-gloom situation by any means," he said.

In its inaugural season in 1994, the New Jersey Cardinals, which once boasted a waiting list for season tickets, attracted more than 140,000 fans. The following year, more than 150,000 fans went through the turnstiles at the ballpark in the former farmfield.

More than a decade later, the Cardinals moved to a new home in State College, Pa., due to declining attendance and a new team, the Sussex Skyhawks of the independent Canadian-American League, moved into the 4,200-seat ballpark in the heart of Sussex County at Ross’ Corner in Frankford Township.

"There’s a big difference between being affiliated and being unaffiliated. Part of the thrill of watching an affiliated team is watching the players who might make it to the majors," said Kelly.

"It’s a different level of baseball entirely, the quality of play," he said.

Fans were still treated to all of the amenities of minor league baseball in a family friendly atmosphere. Free T-shirts were launched into the crowd with a large slingshot, singalongs to the popular songs, "YMCA" and "Cotton Eye Joe," were held during the seventh-inning stretch and the team mascot, Scooter, a bright-blue hawk character, patrolled the stands.

Yet attendance slowly dipped. Last year, the Skyhawks averaged 1,670 fans, or 71,810 over the course of its 43 home-game schedule, leaving the ballpark less than half full on games other than the popular fireworks nights. By comparison, the Jackals had an average attendance of 1,954.

But Hall said there were financial issues. Floyd Hall Enterprises never realized the savings it had hoped for when it started the franchise at Skylands Park in 2006.

"We went into this thinking we’d be bigger, stronger and more efficient. We had a central office, but there were no efficiencies. They are two separate organizations," he said. "In Sussex, we tried our best, but the ownership needs to be locally based, not Montclair based."

When the Skyhawks’ left, five full-time employees lost their jobs, said former Skyhawks’ general manager Ben Wittkowski. Another approximately 80 people will not be hired for seasonal work this summer.

"You have to have the right business plan. They say, ‘build it and they will come,’ but nobody is just going to come," said Wittkowski, adding more events and giveaways would have boosted the Skyhawks’ bottom line.

But he remained hopeful that another team would fill the void left by the Skyhawks.

"The potential to be successful is there. Hopefully, something can be worked out," he said.

More Sussex County news: