Barry Gibb is a legendary British pop music singer who is best known as a member of one of the world’s biggest selling and award-winning bands, the Bee Gees, consisting of him and his younger brothers; Robin and Maurice.

Gibb, who was recognized by Queen Elizabeth as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) for his contributions to music and entertainment in 2002 before being subsequently knighted in 2018, he was well known for his high-pitched voice. However, he is more revered for his exceptional talent as a songwriter, as he is widely regarded as the best and most successful in the business alongside Beatles members John Lennon and Paul McCartney.

Biography, Age

Barry Gibb was born Barry Alan Crompton Gibb on September 1, 1946 in Douglas, Isle of Man. Her father, Hugh Gibb, was a musician, while her mother, Barbara Gibb (née Pass), was a homemaker. He is of English, Scottish and Irish ancestry.

Around the age of 9, following the influence of his father, Gibb began playing guitar, while his younger twin brothers Robin and Maurice, along with several other friends, contributed vocals. Their band, which they call The Rattlesnakes, covered songs by popular artists of that era and managed to put on their first performance on December 28, 1957. A year later, after the Gibb family moved, the brothers changed their name and became Wee. Johnny Hayes and the Blue Cats.

The band later changed their name to the Bee Geesen 1958 when the family moved to Australia. Here they performed at various places including hotels, clubs and speedways to earn money. Barry Gibb then left school in 1961 to devote himself to his music and managed to secure a deal with Australian record company Festival Records. The band released a number of songs and wrote for other artists around the country before returning to England in 1967, where they met and signed Robert Stigwood. The rest, as they say, is history.

Barry Gibb net worth

Barry Gibb has enjoyed enormous success as a musician. His group, the Bee Gees, are among the best-selling acts of all time alongside Michael Jackson, Elvis Presley, the Beatles and Paul McCartney. On a personal note, Gibb himself is an award-winning songwriter and producer and has worked with a number of top artists. All of this work and worldwide acclaim earned him a fortune estimated at around $90 million.

Family – wife, children

Barry Gibb is currently married to former Miss Edinburgh, Linda Gibb (née Grey). The pair are said to have met while taping the BBC show Top of the Pops in London before marrying almost immediately on September 1, 1970, Gibb’s 24th birthday, which found just three months after his death. and his first wife divorced him. His first marriage was at age 19, when Gibb exchanged vows with Maureen Bates, but the marriage only lasted four years.

Gibb revealed that Linda Grey, who was just 17 when they met, was the most beautiful woman he had ever met. He added that he faced stiff competition from people like Steve McQueen, who tried to get away with her on a motorbike but, for some reason, she chose to stay with him. Barry and Linda have been together for nearly five years and have welcomed five children. Stephen, born in 1973, Ashley, born in 1977, then Travis, born in 1981. The last two are Michael, born in 1984 and Alexandra, whom they welcomed seven years later, in 1991.

Stephen, the couple’s eldest son called Steven, followed in his father’s footsteps to become a musician. He was a member of many hard rock and metal bands such as 58, Crowbar, Kingdom of Sorrow, Black Label Society and Saigon Kick.

Height, weight and other facts

Birth name: Barry Alan Crompton Gibb

Date of birth: September 1, 1946

Place of birth: Douglas, Isle of Man

Zodiac sign: Virgo

Height: 5 feet 11 inches (180.3 cm)

Weight: 79 kg (174.2 lbs)