Barry Gibb is famous for being a member of The Bee Gees, but at home, he’s simply known as “dad.” The musician is a father to five kids, whom he shares with his wife, Linda Gray. While some of their children went on to pursue careers in the entertainment industry, a few others chose different paths. Keep reading to learn more about Barry’s incredible family!

Stephen ‘Steve’ Gibb

The eldest of the Gibb kids — who was born in December 1973 — took an interest in playing guitar when he was 13 years old. Steve has contributed to various bands, including Black Label Society, and he joined Barry on his Mythology Tour in Australia and New Zealand. Steve is now married to his wife, Gloria Levas, and they are parents to children Angus and Nina.

During a 2013 interview with The Australian, Steve noted it was a “thrill” to see his “eldest son” on stage with him.

In 2016, Steve and his brother Ashley helped their dad write his album In the Now. Upon releasing the record, Barry told Billboard that he needed his children to encourage him to get back into making music again.

“They give me that youth. They give me that fire,” he told the outlet at the time.

Ashley Gibb

Ashley was Linday and Barry’s second-born child. They welcomed him in September 1977. Even though he wasn’t an experienced songwriter, Ashley joined his father and brother Steve in co-writing the album In the Now. Not only that, but Barry even brought Ashley and Steve in to help him co-write Barbara Streisand’s album Guilty Pleasures.

The second eldest son of the Gibb family is married to his wife, Therese Gibb. They share a son named Lucas together.

Travis Gibb

Travis was born in January 1981 and is reportedly working as a Miami-based real estate agent. He is currently marriage to wife Stacy Bash Gibb, whom he shares kids Layla and Liam with.

Michael Gibb

Michael was born in December 1984. According to multiple reports, Linda and Barry named their son Michael after Barry’s late friend Michael Jackson. Although he did not pursue music like his dad and brothers did, Michael became an actor. He has appeared in films, including Rainbows, Buddies and Stan the Man, per his IMDb profile.

Alexandra Gibb

In December 1991, Barry and Linda welcomed their only daughter, Alexandra. Although not much is known about her career, Alexandra has appeared at a few red carpet events alongside her father over the years.