NEW YORK, June 28, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Legendary Grammy award winning singer/songwriter/producer Barry Gibb has signed with Columbia Records and will release his first album with the label titled, In The Now, in the fall of 2016. The surviving member of one of music's most successful and revered bands, the Bee Gees, (formed with his brothers Robin and Maurice), has kept In The Now a family affair, writing all the songs with his sons Stephen and Ashley.

Produced by Barry and co-producer John Merchant, the album is only the second solo effort of Gibb's career and his first album of all new material since the Bee Gees final studio album in 2001. In The Now is an impassioned solo effort that signals a welcome return of one of the most identifiable and versatile voices in the history of rock, pop, and R&B. The 12-track album was recorded in Miami with the same gathering of accomplished musicians Barry assembled for his acclaimed 2014 solo tour.

As a record producer/songwriter, Barry has been instrumental in creating milestones for other artists, ranging from Barbra Streisand's 'Guilty' album to Dolly Parton and Kenny Rogers' country record 'Islands In The Stream' also, Diana Ross's 'Eaten Alive featuring 'Chain Reaction' as well as Dionne Warwick's 'Heartbreaker' album.

"This is a dream come true for me. It's a new chapter in my life. I always hoped one day that The Bee Gees would be with Columbia or indeed Sony so, it's a great joy for me to start again this way with such great people."

Between Robin, Maurice, and Andy, the Gibb brothers achieved 19 number one records on the Billboard charts including, a phenomenal 6 in a row equaling The Beatles record.

"I will never forget my brothers, they will always be a part of everything I do. Our dream came true."

Barry returned to live performing in 2013-2014 with the Mythology Tour, celebrating the Bee Gees anthology release of the same name as a tribute to his three brothers. The acclaimed tour included shows in Australia, New Zealand, England, Ireland, and The U.S., garnering an outpouring of affection and critical praise from around the world.

For more information, please visit http://www.barrygibb.com/.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160627/383701

SOURCE Columbia Records