“Camp Rock” is one of the most important movies in the Disney Channel’s history, and its cast is second to none. Welcome to MsMojo, and today we’re counting down the “Camp Rock” cast – where are they now?

For this list, we’ll be looking at actors and actresses from the iconic Disney Channel movie “Camp Rock” and seeing what they’ve been up to in recent years.

#10: Jordan Francis

Jordan Francis played Barron James, a rapper, break dancer, and good friend to Caitlyn. Jordan saw success following “Camp Rock,” providing voices for the children’s animated show “Franny’s Feet” and playing Dave Wynott on the Family Channel’s “Connor Undercover.” He also took the stage with the Jonas Brothers in 2010 for their Jonas Brothers Live in Concert tour, which promoted their fourth album, Lines, Vines, and Trying Times. Feel old yet? In 2013, he began hosting “Cross Country Fun Hunt” on the Canadian channel CBC, which saw Jordan traveling all over Canada on his titular fun hunt.

#9: Jasmine Richards

“Camp Rock” wasn’t Jasmine Richards’s first acting role, but it definitely opened up a few doors for her. Following her role as Margaret Dupree, she played Tara Bohun on the Canadian show “Overruled!,” which told the story of a Teen Court in high school. In 2011, she began voicing Maya on the YTV animated series “Redakai: Conquer the Kairu” and later played Reggie on the Global drama “Bomb Girls,” which followed a group of women working at a munitions factory during World War II. Unfortunately, that was Jasmine’s last major role, and she seems to have retreated from the public spotlight in recent years.

#8: Anna Maria Perez de Tagle

Anna Maria got in some acting practice on “Hannah Montana” before killing it as Ella Pador in “Camp Rock.” Following “Camp Rock 2” in 2010, Anna Maria took to Broadway, performing in the revival of “Godspell” at the Circle in the Square Theatre. She has remained relatively quiet since then, appearing in a few short films, one episode of “Baby Daddy,” and one episode of the rebooted “Charmed” in 2018. She also married her long-time partner Scott Kline Jr. in June of 2019, with acclaimed actress Uzo Aduba from “Orange Is the New Black” serving as her maid of honor.

#7: Roshon Fegan

In “Camp Rock,” Roshon Fegan portrayed Sander Loyer, a rapper and dancer close to Jordan Francis’s Barron James. Like his co-stars, Roshon has popped up in random jobs since “Camp Rock 2.” His most substantial role is that of Ty Blue in the Disney Channel’s “Shake It Up,” a role which he inhabited for three years and 59 episodes. Since then, he has appeared on “Parenthood,” “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” and “Insecure.” In 2017, he landed his most substantial post-“Shake It Up” role and played Isaiah Hambrick in 14 episodes of “Greenleaf,” an Oprah Winfrey Network drama about the titular Greenleaf family and their megachurch.

#6: Kevin Jonas

Kevin Jonas has been insanely busy in recent years. After announcing the Jonas Brothers’ hiatus in 2013, Kevin went to work on other avenues of success. He founded a construction company and real estate development firm called JonasWerner, created a food app called Yood, and became the CEO of The Blu Market, which is geared towards social media influencers. And while that’s all well and good, fans just wanted one thing – more Jonas Brothers! Luckily, they got their wish in 2019, when it was announced that the band was getting back together. They released the single Sucker, which peaked at #1 and has been certified 2x platinum.

#5: Meaghan Martin

Meaghan Martin played the series’ main antagonist/anti-hero Tess Tyler, daughter of the renowned T.J. Tyler. “Camp Rock” was her first major role, and it proved immensely successful for the young actress. Immediately following the first movie she landed the role of Bianca Stratford in the TV adaptation of “10 Things I Hate About You.” She also scored the lead role of Jo Mitchell in “Mean Girls 2,” and from 2013 to 2015 she played Julie #2 in the MTV drama “Awkward.” Stretching into other media, she has also ventured into the video game industry, voicing Naminé in the “Kingdom Hearts” series and playing Jess in the 2015 horror game “Until Dawn.” Her personal life is also going swimmingly, as she married her boyfriend Oli Higginson in September 2016.

#4: Nick Jonas

Since the Jonas Brothers began in 2005, Nick has slowly become the most “Hollywood” of the boys. Following the dissolution of the band, Nick appeared in 40 episodes of the Audience Network drama “Kingdom” and has landed roles in major Hollywood blockbusters, including “Midway” and the “Jumanji” movies. He also launched a successful solo career, releasing the albums Nick Jonas and Last Year Was Complicated and scoring successful singles like “Chains,” “Close,” and “Jealous.” Nick became the second Jonas bro to marry (after Kevin), tying the knot with Indian actress Priyanka Chopra in December 2018.

#3: Alyson Stoner

It makes sense that dancer Caitlyn Gellar was played by Alyson Stoner, as she has professionally danced for artists like Missy Elliott, Eminem, and Will Smith. Stoner has remained incredibly busy in the years since “Camp Rock,” both in front of the camera and microphone. In 2014 she reprised her role as Camille Gage in “Step Up: All In,” but she has mainly focused on vocal work. She has provided her voice for “Young Justice,” “The Legend of Korra,” and “Milo Murphy’s Law.” She has also done the voices of Kairi and Xion in the “Kingdom Hearts” series since 2008. Alyson continues to release music on a regular basis, including the non-album single “Stripped Bare,” which was released in February 2019.

#2: Joe Jonas

Joe Jonas has remained in a spot between Kevin and Nick – not as reclusive as Kevin, but not nearly as popular as Nick. Joe kept busy following the dissolution of the Jonas Brothers, playing Johnny Casino in “Grease Live” and serving as a mentor on season 13 of “The Voice.” Following his stint as mentor, he sojourned to Australia and served as a judge on season 7 of “The Voice Australia.” He also released music under his band DNCE, which became well known for their 4x platinum-selling single “Cake by the Ocean.” Lately, he has voiced Kraken in “Hotel Transylvania 3,” reunited with his brothers, and married Queen Sansa herself, Sophie Turner.

#1: Demi Lovato

Following “Camp Rock,” Demi Lovato’s career blew wide open. She has released six studio albums, all of which have peaked within the top five on the Billboard 200. She has also released countless successful singles, including 2017’s “Sorry Not Sorry,” which peaked at a career-high #6 and was certified 4x platinum. Unfortunately, Lovato has suffered some personal setbacks, having relapsed after six years of sobriety and suffering a significant drug overdose in the summer of 2018, which put her out of the public spotlight. Luckily, she seems to be on the upswing, with plans for a new album, a recurring role on “Will & Grace,” and a starring role in Netflix’s “Eurovision.” It’s great to see, and we wish her all the best.