Jasmine Richards is a Canadian-American actress and a singer. As an actress, she is popular for films like Camp Rock, Overruled, and Picture Day. It was her curiosity and interest for acting that she auditioned for the first time at her sweet 11. She landed as Shakira in her first-ever TV series ‘Timbebalzers’. Later, she debuted with the film Devotion in 2005, playing the role of a protagonist. It was with the film Camp Rock that she gained immense recognition and critical acclaim as an immature artist.

Jasmine Richards was born in 28 June 1990 (Age: 32 Years, as in 2022) in Scarborough, Toronto, Canada. Jasmine Richards is 5 feet and 6 inches tall, and her body weight is around 55 Kg.

Jasmine Richards Biography, Lifestyle, Wiki, Height, Weight, Birthday, Age, Movies, TV Serials, Instagram, Salary, Net Worth, Income, Boyfriend, Family, Father, Mother, Husband, Affairs, Marriage Life, Phone Number, Photos, House, Cars, Awards & Facts

Jasmine Richards Biography/Wiki

Jasmine Richards Personal Life

Jasmine Richards Education

Jasmine Richards Physical Statistics And More

How tall is Jasmine Richards?

How much does Jasmine Richards weigh?

How old is Jasmine Richards?

Jasmine Richards Body Measurements

Jasmine Richards Eye Color

Jasmine Richards Family & Relationship

Jasmine Richards Parents & Siblings

Jasmine Richards Boyfriend & Husband

Jasmine Richards Career

What is Jasmine Richards’s Salary?

Jasmine Richards’s main source of income is Acting, Modeling, and Brand Endorsements.

What is Jasmine Richards’s Net Worth?

Jasmine Richards has an estimated total Net Worth of $500 Thousand.

Jasmine Richards Cars And Bikes Collection

Jasmine Richards has a lot of luxury Cars collection including :

Not known

Some Lesser Known Facts About Jasmine Richards

• She has been very creative since her tender age. As such, she auditioned only at the age of 11 and fortunately got a role in ‘Timeblazers’.

• Besides, she has interest in music and is an avid singer. Moreover, she is also involved in dancing and is a huge fan of hip-hop dance.

• Some of her popular songs includes Forgotten, All Right Now, and You Have the Power featuring Thomas. L.

• Besides being creative, she is also romantic and has dated his beloved Nathan Kress from 2005 to 2008. As of now, there are no clues as to her relationship and boyfriend.

• She is often described as ‘Oakville’s Star of Camp Rock’ for her role-stealing acting playing Peggy.

FAQ

1. What is the current Net Worth of Jasmine Richards?

At present, the Net Worth of Jasmine Richards is $500 Thousand.

2. Where was Jasmine Richards born?

The birthplace of Jasmine Richards is Scarborough, Toronto, Canada.

3. What is Jasmine Richards’s true ethnicity?

She believes in Christianity.

4. What is the educational qualification of Jasmine Richards?

Not known

5. Is Jasmine Richards Married?

Jasmine Richards is married to Mike Caci.