Nick Jonas is an American singer, songwriter and actor. Jonas began acting in theater at the age of seven, and released his debut single in 2002 which caught the attention of Columbia Records, prompting Jonas to form a band with his older brothers, Joe and Kevin, known as the Jonas Brothers. In 2005, Jonas was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes at the age of 13. The group released their debut studio album "It's About Time" through the Columbia label in 2006. After leaving Columbia Records and signing with Hollywood Records, the group released their self-titled second studio album in 2007, which became their breakthrough record. The band became prominent figures on Disney Channel during this time, appearing in the successful musical television film Camp Rock and its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, as well as two of their own series, "Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream" and "Jonas."

The band's third studio album, "A Little Bit Longer," saw continued commercial success for the group; the album's lead single "Burnin' Up" hit the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Following the release of their fourth studio album, "Lines, Vines and Trying Times," the Jonas Brothers confirmed a hiatus. Nick formed a new band known as Nick Jonas & the Administration, who released the album "Who I Am" in 2010. Afterward, Jonas shifted his focus to acting and had a recurring role on the television series "Smash."

After the group's official disbandment in 2013, Jonas began work on his second solo studio album, signing with Island Records and releasing "Nick Jonas" through the label in 2014, which saw the commercial success of the single "Jealous." Jonas later co-founded Safehouse Records, a record label in conjunction with the Island and Hollywood labels. His third studio album "Last Year Was Complicated" peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 chart in the United States.

The Jonas Brothers reformed in early 2019, and released the album "Happiness Begins" in June of that year. In the wake of Happiness Begins, the band garnered a bevy of awards, including three trophies in the categories of “Top Duo/Group,” “Top Radio Songs Artist,” and “Top Radio Song” for “Sucker” at the 2020 Billboard Music Awards, a 2019 MTV VMA for “Best Pop Video,” “Best Duo/Group” at the 2020 iHeart Music Awards, and two Teen Choice Awards, including the prestigious “Decade Award.” They also picked up American Music Awards nominations, a coveted Grammy nomination, and more. Jonas Brothers teamed up with Marshmello for “Leave Before You Love Me,” claiming a Top 10 spot at Top 40 radio for six weeks and tallying millions of streams and views. Jonas' third solo studio album, "Spaceman," was released in 2021.