In Roland Emmerich’s World War II drama Midway, out this week, Nick Jonas plays Bruno Gaido, the real aviation machinist who gunned down an incoming Japanese kamikaze plane that attempted to slam into the USS Enterprise aircraft carrier during the Battle of Midway in 1942. Jonas looks the part, including the New York accent and period-appropriate mustache (more on that later). And there’s good reason.

“This is a really special role,“ Jonas said at the film’s premiere in Los Angeles on Tuesday. “My grandfather served in the military so I am honored to be a part of story that puts a spotlight on this battle and pays respects to Bruno Gaido and to all the brave men and women who served. They are the real heroes.”

“I felt a connection to Bruno Gaido because he’s from a world that I know well,“ continued Jonas, who adopts a New York accent for the film. “He’s from Long Island, and I’m from Jersey, and I spent a lot of time in New York. I know those personalities and that community of people.“

It took a major coincidence for Jonas to find a place in the cast, which also includes Woody Harrelson, Patrick Wilson, Aaron Eckhart, Darren Criss, and Dennis Quaid. According to Emmerich, he first met Jonas when Sony Pictures chairman Tom Rothman introduced the singer while all three happened to be at the same restaurant in Hawaii in 2018.

“Tom came up to me and said, ‘This is Nick Jonas. He’s a really good actor. You should consider him for your movie,’” Emmerich recalled on the red carpet. “At first I didn’t consider him. I was still in the process of getting my leads together. All of a sudden, we heard from Nick’s agent saying he would like to play Bruno Gaido.”

Emmerich, best known for disaster films such as Independence Day and The Day After Tomorrow, agreed to hire Jonas and even offered him a bigger part, but Jonas declined. “I asked him why,” the director said, noting that Jonas told him, “‘I think I can do him justice.’ And that’s when we knew he was perfect to play Bruno, and he became Bruno. When we were not filming, Nick is super quiet, relaxed. He’s like a guy who doesn’t talk much. When the cameras are rolling, he just naturally turns into his character. He‘s on. He’s got natural acting skills.”

Jonas was so invested in the role that it was his idea to grow his own mustache for the part.

“It was real. He wanted to have it. He grew it,” said Emmerich. “He asked me, ‘What do you think?’ I said, ‘We should go with it.‘ But in my contract I had to ask the studio Lionsgate about it. Everyone who has a mustache in the film, I had to run it by them. I took a photo of Nick with my iPhone and sent it to them and got an answer back in 20 minutes. They approved his mustache. It was serious. It had to look right.”

More Great Stories from Vanity Fair

— Our cover story: Joaquin Phoenix on River, Rooney, and Joker

— Plus: why a neurocriminologist left Joker completely stunned

— Charlize Theron’s transformation in the Fox News movie wows at the film’s debut

— Ronan Farrow’s producer reveals how NBC killed its Weinstein story

— Read an exclusive excerpt from the sequel to Call Me by Your Name

— From the Archive: How a near-death Judy Garland’s 1961 Carnegie Hall performance became showbiz legend

Looking for more? Sign up for our daily Hollywood newsletter and never miss a story.

Hollywood

Here: Robert Zemeckis’s New Movie Spans a Century, but the Camera Never Moves

Tom Hanks and Robin Wright reunite the Forrest Gump team for a drama set entirely in one household’s living room.

Movies

The 25 Best Movies on Netflix to Stream Right Now

From comedy classics to recent Oscar winners, these are the titles you don’t want to miss.

Award Season

In Conclave, the Pope Dies—Then the Twisty Search for His Successor Begins

Ralph Fiennes top lines the new film from the director of All Quiet on the Western Front, a thriller about both a personal and a collective crisis of faith—backed by a brilliant ensemble including Isabella Rossellini, Stanley Tucci, and more.

Movies

When You’re 23 and Spielberg Calls: The Wild Origin Story of Jon M. Chu

In an excerpt from his new memoir, the director of Crazy Rich Asians and Wicked remembers the shock and awe.

Business

How Art Mogul Louise Blouin Lost Her Fabled Hamptons Estate

Louise Blouin lost La Dune, the Hamptons estate where she once entertained Prince Andrew and Calvin Klein, but she’s not letting go quietly.

Movies

Paul Mescal vs. Pedro Pascal: A First Look at the Epic Gladiator II

In Ridley Scott’s sequel, a new generation of warriors clashes in a savage Rome: “It’s pretty gnarly.”

Style

At Le Sirenuse, Vacationing Is a Work of Art

All great hotels have top-notch service and ritzy clientele. But how many have a Nicolas Party at the bottom of the pool?

Hollywood

22 Undersung TV Gems to Binge Right This Second

Now that Peak TV has peaked, consider watching one of these unjustly uncelebrated series, handpicked by Maureen Ryan.

News

Lauren Windsor Has a “Substantial Amount” of Secret Recordings She Hasn’t Released Yet

The SCOTUS sting-operator who secretly taped Justice Alito talks to VF about the material she’s yet to drop, her “huge list” of targets, and whether it’s ethical to tell a lie in pursuit of the truth.

Hollywood

Deadpool & Wolverine: Inside the Superhero Movie That Plays Rough

Ryan Reynolds, Hugh Jackman, and filmmaker Shawn Levy reveal how a ping-pong table sent by Blake Lively helped bring R-rated troublemaking to the MCU.