Nick Jonas is one of the world's most quintessential musicians and songwriters. He is globally known for being a part of the band with his brothers, called the Jonas Brothers. The band was first formed in 2006, and at the beginning of their musical journey, the band received an immense amount of applause and appreciation from all around. After five years of musical success, the band decided to take a hiatus to focus on their solo endeavors. After thriving in their own careers, it was in 2019 that the band decided to reunite, and they have been a massive hit to this date.

Besides being a legendary musician, Nick Jonas is also an actor. The diverse artist had surprised the world with his acting skills and on-screen presence. So let’s dive right into the world of Nick Jonas movies as we present a collection of his best and most memorable on-screen performances. From touching dramas to action-packed thrillers, Nick Jonas has established himself as a versatile actor with an extensive filmography. Join us for a cinematic ride as we follow his successful cinematic path, one film at a time.

ALSO READ: WATCH: Priyanka Chopra asks daughter Malti Marie to say ‘Ayodhya’ in cute video; drops pics with Nick Jonas, mom

The Good Half

Nick Jonas had been on a roll. Last year, he appeared in The Good Half, an indie drama that debuted at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 8, 2023. The film, written by Brett Ryland and directed by Robert Schwartzman, is a story of bereavement in which its authors use their personal experiences to connect with audiences on universal themes. And maybe they will smile.

Advertisement

The story revolved around a family that came together in the aftermath of a catastrophe, and tense relationships (in this case, those between a brother and sister) mend as they learnt to accept their loss. The lesson was also familiar: grieving did not follow a straight progression, and families leave too much unsaid. The most astonishing feature was Nick Jonas' performance as the leading man. Jonas' performance as Renn, the joke-cracking, emotionally evasive character, is fascinating, making an otherwise unmemorable (and perhaps unlikable) figure easy to love.

Goat

Nick Jonas overcame his pop idol stereotype to deliver a standout performance in the Andrew Neel-directed Goat. Paramount Home Video purchased international rights from Sundance, where the picture performed well with the Park City audience. Neel, David Gordon Green, and Mike Roberts developed the screenplay based on Brad Land's memoir. The plot revolves around a 19-year-old recovering from a horrible assault who enrolls in the same college as his brother and joins his fraternity. As the hazing escalates in the name of brotherhood, his commitment to his true brother is questioned. Christine Vachon, David Hinojosa, James Franco, and Vince Jolivette of Killer Films are producing, with Robert Halmi Jr., John Wells, and Jim Reeve serving as executive producers.

Advertisement

Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle

Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle was a 2017 American epic thriller comic film directed by Jake Kasdan from a screenplay by Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers, as well as Scott Rosenberg and Jeff Pinkner, based on McKenna's original tale.

The plot revolved around four high school students who came into an outdated video game console and were attracted to the game's jungle atmosphere, literally becoming the adult avatars they select. They discovered that Jumanji was more than simply a game; you must survive it. To complete the game and return to the real world, they must embark on the most dangerous adventure of their lives, learn what Alan Parrish left 20 years ago, and change their perspective on themselves—or they will be trapped in the game indefinitely.

The star cast included Alex Wolff, Ser'Darius Blain, Madison Iseman, Morgan Turner, Dwayne Johnson, Kevin Hart, Karen Gillan, Jack Black, and Nick Jonas.

Advertisement

Jumanji: The Next Level

Jake Kasdan directed and co-wrote Jumanji: The Next Level, together with Jeff Pinkner and Scott Rosenberg. Henry Jackman composed the score, Gyula Pados shot the cinematography, Steve Edwards, Mark Helfrich, and Tara Timpone edited the film, and Bill Brzeski designed it. The cast includes Dwayne Johnson, Karen Gillan, Jack Black, Kevin Kevin, Ashley Scott, Nick Jonas, Colin Hanks, Alex Wolff, Morgan Turner, Ser'Darius Blain, and Rhys Darby.

It also had some new faces, like Danny DeVito, Danny Glover, and Rory McCann. The narrative is similar to that of the first film in that the heroes must obtain a MacGuffin and return it to a specific location in order to save Jumanji. However, by making minor adjustments to the character motivations and introducing new characters with tragic subplots, The Next Level elevates itself above the average adventure film.

Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam

Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam was a 2010 musical television film directed by Paul Hoen, based on a screenplay by Regina Hicks, Karin Gist, and Dan Berendsen. The 80th Disney Channel Original Movie (DCOM) was a sequel to Camp Rock (2008) and stars Demi Lovato, The Jonas Brothers, Maria Canals-Barrera, Meaghan Martin, and Alyson Stoner. In the film, Camp Star, an upstart rival summer music camp, threatens Camp Rock's existence.

Advertisement

The plot of the film revolved around Mitchie, who was back at Camp Rock with her buddies, eager to perform music, dance, and have fun. Her boyfriend was present as well. A new camp has arisen across the lake, fostering a sense of competitiveness or enmity.

Midway

Midway was based on the actual confrontation between the American fleet and the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War II. The decisive naval combat in the Pacific Theatre of the Second World War occurred between June 4 and 7, 1942. Notably, it took place six months after Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor, which the US Navy was still recuperating from. Sir John Keegan, the late English military historian, wrote about the Battle of Midway.

In Roland Emmerich's World War II thriller Midway, Nick Jonas played Bruno Gaido, the genuine aviation machinist who shot down an incoming Japanese kamikaze bomber that attempted to slam into the USS Enterprise aircraft carrier during the Battle of Midway in 1942. Jonas looks the part with his New York accent and period-appropriate mustache.

Chaos Walking

Chaos Walking, based on Patrick Ness' first of three young adult novels, is a science-fiction western set on a colonized planet where men's thoughts may be heard by others. That's a good place to start for a genre film, and Ness, co-screenwriter Christopher Ford, and director Doug Liman do an excellent job of visualizing the premise, with characters' thoughts and feelings swirling around their heads in a purple-blue, wreath-like haze reminiscent of scientists' models of how airborne infections spread. When viewed from a distance, every character with this condition looks like a mood ring. Besides Nick Jonas the star cast also included Tom Holland and Daisy Ridley.

Advertisement