Nick Jonas has been many things in his 24 years: boy-band member. Disney star. Teen idol. Singer-songwriter. Solo artist. Now, finally, he has a new label to add to the mix.

On September 23, the former Jonas Brothers singer cements his new status as a serious actor by starring in the James Franco-produced drama Goat, a traumatic coming-of-age film in which he plays a member of a fraternity whose hazing rituals become deadly. Jonas received unanimous positive reviews from critics for his charismatic performance when the picture first screened at the Sundance Film Festival last January. But the transition from singer to credible actor has been difficult for Jonas, even though he has several years of acting experience. When he was a teenager, he starred in Disney’s Camp Rock movie franchise with Demi Lovato, as well as in the Disney Channel’s sitcom Jonas (alongside his brothers Kevin and Joe.)

Jonas admits that being taken seriously has been an uphill battle: “It’s not been easy at all. In the beginning, there was a lot of bias towards projects that I’ve done in the past, and I’ve really been wanting to cut into a different direction and do something that would challenge me,” Jonas told Vanity Fair at the New York premiere of Goat on Monday night at the Sunshine Cinema. “But, I’ve been diving in headfirst with all the acting projects I’ve had and I think the hard work is paying off.”

In the past two years, Jonas has been actively honing his craft by taking on diverse supporting roles. He showed off his comedy skills in Ryan Murphy’s television horror series, Scream Queens, and currently plays a gay M.M.A. fighter on the DirecTV drama Kingdom.

“*Kingdom *was the first project [where] I was really able to break the bias about me and show my acting abilities,” said Jonas. “Then from that, one of the first scripts I read after I started shooting the show was Goat. I was blown away by the story, and I was thrilled to be cast in this and to go on this journey. I knew it was a role that would challenge me and help me grow. Thankfully, they cast me in it.”

His role in Goat has earned Jonas newfound respect, but he still feels some stress to prove to Hollywood that he is a convincing and versatile actor.

“Yeah, I do feel pressure, but I try to focus on the work and make sure that whatever I’m bringing to the table is the best that I can do,” explained Jonas. “I have to continue to grow. The goal was just to push myself to find great projects and work with great creative people that help me to evolve and grow to be better as an actor.”

One of those creative people that gave Jonas a chance was James Franco. As the producer of Goat—he also makes a cameo in the film as a former fraternity brother—Franco immediately thought Jonas would be perfect for the movie.

“I saw his audition and it was very good,” Franco told Vanity Fair. “I know how hard it is to transition from one medium into another, and he didn’t need to do this. He’s got an amazing career as a musician, but if he wanted to do this, I knew he was going to work extra hard. The pressure was going to be on, and he knew that. So once he made the choice to do this, I knew he was going to throw himself into it.”

Jonas has already booked his next acting gig: he will appear in an upcoming remake of Jumanji, the 1995 feature that starred the late Robin Williams. In the reboot, Jonas joins The Rock, Kevin Hart, and__ Jack Black__.

“I’ve been doing pretty dark films for the most part, but I’m about to go to Hawaii to start shooting Jumanji, which will be a totally different direction than Goat,” he said. “It should be a pretty fun cast, and I hope to learn a lot. So it’s all kind of happening for me.”

As he focuses more of his time on acting, Jonas makes a point to say that performing on screen or on the stage is not a new passion. He caught the acting bug early on.

“I’ve always loved acting. When I was just beginning as a little kid, I was doing Broadway shows and I got to do what I love the most both on one stage—acting and singing, so I was kind of spoiled,” said Jonas, who landed the role of Gavroche in Les Misérables at age 10. “So to get to do that now is a real big honor. I’m the luckiest guy.”