When it comes to Bollywood, it’s highly likely like singer Nick Jonas is a fan, given his wife Priyanka Chopra’s superstar status in the Indian film industry. In a recent interview with Khaleej Times, the singer was asked whether he would be open to working in Bollywood projects, to which Nick gave a rather promising response.

On whether he’d ever consider working on a Bollywood film, the singer shared, “I love Bollywood films - I’ve gotten more familiar in the last couple of years after being with my wife; it’s certainly something that I would be interested in doing.” He added further, “I’ve gotten a lot of friends now in that industry and I think it’s just a phenomenal film industry, the work they do is very inspiring and if the right thing came up, who knows? Maybe I’d jump in!”

Referring to Bollywood songs as the ideal music to get yourself grooving to the beat, Nick shared, “I think [Bollywood music] is amazing. I obviously listened to quite a lot of it while I was in India and also at our wedding, we had a lot of great Indian music and Bollywood music. It’s the best kind of music to dance to and it’s definitely what we play at our house parties!”

The singer has also dabbled in acting, playing prominent roles in films such as Jumanji: The Next Level, as well as the television series Scream Queens. When asked what inspires him the most as far as acting is concerned and what kinds of roles he would like to play in the future, Nick shared an interest in telling layered stories.

He explained, “I try to find things that continue to help me to grow and try to work with people that push me. So I think I’d like to find (in addition to things like Jumanji, which was so incredible to be part of) more roles, even that I write myself or go after where there’s an opportunity for me to just show different sides of myself and push myself as an actor and tell really complex stories.”

Nick, who is one-third of the Jonas Brothers, has been making music since his early teens. When asked about his philosophy of music, the singer shared, “Music is something that’s always been within me and I’m lucky to come from a very musical home! My dad was a musician and my brothers and I always made music together but to be able to turn that into a career and to be able to do what I love as a career is a dream come true.”

He added, “I’m thrilled that I’ve been able to branch out as well and that music was the catalyst to me getting into acting, also writing and producing. It’s been something that’s opened so many doors for me creatively and I just always try to follow that instinct. And follow my heart when it comes to the music that I make.”

The Jonas Brothers’ single Sucker recently became a member of Spotify’s Billions Club, being streamed across the world. When asked how he felt about this achievement, Nick reflected, “It’s really special. Obviously, Sucker was the comeback song for us after the break-up and coming back together and just seeing the world react the way that it did to that song that meant so much to us.” He added, “I think anytime you enter a ‘Billion’ club it’s a pretty incredible thing and I think we get a nice plate for it or something so I’m eager to have that sent to my house!”