LONDON.

“JUDE THE OBSCURE,” which starts tonight on American television in the BBC's remarkably faithful six‐part dramatization, was the last novel Thomas Hardy wrote. When it appeared, in 1895, it was condemned by critics on both sides of the Atlantic. In London, The Pall Mall Gazette headlined its review “Jude the Obscene” and said the novel was dirt, drivel, and damnation. The lady reviewer of the New York World said the book was a bad blend of Zola and Tolstoi, and that humanity as seen by Hardy was largely compounded of hoggishness and hysteria.

There were some good notices, too. Havelock Ellis, who reviewed it for a London magazine, thought it was the greatest novel written in England for many years. But the general opinion was expressed by the Bishop of Wakefield, who threw the book into the fire—probably, said Hardy, in his despair at being unable to burn the author.

One of the London reviews was by Edmund Gosse, a close friend of Hardy's, who wrote, “What has Providence done to Mr. Hardy that he should rise up in the arable land of Wessex and shake his fist at his creator?” Hardy was a complex man, and a simple answer to this question will be a wrong one. He was naturally melancholy, and his first marriage, which in 1895 was still dragging on had been a disaster. But that was not all. We shall know Hardy better, and come nearer to an answer to Gosse's question, when we explore a deep and lasting relationship of Hardy's, which remained unknown for almost a hundred years, with a woman he met in 1867 when she was a girl and he was a young man of 27.

*

Her name was Tryphena Sparks, and she was his cousin. They were engaged for five years, she probably bore him the only child he ever had, they parted bitterly, and he remembered her for the rest of his life. He created many of the women of his poems and novels in her image. The most literal portrait of her is in “Jude the Obscure,” in which incidents in the life of the heroine, Sue Bridehead, correspond closely with those now known in the life of the girl Hardy called his “lost prize.”

They parted in 1872. Hardy had not seen her for many years when he wrote in his journal for March 5, 1890, that hi the train on the way to London he had begun a poem about a cousin. It was, he said, a curious example of sympathetic telepathy. Tryphena was dying at the time, though he did not know this. She died six days later, at the age of 38. The poem is entitled “Thoughts of Phena,” and it is in this that he calls her his lost prize.

In his autobiography, Hardy remembers many village girls he knew in his youth, and also writes about Mrs. Florence Henniker, whom he loved when he was in his fifties. But about the woman who was, to say the least, his fiancée for five years, he says nothing. Apart from the mention of the lines written in the train, there is not one word written directly about her. He did his best to suppress everything. In his last years he went through his papers destroying photographs, letters and manuscripts. On the last page of his last notebook he reminds himself to continue to destroy old papers . After his death in 1928, his second wife made a bonfire of most of those that remained.

Hardy began his affair with Tryphena in 1867. In one of the few personal notebooks that have survived, the date 1867 is written on the left hand side of the first page, but after that 10 sheets have been cut out, leaving only the stumps.

So from Hardy's private papers nothing is known of Tryphena. But once her early history is known from other sources, his work is seen to abound with references to her, and she is revealed as probably the single greatest influence on Hardy as a man and a writer. Her engagement to Hardy came to light by sheer accident when her daughter, Mrs. Nellie Bromell, met Lois Deacon, a writer, in 1959 and told her about it. Nellie possessed Tryphena's album with many photographs, and it was Nellie who identified the picture of the son her mother bore Hardy. Until a few days before her death in 1965, at the age of 86, Nellie still talked about her mother, Tryphena. She wrote many letters about her, which are still in Miss Deacon's possession.

Now I must declare my own interest in the Tryphena story. I cannot claim to be a disinterested commentator. In 1964, I heard of Miss Deacon's discovery and went to see her with the idea of writing a magazine article. I was at first very skeptical, but after I saw the photographs and talked to Nellie and read her letters to Miss Deacon, I became convinced that the story was in substance true, and too good for just an article. So Miss Deacon and I collaborated in the writing of a book which was published in 1966 with the title “Providence and Mr. Hardy.”

The story briefly is this. Hardy was the son of a master mason in Dorset. At the age of 21 he left for London to work as an architect, returning home five years later, in 1867. Tryphena was 16. They became lovers and were engaged to marry. Two years later Tryphena left for London to train as a teacher at Stockwell Normal College. The couple often met in London. By the time she qualified, in 1871, he had written two novels. She became headmistress of a girls' school in Plymouth.

For some reason they broke off their engagement in 1872. Hardy married Emma Lavinia, his first wife, and, in 1877, Tryphena married a Devon man and went to live with him in a pub in Topsham. In the next 12 years she had four children and Hardy made his name as a novelist. They did not meet. Then, in 1890, she died of a rupture, and her influence on him suddenly became greater than ever. He visited her grave at Topsham and left a card saying, “In Loving Memory, Tom Hardy.” He visited her former training college at Stockwell, and wrote poems to her memory, in one of which he comes near to deciding to kill himself.

*

Then he began to write “Jude the Obscure,” which has two themes. The first is that of Jude's struggle for an education. The second and more important theme is that of the adulterous and mismatched union between Jude and his cousin Sue Bridehead. In the preface to the first edition, Hardy says that he had visited the scenes of the novel before writing it: we know he had visited Topsham and Stockwell. And he also says that “some of the circumstances” of the novel were suggested by the death of a woman in 1890. That was the year of Tryphena's death. Sue and Tryphena are astonishingly alike. Both were country girls; both light, slight, and mobile, with dark hair and eyes; both went to Normal schools as Queen's scholars; both had love affairs with cousins. The similarities of the novel to the Hardy‐Tryphena affair are too many for coincidence. And according to the “Oxford Dictionary of Christian Names,” the real name of the apostle who bore Hardy's Christian name, Thomas, was Judas, the modern form of which is Jude.

Now for the child. Hardy wanted children, but his wife Emma gave him none. After Emma died, and he married again in 1913 at the age of 73, he provided for a child in his will. But the only child he ever had was probably the boy by Tryphena, born in the early summer of 1868.

In Tryphena's album there was a photograph of a boy aged about 8. Nellie Bromell said the child was Hardy's boy, that everyone knew this, and that his name was Randal. He was born when Tryphena was 17 and was looked after by Tryphena's mother, Rebecca. When Tryphena went to teach at Plymouth, Rebecca accompanied her, taking the child as her own. When Tryphena married, the boy, who was then 9, was sent to live in Bristol with his uncle Nathaniel, a violin maker. Nellie knew nothing more about the boy, except that he died as a young man. She did not know how or where.

Perhaps this child is enough to explain why Hardy suppressed all mention of Tryphena, but there may be another reason. There is some evidence that he feared, rightly or wrongly, that their relationship was closer than that of cousins, and that she was really his niece.

This is only conjecture, for incest is hardly likely to be documented. But here are two of the many fragments of evidence. The typescript of Hardy's autobiography (published as if it were a biography of him by his secand wife Florence, but really his own work) originally contained the Innocent statement that he was the oldest of four children and the only one of the four who married. Hardy then Inserted, In his own hand, that he had “no nephew or niece.” Later still he made another change, to make it clear that he had no “blood niece.”

Why was he so anxious to have this understood, when, if neither of his two sisters or brother married, as they did not, there would have been no reason for anyone to think he had nephews or nieces? And secondly, when he was more than 70, Hardy spent an evening with a friend discussing an intimate matter which was causing that friend much anxiety. Hardy sympathized, saying that in his youth he had been in the same position. The friend's trouble was that he was living with a woman who was his niece.

But incest is unproved, and unprovable. The whole Tryphena story has been debated by Hardy scholars with a violence that has surprised me. Who would have thought literary scholars had such violence in them? Some authorities on Hardy, like F. B. Pinibn and the late Professor C. J. Weber, have strongly opposed the whole thesis. Others, like Dr. W. R. Rutland and Dr. Frank Southerington, just as strongly support it.

And there Is another writer, not a Hardy scholar but a man who understands Hardy better than most academics, whose views I must quote. He is John Fowles, whose novel “The French Lieutenant's Woman” is saturated with the spirit of the time and place of the Hardy‐Tryphena affair.

Mr. Fowles sets “The French Lieutenant's Woman” in 1867, the same year that Hardy went back to Dorset and met Tryphena who was then a girl of 16; he also sets his novel in and around the lush countryside of South Dorset which was very much Hardy's milieu. It is important, to me anyway, that so good a novelist as Fowles, and one so sympathetic to the spirit of Hardy, should believe Tryphena to have been a fundamental influence on Hardy as a man and as a writer, and should say of Hardy's relationship with Tryphena, as he does in “The French Lieutenant's Woman,” that “never was an English genius so devoted and indebted to one muse and onomuse only.”