Sometime in December of 1900 English poet Thomas Hardy sat down to paint a bleak and desolate vision of the previous century. The poem he conceived was titled ‘The Darkling Thrush,’ a four-stanza ballad that features a morose speaker’s musings over the ruinous fate of Western civilization. Using severe and portentous imagery that Hardy draws from the winter landscape, he compares the age to a wasteland of decayed possibilities. Yet the poem is not entirely without faith in renewal and an elusive though perhaps ineffable hope takes shape as the song of its eponymous thrush.

The Darkling Thrush Thomas Hardy

I leant upon a coppice gate When Frost was spectre-grey, And Winter's dregs made desolate The weakening eye of day. The tangled bine-stems scored the sky Like strings of broken lyres, And all mankind that haunted nigh Had sought their household fires.

The land's sharp features seemed to be The Century's corpse outleant,His crypt the cloudy canopy, The wind his death-lament. The ancient pulse of germ and birth Was shrunken hard and dry, And every spirit upon earth Seemed fervourless as I.

At once a voice arose among The bleak twigs overhead In a full-hearted evensong Of joy illlimited; An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small, In blast-beruffled plume, Had chosen thus to fling his soul Upon the growing gloom.

So little cause for carolings Of such ecstatic sound Was written on terrestrial things Afar or nigh around, That I could think there trembled through His happy good-night air Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew And I was unaware.

Summary

‘The Darkling Thrush’ by Thomas Hardy teeters between dismal despair and tenuous hope as the speaker describes a barren hinterland haunted by the spirited evensong of a small bird.

‘The Darkling Thrush’ begins with the speaker describing their immediate surroundings and introducing the reader to the poem’s primary setting. They appear leaning against the gate of a “coppice,” the snow around them a ghostly grey, this harsh winter climate subduing even the light of the sun. Stems of plants rise forebodingly into the sky and not a single human can be seen outside — as they’ve retreated indoors to hide amongst their “household fires.”

The speaker compares the austere landscape to the corpse of a century, referring to the sky as their tomb and the wind as a “death-lament.” All forms of procreation have also stiffened and shriveled. Like the speaker, “every spirit upon earth” lacks any passion.

A voice is then heard rising over the “bleak twigs” of the woodland, singing with “full-hearted” joy. The source of this music is an older thrush whose appearance, “frail, gaunt, and small,” doesn’t account for the uplifting power of its soul. The speaker acknowledges that given the state of the world around them, there is really “so little cause for carolings” or “ecstatic sound.” This leads them to wonder if there is some “blessed Hope” the thrush is aware of that the speaker is not yet privy to.

Structure and Form

‘The Darkling Thrush’ was written by Hardy as a ballad. All four of its stanzas are composed of eight lines (octaves) in iambic tetrameter and trimeter, using a rhyme scheme of ‘ABABCDCD.’ The presence of alliteration (“Century’s corpse“), assonance (“At once a voice arose among”), and consonance (“dregs made desolate”) all lend a heavy and grim tone to the poem’s otherwise upbeat cadence. Enhancing the lack of joy in the first two stanzas but also the fledgling hope of its final ones.

Literary Devices

‘The Darkling Thrush’ relies on some of the following literary devices:

Auditory Imagery: The scene depicted in the poem is one seemingly barren of all sound as well as life. That all changes in the third stanza, when the speaker reveals that all “at once a voice arose” (17), singing a song of limitless joy.

Visual Imagery: One of the arresting features of Hardy’s poem is the dreadful winter countryside. His imagery of the land covered in a “Frost [that] was spectre-grey” (2) serves as both an explanation for its dreariness and a symbol of the malaise that has taken root in society.

Metaphor: In the lines, “The land’s sharp features seemed to be / The Century’s corpse outleant” (9-10), the speaker links the desolation of the landscape with the decline of the past century by referring to the former as a carcass bereft of life.

Personification: At various points, Hardy personifies the sun and thrush as having human characteristics; there’s the line, the “weakening eye of day” (4), and the conferment of intentionality and purpose in the bird’s choice to “fling his soul / Upon the growing gloom” (23-24). This only makes the poet’s despairing comparisons between the winter wasteland and civilization all the more affecting, further muddling the line between nature and humanity in their stagnation.

Simile: There is also an example of simile in the line, “The tangled bine-stems scored the sky / Like strings of broken lyres” (5-6), which imagines the spindly and seemingly leave-less limbs of the trees to be the strings of smashed instruments.

Themes

‘The Darkling Thrush’ dwells on the desolation and hope that exists in a world where nothing seems to grow, absent of not just life but the warmth of passion and feeling. This daunting scenery becomes an extended metaphor for the last century, as well as the current state of civilization, as seen through the eyes of Hardy’s speaker. It is a deterioration visualized through powerful symbols like a broken lyre (music and culture), the image of families at home huddled around their fires (isolation), and the languid “ancient pulse of germ and birth” (procreation).

Hardy spends the first two stanzas lamenting over the hauntingly depressing state of the winter landscape. In the last two stanzas, the song of an “aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small” is spread over the “growing gloom,” their trill so earnest and infinitely joyous that it causes the speaker to wonder if maybe there is some hope left to be discovered in the world. The poem ultimately carries a delicate but sincere promise that something good can suddenly appear.

Analysis, Stanza by Stanza

Stanza One

I leant upon a coppice gate

When Frost was spectre-grey,

And Winter’s dregs made desolate

The weakening eye of day.

The tangled bine-stems scored the sky

Like strings of broken lyres,

And all mankind that haunted nigh

Had sought their household fires.

In the first stanza, we are introduced to the poet, in the first person, “I” He is leaning on a gate in a little wood – it’s traditionally a thinking pose, and the poem conveys his thoughts and feelings. The bitter hopelessness of a cold winter’s evening is stressed by the imagery: “Frost,” “spectre-gray,” “dregs,” “desolate,” “weakening,” “broken,” and “haunted” are unified and strengthened by their suggestions of cold, weakness, and death or ghostliness.

There are plenty of heavy, gloomy “g” sounds: “gate,” “gray,” “dregs,” and equally heavy “d” sounds: “dregs,” “desolate,” and “day.” Even day, which might be cheering, is described as “desolate” and having a “weakening eye.” The only color left in the “darkling” daylight is gray. There is a tiny whisper of sound in the repeated slight “s” sounds of coppice, spectre, dregs, and desolate. “Frost” and “Winter” have capital letters as if their presence is the most important.

The “strings of broken lyres” is a classic image of disharmony, and perhaps points to a lack of joy in the poet’s vision of life. Even the people who have gone home to the warmth of their fires seem to have assumed a ghostly quality, “all mankind that haunted nigh.”

Stanza Two

The land’s sharp features seemed to be

The Century’s corpse outleant,

His crypt the cloudy canopy,

The wind his death-lament.

The ancient pulse of germ and birth

Was shrunken hard and dry,

And every spirit upon earth

Seemed fervourless as I.

The second stanza continues the model of the former if anything in even stronger terms. The whole past century is a “corpse,” the cloudy sky its tomb, and the winter wind like the century’s death song. The personification of the century intensifies one’s feeling that it is a real presence.

The imagery in this stanza continues and enlarges on the motif of death contained in the first. Despite the personal, subjective start of the poem, by the end of the second stanza, Hardy has made his mood an emblem for all life upon earth, and he even suggests that the very life force is “shrunken hard and dry,” that life itself is near to exhaustion and death. This is achieved in an undramatic, almost quiet, manner with a slow build-up to a terrifying vision of death, driven largely by natural images.

The alliteration in this stanza intensifies the atmosphere of gloom and death. Repeated “c” links “century’s corpse,” “crypt,” and “cloudy canopy.” The rhymes of “birth” and “earth” are negated by “dry” and “I.” Everything is seen in terms of death: “sharp features” (of a dead body), “century’s corpse,” “crypt,” “death-lament,” “shrunken hard and dry,” “fervourless.” It seems that it is not just the death of the old century that Hardy is describing, but the death of the pulse of life that vitalizes and energizes him and other people, the death of hope.

Stanza Three

At once a voice arose among

The bleak twigs overhead

In a full-hearted evensong

Of joy illimited;

An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small,

In blast-beruffled plume,

Had chosen thus to fling his soul

Upon the growing gloom.

In the third stanza, at the nadir of ‘The Darkling Thrush,’ the sudden hurling out of its song by a thrush might be seen as the injection of a rather fatuous optimism into the poem. The “full-hearted evensong / Of joy illimited” is certainly a cause for hope.

The choice of bird here is what makes Hardy one of the finest poets: He chooses an old, frail, thin, scruffy-looking thrush, not the nightingale of Miltonic and Romantic tradition. It is an ordinary indigenous song-thrush, but one that is ‘blast-beruffled’: it has survived the strong winter winds, that the poet had hitherto painted as brutal and uncooperative. The “aged” and “frail” thrush is, perhaps facing its own imminent end, and yet it flings its soul ecstatically upon the darkening evening. The resultant picture of an ordinary, weather-beaten, thrush rising from the depths of the winter winds with their “death lament” singing a beautiful song, is one of hope.

Three run-on lines take us at full tilt to its message: “joy illimited.”. The very words with which Hardy introduces the song are lyrical, rhythmic, and repetitive, like the thrush’s song: “At once a voice arose among / The bleak twigs overhead.” In perfect iambics, each prefaced by the vowel “a,” Hardy echoes the sound of the thrush’s song: “At once a voice arose among…”

Stanza Four

So little cause for carolings

Of such ecstatic sound

Was written on terrestrial things

Afar or nigh around,

That I could think there trembled through

His happy good-night air

Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew

And I was unaware.

In the final stanza, the idea of religious faith is conveyed through the thrush’s “carolings,” reminiscent of Christmas carols, and the “blessed Hope” — hope to be one of the three great Christian virtues, faith, hope, and charity (love).

Hardy is careful not to be sentimental about the thrush. Hardy can see no cause for joy, but he can hope, that the thrush can see something he himself cannot perceive. ‘The Darkling Thrush’ is thus finely balanced. It suggests there may be hope, and the very sound of the thrush and its defiance of the prevailing moods shows at the very least the existence of a tragic hope; life may be threatened, its physical existence at risk, but its spirit is indomitable and cannot be crushed.