The Organization of American States (OAS) on Thursday incorporated a bust of former Bahamian Prime Minister and national hero Sir Lynden Pindling to its “Hall of Heroes.”

The OAS said the incorporation took place at its headquarters in Washington, D.C. in a ceremony that was attended by senior Bahamian officials, including the Attorney General and Senator, Allison Maynard Gibson; the Consul General of The Bahamas in Washington, Paulette Zonicle; and the Governor-General and wife of the late Sir Lynden Pindling, Dame Marguerite Pindling.

Others were the Director of the Sir Lynden Pindling Foundation and son of the former Prime Minister, Obafemi Pindling; the Permanent Representative of the Bahamas to the OAS, Ambassador Elliston Rahming; the Ambassador of The Bahamas to the United States of America, Eugene Newry; as well as OAS Assistant Secretary General Nestor Mendez’ and representatives from other OAS member countries.

“The everlasting legacy that this great Caribbean son has left in the lives of the people a small island state like The Bahamas,” said Rahming, noting Sir Lynden’s socio-economic contributions and role in the Bahamas’ independence.

Rahming also recalled the role the former prime minister played in the liberation of the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela, according to the OAS.

Mendez also spoke about the life and heritage of Sir Lynden, highlighting his achievements and contributions in the educational, multilateral, economic, political and legal realm.

“During his lifetime, Sir Lynden, a political giant and visionary, left an indelible mark upon the Commonwealth of the Bahamas and our region,” he said, stating that Pindling was the longest-serving, democratically-elected head of government in the hemisphere.

“We thank the government of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas for honoring our organization with the placement of this bust in our Hall of Heroes,” Mendez said.

“Here, Sir Lynden will proudly stand among the other great luminaries and historical figures of our hemisphere,” he added.