.

REPOSTED FROM: uk.people.dead

Iris Portal, the biographer Iris Butler who died in Norfolk, 9 November,

2002, aged 97, was the younger sister of *Rab* Butler [Lord Butler of

Saffron Walden KG].

She was author of *The Eldest Brother: the Marquess Wellesley 1760-1842*

(1973). Wellesley was Governor-General of India, Foreign Secretary and

Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and elder brother the *Iron Duke*, the 1st

Duke of Wellington.

Hers was the first full biography of Wellesley since the Victorian era,

and Iris Butler's book was given much praise by the critics. Iris Butler

had the good fortune to view a cache of unpublished letters written by

Wellseley to his mistress Hyacinthe, who was the mother of his

children.

Iris Mary Butler was born at Simla, India, 15 June, 1905, the daughter

of Sir Montagu Sherard Dawes Butler, KCSI, [1873-1952], and his wife Ann

Gertrude Smith, daughter of George Smith, CIE, who edited the Calcutta

paper that became The Statesman.

In 1911 Iris, her siblings and their mother went to England to live at

Bourton Manse, on the Butler family estate near Shrivenham in Berkshire.

The girls went to a boarding school in the south of England.

In 1926 Gervas Edward Portal, of Gardner's Horse, became ADC to her

father, who was by then Governor of the Central Provinces of India,

romance blossomed with the Governor's daughter. He and Iris Butler were

married 6 January, 1927. Her husband's brother was Marshal of Royal Air

Force the 1st Viscount Portal of Hungerford, KG.

Her early married years were spent at Meerut, and in the early 1930s

Gervas Portal went to Bombay as Commanding Officer of the governor's

bodyguard. He subsequently served as Comptroller of the Household of the

Nizam of Hyderbad.

After the outbreak of WW2, Iris Portal became a nurse at Delhi, then

followed her husband to Ranchi to work in a military hospital on the

border with Burma.

She finally left India in 1943 and her husband followed three years

later. They settled in Norfolk. Iris was a prominent member of the local

St John Ambulance, the British Legion, and a Commissioner in the Girl

Guides. She contributed reviews to the local Norfolk newspaper.

Gervas Portal died 3 December, 1961. Iris Portal began to fill her days

by researching her first book, *Rule of Three* [1967], a study of Queen

Anne and her favourites, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough and Abigail Hill.

Her next tome was *The Viceroy's Wife: Letters of Alice, Countess of

Reading, from India 1921-1925* [1969].

She shared her vivid reminiscences of days of the Raj with writers such

as Charles Allen, for his book *Plain Tales from the Raj* [1975].

Iris Portal is survived by her two daughters.

--