Bernie Mac, Isaac Hayes and Samuel L Jackson in a still from Soul Men, which is due out next year

Co-stars Bernie Mac and Isaac Hayes, who passed away the same weekend, were both honored in separate memorial services this weekend attended by family, friends, and a multitude of celebrities. Singer Isaac Hayes was remembered in a public service in Memphis, Tennessee on Saturday, where a wide array of celebs were in attendance, from Jesse Jackson, who knew Hayes through his civil rights activism, to fellow Scientologist Kelly Preston. There was also a private service on Sunday, which was attended by Denzel Washington and Tom Cruise.

The weight of soul singer Isaac Hayes’ legacy in Memphis could be measured in a single remark at his memorial service Monday.

“What would you say if you were flying into Memphis and they said you are about to land at Isaac Hayes International Airport,” U.S. Rep. Steve Cohen asked, drawing a huge burst of applause during a four-hour service of music, speakers and video clips.

Cohen, who represented Hayes’ area of Memphis, said the city should celebrate Hayes, an architect of the Memphis sound, as it celebrates Elvis Presley.

“He is a world person who the world will miss,” Cohen said.

The deep-voiced soul singer died Aug. 10 after he was found unconscious at his Memphis residence. No autopsy was performed, but paperwork filed by Hayes’ family doctor, David Kraus, lists the cause of death as a stroke.

About 3,000 fans and friends attended the service. They remembered Hayes for his music and his movies and for his humanitarian work that included building a school in Ghana.

“He was a lovely man, always involved with causes,” the Rev. Jesse Jackson said before the service. “Literacy, civil rights. He was always there, and that’s why we’re all here for him.”

Jackson was among the speakers that included Al Sharpton and actresses and fellow scientologists Anne Archer and Kelly Preston.

From the Huffington Post

Meanwhile, movie and TV actor/stand-up comedian Bernie Mac’s memorial service in Chicago brought thousands of fans, friends and co-stars as well. Jesse Jackson must be racking up the frequent flyer miles, because he attended this service, too. Other mourners included Chris Rock and Cedric the Entertainer, who was reportedly inconsolable at the loss of his Kings of Comedy comrade.

Thousands of mourners came out for a Chicago memorial service honoring Bernie Mac Saturday.

Some fans slept outside overnight in hopes of securing a seat inside the House of Hope church on the city’s South Side, the Chicago Tribune reports.

Chris Rock, Steve Harvey, Cedric the Entertainer and Rev. Jesse Jackson attended the emotional service, in which photos from the comedian’s career were shown on projectors and the White Sox organization presented Mac’s widow Rhonda with a No. 1 jersey bearing his name, the paper reports.

Oprah Winfrey, Barack Obama and Andy Garcia also sent condolences.

During the service, Mayor Richard Daley remembered Mac as someone with “a heart and passion.” Daley, who met with Mac a few weeks ago, added: “He knew the street, he knew the people, and that’s why he was a king of comedy. He wanted to do something personally to get children away from the life of violence. . . . He never lost his soul in Chicago.”

[From People]

Best wishes go out to both men and their surviving families. They will certainly be missed.