BOZEMAN, Mont. - Bozeman-based RightNow Technologies Inc. announced Monday it's being bought by tech giant Oracle.

RightNow helps companies with cloud-based customer service- connecting business and clients over the web and through social media.

Clients include NASA, Yahoo, Canon and the US Postal Service to name a few.

And RightNow Technologies is one of the largest private employers in Bozeman, with over 1,000 employees world-wide.

City manager Chris Kukulski said the business is an important part of the community.

"They employ hundreds of people in the community and they're a fantastic part of Bozeman" he said.

But some worry about what could happen once Oracle takes over. Oracle is a billion dollar company with a history of massive layoffs.

"Sometimes people get very concerned when a big conglomerate corporation takes over a company" said Bozeman Chamber of Commerce president Daryl Schliem.

But Schliem said RightNow's founder and CEO, Greg Gianforte, called and left a message to reassure him the company plans to stay in southwest Montana.

Company representatives said the deal could even help them expand.

"Their plans were to stay in Bozeman, Montana" said Schliem, about Gianforte's message to him. "He was still going forward with the game plan."

He said the game plan includes new jobs. Schliem said the company "almost always had job openings here as they were expanding and creating more high-tech innovation here in the Bozeman, Montana market."

In a press release, the company stated they were excited to "combine capabilities" with Oracle.

NBC Montana contacted RightNow, but they had no comment. Oracle did not return any phone calls.

According to their website, RightNow has handled over 10 billion customer interactions, and work with over 2,000 companies around the world.

The company brought in 57.7 million dollars in revenue over the third quarter of 2011. That's up 19 percent over the same period in 2010.

Total revenue for the first nine months of 2011- 164.8 million dollars.

The merger won't be finalized until the end of this year or early next year.