Bozeman, MT (September 24, 2001) — RightNow Technologies, a leading global provider of Internet customer service solutions, today announced the latest release of its flagship application, RightNow Web eService Center 5.0. RightNow Web eService Center provides the industry's most complete, resource-efficient solution for assisting customers via Web self-service, email, live chat, and phone. It is the first Internet customer service solution to deliver a common knowledge base across all of those communications channels - enabling companies to fully leverage a single, comprehensive support information repository.

RightNow's unique self-learning knowledge base technology, which dynamically builds content based on customers' actual inquiries and interactions, has been proven to rapidly and significantly reduce call center workloads by empowering customers to quickly find 75% to 90% of the answers to their own questions online. This online self-service paradigm has resulted in substantial, quantifiable cost savings and service improvements for companies in every vertical market. Just as importantly, because of RightNow's powerful self-learning capabilities, companies can realize these benefits without requiring extensive up-front investments of time and effort.

New "Browse for Answers" automatically structures content for easy navigation

In addition to automatically building its knowledge base from day-to-day interactions with customers, the new release of RNW eService Center also automatically organizes that knowledge base into a logical, hierarchical structure based on the search and query terms that customers actually use. This use-driven structure makes it easy for customers to immediately see what information is available online and lets them effortlessly browse even the largest knowledge bases to quickly pinpoint the answers they seek.

RightNow's automated structuring is a significant improvement over conventional approaches to self-service content. Plain text search, for example, forces users to guess which words will lead them to the information they need. This can be a slow, frustrating process. Manual organization of content is a very labor-intensive alternative that's not much more effective, since content managers have to guess what headings will be most helpful to customers and must continually work to accommodate new content over time.

RNW eService Center, in contrast, automatically creates easily browsable content areas that are labeled with the same words and phrases that customers themselves use. Plus, it automatically re-structures content areas as required over time without requiring manual intervention by site managers or support staff.

"Multiple-choice tests are always easier than filling in the blanks," explains RightNow CEO and founder Greg Gianforte. "By automatically structuring the self-service knowledge base, RightNow gives customers an easy, multiple-choice approach to finding whatever they're looking for. That's a unique and powerful advantage for delivering superior Internet customer service."

SmartSense™: Flagging and routing inquiries based on emotional content

Another valuable innovation in eService Center 5.0 is its unique ability to monitor customer communications for emotional content. Dubbed "SmartSenseT," this feature uses intelligent language recognition technology to alert CSRs when customers express anger or dissatisfaction. This allows companies to prioritize potentially disgruntled customers, resulting in significantly improved customer satisfaction and retention.

"Effective service is all about treating customers like real people, and real people have feelings," says Gianforte. "By engineering the recognition of emotional language cues into eService Center 5.0, we're giving customer service teams the added advantage of being able to quickly spot 'fires' and extinguish them before they burn out of control."

RightNow Live: Immediate, one-on-one service for Web customers

RNW eService Center 5.0 allows companies to take advantage of RightNow Live to deliver immediate, personalized service to customers while they're online. CSRs can chat with customers to quickly assist them as they browse the company's Web site. They can even launch "co-browsing" sessions to guide customers directly to the right Web page or file.

RightNow also makes CSRs more efficient by empowering them with the same structured knowledge base. A SmartAssistantT feature suggests appropriate solutions to CSRs, which allows even new hires to become very productive very quickly. RightNow also provides intuitive session management tools that enable CSRs to work together, as well as all of the reporting facilities necessary for managers to track the effectiveness and productivity of service teams. An intuitive session-management console lets CSRs track active sessions and seamlessly pass them to one another as required.

Multi-language support for global e-business

RNW eService Center can be internationalized in 15 languages. It automatically recognizes the language of customer inquiries, allowing them to be routed to appropriate CSRs or responded to with scripted replies in the correct language. Content in all languages is managed as a single knowledge base; all translations of each knowledge item are maintained as a single "atomic" information unit. This makes RightNow ideal for companies doing business globally, as well as for supporting the large number of North American customers for whom English is a second language. Supported languages are English (US and UK), Spanish, French (European and Canadian), German, Italian, Japanese, Dutch, Portuguese, Finnish, Swedish, Czech, Greek, and Polish.

Healthy sales growth

The strong appeal of RightNow's Internet customer service solutions is evident from the company's continued strong sales growth in a challenging software marketplace.

"RightNow listened to us and incorporated virtually every enhancement we asked for," said Lt. Col. Bud Bromley, Air Reserve Personnel Center. "Anyone who works with incidents will love it, because information across the board has been more tightly integrated and everything's at your fingertips now."

RightNow Web eService Center is typically implemented as a hosted service, further accelerating customers' time-to-benefit while providing low ongoing ownership costs. It is available immediately through RightNow's global direct and partner sales channels.

About RightNow Technologies

RightNow Technologies is a leading global provider of proven Internet customer service solutions that deliver rapid return-on-investment. RightNow was named the second fastest-growing independent software company in the U.S. by Softletter, an industry newsletter. RightNow's comprehensive solutions include Web-based self-service, email response management, live chat and collaboration, and service analytics. These solutions feature an integrated product architecture, highly intuitive interfaces, and centralized workflow management #151; all based on a proprietary customer-driven, self-learning knowledge base.

RightNow customers include Air Canada, Ben & Jerry's, Black & Decker, Motorola, Nike, Nortel, Pitney Bowes, Sanyo, Social Security Administration, Sprint, and more than 1,100 other organizations in a wide range of vertical markets.