Bozeman is an area that offers a wide variety of growing and expanding job opportunities and in recent years, Bozeman has seen an influx of tech-related industries making their way across the state of Montana. In fact, Bozeman has been ranked the fastest-growing city in the nation for three years consecutively. With over 600 tech firms across the state and an amount of new higher-paying jobs, Bozeman has become Montana’s biggest tech hub grossing over $2.9 billion in annual revenue. Over a third of Montana’s High Tech Business Alliance members are located in the Bozeman area and the city hosts a variety of offices for global tech companies such as Oracle and PFL.

Business in Bozeman

Oracle

One of the largest tech firms in Bozeman is Oracle Corporation. Sold from SaaS firm RightNow Technologies in 2012, for $1.8 billion, Oracle is a software company specializing in cloud technologies and database systems.

Next Frontier Capital

Another big tech company that has roots in Bozeman is Next Frontier Capital. Next Frontier Capital is a capital fund headquartered in Bozeman and it expands across Montana and parts of Colorado. Their goal is to build Rocky Mountain technology companies that harness impact, value, and utility through investing in the region's best tech entrepreneurs. Since 2015, they have funded over 35 companies and invested over $29 million in 20 Montana companies.

PFL Tech

PFL is a marketing technology company that runs out of Bozeman and Livingston. PFL has engineered a marketing-technology platform that incorporated direct mail into the digital world by simplifying direct mail by managing production delivery.

onX

onX is a digital outdoor navigation company that covers over 852 million acres of public land, over 60,000 campgrounds and cabins, and over 550,000 miles of open trials. The founder of onX is a Montana State University graduate and his mission was to awaken the adventure inside of everyone. With over 250 employees in their Montana offices alone, onX is a company that invests in land access initiatives to expand and protect the great outdoors.

Schedulicity

Schedulicity is a software company that is the number one leader in online appointment scheduling. The physical location of this company is in Bozeman in a building on Ferguson Ave. With over 80 employees, Schedualicity offers unlimited bookings using calendar integrations and automatic appointment reminders. It is an easy step-by-step process to set up or book customers online.

Foundant Technologies

Foundant Technologies was founded in Bozeman by Montana State University graduates and is a software designed for philanthropy. They are a SaaS brand management company with a focus on making philanthropy more attainable via innovative technology solutions.

"Montana receives federal tech hub designation, money to advance photonics industry", says the Bozeman Daily Chronicle.

Bozeman, Montana is set to receive funding to advance our tech industry even further! What once was a place where individuals graduating from MSU found themselves having to move out of the state for jobs in the tech industry, they now find a plethora of growing opportunities right here in town!

Are you considering making a move to Bozeman with our increasing job opportunities? I am your local expert and I have guided many individuals and families through their relocation to Bozeman. It can be a daunting process, I am here to help! Let's connect!