On Monday, Oct 2, 2000, I walked into the Life of Montana building in Bozeman, Montana to start a career in technology with an amazing company built on a foundation of incredible people, great leaders, awesome visionary message and technology and an obsessively customer and team centric culture. This was 3 years after my wife Nelda and I made the deliberate decision to move from the natural beauty and splendor of Tahoe City, CA to Montana to create an even better life for ourselves and our children. The internet was relatively new and founding a high tech start up in Montana seemed quite far-fetched, many even thought crazy. Well as they say, the rest is history. Surely the 2012 sale of RightNow Technologies to Oracle for $1.5Bil was quite an accomplishment and delivered strong returns to investors and shareholders. However, for me and many others the financial success is not the most important thing that came out of those magical years at RightNow.

The most amazing thing was witnessing first-hand what we all now know is possible - to create businesses and organizations that are principled, effective, impactful, fun, team-oriented, challenging, innovative, that delivers on its promises, does what it says it will do and is a profound positive difference maker in the lives of its customers, employees, communities and other stakeholders. We all lived it so we know it is possible.

When the day to day drudgery and less principled and effective organizational cultural attributes we find in some of the current companies and other organizations in which we work gets us a little off the positive beam, we must remember what is possible and be examples to others of how to be that possibility and "be the change". We know there is no place for negativity and cynicism in great people and great organizations. We know what is possible and happens when good people put their heart and soul into a common positive mission beyond building a company just to make money. We all know we had a more meaningful purpose - changing lives, changing the way companies interacted with customers, providing software that actually did what it was represented to do, challenging each other every day and having a ball doing it all.

We also know what is possible in terms of small committed, passionate groups, even in little places like Bozeman, Montana when it comes to changing the world for the better, whether it is technological, social or political change. You all know what I am referring to which is RightNow having been a small but vocal and influential very early evangelical voice shouting the revolutionary and disruptive news about the benefits of “hosted” software. The current generational, technologicial shift had to go through “Hosted", then “On Demand”, then “SaaS”, and later adding "IaaS" and "PaaS" to the mix, before it would become the now universally recognized “Cloud”. The Cloud is more than a place where technology lives – it is a state of mind around the purpose of technology, the relationships between technology and its users, the relationships between technology vendors and their customer and defining who should be able to use and benefit from technology – everyone who wants to! We knew this and helped invent some of it.

I want to express my deep gratitude to Brady Meltzer, Steve Holton, Susan Carstensen, Alan Rassaby, Greg Gianforte, Steve Daines, Jeff Davison, Wayne Huyard, Peter Dunning, Marcus Bragg, Mike Myer, Shane Orlick and all the leaders who believed in and supported me in my new career, became my colleagues and friends and who taught me so much. And to the other thousand or so extraordinary people I was honored to work with and among who were the RightNow Experience, I am hopeful we can all bring just a little bit of the RightNow goodness into the lives of others, the communities and the companies where we live, work and play each and every day.