Listen Live to the Sweetest Sound in Town!

We are Jim and Janet Jenkins,

and we bring sweet Christian music to...

WJJJ FM 88.1

Beckley - Bluefield area of West Virginia at 88.1 Mhz on your FM radio. We believe God has created each of us with an individual talent that can be used to give glory to God. We would like to offer our talents to bring to Southern West Virginia an easy listening Christian music radio station. By listening to this station, Christians can separate themselves from the noise and confusion which abounds in our society today. Our radio station will be listener supported. We hope to bring to our whole Christian community programming which gives God the glory for all the blessings He has bestowed upon us.

WXAF FM 90.9

Kanawha County at 90.9 Mhz on your FM radio. We believe God has created each of us with an individual talent that can be used to give glory to God. We would like to offer our talents to bring to Charleston W.V. an easy listening Christian music radio station. By listening to this station, Christians can separate themselves from the noise and confusion which abounds in our society today. Our radio station will be listener supported. we hope to bring to our whole Christian community programming which gives God the glory for all the blessings He has bestowed upon us.

Re-Listen To The Sweetest Sound

Check out our weekly podcast posts.

Would You Consider Giving A Gift?

We thank those of you that have supported this effort with your financial gift or pledge. We hope that you will also keep this ministry in your prayers. If you have been blessed by our music I hope you will help with a tax deductible gift. Your gift will help us to bring the blessing of sweet Christian music to the whole internet community.

You can donate online with your Pay Pal account by using the donate button.

You can send in your gift via mail. I will also be happy to send you an envelope for you to return a gift in.

You can give by having your Visa or MasterCard ready when you call toll free number 1 -(888)-382-0881.

You can also send us your gift by mailing it to Shofar Broadcasting P.O. Box 883 Mabscott, W.Va. 25871 or Shofar Broadcasting P.O. Box 12252 Charleston, W.Va 25302

Another way you can help us is to share this radio ministry with your family and friends by emailing them now and ask them to visit our web site. My wife and I appreciate your love and support for this beautiful music of our faith.

We also create 2 one hour podcasts of our music each week.

Search for the Sweetest Sound in town with your podcast player app.