North London Waste Authority (NLWA) the public body responsible for delivering the North London Heat and Power Project (NLHPP), has appointed Peter Andrews to the role of programme director.

Mr Andrews is now responsible for leading the team to deliver this nationally significant infrastructure project in Edmonton, which includes advanced recycling facilities and a high-tech Energy Recovery Facility to supply heat and power to many thousands of local homes.

With 40 years of experience delivering construction projects across power, oil and gas and other processing facilities, Mr Andrews’ has worked in the UK and internationally including on the West Burton B power station and the Gardanne Biomass power project in France. His most recent roles include the management of a gas transport and storage project (Canvey Island) and a plastics reprocessing facility (Avonmouth).

“Peter is joining the project at an exciting time having just marked our five-year anniversary since the start of construction,” said Martin Capstick, NLWA’s managing director.

“As the vast new recycling facilities become fully operational this summer, the construction on the Energy Recovery Facility continues to progress at pace. Peter’s breadth of experience and leadership background on major projects will be of enormous value and help us deliver crucial infrastructure to ensure north London can continue to manage its waste in the most sustainable way possible.”

Mr Andrews said: “I am very much looking forward to leading the NLHPP for NLWA and find the novel approach of creating a Local Authority controlled and owned cyclic waste process which benefits the local community to be an interesting and beneficial development in my career.

“With my experience of commercial operators of similar facilities, both in the UK and overseas, I am confident that I can make a positive contribution to the successful conclusion and vision of the project.”

Mr Andrew’s appointment follows the retirement of David Cullen last year.

-Ends -

Notes to Editors

About NLWA

NLWA is the statutory public authority serving over two million north London residents in Barnet, Camden, Enfield, Hackney, Haringey, Islington, Waltham Forest.

NLWA’s work includes:

Managing waste transportation and disposal on behalf of seven north London boroughs

Managing recycling collected by our seven boroughs

Promoting waste minimisation and recycling to preserve resources

NLWA aims to preserve the resources and the environment today and for future generations. NLWA is committed to innovation and careful planning to ensure waste resources are effectively and sustainably managed. NLWA works with residents, schools and businesses to promote waste minimisation and recycling.

About the NLHPP

The NLHPP is a crucial asset for north London and is part of NLWA’s positive action to help build the circular economy and manage waste which cannot be recycled in the most cost-effective and sustainable way.

The NLHPP continues to create hundreds of green jobs for local people and is an important part of the ongoing regeneration of Enfield, and part of Enfield Council’s plans to promote high-tech industries in Edmonton. As part of NLWA’s commitment to boosting the local economy, the project is committed to achieving 25% local employment and 10% local expenditure.