ON THE BLACK HILL By Bruce Chatwin. 249 pp. New York: The Viking Press. $14.75.

BRUCE CHATWIN'S highly praised travel book, ''In Patagonia'' (1977), established the writer as, among other things, a connoisseur of human oddity as it flourishes in isolation. His displaced Scottish sheep farmers and Welsh hymn singers, left stranded by the receding tide of economic colonialism, are depicted as turned in upon themselves, rendered queer by their desperate clinging - in the remote wastes of the Argentinian far-south - to obsolete modes and attitudes transplanted a century ago from ''Home.'' Even more bizarre are the descendants of Dom Francisco da Silva, a Brazilian slave trader, who - as Mr. Chatwin tells us in his semihistorical fantasy, ''The Viceroy of Ouidah'' (1980) -founded a mulatto dynasty in the bloodthirsty kingdom of Dahomey. In both works the human peculiarities are set against landscapes poetically evoked with exceptional vividness and exactitude.

The step from such nonfiction to Bruce Chatwin's first novel is not so great as might be imagined. ''On the Black Hill'' also chronicles the lives of odd folk living in relative isolation; it too paints a landscape which, as in the novels of Thomas Hardy, is at least as animate and moody as its inhabitants. But there the resemblance to Mr. Chatwin's earlier books ends. In its imaginative reach, ''On the Black Hill'' is very much a work of fiction. Nothing in Mr. Chatwin's previous work quite prepares us for the dramatic intensity with which scene after scene of the novel is brought to life. Despite the eccentricity of many of the characters, we soon realize that ''On the Black Hill'' belongs not to the literature of exoticism but to a valued, essentially British tradition that stretches back to the closing decades of the 18th century - a tradition of writing about homely, country things with an enraptured attention that causes them to glow with an almost visionary light.

The principal characters of the novel are twin brothers, Lewis and Benjamin Jones, who, at the age of 80, sleep side by side in their parents' four-poster bed in a dark room smelling of lavender and mothballs. Their border-country farm, called The Vision, looks westward to the dark hills of Wales, whence comes the (mostly bad) weather, and eastward to the green hills of Herefordshire in England. While the intensively explored setting is limited to a few square miles of Wales, from which the brothers hardly stray, the time sequence extends generously from the 1890's to Mrs. Thatcher's Britain.

AS a chronicle-novel, ''On the Black Hill'' finds its narrative center of interest in the transformations wrought by time; plot, in the sense of an action first complicated and then resolved, is almost nonexistent. Except for the introduction of the aged brothers in the opening section, the march of events is strictly linear, beginning with the young manhood of the twins' father, Amos Jones, and the marriage of this rough and intermittently brutal peasant to Mary Latimer, the gently reared and educated daughter of an Anglican clergyman. At the same time that he acquires this unlikely wife, Amos signs a lease for The Vision, a property belonging to the estate of an old landed family, the Bickertons of Lurkenhope Castle.

Amos is a harsh father. When the twins (who are identical) are 5, they make a pet of a runty piglet they call ''Hoggage'' -only to have their father slaughter the little creature, saying, ''No sense to keep a runt.'' Thereafter, hatred of Amos is joined to their fear of him. ''Mary came to believe they never forgave their father for the murder. They acted dumb if he taught them some job on the farm. ... They planned to run away. They spoke in low, conspiratorial whispers behind his back. Finally, even Mary lost patience and pleaded, 'Please be nice to Papa.' But their eyes spat venom and they said, 'He killed our Hoggage.' '' On the other hand, the twins worship their mother, who insists on educating the boys, though Amos growls that she will make ''mollycoddles'' of them.

From this tense situation, aggravated by the closed circuit of twinship, Lewis and Benjamin grow into a curiously stunted adulthood. Lewis, the more active of the pair, is drawn to women but remains a virgin until his mid-30's, when he is seduced by an arty bohemian woman in the neighborhood; he never repeats the experience. Benjamin, who is repelled by women other than his mother, is fiercely possessive of his brother. Each is capable, telepathically, of experiencing the other's pain. Together they form a vaguely androgynous whole, with Lewis doing the heavy work on the farm while Benjamin keeps accounts and births the lambs. Great events - World Wars I and II - impinge upon their lives but do not fundamentally alter them. The Vision is purchased when the Bickertons sell off the estate; the parents die, and the twins grow slowly into old bachelorhood; they become prosperous, regularly adding more land to The Vision, resisting mechanization of the farm but at last succumbing to the ownership of a tractor. All they need is an heir - and eventually one is provided from an unlikely source.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.