As Welsh director Andrew Grieve prepares to return to his homeland for a screening of the film On The Black Hill, he shares some stories of his remarkable career with Matt Thomas

LONDON media hangouts like Soho House and the Groucho Club don’t hold much attraction for Andrew Grieve.

The Cardiff-born director has been working in film and television for 50 years now and says he “doesn’t need to hustle anymore”.

With a career that includes work with British cinema grandee Ken Loach, Hollywood maverick William Friedkin and TV hits like Hornblower, which stars Ioan Gruffudd, it’s easy to see where he’s coming from.

The DVD of one of his least “starry” but most personal projects, the 1987 film version of Bruce Chatwin’s On The Black Hill, has just been released.

Telling the story of twin brothers on an isolated hill farm, the book covers some 80 years of Welsh rural life.

Chatwin initially considered the novel impossible to film, but this didn’t put Grieve off.

“It was my first project as director – I’d been doing a lot of TV up to that point, and I had worked as first assistant director before,” says Grieve, who now lives in London.

“But I was looking for something to make into a film, and the book had been optioned (subject to a filming contract) before but nothing materialised.

“So I managed to pick up the rights and write the screenplay and we got it made.”

Working closely with Chatwin, Grieve scouted for filming locations across Wales.

“Bruce was a lovely man to be with. Very actively involved and receptive. He said that the farmhouse we found for the film was closer to how he pictured the farmhouse than real-life one he based the book’s setting on.

“He had just come back from West Africa where he had been filming another of his novels, Cobra Verde, with (legendary German New Wave director) Werner Herzog. He said that the day before he returned (actor) Klaus Kinski had bitten a cameraman.

“Then he came onto our shoot to find us filming a choir of children. He was absolutely charmed by the contrast.”

Although he was happy to be back in Wales, where he had lived while writing the book, Chatwin was ill during the filming.

He died in 1989, aged just 48, after a struggle with Aids, something which he tried to keep secret.

“He was ill at the time,” recalls Grieve, “But he tried not to let it affect him. He struggled through.”

Even though the film is based on Chatwin’s book, Grieve says that for him, making it was “a very personal experience, a very interesting journey.

“I was born in Cardiff but we spent the war years in the Sirhowy Valley.

“Every weekend we’d be loaded up in the car and we’d head out, over the Brecon Beacons, the Black Mountains.

“But then when I turned 13, we moved away to London. So coming back to an area where I had spent so much of my formative years to work was very much in my mind when I was looking to do On The Black Hill.”

Even though the film didn’t propel him into the Hollywood stratosphere, he says he still feels it was a great success.

“I made one other feature (1996’s Letters from the East) but I was never that interested in making Hollywood movies, and the films I wanted to make would never work as Hollywood productions. Personal films about real people, that’s what I’m interested in,” he said.

This attitude towards filmmaking seems to have been informed by his early career, which saw renowned realist director Ken Loach plucking him from the BBC to work on the 1967 film Poor Cow.

“Ken was looking for someone to work as assistant director and he offered the job to me. I almost ended up working on Kes in fact, but at the time it was struggling to get funding.

“So I went off to work for Tony Richardson (director and former husband of Vanessa Redgrave) and by the time they had the money to make Kes he wouldn’t let me go back. So I missed out on that one.”

He doesn’t have many other regrets about his career.

“Well, I think I’ve filmed in about 70 countries in all and had a lot of fun. Doing things like a documentary about the major religions, called The Big Brigades and travelling around Israel and then moving onto Hornblower and putting together big, expensive, complex action scenes. It’s all been very interesting.”

Andrew Grieve will be at Theatr Mwldan in Cardigan tomorrow to address the film society before a showing of On the Black Hill