Who is Ralph Hanan? Biography, gossip, facts?

Josiah Ralph Hanan (13 June 1909 - 24 July 1969) known as Ralph Hanan was a New Zealand politician of the National Party. He was Mayor of Invercargill and then represented the Invercargill electorate in Parliament following in his uncle Josiah Hanan's footsteps. He served in World War II and his injuries ultimately caused his death at age 60. He is best remembered for the abolition of the death penalty which had been suspended by the Labour Party but which National was to reintroduce.

When is Ralph Hanan's birthday?

Ralph Hanan was born on the 13th of June 1909, which was a Sunday. Ralph Hanan's next birthday would be in 305 days (would be turning 116years old then).

What was Ralph Hanan's zodiac sign?

Ralph Hanan's zodiac sign was Gemini.

♊

The ruling planet of Gemini is Mercury. Therefore, lucky days were Wednesdays and lucky numbers were: 5, 14, 23, 32, 41 and 50. Scarlet and Red were Ralph Hanan's lucky colors. Typical positive character traits of Gemini include: Spontaneity, Brazenness, Action-orientation and Openness. Negative character traits could be: Impatience, Impetuousness, Foolhardiness, Selfishness and Jealousy.

Was Ralph Hanan gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Ralph Hanan was gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Ralph Hanan was gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Ralph Hanan was actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Was Ralph Hanan hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Ralph Hanan was hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Ralph Hanan was hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

Did Ralph Hanan do drugs? Did Ralph Hanan smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Ralph Hanan did smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or did Ralph Hanan do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Ralph Hanan did do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Ralph Hanan did take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Ralph Hanan has never tried drugs before.

When did Ralph Hanan retire? When did Ralph Hanan end the active career?

Ralph Hanan retired on the 12th of December 1957, which is more than 66 years ago. The date of Ralph Hanan's retirement fell on a Thursday.

When did Ralph Hanan's career start? How long ago was that?

Ralph Hanan's career started on the 26th of November 1954, which is more than 69 years ago. The first day of Ralph Hanan's career was a Friday.

What is Ralph Hanan doing now?

As mentioned above, Ralph Hanan died 55 years ago. Feel free to add stories and questions about Ralph Hanan's life as well as your comments below.

Are there any photos of Ralph Hanan's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!