B2K topped the Billboard Hot 100 Singles Sales chart for 10 weeks and the R&B/Hip-Hop Singles Sales chart for 7 weeks with "Uh Huh."

B2K released their debut LP - B2K.

B2K hit the Top 40 with "Uh Huh."

B2K was certified gold.

B2K won a BET Award for the Viewer's Choice Video ("Uh Huh").

B2K released B2K Remixes Volume 1.

The video for "Uh Huh" was nominated for 2 MTV Video Music Awards for Best New Artist and Viewer's Choice.

B2K released their next LP, Pandemonium.

B2K hit the Top 40 along with P. Diddy with "Bump Bump Bump." B2K topped the Billboard Year-End Charts with the Top Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Single Sales ("Uh Huh").

B2K were nominated for 2 American Music Awards for Favorite Hip-Hop/R&B Band/Duo/Group and Favorite Hip-Hop/R&B New Artist. They performed "Bump Bump Bump" at the ceremony.

B2K topped the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay chart for 2 weeks with P. Diddy with "Bump Bump Bump."

Pandemonium was certified gold.

B2K topped the Billboard Hot 100 Singles chart for a week with P. Diddy with "Bump Bump Bump."

B2K hit the Top 10 with "Bump Bump Bump."

Pandemonium special edition was released.

B2K won 2 Soul Train Music Awards for R&B/Soul Single Group, Band or Duo ("Bump Bump Bump" with P. Diddy) and R&B/Soul Album Group, Band or Duo (B2K).

Pandemonium was certified platinum.

B2K hit the Top 40 with "Girlfriend."

B2K won a Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Award for Favorite Music Group.

B2K appeared as The Temptations on the NBC television show American Dreams.

B2K could be heard on the soundtrack for American Dreams with their cover of "My Girl."

B2K won 2 BET Awards for Best Group and the Viewer's Choice Award.

B2K's video for "Bump Bump Bump" was nominated for a MTV Video Music Award for Best Group Video.

B2K was nominated for an American Music Award for Favorite Soul/R&B Band/Duo/Group.

B2K released the soundtrack to You Got Served. The film will be released in January and star members of the group.

B2K's manager stated the band had broken up saying the members have decided to pursue solo interests. But later in the month it was reported that the group was still together, and that Omarion had left the group to prep a solo LP to be released during the year, and that he would possibly be replaced by Brandy's brother, Ray J. The remaining members of B2K denied Ray J was joining the group.

B2K could be seen in the film You Got Served.

B2K won a Soul Train Music Award for R&B/Soul Album, Group, Band or Duo (Pandemonium).

The You Got Served soundtrack was certified gold.

B2K's Greatest Hits was released.