On this Page 2

MR. ARCHIBALD MACDOUGALL

AND MR. JOHN STEPHENS.

IN our issue of Saturday last, our readers

may remember to have met with the fol-

lowing pointed disclaimer of certain impu-

tations on the character and conduct of

Mr. Archibald Macdougall:—

In reference to a paragraph which appeared in

this journal on the 5th April last, and which was

calculated to be highly injurious to the reputation

of Mr. Archibald Macdougall we respectfully state,

at Mr Macdoualls request, that that paragraph

was neither written by ourselves, nor the objec-

tionable parts of it inserted with our concurrence, but

contrary to express written instructions at our

dictation, we ourselves being confined to bed at

the time, and, consequently, unable personally

to superintend the affairs of the printing-office.

In addition to the above, we have no objection to

state, that the obnoxious portions of this paragraph,

amid the whole and entire paragraph, which ap-

pearcd in this journal on the 15th of April, have

ever been repudiated by us as grossly unjust to

Mr Macdougall, and that the insertion of them

never occasioned any one greater pain than

ourselves.

The history of the insertion of the

above is a little curious, but may soon be

told.

At the late sitting of the Supreme Court,

Mr Macdougall was about to send in a bill

to the Grand Jury, charging us with libel

in April last, and we ourselves were about

to send in a cross bill against Mr Mac-

dougall, charging him with a like offence

at or about the same time, when, at the

suggestion of Mr J. H. Fisher, Mr Mac-

dougall's counsel, it was agreed that the

matter should be amicably arranged, we

ourselves proffering the insertion of the

above paragraph, and Mr Macdougall, both

personally and by his counsel, intimating

his readiness, in consideration of its ap-

pearance, to insert a similar paragraph in

reference to our grounds for action, or, in

fact, having recourse to the precise words

used on the occasion—" To do whatever we

wished."

Instead of coming forward, however, in

the bold, frank, and open manner, in which

it was understood to have been arranged

in court, judge of our surprise, on Tues-

day last, at finding the following notice of

the affair in the Southern Australian :—

Our readers may remember that in April last,

several libellous articles appeared in the Register

affecting the character of Mr Archibald Mac-

dougall, then publisher of this journal. The

libels were of so gross a nature that Mr Mac-

dougall was advised at once to place the matter

in the hands of the Advocate General, which he

accordingly did, and the case was to have been

tried at the last Sessions. Just as it was to have

come on, however, Mr Allen came forward in

Court and gave Mr Macdougall the subjoined

explanation and apology. (See paragraph pub-

lished above.)

Of course by this Mr Allen shifted the onus of

the affair from his own shoulders to those of Mr

John Stephens, at that time joint Editor of the

Register. Upon this apology bring published in

the Register, however, on Saturday last, Mr John

Stephens called at our office, and produced a letter

from Mr Allen to him, justifying him in writing the

paragraphs alluded to, and even requesting him to

change some of the expressions to make them more

plain and decided against Mr Macdougall. Mr

Allen also called to state that Mr Stephens was

incorrect in this interpretation of his letter, and

has placed in Mr Macdougall's hands the original

manuscript articles, to shew that none of the ob-

jectionable parts were written by him. Mr Ste-

pliens was applied to, to furnish a copy of that

letter, and promised to give one to Mr Mac-

dougall. In the meantime Mr Macdougall, to

whom we have spoken, is inclined to allow the

matter as it stands to go before the public,

leaving it to Messrs Allen and Stephens to ex-

pain this extraordinary business as they best can.

At present we avoid comment.

On the immediate receipt of the above,

we waited upon Mr Macdougall, and called

his attention to the words marked in italics

as uusustained by evidence, reminding

him, at the same time, of what we con-

sidered a violation of the compact entered

into in court, and leaving him with the

intention of referring the matter to Mr

Fisher, at whose instance the arrangement

had been effected.

Mr Fisher, it is but just to ourselves to

say, admits the correctness of the language

imputed to the parties concerned in this

arrangement, namely, that on the insertion

of the foregoing paragraph, " they were

ready to do whatever we wished," and

further states, that it shall be done even

now if we desire it.

Whether we ought, or ought not, to

desire it, our readers will best judge, first

from a paragraph, and next from a letter,

which appeared in yesterday's Southern

Australian. The paragraph is as fol-

lows :—.

We beg to refer our readers to a correspondence

in another column, relative to Mr Allen's apology

for the disgraceful libels upon Mr Macdougall.

As the correspondence speaks tor itself, we only

remark at present that it places Messrs Allen and

Stephens in a most unenviable possession. While

we insert Mr Stephens's " explanatory letter," we

think it necessary to state our opinion, that as

respects his own part in the affair, it is anything

but satisfactory. It remains to be seen what

explanation Mr Allen can give of his very curious

letter of instructions.

The letter is signed " A. Macdougall,"

and is of a like spirit with the above :—

TO THE EDITOR OF THE SOUTHERN AUSTRALIAN

Sir—I feel it due to myself to trespass a little

on your space to-day, in order to lay before the

public the following correspondence. From the

information you gave your readers in your last

issue, it will he unnecessary for me to trouble

them with a history of the matter to which the

correspondence refers. It is sufficient notorious

that my private character was grossly attacked in

thr Register—that I have been injured thereby—

that I look legal proceedings against the proprie.-

tor ol the Register in consequence and that upon

his apologizing I withdrew those proceedings,

although his apology was only given at the

eleventh hour.

As I have accepted the apology from Mr Allen,

I shall not trouble myself with remarking upon

the matter at issue between him and Mr John

Stephens, simply observing, that justification of

their conduct is impossible for either of them.

The public will, however, be able to judge, not

only of their conduct towards me, but as to what

reliance can be placed in them in future,

I am, &c,

A. MACDOUGALL

P.S.—Mr Stephens is in error when he accuses

Mr Allen of giving him up as the author. Mr

S. gave himself up when he called of his own ac-

cord at the office of the Southern Anstralian, and

showed Mr Blackham Mr Allen's note, which he

considered authorized him in writing the libels.

Exposed thus to the cross-fire of these

two doughty champions in their own

cause, instead of being met by Mr Mac-

dougall with a mutual apology, and of

which an example had been set by our-

selves, in accordance with the terms of

agreement in Court, we shall first dispose

of the affair as far as it regards Mr Archi-

bald Macdougall, and next as it relates to

Mr John Stephens.

And first, as it respects the insertion of

the " objectionable parts" of the para-

graph of April the 5th, " without our

concurrence," and " contrary to express

written instructions at our dictation," we

are no longer left relying upon mere

assertion, but can appeal to documentary

evidence. In Mr Macdougall's "Infor-

mation" against this journal on the 22nd

of April last, and the whole of which is

published at the close of this article, we

have the following as the ground of the

complaint:—

That James Allen, of Adelaide aforesaid,

printer, did on the fifth day of this instant April,

at Adelaide aforesaid, unlawfully, wickedly, and

maliciously compose, print, and publish,

and cause to be composed, printed, and

published in a certain publication called the

South Australian Register, whereof the said James

Allen is printer, publisher, and proprietor, of and

concerning the said Archibald Macdougall, a cer-

tain false, scandalous, malicious, and defamatory

libel, containing among other things in one part

thereof the false, scandalous, malicious, and de-

famatory words following, that is to say - " There

are some men who are not to be believed on their oaths,

and others whose word is as little to be relied on

when it may chance to clash with their self-in-

terest, one of these is Archibald Macdougall,

printer and proprietor of the Southern Australian

—meaning this complainant, the said Archibald

Macdougall, who is in fact printer and proprie-

tor of a public newspaper called the Southern

Australian, and containing in another part thereof

the false, scandalous, and malicious words, that is

to say—" But if like others of his fraternity," mean-

ing this complainant the said Archibald Mac-

dougall—"will not cheat"— " he," meaning this

complainant the said Archibald Macdougall—

" can lie as fast as a dog can trot."

At the time the article complained of

was written, we were confined to a sick

bed, and, consequently, unable to write,

but on its being sent to us for approval,

it was returned, accompanied with a note,

of which the following is a copy :—

Dear Sir—I shall be obliged by your substitut-

ing—" There are some men, whose word, it seems,

is but little to be depended upon, when it clashes

with their (interests)—or some such words, in

place of "men who are not to be believed on their

oaths."

I should also like you (to) throw out the sen-

tence—" This Simon Pure "can lie as fast at a dog

can trot," &c—on the third folio.

On the 4th folio—" This perjured man" is a

phrase on the first line which might be altered

for " Mr Macdougall" without weakening the force

of the passage; and besides, it would be actionable

in its present form, the allegation being that Mr

MacD. had not been put upon his oath, and con-

sequently could not have perjured himself.

Considering the relation in which the

writer of that article stood to us at the

time, could we have said more without a

breach of decorum, and ought it not to

have occasioned us surprise on the follow-

ing day to find that our instructions had

not been complied with ? What amuses

us, however, is, that Mr Macdougall, or

any other man possessed of a particle of

right feeling, should strain this, after the

manner in which it was done in the

Southern Australian of Tuesday last,

into a "justification" of the insertion of

the "objectionable parts" of the article

complained of, much less that any man

should assert that the expressions were

changed at our request, " to make them

more plain and decided against Mr Mac-

dougall." Why, not a single part of our

instructions was complied with, all the

offensive expressions being retained, with

the exception of " this perjured man"

which was changed, not as we desired it,

into " Mr Macdougall," and which would

in effect have been an infinitely milder

mode of proceeding, but into " this fast

and-loosc, this black-and-white, this

india-rubber-conscienced man." Had Mr

Macdougall been similarly circumstanced

with ourselves, we should like to know in

what way he would have acted, and whe-

ther, in the event of his having given such

instructions as the above, he would have

considered it fair, after those instructions

had been disobeyed by his "paid as-

sistant," to have had them alleged against

him as a "justification" of the offence

against the commission of which they were

intended to guard? Of course, any former

admission of ours was confined to the

offensive expressions of which Mr Mac-

dougall complained in his "Information,"

and not to the facts alleged in the

article, these having been primarily

stated on the authority of the writer of

the article, and the proof or disproof of

them still resting, as at the first, princi

pally between Mr Macdougall and the

writer himself.

Of Mr John Stephens we have little to

say that is creditable, and we shall there-

fore, confine ourselves to the close of his

letter, which contains the gist of all he

has to advance :—

For an editor or proprietor of a newspaper, says

Mr Stephens, to give up the name of an accre-

dited correspondent, that he may be proceeded

against at law, to screen himselt or his journal

against the consequences of an accepted communi-

cation, is base enough; but for one editor to be-

tray another, or for a newspaper proprietor to im-

plicate his paid assistant, under any circumstances,

but especially to avoid the penalties of inaction

which he himself provoked, is a breach of pro-

fessional honour and usage.

This is modesty with a vengeance!

Mr John Stephens talking about a breach

of "professional honour and usage"! The

man above all others in the Colony least

to be trusted with another's private senti-

ments, to talk of " one editor betraying

another" ! The man who, under the pre-

tence of a partnership, but without a shil-

ling in his pocket, possessed himself of a

knowledge of our most private affairs, and

then went and misrepresented them to

others, complaining of our not throwing

around him the veil of secrecy! The

man, who sat at our table, and rose from

it to join a friend in our garden, and speak

to our prejudice, and afterwards, for his

own private purposes, carried his stories

to places in which they were most likely

to injure us, bellowing about " turpitude

and treachery, and inconsistency, and

falsehood"! Out upon such arrant hypo-

crisy, such a flagrant violation of all that

is due to the dignity of manhood! Pace

the streets of Adelaide—take the city in its

whole length and breadth—and, although

Mr John Stephens has scarcely graced it

with his presence for a period of six

mouths—ask whether the seal of silence

is not imposed upon the lips of every

person into whose presence he may chance

to intrude himself, lest, being thrown off

Yours, &c.,

JAMES ALLEN.

I have the honour to be,

Your humble obedient Servant,

JAMES ALLEN.

Charles Davies, Esq., M.D.,

North Adelaide.

Yours very obediently,

C. DAVIES, M.D.

Mr James Allen,

North Adelaide.

I remain, dear Sir,

Yours faithfully.

JAMES ALLEN.

Mr. Wm. Kyffin Thomas,

Overseer of Register Office.

I am, dear Sir,

Your most obedient Servant,

WM. KYFFIN THOMAS.

James Allen, Esq.,

North Adelaide.

Yours, faithfully,

J. ALLIN.

Mr W. Williams, Register Office.

Dear Sir, yours truly,

W. WILLIAMS.

James Allen, Esq.

their guard, they should be betrayed into an

innocent expression of opinion, which may

afterwards be carried to those for whose ears

it was never intended, and be twisted and

distorted to their disadvantage ? We have

no wish to be more particular at present, or

we could resent this grossly unjust attack

upon ourselves with a severity which Mr

John Stephens would not soon forget.

Let it not be supposed, however, that we

seek to evade Mr John Stephens's charge,

under the cover of a series of vague gene-

ralities, instead of meeting him foot to foot.

When Mr John Stephens charges us with

having given up his name, that he " might

be proceeded against at law," he is guilty of

a gross and malicious falsehood, an applica-

tion to that effect having been made to us in

Court, and refused, and an understanding,

moreover, having been entered into, that, in

the event of the proposed mutual apology,

there should be an end of all legal proceed-

ings whatever in the case. Mr Macdougall,

however, has certified in his letter, that Mr

Stephens's name was never breathed to the

parties, until he had first gone and avowed

himself as the author, but pleaded in "justi-

fication" the contents of our letter forbid-

ding the insertion of the libellous and ob-

jectionable matter.

But can Mr John Stephens—this paragon

of " professional honour"—this personifica-

tion of "professional usage"—this embody-

ment of editorial propriety—say as much for

himself ? Are his hands clean in the matter ?

Can he plead exemption from the " turpi-

tude" of the betrayal of a brother editor ?

How came it to pass that, three weeks

before these proceedings took place in Court,

Mr John Stephens was found at Mr Mac-

dougall's counter, pledging himself that" he

would rather have had his right hand cut off,

than have been the author of certain articles

in this journal, and leading Mr Crawford to

infer his disclaimer of the very articles

which he has since been led to avow?

Where is this betrayer of other people's

secrets now ? Mr Macdougall's establish-

ment is prolific of misfortune to this maligner

of his brethren, this disturber of the cor-

diality of good neighbourhood and the

sanctity of private friendships. Why, apart

from all other considerations, the production

of our letter to Mr Macdougall, written to

Mr John Stephens on business strictly

private, was a gross betrayal of confidence,

although Mr John Stephens may not see it,

which, in the opinion of every right-minded

man, must meet with deserved reprobation.

On all other points mooted in the course

of this discussion, we propose rather to rest

our justification upon the documentary evi-

dence annexed, than upon any mere state-

ments of our own:—

(No. 1.)

South Australia, } The information and com-

District of Adelaide } plaint of Archibald Macdou-

to wit. } gall, of Adelaide, in the

Province of South Australia, aforesaid, Printer,

taken before me Henry Rodolph Wigley, Esquire,

Resident Magistrate for the district of Adelaide

in the said Province, and one of Her Majesty's

Justices of the Peace for the said Province at

Adelaide aforesaid, this twenty-second day of

April, one thousand eight hundred and forty-three,

who giveth me the said Henry Rodolph Wigley

to understand and be informed that James Allen,

of Adelaide, aforesaid, printer, did on the fifth

day of this instant April, at Adelaide aforesaid,

unlawfully, wickedly, and maliciously compose,

print, and publish, and cause to be composed,

printed, and published in a certain publication

called The South Australian Register, whereof the

said James Allen is printer, publisher, and pro-

prietor, of and concerning the said Archibald

Macdougall, a certain false, scandalous, malicious,

and defamatory libel, containing among other

things in one part thereof the false, scandalous,

malicious, and defamatory words following, that

is to say—"There are some men who are not to

be believed on their oaths, and others whose word

is as little to be relied on when it may chance to

clash with their self-interest, one of these is

Archibald Macdougall, printer and proprietor of

the Southern Australian" —meaning this com-

plainant, the said Archibald Macdougall, who is

in fact printer nnd proprietor of a public news-

paper called the Southern Australian, and contain-

ing In another pnrt thereof the false, scandalous,

malicious words following, that is to say —" But

if like others of his fraternity," meaning this com

plainant the said Archibald Maedougall—" will

not cheat"—" he," meaning this compalinant the

said Archibald Macdougall—"can lie as fast as a

dog can trot." And which said false, scandalous,

malicious, and defamatory libel was, as this com

plainant the said Archibald Macdougall verily

believes, so composed, printed, and published,

and caused to be composed, printed, and published,

by the said James Allen, with intent to bring him

this complainant, the said Archibald Macdougall

into contempt, hatred, infamy, and disgrace, and

to injure him in his trade or business of a printer,

and therefore tlii? complainant the said Archi

bald Macdougall prays that the said James Allen

may be dealt with in the premises according to

law.

Abchib&ld Macdougall.

(No. 2)

Dear Sir—l shall be obliged by your nubati

tuting—" There arc come men, whose word, it

seems, is but little to be depended upon, when

it clashes with their interesta"—or some such,

words, in placo of *' men who are not to lie be

lieved on their oaths."

I ihould also like you to throw out the sen

tence— ■■ This Simon Pure can lie as fast na a dog

can trot,*' &c.—on the third folio.

On the 4t!i lolio—"This perjured man" is a

phrase on the first line which might be altered for

" Mr Macdougatl" without weakening the force

of the passage; and, besides, it would be action

able in its present form, the allegation being that

Mr Mac D. had not been put upon liie oath, and

consequently could not have perjured himself.

In all other respects the ailicle will do admi

rably, but pray keep me out of the power of this

drowning man, who, feeling that lie roust go

down, is struggling to seiie hold of others with

his death trrip, and bring them down with him.

Tin- defence nt actions here is enough to appal a

manhebe the.

(No 3.)

Korth Adelaide, July 27th, 1643.

Dear Sir—t beg your attention to the accom

panying copies or the South Amttrdim Register,

and shall feel obliged by your stating, aa tar as

your recollection will allow, what you nay re

member to have heard me state generally at the

lime of their appearance, in reference to those

paragraphs, relating to Mr Macdougall, which

Will be found under date of April the 9th and

April the 16th.

I should hardly have ventured (o trouble you,

but for Ute desire I h«« to see the troth or the

ramttct broadly mod distinctly tuted bj parties

who can be suppoee.l to have no interest in it one

way or the other.

Kermode-slreet, July 2Btli, IS4D.

Dear Sir— l beg lo acknowlrdgv'lhe rucrijil i-t

your letter of yesterday, and listen to comply

with the request it contains, as fur as my rceollec

tlou will allow; and what I here assert I know

to be the truth.

In the first place, previously to your severe

illness, which happened in the latter end of

March, you have, two or three times, in coming

from the Mechanics' Institute, told me that you

must look closely after the articles you wrote, us

Mr Stephens took upon himself to interpolate

them, mid thus alter your moaning very materi

ally. You expressed your strong disapprobation

of such conduct at the lime.

I recollect well having heard you say that the

paragraph relative to Mr Mncdougull, of April

6th, you had ordered some alterations lo he made,

and that when the paper appeared, you were Mir

prised and vexed Unit your instiuc'lions had not

received any attention.

I also perfectly remember that, at my vMt to

you on the moricinjr of the appearance of the

paper, on the 15th of April, y. m mentioned Unit

you had had nothing to do with the editing of

that paper, aud had not seen it until after it came

out, at the same time entirely disavowing mid

reprobating the two paragraphs there inserted,

the one about Mr James, the other concerning

Mr Macdougall, until they were in the hands cif

the public.

_ On_ this occasion, and also through previous

liberties taken with your paper, you told me thist

if jcu could not write, you were resolved to see

the proofs of every paper prior to its appearance,

as you could not tell what difficulties Sir Stephens

might draw you into, he being entirely irrc

pporiEible, and all the onus falling on you.

I might have mentioned before, tli.it previous

to this, in consequence of your illness, I had

advised you to have as little to do with the paper,

for a short time, as you could, it very materially

retarding your recovery.

Again declaring the truth of the above, I remain'

(No. 4.)

North Adelaide, July 27th, 1843.

Dear Sir- I shall feel obliged by your slating

in writing, as correctly as you can, tlie time at

which instructions were given fur the lirsl proofs

of the Register to be sent over to my residence in

North Adelaide before the impression was

worked off, as also the cirriiinManeos which led

to this change as well as you can recollect them.

North Adelaide, July 27th, IS-13.

Dear Sir—ln answer to your letter of this

date, requesting me lo state 'tlie time at which

instructions were given fur tlie lirst i roof of

the Register to be left at your residence before

the imprcssio,u was worked off, and the circum

stances which led to that change, I beg to inform

you that, to the best of my recollection, the proof

of the second form was first left nt jour house on

the Oth of May last, if not before", certainly on

that day, as I remember particularly sending it

then. No paper has been wi ought oft" since, to

my knowledge, without your having first seen a

proof of it.

The circumstance which led to this order

being given were, as I understood from .you, nn

account of Eome nrlielex being inserted' liy Mr

John Stephens,>!r'ii Sub-Editor ofthc I!ryintcr,

«nd other articles altered by him, without yiur

seeing them previous to publication, which'did

not meet with your approval, as being of a libel

lous tendency.

(No. 5 )

Nor'.h Adelaide, July 28. IP-J.l

Dear Sir—l hrg your httention to m It-tier,

signed John Stephens, in the Suuthern Australian

of to-day, and shall feel obliged by your stilting

generally what you may have heard me o\-|ircss in

reference to some of tbn articles refem d to. and

the course I determined upon taking in conse

quence of their appearance.

linjister Office, July 2f?, 1P43.

Dear Sir—!n reply to your note of this date, 1

very distinctly recollect thut, after the publication

of the Snuth Australian liciiister of the Aili A;iril,

you expressed to me b Hi<Hpproliutioii<i( dip parn.

praph respecting Mr Maciinu^all wliicli npj-ciired

in our paper of that day, und that you muted (lint

Bamc poitions of it were inserted contrary to your

particular direction-, itmt you frequently since

that time declared that the pttrnqrupli referred to.

und come others of the smno kind, lind pivrn you

grent uneH6iiic«s, and thut you liud tlii'i<>fore re.

folved that the llrj/istcr, w'hilut ntidur Mr John

Stephcns's editorsiiip, should not he published

until it hud been finuly revised

Mr Hagcn's party liavo taltcn ?wo more fish

•—one on Saturday the 22nd fast., nnd'atiotlicr

on the following Monday. Altogether tlic sea

son, we are glad to hear, prombe* to bo a most

productive and remunerating one.

On the 20th fort. A pineapple of the variety

called the Queen Tine, and which weighed

three pounds, was cut in the garden of Goeorge

Stevenson, Esq., North Adelaide. On Thurs

day last two others were cut of the same va

riety, one of which weighed three pound* am!-

B?half, and the other three pounds and-a-innr

ter, the largest of which may be seen in tlie

ehiipof Mr Matthews, baker and eoufecti.irer,

Ilindley-street. We understand that the plants

of which these fine fruit are the produce, were

orieinslly obtained from Sydnoy. Tlu-y are

treated as half-hardy plmls are in l^r.gUml,

tliat being simply a ci.vciing of^li?? in winter

without bottom licat, and this fact ?lo?c speak?

volumes in favour of the mildness of our winter

reason.

Nanto Kertameru, Warritya Yungarra, and

Marrutya Ngangki, a native man, woman,

and boy, wore brought up in custody on

Wednesday last, at the Resident Magitrate's

Court, from the Port, charged with entering

the premises of the Shipping Company, and

stealing money and goods therefrom. It ap-

peared the robbery had been perpetrated with

all the expertness of English burglars, the

older blacks having furnished the boy Yun-

gurra with a chisel, and then put him through

an opening in the window, at night time.

He then succeeded in getting to the cash-box,

which was full of money, and having broken

it open, decamped with the silver, leaving the

notes and other papers strewed about the floor.

Detection followed by the prisoners offering the

money at Albert Town for bread. They were

remanded for further evidence for a week.

Southern Australian.

On Monday last, William Skelton was

brought up, at the Resident Magistrate's

Court, charged with shooting a native, and

causing his death. James Pow, of the mounted

Police, stated that on 21st June he went to

one of Messrs Hughes's stations, at Reedy

Creek ; saw the prisoner there ; found the

body of a native man about 150 yards from the

hut; did not know the name of the deceased,

but he was a young man under 20, and with-

out a beard ; the body was naked ; saw wounds

on the back part of the head, and on the arm ;

they seemed to have been caused by buck shot

or slugs, but could not say whether he died

from either of these wounds ; buried the

body with the assistance of Mr Hughes. In

the course of the evening, Skelton began (for

the first lime) to speak about the circum-

stances ; he said that on Sunday evening (the

18th), he heard the sheep rush ; he got out

of bed and went to the sheep-fold ; the sheep

rushed towards him ; he called out, and no

one answered him ; he saw something get

over the hurdles, which he thought was a

native dog; he called again, and there being

no answer, he fired ; seeing that the object

did not get up, he went down and found it to

be a black ; he brought the body to the hut,

and then went and reported the mailer to Mr

Hughes ; prisoner did not allude to the body

which he (witness) had buried, but under

stood that it was the body referred to ; it was

very dark on the Sunday evening. The

prisoner was committed for trial, but will be

admitted to bail.— Ibid.