Windows Server 2003 is the operating system of the Windows NT family intended for work on servers. Windows Server 2003 was released by Microsoft corporation on April 24, 2003. Became Windows Server 2003 development of the Windows 2000 Server operating system and the server Windows XP option.

Noticeable innovation in Windows Server 2003, unlike Windows 2000 Server – the preset . net Framework cover that allowed to support the Microsoft .NET platform. Initially Microsoft was going to call the new product "Windows .NET Server". But later this name was rejected. In Windows Server 2003 the set of commands of administration and management appeared. Also a system for the first time includes shadow copy service which allows to save the previous versions of the user files automatically.

Editions

The operating system was released in four editions:

Wed Edition. The "facilitated" version of Windows Server 2003 developed first of all for a web hosting and support of XML of web services in the small organizations and divisions. This edition is delivered only through Microsoft partners and is not on sale as "shrink-wrapped software product".

Standard Edition. Represents the edition focused on use on average and small business. In Standard Edition only those opportunities which, according to Microsoft, are necessary only to large enterprises are not available. Besides, there is a possibility of use up to 4 processors odnoremenno and also 4 GB of RAM.

Enterprise Edition. The edition focused on large and medium business. Enterprise Edition allows to use up to 1 terabyte of RAM, supports up to 8 processors at the same time, adding of RAM "on the fly" and a clustering.

Datacenter Edition. The most powerful of all editions Windows Server 2003, is focused on use in the large organizations. In this edition there are no services which use is reasonable only in the small companies or groups.

Also there were Enterprise Edition and Datacenter Edition editions for the 64-bit systems based on Itanium 2 processors.

Server roles

Windows Server 2003 is the multitasking operating system capable is centralized or distributed to manage different sets of roles, depending on needs of users. Some of server roles:

file server and print server;

Web server and Web server of applications;

mail server;

server of terminals;

server of remote access / server of a virtual private network (VPN);

directory service, domain name system (DNS), server of the protocol of dynamic setup of nodes (DHCP) and Windows service of Internet Naming Service (WINS);

server of stream multimedia broadcasting.

System Requirements

The minimum frequency of the processor is 133 MHz (400 MHz for Datacenter Edition) for computers based on the x86 processor, 733 MHz for computers based on the Itanium processor

The minimum amount of RAM is 128 MB (512 MB for Datacenter Edition)

Space on a disk for installation of 1.5 GB for computers based on the x86 processor, 2 GB for computers based on the Itanium processor

Termination of support of OS

On July 14, 2015 official support of the Windows Server 2003 operating system stopped. Microsoft says that many clients already passed from the outdated server platform to fresher. However there are many companies who did not manage to be updated yet or does not intend to do it, putting at risk the computer systems.

As reported on the website of Microsoft, the company will cease to release updates for a security system of Windows Server 2003/R2 and applications started on this OS and also will stop rendering online support to these users on July 14, 2015. All data processing centers working based on Windows Server 2003/R2 will not conform to security requirements and state regulation in this connection Microsoft recommends to transfer the equipment to new OS as soon as possible. Especially it concerns those companies which deal with confidential data (for example, public health and financial institutions).

As of July, 2014 as reported then Microsoft, in the world there were about 24 million servers managed by Windows Server 2003. The company did not give fresher digits. Most likely, the number of such machines in a year was considerably reduced.

According to Mike Schutz (Mike Schutz), the general marketing manager of cloud platforms of Microsoft, "the overwhelming percent" of clients of the company already transferred the server workloads from Windows Server 2003. However, most likely, still there is a set of the companies which deprived the servers of corrections of security of Microsoft, notes the ComputerWorld edition.

One of such is the major American pharmaceutical company Sanofi which has more than 12 thousand servers on architecture of x86. Mike Stager, the senior director on servers, storage and data recovery of Sanofi, said that the company strongly was late with updating of systems so this process will last for several years.

Despite the stopped support of Windows Server 2003, Microsoft will continue to release critical updates for this OS within the special Custom Support Agreement (CSA) program. Her subscribers will have to pay $600 for one server in the first year of action of the program. In the next year cost will double, and then — will treble.[1]

Councils for migration on new OS

As the new operating system the company offers Windows Server 2012 R2.

The companies which were not going to upgrade OS to new versions can will face a number of difficulties. It is possible to refer lack of access to security updates for the operating system, need to incur additional costs on service and security to number of the most serious. Besides, servers on the basis of Windows 2003/R2 will not be able to be certified by regulators during audit.

"In 2003 Windows Server 2003 was the modern operating system which considered realities and calls of those of years. A decade of OS later became morally outdated and cannot conform to all requirements of modern IT needs, - Rodion Tulsky, the promotions manager of infrastructure solutions for DPC, Microsoft in Russia says. - The Microsoft company offers customers the modern operating system which completely corresponds to today's calls and trends and includes possibilities of virtualization of servers, support of cloud computing, advanced functionality of work with storages and new expanded mechanisms of security".

The Microsoft company offers specialized services in migration of specialists of Microsoft Consulting Services for customers, actively cooperates with partners and developers in order that they could carry out effectively and qualitatively migration and offer the applications supporting Windows Server 2012R2.

At the same time the companies planning transition can purchase the new hardware server, install the Windows Server 2012 R2 operating system and transfer loads of the new server or select a way of virtualization and transfer loads of the virtual machine with the Windows Server 2012 R2 operating system, having reduced equipment costs, the electric power, cooling, the place in DPC. Migration in virtual machines, for example, Microsoft Azure or service of providers can become other alternative.

After the end of support Windows Server 2003, the companies should update not only server OS, but also the equipment. Migration can take different time which will depend on the number of servers, a role which they execute in infrastructure and also from the serviced applications. Migration on new and more modern OS will allow the companies and not only to update the park of operating systems, but also to upgrade the infrastructure. So, when replacing the hardware the company will receive not only the new operating system, but also absolutely other, higher level of performance.

The correct strategy of migration on new and more modern OS includes several crucial elements. She demands identification of the remained systems running Windows Server 2003, the analysis of workloads and identification of a suitable method of transition to new opportunities and technologies. Microsoft offers virtualization of Windows Server 2012 R2, Microsoft Azure and Office 365 as the most suitable systems for migration with Windows Server 2003.

Migration includes:

Consolidation of physical servers or paid virtualization platforms in Hyper-V for economy of means.

Transfer of workloads, such as Exchange or Office 365 for performance improvement and decrease in workloads.

Updating with SQL Server 2005 to SQL Server 2014 for the solution of crucial problems of performance and more quick access to any data.

Transfer of web applications on Microsoft Azure or Cloud OS Network, for simplification of access and scaling of applications and also increase and cost efficiency.

Improvement user and business applications to correspond to requirements and mobile working conditions of modern office employees.

Windows Server 2003 will continue to work also after the end of support, but, it is important to note that software out of the program of support bears in itself serious risks for security and can lead to financial losses.

Migration process is usually divided into 4 steps. Duration of each of them depends on specifics of infrastructure of the company. Phases should be completed one after another and on each of them to be attentive to parts.

Data collection

At a stage of data collection it is necessary to find out in what status there is IT infrastructure what applications and their components are placed on servers running the old operating system. It is also necessary to include in the made directory of servers and applications information on the current loads of a system, for their subsequent analysis.

Analysis

The analysis stage consists of processing of data retrieveds and assessment of criticality of applications. It is necessary to find the most critical applications for business and to think over approaches to their migration, procedures of tests of functionality after the migration.

Also this stage is a good opportunity to create a list of applications and to define owners or responsible for them, to exclude applications which are not used any more or to redistribute resources on the most loaded and critical tasks.

Choice of a way

The list which turned out at the previous stage will allow you to define a further vector of development of your IT infrastructure. At a stage of the choice of a way it is worth thinking of use of new technologies. Perhaps, at this stage you decide to review the current capacities and will give preference to virtual environments, having taken the first step to a private cloud. It will allow to save resources and not to spend additional resources for scalability or fault tolerance.

Migration the Last step is the simplest and on it it is necessary only to follow the planned migration process. Of course, you should not forget that before beginning something large-scale, in our case it is migration, it is necessary to make the backup copy of infrastructure and to think over options of rollback of a system to an initial status.

As well as than the team of experienced specialists can help?

Migration process not always takes place smoothly. Many reefs which, without having regular practical experience, it is impossible to consider at work planning meet. Therefore during planning and testing it is worth using specialists of a different profile for the solution of difficult and uncommon tasks. For example, at migration of the database, it is desirable to keep in readiness its service specialist that in case of fault or failure he could join in elimination of effects quickly.

Besides, experienced specialists in the field of migration of servers in the different fields of business:

will take care of that process of migration was most adapted to your IT infrastructure;

will offer the fulfilled plans taking into account specifics of your company and the information systems involved in it;

considering the terms selected for the project will make the optimal road map on migration of separate components, depending on their influence on infrastructure;

will place in the necessary order priorities on migration of such critical parts of information systems as a directory service, network infrastructure, file services, security components, etc.;

use flexible approach to project implementation that will allow to involve experts from different IT areas, at all stages of the project: from inspection before support;

optimize infrastructure, will reveal weaknesses and will make recommendations about their elimination.

FSTEC is not going to certify Windows Server 2003 after 2017

The Federal Service for Technical and Export Control (FSTEC) after August, 2017 does not intend to extend the validity of certificates of conformity on the Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2003 R2 operating systems[2].

It is connected with the fact that Microsoft since July 15, 2015 will stop support and release of updates for data of OS including directed to elimination of errors and vulnerabilities.

As notes[3] FSTEC, now a considerable part of the certified versions of the Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2003 R2 operating systems continues to be applied to data protection of confidential character (including personal data) in information systems of federal public authorities, public authorities of territorial subjects of the Russian Federation, local government authorities and organizations. It is caused, including, existence of a large number of the specific application software developed under data of OS applied to implementation by public authorities and organizations of the powers.

The termination of release of updates of OS in combination with probable detection in them new vulnerabilities is fraught with security risks of confidential information. Besides, FSTEC predicts increase in interest in the unprotected operating systems from hackers.

Today in the system of certification of FSTEC of Russia three versions of the Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2003 R2 operating systems are certified according to security requirements of information, licenses are granted till August 5, 2017.

FSTEC recommends to the organizations working at these systems to consider the additional security risks of information connected with the end of updating of OS and also to plan actions for transfer till August, 2017 of information systems on the operating systems supported by their producers certified according to security requirements of information.

Also FSTEC advises to set all the relevant obligatory certified updates of the certified versions of the Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2003 R2 operating systems released by the Russian producers then to forbid automatic update of OS, and whenever possible to exclude connection to the Internet and to departmental (corporate) networks of computer aids or segments of the information systems working running the Windows Server 2003 and Windows Server 2003 R2 operating systems.

Links

Windows Server 2003 rates

Expanded Windows Server 2003 overview

Windows Server 2003: details