Johnny Wright

Johnnie Robert Wright, Jr. was born on May 13, 1914 in Mount Juliet, Tennessee. At age 22 he began a long musical partnership with Jack Anglin. Wright and Anglin formed the duo Johnnie & Jack in 1939 and remained together until Anglin died in 1963. During the 24 years they recorded for RCA and Decca, they had eight Top 10 country singles.

Their biggest hit was with the Pat Ballard tune, (Oh Baby Mine) I Get So Lonely that they took to #1 in 1954. The song's pop version by The Four Knights peaked at #2. Several years earlier their success with Poison Love [#4] earned them an invitation to the 'Grand Ole Opry,' where they remained for 15 years.

Wright's first success after Anglin's death was a 1964 song with his Tennessee Mountain Boys, Walkin', Talkin', Cryin', Barely Beatin' Broken Heart. A year later he had his biggest hit, Hello Vietnam. The song by Tom T. Hall spent five months on the Country Chart, three weeks at #1, and started a stream of patriotic tunes such as Loretta Lynn's Dear Uncle Sam. Hall would write several more Vietnam-related songs including the anti-war Mama Bake A Pie (Daddy Kill A Chicken).

At about the same time that Wright started his partnership with Anglin, he took on a life partner by marrying singer Kitty Wells. With more than 80 sides on the Country Chart from 1952's It Wasn't God Who Made Honky Tonk Angels to a 1979 remake of The Wild Side Of Life, she was appropriately known as "The Queen of Country Music." Wells recorded duets with the likes of Red Foley, Webb Pierce and Roy Drusky and in 1968, she and Wright recorded an autobiographical duet, We'll Stick Together. Forty years later that was still true.

Various - History Next Stop Is Vietnam 1961-2008 (13-CD)

Read more at: https://www.bear-family.com/various-history-next-stop-is-vietnam-1961-2008-13-cd.html

Copyright © Bear Family Records

Copyright © Bear Family Records®. Copying, also of extracts, or any other form of reproduction, including the adaptation into electronic data bases and copying onto any data mediums, in English or in any other language is permissible only and exclusively with the written consent of Bear Family Records® GmbH.