PINETOWN Boys’ High School had its annual sports awards dinner last Friday, with Steve Be­zuidenhout, current head of development at AmaZulu FC, the guest speaker.

As a school that offers opportunities in all sports, it was fitting that those who put their minds to what they wanted to achieve personally and for their school, were recognised.

Bezuidenhout, a man whose passion for football runs deep through his veins, gave an impassioned speech, instilling the age-old adage that a life in sport, a desire to reach the top, demands constant work.

It’s a subject Bezuidenhout can relate to, with his unwavering love of football seeing him take a journey from player and coach at various levels, to his current involvement with AmaZulu.

He based his presentation on a book titled The Gold Mine Effect, where the author travelled the world to find out why athletes and sportspeople from poor countries and remote villages are the best in the world at what they do.

“It’s all about dedication, a desire to reach the pinnacle of a certain sport and how to stay ahead of everyone else,” said Bezuidenhout.

“Too often, youngsters think that because they are in a first team at school, they have made the grade and the world will open up for them, providing endless opportunities.

“The harsh reality is that the opposite happens. There is so much more to look out for. Besides the workload that has to be adhered to constantly, there is the management aspect; how to deal with fame and fortune without falling off the rails.”

It was an inspiring address, leaving pupils, staff and parents with much food for thought.

“The book I refer to highlights the will of people always wanting to aim higher. There is a bar that can be raised to an infinite height and they keep pushing that,” said Bezuidenhout.

“If a coach tells them to run 10 kilometres every morning, they will run 12 or 15, just to be that little bit better.”

Main Winners

Sportsman of the Year: Nkanyiso Nzimande (100 m and 200 m inter-house school champion, 1st team rugby, KZN soccer U15 (2012), U16 (2013), U19 (2014), captain of 1st soccer team.

Most Versatile Sportsman (Shared award): Mndeni Sthe Mbatha (athletics, 1st team cricket, 1st team soccer, 1st team rugby) and Merlin van Wyk (captain of athletics, debating, tennis; 1st team hockey; broke the U16 200 m record which stood for 20 years, in 2013.)

Team of the Year: U16A soccer — played 19, won 15, lost 3, drew 1, goals scored 72, goals conceded 7.