Nuku Hiva Island (aka Nukahiva) is the biggest of the Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia (an overseas territory of France in the Pacific). Nuku Hiva (formerly named "Ile Marchand" and "Madison Island") has population around 3,000 and covers a total area of 339 km2 (131 mi2).

Administratively, Nuku Hiva is part of the municipality (commune) of Nuku-Hiva, itself in administrative subdivision of Marquesas Islands. Administrative centre of Nuku-Hiva commune and also of the administrative subdivision of Marquesas Islands is Taioha'e, a settlement located on Nuku Hiva's south side, at the head of a bay of the same name.

The central part of Nuku Hiva Island is a high plateau named To'ovi'i, covered by a tall-grass prairie. Cattle raising experiments are taking place on it for the first time. Fifteen years ago the cattle here were feral and had to be hunted with rifles. The island's highest peak, Tekao (1224 m / 4016 ft) rises on the western edge of To'ovi'i. The northern and western edges of Toovii are a mountain ridge, catching much of the rain which waters Nuku Hiva Island.

Typee (book by Herman Melville) is based on his experiences in Taipivai Valley (Nuku Hiva's eastern part). The first landfall of Robert Louis Stevenson on his voyage on Casco was at Hatiheu, on the north side of the island, in 1888. In 2001, Nuku Hiva Island was used as the filming location for the 4th season of 'Survivor', American reality competition series, airing in the USA in 2002. Ben Fogle, British explorer and presenter, in 2015 filmed an episode of 'Ben Fogle: New Lives in the Wild' with a nomadic couple residing on a boat, moored off Nuku Hiva Island at the time of his visit. In his science fiction novel written in 1863, 'Paris in the Twentieth Century', Jules Verne describes Nuku Hiva Island as one of the world's main stock exchanges of 1960.

Nuku Hiva Island is visited by the cargo cruise ship Aranui 5 (2015-built). Next are listed all ports of call (scheduled day visits) on the ship's 14-day roundtrip cruise itinerary from Papeete Tahiti.

DAY 1 - embarkation in port Papeete at ~10 am. Activities include "Welcome Aboard" party with fruit punch and Marquesan dance show by the swimming pool.

DAY 2 - Takapoto Atoll (Tuamotus) - activities include swimming, lagoon snorkeling, scuba diving.

DAY 3 - At Sea

DAY 4 - Nuku Hiva Island. Activities include stops in ports Taiohae and Hatiheu, cathedral tour, Kamuihei (archaeological site, sacred dance performance), ashore lunch at Yvonne's Restaurant (traditional dish is Hima'a / pig cooked in underground oven), meae (sacred ritual sites, sacred dance performance), paepae (huge stone boulders), optional hiking (trail to Paeke site).

DAY 5 - Ua Pou Island (Hakahau-Hakahetau). Activities include stop in port Hakahau, the ship's crew unloads here supplies (including cement and sugar) and loads copra (dried coconut meat), Hakahau town exploration (handicrafts center, stone carvings shopping, church visit, ashore lunch at Rosalie's Restaurant (special dishes are breadfruit, island staple, curried goat, the poisson cru / raw fish marinated in lime and coconut milk, also fei / red bananas and fruit poe). Dining includes traditional Bird Dance performance.

DAY 6 - Tahuata Island, and Hiva Oa Island. Activities include a stop in port Vaitahu (Tahuata), visiting handcrafts center (bone carvings, shell carvings), stop in port Atuona (Hiva Oa), visiting Paul Gauguin burial site, ashore lunch at Hoa Nui Restaurant, visiting the "House of Pleasure" and museum, optional hiking tour.

DAY 7 - Fatu Hiva Island. Activities include stops in ports Omoa and Hanavave, demonstration (local women make tapa), demonstration (kumuhei making / herbal bundles used by local women as perfume), visiting arts-crafts center (tapa, carvings, monoi coconut oil), optional hiking (16 km / 10 ml from Omoa to Hanavave), ashore lunch.

DAY 8 - Hiva Oa Island. Activities include stops in ports Puamau and Hanaiapa, guided tour visiting Meae Ipona (archaeological site) and Puamau ruins.

DAY 9 - Ua Huka Island. Activities include stops in ports Vaipaee, Hane, and Hokatu, optional (4x4 or horseback riding) tour, visiting a museum, gardens, ashore lunch, visiting woodcarving workshops black and white coconuts carvings), onboard "Polynesian Night" (themed events, traditional dancing and chanting lessons, buffet dinner on pool deck, themed entertainment).

DAY 10 - Nuku Hiva Island. Activities include morning stop in port Taiohae (arts-crafts center), afternoon stop in Hakahau (Marquesan souvenirs shopping).

DAY 11 - At Sea

DAY 12 - Rangiroa Atoll. Activities include lagoon swimming-snorkeling-scuba diving, pearl and shell jewelry shopping.

DAY 13 - Bora Bora Island (Society Islands). Activities include white-sand beach, snorkeling, picnic lunch (with traditional Tahitian dishes), optional excursions (scuba diving, outrigger boat tour, swimming with sharks and manta rays, a helicopter tour over Bora Bora Lagoon).

DAY 14 - disembarkation in Port Papeete at ~9:30 am.

As cruise port, Nuku Hiva Island (Taiohae) is also included in MS Paul Gauguin ship's itinerary "Marquesas, Tuamotus and Society Islands".

Date / TimePortDay1 23:55Departing from Papeete, Tahiti IslandDay2 08:00 - 17:00Fakarava Atoll, TuamotusDay3 08:00 - 18:00Fatu Hiva Island, MarquesasDay4 08:00 - 18:00Hiva Oa Island (Atuona)Day5 08:00 - 18:00Tahuata Island, MarquesasDay6 08:00 - 18:00Nuku Hiva Island (Taiohae)Days 7-8-9At SeaDay10 08:00 - 17:00Huahine Island, Society IslandsDay11 08:00 - 23:00Bora Bora Island, Society IslandsDay12 09:00 - 17:00Tahaa Island, Society IslandsDay13 08:00 - 17:00Moorea Island, Society IslandsDay14 SepArriving in Papeete, Tahiti Island

The 14-day roundtrip Papeete voyage is priced from USD 8150 pp (double-occupancy cabin rates).