Abstract

Jujube (), sometimes jujuba, known by the scientific name Ziziphus jujuba and also called red date, Chinese date, and Chinese jujube, is a species in the genus Ziziphus in the buckthorn family Rhamnaceae.

Cultivation

Jujube was domesticated in South Asia by 9000 BC.Gupta, Anil K. "Origin of agriculture and domestication of plants and animals linked to early Holocene climate amelioration", Current Science, Vol. 87, No. 1, 10 July 2004, 54-59. Indian Academy of Sciences. Over 400 cultivars have been selected.

Varieties

Chico (also called GI 7-62) developed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) in the 1950s Li, major commercial variety in the US Shanxi li, very large fruit Lang, major commercial variety in the US Sherwood Silverhill (also known as Yu and Tigertooth) can be grown in areas with high humidity So Shui Men GA 866 Honey jar, small juicy fruit Sugar cane Winter delight, major commercial variety in China

Culture

In Arabic-speaking regions the jujube and alternatively the species Z. lotus are closely related to the lote-trees (sing. "سدرة sidrah", pl. " سدر sidr") which are mentioned in the Quran,Abdullah, Yusuf Ali (1946) The Holy Qur-an. Text, Translation and Commentary, Qatar National Printing Press. p.1139, n. 3814. while in Palestine it is rather the species Z. spina-christi that is called sidr. An ancient jujube tree in the city Al-Qurnah, Iraq, is claimed by locals as the Tree of Knowledge mentioned in the Bible. Local tradition holds that the place where the city was built was the original site of the Garden of Eden (a passage in the Book of Genesis says that a river flowed from the garden and split into Tigris and Euphrates rivers,"¹⁰ A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters. [...]¹⁴ The name of the third river is the Tigris; it runs along the east side of Ashur. And the fourth river is the Euphrates. (Genesis 2.10, 14)." where is the city currently). The tree is a tourist spot in the town.

Description

It is a small deciduous tree or shrub reaching a height of 5 –, usually with thorny branches. The leaves are shiny-green, ovate-acute, 2 – long and 1 – wide, with three conspicuous veins at the base, and a finely toothed margin. The flowers are small, 5 mm wide, with five inconspicuous yellowish-green petals. The fruit is an edible oval drupe 1.5 – deep; when immature it is smooth-green, with the consistency and taste of an apple with lower acidity, maturing brown to purplish-black, and eventually wrinkled, looking like a small date. There is a single hard kernel, similar to an olive pit, containing two seeds.

Ziziphus jujuba1.jpg|Bark Zizyphus jujuba Blanco1.59.png|Plate from the book ''[[Flora de Filipinas]]'' (Ziziphus jujuba) Foliage at Ammuguda 01.jpg|Foliage in [[Hyderabad]], India Alb-Z. jujuba-leav-4.jpg|Leaf margin Alb-Z. jujuba-flow-2.jpg|Flowers Alb-Z. jujuba-flow-8.jpg|Flowers Alb-Z. jujuba-fruit-2.jpg|Fruit Jujube fruit in a bowl.jpg|Raw fruit in [[Bangladesh]] Ziziphus zizyphus fruit inside.jpeg|Fruit cross section Jujube seed.jpg|Seed

Chemistry Leaves contain saponin and Ziziphin, which suppresses the ability to perceive sweet taste. Flavinoids found in the fruits include Kaempferol 3-O-rutinoside, Quercetine 3-O-robinobioside, Quercetine 3-O-rutinoside. Terpenoids such as colubrinic acid and alphitolic acid were found in the fruits.

Distribution and habitat

Its precise natural distribution is uncertain due to extensive cultivation, but its origin is thought to be in southern Asia, between Lebanon, northern India, and southern and central China, and possibly also southeastern Europe though more likely introduced there.Rushforth, K. (1999). Trees of Britain and Europe. Collins . The plant in Arabic and Persian is known as "Enab (عناب)", and is known as the "hinap" or "finab" in the eastern part of Bulgaria. It grows wild but is also a garden shrub, kept for its fruit. The fruit is picked in the autumn. The tree tolerates a wide range of temperatures and rainfall, though it requires hot summers and sufficient water for acceptable fruiting. Unlike most of the other species in the genus, it tolerates fairly cold winters, surviving temperatures down to about −15 °C, and the tree is, for instance, commonly cultivated in Beijing. This wide tolerance enables the jujube to grow in mountain or desert habitats, provided there is access to underground water throughout the summer. The jujube (Z. jujuba) grows in cooler regions of Asia. Five or more other species of Ziziphus are widely distributed in milder climates to hot deserts of Asia and Africa.S. Chaudhary. "Rhamnaceae" in: S. Chaudhary (Ed). Flora of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Vol II (Part One) 2001. This plant has been introduced in Madagascar and grows as an invasive species in the western part of the island, threatening mostly protected areas. It is cultivated in parts of southern California.

Ecology

Jujube date attacked by an insect larva

Witch's broom, prevalent in China and Korea, is the main disease affecting jujubes, though plantings in North America currently are not affected by any pests or diseases.Fruit Facts: Jujube In Europe, the last several years have seen some 80%–90% of the jujube crop eaten by insect larvae (see picture), including those of the false codling moth, Thaumatotibia (Cryptophlebia) leucotreta. In Madagascar, it is widely eaten by free-ranging zebus, and its seeds grow easily in zebu feces.

Taxonomy

The ultimate source of the name is Ancient Greek zízyphon.ζίζυφον, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus This was borrowed into Classical Latin as (used for the fruit) and (the tree). A descendant of the Latin word into a Romance language, which may have been French or medieval Latin , in turn gave rise to the common English jujube. This name is not related to jojoba, which is a loan from Spanish , itself borrowed from hohohwi, the name of that plant in a Native American language. The binomial name has a curious nomenclatural history, due to a combination of botanical naming regulations, and variations in spelling. It was first named in the binomial system by Carl Linnaeus as Rhamnus zizyphus, in Species Plantarum (1753). Philip Miller, in his Gardener's Dictionary, considered that the jujube and its relatives were sufficiently distinct from Rhamnus to be placed in a separate genus (as it had already been by the pre-Linnaean author Tournefort in 1700), and in the 1768 edition he gave it the name Ziziphus jujuba (using Tournefort's spelling for the genus name). For the species name, he used a different name, as tautonyms (repetition of exactly the same name in the genus and species) are not permitted in botanical naming. However, because of Miller's slightly different spelling, the combination of the earlier species name (from Linnaeus) with the new genus, Ziziphus zizyphus, is not a tautonym, and was therefore permitted as a botanical name. This combination was made by Hermann Karsten in 1882.Clarke, D. L. (1988). W. J. Bean Trees and Shrubs Hardy in the British Isles, Supplement. John Murray . In 2006, a proposal was made to suppress the name Ziziphus zizyphus in favor of Ziziphus jujuba, and this proposal was accepted in 2011. Ziziphus jujuba is thus the correct scientific name for this species.

Uses