Zizyphus jujuba Mill. belongs to the Rhamnales order, Rhamnaceae family, Rhamnus genus. The genus includes about 40 species native to tropical and subtropical regions of both hemispheres, as well as the Mediterranean region. Species Zizyphus jujuba Mill. it is native to SW Asia, has ornamental features and is found spontaneously on the Danube coast. The first cultivated varieties were introduced at the Faculty of Horticulture in Bucharest in Shanxi Province, China in a joint research project in 1997. In our study, the fruits were harvested from two genotypes in the Botanical Park of Timisoara. For the harvested fruits were analyzed: fruit weight (g), seed weight (g), fruit length (mm), fruit width (mm) and chemical analyses were performed: soluble dry matter (%), C vitamin (mg 100 g-1), total potassium content (mg 100 g-1) and protein (%). In the analyzed fruits, the soluble dry matter varied between 28.3-29.81%, C vitamin between 247.97-288.17 mg 100g-1, proteins between 4.84-5.63%...

The breeding programs of the European countries are based on biotypes from wild flora, because they are the true sources of genes. These genes are able to print in the future cultivars resistance to diseases, pests and climatic stress, and also fruits with the best flavor and phytoterapeutic resources. In this aim, Research Institute for Fruit Growing Pitesti-Maracineni conducted numerous studies of exploring the wild flora in different areas of the country. Following these expeditions were identified numerous biotypes of cornelian cherry, rosehip and seabuckthorn. All these native biotypes were subjected to studies of phenology, productivity, and quality of fruits. These researches identified the highest productivity in the following biotypes: MS-40 (cornelian cherry), RC-CN (rose hip) and MPR2P3 (seabuckthorn).

Several physical and nutritional properties of jujube fruits (Zizyphus jujuba Mill.) grown in Turkey were investigated.These properties are necessary for the design of equipments for harvesting, processing, transportation, sorting, separatingand packing. The average fruit length, width, thickness, the geometric mean diameter, sphericity index, fruit mass,thousand of fruit mass and volume of fruit of jujube fruits were determined as 17.75 mm, 14.81 mm, 14.19 mm, 15.43mm, 87.56 %, 1.26 g, 1139 g and 1.99 cm3, respectively. The bulk density, fruit density and porosity were 380 kg/m3, 639kg/m3 and 39.35 %, respectively. While the static friction coefficient on galvanized iron sheet, iron sheet, thin plate,wood and rubber were 0.369, 0.528, 0.633, 0.475 and 0.844, the dynamic friction coefficient on the same surfaces were0.317, 0.475, 0.581, 0.422 and 0.792, respectively. The moisture content, titratable acidity, ascorbic acid, rupture strength and terminal velocity were 20.04 %, 0.33 %,...

A study was conducted to investigate changes in the activity of the enzymes invertase and cellulase, as well as soluble proteins and free amino acids during growth and development of fruits of jujube cvs.Tufahi(Ziziphus mauritiana Lamk) and Bambawi(Zizphus spina-christi Wild). The results indicated that the pattern of changes in invertase was similar in fruits of both cultivars, as the activity was low during early stages of development,but the activity increased as the fruit advanced toward ripening and then activity declined as the fruit entered an over ripe stage.For cellulase, the activity was high earlier in fruits of Tufahi as compared with fruits of the cultivar Bambawi. However,the activity of cellulase in fruits of both cultivars declined rapidly as the fruits entered an over ripe stage.Levels of free amino acids was high during early stages of fruit growth in of both cultivars, but levels declined rapidly as fruits advanced toward an over ripe stage.As for soluble proteins...

An experiment was carried out during 2002–07 to assess the nature and genetic parameters and their utilization to develop superior genotypes of Indian jujube (Ziziphus mauritiana Lamk.) for Punjab region. The high estimates (&gt;15%) of genotypic co-efficient of variation (GCV) recorded for stone weight, fruit weight, pulp stone ratio, fruits yield/plant, total soluble salts and fruit length, indicated the presence of adequate genetic variation among the genotypes and suitability of these attributes for further improvement by selection. The characters, like stone weight, fruit weight, pulp stone ratio, fruit yield/plant and total soluble salts showed high heritability estimates coupled with high genetic advances. It can therefore be inferred that these traits are under the control of additive gene action and phenotypic selection for their improvement may be effective. The estimates of correlation co-efficients showed positive significant association of fruits yield/plant with pulp p...