Class size is limited. Registration is required. Please register with your valid library card and current email on Friday, July 30th, at 9am.

You may register through the CMCL Online Events Calendar listing, by calling the Adult Events Department at (609)463-6350 x700, by clicking one of the buttons, or you may register through any of your local library branches.

This series will run every Thursday from August 5th-26th, 10am-12pm, on Zoom. After Registration, an email will be sent to you with the link to the classes, as well as a copy of the supplies you will need.

MATERIALS/SUPPLIES NEEDED FOR EACH CLASS:

140 lb. Watercolor Block,OR Single-sheets of Fabriano Watercolor paper (Hot, Cold, Soft Press - any style you prefer)

Two Brushes: 1 Large Round Point #10 AND #6 (Sable Synthetic, or any other Watercolor brush)

Large Jar with Lid- for water (Plastic Containers are okay for substitution)

Roll of Paper Towels

Student Grade (Cotman) or Professional Grade Tube Paints Starting Colors (primary)- Cobalt Blue, Alizarin Crimson, and Aurelian (Yellow)

Adding Later- Burnt Sienna, Permanent Sap Green, and Violet

Palette with Lid- for use with paints & mixing colors

Pencils, Erasers

Notebook

Table Easel- to prop paper on an angle

Spray bottle (of water)- for water spritz (OPTIONAL)

Large Clips OR Tape AND a Board (to attach paper)

MAGIC IN WATERCOLOR TOPICS INCLUDE:

Introduction to Color Wheel (Primary & Secondary colors, Complimentary colors, Warm & Cool, Opaque & Transparent, Creating Luminosity)

Value Scale of Black to White (with 2 value sketches- using shapes, any color)

Painting a Landscape (with one color)

Painting a Still-Life (using values & saving whites, using 3 shapes- ex. fruit, cans, bottle, Two-Color Complimentary Painting)

Principles & Elements of Design (Seven Established Elements & Principles around which to compose paintings, Developing & Understanding the meaning of each principle, Using Still-Life and Props)

Perspective (Vanishing Points, One & Two-Part Perspective, Horizon Line, & Single-Point Perspective)

Techniques, Critiques, & Painting Trouble Spots (Reflections, Puddles, Skies)

NOTE FROM THE INSTRUCTOR:

When starting a painting semester, I will supply a list of materials as well as a syllabus, outlining the 4-week agenda for the class:

1. I begin with color development and education of values, relationships and temperatures. (When choosing the image for class to follow, all of these criteria contribute to my decision.)

2. When we move into picture development, perspective, composition, principals and elements of design, each category is examined and explained, with question and answer periods for clarification.

3. Choosing subject matter for classes depends on students’ preferences. Portraits, landscapes, still-life, and architecture are all viable choices.

DIANE HARK- Diane is a Signature Member PWS, MoWS, Philadelphia Sketch Club, Allied Artists of America, & an alumni of the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art.

Diane Hark has been an artist for virtually her whole life. She began studies at Cheltenham Art Center and the Philadelphia Museum of Art. Majoring in Art as a student at Moore Institute of Art, Woodmere Art Museum, and finally the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art, helped develop her skills, talent, and "artist's eye." She credits her superior teachers, notably Arthur De Costa, Ben Kamahira, Sidney Goodman, Homer Johnson, and Elizabeth Osbourne (at PAFA), for giving her the formal training that all artists need. Dominic DeStefano’s Master Class in Watercolor gave focus to continued development in composition and design. Meeting “Dee” many years ago, proved to be a perfect fit for Ms. Hark, who because of raising many children, was always in a hurry. He used big brushes, big paper, and lots of paint, talking continuously, as he demonstrated his award winning techniques.

Establishing her extensive website, www.dianeharkart.com, she invites travelers, galleries, and art collectors, to share these impressionistic watercolors. Ms. Hark’s award winning painting's have been exhibited and commissioned for juried national and solo shows. The famous acrylic “Mummers Marching on New Years” have been exhibited in “Art in City Hall”, and Senator Arlen Specter’s Office in the Senate Building of Washington, DC, and now hangs permanently in the Mummers’ Museum in Philadelphia. At the Invitation of the President of the United States, Ms. Hark represented the Artists from Pennsylvania for a Christmas display in the Blue Room.

Traveling throughout Europe, following the individual Impressionists’ path of inspiration, Ms. Hark gathered material and information to document on-site lessons. Whether it is a landscape painting by Van Gogh in St Remy(1), Renoir in Paris(2), Cézanne in Avignon(3), Monet in Giverny(4), or Matisse in Collioure(5), Diane continues to elevate each composition, bringing beauty to the eye of the beholder. Reading extensively from the contemporary books of more recent artists, she continues to learn the magical secrets of watercolor painting.

Ms. Hark continues to exhibit her work in solo and group shows, and teaches regularly at senior foundation centers, assisted living, and nursing facilities. Privately, she feels her paintings will contribute and make a difference in how we perceive our life. Ms. Hark tries to open our eyes to appreciate the gifts we have. Donating paintings to charitable organizations, senior care facilities, and health organizations, fundraising events is part of her mission, and Ms. Hark supports them all.

A Philadelphia native, Ms. Hark has been represented by Langman Gallery (Willow Grove, NJ), Wm Ris Gallery (Stone Harbor, NJ), East End Gallery (Margate, NJ), Soma Gallery (Cape May, NJ), and Fire Fly Gallery (LBI, NJ). She is a Signature Member of PWS, PWCS, MoWS, Philadelphia Sketch Club and Allied Artists of America. Her original watercolor and acrylic paintings can be found in regional corporate offices, Wills Eye Hospital Glaucoma Research Center and the Mummers’ Museum in Philadelphia.

After extensive personal fulfillment, exhibiting, and learning new skills, Ms. Hark has decided to reach out to the senior community. She has been teaching full time in the Olli Foundation, as well as in independent living communities, nursing and assisted living facilities, religious schools, and she also provides private adult classes. Bringing smiles, laughter and creativity to these groups has been most enjoyable and fulfilling, and Ms. Hark is happy to do it.

(1-VanGogh) (2-Renoir) (3-Cézanne) (4-Monet) (5-Matisse)