View waymark gallery

The Sovereign Military Order of Malta - Venice, Italy

Posted by: jiggs11

N 45° 26.183 E 012° 20.759

33T E 292417 N 5034855

Sovereign Military Order of Malta Grand Priory of Lombardy and Venice, located in the Church of the Grand Priory, St Giovanni Battista, in Venice.

Waymark Code: WMXGX4

Location: Veneto, Italy

Published By: Kelux

Views: 0

The home of the Grand Priory of Lombardy and Venice since 1187. It is located at 3253 Corte S. Giovanni Di Malta.

Translated from the Priory website:

"The current seat of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta in Venice comes from a palace that was the Templars, and after the confiscation of their property was assigned to the "Religion of the Hospitallers of St. John." We find the first news of the inauguration of the Templars in Venice in an act of donation made on November 9, 1187 by Gerardo, Archbishop of Ravenna, of some land sites in Venice in the locality Fossaputrida, so that they build a hospital and a church; One has reason to believe that the house and the Church of St. John of the temple transferred after the suppression of the Templars to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, were those where it now houses the Grand Priory of Lombardy and Venice. The Fossaputrida would be the territory of San Giovanni in Bragora, current parish in Venice.

In 1313 the knight Bro Nicola from Parma, Prior of Venice of the Order of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, accompanied by the knight Fra ' Baldwin Trevisan, presented himself to the Doge Soranzo to ask that the goods already belonged to the Templars were Recognized property of the John. The question was accepted and they acquired, as has been said, the convents and churches of St. John of the Temple (also called the Furlani because there lived many citizens from Friuli) and Santa Maria in Broglio (or Brolo)."

The Priory is active.

Further information may be found on the Priory webpage (Italian): (visit link)

Name of Military Order: Knights HospitallerLink documenting charitable acts: [Web Link]

Visit Instructions:

Posters must have physically visited the location. Uploading an original photo is strongly encouraged.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Legacy of Medieval Spiritual Warriors

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point

Recent Visits/Logs:

Date Logged Log 08/15/2024 Aussiebrian visited it