A decade since it first opened, a significant milestone has been marked in the history of Wales' only dedicated hospital for children.

The first minister officially opened the £64m second phase of the Noah's Ark Children's Hospital for Wales.

It means almost all specialist care for children will be under one roof in Cardiff for the first time.

Doctors say children from across Wales will benefit from a children's hospital "in the premier league" for the UK.

Dr Allan Wardhaugh, clinical director of acute child health in Cardiff and Vale, said it was tremendously exciting.

"The new building is spacious and provides comfort and dignity to the patients coming to us and it brings a group of clinicians who need to work with children together for the first time," he said.

"We aim to provide as many of the comforts of home as we can to make their stay better - certainly more than the children's wards I started work on.

"There are beds in all the rooms for parents to sleep in. It allows them a little more normality as these are stressful times they're going through."

The new building includes five cutting-edge operating theatres, which will be used solely for children's surgery.

Having dedicated children's theatres help reduce the distress that can occur when children encounter seriously ill adults.

The theatres are also be kitted out with state-of-the-art ventilators which can deliver more accurate doses of anaesthetics.

The new wing's wards are significantly larger than in the original building - with more accommodation available for parents along with several play areas.

The second phase also includes a new hydrotherapy pool kitted out with the latest audio visual equipment and an "open" MRI scanner.

Such scanners are larger and less claustrophobic than traditional ones and allow children to see outside the scanner at all times.

Children can also follow cartoon images as a distraction and it is hoped it will the reduce the need to anaesthetise some children before a scan.