Marketing for financial services brands can be filled with tropes. Avoid this—and embrace more clickable content—with insights from AI.

If you’re a marketer for clients in the financial industry, you’re likely familiar with some common tropes in advertising visuals. Graphs, money, and calculators are all too common. Of course, these creative choices are beloved for a reason, but advertisers have other—often more engaging—options to choose from, when planning campaigns.

Artificial intelligence can predict which creative decisions will be the most clickable for audiences across a variety of industries, including those getting targeted by financial services ads.

Shutterstock.AI does just that. In fact, this blog post is filled with actionable creative insights to include in your ads right now.

By analyzing an up-to-the-moment data set of more than 700 billion marketing data points, AI answers:

Which colors drive audiences to click, when it comes to finance ads?

Are there specific photo and video settings that get optimal engagement?

What should people in your ads be doing, in order to maximize campaign ROI?

It’s time to break away from the tired, money-focused images that feel like safe bets. Creative opportunities are out there, and including them in ads can help you bank on better click-through rates (CTRs).

Blue Is the Best Color

When it comes to clickable creative decisions, colors certainly make an impact. While observing which colors boost CTRs for financial ads, one color family stands out above all.

Blue is—by far—the most clickable color for the finance industry. In fact, blue shades make up 40% of the industry’s top 25 most clickable colors.

More specifically, several shades close to royal blue are among the most clickable colors. Bright and splashy neon blues are performing well. Even baby blue drives up engagement rates for finance ads.

License these images via Jacob Lund, PERO studio, Rido, Dusan Petkovic, silverkblackstock, eggeegg, Virrage Images, fizkes, and Rawpixel.com.

Beyond just blues, we see another color that stands out in the industry. Brick reds make up 16% of the financial industry’s top 25 most clickable colors.

This is likely because cities and urban areas are among the most engaging environments for photo settings.

License these images via Kathleen Finlay / Image Source, Richard Re Photography, Kirill Neiezhmakov, Rizar el pixel, PeopleImages.com – Yuri A, Shyntartanya, and Victoria Chudinova.

Embrace City Life in Imagery

When it comes to which settings are most clickable for the financial industry, cities stand out above all others. In fact, photos of cities, in general, have seen their CTR rise 44% over the last year.

License these images via Hernandez and Sorokina / Westend61, Juan Alberto Ruiz / Addictive Creative, Gutesa, Max4e Photo, Dasha Petrenko, Odua Images, Dean Drobot, Liderina, and Halfpoint.

Digging in a little more specifically, data tells us that apartment buildings are the fifth most clickable image item for the industry. Apartment buildings have seen their CTR climb 229% since last summer.

Just behind them are shots of downtown areas. Downtowns are the sixth most clickable image content, and their CTR has risen 92% over the same time period.

License these images via Rafa Cortes / Addictive Creative, Eugenio Marongiu / Image Source, Johnér, Manu Reyes / Westend61, Ricardo Junqueira, Gu / Image Source, GaudiLab, Pressmaster, and Gorodenkoff.

High-rise buildings are 203% more clickable now than they were just one year ago. Even office buildings are making a comeback, perhaps thanks to a movement encouraging (or sometimes obligating) workers to return to their offices. The CTR of office buildings has risen 83% since last year.

License these images via AWL Images, Javier Martinez / Addictive Creative, Gorodenkoff, anatoliy_gleb, Gorodenkoff, Sergey Novikov, Engel Ching, jamesteohart, and Akarawut.

Set Videos at the Seaside

Even though cities work well for photos, data indicates that different setting choices should be made when it comes to video ads. Seaside and ocean settings are the most engaging for this medium.

Reflective of the industry’s clickable blue colors, we see that several settings on the water have trended up over the last year:

The CTR of shorelines is up 350%.

The CTR of beaches is up 700%.

The CTR of coasts is up 981%.

The CTR of horizons is up 2,433%.

License these images via Xavier Lorenzo / Westend61, Anthony Lanneretonne, Fernando Valencia / Addictive Creative, adriaticfoto, Rawpixel.com, and Goldsithney.

Even beyond bodies of water, a couple of other ocean-oriented objects are paying off for advertisers right now.

The CTR of sun hats has lifted 1,025% over the last year. Boats are 182% more clickable this summer. Oars are 187% more clickable, too.

It looks like, when it comes to video ads, the sea is the place to be.

Show Off Exercise in Videos Ads, Too

Speaking of video ads, artificial intelligence tells us that financial services consumers are more likely to click on videos that show people exercising. A few specific types of exercise are performing well for these audiences at the moment.

For example, hiking is rather engaging right now, as trails are the fourth most clickable video content for ads. The CTR of trail videos has risen 486% over the last year.

License these images via ksnyd_10, Vitalii Matokha, Jacob Lund, and Patrick Kunkel / Mauritius Images.

Running, which also drives performance for healthcare and pharmaceutical ads, is working out well for advertisers in finance. The CTR of running shoes, specifically, has risen 547% this year alone.

While sneakers have also increased 261% in clickability, we see that running shoes are 27% more engaging.

To sum it up—if you’re in financial services marketing, choosing real running shoes over fashion sneakers will give your ads a bit more of a boost.

License these images via Jacob Lund, sportpoint, and Ivanko80.

Even skateboarding can bring a refreshing and engaging edge to financial services ads. Perhaps this is because we’re living through a new golden age of the sport.

Data tells us that skateboards have really surged in popularity. In fact, their CTR has skyrocketed 3,392% over the last year alone.

In Imagery, People Need to Relax

Image trends in the financial industry are a complete 180, compared to video ads. When it comes to activities to show off in imagery, AI tells us that relaxation is key.

For example, vacation photos are very successful for this industry. Vacations are the tenth most clickable image contents, and their CTR has risen 51% since the summer of 2021.

License these images via Sorapop Udomsri, Monkey Business Images, ArtOfPhotos, and T.Den_Team.

Even relaxing at home is bigger than ever. Here are a few key ways to boost campaign CTRs by giving your ads a “staycation” theme:

Video games are the 12th-most clickable image contents in the industry. Interestingly, their CTR has dipped since last summer, but they’re still a safe bet to include in your creative.

Board games are in the top 15 most clickable image content choices, and their CTR has risen a slight 3% since last summer.

Artwork—think of people painting or crafting—has risen 52% in clickability this year.

Home decorating is really big. Its CTR has surged 1,400% over the last year.

License these images via Blue Jean Images, Maskot, DC Studio, Dmytro Zinkevych, DC Studio, Michele Rinaldi, and Jeanne McRight.

By studying advertising campaign data in the financial industry, Shutterstock.AI revealed that video and image ads should have completely opposite approaches to creative content.

While all creative advertising decisions are valid, those backed by data will often be more successful in today’s marketplace.

License this cover image via PERO studio.