In September 2022, we came together to celebrate 100 years of British Engines at the iconic international music centre, Sage Gateshead.

Employees from across the group were invited with their partners to step back in time to 1922 at the prestigious location overlooking Newcastle’s Quayside.

The event, which took place on Saturday 3 September, featured performances from soul singer Beverley Knight MBE and British R&B singer, Lemar, as well as the Strictly Smokin’ Big Band.

A number of prizes were raffled to over 900 guests to raise money for Tyneside and Northumberland Mind, a local charity delivering mental health services across the region.

Guests at the event raised £5,560 for the charity by purchasing tickets to win prizes including a holiday worth £2,500 which was won by Clare Curtis, a Freight Forwarder at group company Stadium Export Services.

Alex Wilson, CEO of Tyneside and Northumberland Mind, said: “I would like to say a huge thank you to the British Engines Group for raising funds to support those in our local area with their mental health.

“It is no surprise that poor mental health is on the rise and we are particularly worried about how the cost of living increases will impact people, particularly as the winter months are coming, so all of your support means so much in these challenging times”.

Alongside the view of the Tyne Bridge built in 1928, the Gateshead Millennium Bridge was lit in British Engines red, a sight that could be seen from inside of the venue providing the perfect backdrop for the event.

Alex Lamb, Chairman at the British Engines Group, said: “There is no doubt that my grandfather and great uncle would have been amazed by this achievement after starting in a small workshop on the St. Peters site.

“I am incredibly proud to say that the group is a major employer of 900 people in the region and 1,200 people across the world, and what better way to celebrate than to come together at this amazing venue”.

Since 2021, we have increased our headcount by 45 people and with activity levels continuing to strengthen, we have launched a significant recruitment drive to attract 100 new employees.

As part of the campaign, we are looking to recruit several permanent, full time positions for CNC machinists, grinders, automation fitters and operators at our sites across the North East.