North East headquartered Sage recently announced a £1.8m skills investment, heralded as “transformational” by Simon Clark MP, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury. The tech leader expects the event will knock down barriers to ensure the region’s young people are given the tools and support they need to explore opportunities in science, technology and mathematics.

Claire Willis, Business Development Manager at the North East STEM Hub, said: “We are delighted to be working with Sage, Newcastle United Foundation and the North of Tyne Combined Authority on this major education exhibition for our region.

“There are so many North East companies working in this sector which our future workforce aren’t aware of. Through this event, we aim to enthuse and engage young people in STEM, highlight not only the companies, but also the various career paths open to these young people, right on their doorstep.”

STEMFest Net Zero will showcase STEM organisations from across the region, their response to climate changes and their plans to reach net zero by 2030.

The three-day exhibition between July 4 and July 6, 2022, will be held at St. James’ Park and is a flagship event for Newcastle United Foundation’s NU Futures programme.

Sarah Medcalf, Deputy Head of Newcastle United Foundation, said: “NU Futures is our Foundation’s commitment to providing career experiences for the next generation to explore life-changing opportunities available to them, here, in the North East.

“With significant support from the North of Tyne Combined Authority and Sage, we are thrilled to join the North East STEM Hub in hosting STEMFest and introducing young students to the North East’s thriving STEM sector.”

The Foundation recently announced Sage as its official Technology Partner as part of a multi-year agreement to transform and empower young people’s perspectives on their future from the charity’s new home – NUCASTLE, powered by Newcastle Building Society – opening later this month.

Paul Struthers, MD UKI, Sage, said: “We want to empower young people to discover a world of career opportunities and enable them to get first-hand experience of what a job in STEM could look like. We believe this will drive interest in more engineering and technology-based careers in the younger generation and help to bridge the region’s skills gap.

“The sponsorship of STEMFest and the partnership with Newcastle United Foundation is part of a wider investment programme Sage has committed to in the North East. The aim of which is to drive STEM growth, nurture regional talent and curb digital inequality in the region.”

STEMFest Net Zero will see five themed zones bringing concepts to life for young people across climate adaptation, business and industry, buildings and construction, transport, and power and natural resources.

To get involved with STEMFest Net Zero, or to join the School Primary Day waiting list, visit stemfest.org.uk or email stem@rtcnorth.co.uk

For more information about the Foundation and programmes near you, follow Newcastle United Foundation on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn and Twitter for regular news and updates.