Newcastle software company Sage has outlined a wide-ranging plan to step up its impact on society, including schemes to improve children’s skills and help people become business owners in its North East heartland.

The FTSE-listed firm has launched a new sustainability and society strategy called Knocking Down Barriers which aims to use the company’s resources to tackle economic inequality and the climate crisis.

The plan includes a number of initiatives, led by a plan to provide business mentoring, advice and support for more than 1.2m people from underrepresented groups to help them start their own businesses, including in the North East.

Sage has also commited to help tackle the skills gap by providing 10,000 children in the most deprived areas of North of Tyne with access to STEM skills education.

In the area of climate change, Sage says it will be a net zero company by 2040, with moves to slash air travel and hotel stays across the group, and switch to electric vehicles across its fleet and renewable energy in all Sage offices. It will also provide a sustainability online advice hub for millions of SMEs globally to help them address their climate impact.

The strategy builds on work Sage has done previously to position itself as a champion for the SMEs that use its product, while its Sage Foundation has seen its employees involved in fundraising and providing thousands of volunteering sessions around the world.

Sage CEO Steve Hare said: “Sage is standing with the millions of small and medium size businesses (SMEs) we serve around the world by tackling the big challenges of our time.

“We want to knock down the barriers that hinder access to opportunity, equality and sustainability. We are upping our commitments to our environmental impact with an ambitious net zero carbon target across our entire value chain, and our social impact, using our technology, time and experience to support a new generation of diverse and sustainable businesses.”

Research by Sage claims that the majority of SMEs are committed to addressing their environmental and social impact, with more than 80% believing the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic should be used as an opportunity to promote sustainability. It also found that many SMEs prioritise education and skills as crucial for long-term economic growth.

The company also questioned people in deprived areas of Newcastle and London, finding that more than 40% of them have a start-up idea, but mostly lack the confidence and the resources to start their own business.

It is working with tech company MyKindaFuture and Jobcentre Plus to provide mentoring and training to unemployed people looking to start their own firm and has also called on the UK Government to provide financial assistance and other support for people looking to start their own businesses.

The company is also working with The BOSS Network on a three-year programme to provide support and guidance to help black women achieve their goals and has set up a three-year partnership with non-profit lending platform Kiva aimed at improving financial inclusion in communities where it is hard to start or grow businesses.

Sage, which is this year moving to new offices on the Cobalt business park, has alread committed to providing 10,000 children in the most deprived areas of North of Tyne with access to STEM skills education. It is also investing further in its Futuremakers programme to give young people access to Artificial Intelligence education.

But the strategy is not confined to Sage’s own actions, and it has called on the Government to expand the New Enterprise Allowance to £100 a week for up to a year to help budding business owners and to incorporate entrepreneurship into the Government’s lifelong learning programme.

Mr Hare said: “The most deprived communities in the UK have taken a huge hit over the last 12 months. We know that starting and growing a business is a proven route to long term employment, high job satisfaction and wealth creation, but that opportunity is not always accessible to everyone in these areas.

“As a business that supports millions of SMEs globally, we want to knock down these barriers.

“I passionately believe that everybody should have the opportunity to thrive and have seen first-hand the long-term benefits individuals, families and communities experience when given that chance. Our partnership with MyKindaFuture will provide real support, the right tools and quality mentoring so that people can build and own their own businesses and be part of an inclusive recovery.”