Everybody's Famous Directed by Dominique Deruddere Starring Eva Van Der Gucht, Josse De Pauw, Werner De Smedt Classification: PG Rating: **

A nominee for Best Foreign Language Film at the last Academy Awards, Everybody's Famous is yet another satire on the evils of celebrity and media manipulation. The difference is that Everybody's Famous does not take place among the usual bitter circles of Hollywood insiders. Instead, writer-director Dominique Deruddere's tale is set in the razzle-dazzle world of the Flemish music business, where young nubiles in glittery blue wigs rule the charts.

The sight of Belgian TV viewers held spellbound by garish variety shows and some truly horrid pop tunes adds novelty to what's basically a so-so remake of Martin Scorsese's 1983 film The King of Comedy. Instead of Rupert Pupkin -- the stand-up comic who so wants to be famous that he kidnaps a talk-show host -- Everybody's Famous offers Marva (Eva Van Der Gucht), an overweight but pleasant girl who is a talented singer only in the eyes of her father, Jean (Josse De Pauw).

Though she's game enough to perform Vanessa Paradis and Madonna hits in miserable local talent shows, Marva is largely indifferent toward her father's ambitions. When he debuts a new song for her, she shows more interest in her bacon-and-egg sandwich.

Then the bottle factory where Jean works goes bankrupt and he gets serious about jump-starting his daughter's career. Opportunity knocks when Debbie (Thekla Reuten), a prematurely world-weary pop star who'd rather be an auto mechanic, stops to fix Jean's broken car on a deserted country road. Jean promptly drugs and kidnaps her. Wearing a Michael Jackson mask as a disguise, he makes his ransom demands to her manager, Michael (Victor Low). Jean and Marva become eager prey for the much more savvy Michael, who turns the kidnap plot into a media sensation. Meanwhile, Debbie is holed up with Jean's sheepish buddy Willy (Werner De Smedt), and faster than you can say "Stockholm Syndrome," captor and captive have fallen for each other.

Though Everybody's Famous is intermittently clever and charming, Deruddere seems unsure how to regard the film's viewers: are they wary observers who are hip to Michael's hype machine, or are they the same kind of rubes who buy Debbie's records and long for happy endings? Deruddere -- whose best-known film remains his 1987 debut Crazy Love, a berserk adaptation of several Charles Bukowski stories -- tries to have it both ways. First, he cynically treats Jean and Marva as losers ripe for exploitation by the nasty Michael, then he delivers an overblown, implausible ending and a reassuring message about how even the most pathetic fools can make it if they believe in themselves.

The film's darker themes -- never mind the violence implicit in the sight of Debbie tied up and unconscious or Jean's threat that "if you don't do what I say, I'll cut off her head!" -- demand a more sombre outcome, but Everybody's Famous ends like one more star-struck fantasy smothered in sap.