Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde tourism and travel guide

Photo is of Bellegarde at 2 km from Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Visit Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde: highlights and tourist information

To Visit Attractions Book hotels, car hire, flights

Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde is situated in the Loiret department and Centre-Loire Valley region.

Below you can see some of the places that we have visited and reviewed and can recommend when you are sightseeing close to Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde in Centre-Loire Valley.

Popular places to visit nearby include Bellegarde at 2 km and Arboretum des Grandes Bruyeres at 19 km.

Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde, France: places to visit and attractions

Note that all distances below are 'direct' and real driving distances will be greater!

Bellegarde

at 2 km (direction west-south-west)

Bellegarde is a small traditional town with an atractive moated castle in the centre...

See Bellegarde guide

Arboretum des Grandes Bruyeres

Garden at 19 km (direction west)

The arboretum des Grandes Bruyeres is a fabulous arboretum and garden near Orleans...

See Arboretum des Grandes Bruyeres guide

Montargis

at 20 km (direction east)

With more than 130 bridges across the numerous canals and rivers in Montargis, it...

See Montargis guide

Yevre-le-Chatel

Most Beautiful Village at 21 km (direction north-west)

The walk along the Rimarden river, the traditional charm and the ruined castle all...

See Yevre-le-Chatel guide

Advertisement

Chateau de Chamerolles

Castle at 24 km (direction west-north-west)

The chateau de Chamerolles is an attractive chateau with a pretty Renaissance garden...

See Chateau de Chamerolles guide

Saint-Benoit-sur-Loire Abbey

Abbey at 24 km (direction south-west)

Fans of romanesque architecture will appreciate the many period features in the 12th century...

See Saint-Benoit-sur-Loire Abbey guide

Gien

at 37 km (direction south-south-east)

To the east of the main Loire Valley, the view across the bridge to...

See Gien guide

Parc Floral de la Source, Orleans

Garden at 43 km (direction west-south-west)

The Parc Floral de la Source is an extensive park to the south of...

See Parc Floral de la Source, Orleans guide

Cathedral of Sainte-Croix, Orleans

Cathedral at 43 km (direction west)

The carvings and grandeur of the western facade are the highlight of the 17th...

See Cathedral of Sainte-Croix, Orleans guide

Orleans

at 43 km (direction west)

The large town of Orleans has a great deal to recommend it: a famous...

See Orleans guide

Hotel Groslot

at 43 km (direction west)

The Hotel Groslot is a beautiful mansion close to the cathedral in Orleans....

See Hotel Groslot guide

Briare

at 45 km (direction south-east)

With the Loire River and the Canal de Briare crossing in the centre of...

See Briare guide

Fontainebleau

Castle at 49 km (direction north-north-east), in the Seine-et-Marne department

The extraordinary decoration of the numerous rooms and royal apartments at Fontainebleau, and the...

See Fontainebleau guide

Moret-sur-Loing

at 50 km (direction north-east), in the Seine-et-Marne department

Moret-sur-Loing is a pleasant town with a historic centre close to Fontainebleau...

See Moret-sur-Loing guide

... or see ALL recommended places to visit in Loiret

Arrange a visit to Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Book hotels, car hire and flights

Book a visit

Hotels

Car Hire

Flights

Organise your visit using the options shown...

Hotels in Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Booking.com: best prices

See Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde hotels

Reserve excursions

Map of places to visit near Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Advertisement

Markets in and near Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Lorris: market Thursday (12km)

Montargis: market Wednesday & Saturday all day (19km)

Chalette-sur-Loing: market Friday (21km)

Puiseaux: market Monday (23km)

Chateauneuf-sur-Loire: market Friday all day (23km)

Pithiviers: market Saturday all day (25km)

Sully-sur-Loire: market Monday all day (27km)

Malesherbes: market Wednesday (34km)

Chatillon-Coligny: market Friday (34km)

Nemours: market Wednesday & Saturday (35km)

More information about Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde, Loire Valley

Tourist attractions near Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde, France

What to do at Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde? Some places with official tourist classifications and other places of interest to visit nearby that should provide inspiration if you are visiting Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde.

Recommended detour towns (fr: plus beau détour)

Montargis (20km)

Moret-sur-Loing (50km)

Churches and religious monuments

Eglise de Notre Dame (Boiscommun) (8km)

Abbaye de Saint Benoît sur Loire (Saint-Benoit-sur-Loire Abbey) (24km)

Remarkable gardens

Arboretum des grandes bruyères (19km)

Arboretum national des Barres (28km)

Potager du jardin du château de La Bussière (32km)

Jardins du manoir du Grand Courtoiseau (39km)

Parc Floral de la Source (43km)

Towns of Art and history

Orleans (43km)

Villages in bloom 4* (fr: ville fleurie)

Quiers-sur-Bezonde (2km)

Fleury-les-Aubrais (41km)

Saint-Cyr-en-Val (41km)

Briare (43km)

Olivet (44km)

Saint-Jean-de-la-Ruelle (45km)

Advertisement

Geography and distances

Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde is in the western-centre of France at 43 kilometres from Orleans, the department capital (general information: Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde is 96 kilometres from Paris).

Geographical Information

Commune: Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

Canton: Bellegarde

Arrondissement: Montargis

Department: Loiret

Region: Loire Valley

New region: Centre-Loire Valley

Postcode: 45270

Distance to Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde

from Orleans (prefecture): 43 km

from Paris: 96 km

from Calais: 332 km

from Nice: 605 km

from Bordeaux: 421 km

from Strasbourg: 396 km

Getting here

Most visitors will either fly into one of the airports in Paris (Orly / Charles de Gaulle) or come via a ferry from the UK to a port such as Le Havre and Caen, 3-4 hours drive from here. For driving distances to Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde from anywhere in France see driving distances and route planner.

We have 10 other places listed as being close (less than kilometres from ): Auvilliers-en-Gatinais, Bellegarde, Chailly-en-Gatinais, Freville-du-Gatinais, Ladon, Mezieres-en-Gatinais, Montbarrois, Montliard, Quiers-sur-Bezonde and Saint-Loup-Des-Vignes.

This page in French: Visiter Ouzouer-sous-Bellegarde