Biography and career

Dr. Patel was born in Fiji and obtained a degree in biochemistry and microbiology from University of Otago in New Zealand, and MA and PhD in Educational Psychology (Medical Cognition,1980,1981) from McGill University in Montreal, where she also served as professor of Medicine and Psychology and director of the Centre for Medical Education. She was a founding member of HEALnet (Health Evidence Application and Linkage Network), which made seminal contributions furthering informatics research and application in Canada. She was also a member of the InterMed Collaboratory, which developed guidelines for medical decision support, and has done extensive work in India, Africa, and Colombia in cross-cultural cognition research.

In 2000 she became director of the Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Making in the department of Biomedical Informatics at Columbia University, where she was also faculty in the department of Psychiatry and Teacher's College. From 2007-09, she served as interim chair and vice chair of Department of BMI at Arizona State University. Dr. Patel was a Professor of Biomedical Informatics and Co-Director of the Center for Cognitive Informatics and Decision Making at the University of Texas at Houston from 2009-11.As of November 2011, Dr.Patel joined the New York Academy of Medicine as a Senior Research Scientist and is the head of the Center for Cognitive Studies in Medicine and Public Health and is an adjunct professor of Biomedical informatics at Columbia University in NY.

Research

In 1978 Elstein, Shulman and Sprafka applied cognitive science methods to investigate physicians’ clinical competence, developing a model of hypothetico-deductive reasoning which proposed that physicians reason by generating and testing a set of hypotheses to explain clinical data. This is an example of backward (hypothesis-to-data) reasoning. In 1986, Patel and Groen demonstrated that experts who accurately diagnosed complex clinical problems used forward reasoning (data to hypothesis), in contrast to novice subjects who used backward reasoning and misdiagnosed or partially diagnosed the same problems.

Patel also applied text comprehension methods to understanding the use of clinical practice guidelines with the goal of increasing adoption of best practices. Patel and colleagues have recently argued for new paradigm for error studies, where instead of zero error tolerance, detection and correction of potential error is viewed as an integral part of cognitive work in a complex workplace.

She is the author of more than 300 publications in cognitive psychology, biomedical informatics, medical education and related fields.

Honors

Member, Committee on Patient Safety and Health Information Technology, Institute of Medicine (IOM). 2010-2011.

Science and Technology Research Award (STAR) with Edward Shortliffe, UTH System, Houston,Texas. 2009

Vice Chair, AMIA Program Committee. 2009

Service Faculty of the Year Award, School of Computing and Informatics, Arizona State University. 2008

Member, Clinical Research Review Committee, The National Center for Research Resources (NCRR). 2007-2009

Selected for Marquis Who’s Who in the World. 2007

Member, Committee on Opportunities in Basic Research in the Behavioral and the Social Sciences for the Military, National Research Council, U.S.A. 2006

Elected Fellow, New York Academy of Medicine. 2004

Vice President (Member Service), International Medical Informatics Association Governing Board. 2003-2006

Outstanding Manuscript Award in Educational Methodology, Journal of Dental Education. 2002

Member, Bio-engineering Training and Education Program, National Science Foundation, USA. 1999-2007

Chair, Editorial Committee, Medinfo2001, International Medical Informatics Association, London, UK. 1999

D.Sc. (honorary), University of Victoria, BC, Canada. 1998

Member, Roundtable on Work, Learning and Assessment, National Research Council, U.S.A. 1997

Elected Member, Board of Governors, Cognitive Science Society. 1997

Elected Fellow, American College of Medical Informatics. 1996

Fellow, The Royal Society of Canada (elected by the Academy of Humanities and Social Sciences). 1996

Elected “Woman of Science” for the year (Sweden). 1994

Publications

Journal Articles

Book Chapters

Medline Publications

Google Scholar Citations