I'm kind of a weirdo when it comes to my taste in TV.

The Shondaland block on Thursday nights is appointment viewing for me. It took forever for me to get into Breaking Bad. I'm a giant Whedon and Veronica Mars geek. Hate-watching 7th Heaven was a favorite pastime, while I genuinely loved Everwood to the point I cursed myself for ignoring it during most of its original run. And of course I’m a sucker for cop, spy, lawyer, and doctor shows. I once binge watched the one season of Three Rivers on Netflix, and I really have no clue why.

One of my biggest idiosyncrasies is that I watch Law & Order: SVU every week even though I'm not sure I've liked it for at least a decade. Part of it is that it’s the last remaining Law & Order show: I absolutely adored the original and hated that it got cancelled when it finally got great again. Plus, well, I’ve been watching from the beginning. I had become a fan of both the mothership as well as Homicide: Life on the Street (the original home of Richard Belzer’s John Munch character) and it was the hot new show that season, so why not?

For a number of reasons, it really wasn't good when it started. Mariska Hargitay was still developing an actress, the tone was uneven, and it was constantly being retooled. Oh, and one more thing: The writers clearly hated the concept and wanted to get as far away from it as possible.

The show’s entire existence has always been, to be blunt, fucking weird. Barry Diller had the sense to realize that a show named “Sex Crimes” wouldn’t sell, but nobody considered the idea that a show ABOUT sex crimes would be weirdly depressing in a way that decades of murder mystery shows weren’t. Well, until it got to the writers, who filled as many episodes as possible with cases mistaken for rape-homicides that turned out to be about things like stolen diamonds.

You know how on regular Law & Order, it’s never the first suspect? SVU was all about throwing out the entire plot that opened the episode to contrive the non-sex crime story that the writers actually wanted to tell. When they DID tell stories that would theoretically be investigated by a real life SVU, they were disorienting and extra disturbing because the show had trained you not to expect it. That changed in season 12, when long-time showrunner Neal Baer was replaced by Warren Leight, a playwright who had served as head writer of Law & Order: Criminal Intent and HBO’s brilliant In Treatment.

Parts of the show improved, thanks to both a tonal shift from the new creative direction and some cast changes. But Leight was open in interviews about how the show had lost its grounding, and he wanted to take the show back to its (theoretical) roots and show the type of cases the real SVU has to deal with, a perfectly noble intention. Only he didn't seem to realize why SVU was rarely about rapes, and he didn’t ground the show enough to at least make the shift to the more “uncomfortable” subject matter resonate properly.

Well, and he didn't abandon the “ripped from the headlines” concept that has screwed with the entire franchise forever. It was always obvious, and one early episode of the mothership, “Indifference,” ends with the “In the criminal justice system…” narrator reading a LONG disclaimer about the real-life case as it scrolls down the screen. It’s one of their best episodes, so it’s not like it’s something that inherently derails the show.

But on SVU, they've lost all concept of when they're telling interesting stories based on real life. Not only was there a Rihanna/Chris Brown episode, but it read like they went into it with the intention that they, the SVU writers, could get through to Rihanna by doing an episode where her avatar got killed.

And then there was tonight. A Zoe Quinn/Brianna Wu/Anita Sarkeesian composite character gets constantly threatened, turns down police protection, and she gets not only kidnapped, but also gang raped. Real women who are still being menaced by rape threats every single day. This is not some case buried in the past that they tacked a rape onto to make it fit the show. It was crass, it was ghoulish, and it never should have happened.

I'm sure they've done episodes before that the subjects were haunted by and were completely inappropriate to put on TV, but this feels different somehow. Maybe it’s seeing the subjects react on Twitter.

Well, not “maybe.” That’s probably it. But I can’t think of another time I felt like a terrible person for watching the show. It’s been on the wrong side of disturbing and ghoulish before, but it was never THIS. This episode is all the proof we need that this show, if it was ever a good idea (it probably wasn’t), should’ve been some kind of limited run series and not on a broadcast network as a junk cop drama. It should’ve been the most carefully crafted thing ever to air on television, more or less.

The crazy thing is that the show HAS done good. Mariska Hargitay is now a vocal activist for sexual assault survivors. If you Google some of the more obscure jargon used in the show’s history to try to determine if it’s real, you find online support groups for women who survived horrible abuse and couldn’t find anyone to relate to until SVU gave them a term to put into a search engine. It’s brought attention to Hargitay’s pet issues, like untested rape kits. Some of these things might not have happened without SVU.

But it’s also the show where every suspect was threatened by the cops with a sentence of prison rape for years and years, even long after an episode that deliberately spotlighted that they needed to STOP DOING THAT. It’s long outlived its usefulness.

And it’s been renewed for another season. Mazel tov?