Reseña del editor:

Chapters: Innherredsferja, Skarnsund Bridge, Vangshylla-kjerringvik Ferry, Norwegian National Road 755, Grong Sparebank, Verran Sparebank, Venneshamn, Skavlen Transmitter, Framverran. Source: Wikipedia. Pages: 43. Not illustrated. Free updates online. Purchase includes a free trial membership in the publisher's book club where you can select from more than a million books without charge. Excerpt: Innherredsferja AS ("The Innherred Ferry") was a Norwegian ferry operator in Trondheimsfjord in Nord-Trøndelag. It operated the LevangerHokstad Ferry between Levanger and Ytterøy, and the VangshyllaKjerringvik Ferry between Inderøy and Mosvik. The company operated seven ferries through its history, and had up to three operating at any time, including one in reserve. Innherredsferja was based in Levanger. The company was founded in 1957, and started a service between Venneshamn, Kjerringvik, Vangshylla, Hokstad and Levanger. The initial owners of the company were a mixture of municipalities, the county and private individuals and companies. In 1964, the company's operations were split into two services, each with a single crossing. Following the opening of the Skarnsund Bridge in 1991, the VangshyllaKjerringvik Ferry was terminated. In 2005, the company was taken over by Fosen Trafikklag, after the state decided that the route would be subject to public service obligation. The company lost the bid to Nor-Ferjer, and operation ceased at the end of 2006. The quay at Kjerringvik has been closed since 1991The initiative for a cross-fjord ferry services was taken by Arthur Selvig, leader of the merchants' association in Levanger. In January 1955, he invited members of the municipal councils on both sides of the fjord to establish a company. The meeting was held in Levanger, and the representatives from Mosvik took two days to get to the meeting. An interim committee was appointed, which was to cooperate with Innherreds Aktie Dampskibssel...More: http://booksllc.net/?id=9054265

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.