Data Processing ServicesTechnology Services

Transaction Network Services, Inc. provides payments, financial services, and telecommunications solutions. It offers managed processing services, security, global connectivity, identity and protection, and market data. The firm provides services to many organizations in the global payments and financial communities, as well as a provider of extensive telecommunications network solutions to service providers The company was founded by John J. McDonnell, Jr. in 1990 and is headquartered in Reston, VA.

Specialty TelecommunicationsCommunications

Part of Safran SA, AirIQ Marine, Inc. is a company that provides wireless maritime information solutions to over 400 commercial fleets in the offshore, inland, fishing, and government markets. The company is based in San Diego, CA. The CEO of the company is Irwin Rodrigues. AirIQ Marine was acquired by Orolia Holding SAS, a subsidiary of Safran SA from Mosaic Capital Corp. on July 18, 2012.

Investment ManagersFinance

Founded in 1976, Apax Partners, Inc. is a venture capital/private equity firm located in New York City. The firm is a subsidiary of London-based Apax Partners LLP

Computer CommunicationsElectronic Technology

Carrier Access Corp. engages in the development of broadband equipment solutions for communications service providers. Its products enable customers to consolidate and upgrade access capacity for the implementation of converged voice, video, and data services at lower costs. The company was founded By Roger L. Koenig and Nancy G. Pierce in 1992 and is headquartered in Boulder, CO.

Investment ManagersFinance

Alcatel-Lucent Holdings, Inc. develops and builds communications networks. It provides equipment, software, and related network services for carriers, service providers, and enterprise customers. The company supplies broadband Internet access products and digital subscriber line (DSL) technology for residential and small business end-users. It is headquartered in Plano, TX.

Information Technology ServicesTechnology Services

Bytemobile, Inc. provides internet protocol services for mobile data networks. The company was founded by Kannan Ramchandran, Upamanyu Madhow, David Pelly, Constantine Polychronopoulos and Vaduvur Bharghavan in 2000 and is headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, FL.

Packaged SoftwareTechnology Services

ProQuent Systems Corp. develops mobile multiple-services switching platforms. It provides content inspection solutions that are components for providing visibility and enforcement of mobile network policies on IP traffic in operator networks. The company was founded by Thomas E. Hamilton in 2000 and is headquartered in Marlboro, MA.

Other Consumer ServicesConsumer Services

Harvard University engages in the provision of teaching and research. It has twelve degree-granting Schools in addition to the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, offering a global education. The university was founded in 1636 and is headquartered in Cambridge, MA.

Telecommunications EquipmentElectronic Technology

Part of Oracle Corp., Thales Microsonics is a telecommunications equipment manufacturer. The company is based in Sophia-Antipolis, France. Thales Microsonics was acquired by Tekelec Global, Inc., a subsidiary of Oracle Corp. from Thales SA on February 05, 2003.

Investment ManagersFinance

Cerberus Capital Management LP (Cerberus) is a private equity firm founded in 1992 by Stephen A. Feinberg and William L. Richter. It is headquartered in New York.

TextilesProcess Industries

WestPoint International LLC manufactures, sources, markets and distributes bed and bath home fashion products. Its product portfolio include sheets, pillowcases, comforters, blankets, bedspreads, pillows, mattress pads, towels and related products. The firm conducts its operations exclusive in the consumer home fashion industry. It markets the products under trademarks, brand names and private labels, namely, WestPoint Home, Atelier Martex, Grand Patrician, Martex, Patrician, Lady Pepperell, Luxor, Utica and Vellux. The company was founded on February 25, 2005 and is headquartered in New York, NY.

Pharmaceuticals: MajorHealth Technology

Part of Pfizer Inc., Wyeth BioPharma is a company that develops and manufactures protein biopharmaceuticals. The company is based in Collegeville, PA.

Wireless TelecommunicationsCommunications

Nokia of America Corp. develops and provides networking and communications technology, products and services. It offers fixed and mobile broadband, IP and optical technologies. The firm offers a portfolio of solutions and services for telecom services providers, public and private organizations, wireline and wireless operators and enterprises. The company is headquartered in Murray Hill, NJ.

Electronic Equipment/InstrumentsElectronic Technology

Orolia Switzerland SA designs, manufactures and markets crystal, rubidium and maser sources, integrated GPS or GNSS reference clocks and clock testing systems. Its products are used in different applications, including telecommunications, defense, navigation, instrument, broadcasting, and space. The company was founded by Pascal Rochat in 1995 and is headquartered in Neuchatel, Switzerland.

Packaged SoftwareTechnology Services

Preligens SAS provides integrated monitoring services based on infrared imaging and nanosatellite technology. The company was founded by Arnaud Gu茅rin and Renaud Allioux on February 17, 2016 and is headquartered in Toulouse, France.