Entertainment is a field where talent plays an important role in taking you to places. Once you have that, success comes along gradually. While the debate of deserving and undeserving continues for another upcoming year, Santosh Shukla is already enjoying a success that he built from scratch. After dazzling on screen in films like Jai Ho and Bachchan Pandey where he held his ground in front of powerhouses like Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar, Santosh is gearing up some interesting back-to-back releases in the upcoming year. The actor sat down with City First to talk about his short film Gulabi Revdi and several other projects.

While he has an exciting project lined up with producer Sajid Nadiadwala, Santosh laughed off the topic in hesitation as he yet cannot disclose the details. “It is a big film and a big production. So, we will have to respect the boundaries. I yet cannot disclose anything but I can surely talk about my upcoming film, Gulabi Revdi.”

While Santosh has always had a strong screen presence, this was the first time the audience was going to see him play the main lead in a film. Revealing details about the project, Santosh said, “I am playing the main character of Nitya Shukla. Gulabi Revdi is a long-shot film of 35 minutes. We extensively shot it in Lucknow as the story is based in Lucknow. It is about a Lucknowi family who has the ancestral business of making and selling revdi. Nitya belongs to the third generation of revdi makers and the film revolves around his life. It talks about Lucknow’s culture and the sweetness of revdi.”

Explaining how he came across the project, the actor shared, “Deepak Srivastava, who directed the film is an old friend of mine. He has directed two Eros projects as well. He once called me and said that he heard a script written by Sujit Kumar Gupta and thought of me. He knew that I am a native of Lucknow. I heard the story and found it very interesting. I felt that it is a story that should come out in the world. I have two actresses along with me namely Lekha Prajapati and the second is Nazia Hussein. Nazia is the niece of Sanjay Dutt. There are also several actors from the Lucknow theatre along with us and I am grateful they could be a part of this project with me.”

Talking about another project Santosh said, “Salman Bhai is a dear friend of mine. He used to always highly praise me and I always thought it was because he has a huge heart. But now I know, with that huge heart, he also has a great vision for the future. So he must have said those things because he found something in me. I am just glad I got to work with him yet again.”