‘It’s a blessing when you are in touch with a superstar like him.'

‘He is the superstar of his family too.'

‘I am not a superstar but I want to at least become the superstar of my family like him.'

It was his stint on Bigg Boss that changed actor Santosh Shukla’s life.

Not only did he become famous nationally, he also found his mentor in Salman Khan.

Soon after stepping out of the house, he was signed on to play the villain in Salman’s Jai Ho.

Shukla tells Rediff.com contributor Rajul Hegde what makes Salman such a superstar.

You have become close to Salman Khan after Bigg Boss.

Yes. I never imagined Salmanbhai would like me. I never tried to impress him during the show.

Everything happens for the good. I think he liked me in the show and saw his chavi (shadow) in me.

When I came out after the eviction episode, he gave me his number and told me to message my number so he could save it. After three-four days, he messaged and told me to meet (his brother) Sohail Khan.

After a meeting that lasted two long hours, I was offered a role in Jai Ho.

You bonded well with Salman during the making of Jai Ho. Would you like to share any anecdote?

Salmanbhai is chasing me in a particular scene. While filming it, both of us got cramps at the same time. Salmanbhai said. ‘Tu Kumbh ke mele mein bichada hua mera bhai hai (You’re the brother I lost in the Kumbh mela).

I am doing another film with him but I can’t divulge the details.

What is the one thing that you like about Salman?

Bhai is very strict during workouts. Hard work and dedication is something you have to learn from him.

People relax after becoming superstars but this man doesn’t. He says there is much more to do.

People get to do one show on television lose sight of the ground beneath their feet but this man is so humble despite being such a huge star.

How many times do you visit his place in a month?

Nothing fixed as such but Salim uncle (Salman Khan’s father) has asked me to visit their place at least once in a month. So I make it a point to do so and have dinner with him.

I get to learn so much from Salim uncle as he is a veteran in the industry.

When I meet Salmanbhai in the ground floor of his apartment, I again get to learn so much from him as he is a superstar and been in the industry for so long.

Plus, I get to meet all the big producers and directors. Sometimes, he recommends me.

Go on…

I try and meet Salmanbhai only when he is at Galaxy (his residence in Bandra, suburban Mumbai) and not when he is working.

When we meet at his place, we mostly workout together at his gym, party at night and then go home.

Sometimes he does message and ask me to meet him at particular place or at his farm house.

It’s a blessing when you are in touch with a superstar like him.

He is the superstar of his family too.

I am not a superstar but I want to at least become the superstar of my family like him.

You parents met him during their visit to Mumbai.

Yes. When Salmanbhai got to know about their visit, he called them over for dinner at his house. He welcomed my parents as if they were his parents.

What he likes about me is that, like him, I am attached to my mother. That’s the one common thing between us (smiles).

What is that one thing that you like about him?

He is a very emotional and big-hearted person. I don’t think any other superstar has this quality. Maybe I am little biased towards him.

What is that one thing that nobody knows about him?

He is a shy person.

Do you take his advice?

I don’t disturb him much. But, yes, sometimes if I am stuck and feel I need his advice, I do call him as he is an experienced actor.

What’s the best advice he has given you?

Don’t get married (with a loud laugh) until you feel you can be a good husband. I felt that was genuine advice as I fall in love very easily.

I am following it; we’ll see what will happen in future (smiles).

Photograph: Santosh Shukla/Twitter

Which is your favourite Salman film?

All his films are good but his recent film, Bajrangi Bhaijaan, is one of his best films.

We have seen him mostly beating up bad guys in films but this was something different. It was interesting and fun to watch.

What are his birthday and Eid parties like?

Parties are always rocking with family and friends. His house is like an open house, everybody can walk in. There is so much of joy and madness in the party.

What would you wish for him on his 50th birthday?

I wish him all the happiness and success in his life. He could be our last superstar.