New Delhi, 15th October 2019: The Delhi auditions for Miss & Mrs India Asia Pacific Pageant 2019-2020, jointly organized by ‘Prestiza Integrated Solutions’ and ‘Miss & Mrs India Asia Pacific Organization’, received an overwhelming response from Delhiites as married & unmarried women from various walks of life took part in the event with great zeal and enthusiasm.

The auditions were organized between 9.30 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. at Hotel Holiday Inn, Aerocity, New Delhi on Sunday, wherein some shining Bollywood stars graced the occasion as Jury Members.

Jury members’ profile-

Ishita Raj Sharma: She is an Indian film actress and model, best known for her work in Pyaar Ka Punchnama and Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety.

Abhilasha Jakhar: She is an Indian Television Actress, Model and she also acted in various other popular TV serials like Saath Nibhana Saathiya (2017), Meri Durga (2017). Her Debut TV Serial Pavitra Bandhan Do Dilon Ka (2013-2014).

Santosh Shukla : He is an Indian Bollywood film and television actor. He gained fame after his stint in Bigg Boss 6. He made his Bollywood debut from the film Jai Ho – released in 2014.

Ajay Nagrath (born 16 February 1986): He is an Indian television and movie actor. Currently he is playing the role of Pankaj in CID.

Mr. Raghav, the creator & the owner of International India Asia Pacific Pageant said, “The main aim of this program is Women Empowerment. We organize this event every year to provide an identity to married & unmarried women for their beauty, skills, talent, simplicity, traditional and culture. It helps them to reach their dreams.”

The Miss and Mrs India Asia Pacific event is organized by Prestiza Integrated Solutions in Mumbai, owned by Mr. Rakesh Jain & Jay Shah. said, “Naari Shakti is a female empowerment program for married Indian Women. Our motive to organize this pageant every year for married & unmarried women is more of a movement to empower women by providing them with opportunities in terms of Corporate, Finance, Aviation, Retail and other Lifestyle domains as rather than just a beauty pageant. She is smart, she is brave, she is someone who wants the best for her family, society and the country. This pageant takes you on a journey of a lifetime and allows you to dream and also helps turn those dreams to realities.”

Jury Members also praised this event and complimented, “The Miss and Mrs India Asia Pacific is one of the most credible and prestigious beauty competitions held in the Asia Pacific Region.”

Contestants from different cities will be shortlisted by the jury and region-wise winners will also be announced for both the categories i.e. for Miss and Mrs titles. After the city auditions, 30 contestants will be taken to Bali for the Grand Finale, where all the contestants will be given vigorous training in different aspects. The Grooming Sessions will be supervised by Pooja Bimrah who is the Founder Fashion India Advocate Academy. In the Grand Finale, all the contestants will compete for the crown against each other in 3 rounds.