Although he stayed in the Indian reality show 'Bigg Boss' house for only a month, regional film actor Santosh Shukla has managed to impress the host of the show and superstar Salman Khan.

Santosh Shukla is over the top claiming that Salman has offered him a movie role in one of his forthcoming films.

After his eviction from the reality show Santosh was very upset with the other contestants of the house. He was accused of obscenity which he felt was unjust.

But despite all the negative energy created in the house, Shukla is still smiling. He spoke to reporters saying that Salman Khan was always very protective about him.

According to him Salman came forward to protect him and went on record to say that the actor went through all the recordings of the show and gave him a clean chit.

Apparently after his ouster, Salman invited Shukla for a chat and their conversation lasted for over two hours.

Shukla also stated that Salman offered him a role in one of his forthcoming films.

Santosh will make his debut in the Hindi film industry with ‘Balwinder Singh Famous Ho Gaya’ with singers Mika and Shaan.

The ‘Chandrakanta’ actor wishes to meet his family in Luknow but wants to focus on his future commitments, “I have been waiting to meet my family in Lucknow ever since I got evicted from the show, but then I was preparing for the Bigg Boss finale, so I couldn't go back. And when the rehearsals got over, I got to know that they want me back in the house to settle my score with Aashka and Rajeev!" [sic] he told an Indian Daily.

Santosh was fond of housemate Aashka Goradia and often told her that he would stand by her no matter what. But the affection did not last long as he was seen complaining to other contestants about Aashka's "changing behaviour" towards him.

So shall we expect to see him once again on the show?

But we hope Salman keeps his word as he promised there won't be any re-entry once the contestants are evicted. Looks like a twist in the making.

Till we see more drama in Bigg Boss follow this space for more updates.

MUST LISTEN:

Delhi gang-rape: Hear Amitabh Bachchan - India's conscience of the people - speak

MUST READ:

Nach Baliye 5: Sania Mirza, Shoaib to reveal their love story

Salman Khan makes his wedding announcement...

Is Salman Khan Bollywood’s answer to ultimate superhero - Rajinikanth?