It’s about time filmmakers turned their attention away from English-language young adult fantasy fiction and returned to the land where the Western tradition in literary fantasy began, in the land of the Brothers Grimm.

But the Amazon/MGM production of Kerstin Gier’s “Dream” trilogy has been seriously Anglicized for mass cinematic consumption.

“Silver and the Book of Dreams” transplants characters and situations to London, a posh (ish) high school and the weird goings on with dream-obsessed boys and the latest student to stuff her books and backpack in a “cursed” locker.” But it’s still oddly off-center in some distinctly German ways, and it doesn’t look like any other YA screen fantasy of recent memory.

That’s not so much an endorsement as a suggestion that it might pique your curiosity. It certainly did mine.

Liv and Mia (Jana McKinnon and Riva Krymalowski) are siblings who have been shuffled about a lot — “seven school (introductory) tours in five years,” according to older sister Liv — since the death of their father.

Now they’re in London, with their mother (Nicolette Krebitz) and the new makeshift family she and partner Ernest (Rory Nolan) have formed.

French step-sister Florence (Gwenaelle Gillet) is openly rude and hostile, demanding her dad pay her to spend time — even mealtime — with these two upstarts. Stepbrother Grayson (Théo Augier Bonaventure), named for the dirtiest player in the history of Dook basketball, is less judgmental.

Liv’s dreams are often about her dead father and her trapped under the ice, drowning with him. Moving into this London townhouse, she finds herself wandering into dreams with Grayson. Is she really following him and his three mates into Highgate Cemetery in the foggy wee hours of the morning?

What’s this talk about needing “four men and a maiden” to “complete the ritual?” And this “Book of Dreams,” is that why she’s “lucid dreaming” her way down a fancifully-colored enclosed alley, opening doors into the dreams of others?

Having a “cursed” locker at school that ties her to the missing Annabell Scott would seem the reason for all this. Grayson’s pals Jasper (Efeosa Afolabi), Arthur (Chaneil Kular) and sweet-on-Liv Henry (Rhys Mannion) insist she’s the “Chosen One,” “a natural dreamer.”

Perhaps the locker “chose” her?

All the business about initiating Liv Silver into their cult of dreams, the “rules” of visiting the dreams of others, making their “fondest dreams” come true and avoiding their “worst nightmares” are colorfully pedantic and dull. It’s the quirky but recognizable teen “types” and high school world that’s more interesting here.

Exotic and outgoing school class president Persephone (Samirah Breuer), the generic rites-of-affluent-teen passage depicted — raves, popularity contests, young love, inclusion — are all just set decoration for a story that lacks urgency and that has a difficult time selling us its hgh stakes.

Are kids “disappearing” into this dreamscape, or truly dying in their own “worst nightmares?” Helena Hufnagel’s film doesn’t manage the feat of making one care about that.

What I want to know is what got up French-girl Florence’s bum that has her hating and looking down on the world, aside from Euro-stereotypes in action? Setting up the Silver siblings as thick as thieves, and all but abandoning Mia as a character seems clumsy. But then, that might not leave time for Liv and Henry to make eyes at each other and eventually make out.

The whole business of dreamland being a Diagon Alley with “Monsters, Inc.” doors to the dreams of others is a bit of an eye-roller, no matter how luridly imagined. But perhaps that’s the idea, a YA fantasy made-to-order for kids of any nation where Pixar and J.K. Rowling are what they grew up on.

Rating: TV-16

Cast: Jana McKinnon, Rhys Mannion, Josephine Blazier, Théo Augier Bonaventure, Efeosa Afolabi, Chaneil Kular, Riva Krymalowski and Samirah Breuer

Credits: Directed by Helena Hufnagel, scripted by Sina Flammang based on a novel by Kerstin Gier. An MGM/Amazon Prime release.

Running time: 1:32