The first time I heard about Matilda of Boulogne, was when I was researching on the Anarchy (you can check out part one and two). Then there was an article in BBC History Magazine. Once I read that, I needed to do a whole blog just on this fascinating woman.

In c.1105, Matilda was born in Boulogne, France to Eustace III, Count of Boulogne and Mary of Scotland.

Mary of Scotland was sister to Matilda of Scotland, who married Henry I of England. Their daughter, Empress Matilda, will come into play later on in life for a contestant to the crown of England.

At the age of around twenty in 1125, Matilda married Stephen of Blois, Count of Mortain. Even though it was an arranged marriage it was a happy one, with much evidence to prove the couple’s affection for one another.

When Matilda’s father, Eustace III, abdicated and retired to a monastery that same year, his title of Boulogne was inherited by Matilda. Later on in the year, Eustace III passed away leaving Matilda and Stephen as joint rulers of Boulogne.

During the reign of Henry I of England, Matilda and Stephen were granted a residence in London. There, they gave birth to two children, Baldwin after Matilda’s uncle, King Baldwin I of Jerusalem, and a daughter named Matilda.

Sadly Baldwin died in early childhood and the young Matilda is thought to have died during her childhood too, although she lived long enough to be espoused to Waleran de Meulan, Earl of Worcester.

On 1 December 1135 Henry I of England died from possible food poisoning. Stephen, through his mother Adela of Normandy who was sister to Henry I of England, took this advantage to sail to England to be crowned King of England on 22 December.

Henry I had only one surviving child, Matilda, who was Empress from her first marriage to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor. To not get everything confused, I’ll refer to this Matilda as Empress Matilda.

Matilda of Boulogne was heavily pregnant at that time. After she gave birth to a son, Eustace, she crossed the Channel to England. She was crowned Queen at Easter on 22 March 1136.

She gave birth to two more children, Marie in c.1136 and William in c.1137.

Matilda was a big supporter of the Knights Templar, founding Cressing Temple in Essex in 1137 and Temple Cowley in Oxford in 1139. Like her predecessor, Matilda of Scotland (wife of Henry I), she has a close relationship with the Holy Trinity Priory at Aldgate. Two of her children were buried there.

In the civil war that followed known as the Anarchy, Matilda proved to be Stephen’s strongest supporter.

In 1138 England was invaded, Matilda called troops from her hometown of Boulogne and its ally, Flanders. They besieged Dover Castle with success and then went north to Durham where she made a treaty with David I of Scotland in 1139.

On 2 February 1141 at the Battle of Lincoln, Stephen was captured by the enemies. Matilda rallied the Stephen’s partisans, raising an army with the help of William of Ypres.

While Empress Matilda waiting in London to prepare for her coronation, Matilda and Stephen’s brother, Henry of Blois, had her chased out of the city. Empress Matilda went on to besiege Henry of Blois at Winchester, leading Matilda then commanded her army to attack the besiegers.

There was a rout in which Empress Matilda’s half-brother, Robert of Gloucester, was captured. Both the Matilda’s then agreed to exchange their prisoners, Stephen for Robert.

I’m not going to go into too much detail on what ensured next, you can read all about this civil war in part one and two of my blog, the Anarchy.

On 3 May 1152 Matilda died from a fever at Hedingham Castle, Essex, England, Stephen by her side. She was buried at Faversham Abbey, which she and Stephen founded.

Matilda proved a strong Queen, feisty and indefatigable in her support of Stephen.