Tori Spelling’s ex-husband, Charlie Shanian, recently spoke to the Daily Mail about her reaction to her late father, Aaron Spelling, leaving his entire fortune to her mom, Candy Spelling.

Page Six’s recent article entitled, “Tori Spelling’s ex-husband claims she cried when dad left fortune to mom Candy: ‘She was so upset’,” reports that Shanian, a screenwriter who was married to Tori from 2004 to 2006, said that the 50-year-old actress discovered before Aaron’s death and was “so upset” by the inheritance news that she started “crying.”

Shanian explained, “From what I understand … his hope was that it would bring Tori closer to her mom because it would require a connection between them.”

Aaron left his immense fortune to his wife Candy. Shanian recalls Tori allegedly “crying” over the “control” the will gave Candy.

“She was crying and feeling upset, not about the money, but about what it meant that [it] was structured in such a way,” Shanian claimed. “There’s a real pain in there.”

The 58-year-old went on to allege that Candy, 77, has set up trusts for her children, which they will “still get … someday.”

“It really angered her and hurt her,” Shanian said. “It was, like, this cathartic cry of just, ‘This is my life. … This is what everyone thinks of me.’”

Meanwhile, Candy, who has been bashed on social media for casually posting amid Tori’s reported “monetary” struggles, found a house for her daughter and grandkids. However, according to a source, Tori declined because she “wanted to live in a certain place.”

When asked whether she’d assist Tori “financially” in a TMZ interview last month, Candy said, “Of course. I will always be there for her.”

Tori’s first major role was Donna Martin on Beverly Hills, 90210, beginning in 1990. She has appeared in a number of made-for-television films, and she reprised her role of Donna Martin in Beverly Hills, 90210’s spin-off, BH90210, in 2019. Her autobiography, Stori Telling, debuted on top of the New York Times Best Seller list and was awarded the title of best celebrity autobiography of 2009.