“Beverly Hills 90210” star Tori Spelling said she fell in love with Peabody, Mass. – but not her first hubby, Peabody homey Charlie Shanian – and felt no regrets when she cheated on him with her current mate, Dean McDermott.

“Charlie was different from anyone I’d dated,” Spelling writes in her new tell-all, “sTori Telling,” which is excerpted in the new People maggie.

“His family was a major part of the attraction. He took me to his mother’s house in Peabody, Mass. It was total suburbia, something I’d only experienced on TV, and I loved it.”

Poor little rich girl Tori, the daughter of late Hollywood mogul Aaron Spelling and his shopaholic spouse Candy, had never lived a “normal” life before, and she was besotted.

“I wanted Charlie’s family,” she wrote. “I was in love with the idea of him.”

The couple had met when Tori starred opposite Shanian – an actor and writer – in his play “Maybe Baby, It’s You” – about finding a soul mate.

For a while, the Hollywood honey did the simple suburban life thing with Shanian. They were spotted in the gym at St. Vasilios Greek Orthodox Church in Peabody for Easter Mass, chowing on chili at the 466 Pub & Grille in Danvers, and even – gasp! – shopping at Costco!

Still, in the back of her mind, Spelling writes, she always knew “divorce was an escape hatch if I needed it.”

Of course, you know the rest of the story. A year after Tori and Charlie tied the knot – in a lavish million-dollar bash, we might add – Spelling met her current hubby, Dean McDermott, on the set of “Mind Over Murder.” Although they were both married to others, they slept together.

“The following day when I woke up next to Dean, I had no regrets,” she writes. “Something was really wrong with my marriage. Not only because I slept with this guy – though that certainly wasn’t a postive sign – but because I didn’t regret it.”

Dean ’fessed up to his wife and told her he was leaving, but Tori was too terrified to break the news to Charlie. So she e-mailed him and asked him to meet her at her therapist’s office.

“He saw me and started to cry. He said, ‘I’m not going to let you get rid of me. I love you.’ I told him that I’d never been in love with him . . . He had been a friend to me but I married him because he was a great guy.”

Tori confessed she had cheated with Dean, and Charlie left “angry and hurt.”

“I never got to say a goodbye to Charlie’s family, who I knew must hate me,“ she writes. “A relative with whom I’d been close wrote to say, ‘All those years when people said “Tori Spelling’s a whore,” I defended you. At least I don’t have to anymore.’ ”

Um, ouch.

But can we at least give Tori props for being brutally honest??? You can read more in People, which hits stands today.

BTW, Charlie and his family, through his publicist, declined to comment. Showing far more class, we guess, than his ex . . . .