She left her first husband Charlie Shanian for Dean McDermott.

And after trying to gain closure Tori Spelling sobbed loudly on Tuesday's episode of her reality show after a meeting with her first spouse who she hadn't seen since 2005.

The 41-year-old actress fell sick with a migraine in the previous episode of True Tori and was forced to reschedule her meeting with ex-husband Charlie.

The former Beverly Hills, 90210 star has been chronicling her life on True Tori while attempting to salvage her marriage to Dean McDermott, 47, following a cheating scandal.

The Lifetime episode was titled Tale Of Two Husbands and juxtaposed Tori's therapy sessions with Dean as she steeled herself to see Charlie, who she cheated on with Dean while making a movie in Canada.

Tori during a couple's therapy session with Dr. Ann Wexler said she had another migraine as her meeting with Charlie neared.

'When she gets nervous, it manifests in her body,' Ann earlier told Dean as they waited for tardy Tori to arrive at the session.

Ann encouraged Tori to change how she reacts to her feelings and to follow through and talk to Charlie to 'clean up that regret.'

The mother of four was typically running late for her meeting with Charlie who she hadn't seen since leaving him during a joint therapy session for Dean.

'I told him I'll be late. He'll expect that, he was with me for four years,' Tori said.

Charlie declined to have his meeting with Tori recorded, but she was clearly deflated after they spoke for two hours.

'He told me how he felt. It made me feel sad that he had to come to grips with what I said. ...He's a good man,' Tori said as she started crying while driving.

Tori trudged upstairs and found Dean in bed dealing with a migraine of his own.

Dean asked Tori about her visit and she started bawling as she opened up about their meeting.

'It felt like family, safe, nurtured by and then it felt like a loss,' Tori said sobbing with her shoulders heaving.

'I remember how safe I felt with him. When I left I just suddenly felt really alone and I don't know why,' she said while wiping away tears with tissue.

Dean asked Tori if she regretted leaving Charlie following Tori and Dean's affair while filming the Lifetime movie Mind Over Murder in Canada.

She responded that Charlie was a 'good man' and listed his positive qualities.

Dean then asked Tori if seeing Charlie and remembering what a good man he was brought up more feelings of anger and resentment toward him.

'A little bit,' Tori responded.

The Due South star told his wife that he was 'sensing a lot of doubt' from her about their relationship.

'I chose not to be with him. I chose to be with you. I made the choice, so I need to figure it out,' Tori replied.

Tori and Dean earlier in the episode got in a verbal argument over how to cook a potato in the microwave.

'Why are you even with me? I feel like such a nag,' Dean exclaimed during their heated potato argument.

Dean earlier told Tori that he 'literally' had a 'demon inside my head' that tries to destroy the good things in his life.

Tori warned that she didn't want that as an excuse as she kept tabs on whether Dean was attending his alcoholic meetings.

During a joint therapy session Dean admitted that he had been missing meetings as he couldn't find 'a good time to go.'

'There's an 80 percent chance of relapse if you don't go to meetings,' the couple's therapist told him.

Dean was also seen showing coming to grips with a suicide by a member of his rehab group and sharing his nine-month sobriety chip with Tori.