Tori Spelling’s ex-husband is telling all.

Charlie Shanian spoke to the Daily Mail Friday about the “BH90210” alum’s reaction to her late father, Aaron Spelling, leaving his entire fortune to her mom, Candy Spelling.

The screenwriter, who was married to Tori from 2004 to 2006, said that the actress, 50, found out before Aaron’s death and was “so upset” by the inheritance news that she started “crying.”

Shanian explained, “From what I understand … his hope was that it would bring Tori closer to her mom because it would require a connection between them.”

The mother-daughter duo were estranged when Aaron passed away in June 2006, leaving Tori distressed over the “control” his will gave her surviving parent as the sole heir of $600 million.

“She was crying and feeling upset, not about the money, but about what it meant that [it] was structured in such a way,” Shanian claimed. “There’s a real pain in there.”

The 58-year-old went on to allege that Candy, 77, has set up trusts for her children, which they will “still get … someday.”

He also detailed a different time Tori allegedly “collapsed crying” over a doorman’s comment about how she “should be in a limousine” instead of a “beat-up” car.

“It really angered her and hurt her,” Shanian said. “It was, like, this cathartic cry of just, ‘This is my life. … This is what everyone thinks of me.'”

Page Six has reached out to Tori’s rep for comment on her ex-husband’s allegations, but did not immediately hear back.

Recently, the “Beverly Hills, 90210” alum clapped back when she was slammed for staying in a $100 motel in Los Angeles with her five children — Liam, 16, Stella, 15, Hattie, 11, Finn, 10, and Beau, 6 — amid her and estranged husband Dean McDermott’s divorce.

“You would do whatever you can for your kids, right?” Tori asked a paparazzo in July.

She has yet to directly address her family’s subsequent stay in an RV — although her friend Joey Camasta told Page Six earlier this month that she was teaching her little ones a “lesson.”

He explained, “[She] is just saying … ‘I’m gonna teach my kids this lesson of resilience and show them that Mommy was raised with the money, and it didn’t get me where it should be.'”

A source also previously told us that Tori had access to friend and “Million Dollar Listing” star Josh Flagg’s Bel-Air mansion after vacating her rental home due to mold, but she chose to leave the $9 million estate for the motel and mobile home.

Meanwhile, Candy, who has been bashed on social media for casually posting amid Tori’s reported “monetary” struggles, found a house for her daughter and grandkids, another insider told us.

The source said that Tori declined because she “wanted to live in a certain place.”