Is Tori Spelling reuniting with first husband Charlie Shahnaian and leaving, literally poor, Dean McDermott? Would anyone blame Spelling for divorcing the self-confessed cheating Dean McDermott?

But the thought of Charlie taking Tori back is laughable, don’t you think? Sources told the ever reliable Radar Online that Spelling regrets cheating on Shanian with McDermott. Apparently Tori has come to the realization that Dean is not the love of her life.

Spelling and McDermott are basically bankrupt. Candy Spelling is paying the children’s school tuition, buying groceries and making the house payments. Why in the world would Charlie want to reunite and remarry Tori? Charlie has never had anything nice to say about Tori since their split in 2006 after fifteen months of marriage.

Dean and Tori have tried to sell their marriage as a love story of the century. Apparently it’s anything but. They each cheated on their respective spouses in order to be together. The couple has made a few attempts at reality television shows which failed miserably. Tori has written a few books that have ended up in bargain bins at bookstores. Did we mention, Dean and Tori are broke?

Regrets, Tori allegedly has a few. The insider divulged that whenever Tori Spelling and Dean McDermott “go through bad times” Tori gets out the photos from her marriage to Charlie Shahnaian. Looking at the photographs has made Tori feel bad for what happened between her and Shahnaian.

Tori just shelled out $45,000 to Dean’s ex-wife Mary Jo Eustace for back child support. Where Tori got the money, we don’t know. Spelling is being sued by a credit card company for $38,000 for missed payments. Yeah, that’s a hot mess Charlie would probably like to avoid.

There may be a Tori Spelling and Dean McDermott divorce brewing. That should be an interesting child support battle with four kids and no money. We’re betting Charlie Shahnaian has nothing to do with any break-up of the Spelling-McDermott marriage. We’re also pretty sure Charlie has no plans to reunite with Tori.

Let us know what you think in the comments section below and come back to CDL for the latest celebrity news.

FameFlynet Image Credit