1907-1989

"Writers should be read, but neither seen nor heard."

Birthplace

London, England.

Education

Born into a prosperous, creative family, the young Daphne was initially educated at home and later at school in Paris.

Other jobs

Du Maurier's literary ambitions were encouraged from an early age by her father, the actor-manager Sir Gerald du Maurier. Her first story was published when she was still a teenager, and she never pursued any other career than that of a writer.

Did you know?

Manderley, the famous Gothic mansion in which Rebecca is set, was inspired by Menabilly, the house on the Cornish coast where Du Maurier lived for 26 years. In 1969, when she was evicted from the house by its hereditary owners, the Rashleigh family, she moved into its dower house, Kilmarth.

Critical verdict

Despite - or perhaps due to - her immense popularity, Du Maurier was long regarded as a resolutely middlebrow author. However, recent criticism focusing on the Freudian and Jungian subtexts of her books has forced a reappraisal of her canon. Although many of her novels rely on the trappings of the formulaic romance, her best works, such as Julius, The Parasites and The House on the Strand transcend the genre to achieve a powerful psychological realism. In Rebecca, meanwhile, Du Maurier gives a unique spin to the Cinderella myth to create a masterful study of obsession and sexual dominance that has fascinated generations of readers.

Recommended works

Most readers begin with Rebecca (1938), certainly Du Maurier's most successful novel. The short story collections, The Breaking Point (1959) and Not After Midnight (1971) prove her to be a master of the genre.

Influences

Du Maurier's beloved Cornwall is the setting for many of her books, and allowed her the "freedom to write, to walk, to wander ... to be alone" (Vanishing Cornwall, 1967). The author saw the Bronte sisters as her closest literary forbears and her best work is steeped in a similar Gothic romanticism. In 1961 she wrote a biography of Branwell, the Brontes' brother.

Now read on

For those who can't get enough of Manderley, Sally Beauman's Rebecca's Tale (2001) provides a sequel in which the circumstances of the eponymous heroine's death are reexamined.

Adaptations

A great many of Du Maurier's works have been adapted for both stage and screen. Orson Welles kicked off the trend with his 1938 radio adaptation of Rebecca, which in turn helped inspire Hitchcock's Oscar winning screen version of 1940. In 1973, Nicolas Roeg turned one of the author's last short stories into the spine-chilling metaphysical thriller Don't Look Now, while The Birds, Alfred Hitchcock's enduringly famous 1963 film, is based on one of her short stories, too.

Recommended biography

Nina Auerbach's Daphne Du Maurier: Haunted Heiress (2002) provides a long-overdue critical appraisal of the author's life and works. The biography lays particular emphasis on Du Maurier's troubled relationship with her father, who made no secret of his disappointment that she was not born a boy. Du Maurier collected and edited her own diaries from 1920 to 1932 and published them as Growing Pains (also known as Myself When Young). These provide a fascinating portrait of the author's early development.