Isabel Coixet, the film director who has won five Goyas has offered a meeting with the students of the University School of Arts TAI where Explained that "If a director doesn't know how to direct a sex scene, maybe he should go back to school". "Perhaps I should learn to do it before starting to direct", added the Catalan, whose last work released in cinema has been It snows in Benidorm, produced by El Deseo and distributed by BTeam Pictures.

The author of titles like Things I never told you, My life without me o map of the sounds of tokyo, has confessed that for her success lies in doing what you "feel at all times". "This success sounds ugly, even the word failure has another beauty", The filmmaker has qualified, who has confessed: "The way I am, it's almost a miracle that I've made so many movies". “I come from a family where there was no relationship with the cinema or money. I always thought directors had to be like Visconti, from a super rich family and, the truth is that 80% of the directors are from a fairly rich family, but there are 20% of people who have started with a lot of stubbornness, innocence and faith and have managed to make films”, he clarified.

Respecto a It snows in Benidorm, Coixet stated that he wanted to make a film "with an atmosphere and certain characters, but that lpeople who saw it would draw their own conclusions”. “I feel more and more like leaving loose ends, before I was very obsessed with everything ending, but based on my experience as a spectator, I like to stay thinking about the movie and that it changes the next day, that it be something alive. When you see that the director and the screenwriter are speaking through the mouth of a character, I disconnect”, he has recounted.

Author of films, documentaries, short films, books and video installations, has indicated that, More than love, the recurring theme of his filmography is "solitude". "For me, my theme, more than love, which is secondary, is lloneliness, how we fight it, how we live it, how it marks us in our lives; that feeling of being born and dying alone and everything in between, which is a kind of fleeting company”.

The director, who has in mind make a documentary about a true story of sexual harassment in a theater school, He has also expressed that something he has never done is “sacrificing something that I wanted for the sake of making the movie commercial.”

Another aspect that you have mentioned is that she is always the operator of her films because he doesn't see “anything” on the monitor and he finds it “much more fun to find things, try out with the camera and see what can be done”.

“Making dreams come true is not easy, being aware that dreams are like a balloon, that there are many people who want to puncture the balloon”, has added.

These meetings framed within the program talents of relevance which TAI has been developing for years and has already brought to its classrooms figures of the stature of David Lynch, David Fincher, Bong Joon Ho, John Waters, Spike jonze, Julie Delpy, François Ozon o Juan Carlos Fresnadillo, among many others.