Press Release from SGO

Madrid, Spain, 21 July 2009: SGO, one of the leading European developers of high-end solutions for the post production and broadcast markets is delighted to announce that new feature film entitled MAP OF THE SOUNDS OF TOKYO (MAPA DE LOS SONIDOS DE TOKIO), which has just won a coveted technical artist Cannes award, was post produced using Mistika at Molinare in Madrid. It was written and directed by internationally acclaimed Director Isabel Coixet and produced by Jaume Roures, Javier Mendez and Bernat Elias. Director of Photography, Jean Claude Larrieu shot the film using the RED One Camera in 4K.

MAP OF THE SOUNDS OF TOKYO is about a solitary woman, Ryu whose fragile appearance is in stark contrast with the double life she leads, working nights at a Tokyo fish market and sporadically taking on jobs as a hit-woman. The film reveals how she is linked to a man who is unable to cope with the loss of his daughter, and is on a blind search for revenge that eventually leads to a tragic end.

Complete post production, which was achieved using Mistika at Molinare involved the entire post process from conforming; creation of digital effects; colour grading; Digital Intermediate (DI); as well as the coordination and supervision of the photochemical laboratory right through to delivery of the final version. Mistika's real-time play-out and 4K resolution, especially in relation to RED One Camera footage, enabled the Mistika artists to conform; colour grade and post produce directly from the R3D files with no need to convert the RED raw file footage in external tools.

Carlos Cervera, Production Manager working on the cinema project at Molinare confirmed: "Owing to the fact that Mistika enabled us to work directly with the RED raw files meant that our colour grading time was significantly reduced by three weeks and we were way ahead of schedule. Mistika, with its versatility and efficiency, delivered the results in our time demanding world of cinema post production." The post team at Molinare benefited from Mistika's impressive functionality and remarkable speed for this project especially with regard to Mistika's ability to handle RED raw data files in 4K in real-time.

What differentiates Mistika from other systems at the moment is that it enables editing, grading and compositing direct from RED format files, natively in real-time, without importing, processing or conversion. In addition, considerable disk space is saved as a result of not having to convert RED file formats into large DPX files. This in turn has a definite knock-on effect, by also reducing production time and thereby increasing RED and Mistika's efficiency to work in synchronisation together on projects. Mistika's seamless integration between timeline-based editing, conforming, visual effects, advanced colour grading, restoration, infinite layer compositing and advanced stereoscopic 3D toolset all in one post production system is also. Unique. Its truly open architecture enables easy file exchange and storage-sharing with other systems is fully parallel and GPU optimised, resulting in real-time performance including colour grading 4K DPX and RED R3D formats.

SGO will be partnering with HP at IBC this year at the RAI Convention Centre in Amsterdam (www.ibc.org). Be sure to see the magic of Mistika at Stand C30, Hall 7. To witness Mistika in action at IBC this year, email marketing@sgo.es to reserve your place to view its RED and other data workflows, developing stereoscopic 3D toolset and advanced colour grading power.

Director, Coixet has also made notable documentaries on current issues, such as INVISIBLES, about Doctors without Borders; a Panorama selection at the 2007 Berlin Film Festival, and VIAJE AL CORAZON DE LA TORTURA (JOURNEY TO THE HEART OF TORTURE), filmed in Sarajevo during the Balkan war, which won a prize at the October 2003 edition of the Human Rights Film Festival. Her latest film, Elegy, based on Philip Roth's novel "The Dying Animal", starring Penelope Cruz, Sir Ben Kingsley and Dennis Hopper, was presented at the 58th Berlin International Film Festival.

MAP OF THE SOUNDS OF TOKYO will be released for public viewing at cinema circuits from 22 August 2009. To view a trailer of the film, please visit the official website: www.mapofthesoundsoftokyo.com

CREDITSTitle: MAP OF THE SOUND OF TOKYODirector & Writer: ISABEL COIXETDirector of Photography: JEAN CLAUDE LARRIEU (A.F.C.)Camera: RED ONE CAMERAProducer: JAUME ROURESExecutive Producer: JAVIER MENDEZLine Producer: BERNAT ELIASPost Production Company: MOLINAREPost Production System: SGO MISTIKAPost Production Producer: CARLOS CERVERAColour grading: PAULA MORONFX and postproduction Supervisor: FERRAN PIQUER