Albert Einstein and the Nobel Prize

Introduction

A genius is not somebody who learns quickly or has a high IQ. Geniuses invent new ways of thinking and often improve discoveries. Albert Einstein was a famous scientist and has made a large impact on modern science (Mohun, 2004). Einstein started off as an unknown scientist in a patent office in Bern, but soon became one of the world’s leading scientists after writing several revolutionary scientific papers in 1905, the year which was later known as Annus Mirabilis (Na, 1996). The Nobel Prize has made the award-winning scientists known to the public. In 1921, Einstein received the Physics Nobel Prize for his discovery of the Law of the Photoelectric Effect. This report will be looking …show more content…

The Photoelectric Effect, which won the Nobel Prize in 1921, helped scientists develop many new inventions, such as solar cells and telecommunication networks. According to the Nobel Prize website Einstein is the most popular Physics Nobel Laureate in the world. He became famous due to his discovery of the two revolutionary Theories of Relativity. When Einstein won the Nobel Prize, it made him even more known to the general population. Einstein’s work still today inspires scientists and his work is often the foundation for many inventions and discoveries. Einstein’s work helped improve ways of displaying light and also research in Nuclear Physics. There is much more to explore about the emission of neutrons and electrons. For example, atoms are made up of quarks, but it is debatable if these quarks are made up of something even smaller. Otherwise, the structure of quarks and how they behave requires further research. This connects with Einstein, because he was one of the founders of the Quantum Physics. M. Ley, the author of this report, will aim to do more research on Quantum Physics and the field’s connection with Albert Einstein’s work. Albert Einstein has also created more than two Theories, so the author wants to investigate and understand some of Einstein’s other less famous, but still important theories. Albert Einstein is a good example for the impact for the 113 year old tradition of the Nobel Prize, which still has a huge influence on our lives