Skim is a PDF reader and note-taker for OS X. It is designed to help you read and annotate scientific papers in PDF, but is also great for viewing any PDF file. Skim requires OS X 10.10 or higher.

Features

Viewing PDFs

Adding and editing notes

Highlighting important text, including one-swipe highlight modes

Making "snapshots" for easy reference

Navigation using table of contents or thumbnails, with visual history

View all your notes and highlights

Convenient reading in full screen

Giving powerful presentations, with built-in transitions

Handy preview of internal links

Focus using a reading bar

Magnification tool

Smart cropping tools

Extensive AppleScript support

Bookmarks

Saving passwords in Keychain

Export notes as text

Automatic download of remote PDFs

Support for Apple Remote Control

Interaction with LaTeX, SyncTeX, and PDFSync

Integration with BibDesk and other third party applications

Spotlight support

Highly customizable

And much more...

See All Activity >

License

BSD License

Follow Skim

Skim Web Site

You Might Also Like

The Most Powerful Software Platform for EHSQ and ESG Management

Addresses the needs of small businesses and large global organizations with thousands of users in multiple locations.

Choose from a complete set of software solutions across EHSQ that address all aspects of top performing Environmental, Health and Safety, and Quality management programs.

Rate This Project

Login To Rate This Project

User Ratings

4.6 out of 5 stars

★★★★★

★★★★

★★★

★★

★

86

11

3

0

5

ease 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 4 / 5

features 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 4 / 5

design 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 4 / 5

support 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 4 / 5

User Reviews

Very useful and delicate app!

Excellent PDF reader, really well done and with sound scripting support (which is much appreciated), thank you!

Irritated by Adobe Reader and unable to afford the full Adober suite anymore, I saw Skim recommended for academics like me who have to review lots of PDFs. Great for that purpose! No complaints...praise to the coders!

Great

I LOVE Skim, but version 1.6.9 has a bug: it places an annoying black rectangle over the part of page containing an error, which remains there after correcting and after quitting Skim. So I re-installed 1.6.8 and all is well! Thank you for your (usually faultless) work! Much appreciated.

Read more reviews >

Additional Project Details

Operating Systems

Mac

Languages

French, Dutch, Italian, English, German, Spanish, Russian

Intended Audience

Science/Research, Education

User Interface

Cocoa (MacOS X)

Programming Language

Objective C

Related Categories

Objective C Image Viewers, Objective C Scientific Engineering, Objective C PDF Software, Objective C PDF Readers, Objective C Note-Taking App

Registered

2007-03-28