WHO: Fatally Yours

MEMBERS:

Billy Fisher (Vocals)

Keith Thompson (Bass/Vocals)

Christian Rivera (Guitar)

Chuck Moore (Guitar/Backing Vocals)

Justin Posner (Drums)

WHERE: Baltimore, MD, USA

ABOUT: Since their beginnings in 2012, Fatally Yours has independently released two EPs that gained praise throughout the Baltimore music scene, as well as airplay on Baltimore’s WIYY 98 Rock, with their songs “Exit Sign,” their debut EP’s title track, “Every Moment,” and their latest single, “Damn Your Eyes.”

Fatally Yours has toured from New York to Los Angeles, and has shared the stage with major label acts such as Alice in Chains, Jane’s Addiction, Pop Evil, Coheed and Cambria, Circa Survive, Trapt, Candlebox, Saliva, Young Guns, Big Wreck, Taproot, and Adam Gontier (Three Days Grace), and they have built lasting relationships with some great companies such as Coldcock Whiskey, Get’m Get’m, and Ernie Ball.

The band is now taking a fresh approach and steadily releasing new music to follow up 2013’s Every Moment, an effort which was spearheaded with the recent release of their highly anticipated and highly praised single, “Damn Your Eyes.” Fatally Yours is slated to release brand new music throughout 2017 and take their show on the road, culminating with a performance at the 2017 Maryland State Fair, sharing the stage with Grammy Award winners, Halestorm.

For Fatally Yours, 2017 and beyond will be a new musical journey, with the sky’s limits as the goal to reach.

Let Guitarist Christian Rivera fill you in!

What would you say that your band has to offer that is different from what is out there?

Great question. I’d have to say honest, sincere music. It’s really hard to come by in our genre these days when virtually all of the other Hard Rock and Metal acts out there are using backing tracks, samples, and other gimmicks. Conversely, all of our songs start on an acoustic guitar and are built from there, and what you see is what you get. Doing it this way also makes it a breeze to strip the songs back down and play them acoustically. I feel like we’re carving out a niche with our music that’s bridging the gap between a few genres, especially with new stuff that we’re working on!

What would you say is the essence behind your band, Fatally Yours?

The true essence of our band is really just five guys who have a true sense of passion for the art they love so dearly, getting up and just leaving it all on the stage each and every time they play.

How do you compete in today’s market?

Two words: great songwriting. You can only get so far on a certain look or a certain gimmick. But you cannot deny a great song.

Describe your music. What do you want it to convey?

Our music is extremely raw and sincere, with lyrical content that covers topics such as love, death, addiction, and coping with personal demons. Our bass player, Keith, has written all of the lyrics up to this point, and he really bares his soul to anyone who is willing to lend their ear.

Define some of the goals for the band.

Our goals include personal and professional growth, further honing our craft and becoming the best musicians we can be, and growing our audience and sharing our music with as many people possible. We’re happiest when we’re taking our show on the road, and I know I can speak for the rest of the guys when I say we’d love to take Fatally Yours to the far corners of the earth.

Anything else you would like to add?

Yes, I’d like to thank you for the opportunity to chat about the band, and I’d like to thank your readers for giving us a chance and checking us out!

CONTACT: