“Go find your passion.”

This is probably the most frequently doled out piece of career/life advice. And it’s a shame.

It’s a shame because it’s become such a watered down concept. So, I think people vaguely understand that you should find work you don’t hate—even if only for the basic reason that life gets miserable very quickly if you’re spending the majority of your waking hours doing work you don’t like for people you don’t like and a company you don’t care about.

Yes, everyone should avoid work they don’t enjoy.

But there’s a detail hidden in this common piece of advice that people miss…

If you have any aspirations to be an expert, thought leader, successful entrepreneur, or top executive—basically, if you want to have a kick-ass career—there’s literally no choice. You’re either going to spend the time now figuring out exactly what keeps you awake at night and gets you up every morning, or you’re always going to fall short in your expectations for your future career.

That’s not a prediction. That’s a promise.

The hard truth is that if you don’t figure out what you feel compeled to do—what you were put on this planet to do—you will wind up doing something you’re sorta kinda interested in or good at, you’ll make a living, and that’ll be the extent of it.

Now notice, I didn’t say everyone needs to pursue their utmost passions, or else it’s doom and gloom. If you’re goal is to become a senior manager, or run a local “solopreneur” business, or doing some freelance and consulting work to pay the bills so you can spend most of your time engaging in hobbies that you don’t wish to monetize, then maybe you truly don’t need to go through the crazy-hard work of finding that thing you feel absolutely, totally born to do. It’s a “nice-to-have,” not a “must-have,” for you.

But, if you’re reading this and you aspire to be a leading expert, inventor, top executive, news-making entrepreneur—if you have a strong urge to be at the top of the game in whatever industry, community, etc. you’re passionate about—you better be damn prepared to find your passion. And you better be prepared to chase after it hard.

Whatever excuse you’re coming up with in your head right now about why you can’t or why it’s hard or why I’m wrong…I’d ask you to take a deep look at why you’re resisting the idea so much.

Is it because you’re scared you’ll never find it?

It it because you’re afraid you’ll fail?

Do you think you don’t have what it takes to become the best?

If you can answer those questions honestly and still think I’m wrong, come talk to me. I’m confident that I can find a workaround.

But if I’ve got your buy-in, then it’s time for you to get real and do the hard research and work to figure out what it is that totally drives you. There’s no magic bullet—finding your passion is often a long-term game of trial and error. Trust your instincts and let yourself be drawn toward whatever it is your drawn toward. Then, test, test, test. Meet with people who are doing things similar to what you want to be doing. Ask them a lot of questions. Shadow them for a day. Watch and read inspiring stories about experts in the space you really want to get into. Study the people who have your dream job.

Then, put what you learn into practice.

One day at a time, one decision at a time.

Because they eventually build up to a career worth building, and a life worth living.