If you’ve ever visited a friend or loved one who is terminally ill and not very responsive, you may wonder whether your visits make a difference.

You may think: “I don’t feel like I am doing anything.” … “The person is asleep, or falls asleep, during my visit. Should I wake them? Should I stay?” … “What should I be doing?” … “Am I helping?” or “What should I say to the person?”

Your presence does make a difference. It can be difficult to be with someone who is terminally ill; it isn’t always clear what to do, or say. Intention is everything. The person will sense your tone, pace of the visit and more. If your visit is intended to make the person feel encouraged, cared about, or put a smile on his or her face, the person will sense it.

Below are several helpful suggestions about how to prepare for a visit and ideas to guide you during the visit:

It’s so important to make sure you are in a place of peace before the visit. If you don’t feel calm, peaceful and centered, take some time to quiet yourself before entering the person’s home or room.

Always approach the person slowly and quietly so as not to startle them.

Introduce yourself with a quiet voice. “Hi, it’s your niece, Jane. I would like to sit with you for a while.”

If you want, hold the person’s hand. Start by telling the person what you are doing. “Mary, I am going to hold your hand now.” Another option is to put the person’s hand on top of yours. That way if the person does not like touch, they can pull away.

If the person has a book or newspaper by their bed, read it aloud.

If the person appears to be in and out of sleep, that is okay. They will know they are not alone.

Although it’s natural to be concerned about what you’re going to say, don’t worry so much about the words. The main thing is that your message comes from the heart. It’s also important to remember to stop talking at times and simply listen to the person if he or she is able to communicate.

Here are a couple of tips to help you keep the visit authentic: