Video Game Reviews

Title: Rygar: The Legendary Adventure

Review rating: **1/2

Platform/console: Playstation2

Release date: November 2002

Genre: Role-playing/action

Players allowed: 1

ESRB rating: T (blood, gore, violence)

Production company: Tecmo

Stomp, tackle, lift, grapple and attack enemies in mid-air in this exciting role-playing adventure that has familiar controls, challenging bosses and environments. Great graphics and music. Don’t hit start to get past the beginning sequence! Watch the excellent graphics and music pull you into the story which involves ancient Roman and Egyptian worlds that involves mystical characters including Argus.

The battles would be too great without your Diskarmor, battle shield of the Gods which shields as well as attacks enemies sometimes from long distances. You can get big air on the jumps and you can’t fall off ledges and cliffs. Don’t worry about falling debris or hitting walls with your weapons – you receive no damage. Whenever you feel vibration on your analog controller you know a big monster is coming. The bosses are fairly easy once you know their weaknesses. Your powers will advance to include summons to use a orberus (dog that burns enemies) or siren (freezes enemies) when your basic skills and weapons aren’t enough. Camera control seriously lacks here as you really have now way to look around at your environment and see elements that are mostly off screen especially when you get to a stopping point, like knowing where to slide under a space to advance.

You can access the One World mode when you clear a stage. This stage evaluates play time and your combo attack moves. You can also visit the Gallery and access the theater, music and pictures. The on screen help text will help you with the problem solving elements of the game, but pay special attention when you see location text so you’ll know where you’re going when you access the map. The lead character’s campy voice doesn’t leave much of an impression but the song “Wish” by Izzy Cooper, a 26 year old soprano singer, is a welcome element of this satisfying game.

Review by Michael Siebenaler