"Septembers of Shiraz" one of my most favorite movies, is a touchy example of the 'Summary' stated above. You can say, it has forced me to realize this real life truth.

This movie is a dramatization version of a famous award winning novel:

"The Septembers of Shiraz (2007) is a critically acclaimed debut novel by Iranian American author 'Dalia Sofer.' It narrates the lives of a well-to-do Iranian family during and after the Iranian revolution which additionally overthrew the Shah and ushered in the Islamic republic."

................(Wikipedia)

Directed by 'Wayne Blair', Screenplay from 'Hanna Weg' and mind blowing appearances of the stars like 'Salma Hayek' & 'Adrien Brody' a perfect 'Thriller' was released on June 24, 2016 in the USA.

From my point of view there is nothing so much there for saying or reviewing rather than watching the movie full length at a time. I'm pretty much sure that it will thrill you away. Here I'm just pointing at some major issues relevance with this film.

It's Plot reflects that - While ruling Parties were marginalized or outlawed, Social and political protest was often met with censorship, surveillance, or harassment. Along with illegal detention and torture were common.

Adrien Brody and Salma Hayek are none-too-convincing Tehran Jews caught up in the Iranian Revolution in this adaptation of Dalia Sofer's bestseller - "Septembers of Shiraz".

Jeweler Isaac (Adrien Brody) is a self-made man who considers himself apolitical, he and his wife, Farnez (Salma Hayek), got rich catering to the royals and their cronies. Their teenage son, Parviz (Jamie Ward), is packed off to boarding school in the U.S., in effect fleeing the political turmoil like many of the privileged Iranian class. But his parents are reluctant to leave their homeland with their younger daughter, Shirin (Ariana Molkara), delaying that decision until too late.

"Indeed, the revolution aroused fears among Iranian Jews and around two thirds of the community left the country."

................ as per an International survey

"An additional information - At least 13 Jews have been executed in Iran since the Islamic revolution, most of them for either religious reasons or their connection to Israel. For example, in May 1998, Jewish businessman Ruhollah Kakhodah-Zadeh was hanged in prison without a public charge or legal proceeding, apparently for assisting Jews to emigrate."

Finally I want to add, out of the many catastrophes that the Jewish people have been through during the revolution, "Septembers of Shiraz"s story was one of the first with a happy ending.

As an exceptional movie lover - watch it! Realize it!

3 out of 7 found this helpful. Was this review helpful? Sign in to vote.

Permalink