Drøbak is situated on the Oslo Fjord, south of the city of Oslo. It belongs to the municipality of Frogn in the county of Akerhus. Frogn and several neighboring municpalities also make up a region known as Follo.

If you search for directions from Oslo to Drøbak in Google Maps, you’ll not only see Drøbak’s location relative to Oslo, but you might also notice that Drøbak is at the narrowest point of the Oslo Fjord. This has been very important for the town’s history, for two reasons. First, Drøbak traditionally functioned as the winter port for Oslo when the innermost parts of the fjord would freeze, but the stretch south of Drøbak typically remained free of ice. Second, the narrowest point of the fjord is a natural place for military defense against naval invasion. For this reason, a large fort, Oscarsborg Fortress, is located on one of the islands just outside of Drøbak. This fortress is best known for the sinking of the German battleship Blücher during WWII, which delayed the German invasion by the few hours necessary to allow evacuation of the king, government and parliament of Norway (as well as the Norwegian gold reserves) from Oslo.

Oscarsborg Fortress is now a tourist attraction open to the public and is an excellent place for an outing on a sunny afternoon. (I’ll save further info on that for a later posting.)

The current town of Drøbak consists of both the”Old Town” (Gamle Drøbak) and its more modern adjacent settlements. According to Statistics Norway, as of 1 Januar 2011, 12 720 people lived within the town of Drøbak while only another 2094 lived in the rest of Frogn municipality.

The quaint Old Town of Drøbak is largely made up of old wooden buildings and houses clustering on the rugged hillside along the fjord. Indeed, Drøbak is derived from the expression for “steep hill” in Norwegian.

Our house will be located up one of the steep slopes just outside the Old Town. It’s about a five minute walk from our house down to the main square of the Old Town and about ten minutes going back (uphill). There is regular bus service to and from Oslo twice an hour all day and evening and express busses running about every 10 minutes during rush hour. In the summer months, a ferry runs once a day to and from Oslo for tourists.