Ruben Studdard’s marriage has been on shaky grounds for a while.

The second season American Idol winner, 33, and his wife of three years, Surata Zuri McCants, have called it quits, according to reports.

The two met in October 2006, when Studdard was signing CDs at an Atlanta Walmart. Attracted to McCants, the singer followed her to the store’s toy department and requested her phone number

Ruben Studdard, Surata Zuri McCants Image:

Michelle "Bombshell" McGee says she thinks wearing Nazi regalia does not constitute racism, according to reports.

"I don’t believe it’s racism at all," she allegedly said in an interview with etalk, a Toronto TV show.

"Anti-Semitism? Yes. If that was the intention of putting the costume on."

When it was suggested to McGee that anti-Semitism is a form of racism, the model is reported to have responded: "That’s your view on that. I don’t see it that way."

It is claimed she went on to say: "In a twisted type of way, I guess Sandra should be thankful that I did come forward and let her know that her husband did cheat on her."

The model, who was in Toronto to film an advertisement for a “pro-adultery” website, defended her decision.

Michelle "Bombshell" McGee believes cheating is commonplace, saying "men are made to spread their seed".

The tattooed stripper – whose affair with Sandra Bullock’s husband Jesse James ended the couple’s marriage – said women need to accept their male partners are likely to be unfaithful.

She said: "I think men are made to spread their seed. Women need to accept that. If you’re going to be married to somebody, you need to know that men are not meant to be with one woman. I think you can totally love your spouse and still sleep with other women. That urge will always be there if you’re a man. I believe you can love your wife 100 per cent and still stray."

McGee, 32, said she feels bad for Speed star Bullock, 45, who has now filed for divorce from James, 41.

Kalie Machado, Britney Spears’ former assistant who leaked these pictures last week, says Britney kept a shrine dedicated to Kevin Federline in her house and regularly cried uncontrollably after he left her. Britney kept her wedding dress in a case on the wall in the entrance of her Malibu house. She kept all Kevin’s clothes and she would wander into his wardrobe looking at them. You could say it was a shrine to him. She was incredibly sad and lonely while I was with her. I could tell she desperately wanted him back. She’d burst into tears when he wouldn’t return her calls. She’d cry at night a lot.”