About Indecision: Combining the styles of Steely Dan, Little Feat and the Grateful Dead into a unique and original sound, Indecision has delighted jam band audiences for over 30 years. Having begun their journey together while still in high school, the band possesses a musical relationship rarely seen in the world of music. Playing both original and cover songs, each is very much rooted in the exclusive Indecision sound.

Indecision made their official nightclub debut in 1984 at the Mineshaft Cellar in Charlottesville, Virginia. However, they began performing together in 1980 while attending high school, and in 1983 they began rehearsing regularly as "Indecision." Aaron Evans (guitar and vocals), David Ibbeken (guitar and vocals), Craig Dougald (drums and vocals), Shawn McCrystal (bass), initially formed Indecision in Charlottesville, VA.

For the first several years, Indecision played primarily in Virginia, the Carolinas and the Washington DC area, including the infamous Bayou nightclub, during which time the band members attended college. By late 1989, Indecision was touring nationally and appeared with many well known groups and musicians: The Neville Brothers, Phish, Widespread Panic, Blues Traveler, Dave Matthews Band, Jorma Kaukonen, Paul Barrere, Danny Gatton, Hootie and the Blowfish and The White Animals.

Doug Wanamaker (keyboards and vocals) performed with Indecision from time to time for about a year prior to officially joining in 1989. Chris White (acoustic guitar and vocals) also began sitting in with Indecision as early as 1987, and officially joined the band at the beginning of 1990 to complete Indecision's composition as they are today. After many grueling years living on the road, Indecision mutually decided to disband in 1993 shortly after the release of their third studio release “Reservoir.” After a period though, the band played a few reunion shows, and has since played a few shows each year.

Live recording is generally authorized by the band, in keeping with the long tradition held by many of the “jam bands,” as each show is truly a unique experience. In addition to the many live recordings accumulated over the years, Indecision has also released several studio projects over the years. The first, titled “Indecision,” was released on vinyl in 1986. The second, titled “Ponder Yonder,” was released in 1991 and a third, titled “Reservoir”, was released in 1993. In 2004, “The Great Road” was released. All recordings except “Indecision” are available for purchase in either CD or download formats.

About Sarah White:

Sarah White (animal): female of the human persuasion; songwriter and purveyor of guitar sounds; a subtle lyricist with a haunting voice; cunning and creative, works and plays well with others in various situational constructs.

She is a tremendous songwriter who might resemble some kind of Hazel Dickens/Patti Smith/Cat Power love child. She's released records on Jagjaguwar and Antenna Farm and won Best Song at the 2007 Mountain Stage NewSong Contest. Her 2006 album White Light became a cult favorite for its eclectic blend of driving folk-rock, sorrowful country ballads and experimental, personal narrative songs -- the trifecta that defines her lengthening body of work.

These days Sarah performs solo or with her band, a a dynamic hybrid of pop, honky tonk and post-punk that owes as much to Gun Club and X as Wilco and Lucinda Williams.

Sarah has performed with or opened for Merle Haggard, Justin Townes Earle, Earl Scruggs, Will Oldham, Dave Matthews Band Caravan and was named 2013 Best Songwriter in her hometown of Charlottesville, the town invented by Thomas Jefferson."

About Sarah White: