Released

May 9, 2006

Genre

Traditional pop music

Artist

Jo Stafford

Label

Sepia Records

Similar

This Is Jo Stafford, At the Supper Club, V‑Disc Recordings - Jo Stafford, At the Supper Club Part II, Songs for Sunday Evening

Sincerely Yours is a 2006 compilation album of songs recorded by American singer Jo Stafford. It was released on May 9, 2006 on the Sepia Records label.

Contents

Track listing

Songs

References

The "Hollywood House Party" included on the album was a special release of Columbia Records in 1955. It was recorded at a party Stafford and husband Paul Weston gave at their home. Columbia had produced several new phonographs in 1955; part of their sales promotion for them was to give buyers of units valued at $100 or more the Columbia House Party album, which was not available any other way. One side of the album featured the party with celebrities at the Weston's California home, while the other featured Mitch Miller's New York City party. Those who attended the Weston's Hollywood house party and are heard on this album include Liberace, Dave Brubeck and Frankie Laine.

Track listing

Travelling Salesman Polka

Prisoner of Love's Song

Love, Mystery and Adventure

Juanita

Sweet and Low

As You Desire Me

Blue Moon

Without My Lover (Bolero Gaucho)

Blue Skies

If It Takes Me All My Life

What Good Am I Without You

The Christmas Blues

Adi-Adios-Amigo (Il Passerotto)

Let Me Hear You Whisper

Nearer My Love to Me

Darling! Darling! Darling!

It Is Springtime

Each Step of the Way

The Lord Is My Shepherd

Please Don't Go So Soon (Wenn Die Liebe Will)

I Cover the Waterfront

Dancing on the Ceiling

Ain't Cha-Cha Comin' out Tonight?

Arriverderci, Darling

Cripple Creek/Goin' Down the Road

Mona Lisa (Sung in Italian)

Hey Ho, Anybody Home/Swing Low Sweet Chariot

Swanee River

Nice Work If You Can Get It

Camille

Songs

1Travelling Salesman (with Tex Williams)Tex Williams2:53

2Prisoner Of Love's Song (with Red Ingle)Red Ingle2:59

3Love - Mystery And Adventure (feat Tex Williams - Red Ingle - Gordon MacRae & David Hughes)Gordon MacRae - Tex Williams - Red Ingle - 2:13

References

Sincerely Yours (Jo Stafford album) Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA