The ex-EastEnders beauty, 24 – who played Kelly Taylor – collapsed in grief as she read floral tributes left at the scene of the murder.

Brooke held her head in her hands as her boyfriend, ex-EastEnders star Ray Panthaki, 29, consoled her.

She was “devastated”, her publicist revealed last night.

Ben, 16, died in the early hours of Sunday after a fight broke out at a pub in Islington, north London.

One of his friends told yesterday how the teenager had made a desperate phone call minutes before he died.

The teenager said: “Ben called me and just said: ‘Help.’ He sounded really scared and then it just clicked off.”

Another said there had been a fight in a pub called Shillibeers.

“I don’t think that Ben was involved at first but then it got out of hand and was in the streets,” he added. “I think Ben tried to run away but he was chased.

I heard someone shout: ‘Get him! Get him!’ and then he was stabbed. I think he was stabbed in the back and chest, and there was blood everywhere.”

James Jobe, 16, who went to Holloway School with Ben, said: “Everybody liked him and he was never in any trouble.”

A tearful pal, who did not want to be named, added: “He has appeared in The Bill once. I think he was going to be in EastEnders like his sister.”

Another friend, Geo O’Reilly, 19, said: “He was a nice guy and I think he was just in the wrong place at the wrong time. I can’t imagine him being involved in trouble.”

Dozens of family and friends arrived at the scene yesterday. Among the mourners was Birds Of A Feather star Linda Robson, 50, who laid flowers.

Ben was taken by ambulance to the Whittington hospital where he died, despite the efforts of hospital staff, police said.

Last night two youths had been arrested and were being quizzed.

Tragic Ben is the 17th teenager to die violently in London this year.

Tributes immediately started pouring in on social-networking site Facebook.

Bob Hamlyn, headteacher of Holloway School, said: “He comes from a lovely family and I am shocked for them. I just want this to stop for everyone’s sake. It’s too many now, 17.”

Brooke was a cast member in EastEnders from 2002 to 2004 and shared a lesbian kiss with Michelle Ryan, 24. Boyfriend Ray Panthaki played Ronny Ferreira in the series.

A policeman at the family home in Islington said the family were too distraught to comment.