EastEnders star Brooke Kinsella was in mourning last night after her 16-year-old brother was knifed to death.

Model student Ben Kinsella was killed in the street as he was chased by a mob of baying youths from a fight outside a bar at 2am.

The easy-going teenager, known by his friends as Gentle Ben, had been celebrating the end of his GCSE exams.

He was the 17th youngster to be murdered in London this year.

Brooke, 24, who played Kelly Taylor in the TV soap, was "devastated".

She was joined by other EastEnders stars at the murder scene in Holloway, North London.

Brook Kinsella

Ben's pal Gio Reilly, 19, said: "The gang was shouting 'Get him!' He was in the wrong place at the wrong time."

Two youths of 16 arrested in connection with the stabbing were today released on bail.

Another friend, David Dugdale, 17, revealed that Ben's last words were a heart-rending cry for help as he was hunted down by the mob of baying youths.

Horrified David revealed: "He called me on his mobile. All he said was 'Help, help! I'm being chased'

"He sounded petrified. Then I heard a click and the line went dead. I didn't even get a chance to ask him where he was.

"It's awful, he didn't stand a chance. I wish I could have helped him."

Yesterday more than 50 grieving mourners, including 30 youngsters, gathered to lay flowers at the murder scene.

One friend said: "Ben was a true role model.

"He loved life and made everyone he knew happy.

"We all looked up to him. He never shouted and never upset anyone. He was so calm we called him Gentle Ben. I've never seen him in an argument, let alone a fight."

Ben's parents George, 49, and Deborah, 46, who live in a £3million home in Islington, North London, were joined at the scene by Brooke, 24, and her boyfriend, former EastEnders actor Ray Panthaki.

Taxi driver George and Deborah, who have a second daughter, were too upset to comment.

Brooke, who played Kelly Taylor in EastEnders from 2002 to 2004, said she was "devastated". She has pulled out of a production in East London she was due to join today.

Also paying tribute were EastEnders' actors Joe Swash and Charlie Hawkins - who play Micky and Darren Miller - Birds of a Feather star Linda Robson and her son Louis, 15, who was a friend of Ben.

Ben, who has appeared as an extra in ITV's The Bill, was celebrating finishing his GCSEs with friends when a row flared outside Shillibeers bar, in Holloway, North London.

Within minutes, around 50 youngsters had gathered. Tragic Ben went outside the bar but got split up from his mates.

Partygoer Gio Reilly, 19, said: "A lot of the crowd had been drinking. They were shouting and pushing each other. Soon, punches were flying all over the place. One guy was bottled. I saw Ben come outside. Then I saw him running away from the crowd and a few guys chasing him. He shouted for help.

"The others were yelling 'Get him! Get him!' I heard later he'd been stabbed.

"He was in the wrong place at the wrong time. I can't imagine him ever being involved in any trouble. Now I can't believe he's gone. People wanted to help, but were too scared."

A teenager who saw Ben after the attack said: "His shirt was pulled up and I could see red marks all over his stomach.

"Paramedics were putting an oxygen mask on him. They were trying to stop the flow of blood and revive him."

Ben was taken to nearby Whittington Hospital but died later.

The youngster had just finished studying at Holloway School where he was described as a model student.

He was expecting good GCSEs, excelled at art and had also attended drama college.

Since leaving school, Arsenal fan Ben had been working in an internet cafe as an IT tutor.

He had already set up a graphic design business with friends.

On his MySpace website page, he wrote: "Art is my passion. Used to be playin' football but that dream died when I started breakin' bones/bad times."

Describing himself, he wrote: "Down to earth/easy going/get on with just about everyone. I'm a nice guy. I'm not flash/backstabber/mugger.

"Quite funny? Ask my friends/always tryin' 2 entertain/make people larff."

Ben's former head teacher, Bob Hamlyn, appealed for youngster to stop using knives.

He said: "Seventeen youngsters killed this year is 17 too many. For everyone's sake, the stabbing must stop now. Put the knives away."

He was backed by the mum of Harry Potter actor Rob Knox, 18, stabbed to death outside a bar in Sidcup, Kent, last month.

Sally Knox said: "I can't believe this has happened again. How many young people have to die before these killings stop?"

London mayor Boris Johnson, who lives a 10-minute walk from the murder scene, said: "I deeply regret that another young person has lost their life to violence."

Police said: "Two 16-year-olds have been arrested. We have an open mind about motive."

16 teen victims

Jan 1: Henry Bolombi, 17, Edmonton.

Jan 5: Faridon Alizada, 18, Erith.

Jan 21: Boduka Mudianga, 18, Edmonton.

Jan 26: Fuad Buraleh, 19, Ealing.

Feb 19: Sunday Essiet, 15, Woolwich.

Feb 23: Tung Le, 17, Deptford.

FEB29: Ofiyke Nmezu, 16, Edmonton.

Mar 13: Michael Jones, 18, Edmonton.

Mar 14: Nicholas Clarke, 19, Brixton.

Mar 27: Devoe Roach, 17, Stamford Hill.

Mar 27: Amro Elbadawi, 14, Queen's Park.

May 3: Lyle Tulloch, 15, Peckham.

May 10: Jimmy Mizen, 16, Lee.

May 24: Rob Knox, 18, Sidcup.

MAY28: Sharmaarke Hassan, 17, Camden.

Jun 2: Arsema Dawit, 15, Waterloo.