'It's time to go back to acting': EastEnders star Brooke Kinsella talks about new BBC role after brother's murder

Fresh challenge: Brooke Kinsella stars in Missing with Pauline Quirke

Former EastEnders star Brooke Kinsella says she is ready to focus again on acting – more than 18 months after her brother Ben was stabbed to death.

The 26-year-old was speaking as she gathered with her family to toast their successful campaign to raise the minimum sentence for knife murder from 15 to 25 years.

And the bittersweet celebration last week came on the eve of Brooke’s first television role since her brother was killed by three teenagers outside a pub in Islington, North London, in June 2008.

Ben, 16, was stabbed 11 times in the incident. Now Brooke says the change in the law signals a fresh phase for her – although she has vowed to keep on campaigning.

‘This year marks the beginning of my recovery, I suppose,’ she said. ‘I’ve realised that I need to regain some kind of normality and start working again.

‘I wanted to make a difference and this [change in the law] is great. However, I need to begin healing myself.

‘Having spent a year-and-a-half looking after my family and keeping our campaign going, it’s only now that what’s happened has started to hit me.

‘So I’ve decided I need to take a little time to think about myself and focus on my career and do something that will really distract me and, maybe, put me on that path that’s going to make me feel a bit better.’

Brooke will star with Pauline Quirke in the daytime BBC1 drama Missing, which starts on March 15, playing the mother of a girl who has disappeared.

‘I thought it might be a very good outlet, almost like therapy if you like, to do something like that,’ she said.

‘It’s the first role I’d been up for since Ben. I had made the decision not to do much work because my passion was campaigning.

Back to the small screen: The actress starred as Kelly Smith - here she is seen with Michelle Ryan in a scene from a 2003 episode of EastEnders

'Not in vain': Ben was murdered outside a pub in North London, in June 2008

‘I did do a bit of theatre, but in terms of mainstream television and putting myself out there I just wasn’t ready.’

The actress is also about to join a week-long anti-knife crime tour of schools organised by Families Utd, whose members include relatives of stab victims Damilola Taylor, Jimmy Mizen, Rob Knox and David Idowu.

She hopes to get a million children to sign a pledge not to carry knives.

The tour is an indication of how her life has been transformed since the tragedy.

Gone are the blonde hair extensions, replaced by her more sober natural brown colouring.

Gone too are the carefree nights out she could once enjoy. And sadly, Brooke’s four-year relationship with actor Ray Panthaki broke down during the stress of the case.

Soon after Ben’s death, Brooke led a 500-strong march through London.

She lobbied the Government for stiffer sentencing and was made one of Gordon Brown’s crime-fighting ambassadors.

These days the actress spends much of her time in official meetings and is at No 10 once a month.

‘They joke that I should have my own bed there,’ she said. ‘Well, maybe I could have an office!’

But while the efforts of campaigning and the stresses of the seven-week trial of Ben’s murderers Jade Braithwaite, Michael Alleyne and Juress Kika have taken their toll, Brooke feels ready to be on TV again.

Although others campaigned, for the Kinsellas – mother Debbie, stepfather George, Brooke and her two sisters – Schedule 21 of the Criminal Justice Act will always be Ben’s law.

‘We’re so proud,’ Brooke said. ‘It means that Ben’s death wasn’t in vain. For a 16-year-old boy to have actually changed the laws of a nation, I think is amazing.’