Stabbed to death: Ben Kinsella, 16, was killed on a night out to celebrate the end of his GCSEs

The parents of Ben Kinsella yesterday came face to face with the three men accused of stabbing their 16-year-old son to death.

Ben's father George, 48, sobbed as Juress Kika, 18, Michael Alleyne, 18, and Jade Braithwaite, 19, appeared in court charged with murdering his son on Sunday, June 29, in Islington, North London.

Mr Kinsella watched the hearing at Highbury Corner Magistrates' Court in North London with his wife Deborah, 46, and their daughter Jade, 22. Former EastEnders star Brooke Kinsella, another of Ben's sisters, was said to be too distraught to attend.

As Kika and Alleyne appeared in the dock half a dozen men in a packed public gallery hurled abuse at them, shouting 'scumbag' and 'you're going to get it'. Braithwaite was allowed to appear separately.

Deputy District Judge Alan Jones also took the step of refusing to give out their addresses for fear their families could be subjected to reprisal attacks.

Scroll down for more

Tensions: Ben's parents Deborah and George and his sister Jade (right) were escorted by police as they left court

Accused: The three defendants charged with murdering Ben arrive at court

As they were led away by five prison officers at the end of the hearing, threats and abuse rang out in the courtroom.

The three, who are all from Islington, were remanded in custody until their next hearing at the Old Bailey on October 13.

Ben, an A-grade student and aspiring graphic designer, was killed in the early hours of Sunday morning near to his parents £2million home in Islington.

He had been out celebrating with a group of friends when they became caught up in a row in a pub which spilled out onto the street.

It is thought Ben was targeted because he had been acting as some kind of peacemaker and although he tried to run away, it is alleged he was ambushed by a gang of youths as he fled.

Tribute: Ben's sister, former soap star Brooke Kinsella who was not in court, has described his as a 'true angel with a heart of gold'

His friend, Louis Robson, 16, the son of Birds of a Feather actress Linda Robson cradled his body as he died.

It has since emerged he had 11 stab wounds and was attacked with four different weapons.

His actress sister, Brooke, 24, has called for the reintroduction of National Service to combat knife crime following his killing.

She declared violent boys should be made to channel their aggression in the armed forces because weapons amnesties were not tough enough.

Grief: The teenager's friends have left tributes and written on a road sign near his home

In an emotional statement days after his murder, she also begged teenagers to lay down their guns and weapons to avoid any more bloodshed.

'Now truly is the time to stand up and put an end to this. Please, please let us learn from Ben and every other child that has been stolen from us,' she said.

'We always knew Ben would make a special mark in this world and although this is in the worst possible circumstances, hopefully he will be the one that finally puts an end to this.'

A day later, the actress led hundreds of teenagers through London protesting against the ongoing violence.

Protest: Family and friends of the murdered GCSE pupil marched in London to demand an end to the violence

Ben was the 17th teenager to be murdered in the capital this year, despite attempts to cut down on gun and knife crime.

Kika and Alleyne were arrested late on Monday night at an address in the Chadwell Heath area, while Braithwaite was arrested in Bethnal Green on Tuesday.

Two 16-year-old men were arrested at the scene following the incident but were released without charge.

An 18-year-old man was arrested on Monday at an address in Islington and has been bailed to return to a London police station in mid-August pending further enquiries.

Making their point: Former EastEnders stars James Alexandrou and Ray Panthaki - who is also Brooke's boyfriend - in anti-knife crime t-shirts against knife crime