To the eyes of the world, Brooke Kinsella appeared to be coping admirably with the senseless murder of her brother Ben.

She was determined to make something positive out of his senseless death and seemed full of energy, drive and campaigning spirit.

But in private, the former EastEnders star was masking her heartache with booze binges and thoughts of suicide.

She would down 15 drinks on the trot and mull over how to kill herself so she could join her little brother in heaven.

Once she deliberately unstrapped her seatbelt hoping to die in a car crash.

Today, in a sensational interview, Brooke admits for the first time the secret drinking, binge-eating and dark thoughts which have plagued her since her 16-year-old brother was killed.

Ben was out celebrating the end of his GCSEs when, in a frenzied, motiveless attack, he was stabbed in a North London street by three thugs.

Fourteen months on, it is only now that Brooke is starting to believe her own life might be worth living again.

She is auditioning for a TV play, planning a weekend away with girlfriends in Marbella.

Brooke has also started taking pride in her appearance again. Her long blonde hair and carefully made-up face are a far cry from last year when she often looked haggard and drawn.

Back then her way of dealing with the grief was to throw herself into campaigning. She went on the Mirror's anti-knife march in London and met MPs to discuss how to tackle street crime.

But behind the scenes Brooke was fantasising about being with Ben again.

"There were times when I thought I'd get some tablets, red wine and a bottle of vodka and just do it," says 26-yearold Brooke, who has written a book, Why Ben?, about the ordeal.

"I thought, 'I can't ever see myself being happy again, I don't want to get married or have kids, I don't want a great acting job. I might as well give up now and do what will make me happy - be with Ben.' "I would drink to try to forget about it, then horrible thoughts would go through my head. I stopped wearing my seatbelt and would drive recklessly.

"I was at rock bottom. I would pick up a knife and think, 'How sharp is this? If I prick myself with it, how much will it hurt? What pain did Ben go through if it went all the way through him?' "But Ben's funeral made me realise I couldn't put my mum and dad or my two younger sisters, Jade and Georgia, through that again.

"I still have days when I don't want to go on. I don't think it will ever go away. Ben is 16 - I can't bear the thought of him being 'up there' on his own."

Brooke suffered depression and mood swings and vented most of her anger on her boyfriend of six years, Ray Panthaki, who played Ronnie Ferreira in EastEnders. During one dreadful row, she even came dangerously close to harming herself with a knife.

"It was an out-pouring of grief and it is still a blur," says Brooke. "It was midday, I hadn't even had a drink, and I remember picking an argument with Ray, which I do a lot because I can't take it out on my family.

"I was screaming at him. I kicked the wardrobe, which is still broken, and Ray was trying to calm me down. I was crying, 'You don't understand, my brother is dead, you'll never understand!' "I have just two knives in the kitchen - there was a time when I wouldn't have any in the house - and I picked up a long one with a wooden handle and tried to get into the bathroom.

"I don't know what I thought I was doing, but luckily Ray was there and he managed to take it and calm me down. I have never done anything like that since and I'm really ashamed.

"Ray loved Ben just as much as I did and he is just as heartbroken. I do say, 'You don't understand.' But that's not fair - he understands better than anyone.

"He has seen me go through every possible emotion and he's put up with me time and time again. It's made us a lot closer and I can only thank him. He's a saint for putting up with me."

With the shock of her brother's murder, Brooke, who is just 5ft 1in, stopped eating and let herself go. Then she began binge eating and drinking to ease the pain.

"In the first few weeks I only ate once every three days," she says. "I couldn't stomach food. I lost half a stone in a month and I looked as if I had aged 100 years.

"I stopped going to the gym or looking after myself. Then for a few months I slumped on the sofa and ate everything in sight.

"I felt this hole in my belly - which is never going to go away - and I tried to fill it with takeaways. I'd eat everything I could, feel great for 10 seconds then feel guilty. I would go out on a Friday and Saturday night and drink to blur the pain - shots, cocktails, vodka, anything.

"I'd have up to 15 drinks, maybe more. It would help for a while until I got home and then I would feel really angry and cry my eyes out. I would get out my Ben box, with his T-shirts inside, and smell them, sobbing, on the floor.

"The next day when I was hungover, not only was I depressed and grieving, but I would feel awful, too.

"I stopped all that at the time of the trial - I needed to be focused in court.

"It's only in the past two weeks that I have started going to the gym again, but it makes me feel shallow and vain. I think, 'Does it matter what I look like?' I have stopped drinking. I'm back to eight stone and I have some energy.

"In the last couple of weeks people have told me there seems to be some light in my eyes."

After Ben's death, Brooke swore she would never have a child of her own, but those feelings are changing.

She says: "I thought, 'I don't want to bring kids into this world to run the risk of losing them.' When I saw the pain in mum's eyes I thought I can't bear that.

"Also, I didn't want to live a long life to bring up kids. Then because my friends were all having babies I became very broody. I wanted to have a little boy. I was going to call him Ben.

"Now I realise I can't just have a baby because it would be good news for the family. It has to come in the right way. I can't click my fingers and replace Ben."

Writing her book has been therapeutic.

Brooke says: "I started writing it three months after he died because I couldn't talk to anybody. I would try to talk to Ben in my head but I would break down crying.

"Although it was so painful, I wanted to remember every detail. When I've got children I want them to read about Ben because they'll never get to know him."

Deliberately, there are no mugshots of her brother's jailed killers - Jade Braithwaite, 20, Michael Alleyne, 18, and Juress Kika, 19 - included in her book.

"I don't want to give them the satisfaction, or the notoriety," says Brooke, who is dreading the day they are released. "They'll only be in there for another 18 years. They'll be out when I'm 44. The time will fly by."

As well as acting, Brooke plans to open a drama school with Ray next year. And her campaigning against street crime will continue.

She is an ambassador for the Government, works with the Prince's Trust, and is involved with the charitable trust launched in Ben's name. So far, £60,000 has been raised and the family plan to open a youth centre near their home in Islington, North London.

The family's next hurdle is Ben's 18th birthday in October. Brooke says: "He was always looking forward to his 18th.

"It feels like yesterday that I saw Ben for the last time. He was smiling at work and I kissed him goodbye. My biggest fear is that my memories will fade.

"There are a couple of hours in the day when I don't think about him. Then I hate myself and think, 'How could you have forgotten him?' It is the most terrible pain.

"I wake up every day and think about him. And I know I'll do that for the rest of my life."

* Why Ben? A Sister's Story of Heartbreak and Love for the Brother She Lost by Brooke Kinsella (£7.99, Simon & Schuster) is out on Thursday .

Mirror's 5 demands

1 Give our police tools to catch knife thugs

2 Launch amnesty to bring in the blades

3 Medics must report treating stab victims

4 Teach all pupils that knives solve nothing

5 Texts and internet will help win battle