The Third Republic of France, in 69 years of sturdy life, has had 14 Presidents. Of these only five have served their full seven-year terms—Emile Loubet, Armand Falliéres, Raymond Poincaré, Gaston Dou-mergue. Jules Grévy. Six have resigned. Adolphe Thiers, Marshal MacMahon and Alexandre Millerand quit under political pressure. Jules Grévy tried a second term, left when his son-in-law was caught trafficking in Legion of Honor decorations. Casimir Périer got disgusted with his job. Paul Deschanel went crazy, tried to commit suicide by jumping out of a train, resigned. Two were assassinated: Sadi Carnot by an Italian anarchist in 1894, Paul Doumer by a Russian in 1932. Félix Faure died a natural death in office.

The office of President was created, oddly enough, by a monarchist bloc in 1875. They wanted a job which could easily be turned into a throne. Theoretically the President has great powers, actually none. He is elected to a seven-year term and can succeed himself, but only one President has tried. He is expected to be seen rather than heard. He plays host to foreign notables, receives ambassadors, launches ships, opens hospitals, unveils war monuments, throws parties for poor children, meddles not at all in politics. He gets $47,700 salary a year, an equal amount for expenses, has the Elysée Palace as a Paris home and the ancient royal château of Rambouillet for his summer residence. French wits call him the “prisoner of Marianne.” The last job an ambitious, up-&-coming French politician wants is the presidency.

Most likely to be M. le Président No. 6 to finish the full term of office is the incumbent, Albert Lebrun, whose seven years as “prisoner of Marianne” end May 10. Last week, the Cabinet of Premier Edouard Daladier set the date for the next election. On April 5 the members of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate will, according to tradition, travel to Versailles, eleven miles from Paris, constitute themselves into a National Assembly and, in the Palace of Louis XIV, elect by majority vote the 15th President of the Republic.

Since it is considered indelicate to “run” for the Presidency, no man ever becomes an openly avowed candidate. Political tradition dictates that the President be chosen from the presiding officers of the Senate or Chamber. Jules Jeanneney, the Senate President, is 74 years old, however, and Edouard Herriot, the Chamber President, has decided not to allow his name to be put forward. French political observers believed last week that the best bet was a re-election of “Papa” Lebrun.