King Edward VII, seated in a carriage beside President Ēmile Loubet (1838-1929), turns to wave to the crowds on the left; behind the carriage is a large cavalry escort reaching back along the Champs Elysées to the Arc de Triomphe in the distance.

In May 1903, as a prelude to the signing of the Entente Cordiale, King Edward VII made a State Visit to Paris which was extensively reported in the British press. Ridley, in her biography of Edward VII, writes that ‘Edward VII’s reputation as a king rests largely on his role in foreign policy. He was Edward the Peacemaker, responsible for making possible the Entente Cordial with France.’ Noting that ‘His visit to Paris in May 1903 was perhaps the most important political intervention he ever made’ (Ridley 2012 p. 376).

The King arrived by train into the Bois de Boulogne station on the 1 May where he was met by President Loubert. The two men rode in the ceremonial equipage of the Elysee, drawn by four horses and conducted by four postilions, while two footmen in the Presidential livery stood behind, accompanied by a strong body of cuirassiers. The Times reported that ‘His Majesty’, dressed in the uniform of a British Field marshal, was ‘compelled to give the military salute without intermission throughout his drive’ and was greeted with cries of ‘Vivre le Roi’ and ‘Vivre l’Angleterre.’ However, reports as to the warmth of the King’s reception appear to differ. Sidney Lee records a sullenly respectful crowd, although cries were heard of “Vivent les Boers!” and “Vive Fashoda” (referring to a recent territorial dispute between Britain and France in Eastern Africa in 1898). Lee also noted that the King’s suite was booed on arrival, prompting a remark of ‘The French don’t like us” to which the King replied, “Why should they?” (Lee 1927, Vol II p. 237). The King later gave a speech at the Chamber of Commerce and in the evening he attended the theatre; the following day he watched a military review of 18,000 men at Vincennes. That evening, at a State banquet hosted at the Elysee Palace, he expressed his earnest wish for a closer alliance with France… ‘I am glad of this occasion, which will strengthen the bonds of friendship and contribute to the friendship of our two countries in their common interest. Our great desire is that we may march together in the path of civilisation and peace.'

In June of the same year President Loubet reciprocated with a visit to England.