Jerry Lee Roberts, Sr., of Covington, passed away Tuesday, November 7, 2023, at the age of 79. Mr. Roberts was a dedicated member of Newton Baptist Church. He was a Godly man and he enjoyed telling everyone he met about Jesus and loved sharing Jesus through being Santa. In addition, he loved his church and devoted his time driving the bus for the bus ministries, teaching Sunday School classes, directing the choir for many years, and was a deacon at all the churches he attended. Mr. Roberts never met a stranger and everyone that met him loved him – he was a friend to everyone. He loved spending time with his family and would even be the camp chef when he and his family went hunting. Mr. Roberts was a hard worker and a wonderful provider for his family. He took care of his wife like a man should treat a woman, loved his daughters-in-law dearly, and his whole family. In addition, Mr. Roberts held a special place in his heart for his cats, especially the one called beautiful. He was preceded in death by his parents, Jessie and Lucy Roberts; sister, Inez Roberts Johnson; brothers, Grady Roberts, Ruffus Junior Roberts, Floyd Roberts, Sr.; and daughter-in-law, Deborah Roberts.

Survivors include his loving wife, Janie Roberts; sons, Jerry Roberts (Lynne), Todd Roberts (Pierrette); grandchildren, April Hegwood (Jake), Christann Sweat (Brant), McCord Roberts (Danae), TJ Roberts, Rosser Roberts (Mendy); great-grandchildren, Bailee Hegwood, Rilee Hegwood, Charlee Hegwood, Henlee Hegwood, Annistan Sweat, Presleigh Sweat, Myla Sweat, Ava Roberts, Paelyn Roberts, Cohen Roberts, Marlow Roberts, Mason Roberts, Deacon Roberts, Melany Roberts, Maebry Roberts; as well as several nieces and nephews.

A Funeral Service for Mr. Roberts will be held Monday, November 13, 2023, 2:00 P.M., at Newton Baptist Church, 720 Jack Neely Road, in Covington, with Pastor Rosser Lee Roberts, Rev. Jerry Lee Roberts, Jr., and Pastor Craig Hudgins officiating and interment following in Lawnwood Memorial Park, in Covington. Friends are invited to visit with the family at the church, Monday, from 12:00 noon – 2:00 P.M.