Swindon Town are currently contemplating life in League Two, but on the last two occasions they have come straight back up again after relegation. This is what the last batch of promotion winners are up to now...

Five years on, Swindon fans hark back to the passioned and potty reign of Paolo Di Canio's tenure that saw the Robins romp to the League Two title, despite a rocky start.

Di Canio's transfer dealings saw him sign 31 players in his first two transfer windows, with 15 nationalities, everything from Algeria to Saudi Arabia being represented, but what are the 2011-12 alumni up to these days?

In the first of three instalments, we take a look at the goalkeepers and the defenders.

Mattia Lanzano (Goalkeeper)

Signed on a free transfer following his release by Italian third division outfit US Gavorrano, Lanzano played seven games for Town in all competitions.

It was not his last outing for the club, but the defining image of the keeper was the horror show at Burton where, from a goal kick, he gave the ball straight to Jacques Maghoma, who made it 2-0.

Lanzano's contract was terminated in June 2012, halfway through his initial two-year deal. He has since had spells back at Gavarrano, followed by a stint in Greece with Fokikos before returning to Italy's lower tiers with FC Grossetto and now Piacenza Calcio.

Phil Smith (Goalkeeper)

One of the few players that stuck around following relegation from League One, Smith started as Swindon's number one stopper, was temporarily displaced by Lanzano, but restored himself back in the XI until Wes Foderingham arrived in October.

Smith left at the end of the season and signed for Portsmouth in December of 2012, making four appearances in two years and then left for Aldershot, where he spent a further two years.

The keeper is now at Weston Super Mare in the National League South after being signed in March of this year, but he was only drafted in as a reserve.

Wes Foderingham (Goalkeeper)

Swindon initially struggled to find their feet in League Two, that all changed when Wes Foderingham rocked up at the County Ground.

He made his debut in a 2-0 win at Accrington, and Swindon only lost five games for the rest of the season (one of which he did not even play in). He was also one game away from equalling a club record of six clean sheets on the bounce.

After originally signing on loan from Crystal Palace, Foderingham penned a permanent deal in January and went on to be a key figure for Swindon, as Town finished got to the play-off semi finals and the final in the next two seasons.

He was out of contract in 2015 though and signed for Scottish giants Rangers on a free transfer, and still resides in Glasgow.

Jay McEveley (Left-back)

Swindon had a deluge of left-backs over the course of the famous 2011-12 campaign (we will get to the rest later) but McEveley was the only one who Di Canio stuck with.

McEveley arrived late, signing on loan from Barnsley in March, but proved to be a solid aquisition at left-back as he helped guide Town over the line to promotion, and then the title.

The former Scotland international had two more seasons at the County Ground, making 60 league appearances, but left in 2014 for Sheffield United, where he played a further 70 games. He is now in Scotland with Foderingham, but at Ross County, not Rangers.

Callum Kennedy (Left-back)

If you went to a Swindon Town-based pub quiz, one of the questions may be: "Who scored the first goal of the Paolo Di Canio era?" The answer would be Callum Kennedy.

Kennedy's one and only goal for the Robins was a penalty in the opening day 3-0 win over Crewe and the youth academy graduate played a further 17 league games for Di Canio.

He left when his contract expired in the summer of 2012 and went to Scunthorpe for a year before AFC Wimbledon, then in League Two, snapped him up a year later. Kennedy is now back in League Two with recently-relegated Leyton Orient, but he is out of contract this summer.

Aden Flint (Centre back)

Is Aden Flint fondly remembered in Wiltshire anymore? No, no, no. Once upon a time though, he was a key cog for Swindon in multiple promotion charges.

Flint was bedded in towards the end of Town's relegation season, but was a key member in League Two, featuring in 32 games with two goals to his name.

He was even better during the season back in League One, but left for fierce rivals Bristol City after helping guide Town to the play-off semi finals, where Town lost against Brentford. Flint is still at City.

Joe Devera (Centre back)

If you are still at the Swindon pub quiz mentioned in Kennedy's paragraphs, Devera was Di Canio's first signing. Jot it down.

Devera signed a two-year deal at the County Ground, and honoured it, playing a part in Town's title win and the first play-off year in League One.

Following his release he dropped down the leagues, first going to Portsmouth in League Two and, since 2015, he has been at Boreham Wood in the National League.

Alberto Comazzi (Centre back)

It is not often Swindon bring ex-AC Milan players to Wiltshire, but anything could happen when Di Canio managed the club.

Alberto Comazzi, however, never looked like someone who once plyed his trade for the Rossoneri. Four league games, one red card is not a great record.

It got worse when, in June 2012, he was suspended from football for four years for involvement in the 2011-12 matchfixing scandal in Italy.

He can play football again now, but at the age of 38, he is unlikely to get any suitors.

Daniel Boateng (Centre back)

In mid January, occasional Arsenal reserve captain Daniel Boateng was announced as a Swindon loan signing.

Boateng only played two games for Swindon and then joined arch enemy Oxford, also on loan, the following season.

Another loan, at Hibernian, followed and then a permanent switch to Sodertalje in Sweden happened in 2014 after he was released by Arsenal. He is now back in Scotland with Airdrieonians - a club he joined in 2016.

Paul Caddis (Right-back)

When you are the first captain to win a title with Swindon since Shaun Taylor in 1996, you are going to get remembered. Step forward, Paul Caddis.

Caddis was not even supposed to be captain. Di Canio originally appointed Oliver Risser as his skipper, with Comazzi as deputy but the born leader soon won Paolo round.

Although his only prior season was *that* relegation year, he was still adored by the fans, and that only grew as he guided Town to the title. That was his final campaign at Swindon though as him and Di Canio fell out on a personal level.

The right-back jumped two divisions to Birmingham and was at St.Andrews for four-and-a-half years and then signed for Bury on a deal until the end of the season this January, which means he is out of contract this summer. Could be a homecoming be on the cards?

Nathan Thompson (Right/centre back)

The one and only member of the 2011-12 squad that remains at Swindon. For the time being, anyway.

Back in the days of yore of 2011, Thompson was an up-and-coming young buck who only played six games in all competitions.

He was a regular by the next season and was appointed club captain in August, 2014. Thompson has established himself as a club legend but, with Town's relegation confirmed and Thompson out of contract, his time at Swindon may be over.

Alessandro Cibocchi (Left-back)

How players become cult heroes is one of the sport's big mysteries, but one thing is for certain: Alessandro Cibocchi was a fan favourite, albeit a bizarre one.

One of four left-backs used by Swindon over the course of the season, the Italian was subject to possibly the best chant heard in the stands: "I want to dance with Cibocchi" to the tune of Whitney Houston's "I wanna dance with somebody."

Sadly, no fan of any club is dancing with 'Cibo' at the moment, which might explain a 2015 tweet of Alessandro's that read: "I want come back at Swindon Town FC (sic)...My family, My life."

Chris Smith (Right-back)

Chris Smith might not be a name many remember, however he holds a very special accolade.

Of the three players to win a contract at Swindon Town via the Samsung competition (Jordan Pavett, Smith and Kayden Jackson), Smith is the only one to play a game for the Robins.

Smith came on as a 21st-minute sub for Thompson in a 0-0 draw at Bradford City on the last game of the season, after signing from Stone Dominos in February. Smith was most recently at Kidsgrove Athletic in the Evo-Stick Northern Premier.

Liam Ridehalgh (Left-back)

The full-back signed for Town on a three-month loan from Huddersfield in September and made 11 appearances on the left of Swindon's defence.

Ridehalgh then joined Chesterfield on loan in the new year and stuck with them as Town and Chesterfield swapped leagues.

He was then loaned to Rotherham before Huddersfield decided to finally let him go permanently, to Tranmere, and Ridehalgh has stuck with them as Rovers have dropped from League One to the National League.

They have guaranteed a play-off spot this year, however, so Tranmere, and Ridehalgh, could face-off against Swindon next season.