The long-serving Robins keeper impressed in Saturday’s 2-1 defeat to Reading, making some crucial saves that prevented the visitors from adding more to their tally.

Smith is one of few current players who has been in this situation before with the club, having been between the sticks when the Robins sealed promotion from League Two at the first time of asking four years ago.

With David Lucas set to move on, boss Paolo Di Canio enlisted the services of Mattia Lanzano in the summer.

The Italian shotstopper was brought in with the intention of being the club’s number one for the coming campaign, but has yet to feature in a match situation in England after suffering a rib injury in training.

He is almost certain to miss the first game of the season against Crewe on Saturday, giving Smith the chance to stake his claim.

However, the former Crawley shotstopper feels that as soon as Lanzano is fit again, he will find himself back on the bench.

When asked if the fact supporters are yet to see Lanzano could work to his advantage, Smith told the Advertiser: “The manager makes the decision at the end of the day.

“It doesn’t make a difference what anyone has seen with all due respect as it is his decision.”

Smith has often expressed his happiness at being at Swindon, and insists that though he is unlikely to play much as things stand, he is not looking to move elsewhere.

“When the manager told me I explained that this is my club and my family are happy here,” he said.

“Obviously it is better if I play and only time will tell what will happen in the future but I will apply myself 100 per cent every day and see what goes from there.

“I can’t say if I am going to go anywhere because you do not know what will happen but I am not looking to go anywhere.”

Di Canio has been full of praise for Smith in pre-season, stating his belief that he has improved a lot during his time at the club so far.

And he was once again happy with his display against Reading at the weekend.

“I said a few days ago we do not need a loan goalkeeper. We have Phil Smith and he has improved a lot,” said the Town boss.

“We wait for Mattia Lanzano and I do not want to bring anyone else here because it means they are not at a good level.

“I would prefer to give a chance to our own young players.

“I am happy with Phil Smith and I hope Mattia can recover very soon because then we will have two very good goalkeepers at the same level, which is good.”