Mileva Marić was the first wife of renowned theoretical physicist Albert Einstein. The two met whilst studying at Zurich Polytechnic where they quickly bonded over their love of mathematics and physics. Whilst Mileva left academia to raise their children, Albert went on to become one of the most recognised scientists in history. This article will look at Mileva’s remarkable academic achievements and the debate surrounding her contributions to Alberts works.

(Mileva Marić. Image from:http://thesrpskatimes.com/mileva-maric-einstein-wife-of-genius-or-unrecognized-genius/)

Mileva Marić was born on the 19th of December, 1875 in Titel, modern day Serbia. The eldest of three children born to Miloš Marić and Marija Ružić Marić, little is known of her early life, only that shortly after her birth her father left his job in the military and began working at the court in Roma.

In 1886, Mileva was ready to begin her secondary education, first in Novi Sad, where she attended a high school for girls, a year later she moved to a school in Sremska Mitrovica. In 1890, Mileva moved again, this time to study at the Royal Serbian Grammar School in Sabah. In 1891, her father was able to obtain special permission for Mileva to enrol as a private student in the all-male Royal Classical High School in Zagred, providing she passed the entrance exam. Mileva, passed and enrolled in 1892, where she was taught mathematics by Vladimir Varcak, and in 1894, Mileva, won special permission to attend physics lectures and passed her final exams in 1894, with high marks in maths and physics. In the same year, she fell ill and moved to Switzerland. By 1896, Mileva had recovered her health and passed the Matura-Exam and began studying medicine at the University of Zurich.

After just one semester Mileva transferred from the University of Zurich to the Zurich Polytechnic, where she enrolled on a diploma course to teach mathematics and physics in secondary schools. At the time there was a bias against enrolling women, due to this Mileva was the only woman to be admitted in the group of six students and was only the fifth woman to enter the section. A testament to her dedication and academic prowess. It was there that she met Albert Einstein, and the two quickly became friends, bonding over a shared love of mathematics and physics.

In October, 1897, Mileva, spent a semester at Heidelberg University where she audited mathematics and physics classes, before returning to Zurich Polytechnic in the April of 1898, taking classes in differential and integral calculus, descriptive and projective geometry, mechanics, theoretical physics, applied physics, experimental physics, and astronomy. Taking her intermediate diploma examinations in 1899, a year after the rest of her classmates. Mileva’s results put her fifth out of the six students taking the examinations that year. Her physics grade was the same as Einstein’s, however, she scored higher than him in applied physics, however, in 1900, she failed her final exam. A year later, she took the exam once more, only to fail again, ending her academic career.

By 1901, Mileva and Einstein were in a relationship but were not married, despite this Mileva fell pregnant with what was to be their first child, a daughter, who was born in 1902, and for whom there is no birth of death certificates. In their correspondences, Mileva and Albert referred to the child as Hansel before she was born and Lieserl after, and there is some question over what happened to her. Some accounts suggest that she died soon after contracting Scarlett Fever which left her with permanent damage, whilst others believe she was put up for adoption in Serbia.

(Mileva and Albert c.1912. Image from: ETH Zurich Archives and https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/the-forgotten-life-of-einsteins-first-wife/)

The couple married in 1903, in Bern, Switzerland, where Einstein had been able to get a job at the Federal Office for Intellectual Property. A year later, in 1904, Mileva gave birth to a son, Hans Albert, a second son, Eduard was born in 1910 by which time the family were once more living in Bern, where Albert was teaching at the University of Zurich. In 1911, they moved to Prague, before returning to Zurich a year later when Albert began teaching at Zurich Polytechnic. In 1913, Albert was invited to Berlin by Max Planck and Walther Nernst, he agreed but Mileva was not happy about moving again. The marriage became strained when in 1912, Einstein began an affair with his cousin, Elsa Löwenthal. Mileva, who had not wanted to go to Berlin, became increasingly unhappy in the city, and by July, 1914, Mileva and her two sons returned to Zurich. Despite their separation, Einstein sent an annual maintenance of 5600 Reichsmarks, which was around half his salary. After being legally separated for five years, the couple divorced on the 14th of February, 1919.

A clause in their divorce which stated, should Einstein win the Nobel Prize, Mileva would receive the prize money, however, in 1925, Einstein stated in his will that the money was to be held in trust for the couples two sons, Mileva objected to this, believing the money should have gone to her for her contribution to Einstein’s work, this as we will see later was something Einstein strongly objected to. Walter Issacson, claims that Mileva invested the money into three apartment buildings in Zurich as a means of creating a small income, with the family living in one and renting the other two. When he was 20, Eduard was diagnosed with schizophrenia, to pay for his care, Mileva was forced to sell two of the houses adding to Mileva’s financial struggles, she survived by giving private lessons and the small alimony Einstein sent, although these payments were irregular.

Mileva died on the 4th of August, 1948, when she was 72 years old, and was buried in Nordheim-Cemetery, Zurich.

(Bust of Mileva on the campus of the University of Novi Sad. Image from:https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mileva_Marić)

In 2005, Mileva was honoured by the ETH and the Gesellschaft zu Framünster, with a memorial plaque being unveiled on her former residence in Zurich. In the same year, a bust of her was erected in Sremska Mitrovica. There is another bust located on the campus of the University of Novi Sad.

Despite Mileva’s proven academic merits and success there is a debate about how much she contributed to Einstein’s work.

There is no conclusive answer to this, however the language in the correspondence of both Mileva and Einstein, and multiple accounts from contemporarys give the impression Mileva was important to and that the two worked on many papers and ideas together from as early as 1900.

In September 1900, in a letter to Mileva, Einstein wrote that he was looking forward to “…resume our new common work.” and encouraged Mileva to continue her own research, whilst expressing his pride in her achievements, writing, “… how proud I will be to have a doctor for my spouse when I’ll only be an ordinary man.“ In the December of the same year, the couple submitted an article on capillarity, although, it was signed only by Einstein, they both in correspondence with other people referred to it as a joint project. Mileva in a letter to Helene Savić, wrote, “We will send a private copy to Boltzmann to see what he thinks and I hope he will answer us.” It’s clear from their language that this was something they worked on together. Further evidence that the two collaborated can be found in a letter, Einstein wrote to Mileva in March 1901, talking of their work on relativity. “How happy and proud I will be when the two of us together will have brought our work on relative motion to a victorious conclusion.”

The reasoning for publishing under, Einstein’s name alone, appears to be a decision they made together. Radmila Milentijević, who published a biography of Mileva’s life, suggests that her motivation was to help Einstein’s reputation grow so he would be in a position to marry her. However, Dord Krstić, suggests the motive had nothing to do with romance, rather the established bias against women at the time, meant the papers “…co-signed with a woman might have carried less weight.”

Beyond the language used by both Mileva and Einstein, proof of their collaborations can be found in the accounts of those that knew the couple and observed. Krstić, gives an account described by Miloš Jr, Mileva’s brother, who stayed with the Einstein’s several times, “…during the evenings and at night, when silence fell upon the town, the young married couple would sit together at the table and at the light of a kerosene lantern, they would work together on physics problems. Miloš Jr. spoke of how they calculated, wrote, read and debated.” Accounts of them working together and discussing physics is repeated by others, including their son Hans Albert, who told Krstić that his parents’ “scientific collaboration continued into their marriage, and that he remembered seeing [them] work together in the evenings at the same table.” When Hans-Albert’s first wife, Frieda, tried to publish the letters Mileva and Albert sent to Hans, she was blocked by Helen Dukas and Otto Nathan the executors of Einstein’s estate, in what Krstić called “…an attempt to preserve the ‘Einstein’s myth’’”. They prevented other publications, including one from Krstić, himself and he goes on to mention that after Mileva’s death, Nathan ‘visited’ her apartment in search of damning evidence.

As touched on previously, the money from Einstein’s Nobel Prize caused conflict between the two of them, whilst Einstein stated the money was for his son’s, Mileva felt the money, or at least some of it should have been given to her, as a contributor and even considered releasing details of her involvement. The language in Einstein’s response shows how different their relationship had become,

“You made me laugh when you started threatening me with your recollections. Have you ever considered, even just for a second, that nobody would ever pay attention to your says if the man you talked about had not accomplished something important. When someone is completely insignificant, there is nothing else to say to this person but to remain modest and silent. This is what I advise you to do.”

Whilst Mileva, her publicly claimed credit for any of Einstein’s theories she continued to privately lament the lack of recognition she received from their work, and her involvement, however large or small remains a mystery.

Whatever her level of involvement in Einstein’s work, there is no doubt that Mileva Marić, was academically gifted in the fields of mathematics and physics at a time when women weren’t expected to be able to flourish in those fields. Whilst it is unlikely we will ever know the true extent of her contributions to his work, her support as a wife was just as important in allowing Einstein to become the celebrated scientist remembered today.

Author: Gemma Apps.

We are excited to announce we now have our own website, as well as the Hidden Matriarch content, you will find our podcast and two new sections. The first, Historic Housewife provides a lighthearted look into the role of women as the “housewife” with topics from food to health and beauty, childcare to historic cleaning hacks. The second is, Sagas of She After Dark explores the darker side of history from cults to ghost stories, no topic is off limits. Told through feature length podcasts and videos. Warnings for blood guts, and gore galore! Find us at www.sagasofshe.co.uk

Sources used.

https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/the-forgotten-life-of-einsteins-first-wife/

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mileva_Marić

M. Popović (2003). In Albert’s Shadow: The Life and Letters of Mileva Marić, Einstein’s First Wife.

Einstein, Albert and Marić, Mileva (1992) The Love Letters. Edited by Jürgen Renn & Robert Schulmann. Translated by Shawn Smith. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Einstein, Albert and Marić, Mileva (1992) The Love Letters. Edited by Jürgen Renn & Robert Schulmann. Translated by Shawn Smith. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-00741-6

Dord Krstić: Mileva & Albert Einstein: Their Love and Scientific Collaboration, Didakta, 2004.