Mileva Maric Einstein was a Serbian mathematician and the first wife of Albert Einstein. She was born on December 29, 1875 in Titel in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy (today's Serbia), and died on August 4, 1948 in Zurich, Switzerland.

Mileva Marić did not spare her life. She was born with a shorter left leg due to a hip dislocation, as the oldest of three children in a wealthy family. Her parents Marija and Miloš took her to the best doctors, taught her to walk properly, but that didn't help. She spent her earliest childhood with her grandparents on a farm in Kać.

Even as a child, she excelled in class, so her father made an effort to provide her with a good education. In 1886, she started the Women's Gymnasium in Novi Sad, and in 1888 she moved to the Gymnasium in Sremska Mitrovica, where she graduated in 1890 as the best in the class in mathematics and physics. From 1890, she attended the Royal Serbian School in Šabac. When she moved to Zagreb, she received a special permit to go to a school where only boys went.

In the summer of 1896, she enrolled in medical studies at the University of Zurich, and in October she transferred to the State Polytechnic School to study mathematics and physics. She was only the fifth woman admitted, and only the second to graduate from that college.

She met Albert Einstein,since she was 4 years older, at the college. Paulina Einstein, Albert Einstein's mother, was broken when she learned that her beloved son was in a relationship with a colleague, a physics student, an older girl of another faith, originally from remote parts of the Balkans. "If she gets pregnant, you'll be in big trouble," she warned him. But 22-year-old Albert, unrestrained and independent in his private life, just as it will be in science, did not pay attention and continued this love affair.

In 1902, Mileva Maric gave birth to a daughter, Lieserl Einstein, out of an extramarital affair with Einstein. Her christened name was Ljubica. However, according to some, Lizerl fell ill early and passed away soon after birth, and according to others, she was given for adoption in Serbia. Mileva and Albert were married in 1903 and later had two sons, Hans Albert Einstein and Eduard Einstein. They separated in 1914, and Mileva returned to Zurich with her sons from Berlin. They officially divorced on February 14, 1919, and he remarried the same year.

There are extremely controversial opinions about the role of Mileva Maritz Einstein in the scientific papers published by Albert Einstein. While some claim that she actively helped him in research, and solved complex mathematical problems, others point out that her active involvement in Einstein's achievements cannot be proven.

The fact is that this cannot be proven with certainty. However, there are certain indications that Mileva Maritz Einstein contributed a lot to the work of her husband, and some believe that the two of them worked together on the theory of relativity.

This theory was most ardently advocated by the American physicist Dr. Evan Harris Walker. In an interview, he boldly claims: "Albert Einstein and Mileva Marić discovered the theory of relativity together"!

As proof that Mileva was actively involved in the work of her husband, their letters are also mentioned, in which they mention joint work on the theory of relativity. Such is, for example, the letter that Albert Einstan sent to his wife on March 27, 1901, in which he wrote: "How I will be happy and proud when we finish our work on relative motion victoriously together."

Soviet academician Avram Fedorovich Joffe said that he was once on the editorial board of the journal "Physical Annals" , in which Albert Einstein published the first scientific article on relativity in 1905, and that he saw the originals of published texts from that year. They were signed with - Einstein-Marity! (which was the Hungarian variant of the surname Maric, and so Mileva signed her wedding certificate)

The question also arises as to why Albert Einstein gave the entire amount of the Nobel Prize he received in 1921 to his then ex-wife Mileva, and immediately after his death he sent his trustees to the house where she lived, who reviewed all the papers they found there, including and their personal correspondence.

Despite the multitude of more or less convincing statements that Mileva Marić greatly helped her husband Albert Einstein in his scientific research, it remains unclear how much that contribution was. Is there any hope of ever unveiling one of the greatest creative puzzles of the 20th century?

One thing is for sure, Mileva Maric Einstan trusted her husband Albert Einstan.

She trusted him, both the unknown and the known. And she never publicly accused or insulted him. Despite the bitterness that ate her more and more after the divorce, until her death. Mileva Marić Einstein remained. A rock with two names (ein Stein - one rock in German). A life companion of one of, probably, the most brilliant scientists in history. In the twentieth century, of course. How much did she help him with that?