Bill Richmond, who collaborated with Jerry Lewis on the screenplays for “The Ladies Man,” “The Nutty Professor” and a half-dozen other Lewis films before establishing a successful television career writing for Carol Burnett and others, died on June 4 at his home in Calabasas, California. He was 94.

His death was confirmed this week by his wife, Saria Kraft.

Richmond was working as a jazz drummer with the Nelson Riddle Orchestra in 1959, backing Frank Sinatra in Las Vegas, when Lewis, attending one of the shows, came backstage and introduced himself.

“We became almost instant friends,” Richmond told Written By magazine in 2011. “In the first place, I truly thought he was funny. Not in his act necessarily, but being around him — really funny in a way that I think is funny.”

Lewis hired his new friend to be the drummer for his stage band and then, sensing their comic rapport, asked him to collaborate on the screenplay for “The Ladies Man.” The film was a hit, and Richmond went on to share screenwriting credits with Lewis on “The Errand Boy” (1961), “The Nutty Professor” (1963), “The Patsy” (1964), “The Family Jewels” (1965) and “The Big Mouth” (1967).

His role, as he described it, was to set the stage for Lewis to ad-lib and indulge in physical comedy. “You’re creating for a guy who started out as a dumb act with this little record player playing in clubs — he couldn’t talk, couldn’t tell jokes, all he could do is be silly and pratfalls,” Richmond told Written By. “I realized I’m not going to write funny dialogue, but I’m going to try and put him in that situation.”

Richmond later made a smooth transition to television, first as a monologue writer for “Rowan and Martin’s Laugh-In” and later, most notably, for “The Carol Burnett Show,” where he and his fellow writers won three Emmy Awards. “I had a sketch on every single show for the five years that I wrote for it,” he told the blog TV Store Online in 2015.

William Earle Richmond was born on Dec. 19, 1921, in Central City, Kentucky. His father, Leon, was a station agent for the Illinois Central Railroad in Eastview, Kentucky. His mother, the former Mary Elizabeth Ragland, was a homemaker.

A transfer by the railroad sent the family to Rockford, Illinois, when Bill was 5. There, after hearing Benny Goodman on the radio, he joined the junior high school band and was handed a pair of drumsticks.

He attended the University of Illinois but left to enlist in the Marine Corps during World War II. He was trained as a fighter pilot and served in stateside posts.

After being discharged from the Marines, he headed to Los Angeles to pursue a musical career. “I wasn’t very good, but I could keep pretty good time and could look like I knew what I was doing,” he told The New York Times in 2012. “In a few months I actually got a job in a downtown bar and in due time was playing in a big band.”

In 1947 he married Diana Jannotta, who died in 1993. His second wife, the former Lorraine Sevre, died in 2007. In addition to Kraft, he is survived by two sons, Bill and Stephen; two daughters, Darlene McMullin and Melanie Klibanoff; four grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.

Richmond toured with Harry James, Les Brown and Ray Anthony in the 1950s and, when not on the road, picked up work wherever he could find it. He was the rehearsal drummer for Shirley MacLaine. He played on the soundtrack of “The Lady and the Tramp.” In Los Angeles he sat in with the trumpeter Chet Baker at the nightclub the Haig, was the house drummer at Strip City, where Lenny Bruce performed.

With the Nelson Riddle Orchestra, he played on several of Sinatra’s albums, notably “Only the Lonely” and “Come Dance With Me,” and on “Ella Fitzgerald Sings the George and Ira Gershwin Song Book.”

The invitation from Lewis came at a time when Richmond was growing tired of the music business and feeling threatened by the domination of rock ‘n’ roll, which he despised. He now had a foot in the door of the film business.

“After about six months of working together I found myself wanting to make him laugh, and he was making me laugh hysterically,” he told TV Store Online. “We’d tell each other jokes all the time, and it went from there.”

For “The Ladies Man,” in which Lewis’ character works at a genteel women’s boardinghouse, Richmond drew on his experience dating a woman who lived at the Hollywood Studio Club, a dormitory for young actresses. “I’d write something, then he’d look it over, and then he’d write a few lines, or he’d take what I had written and he’d go off and work on it on his own or vice versa,” he told TV Store Online.

He was a writer on Lewis’ two television variety shows in the 1960s, and reconnected with him in the 1980s to co-write “Cracking Up” (originally released as “Smorgasbord”), Lewis’ last movie as a director.

After “The Carol Burnett Show” went off the air in 1978, Richmond kept busy writing for sitcoms, including “Three’s Company,” “Welcome Back, Kotter,” “The John Larroquette Show” and “Blossom.”

His greatest accomplishment may have been his ability to manage his relationship with the notoriously temperamental Lewis.

“He’s arguably my best friend,” Richmond told Written By. “He not only made me a writer but handed me a career.”

On the other hand, he told TV Store Online, “All I had to do was say one wrong thing to him, and I could’ve been out of there.”