The film stars Vivica A. Fox (Kill Bill, Independence Day) along with rising talent, Cristine Prosperi ("Degrassi: The Next Generation," Betrayed), Jordan Rodrigues ("The Fosters," "Dance Academy"), Sophie Vavasseur (Resident Evil: Apocalypse, Evelyn), and Gia Ré ("Jinx," "Rocket's Island"), the film integrates the evolution of social media taking viewers into the cheerleading universe. Bring It On: Worldwide #Cheersmack on Blu-rayTM, DVD and Digital HD will come packed with exciting bonus content including exclusive behind-the-scenes footage as well as a hilarious gag reel.

Vivica A. Fox makes her Bring it On debut as Cheer Goddess, the Internet's most popular "Cheer-lebrity." When Destiny (Prosperi), captain of three-time national champions "The Rebels," is challenged to a global cheer showdown by an edgy new team called "The Truth," the Cheer Goddess organizes a virtual battle for squads from all around the world. It seems like the whole world wants to take down Destiny and her team, and they just might succeed, unless Density can rise to the challenge, set her ego aside and figure out who her real friends are.

The film is executive produced by Beacon partners Armyan Bernstein and Charlie Lyons, produced by Mike Elliott (Honey 3: Dare to Dance), and co-produced by Greg Holstein (Kindergarten Cop 2), Genevieve Hofmeyr (Mad Max: Fury Road), Marvin Saven (Death Race 2) and Tony Gonzalez (Bring It On franchise). Tony Gonzalez also returns as the choreographer to create the franchise's most out-of-this world stunts yet.

BONUS FEATURES EXCLUSIVE TO BLU-RAYTM, DVD AND DIGITAL HD:

Around the World: Building the Squads – Discover how actors were able to master the escalating difficulty of cheer routines choreographed by Tony Gonzalez featuring teams from South Africa and Brazil.

A New Routine – Filmmakers, cast, and crew discuss what sets the latest chapter of the Bring It On franchise apart, including focusing on social media's potential negative impacts in the world of all-star cheerleading. This piece also includes cheer teams from England, Ireland and Costa Rica.

The Look of Bring It On: Worldwide – A look into how the set design and costumes provide a vibrancy and unique flair to the film's backdrop.

Gag Reel

FILMMAKERS

Cast: Cristine Prosperi, Jordan Rodrigues, Gia Ré, Sophie Vavasseur, Sven Ruygrok, Stephan Lee Benson, Natalie Walsh, Vivica A. Fox

Casting By: Jan Glaser, CSA, Gillian Hawser, CDG, CSA, Mito Skellern

Supervising Choreographer: Tony Gonzalez

Music Supervisor: Paul DiFranco

Score By: Frank Fitzpatrick

Director of Photography: Trevor A. Brown

Production Designer: Franz Lewis

Edited By: Richard Starkey

Costume Designer: Dihantus Engelbrecht

Co-Producers: Greg Holstein, Tony Gonzalez, Genevieve Hofmeyr, Marvin Saven

Line Producer: Donovan Roberts-Baxter

Executive Produced By: Armyan Bernstein, Charlie Lyons

Produced By: Mike Elliott

Written By: Alyson Fouse

Directed By: Robert Adetuyi

TECHNICAL INFORMATION - Blu-ray™:

Street Date: August 29, 2017

Copyright: 2017 Universal Picture Home Entertainment

Selection Numbers: 63111839 (US) /63175336 (Canada)

Aspect Ratio: 1.78:1 Widescreen

Rating: PG-13 for crude sexual material.

Layers: BD-50

Sound: English DTS Master Audio 5.1, French DTS Digital Surround 5.1, Spanish DTS Digital Surround 5.1

Language/Subtitles: English SDH, French, Spanish

Run Time: 1 hour, 35 Minutes

TECHNICAL INFORMATION - DVD:

Street Date: August 29, 2017

Copyright: 2017 Universal Picture Home Entertainment

Selection Numbers: 63111838 (US) / 63175337 (Canada)

Aspect Ratio: 1.78:1 Anamorphic Widescreen

Rating: PG-13 for crude sexual material.

Layers: Dual Layers

Sound: English DTS Master Audio 5.1, French DTS Digital Surround 5.1, Spanish DTS Digital Surround 5.1

Language/Subtitles: English SDH, French, Spanish

Run Time: 1 hour, 35 Minutes

For artwork, please log onto our website at www.uphe.com

Website: http://uni.pictures/Cheersmack

Trailer: http://uni.pictures/CheersmackTrailer

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/BringItOnTwitter: https://twitter.com/bringiton

Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/bringiton

#BringItOn #CheerSmack

About Universal 1440 Entertainment, LLC:

The Universal 1440 Entertainment banner develops and produces live-action and animated non-theatrical productions directly for distribution in all media worldwide. Since its formation in 2005, the group has assembled an exceptional roster of animated family fare, including the Daytime Emmy®-winning Curious George television series for PBS Kids and Hulu; as well as the latest installment of the beloved The Land Before Time film series, The Land Before Time: Journey of the Brave. The group also has successfully built upon some of Universal's highly celebrated live-action, comedy and drama franchises, Scorpion King, Death Race, Jarhead, American Pie, Honey and Bring It On. Projects currently readying for release include the latest in the terrifying suspense saga Cult of Chucky, the newest installment of the epic sci-fi adventure hit Tremors and the all-new animated family film Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas is You.

Universal 1440 Entertainment is a production entity of Universal Pictures Home Entertainment (www.uphe.com). Universal Pictures Home Entertainment (UPHE) is a unit of Universal Pictures, a division of Universal Studios. Universal Studios is part of NBCUniversal. NBCUniversal is one of the world's leading media and entertainment companies in the development, production and marketing of entertainment, news and information to a global audience. NBCUniversal owns and operates a valuable portfolio of news and entertainment networks, a premier motion picture company, significant television production operations, a leading television stations group and world-renowned theme parks. NBCUniversal is a subsidiary of Comcast Corporation.

About Beacon Communications:

Armyan Bernstein and Charlie Lyons are partners at Beacon Communications, a producer and financier of film, television and stage. Their films include Air Force One, The Hurricane, Family Man, Spy Game, For Love of the Game, Thirteen Days, End of Days, The Commitments, The Babysitters Club, Princess Caraboo, The Water Horse, Open Range, The Guardian, Firewall, A Lot Like Love, and Raising Helen. They are the Executive Producers of the Bring It On franchise.

Azure Anderson

Universal Pictures Home Entertainment

[email protected]

SOURCE Universal Pictures Home Entertainment

Related Links