Vivica A. Fox Responds To 50 Cent’s Commentary About Exotic Women: ‘You Can’t Handle A Black Woman, Can You?’

50 Cent recently went on a rant regarding his preference for “exotic women” during an interview with Lil Wayne.

“That s— exotic. That s— look a lot different than the s— you see in the neighborhood all the time. That s— look like it came off a boat,” 50 Cent said.

During the July 7th episode of Fox Soul’s Cocktails With Queens, Vivica A. Fox, who previously dated 50 Cent, responded to 50 Cent’s recent commentary on “exotic women.”

“He just has such f—boy tendencies. When I read that I was like, “Really? You would say that. You don’t want anybody to challenge you,'” Fox said.

“You want somebody to sit over and be a pretty little dog and that you can just pay.”

Syleena Johnson then asserted that she wanted to chime in on the conversation.

“50 Cent is a powerful Black man and we look up to him in a lot of different ways as a businessman. You are leading a lot of Black men whether you like it or not,” Johnson said.

“We need you. We need you to love on us. To do that kind of allows them, it kind of leads other Black men to feel that way. And this is how we keep being in predicaments where we can’t get our men to connect with us.”

“Now, there’s a disconnect within our culture. We don’t need that right now. This is not the time for that,” Johnson said.

“Okay, I think y’all about to be mad at me,” LisaRaye said, chiming in. “Here’s the thing. If that’s his preference, that’s his preference.”

LisaRaye then explained that she thinks 50 Cent’s stance comes from being around a lot of “strong Black women.” Vivica A. Fox then interrupted LisaRaye and gave her the “church finger” and added more to her stance.

“No, no, no…It was the levels of disrespect as far as I was concerned, which is so demeaning. The statement and the whole arrogance of it all. You came from a Black woman. Don’t ever forget that,” Fox said.

“Everyone has a preference. You might like them tall, slim. I used to love a six-pack and a smile when I dated him, when he [50 Cent] did have it. Everyone has their preference and you’re entitled to that. You just don’t have to be mean.”

Glennisha Morgan is a Detroit-bred multimedia journalist and writer. She writes about intersectionality, hip-hop, pop culture, queer issues, race, feminism, and her truth. Follow her on Twitter @GlennishaMorgan.