• Matthew Settle is an American actor.

• He is possibly in a relationship with Kelly Rutherford.

• He has one ex-wife and two daughters.

• He has appeared in many films and television series, such as “Band of Brothers” and “Gossip Girl”.

• As of March 2021, his net worth has been estimated at over $4 million.

Who is Matthew Settle?

Jeffrey Matthew Settle was born in Hickory, North Carolina USA, on 17 September 1969 – his zodiac sign is Virgo and he holds American nationality. He is an actor, who is perhaps still known best for his portrayal of Captain Ronald Speirs in the 2001 critically acclaimed historical action mini-series “Band of Brothers”, which starred Scott Grimes, Damian Lewis and Ron Livingston, and follows the lives of members of the US Army’s 101st Airborne Division who fought in the Second World War. The mini-series won 34 awards including a Golden Globe, while it was nominated for 26 other awards, and is rated the third best series of all time, right behind “Planet Earth II” and “Planet Earth”.

Is he in a relationship with Kelly Rutherford?

Matthew was married to Naama Nativ, an actress and a model perhaps known best for her portrayal of Sara in the 2008 comedy movie “You Don’t Mess with the Zohan” which starred Adam Sandler. The two were wed in a secret ceremony in 2006, and in 2009 Naama gave birth to their daughter Aven. Matthew and Naama divorced for unknown reasons in May 2011.

Not long afterwards, Matthew began dating the non-celebrity woman Maria Alfonsin, and she gave birth to their daughter Nalu in 2015.

There are rumors circulating the internet that Matthew is in a relationship with Kelly Rutherford, who portrayed his wife in the series “Gossip Girl”, and while the two haven’t commented on these rumors, they appear to be true judging by their pictures on Instagram.

As of March 2021, Matthew seems to be dating Kelly Rutherford, has married once, and has two daughters.

Early life and education

Matthew was raised in Hickory alongside his three older brothers and two older sisters, by their father Robert Settle who was a Baptist minister, and their mother Joan who was a concert organist.

He has kept details of his childhood to himself, so not a lot is known about his teenage years; Matthew became interested in acting while attending a local high school, at which he was also sporting as he played football for the school’s team. He matriculated in 1987 and although he hasn’t spoken about his further education, it is widely believed that Matthew enrolled at a college from which he graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in 1991.

Matthew spent the following five years working various jobs, before launching his acting career.

Roles in movies

Matthew made his debut film appearance with his portrayal of the lead role of Tommy Shaughnessy in the 1996 western “Shaughnessy” which also starred Linda Kozlowski and Tom Bower, and follows an Irish immigrant who becomes the sheriff of a small city in Kansas.

His first notable performance was his portrayal of the supporting character Will Benson in the 1998 mystery horror “I Still Know What You Did Last Summer”, directed by Danny Cannon and which starred Jennifer Love Hewitt, Freddie Prinze Jr. and Brandy Norwood. It follows the fisherman from the 1997 prequel “I Know What You Did Last Summer”, who comes back to kill the two teenagers who previously tried to kill him; the movie won five out of the 12 awards it was nominated for.

Matthew went on to appear in a couple other critically acclaimed movies, such as the 1999 crime drama “Lansky”, the 2000 war action “U-571”, and the 2000 mystery thriller “The In Crowd”. The year 2002 saw him play the supporting character Jack in the drama “Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood”, which starred Sandra Bullock, Ellen Burstyn and Fionnula Flanagan, and follows the girl Siddalee as she receives her mother and her childhood friends’ scrapbook.

In 2007 Matthew appeared in two popular movies: the romantic thriller “Blue Smoke” and the mystery thriller horror “Beneath”, and the following year saw him portray President Kennedy in the hit biographical sports drama “The Express”, which starred Rob Brown, Clancy Brown and Dennis Quaid, and follows the life of Ernie Davis who was the first African-American winner of the Heisman Trophy.

Three of his most recent roles in movies have been in the 2015 family drama “Marshall’s Miracle”, the 2016 mystery horror “The Faith of Anna Waters”, and the 2017 action film “Valentine”.

Roles in TV series

Matthew’s role in “Band of Brothers” was also his debut TV series appearance, after which in 2002 he portrayed the supporting character Brian Westlake in the romantic drama “ER”, created by Michael Crichton, and which starred Anthony Edwards, George Clooney and Julianna Margulies. It aired from 1994 to 2009, and won 156 awards including a Golden Globe, while it was nominated for 370 other awards.

Matthew then played a supporting character in the hit mystery crime drama “The Practice”, and made a guest appearance in both the action crime drama “CSI: Miami”, and the biographical mystery mini-series “The Mystery of Natalie Wood”.

The year 2005 saw him portray Jacob Wheeler, one of the lead characters in the historical adventure mini-series “Into the West”, which also starred Joseph M. Marshall and Irene Bedard, and follows one family of Native Americans and the other of white settlers, living in the American West in the 19th century. It won 22 awards while it was nominated for 32 others, including a Golden Globe. Matthew continued to appear in various series, such as the mystery crime drama “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit”, the drama “Brothers & Sisters”, and another drama “Secrets of a Small Town”.

From 2007 to 2012 he portrayed Rufus Humphrey, one of the lead characters in the hit romantic drama “Gossip Girl”, created by Stephanie Savage and Josh Schwartz, and which starred Blake Lively, Penn Badgley and Leighton Meester.

It follows a blogger as he/she reveals secrets of the privileged teenagers living on New York’s Upper East Side – the series won 21 awards of the 57 it was nominated for.

Matthew’s most recent role in a TV series has been in the 2016 episode “De Los Inocentes” of the action crime adventure “Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders”.

Other credits

Matthew sang the song “Everytime” in the 2008 episode “O Brother, Where Bart Thou?” of the series “Gossip Girl”.

He received special thanks for the 2012 documentary movie “Gossip Girl: XO XO”.

Matthew has appeared in various documentaries too, such as the 2003 film “Young Hollywood Awards”, the 2004 series “Decisive Battles”, and the 2009 short documentary “Stylish Confessions: The Fashion of ‘Gossip Girl’”.

He has also made a guest appearance in several talk-shows such as “The Sharon Osbourne Show”, “Entertainment Tonight” and “The Wendy Williams Show”.

Awards and nominations

Matthew has been nominated for three awards winning one: a 2006 Western Heritage Bronze Wrangler Award for Television Feature Film which he and his colleagues share for their performance in the mini-series “Into the West”.

He was nominated for a 1999 Teen Choice Award for Film – Choice Sleazebag for “I Still Know What You Did Last Summer”, and a 2000 Teen Choice Award for Choice TV Parental Unit for the series “Gossip Girl”.

Hobbies and interesting facts

Matthew was raised alongside his two sisters, and when asked about what he learned about women thanks to them, he answered: ‘Women are to be loved, not understood’.

He is quite sporting, as he has several training sessions at the gym each week and is also active outdoors as he enjoys hiking in the mountains, running and playing soccer and tennis with his friends.

Matthew is an avid traveler, who has been to over 30 countries including several in Europe such as England and France , and China (Asia).

He has his own favorite actors and actresses, some of whom are Woody Allen, Tom Hanks and Anne Hathaway, and a couple of his favorite movies are “Picking Up the Pieces”, “Sleepless in Seattle”, and “Les Miserables”.

Age, height and net worth

Matthew’s age is 51. He has short brown hair and brown eyes, his height is 5ft 10ins (1.78m) and he weighs around 165lbs (75kgs).