At times, Mike Jaixen feels like he’s drowning in content. The manager of information architecture for transportation giant Union Pacific (UP) was charged with finding a way to manage an ever-growing warehouse of documents on the company’s internal and external Web sites. At last count there were 200,000 pages stored on the company’s servers.

After evaluating products from Documentum, Vignette and others, Union Pacific picked an enterprise content-management platform from Interwoven. A big factor was the ability to create easy-to-use templates for UP employees to generate content and have it flow through an automated editing and approval process.

“It really addressed the ability for Joe Q worker, who is an expert in his job but doesn’t know a thing about HTML, to contribute content to the site,” says Jaixen.

Lovelace Health Systems, one of the largest hospital groups in New Mexico, found its approval processes were so cumbersome that the organization’s site was only updated on a weekly basis. After deploying Interwoven, the hospital group went to a daily publishing schedule. Matt Berlin, director of Internet operations, estimates the system will eliminate about 180 hours of work per month once staff are fully trained in its use.

Interwoven has been one of Berlin’s favorite vendors to deal with, and his only knock was that there was some confusion in support when a regional sales group was created in Phoenix.

The state of Massachusetts needed to coordinate content published online by 160 state agencies. Robert Nevins, director of the Mass.gov portal, says Interwoven provided it with a way to develop a standard look for the state’s Web sites, and helped get rid of bottlenecks that had prevented timely publication of information. Now each agency can designate its own content contributors, and customize the work flow procedure for approving and publishing content.

Early on, the state wasn’t happy with the user interface developed by a third-party integrator. However, Nevins says when Interwoven was notified of the issue, it was resolved. “And since then their support has been very good,” he adds.

Interwoven, Inc.

803 11th Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94089

(408) 774-2000 www.interwoven.com

Ticker: IWOV

Exchange: NASDAQ

Employees: 900

Martin Brauns

Chairman

Joined company in 1998. Was chairman, CEO and president until John Van Siclen was promoted this year. Previously, Brauns was COO of Sqribe Technologies. He’s also worked at Informix and Adaptec.

John Van Siclen

President, CEO

Joined Interwoven in 1999 as VP of business development. Named president in January and then CEO in July. Before Interwoven, he was president and CEO of Perspecta.

Jack Jia

Vice President, Chief Technology Officer

With Interwoven since 1997, primarily in software development, rising to become VP of engineering. Named CTO in January. Previously founded V-Max America, a computer distribution company.

Products

Key offering is TeamSite Content Management System. Helps companies simplify the process of creating and managing the publishing of content to the Web or on corporate intranets.

Reference Checks

AMERICAN HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION

Herman Baumann

Executive Director, Strategic Development

(312) 422-3000

Project: Uses Interwoven to manage content on HospitalConnect, a portal for its 5,000 hospitals and health-care members.

BERGER FINANCIAL GROUP

Joe Tooman

Manager, Web Services/Business Analysis

(303) 329-0200

Project: Has been using Interwoven for close to two years to manage and publish content related to the mutual fund company’s investment products.

LOVELACE HEALTH SYSTEMS

Matt Berlin

Director, Internet Operations

(505) 262-7000

Project: Uses TeamSite to manage content and ensure content meets federal health-privacy rules. Hospital group plans to have up to 300 content contributors.

MASS.GOV

Robert Nevins

Director, Mass.gov

(617) 626-4500

Project: Using TeamSite to de- velop an Internet portal connecting citizens of Massachusetts to 160 state agencies.

UNION PACIFIC

Mike Jaixen

Manager, Information Architecture

(402) 271-5000

Project: Transportation giant is using TeamSite to manage more than 200,000 pages of online content.

VECTREN CORP.

Lara Ceresko-Kissel

eBusiness Technology Analyst

(812) 491-4000

Project: Utility company, which services Indiana and Ohio, has been using Interwoven for about 19 months to publish and manage content on its Web site.