printer-friendly

Sample Business Contracts

California-Sunnyvale-1195 West Fremont Boulevard Lease [Assignment] - beyond.com and Interwoven Inc.

ASSIGNMENT OF LEASE ------------------- Recitals -------- Section 1. Effective Date of Assignment Section 2. Assignment Section 3. Assumption of Lease Obligations/Indemnity Section 4. Covenants Section 5. Sublease Cash Security Deposit/Letter of Credit Section 6. Brokers Section 7. Condition of Premises Section 8. Successors and Assigns Section 9. Governing Law Section 10. Attorneys' Fees Section 11. Counterparts Exhibit A. Master Lease Exhibit B. Sublease This Assignment of Lease ("Assignment") is made to be effective as of the Effective Date (as defined below) between beyond.com, a Delaware corporation ("Assignor"), and Interwoven, Inc., a California corporation ("Assignee"). Recitals -------- A. SUNNYVALE PARTNERS LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, an Illinois limited partnership, as landlord ("Landlord"), and FIRST DATA MERCHANT SERVICES CORPORATION as tenant ("Tenant"), entered into a lease, made as of March 18, 1997 ("Master Lease"), with respect to premises described in the Master Lease and commonly known as 1195 West Fremont Boulevard, Sunnyvale, California ("Master Premises"). B. A copy of the Master Lease (with certain confidential economic details deleted) is attached to this Assignment as Exhibit A. C. Tenant, as sublessor ("Sublessor"), subleased a portion of the Premises (the "Subleased Premises") to Software.Net Corporation (whose name was changed to beyond.com), as sublessee, by means of a an undated Sublease, (the "Sublease"). D. A copy of the Sublease is attached to this Assignment as Exhibit B. E. Interwoven occupies the balance of the Master Premises pursuant to a Sub-Sublease with Tenant. Interwoven is familiar with the Landlord, Sublessor, the building in which the Subleased Premises are located and the operation of the Master Premises. <PAGE> F. beyond.com desires to assign to Interwoven, and Interwoven desires to receive an assignment from beyond.com, all of the Subleased Premises which is identified in the Sublease ("Subleased Premises"). From and after the Effective Date, Interwoven shall be responsible for and shall assume all obligations of beyond.com under the Sublease accruing on or after the Effective Date. G. The assignment of the Subleased Premises is conditioned upon Landlord and Sublessor both consenting to the terms and conditions of this Assignment. NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises and covenants contained herein, the parties hereto agree as follows: Section 1. Effective Date of Assignment ---------------------------------------- This Assignment shall become effective upon the first day ("Effective Date") on which each of the following have occurred: (i) this Assignment has been executed by Assignor and by Assignee, and each has received a copy executed by the other party; (ii) Assignee has delivered to Assignor $297,454.50 in cash in the form of a certified bank check as described in clause 5(a); (iii) Assignee's letter of credit in the amount of $297,454.50 as called for in Section 5 has been issued with Sublessor as beneficiary; (iv) Sublessor has released Assignor's letter of credit, as described in clause 5(b); (v) Sublessor and Master Landlord have consented in writing to this Assignment with no additions, deletions or amendments; (vi) Assignee has executed the Bill of Sale for certain personal property and delivered to Assignor the sum of $288,000, by certified bank check, pursuant to the Bill of Sale; (vii) Assignee has delivered to Sublessor insurance certificates evidencing all insurance required under the Sublease, in form acceptable to Sublessor, and (viii) Assignor has tendered possession of the Subleased Premises to Assignee. If all of the above have not occurred on or before November 22, 1999, this Assignment shall automatically terminate and be of no further force and effect. Assignor and Assignee shall execute a certificate certifying the date that all conditions have been met. Section 2. Assignment ---------------------- As of the Effective Date, Assignor hereby assigns and transfers to Assignee all of Assignor's right, title, and interest in the Sublease and Assignee hereby accepts from Assignor all of Assignor's right, title, and interest, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Assignment. As of the Effective Date. Assignor releases all right, title and interest it has or may have with respect to the cash security deposit provided for in Section 30 of the Sublease. Section 3. Assumption of Lease Obligations/Indemnity ----------------------------------------------------- Effective as of the Effective Date, Assignee assumes and agrees to perform and fulfill all the terms, covenants, conditions, and obligations accruing on or after the Effective Date and required to be performed and fulfilled by Assignor as sublessee under the Sublease, including the making of all payments due to Sublessor under the Sublease or payable by Assignor as Sublessee under the Sublease, all as they become due and payable. Assignee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless Assignor from and against any and all claims, costs, 2 <PAGE> expenses, liabilities, obligations and damages of any nature whatsoever arising from Assignee's default under the Sublease (collectively "Claims"). Without limiting the foregoing, if any Claim is made against Assignor, Assignee shall defend Assignor with counsel reasonably acceptable to Assignor. Section 4. Covenants --------------------- (a) Assignor covenants as follows: (i) that the copy of the Sublease attached as Exhibit B is a true and accurate copy of the Sublease as of the Effective Date and that there exists no other agreement affecting Assignor's tenancy under the Sublease; (ii) the copy of the Master Lease attached as Exhibit A, to the best of Assignor's knowledge, is a true and accurate copy of the Master Lease as of the Effective Date; and (iii) the Sublease is in full effect and, to the best of Assignor's knowledge, no defaults exist under the Sublease, nor any acts or events which, with the passage of time or the giving of notice or both, could become defaults. (b) Assignee covenants as follows: (i) that it has read the Master Lease attached hereto and the Sublease; and (ii) that as of the Effective Date it shall have made such investigations of the Subleased Premises as it deems necessary to determine that the Subleased Premises are acceptable to it. Section 5. Sublease Cash Security Deposit/Letter of Credit ----------------------------------------------------------- (a) On or before the Effective Date, Assignee shall pay Assignor $297,454.50 in cash in the form of a certified bank check in exchange for Assignor's assignment to Assignee of all of Assignor's right, title and interest in the $297,454.50 cash security deposit provided for in Section 30 of the Sublease ("Sublease Security Deposit"). (b) On or before the Effective Date, Assignee shall deliver to Sublessor $297,454.50 in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit (the "Letter of Credit Security Deposit") issued by a bank acceptable to Sublessor and in form and substance acceptable to Sublessor (the "Letter of Credit") and otherwise in full compliance with Section 30 of the Sublease. Concurrently with the delivery to Sublessor of Assignee's Letter of Credit Security Deposit, Sublessor shall cause Assignor's letter of credit (which Sublessor currently holds as security under Section 30 of the Sublease) to be released provided, however, no such release shall occur unless and until Sublessor has received and approved Assignee's Letter of Credit Security Deposit. The release by Sublessor of beyond.com's letter of credit on or before November 22, 1999 shall be a condition to the effectiveness of Assignor's assignment hereunder. If Assignor's letter of credit is not released on or before such date, on twenty-four hours written notice Assignor may rescind this Assignment at any time until its letter of credit is released. Section 6. Brokers ------------------- Assignor and Assignee acknowledge that no real estate broker brought about this assignment transaction. Each party hereby agrees to indemnify the other party against claims of any person claiming by, through or under the first party in connection with this assignment transaction. 3 <PAGE> Section 7. Condition of Premises --------------------------------- Assignor makes no representations or warranties with regard to the conditions of the Subleased Premises. Assignee is in occupancy of the building in which the Subleased Premises are located and is familiar with the building systems that service the building and with the custom and practice of Sublessor. Assignee may investigate the Subleased Premises and all parts thereof prior to signing this Assignment. To the best of beyond.com's knowledge, without investigation, beyond.com has received no notice that the Subleased Premises are in violation of any ordinance, rule, code or regulation of any governmental agency. Section 8. Successors and Assigns ---------------------------------- This Assignment shall be binding on and inure to the benefit of the parties to it, their successors-in-interest, and assigns. Section 9. Governing Law ------------------------- This Assignment shall be governed by and construed in accordance with California law. Section 10. Attorneys' Fees ---------------------------- If either party commences an action against the other in connection with this Assignment, the Sublease, for indemnity or any matter related thereto, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover costs of suit and reasonable attorneys' fees. Section 11. Counterparts ------------------------- This Assignment may be executed in counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. The parties have executed this Assignment as of the date first above written. Assignor: beyond.com, a Delaware corporation By: /s/ Garry Stuib ------------------------- Title: Director of HR ------------------------- Assignee: Interwoven, Inc., a Delaware corporation By: David M. Allen ------------------------- Title: V.P. & CFO ------------------------- 4 <PAGE> Consent of Master Landlord -------------------------- First Data Merchant Services Corporation ("First Data"), Tenant under the Master Lease and Sublandlord under the Sublease and Sunnyvale Partners Limited Partnership ("Sunnyvale Partners"), Landlord under the Master Lease, hereby consent to this Assignment of the Sublease to Assignee and Sunnyvale Partners confirms that the consent given hereby satisfies the requirements for giving consent as set forth in the Master Lease regarding this Assignment and First Data confirms that the consent given hereby satisfies the requirements for giving consent as set forth in the Sublease regarding this Assignment. However, Assignor and Assignee remain otherwise subject to all terms and conditions of Section 18 of the Sublease as set forth in the Master Lease. By so consenting to the Assignment of the Sublease, Sunnyvale Partners and First Data do not hereby consent to become a party to the Assignment. If the Master Lease is terminated prior to the termination of the Sublease, the Sublease shall terminate simultaneously therewith and Assignee's rights to possess to any portion of the Subleased Premises arise solely from the provisions of the Sublease and neither the Sublease nor this consent shall be deemed as granting Assignee any greater tenancy rights than Subtenant under the Sublease. Nothing in this Consent or the Assignment shall be deemed to be either (i) a modification of or an amendment to the Sublease or Master Lease; or (ii) a release of beyond.com from its obligations under the Sublease or a modification of any of beyond.com's obligations under the Sublease. First Data hereby consents to the right of beyond.com to cure any defaults by Assignee under the Sublease provided such defaults are cured within the time periods set forth in the Sublease. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this Consent, nothing contained herein shall operate as a consent to or approval or ratification by First Data or Sunnyvale Partners of any of the provisions of the Assignment or as a representation or warranty by First Data or Sunnyvale Partners, and neither First Data nor Sunnyvale Partners shall be bound or estopped in any way by the provisions of the Assignment. In addition, nothing herein shall be construed to waive any future or present breach or default on the part of beyond.com under the Sublease. Sunnyvale Partners Sunnyvale Partners Limited Partnership, a California limited partnership By: /s/ James Small -------------------------------- Title: General Partner First Data Merchant Services Corporation, a Florida corporation By: /s/ David Schlapbach -------------------------------- Title: -------------------------------- <PAGE> EXHIBIT A BUILD-TO-SUIT LEASE AGREEMENT ----------------------------- Landlord: SUNNYVALE PARTNERS LIMITED PARTNERSHIP Tenant: FIRST DATA MERCHANT SERVICES CORPORATION March 18, 1997 <PAGE> EXHIBIT A TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. Description........................................................... 1 2. Term and Occupancy.................................................... 1 3. Rent.................................................................. 2 4. Construction.......................................................... 3 5. Use................................................................... 7 6. Condition of demised Premises......................................... 8 7. Maintenance and Repairs............................................... 8 8. Alterations........................................................... 9 9. Signs................................................................. 11 10. Services.............................................................. 11 11. Compliance with Law................................................... 12 12. Landlord's Title, Authority, and Quiet Enjoyment; Tenant's Authority.. 13 13. Subordination......................................................... 13 14. Assignment and Sublease............................................... 14 15. Lease Extension....................................................... 15 16. Impositions........................................................... 16 17. Insurance............................................................. 18 18. Destruction and Restoration........................................... 20 19. Condemnation.......................................................... 22 20. Default by Tenant..................................................... 26 21. Landlord's Remedies................................................... 27 22. Default by Landlord................................................... 28 23. Tenant's Remedies..................................................... 28 i <PAGE> EXHIBIT A 24. Delivery of Executed Lease............................................ 29 25. Termination........................................................... 29 26. Notices............................................................... 29 27. Brokerage............................................................. 30 28. Estoppel.............................................................. 30 29. Hazardous Substances.................................................. 30 30. Holdover.............................................................. 32 31. Surrender............................................................. 32 32. Liens................................................................. 33 33. Interest; Late Charge................................................. 34 34. Inspections........................................................... 34 35. Transfer of Landlord's Interest....................................... 34 36. Indemnity............................................................. 35 37. Modifications of Lease................................................ 35 38. Memorandum of Lease................................................... 36 39. Paragraph Captions.................................................... 36 40 Entire Agreement...................................................... 36 41. Choice of Law and Interpretation...................................... 36 42. Prevailing Party...................................................... 36 43. Exhibits.............................................................. 36 44. Guarantee............................................................. 37 45. Independent Covenants................................................. 37 46. Entry by Landlord..................................................... 37 47. [Deleted by intent of parties.]....................................... 37 48. Survival of Obligations............................................... 37 ii <PAGE> 49. Lease Subject to Landlord's Acquisition of Demised Premises........... 38 50. Americans With Disabilities Act....................................... 38 51. Reports by Tenant..................................................... 39 52. Option to Purchase.................................................... 39 53. No Third Party Beneficiaries.......................................... 41 54. Counterparts.......................................................... 41 55. Consents and Approvals................................................ 41 56. Limitation on Damages................................................. 41 57. Tenant's Property..................................................... 41 Exhibit A - Legal Description Exhibit B - Site Plan Exhibit C - Plans Exhibit C-1 - Construction Schedule Exhibit D - Schedule of Rents Exhibit E - Lease Term Agreement Exhibit F - Memorandum of Lease Exhibit G - Landlord's Development Costs Exhibit H - Permitted Exceptions Exhibit I - Escrow Agreement iii <PAGE> THIS BUILD-TO-SUIT LEASE AGREEMENT (this "Lease") is made as of the 18th day of March, 1997 (the "date hereof") between SUNNYVALE PARTNERS LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, an Illinois limited partnership, having its principal office at c/o Ridge Sunnyvale, Inc., c/o Ridge Capital Corporation, 257 East Main Street, Barrington, Illinois 60010 (hereinafter referred to as "Landlord"), and FIRST DATA MERCHANT SERVICES CORPORATION, having its principal office at 5660 New Northside Drive, Suite 1400, Atlanta, Georgia 30328 (hereinafter referred to as "Tenant"). W I T N E S S E T H: - - - - - - - - - - Landlord, for and in consideration of the rents, covenants and agreements hereinafter set forth on the part of Tenant to be paid, kept, observed and performed does hereby lease unto Tenant, and Tenant does hereby take subject to the conditions herein expressed, all that parcel of land situated in the City of Sunnyvale, County of Santa Clara, State of California and legally described on Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof (the "Land"), together with all improvements located and to be constructed thereon by Landlord, which are hereinafter called "Landlord's Improvements." Landlord's Improvements and all improvements, machinery, building equipment, fixtures and other property of Landlord, real, personal or mixed (except Tenant's trade fixtures and any other property of Tenant), installed or located thereon, together with all additions, alterations and replacements thereof are collectively referred to herein as the "Improvements." The Land and the Improvements are sometimes hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Demised Premises". The structure located upon and being a part of the Demised Premises which is constructed to be used as a two story office building containing approximately 80,000 "useable square feet" (as defined in Paragraph 4 below) is hereinafter referred to as the "Building". 1. Description. Landlord will cause Landlord's Improvements (including the Building and other site improvements depicted on the Site Plan attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit B) to be constructed in substantial accordance with the plans and specifications enumerate on Exhibit C (the "Plans"). Landlord agrees that Landlord shall not make any modifications or changes to the Plans without Tenant's prior written consent. Landlord further agrees to make any changes to the Plans requested by Tenant in writing and if the change requested by Tenant increases or decreases the cost of the Demised Premises, the Base Rent provided for herein shall be adjusted in accordance with the provisions of the formula provided on Exhibit D. 2. Terms and Occupancy. A. The term of this Lease shall commence on the Construction Completion Date, as provided in Paragraph 4 below (hereinafter referred to as the "Commencement Date"), and shall end on the date which is the last day of the month that includes the twelfth (12th) anniversary of the Commencement Date (hereinafter referred to as the "Expiration Date"), unless the term be extended or earlier terminated as provided herein. Landlord shall notify Tenant of the anticipated Construction Completion Date. Landlord agrees to notify Tenant promptly from time to time of any changes in the anticipated Construction Completion Date. Tenant shall have the right to enter the Demised Premises during the approximately ninety (90) day period preceding the Construction Completion Date for the purpose of installing its equipment and Tenant does hereby agree to assume all risk of loss or <PAGE> damage to such equipment, and to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless Landlord from and against any loss or damage to such equipment and all liability, loss or damage arising from any injury to the property of Landlord, or its contractors, subcontractors or materialmen, and any death or personal injury to any person or persons arising out of such installation. Landlord agrees to cooperate with Tenant so that Tenant's contractors and tradespeople will be permitted to reasonably perform their work without material interference. Tenant agrees to cooperate with Landlord so that Landlord's contractors and tradespeople will be permitted to reasonably perform their work without material interference. B. Notwithstanding anything else in this Lease to the contrary, Tenant shall have the right to terminate this Lease as of the end of the eighth (8th) Lease Year (the "Early Termination Date") provided that Tenant shall (a) notify Landlord in writing of its election to terminate at least one (1) year prior to the Early Termination Date, and (b) pay to the Landlord, concurrently with the notification to Landlord hereunder, a termination fee by certified or cashier's check or wire transfer of available funds ("Termination Amount") equal to the discounted present value (using Landlord's financing interest rate) amount needed to reduce the remaining unamortized principal balance due on the indebtedness originally incurred by Landlord to finance the Landlord's Development Costs (as defined in Paragraph 19F) to [deleted text]. If Tenant gives such notice as required hereunder and pays the Termination Amount concurrently therewith, this Lease shall be deemed terminated as to all rights or obligations hereunder (except such rights and obligations as Landlord and Tenant would otherwise have upon normal expiration of the term of this Lease). Any such notice hereunder, not accompanied by the Termination Amount as provided hereinabove, shall be deemed invalid and of no force or effect. Upon Landlord's closing on the permanent loan for the financing of the Landlord's Development Costs, Landlord shall provide to Tenant a copy of the twenty (20) year permanent loan amortization (the "Loan Amortization"), which shall include the principal amount that will be due at the end of the eighth (8th) Lease Year. Tenant shall have the right to pay the Termination Amount to any mortgagee of the Demised Premises or other person with a lien on the Demised Premises or the rents derived therefrom, but Tenant shall have no such obligation to do so unless such obligation is specifically set forth in a non-disturbance or other agreement between Tenant and such mortgagee or other lienholder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Tenant acknowledges and agrees that any payment to any such mortgagee or other lienholder shall only be effectuated by a two-party or two- payee certified or cashier's check, made payable to both Landlord and any such mortgagee or other lienholder. 3. Rent. The annual base rental ("Base Rent") shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions set forth on the Schedule of Rents attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit D. Base Rent shall be paid monthly, in advance, in equal installments, without offset or deduction by wire transfer in accordance with separate instruction given by Landlord to Tenant, on the Commencement Date and on the first day of each month thereafter during the term hereof; provided however, that if the term of this Lease shall commence on a date other than the first day of a calendar month or end on a date other than the last day of a calendar month (i) the first and last month's Base Rent shall be prorated based upon the ratio that the number of days in the term within such month bears to the total number of days in such month, and (ii) Base Rent reserved for the calendar month of any scheduled rent escalation shall be equitably adjusted upon due 2 <PAGE> consideration of the number of days in such month falling within the preceding Lease Year (as herein defined) and the number of days in such month falling within the current Lease Year. For purposes of this Lease, the term "Lease Year" shall mean the 12-month period commencing on the Commencement Date and each 12- month period thereafter during the term of this Lease (and any renewal or extension thereof), provided that, if the Commencement Date is not the first day of a calendar month, the first "Lease Year" shall be the period commencing on the Commencement Date and ending on the last day of the twelfth (12th) full calendar month following the Commencement Date and all Base Rent payable for the month in which the Commencement Date occurs shall be paid on the first day of the following calendar month. Notwithstanding the foregoing, on or prior to the date of closing under the Sale Agreement (as defined herein), Tenant shall also deposit into escrow with First American Title Guaranty Company the sum of Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00) to cover a portion of the Landlord's Development Costs which shall be disbursed in accordance with the Escrow Agreement attached hereto as Exhibit I. 4. Construction. A. Landlord agrees, at Landlord's sole cost and expense, to cause construction of Landlord's Improvements in accordance with the following schedule: (a) Landlord shall use all reasonable efforts to commence the Site Preparation Phase (as defined in that certain Real Estate Purchase and Sale Agreement and Joint Escrow Instructions dated March 18, 1997 (the "Sale Agreement") between Regis Homes of Northern California, Inc. and Landlord) as soon as possible following the date Landlord acquires the Land and in any event on or before the date four (4) business days following the date Landlord acquires the Land (the "Estimated Construction Commencement Date"), in accordance with the Plans and in accordance with the construction schedule attached hereto as Exhibit C-1 (the "Construction Schedule") and shall diligently pursue construction in an effort to complete Landlord's Improvements on or before the Estimated Construction Completion Date (as herein defined); provided, however, if delay is caused or contributed to by act or neglect of Tenant, or those acting for or under Tenant including, without limitation, changes ordered by Tenant, or delays caused by labor disputes, casualties, acts of God or the public enemy, governmental embargo restrictions, shortages of fuel, labor, or building materials, action or non-action of public utilities, or of local, State or Federal governments affecting the work, or other similar causes beyond the Landlord's reasonable control, then the time of commencement of said construction shall be extended for the additional time caused by such delay (such delays are each hereinafter referred to as an "excused delay"). The date on which Landlord actually commences construction of Landlord's Improvements shall be referred to as the "Construction Commencement Date." (b) Landlord shall use all reasonable efforts to substantially complete construction of Landlord's Improvements as soon as possible following the Construction Completion Date in accordance with the Construction Schedule attached hereto as Exhibit C-1, as may be extended by excused delays (the 3 <PAGE> "Estimated Construction Completion Date"). The date on which Landlord substantially completes construction of Landlord's Improvements (except for work to be performed by Tenant) shall be referred to as the "Construction Completion Date." Landlord acknowledges that Tenant will suffer significant damages if Landlord fails to deliver the Demised Premises on or before the Estimated Construction Completion Date and that time is of the essence with respect to Landlord's completion of the Landlord's Improvements as required herein. If Landlord fails to cause the Landlord's Improvements to be substantially completed on or before the Estimated Construction Completion Date, as said date may be extended from time to time due to excused delays, Landlord shall be obligated to pay to Tenant the following sums for each day after the Estimated Construction Completion Date until the Construction Completion Date up to the maximum of sixty-five (65) days of delay and thereafter, Landlord shall be liable for Tenant's actual damages for the delay (which shall include Tenant's actual costs incurred in connection with holding over at its present location and/or renting reasonably acceptable substitute space): (a) for the first thirty (30) days of delay, the sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each calendar day of delay; (b) for the thirty-first (31st) day through the sixtieth (60th) day of delay, the sum of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) per day for each calendar day of delay; and (c) for the sixty-first (61st) day through the sixty-fifth (65th) day of delay, the sum of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) per day for each calendar day of delay. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall Landlord be liable to Tenant for any punitive, special, incidental, indirect or consequential damages of any kind whatsoever, each of which is hereby excluded by agreement of the parties regardless of whether or not any party has been advised of the possibility of such damages. Landlord shall pay the sums calculated above (other than actual damages accrued after the 95th day of delay) within thirty (30) days after the Commencement Date. In connection with the foregoing, Landlord agrees to deposit into escrow for the benefit of Tenant all damages received from Regis Contractors of Northern California, L.P. pursuant to Section 1.7 of that certain Construction Management Agreement dated March 18, 1997. Tenant agrees to deliver to Landlord an accounting of Tenant's actual damages upon request. B. Tenant or its architect will from time to time upon written request of Landlord or Landlord's construction lender certify that the construction of Landlord's Improvements has been completed to that point to the reasonable satisfaction of Tenant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to abrogate, waive or compromise any of Tenant's rights hereunder with respect to the construction and completion of Landlord's Improvements. C. In the event this Lease has not been terminated pursuant to Paragraph 49 of the Lease, Landlord and Tenant promptly shall execute a document substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit E and made a part hereof, to establish the Commencement Date and the Expiration Date. 4 <PAGE> D. The following phrases have the meanings set forth below: (a) The phrase "commence[d][s] construction of Landlord's Improvements" as used herein means issuance of all necessary permits needed to commence construction, a building permit, execution of a construction contract or contracts for the completion of Landlord's Improvements in accordance with the Plans, execution of this Lease, and excavation work has commenced. (b) The phrase "substantial[ly] complete[ed] [ion] [of] construction of Landlord's Improvements as used in this Lease shall mean the municipality having jurisdiction thereof issues a certificate of occupancy permitting Tenant to occupy Landlord's Improvements or takes such other action as may be customary to permit occupancy or use thereof for the purposes provided herein and Landlord's Improvements are otherwise ready for beneficial use and occupancy by Tenant subject to completion of any punchlist items (as defined herein) by Landlord and Landlord's architect certified to Tenant in writing that Landlord's Improvements have been constructed and completed in a good and workmanlike manner in substantial accordance with the Plans and that to the best of its knowledge the Plans comply with applicable laws, including without limitation all building codes, zoning ordinances and regulations and the Act (as defined herein) and Landlord's Improvements are otherwise ready for beneficial use and occupancy by Tenant subject to completion of any punchlist items by Landlord; provided, however, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or such other action as may be customary to permit occupancy or use thereof and the issuance of the architect's certificate shall not be a condition to payment of rent or commencement of the term if failure to secure such certificate of occupancy or action or architect's certificate is caused by the act or neglect of Tenant or if matters required for issuance are the responsibility of Tenant. (c) The phrase "usable square feet" means the square feet contained within the inside of the exterior walls of the Building. E. Within fifteen (15) days after the Construction Completion Date, Tenant, Landlord and Landlord's Architect shall prepare and execute a punchlist (the "punchlist") of incomplete and incorrect items which shall include details of construction and mechanical and electrical adjustments which are minor in character and do not materially interfere with Tenant's use or enjoyment of the Demised Premises in accordance with the provisions of this Lease, and may also include landscaping and other items which do not materially affect Tenant's use of the Demised Premises but which cannot be immediately completed because of weather, or any items listed on the Plans or the Construction Schedule as items to be completed after substantial completion of the Landlord's Improvements, if any (such items are sometimes hereinafter referred to as "punchlist items"). Landlord shall use all reasonable efforts to complete the punchlist items as soon as possible after its receipt of the punchlist, and to minimize disruption of Tenant's business and other inconveniences to Tenant, subject to excused delays. If Landlord fails to complete the punchlist items within ninety (90) days after the receipt by Landlord of the completed punchlist by Tenant, subject to excused delays, then Tenant shall have the right, but not the obligation, to complete the punchlist items and the Landlord shall reimburse Tenant for its 5 <PAGE> reasonable out-of-pocket expenditures in connection therewith upon presentation of invoices in sufficient detail and upon waivers covering performance of the work. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to permit Tenant to offset against Base Rent or other charges payable by Tenant hereunder. Landlord shall deliver to Tenant "as built" working drawings of the Landlord's Improvements within sixty (60) days after completion of the punchlist items. Landlord shall maintain a retainage of a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the cost of the so-called tenant improvement portion of the Landlord Improvements (the "TI Work") or, based on an estimated approximate cost of for the TI Work. The aforementioned retainage shall not be released until the punchlist items for TI Work have been completed to Tenant's reasonable satisfaction. F. Landlord shall at its own expense correct or repair any parts of Landlord's Improvements that fail to conform with the requirements of the Plans during the period of construction of Landlord's Improvements (unless Tenant is willing to accept such non-conforming work and so notifies Landlord thereof in writing). Landlord shall correct any defects in the construction of Landlord's Improvements not caused by Tenant which appear within a period of one (1) year from the Construction Completion Date, but not otherwise. Landlord shall obtain for the joint benefit of Landlord and Tenant, a joint, non-exclusive assignment of all contractor, subcontractor, equipment, material and manufacturers' warranties relating to the Landlord's Improvements which shall contain a minimum of a one (1) year warranty period commencing with the contractors' or subcontractors' completion of the work included in Landlord's Improvements (the "Warranties"). Furthermore, on the Construction Completion Date, Landlord shall assign to Tenant the non-exclusive right to enforce any and all Warranties and Landlord agrees to reasonably cooperate with Tenant's pursuit of any and all claims under the Warranties. G. Tenant shall have the right to request that changes be made to the Plans. Within ten (10) days after Tenant's requests, Landlord shall provide an estimate of the amount that the change will increase or decrease the cost of completing the Landlord's Improvements and the time adjustment to the Construction Schedule, if any. If Tenant approves the change following receipt of the estimates, Landlord shall submit a change order to its contractors to implement the change requested by Tenant. The estimated increase or decrease in the time required to complete the Landlord's Improvements resulting from Tenant's change shall be reflected as an adjustment to the Construction Schedule and shall be deemed an "excused delay" and any net increase or decrease in Landlord's construction costs due to Tenant's change order, shall be borne by or credited to Tenant, as the case may be, by means of an adjustment to the Schedule of Rents in accordance with the formula established on Exhibit D. H. If due to change orders initiated by Tenant, Landlord's Development Costs exceed the amount of [deleted text] then concurrent with any such change order, Tenant agrees to deposit into the escrow created by the Escrow Agreement (as defined in Paragraph 3 hereof) the total amount of any such increase in Landlord's Development Costs in excess of [deleted text]. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the closing of the permanent financing for the Demised Premises occurring on or after the Commencement Date, Landlord shall reimburse Tenant for all such increased costs and the Base Rent shall be adjusted in accordance with the formula 6 <PAGE> established on Exhibit D; provided, however, Base Rent shall not be adjusted until such time as Tenant is reimbursed hereunder. 5. Use. A. The Demised Premises shall be used and occupied for general office purposes and for any other purpose which does not violate any applicable law, rule, ordinance or regulation of any applicable government authority having jurisdiction ("Tenant's Use"). Landlord represents that, to its actual knowledge, the Demised Premises are currently zoned "O," Administrative- Professional District and R1.7/PD, low medium density residential district under the zoning ordinance of the City of Sunnyvale, California, which zoning classification, to Landlord's actual knowledge, will not restrict or limit Tenant's Use; provided, however, Landlord makes no representation as to whether a special use permit, zoning variance or comparable relief from the local zoning ordinance is required to conduct Tenant's Use, and if such special use, variance or comparable relief is required, Tenant shall obtain the same (at its sole cost and expense). Landlord further represents, to its actual knowledge without independent investigation or inquiry and subject to the foregoing proviso, that there are no other zoning ordinances or any other prohibitions restricting or limiting Tenant's Use in any material respect. In addition, Tenant may use all or any part of the Demised Premises for any lawful purpose then permitted by local zoning ordinances and the certificate of occupancy, if available; provided, however, Tenant may not use or occupy the Demised Premises, or knowingly permit the Demised Premises to be used or occupied (including without limitation subleasing the Demised Premises or any part thereof or assigning this Lease to any other party conducting a business other than Tenant's Use) or in such a manner as to cause the value or usefulness of the Demised Premises, or any part thereof, substantially to diminish (reasonable wear and tear excepted). Tenant shall have the exclusive right to use of and shall have full access to the Demised Premises twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year during the term. B. Tenant may, if Tenant so elects, and for Tenant's sole use, install and operate within the Building microwave ovens and install and operate within the Building vending machines to dispense hot and cold beverages, ice cream, candy, food and cigarettes; such machines shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition and shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances. Tenant shall also have the right to use, install and operate within the Building, all telecommunication lines and other telecommunication and electronic facilities relating to services to be provided to Tenant and its subtenants and Landlord agrees to provide all necessary easements upon the Demised Premises reasonably required by said service provider. Upon termination of the Lease, and if so requested by Landlord, Tenant shall, at its sole cost and expense, in a good and workmanlike manner and in as expeditious a manner as possible, remove any or all such items from the Demised Premises, to the extent required by Landlord. Tenant further agrees to repair any damage to the Demised Premises caused by the removal of such items. In connection with any easements granted hereunder to service providers, Landlord reserves the right to condition any such grant upon receipt of acknowledgment from the relevant service provider(s) that such service provider agrees to vacate the easement, and relinquish all of its rights in the Demised Premises, effective upon the termination of the Lease. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, if the Lease is in full force and effect as of the thirteenth (13th) anniversary of the Commencement Date and Tenant is not then in default 7 <PAGE> hereunder, Landlord waives its rights hereunder to require Tenant to remove from the Demised Premises any or all of the items referred to above, upon termination of this Lease. 6. Condition of Demised Premises. Landlord shall construct and Tenant shall reasonably accept Landlord's Improvements in accordance with the Plans. As of the Commencement Date, Landlord's Improvements shall be in good working order and condition and, subject to the items on or to be inserted on the punchlist, constructed in substantial accordance with the Plans. 7. Maintenance and Repairs. A. Except as otherwise provided herein, during the term of this Lease, Tenant shall, at Tenant's sole expense, keep the Demised Premises in good working order, condition and repair and in compliance with all applicable laws and shall perform all routine maintenance thereof and all necessary repairs thereto, interior and exterior, structural and nonstructural ordinary and extraordinary, foreseen or unforeseen, of every nature, kind and description. When used in this Paragraph 7, "repairs" shall include all necessary replacements, renewals, alterations, additions and betterments. If Tenant cannot keep the Demised Premises or any portion thereof in good working order, condition and repair, then Tenant shall replace the same in a first-class manner. Tenant shall comply with manufacturers' recommended schedules for warranty work. Tenant shall furnish its own cleaning services. All repairs and replacements made by Tenant shall be at least equal in quality to the original work and shall be made by Tenant in accordance with all applicable laws. The necessity for or adequacy of maintenance, repairs and replacements shall be measured by the standards which are appropriate for improvements of similar construction and class, provided that Tenant shall in any event make all repairs and replacements necessary to avoid any structural damage or other damage or injury to the Demised Premises. B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 7.A., and Tenant's obligations to pay for all repairs, in the event that at any time during the term of this Lease after the expiration of the twentieth (20th) Lease Year (commencing with the Third Extension Term), Tenant reasonably determines that capital expenditures are required to be expended by Tenant in connection with maintaining,, repairing or replacing the roof or structural components of the Building, or replacing the parking areas, Building plumbing, electrical heating, ventilation, or cooling equipment, sprinkler systems, or making any other capital expenditure required by subsequent law (any such capital expenditure being herein referred to as a "Specified Capital Item"), then the Tenant shall submit to Landlord a proposed budget for such capital expenses for the Specified Capital Items and obtain Landlord's prior written approval thereof, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Upon Tenant's obtaining Landlord's prior written approval of such Specified Capital Items and Tenant completing such work in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Lease then and in that event, the Landlord agrees that it shall reimburse Tenant for an amount ("Reimbursement Amount") equal to the actual costs incurred in connection with the Specified Capital Item previously approved by Landlord and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the portion of the useful life of such Specified Capital Items remaining after the then existing term and the denominator of which is the useful life of such Specified Capital Item (i.e., by way of example, in the event that the approved cost for an approved Specified Capital Item was One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) and the useful life of such Specified Capital Item was eight (8) years and such work was commenced at the end of the 8 <PAGE> twentieth (20th) Lease Year, then in such event, Landlord should reimburse Tenant for Five Hundred Dollars ($500) as the Reimbursement Amount. The "useful life" of a Specified Capital Item shall be determined using the United States Internal Revenue Service standard depreciation schedule in effect on the date that the applicable capital expenditure is made. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in the event that the Tenant exercises its option to extend the term of the Lease, then simultaneous with the exercise of such renewal option, the Tenant shall pay to Landlord an amount equal to the difference between the Reimbursement Amount and the amount Landlord would have paid as a Reimbursement Amount had the term been extended by the Extension Term at the time such Specified Capital Item was commenced (i.e., by way of example, in the event that the Specified Capital Item was One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) and that the useful life of the Specified Capital Item was eight (8) years, with such work having been commenced at the end of the twentieth (20th) Lease Year, whereby Landlord reimbursed Tenant a Reimbursement Amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500), then simultaneous with the exercise of its option to extend the Term for the Fourth Extension Term, the Tenant would pay to Landlord an amount equal to Five Hundred Dollars ($500)). The allocation of the costs of Specified Capital Items as set forth in this Paragraph 7.B. shall not relieve Tenant of Tenant's maintenance and repair obligation sunder this Lease. 8. Alterations. Tenant may install tenant finishes in the Demised Premises and make interior alterations, additional installations, modifications, substitutions, improvements and decorations (collectively, "Alterations") in and to the Demised Premises, subject only to the following conditions: (i) any Alterations shall be made at Tenant's sole cost and expense so that the Demised Premises shall at all times be free of liens for labor and materials supplied to the Demised Premises; (ii) without the prior written approval of Landlord, Tenant shall make no Alterations (x) which are structural in nature or adversely affect in any way the structure of the Demised Premises; or (y) which adversely affect or could render void or invalidate any Warranties under this Lease. In addition, without the prior written approval of Landlord, Tenant shall make no Alterations to any portion of the exterior or elevation of the Building. (iii) any Alterations shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in compliance with all applicable laws and requirements of governmental authorities having jurisdiction and applicable insurance requirements and shall not violate any term of any agreement or restriction to which the Demised Premises are subject; (iv) Tenant, at its sole cost and expense, shall cause its contractors to maintain builder's risk insurance and such other insurance (including, without limitation, workers compensation insurance) as is then customarily maintained for such work, all with insurers licensed by the State of California; (v) At least fifteen (15) days prior to Tenant's commencement of any Alterations costing in excess of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), the plans and specifications therefor shall be submitted to Landlord for Landlord's review and 9 <PAGE> approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed provided that the provisions of this subparagraph (v) shall not apply to initial tenant improvements needed to locate a subtenant in the Demised Premises; and (vi) To the extent not inconsistent with the requirement set forth above, ten shall not be required to obtain Landlord's consent to Alterations which are a subtenant's initial tenant improvements. Any Alteration shall, when completed, be of such character as not to reduce the value or utility of the Demised Premises or the Building to which such Alteration is made below its value or utility to Landlord immediately before such Alteration, nor shall such Alteration alter the exterior of the Improvements or reduce the area or cubic content of the Building, nor change the character of the Demised Premises or the Building as to use without Landlord's express written consent. No change, alteration, restoration or new construction shall be in or connect the Improvements with any property, building or other improvement located outside the boundaries of the Land, nor shall the same obstruct or interfere with any existing easement. Tenant shall notify Landlord in writing 30 days prior to commencing any alterations, additions or improvements to the Demised Premises so that Landlord shall have the right to record and post notices of nonresponsibility on the Demised Premises. Within a reasonable time period prior to commencing the alterations, additions or improvements, ten shall provide Landlord with copies of all plans and specifications prepared in connection with any such alteration, addition or improvement, as well as copies of each material amendment and change thereto, if and when applicable. All of Tenant's generators and uninterruptible power supply equipment (but in no event including the primary HVAC system serving the Building), trade fixtures, movable partitions, furniture, machinery and furnishings installed by Tenant or assignees, subtenants or licensees of Tenant shall remain the property of the owner thereof with the right of removal, whether or not affixed and or attached to the real estate and the owner thereof shall be entitled to remove the same or any part thereof during the term or at the end of the term provided herein, provided that such owner shall repair any damage caused by such removal. Except as otherwise provided herein, all Alterations made or installed by Tenant shall remain the Property of Tenant and Tenant shall have the right to remove the Alterations at any time during the term hereof provided Tenant shall repair any damage resulting therefrom and leave the Demised Premises in a commercially reasonable condition. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Alterations remaining on the Demised Premises at the end of the term shall become the property of the Landlord without payment therefor by Landlord, and shall be surrendered to Landlord at the expiration of the term of this Lease; provided however, if the Lease term ends prior to the thirteenth (13th) anniversary of the Lease Commencement Date, if so requested by Landlord, Tenant shall, at its sole cost and expense and in as expeditious a manner as possible remove any or all of such Alterations from the Demised Premises, to the extent required by Landlord. Tenant further agrees to repair any damage resulting therefrom and leave the Demised Premises in a commercially reasonable condition. 10 <PAGE> 9. Signs. A. Tenant may install, at its expense and pursuant to the Plans, a monument identification sign containing Tenant's name at a location depicted on Exhibit B unless such location would cause a violation of applicable laws in which event said monument identification sign shall be moved to a location mutually acceptable to the parties. Tenant shall also have the right to place any additional signs at the Demised Premises without the prior consent of Landlord, provided that such sign or signs (a) do not cause any structural damage or other damage to the Building; (b) do not violate applicable governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations; (c) do not violate any existing restrictions affecting the Demised Premises; and (d) are compatible with the architecture of the Building and the landscaped area adjacent thereto. Tenant shall remove all signage from the Demised Premises at the end of the term. B. Landlord may place signs on the Demised Premises identifying Tenant prior to the Construction Completion Date, provided Tenant has approved each sign, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. 10. Services. A. Landlord shall provide all utility equipment, distribution systems, fixtures and parts to the Demised Premises in accordance with the Plans, and shall in all other respects prepare the Demised Premises to accept all utilities to be used by Tenant during the term of the Lease as contemplated by the Plans including all connection, tap-in and impact fees, any charges for the underground installation of electric, gas or other utilities or services, and other charges relating to the extension of or change in the facilities necessary to provide the Demised Premises with adequate utilities services. Tenant shall contract for and pay directly or the cost of usage of all utilities including all charges for water, heat, gas, light, garbage, electricity, telephone, sewage, steam, power or other public or private utility services. If after Landlord's installation of the utility systems required to be provided herein, any bond, charge or fee is required by the state in which the Demised Premises are located, or any city or other agency, subdivision, or instrumentality thereof, or by any utility company furnishing services or utilities to the Demised Premises, as a condition precedent to continuing to furnish utilities or services to the Demised Premises, such bond, charge or fee shall be deemed to be a utility charge payable by Tenant. To the extent existing utility easements on the Demised Premises are not sufficient to provide utility and communication services to the Demised Premises for Tenant's use, Landlord agrees to grant additional easements to utility providers, including telecommunication and electronic service providers, if reasonably required by Tenant. B. The Demised Premises shall include all of the improvements shown on the Site Plan, including, without limitation, exclusive use of the paved parking as set forth on the Site Plan. C. Tenant acknowledges that any one or more of the services provided for in Paragraph 10 hereof may be interrupted or suspended by reason of accident, repair, alterations or improvements necessary to be made, strike, lockout, misuse or neglect by Tenant or Tenant's agents, employees or invitees, or by shortages of fuel or other energy supplies to be provided by public or private utilities or supplies or by other matters, and Landlord shall not be liable to 11 <PAGE> Tenant therefore, nor shall Tenant have any right to terminate the Lease or other rights against Landlord in the event of a failure, interruption or suspension of any of the aforesaid services. 11. Compliance with Law. A. Landlord covenants that the Demised Premises (except trade fixtures, equipment, machinery or any other item constructed or installed by Tenant) will materially conform as of the Commencement Date to any applicable laws, orders, statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations and requirements of federal, state and municipal governments, including, without limitation, all applicable rules and regulations of the Board of Fire Underwriters and any requirements of the certificate of occupancy or any permit with respect to the Demised Premises and the sidewalks, curbs, roadways, alleys, entrances or other facilities adjacent or appurtenant thereto. Landlord shall be responsible for procuring building and other permits and licenses necessary for construction of Landlord's Improvements. B. Tenant shall throughout the term of this Lease, at ten's sole cost, materially comply with or remove or cure any violation of any applicable laws, orders, statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations and requirements of federal, state and municipal governments, including, without limitation, any applicable laws, orders, statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations and requirements of any federal, state or local government relating to occupational safety and health (collectively, the "OSHA Regulations"), all applicable rules and regulations of the Board of Fire Underwriters and any requirements of the certificate of occupancy or any permit with respect to the Demised Premises and the sidewalks, curbs, roadways, alleys, entrances or railroad track facilities adjacent or appurtenant thereto, and whether the compliance, curing or removal of any such violation and the costs and expenses necessitated thereby shall have been foreseen or unforeseen, ordinary or extraordinary, and whether or not the same shall be presently within the contemplation of Landlord or Tenant or shall involve any change of governmental policy, or require structural or extraordinary repairs, alterations or additions by Tenant and irrespective of the costs thereof; provided, however, that Landlord shall be responsible, at Landlord's sole cost, to make all repairs needed for the Demised Premises to comply with all laws if said repair is required within one (1) years after the Commencement Date and is necessary due to a defect in the construction of the Landlord's Improvements including without limitation, a failure to construct the Landlord's Improvements so that the Demised Premises are in compliance with all laws as of the Commencement Date. Tenant, at its sole cost and expense, shall comply with all agreements, contracts, easements, restrictions, reservations or covenants, if any, affecting the Demised Premises or hereafter created by Tenant and consented to, in writing, by Tenant or requested, in writing, by Tenant. Tenant shall also comply with, observe and perform all provisions and requirements of all policies of insurance at any time in force with respect to the Demised Premises and shall comply with all development permits issued by governmental authorities issued in connection with development of the Demised Premises. Tenant shall procure and maintain all permits and licenses required for the transaction of Tenant's business at the Demised Premises, including with limitation, any special use permit, zoning variance or comparable zoning relief necessary for Tenant's Use. 12 <PAGE> 12. Landlord's Title, Authority, and Quiet Enjoyment: Tenant's Authority. A. Landlord represents that it will have, as of the Commencement Date, marketable fee simple title to the Demised Premises, subject to the exceptions to title currently encumbering the Demised Premises as described in Exhibit H, and any additional exceptions to title created in connection with Landlord's acquisition or development of the Demised Premises, or financing of such acquisition or development (collectively referred to herein as the "Permitted Exceptions"). Landlord represents that any such additional exceptions to title created in connection with Landlord's acquisition or development of the Demised Premises or financing of such acquisition or development shall not materially interfere with Tenant's intended use of the Demised Premises. Any lien claims properly bonded over or insured over by title insurance shall be deemed to be Permitted Exceptions hereunder. B. Landlord represents and warrants that it has full and complete authority to enter into this Lease under all of the terms, conditions and provisions set forth herein, and so long as Tenant keeps and substantially performs each and every term, provision and condition herein contained on the part of Tenant to be kept and performed, Tenant shall peacefully and quietly enjoy the Demised Premises without hindrance or molestation by Landlord or by any other person claiming by, through or under Landlord, subject to the terms of the Lease. Without limiting the foregoing, Landlord covenants to perform all obligations to be performed by Landlord and to pay as and when due all amounts to be paid by Landlord under any mortgage, deed of trust, ground lease or other instrument encumbering the Demised Premises. Each individual executing this Lease on behalf of Landlord represents and warrants to Tenant that he or she is duly authorized to do so. C. Tenant represents and warrants that it has full and complete authority to enter into this Lease under all of the terms, conditions and provisions set forth herein. D. Tenant hereby approves the condition of Landlord's title to the Demised Premises. This Lease shall be subject to the Permitted Exception sand Landlord shall not permit or cause any easements, covenants, restrictions, conditions or other changes in Landlord's title which would materially and adversely impact Tenant's Use. Landlord shall notify Tenant in writing prior to permitting or causing any easements, covenants, restrictions, or conditions to be placed of record. 13. Subordination. The priority of this Lease and the leasehold estate of Tenant created hereunder are and shall be subject and subordinate to the lien of any mortgage, deed of trust, sale-leaseback, ground lease or similar encumbrance, whether such encumbrance is placed against the fee or leasehold estate, affecting the Demised Premises and to all renewals, modifications, consolidations, replacements and extensions thereof, and advances thereunder; provided, however, with respect to any mortgage, deed of trust, sale-leaseback, ground lease or similar encumbrance such subordination shall be subject to receipt by Tenant of a nondisturbance agreement in form reasonably required by any such lienholder or ground Lessor (collectively, a "Mortgagee") and reasonably acceptable to Tenant. Tenant agrees at any time hereafter, upon twenty (20) days prior written notice, to execute and deliver any instruments, releases or other documents that may reasonably be required for the purpose of subjecting and subordinating this Lease, as above provided, to the lien of any such mortgage, deed of trust, ground lease, sale- 13 <PAGE> leaseback or similar encumbrance in a form reasonably acceptable to Tenant and the holder of such mortgage, provided said subordination provides that all insurance proceeds and condemnation awards will be made available for the restoration of the Demised Premises, as provided herein, and that Tenant's rights hereunder will not be disturbed unless Tenant is in default beyond all applicable cure periods. Any fee which Landlord's lender or ground lessor may charge for such agreement shall be paid by Landlord. In the event of any act or omission of Landlord constituting a default by Landlord, Tenant shall not exercise any remedy until Tenant has given Landlord and any mortgagee, ground lessor or sale-leaseback lessor of the Demised Premises that has provided Tenant with written notice of its interest in the Demised Premises and a notice address for each such party a prior thirty (30) day written notice of such act or omission and until a reasonable period of time to allow Landlord or the mortgagee, ground lessor or sale-leaseback lessor to remedy such act or omission shall have elapsed following the giving of such notice; provided, however, if such act or omission cannot, with due diligence and in good faith, be remedied within such thirty (30) day period, then Landlord or any such mortgagee, ground lessor or sale-leaseback lessor shall be allowed such further period of time as may be reasonably necessary provided that it commence remedying the same with due diligence and in good faith within said thirty (30) day period. If any Mortgagee shall succeed to the rights of Landlord under this Lease or to ownership of the Demised Premises, whether through possession or foreclosure or the delivery of a deed to the Demised Premises, then, upon written request of such mortgagee so succeeding to Landlord's rights hereunder, Tenant shall attorn to and recognize such mortgagee, ground lessor or sale- leaseback lessor as Tenant's landlord under this Lease, and shall promptly execute and deliver any instrument that such mortgagee may reasonably request to evidence such attornment (whether before or after making of the mortgage, ground lease or sale-leaseback lease). In the event of any other transfer of Landlord's interest hereunder, upon the written request of the transferee and Landlord, Tenant shall attorn to and recognize such transferee as Tenant's landlord under this Lease and shall promptly execute and deliver any instrument that such transferee and Landlord may reasonably request to evidence such attornment. 14. Assignment and Sublease. Tenant, if there is no Material Breach (as herein defined) by Tenant hereunder, shall have the right to assign this Lease or to sublease all or any portion of the Demised Premises, without Landlord's written consent in accordance with the terms of this Paragraph 14. Tenant may assign this Lease or sublet the Demised Premises to an affiliate or subsidiary more than fifty percent (50%) of the voting stock of which is owned directly or indirectly by the direct or remote parent of Tenant (without Landlord's consent, upon prior written notice to Landlord) and further Tenant' interest in this Lease may be assigned to and assumed by a successor to Tenant pursuant to a purchase of all or substantially all of the assets of Tenant in connection with the sale of such assets or to any entity which acquires all of Tenant's capital stock (without Landlord's consent upon prior written notice to Landlord). Any assignment or sublease shall require the assignee or subtenant to comply with all terms of this Lease except for any sublease term, which shall be at Tenant's discretion (but in no event extend beyond the term of this Lease), and a copy of such sublease or assignment shall be 14 <PAGE> delivered to Landlord at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of such sublease or assignment. Any assignee shall assume, by instrument in form and content satisfactory to Landlord, the due performance of all of Tenant's obligation sunder this Lease, including any accrued obligations at the time of the effective date of the assignment, and such assumption agreement shall state that the same is made by the assignee for the express benefit of Landlord as a third party beneficiary thereof. Each sublease permitted by this Paragraph 14 shall be subject and subordinate to all of the terms, covenants and conditions of this Lease and to all of the rights of Landlord hereunder; and in the event this Lease shall terminate before the expiration of such sublease, the sublessee thereunder will, at Landlord's option, attorn to Landlord and waive any rights the sublessee may have to terminate the sublease or to surrender possession thereunder, as a result of the termination of this Lease. Tenant agrees to pay on behalf of Landlord any and all costs of Landlord or otherwise occasioned by such assignment or subletting, including without limitation, the cost of any alteration, addition, improvement or other renovation or refurbishment to the Demised Premises made in connection with such assignment or subletting and any cost imposed by any governmental authority in connection with any of the foregoing. Any assignment or subletting under this Paragraph 14 shall not relieve Tenant (or any guarantor of Tenant's obligations under the Lease or any assignee) of its obligations hereunder. Any assignment or subletting of this Lease which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Paragraph 14 shall be of no effect and void. Except as permitted in this Paragraph 14, Tenant shall not transfer, sublet, assign or otherwise encumber its interest in the Lease or the Demised Premises, unless consented to by Landlord. No assignment or subleasing hereunder shall relieve Tenant from any of Tenant's obligation sin this Lease contained. All profits from any such assignment or subletting shall be the property of Tenant and not Landlord. 15. Lease Extension. If this Lease shall not have been terminated pursuant to any provisions hereof and there is no Material Breach (as defined herein) by Tenant hereunder at the time set for exercise of the Extension Terms (as herein defined) and at the time set for commencement thereof, then Tenant may, at Tenant's option, extend the term of this Lease for five (5) successive additional terms of four (4) years each (each an "Extension Term," collectively the "Extension Terms") commencing on the expiration of the original term, or the immediately preceding Extension Term, as the case may be. Tenant may exercise such option by giving Landlord written notice at least ten (10) months prior to the expiration of the original or the immediately preceding Extension Term, as the case may be. Upon the giving by Tenant to Landlord of such written notice and the compliance by Tenant with the foregoing provisions of this Paragraph 15, this Lease shall be deemed to be automatically extended upon all the 15 <PAGE> Covenants, agreements, terms, provisions and conditions set forth in this Lease, except that Rent for each such Extension Term shall be as provided on Exhibit D. If Tenant fails or omits to so give to Landlord the written notice referred to above, Landlord shall provide Tenant with written notice of Tenant's failure to exercise the Extension Term, and upon receipt of such notice, Tenant shall be allowed fifteen (15) days to exercise the extension option allowed for herein. If Landlord fails to provide such notice, Tenant's renewal option shall expire upon the expiration of the then current term. Failure to respond to Landlord's notice within such fifteen (15) days shall be deemed to be a waiver by Tenant of its extension option hereunder. 16. Impositions. A. Tenant covenants and agrees to pay during the term of this Lease, as Additional Rent, before any fine, penalty, interest or cost may be added thereto for the nonpayment thereof, all impositions described herein that accrue on or after the Commencement Date, which include without limitation, all real estate taxes, special assessments, water rates and charges, sewer rates and charges, including any sum or sums payable for future sewer or water capacity increases, charges for public utilities, street lighting, excise levies, licenses, permits, inspection fees, other governmental charges, and all other charges or burdens of whatsoever kind and nature (including costs, fees, and expenses of complying with any restrictive covenants or similar agreements to which the Demised Premises are subject), incurred in the use, occupancy, ownership, operation, leasing or possession of the Demised Premises, without particularizing by any known name or by whatever name hereafter called, and whether any of the foregoing be general or special, ordinary or extraordinary, foreseen or unforeseen (all of which are sometimes herein referred to as "Impositions"), which at any time during the term may have been or may be assessed, levied, confirmed, imposed upon, or become a lien on the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, or any appurtenance thereto, rents or income therefrom, and such easements or rights as may now or hereafter by appurtenant to appertain to the use of the Demised Premises. B. If, at any time during the term of this Lease, any method of taxation shall be such that there shall be levied, assessed or imposed on Landlord, or on the Basic Rent or Additional Rent, or on the Demised Premises or on the value of the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, a capital levy, sales or use tax, gross receipts tax or other tax on the rents received therefrom, or a franchise tax, or an assessment, levy or charge measured by or based in whole or in part upon such rents or value, Tenant covenants to pay and discharge the same, it being the intention of the parties hereto that the rent to be paid hereunder shall be paid to Landlord absolutely net without deduction or charge of any nature whatsoever foreseeable or unforeseeable, ordinary or extraordinary, or of any nature, kind or description, except as in this Lease otherwise expressly provided. Nothing in this Lease contained shall require Tenant to pay any municipal, state or federal net income or excess profits taxes assessed against Landlord, or any municipal, state or federal net income or excess profits taxes assessed against Landlord, or any municipal, state or federal capital levy, estate succession, inheritance or transfer taxes of Landlord, or corporation franchise taxes imposed upon any corporate owner of the fee of the Demised Premises. C. Tenant covenants to furnish Landlord, within 30 days after the date upon which an Imposition or other tax, assessment, levy or charge is payable by Tenant, official receipts of 16 <PAGE> the appropriate taxing authority, or other appropriate proof satisfactory to Landlord, evidencing the payment of the same. The certificate, advice or bill of the appropriate official designated by law to make or issue the same or to receive payment of any imposition or other tax, assessment, levy or charge may be relied upon by Landlord as sufficient evidence that such Imposition or other tax, assessment, levy or charge is due and unpaid at the time of the making or issuance of such certificate, advice or bill, unless Tenant provides Landlord with evidence to the contrary. D. At Landlord's written demand after any Event of Default (as defined in Section 20 hereinafter) and for as long as such Event of Default is uncured, or upon the request of any Mortgagee of the Demised Premises, (but only after an Event of Default and for as long as such Event of Default is uncured) Tenant shall pay to Landlord the known or estimated yearly real estate taxes and assessments payable with respect to the Demised Premises in monthly payments equal to one-twelfth of the known or estimated yearly real estate taxes and assessments next payable with respect to the Demised Premises. From time to time Landlord may re-estimate the amount of real estate taxes and assessments, and in such event Landlord shall notify Tenant, in writing, of such re-estimate and fix future monthly installments for the remaining period prior to the next tax and assessment due date in an amount sufficient to pay the re-estimated amount over the balance of such period after giving credit for payments made by Tenant on the previous estimate. If the total monthly payments made by Tenant pursuant to this Paragraph 16D shall exceed the amount of payments necessary for said taxes and assessments, such excess shall be credited on subsequent monthly payments of the same nature; but if the total of such monthly payments so made under this paragraph shall be insufficient to pay such taxes and assessments when due, then Tenant shall pay to Landlord such amount as may be necessary to make up the deficiency. E. Tenant shall have the right at its own expense to contest the amount or validity, in whole or in part, of any Imposition by appropriate proceedings diligently conducted in good faith, but only after Tenant provides Landlord or the Mortgagee reasonable security, or Tenant makes payment of such Imposition, unless such payment, or a payment thereof under protest, would operate as a bar to such contest or interfere materially with the prosecution thereof, in which event, notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 16A hereof Tenant may postpone or defer payment of such Imposition if neither the Demised Premises nor any portion thereof would, by reason of such postponement or deferment, be in danger of being forfeited or lost, and (b) Tenant is not then in Material Breach of this Lease. Upon the termination of any such proceedings, Tenant shall pay the amount of such Imposition or part thereof, if any, as finally determined in such proceedings, the payment of which may have been deferred during the prosecution of such proceedings, together with any costs, fees, including attorney's fees, interest, penalties, fines and other liability in connection therewith, and upon such payment Landlord shall return all amounts or certificates deposited with it in respect to the contest of such Imposition, as aforesaid, or, at the written direction of Tenant, Landlord shall make such payment out of the funds on deposit with Landlord and the balance, if any, shall be returned to Tenant. Tenant shall be entitled to the refund of any Imposition, penalty, find and interest thereon received by Landlord which have been paid by Tenant or which have been paid by Landlord but for which Landlord has been previously reimbursed in full by Tenant. Landlord shall not be required to join in any proceedings referred to in this Paragraph 16E unless the provisions of any law, rule or regulation at the time in effect shall require that such proceedings be brought by or in the name of Landlord, in which event Landlord shall join in such proceedings 17 <PAGE> or permit the same to be brought in Landlord's name upon compliance with such conditions as Landlord may reasonably require. Landlord shall not ultimately be subject to any liability or the payment of any fees, including attorney's fees, costs and expenses in connection with such proceedings. Tenant agrees to pay all such fees (including reasonable attorney's fees), costs and expenses or, on demand, or make reimbursement to Landlord for such payment, Of Landlord is provided a certificate of deposit or other interest bearing instrument as security for the payment of the contested Imposition, during the time when any such certificate of deposit or other interest bearing instrument is on deposit with Landlord, and prior to the time when the same is returned to Tenant or applied against the payment, removal or discharge of Impositions, as above provided, Tenant shall be entitled to receive all interest paid thereon, if any. Cash deposits shall not bear interest. 17. Insurance. A. During the term of this Lease, during any extension thereof, and during any holdover period, Tenant shall at its cost and expense procure and keep in force a policy of comprehensive public liability insurance, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 for injury to any one person, $2,000,000 as to any one accident, and $100,000 as to property damage, all on a per occurrence basis which policy shall name Landlord and its managing agent as additional insureds. A certificate of such insurance shall be delivered to Landlord prior to the Commencement Date and shall provide that same may not be cancelled or lowered in amounts without prior written notice of not less than thirty (30) days to Landlord and Landlord's mortgagee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Tenant may insure the foregoing risks under its blanket policy or elect to self-insure such risks as provided in Paragraph 17E below. Any such liability insurance shall contain a contractual liability endorsement covering Tenant's indemnification obligations under this Lease. B. During the term of this Lease and any extension thereof, Tenant, at its sole cost and expense, shall obtain and continuously maintain in full force and effect, policies of insurance covering the Improvements constructed, installed or located on the Demised Premises naming the Landlord, as loss payee as its interest may appear, against (a) loss or damage by fire; (b) loss or damage from such other risks or hazards now or hereafter embraced by an "Extended Coverage Endorsement,) including, but not limited to, windstorm, hail, explosion, vandalism, riot and civil commotion, damage from vehicles, smoke damage, water damage and debris removal; (c) loss for flood if the Demised Premises are in a designated flood or flood insurance area; (d) loss for damage by earthquake if the Demised Premises are located in an earthquake-prone area; (e) loss from so- called explosion, collapse and underground hazards; and (f) loss or damage from such other risks or hazards of a similar or dissimilar nature which are now or may hereafter be customarily insured against with respect to improvements similar in construction, design, general location, use and occupancy to the Improvements. At all times, such insurance coverage shall be in an amount equal to 100% of the then "full replacement cost" of the Improvements. "Full Replacement Cost" shall be interpreted to mean the cost of replacing the improvements without deduction for depreciation or wear and tear, and it shall include a reasonable sum for architectural, engineering, legal, administrative and supervisory fees connected with the restoration or replacement of the Improvements in the event of damage thereto or destruction thereof. If a sprinkler system shall be located in the Improvements, sprinkler leakage insurance shall be procured and continuously maintained by Tenant and Tenant's 18 <PAGE> sole cost and expense. Tenant shall cause to be inserted in the policy of insurance required by this Paragraph 17B the so-called "waiver of subrogation" clause as to Landlord and Landlord's insurer. C. During the term of this Lease and any extension thereof, TENANT shall maintain Workman's Compensation Insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of California. D. Tenant shall maintain insurance coverage (including loss of use and business interruption coverage) upon Tenant's business and upon all personal property of Tenant or the personal property of others kept, stored or maintained on the Demised Premises against loss or damage by fire, windstorm or other casualties or causes for such amount as Tenant may desire, and Tenant agrees that such policies shall contain a waiver of subrogation clause as to Landlord and Landlord's insurer. E. Tenant's right to self-insure with respect to liability insurance is conditioned upon Tenant or Tenant's guarantor maintaining a net work of at least $100,000,000.00. Tenant shall furnish Landlord written confirmation that Tenant has elected to self-insure with respect to liability insurance (if that is the case), and if so, that Tenant's or Tenant's guarantor's net worth is at least $100,000,000.00 as evidenced by audited financial statements of Tenant or Tenant's guarantor or an affidavit from Tenant's or Tenant's guarantor's chief financial officer. If Tenant self-insures with respect to liability insurance, then Tenant agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold Landlord harmless from and against any loss, damage, costs, fees (including attorneys, fees), claims, demands, actions, causes of action, judgements, suits and liability that was or would have been covered by the insurance policy or policies replaced by self- insurance and such self-insurance shall not affect the nonliability of Landlord under Paragraph 17F as to any loss or damage caused by the period described therein. The indemnification contained in this Paragraph 17E is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any covenants or obligations of Tenant contained in the other Paragraphs of this Lease. If Tenant so elects to become a self-insurer with respect to liability insurance, Tenant shall deliver to Landlord notice in writing of the required coverages which it is self-insuring setting forth the amount, limits, and scope of the self-insurance in respect to each type of coverage self-insured. Tenant, at Landlord's request, shall provide to Landlord's mortgagee or assignee a certificate satisfactory to such mortgagee or assignee setting forth the self-insured coverages, if any, and stating that all losses shall be payable to such mortgagee and/or assignee as its interests may appear. Nothing in this Paragraph shall prevent Tenant from taking out insurance of the kind and in the amount provided for under the preceding paragraphs of this Paragraph under a blanked insurance policy or policies (certificates thereof reasonably satisfactory to Landlord shall be delivered to Landlord) which may cover other properties owned or operated by Tenant as well as the Demised Premises; provided, however, that any such policy of blanket insurance of the kind provided for shall specify therein the amounts thereof exclusively allocated to the Demised Premises or Tenant shall furnish Landlord and the holder of any fee mortgage with a written statement from the insurers under such policies specifying the amounts of the total insurance exclusively allocated to the Demised Premises; and provided, further, however, that such policies of blanket insurance shall, as respects the Demised Premises, contain the various provisions required of such an insurance policy by the foregoing provisions of this Paragraph 17. 19 <PAGE> F. Tenant hereby releases Landlord (and Landlord's assignees, employees, agents and servants) and waives any claims it may have against Landlord from any liability for damage to or destruction of Tenant's trade fixtures, personal property (including also property under the care, custody, or control of Tenant), machinery, equipment, furniture, fixtures and business interests on the Demised Premises, except arising from Landlord's or Landlord's assignees', employees', agents' or servants' negligence. This Paragraph shall apply especially, but not exclusively, to damage or destruction caused by the flooding of basements or other subsurface areas, or by refrigerators, sprinkling devices, air conditioning apparatus, water, snow, frost, steam, excessive heat or cold, falling plaster, broken glass, sewage, gas, odors or noise, or the bursting or leaking of pipes or plumbing fixtures, and shall apply equally, whether any such damage results from the act or omission of other tenants or occupants in the Demised Premises or any other persons, and whether such damage be caused by or result from any of the aforesaid, or shall be caused by or result from other, circumstances of a similar or dissimilar nature. G. Tenant shall require each of its contractors and tradespeople to carry contractors liability/completed operations insurance, in the amounts specified in Paragraph 17A above, from companies licensed to do business in the State of California. H. Upon expiration of the term of this Lease, the unearned premiums upon any insurance policies or certificates thereof lodged with Landlord by Tenant shall be payable to Tenant, provided that Tenant shall not then be in default in keeping, observing or performing the terms and conditions of this Lease. 18. Destruction and Restoration. A Tenant covenants and agrees that in case of damage to or destruction of the Improvements after the Commencement Date of the term of this Lease, by fire or otherwise, Tenant, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly restore, repair, replace and rebuild the same as nearly as possible to the condition that the same were in immediately prior to such damage or destruction with such changes and alterations (made in conformity with Paragraph 8 hereof) as may be reasonably acceptable to Landlord or required by law. Tenant shall forthwith give Landlord such written notice of such damage or destruction upon the occurrence thereof and specify in such notice, in reasonable detail, the extent thereof. Such restoration, repairs, replacements, rebuilding, changes and alterations, including the cost of temporary repairs for the protection of the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, pending completion thereof are sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "Restoration." The Restoration shall be carried on and completed in accordance with the provisions and conditions of Paragraphs 8 and 18B hereof. If the net amount of the insurance proceeds (after deduction of all costs, expenses and fees related to recovery of the insurance proceeds) recovered by Landlord and held by Landlord and Tenant as co-trustees is reasonably deemed insufficient by Landlord to complete the Restoration of such improvements (exclusive of Tenant's personal property and trade fixtures which shall be restored, repaired or rebuilt out of Tenant' separate funds), Tenant shall, upon request of Landlord, deposit with Landlord and Tenant, as co- trustees, a cash deposit equal to the reasonable estimate of the amount necessary to complete the Restoration of such improvements less the amount of such insurance proceeds available. 20 <PAGE> B. All insurance moneys recovered by Landlord and held by Landlord and Tenant as co-trustees on account of such damage or destruction, less Landlord's reasonable out-of-pocket costs, if any, to Landlord of such recovery, shall be applied to the payment of the costs of the Restoration and shall be paid out from time to time as the Restoration progresses upon the written request of Tenant, accompanied by a certificate of the architect or a qualified professional engineer in charge of the Restoration stating that as of the date of such certificate (a) the sum requested is justly due to the contractors, subcontractors, materialmen, laborers, engineers, architects, or persons, firms or corporations furnishing or supplying work, labor, services or materials for such Restoration, or is justly required to reimburse Tenant or any expenditures made by Tenant in connection with such Restoration, and when added to all sums previously paid out by Landlord does not exceed the value of the Restoration performed to the date of such certificate by all of said parties; (b) except for the amount, if any, stated in such certificates to be due for work, labor, services or materials, there is no outstanding indebtedness known to the person signing such certificate, after due inquiry, which is then due for work, labor, services or materials in connection with such Restoration, which, if unpaid, might become the basis of a mechanic's lien or similar lien with respect to the Restoration or a lien upon the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof; and (c) the costs, as estimated by the person signing such certificate, of the completion of the Restoration required to be done subsequent to the date of such certificate in order to complete the Restoration do not exceed the sum of the remaining insurance moneys, plus the amount deposited by Tenant, if any, remaining in the hands of Landlord after payment of the sum requested in such certificate. Tenant shall furnish Landlord within thirty (30) days after Tenant's receipt of each progress payment with evidence reasonably satisfactory to Landlord that Tenant has paid all bills in respect to any work, labor, services or materials performed, furnished or supplied in connection with such Restoration which was covered by the previous progress payment. Landlord shall not be required to pay out or consent to any additional insurance moneys where Tenant fails to supply satisfactory evidence of the payment of work, labor, services or materials performed, furnished or supplied, as aforesaid. If the insurance moneys in the hands of Landlord and Tenant as co-trustees, and such other sums, if any, deposited with Landlord and Tenant as co-trustees pursuant to this Paragraph 18, shall be insufficient to pay the entire costs of the Restoration, Tenant agrees to pay any deficiency promptly insurer, and provided further that notwithstanding that the insurance moneys are insufficient to pay the cost of the Restoration, Tenant shall continue to be liable for full payment of Base Rent, Additional Rent and any other amounts due and payable hereunder. Upon completion of the Restoration and payment in full thereof by Tenant, Landlord shall within a reasonable period of time thereafter, turn over to Tenant all insurance moneys or other moneys then remaining upon submission of proof reasonably satisfactory to Landlord that the Restoration has been paid for in full and the damaged or destroyed Building and other improvements repaired, restored or rebuilt as nearly as possible to the condition they were in immediately prior to such damage or destruction, or with such changes or alterations as may be made in conformity with Paragraphs 8 and 18A hereof. C. No destruction of or damage to the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, by fire, casualty or otherwise shall permit Tenant to surrender this Lease or shall relieve Tenant form its liability to pay to Landlord the Base Rent and Additional Rent payable under this Lease 21 <PAGE> or from any other such obligations under the Lease, and Tenant waives any rights now or hereafter conferred upon Tenant by present or future law or otherwise to quit or surrender this Lease or the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, to Landlord or to any suspension, diminution, abatement or reduction or rent on account of any such damage or destruction. D. Landlord agrees, subject to the provisions of Paragraph 8 and 18 hereof, to in all instances turn over and make available to Tenant all insurance moneys contemplated by Paragraph 18B hereof. 19. Condemnation. A. If, during the term of this Lease, the entire Demised Premises shall be taken as the result of the exercise of the power of eminent domain (hereinafter referred to as the "Proceedings"), this Lease and all right, title and interest of Tenant hereunder shall cease and come to an end on the date of vesting of title pursuant to such Proceedings and Landlord shall be entitled to and shall receive the total award made in such Proceedings; provided that Tenant shall have the right to state a claim separate from Landlord's claim against the condemning authority for Tenant's moving costs and the loss of the bargain of this Lease, to the extent that such a claim by Tenant does not otherwise reduce Landlord's award. In any taking of the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, whether or not this Lease is terminated as in this paragraph provided, Tenant shall not be entitled to any portion of the award for the taking of the Demised Premises or damage to the Improvements, except as otherwise provided for in Paragraph 19C with respect to the restoration of the Improvements, or for the estate or interest of Tenant therein, all such award, damages, consequential damages and compensation being hereby assigned to Landlord, and Tenant hereby waives any right it now has or may have under present or future law to receive any separate award of damages for its interest in the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, or its interest in this Lease, expect that Tenant shall have, nevertheless, the limited right to prove in the Proceedings and to receive any award which may be made for damages to or condemnation for Tenant's movable trade fixtures and equipment, and for Tenant's relocation costs in connection therewith. B. If, during the initial term of this Lease, or any extension or renewal thereof, less that the entire Demised Premises, but more than 15% of the floor area of the Building, or more than 25% of the land area of the Demised Premises, or more than 20% of the parking spaces, shall be taken in any such Proceeding, this Lease shall, upon vesting of title in the Proceedings, terminate as to the portion of the Demised Premises so taken, and Tenant may, at its option, terminate this Lease as to the remainder of the Demised Premises, Tenant shall not have the right to terminate this Lease pursuant to the preceding sentence unless (a) the business of Tenant conducted in the portion of the Demised Premises taken cannot reasonably be carried on with substantially the same utility and efficiency in the remainder of the Demised Premises (or any substitute space securable by Tenant pursuant to clause (b) hereof ) and (b) Tenant cannot construct or secure or Landlord cannot provide substantially similar space to the space so taken, on the remainder of the Demised Premises, or Landlord cannot provide replacement parking spaces on additional property located in close proximity to the Demised Premises that are reasonably acceptable to Tenant. Such termination as to the remainder of the Demised Premises shall be effected by notice in writing given not more than 60 days after the date of vesting of title 22 <PAGE> in such Proceedings, and shall specify a date not more than 60 days after the giving of such notice as the date for such termination. Upon the date specified in such notice, the term of this Lease, and all right, title and interest of Tenant hereunder, shall cease and come to an end. If this Lease is terminated as in this Paragraph 19B provided, Landlord shall be entitled to and shall receive the total award made in such Proceedings, Tenant hereby assigning any interest in such award, damages, consequential damages and compensation to Landlord, and Tenant hereby waiving any right Tenant has now or may have under present or future law to receive any separate award of damages for its interest in the Demised Premises, or any portion thereof, or its interest in this Lease except as otherwise provided in Paragraph 19A. The right of Tenant to terminate this Lease, as in this Paragraph 19B provided, shall be exercisable only upon condition that Tenant is not then in default in the performance of any of the terms, covenants or conditions of this Lease on its part to be performed, and such termination upon Tenant's part shall become effective only upon compliance by Tenant with all such terms, covenants and conditions to the date of such termination. In the event that Tenant elects not to terminate this Lease as to the remainder of the Demised Premises, the rights and obligations of Landlord and Tenant shall be governed by the provisions of Paragraph 19C hereof. C. If 15%, or less, of the floor area of the Building, or