Like many of Lukas Moodysson's films, Lilja 4-ever (Lilya 4-Ever, 2002) centres on a complex female protagonist on the verge of adulthood. Lilya is based on a documented case of suicide by a trafficked young woman from the former USSR, whose eventual redemption, or at least her dream of escape, is self-consciously visualized in sequences featuring Lilya and her friend as winged angels. This tension in registers, between fantasy and social realism and between melodrama and societal critique, opens up interpretive venues that paradoxically signal both the film's protest against, and implication within, ideologies and practices of neoliberalism and globalization. Moodysson's questioning of neoliberalism and globalization within a double framework of gender and religiosity point to his desire to find alternate (political) discourses outside the dominant ones. This ambition, however, figures Lilya as a victim of abuse on multiple levels: as trafficked girl, as didactic vehicle for a political message and, arguably, also as part of a postmodernist experiment that reinserts a redemptive spirituality into a context marked by capitalist and political secularism.

TY - JOUR

T1 - Lilya 4-ever. Post-Soviet neoliberal angels and nordic intellectual secularism

AU - Stenport, Anna Westerstahl

PY - 2014

Y1 - 2014

N2 - Like many of Lukas Moodysson's films, Lilja 4-ever (Lilya 4-Ever, 2002) centres on a complex female protagonist on the verge of adulthood. Lilya is based on a documented case of suicide by a trafficked young woman from the former USSR, whose eventual redemption, or at least her dream of escape, is self-consciously visualized in sequences featuring Lilya and her friend as winged angels. This tension in registers, between fantasy and social realism and between melodrama and societal critique, opens up interpretive venues that paradoxically signal both the film's protest against, and implication within, ideologies and practices of neoliberalism and globalization. Moodysson's questioning of neoliberalism and globalization within a double framework of gender and religiosity point to his desire to find alternate (political) discourses outside the dominant ones. This ambition, however, figures Lilya as a victim of abuse on multiple levels: as trafficked girl, as didactic vehicle for a political message and, arguably, also as part of a postmodernist experiment that reinserts a redemptive spirituality into a context marked by capitalist and political secularism.

AB - Like many of Lukas Moodysson's films, Lilja 4-ever (Lilya 4-Ever, 2002) centres on a complex female protagonist on the verge of adulthood. Lilya is based on a documented case of suicide by a trafficked young woman from the former USSR, whose eventual redemption, or at least her dream of escape, is self-consciously visualized in sequences featuring Lilya and her friend as winged angels. This tension in registers, between fantasy and social realism and between melodrama and societal critique, opens up interpretive venues that paradoxically signal both the film's protest against, and implication within, ideologies and practices of neoliberalism and globalization. Moodysson's questioning of neoliberalism and globalization within a double framework of gender and religiosity point to his desire to find alternate (political) discourses outside the dominant ones. This ambition, however, figures Lilya as a victim of abuse on multiple levels: as trafficked girl, as didactic vehicle for a political message and, arguably, also as part of a postmodernist experiment that reinserts a redemptive spirituality into a context marked by capitalist and political secularism.

KW - Globalization

KW - Lilya-4-ever(film)

KW - Lukas Moodysson

KW - Neoliberalism

KW - Secularism

UR - http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?scp=84924499219&partnerID=8YFLogxK

UR - http://www.scopus.com/inward/citedby.url?scp=84924499219&partnerID=8YFLogxK

M3 - Article

AN - SCOPUS:84924499219

SN - 0036-5653

VL - 53

SP - 34

EP - 54

JO - Scandinavica

JF - Scandinavica

IS - 1

ER -