Hollywood - The foreign-language Oscar race is heating up, as six more countries have announced their candidates for selection.

Writer/director Lukas Moodysson's Lilya 4-Ever entered the race for Sweden on Monday - even though it's mainly a Russian-language picture. It stars Oksana Akinshina in the sex-trafficking tale of a 14-year-old girl who moves from the former Soviet Union to Sweden with her boyfriend.

The $3 million project will be distributed domestically by Newmarket.

On Friday, Brazil selected Fernando Meirelles' City of God, which has grossed $4 million, a record for a homegrown picture produced in the last 10 years.

Based on the semiautobiographical book of Paulo Lins, the film depicts the drug trade in Rio's housing project Cidade de Deus (City of God) since the 1960s. It won extra notoriety after drug lord Paulo Sergio Magno, who controls the drug trade in Cidade Alta, was arrested in a Rio multiplex as he waited to see the picture. Miramax is handling domestically.

India has chosen Devdas, an opulent love story, starring Shah Rukh Khan, as its entry an industry official said on Monday.

The three-hour musical extravaganza cost $10.3 million to make - the most expensive Indian film ever. Devdas was also the first mainstream Bollywood picture to be screened at the Cannes Film Festival earlier this year.

Polish culture minister Waldemar Dabrowski unveiled his country's choice this weekend: Piotr Trzaskalski's Edi.

Thailand, meanwhile, chose Mon-rak Transistor, the third film from Thai director Pen-ek Ratanaruang, as its official submission. The film is about a singer who leaves the love of his life for stardom.

Zhang Yimou's $31 million martial arts epic Hero, about a plot to assassinate an emperor-in-waiting, won the vote from China and opened on one screen in southern China for a week to qualify. Miramax has North American and other rights.

The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences will pick five of the national entries on February 11 for nomination as best foreign language picture. The Academy Awards ceremony will take place on March 23.