The information in this article is part of an upcoming rework, and may not be reflected in other articles.

This article is designated as vetted, meaning that it is up-to-date and accurate. Please ask before making changes.

Robert Bontine Cunninghame Graham (24 May 1852 – July 1929) was a Scottish politician, writer, journalist and adventurer. Following an adventurous career abroad, he served as a Liberal Party Member of Parliament (MP); the first ever socialist member of the Parliament of the United Kingdom; a founder, and the first president, of the Scottish Labour Party; a founder of the National Party of Scotland in 1928 and its first president and the president of the Scottish Workers Republican Party.

Graham was largely unknown outside of until he sparked international interest due to his leadership of the Nationalist side of the 1928 Scottish Independence Referendum. Graham was considered an effective campaigner but his increasing militancy and entertainment of violent allies in the movement alienated more moderate members. Graham was arrested and featured in a sensationalised trial in which he questioned the validity of the British state. While he avoided imprisonment, his dissident activities caused additional arrests, one of which caused him to contract pneumonia in jail and lead to his eventual death.

Biography[]

Early Life[]

Graham was the eldest son of Major William Bontine of the Renfrew Militia and formerly a Cornet in the Scots Greys with whom he served in Ireland. His mother was the Hon. Anne Elizabeth Elphinstone-Fleeming, daughter of Admiral Charles Elphinstone-Fleeming of Cumbernauld and a Spanish noblewoman, Doña Catalina Paulina Alessandro de Jiménez, who reputedly, along with her second husband, Admiral James Katon, heavily influenced Graham's upbringing. Thus the first language Graham learned was his mother's maternal tongue, Spanish. He spent most of his childhood on the family estate of Finlaystone in Renfrewshire and Ardoch in Dunbartonshire, Scotland, with his younger brothers Charles and Malise.

After being educated at Harrow public school in England, Robert finished his education in Brussels, Belgium, before moving to Argentina to make his fortune cattle ranching. He became known as a great adventurer and gaucho there, and was affectionately known as 'Don Roberto'. He also travelled in Morocco disguised as a Turkish sheikh to find the "forbidden" city of Taroudant but was captured by a Caid. He later prospected for gold in Spain; befriended Buffalo Bill in Texas and taught fencing in Mexico City, having travelled there by wagon train from San Antonio de Bexar with his young bride sic "Gabrielle Chideock de la Balmondiere" a supposed half-French, half-Chilean poet.

Early Politics[]

After the death of his father in 1883 he reverted to the Cunninghame Graham surname and returned to the UK, having become interested in politics. He attended socialist meetings where he heard and met William Morris, George Bernard Shaw, H. M. Hyndman, Keir Hardie and John Burns. Despite his wealthy origins, Graham was converted to socialism and he began to speak at public meetings. He was an impressive orator and was especially good at dealing with hecklers.

Although a socialist, in the 1886 general election he stood as a Liberal Party candidate at North West Lanarkshire. His election programme was extremely radical and called for among other things; the abolition of the House of Lords; universal suffrage; nationalisation of industries; free school meals for children; state secularism; an eight hour workday and Scottish Home Rule. Supported by liberals and socialists, Graham defeated the Unionist candidate by 322 votes. He had stood against the same candidate at the 1885 general election, in which Graham won by over 1100 votes. Graham was the UK's first socialist MP and was notable for refusing to accept the conventions of the British House of Commons. On 12 September 1887 he was suspended from parliament for making what was called a "disrespectful reference" to the House of Lords. He was the first MP ever to be suspended from the House of Commons for swearing; the word was damn.

Graham's main concerns in the House of Commons were the plight of the unemployed and the preservation of civil liberties. He complained about attempts in 1886 and 1887 by the police to prevent public meetings and free speech. He attended the protest demonstration in Trafalgar Square on 13 November 1887 that was broken up by the police and became known as Bloody Sunday. Graham was badly beaten during his arrest and taken to Bow Street Police Station, where his uncle, Col William Hope VC, attempted to post bail. Both Cunninghame Graham, who was defended by H. H. Asquith, and John Burns were found guilty for their involvement in the demonstration and sentenced to six weeks imprisonment. Shortly after Graham was released from Pentonville prison he continued his campaign to improve the rights of working people and to curb their economic exploitation. He was suspended from the House of Commons in December 1888 for protesting about the working conditions of chain makers. His response to the Speaker of the House, "I never withdraw", was later used by George Bernard Shaw in Arms and the Man.

Towards Scottish Independence[]

A strong supporter of Scottish independence and autonomy within the Union, in 1886, he helped establish the Scottish Home Rule Association (SHRA), and while in the House of Commons, he made several attempts to persuade fellow MPs of the desirability of a Scottish parliament so as to take pressing issues away from London. On one occasion, Graham joked that he wanted a 'national parliament with the pleasure of knowing that the taxes were wasted in Edinburgh instead of London.' Later on, Graham attended the SHRA Conference at the Anderton's Hotel in Fleet Street and passed a motion, 'That in the opinion of this Conference the interests of Scotland demand the establishment of a Scotch national Parliament and an Executive Government having control over exclusively Scotch affairs, with a due regard to the integrity of the Empire' The motion was supported by Mr Cuninghame Graham (as name spelt in article), who said he 'wanted a Scotch Parliament to do justice to their crofters and keep them at home, to pass an Eight Hours' Bill for their miners, to settle the liquor laws, and to nationalise the land.' Peter Esslemont MP attended. Dr G.B Clark Chaired conference MP for Caithness-shire.

While in the House of Commons, Graham became increasingly more radical and went on to found the Scottish Labour Party with Keir Hardie. Graham left the Liberal Party in 1892 to contest the general election in a new constituency as a Labour candidate. During this time, he supported workers in their industrial disputes and was involved with Annie Besant and the Matchgirls Strike and the 1889 Dockers' Strike. In July 1889, he attended the Marxist Congress of the Second International in Paris with James Keir Hardie, William Morris, Eleanor Marx and Edward Aveling. The following year he made a speech in Calais that was considered by the authorities to be so revolutionary that he was arrested and expelled from France. Graham was a supporter of the eight-hour day and made several attempts to introduce a Bill on the subject. He made some progress with this in the summer of 1892, but he was unable to persuade the Conservative government, headed by Lord Salisbury, to allocate time for the Bill to be fully debated.

At the 1892 general election Graham stood as the Scottish Labour Party candidate for Glasgow Camlachie. He was defeated, bringing his parliamentary career to an end though he remained active in political circles. His first move was helping his colleague Keir Hardie establish the Independent Labour Party and enter parliament as the MP for West Ham. However, he became disillusioned by the pettiness and dissent of those he called 'piss-pot socialists' and increasingly turned to a nascent Scottish nationalism as a means of achieving social justice and cultural revival. Between 1905 and 1914, Graham, while retaining the position of elder statesman, social commentator, and renowned world-traveller, became more militant, involving himself in many left-wing causes and protests. There is evidence to suggest that he joined the hard-left British Socialist Party, and he was an associate of anarchists and a political assassin. Graham was also a vociferous anti-imperialist at the height of British jingoism as well as a high-profile supporter of the women's suffrage movement and Home Rule for Ireland and India.

The British Civil War[]

Graham had been an opponent of the Great War and found himself attempting to re-enter politics in the aftermath of Britain's loss. He spoke repeatedly that this was now the opportune moment for Scotland to abandon London and forge its own path though he found little reception within the ILP. Graham largely retreated toward speaking and writing as opposed to actively campaigning. In the run-up to the Civil War he advocated on behalf of the Plymouth strikers and lent his support to the TUC's general strike though at one meeting he joked 'now if this were all happening at Inverness then the whole nation would have gone up by now!' When civil war broke out, Graham was living at his estate in Scotland though he quickly moved to Edinburgh to help organise rebel forces.

When Graham arrived he found the city in a state of open warfare and while too old to properly participate (his offer of leading a cavalry unit was rejected by the local rebel commander, Thomas Murray) he did tour the rebel controlled parts of the city to give speeches and moral support to the fighting rebels. The presence of the famed 'Don Roberto', at times riding on horseback through the city streets, did much to boost morale and Royalist forces were soon driven out of the city. When the Edinburgh and Glasgow were able to assume control of the central belt, Graham travelled to the city amid Royalist bombing raids and spoke there as well, being photographed helping clear the rubble for rebel propaganda. When the Scottish Provisional Republic was formed, Graham was quickly nominated as a delegate and opted to sit as a member of the informal Nationalist faction.

In the Republic, Graham was one of the most vocal supporters of the nationalist cause and believed that this was Scotland's most opportune moment to seize its destiny and chart its own path. He attempted to pass a motion that would issue a declaration of independence, transitioning the republic from a provisional entity into a fully-fledged independent republic though the motion was defeated. Nevertheless, Graham was noted for being one of the more conciliatory nationalists and often opposed his own faction in terms of cooperation with the Southern rebels. Graham felt that Scottish independence was a goal alongside the liberation of the rest of the British workers, and that the communes in Cardiff and England could not 'be sold down the river'. He attacked Maclean for his refusal to send Scottish militias South of the border and contested that Scotland securing Newcastle and the North of England for their 'English comrades' would be the best course of action.

Ultimately Maclean proved to not be an obstacle due to his death and January, as Graham would succeed him as leader of the Nationalist faction in the Congress. Already a more pragmatic and amenable leader, and having previously proposed such measures, was quick to agree with the Unionist leader, Willie Gallacher, on the measure of striking South. Likewise, on the issue of independence Graham was more amenable but concerned of Scotland's future should it agree to join the recently established Union of Britain. In private meetings with Gallacher and correspondence with Arthur Cook, Graham was eventually turned to the side of entering the Union in what he sold to nationalists as 'the revolutionary Popular Front'. Graham argued that the war effort was more important and that as Scotland was granted self-determination under the Liverpool Manifesto, the issue could be solved at a late date. Indeed, behind closed doors it had been agreed that a referendum on Scottish Independence would be conducted as soon as possible once the war had been prosecuted, leaving Graham content that growing nationalism and the experiment with sovereignty meant independence was only some years off.

In the aftermath of the annexation, Graham fell out of active politics again and returned to political campaigning. He contested leadership of the Scottish Workers Republican Party from John Ball and was elected Chairman of the party's Central Committee leading to a small exodus from the party to form the rival Scottish Worker's Party. Nevertheless, it grew rapidly under Graham's leadership and became the largest 'left-nationalist' party operating in Scotland.

The Independence Referendum[]

Following the end of the war, Graham returned to an active role organising the SWRP but was unable to secure a seat in the Constitutional Convention. Nevertheless, he maintained correspondence with Gallacher, the-then governor of Scotland, who had assured him that a referendum had been agreed. By 1927 it was announced it would take place in the following year and Graham began preparing his party for the ensuing campaigns.

Early into the year, Graham entered into negotiations with other organisations to unite the disparate Nationalist movement into a single entity that could coordinate campaigning efforts on a national scale and cut across ideological divides. Graham's SWRP, now the largest of the left-nationalist groups, entered into negotiations with John MacCormick and his Glasgow University Scottish Nationalist Association about a merger. MacCormick enthusiastically agreed and in the inaugural meeting at Stirling, the SWRP and GUSNA signed the Scottish National Covenant, pledging the two to cooperation. A month later in March, further negotiations saw the involvement of William Gillies' Scots National League, Lewis Spence's Scots National Movement and the Scottish Home Rule Movement leading to the establishment of the National Party of Scotland, a fusion of the above organisations. Graham was elected its first President.

On the campaign, Graham proved an effective orator and a sensational figure. Often riding on horseback at rallies, 'Don Roberto' charmed and amused voters with his antics and stories of adventure but this irritated some of his allies in the NPS. Graham, more of a showman than a real politician, was attacked by his more orthodox comrades in the SWRP wing of the party (it still existed as a subordinate party) for his 'theatrical deviancy' and found detractors within in the more moderate sections who felt Graham dominated at the campaign at the expense of figures such as MacCormick. Nevertheless, Graham proved entertaining and charismatic, often taking hecklers on directly though he was at times unable to provide in-depth responses to economic concerns or what a post-independence Scotland's relationship with Britain would look like.

As the year wore on, so did Graham's campaign efforts though he became frustrated at the lack of a large breakthrough for the nationalist cause. Likewise, Graham began to find an antipathy for his colleagues in the NPS emerging as he felt many of them were more interested in internal party disputes than they were on focusing on the campaign. Indeed, Graham's despair was not without merit, as two distinct factions had emerged during the mid-summer of the year: the Confederalists and Centralists. This was not in reference to a Scottish state but rather how the party should be run; the Confederalist faction (to which Graham de facto belonged) wished for the party to remain as it was then: an association of multiple parties and organisations that sought affiliation to the wider NPS and would contest elections. Graham and his allies in the SWRP had purposefully modelled this after the Labour Party and believed that in an independent, and socialist, Scotland, the NPS would form the nexus of all political activity. Opposed to this faction was the 'Centralists', largely based out of GUSNA, which wished for the NPS to become a 'regular' party and adopted a centralised structure.

Likewise, Graham found his sympathies within the party shifting. Initially, Graham aligned more with the party's 'pragmatists', such as MacCormick, who wished to strike a more moderate tone and bridge the divide between the Nationalist camp and Unionists that were sceptical of independence but not necessarily committed to Britain. But as the campaign wore on he gradually found himself aligning more with the militant radicals on the party such as Gillies and Ruaraidh Erskine of the Scots' National League. Gillies, inspired by Sinn Féin, wished to use his nationalist paramilitary, Fianna na hAlba, to wage war against Britain in the event that independence was denied. Graham had previously condemned such proposals but had grown more sympathetic to the position and wrote in private that 'the road to Scottish sovereignty appears less likely to be settled at the ballot box, but by force of arms.' While Graham refused to endorse a military campaign if the Nationalists lost the referendum, he did not necessarily oppose it if Scottish liberties were curtailed. Likewise Graham grew irritated by his allies in the SWRP who he felt were not truly committed to the Scottish national cause.

The tensions reached their height in August, with the referendum only weeks away, when the syndicalist activist, Tom Bell, was assassinated in the Newcraighall Train Bombing. No one came forth to claim responsibility but the Loyalist Opposition was suspected of having organised the attack. However, when writing in the NPS' newsletter, The Scots Independent, Graham warned that 'gunpowder and grapeshot', such as the bombing, would become the 'new normal' if England chose to deny Scotland its sovereignty. Graham was promptly arrested for seditious activity some 5 days after the bombing. The referendum was also suspended.

Trial & Later Life[]

Amid outrage and rioting in Scotland over the news, MacCormick and Graham had been transported to London to face trial at the High Court for their seditious acts. MacCormick protested his innocence and sought to vindicate himself and his supporters, arguing that whoever carried out the attack was 'no true Scotsman' and not indicative of MacCormick's beliefs. Graham on the contrary attempted to sensationalise his trial by participating in theatrical discourse. He refused to be tried by an 'English court' and demanded he be tried on Scots' law. Rather than attempt to fight the charges of sedition levelled against him, he instead sought to bring attention to the nationalist cause. The court was not forthcoming and he was declared guilty and forced to pay a fine of £50. Graham refused to pay the fine and was jailed for a month afterwards. When he returned to Scotland, he was in poor health and disgusted to learn that MacCormick had collaborated with the Union authorities to host what he called a 'Tory referendum'. MacCormick promptly pulled the SWRP out of the NPS which can began the process of centralising.

Outside of the NPS and with the nationalist movement stalled due to its electoral failure, the SWRP lost much momentum and began to gradually decline. While it saw a brief revival in membership owing to defections from the SNL, this was not enough to keep the party above water, particularly as Graham fell out with his own colleagues over the matter of moving forward. In January, Graham was arrested once again for sedition and libel, spending a month in jail as a result during which he went on a brief, week-long hunger strike but was forced to abandon it shortly after. His health worsened and he contracted pneumonia during this prison stint, which permanently damaged his health. While he was inside and out of prison, he repeatedly lobbied for his nationalist beliefs and continued to write extensively.

By March, shortly before Graham was released, the rump Scottish Workers' Party had been absorbed back into the wider SWRP. The members now established an informal 'Macleanist' faction in the party that opposed Graham for his lack of commitment to Marxism, forming the nexus of a Leninist tendency in the party. Graham, who was principally a nationalist who supported leftist politics, contrasted with the SWRP old guard who were more hard-line Leninists and Marxists that supported Scottish sovereignty second. John Ball, who Graham had ousted and headed the SWP, never forgave Graham for this act and schemed with Peter McIntyre, Thomas McGregor and Edward Rennie to resume control of the party. In a vote of no confidence triggered by McGregor on the Central Committee, Graham lost 4-3 and was ejected from the party, and replaced with Edward Rennie. Graham condemned the move but formally left politics and took up journalism work, writing for various pro-nationalist outfits in Edinburgh.

After a long series of health issues first appearing during in 1928 and being worsened by his prison stint in 1929, Graham died in his Edinburgh lodgings in July. He was buried on his family estate where a memorial to him was made. It continues to be a pilgrimage site for ardent Scottish nationalists.

Author & Artist[]

Between 1888 and 1892, Graham was a prolific contributor to small-circulation socialist journals, but his literary career took off when he was recruited by Frank Harris to write for the Saturday Review in 1895, and he continued writing for the Saturday until mid-1924, as well as other journals. His main form was the 'sketch', or sketch-tale', mostly descriptive, atmospheric works on South America and Scotland, which gave his work a unique aesthetic, while carrying a subtext of anti-colonialism, nostalgia, and loss. T. E. Lawrence (of Arabia) described his Scottish sketches as 'the rain-in-the-air-and-on-the-roof mournfulness of Scotch music in his time-past style [. . .] snap-shots - the best verbal snapshots ever taken I believe.' His many works were collected into anthologies. Subject matter included history, biography, poetry, essays, politics, travel and seventeen collections of short stories or literary sketches. Titles include Father Archangel of Scotland (1896 in conjunction with his wife Gabriela), Thirteen Stories (1900), Success (1902), Hope (1910), Scottish Stories (1914) and Brought Forward (1916). Biographies included: Hernando de Soto (1903), Doughty Deeds (1927), a biography of his great-great-grandfather, Robert Graham of Gartmore.

He helped his close friend Joseph Conrad, whom he had introduced to his publisher Edward Garnett at Duckworth, with research for Nostromo. Other literary friends included Ford Madox Ford, John Galsworthy, W. H. Hudson, George Bernard Shaw (who openly admits his debt to Graham for "Captain Brassbound's Conversion" as well as a key line in Arms and the Man) and G. K. Chesterton, who proclaimed him "The Prince of Preface Writers" and declaring of him that while Cunninghame Graham would never be allowed to be Prime Minister or Chairman, he instead 'achieved the adventure of being Cunninghame Graham', which Shaw described as 'an achievement so fantastic that it would never be believed in a romance.'