PERSONAL:

Born 1971. Education: Graduated from Barnard College and Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.

ADDRESSES:

Home—New York, NY.

CAREER:

Journalist. Bloomberg News Agency, New York, NY, art market writer. Formerly a columnist for the New York Sun.

WRITINGS:

The Girl with the Gallery: Edith Gregor Halpert and the Making of the Modern Art Market, Public Affairs (New York, NY), 2006.

Contributor to periodicals, including Art & Auction, ARTnews, Art Review, and the Art Newspaper.

SIDELIGHTS:

Lindsay Pollock is a journalist with the Bloomberg News Agency and writes about the art market and auctions. She is a graduate of Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism and Barnard College. Aside from her work with Bloomberg, Pollock is also a freelance writer, contributing to various journals and periodicals on art, including Art & Auction, ARTnews, Art Review, and the Art Newspaper. She published her first book, The Girl with the Gallery: Edith Gregor Halpert and the Making of the Modern Art Market, in 2006. Chronicling the life of Edith Halpert, Pollock tells how the Odessa-born immigrant moved to New York City as a poverty-stricken child and made her mark in New York's art scene selling artwork from a wide variety of artists and becoming one of the most successful art dealers of the twentieth century.

Booklist contributor Donna Seaman called the book a "riveting portrait" of Halpert's life. Richard B. Woodward, writing in the New York Times, noted that "historians of the American folk art market, created in part by [Halpert's] salesmanship, will find plenty of details to chew on" in Pollock's book. A reviewer in Publishers Weekly commented that the book is "long overdue," while a Kirkus Reviews contributor called the "polished work … a significant contribution to American beaux arts."

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL SOURCES:

PERIODICALS

Booklist, November 1, 2006, Donna Seaman, review of The Girl with the Gallery: Edith Gregor Halpert and the Making of the Modern Art Market, p. 27.

Kirkus Reviews, September 1, 2006, review of The Girl with the Gallery, p. 890.

Magazine Antiques, November, 2006, review of The Girl with the Gallery, p. 70.

New York Times, January 14, 2007, Richard B. Woodward, review of The Girl with the Gallery.

Publishers Weekly, September 4, 2006, review of The Girl with the Gallery, p. 49.

Vogue, October, 2006, Megan O'Grady, review of The Girl with the Gallery, p. 308.

ONLINE

Lindsay Pollock Home Page,http://www.lindsaypollock.com (March 1, 2007), author biography.