SINGAPORE, Sept. 16 -- Former soccer star Abbas Saad, who was convicted of match-fixing here earlier this year, is returning from his home in Australia for a meeting with partners to discuss the opening of Singapore's first male strip-tease club. Abbas, 28, is one of four shareholders in The Hot Bod Club scheduled to open next month in Singapore's trendy Boat Quay area. The new club will feature 'muscled men dancing in G-strings' and will present a show similar to the world famous Chippendale revue, Singapore's New Paper reported. The club will be the first of its kind in the conservative Asian city-state, whose leaders attribute their nation's prosperity, safety and stability to 'Asian values,' and regularly warn of corruptive moral influences from the West. Singapore's government bans pornography, censors sex scenes in movies, and has banned risque T-shirts and popular compact disc covers. Abbas, a Lebanon-born Australian whose hat trick carried Singapore's national soccer team to its first Malaysian Cup victory in 14 years last year with a 4-0 victory over Malaysia's Pahang State team, was Singapore's star player for several seasons. He was arrested and tried in a Singapore court for criminal conspiracy for allegedly trying to fix the score in a match. He testified that police threatened him, deprived him of sleep and kept him in a cold room during more than 30 straight hours of interrogation prior to his trial earlier this year. Abbas claimed the police also threatened and coerced him into signing statements that were used against him in court.

Although a police interrogator testified that the statements were not entirely in Abbas' own words and were written from the interrogator's memory after the interviews, the judge admitted them as evidence. Abbas was convicted and fined $36,000, and the International Football Association (FIFA) permanently banned him from playing, coaching or teaching soccer. Abbas, a handsome and flamboyant player known for his quick temper and fast lifestyle, was a favorite of female fans in Singapore, many of whom packed the courtroom during his lengthy trial and wept openly when he was pronounced guilty. The news of Abbas' impending return and business venture in Singapore startled and bewildered many of his fans. 'I just don't know what to make of this,' said retail sales representative Cherie Tan, 21, who called herself an avid Abbas fan. 'I'm glad he's coming back, but I wouldn't if I were him.'