SINGAPORE, May 23 -- A Singapore soccer star accused of conspiring to fix matches claims he was threatened and tricked by investigators into making incriminating statements, a published report said Tuesday. Abbas Saad, a Lebanese-born Australian national, contends he was coerced into signing statements when Singaporean authorities detained him for 47 hours in February, the New Paper reported. Abbas, 27, a star on Singapore's national soccer team, is accused of taking part in a criminal conspiracy to fix the results of matches in the 1994 Football Association of Malaysia Premier League competition. During a court hearing Monday, Abbas's defense attorney said written statements signed by the player in February were not made voluntarily and should not be admitted as evidence, the paper said. Attorney Edmond Pereira said Abbas was ill and exhausted at the time, and that he was threatened by authorities. The investigators deceived Pereira so that he was tricked into signing the statements, Pereira said. Pereira said an interrogating officer 'told Abbas 'Look, we know your lifestyle here...we have been following you and and we know what you have been up to,'' according to the New Paper. The defense attorney said officers told Abbas they knew he had been having an affair with a married woman and threatened to bring in the woman's husband if Abbas did not cooperate. Investigating officer David Tan Siang Khng denied threatening or pressuring Abbas. 'No threat was made to him, no inducement was given to him,' Tan said.

'In the midst of interviewing him, he told me that he had thought it over and decided to tell me of his involvement in match-fixing syndicates.' Pereira said Tan assured Abbas he had 'nothing to worry about' as he had allegedly agreed to help another player fix matches but had not accepted any money. 'No such assurances were made,' Tan said. Pereira also said that Abbas complained of a high fever during the questioning and pleaded with investigators to let him go home. 'You systematically wore him down so you could get whatever information you can from him,' Pereira said to Tan in court. Tan denied that Abbas had complained of a fever. 'In my 15 years here, I haven't interviewed a fitter person than Abbas,' Tan said. Another player accused of fixing matches, Czech national Michael Vana, 31, jumped bail and fled Singapore last year after he was charged with corruption. If convicted of criminal conspiracy charges, Abbas would faces a fine of up to $72,000 and up to five years in prison.