Get Into Duke University

Duke is a private research university located in Durham, NC. More than just the home of the Duke Blue Devils men’s basketball team, Duke is consistently ranked among the top 10 national universities according to U.S. News and World Report. There are 6,417 undergraduates enrolled in Duke’s two undergraduate colleges and 10,423 students enrolled in Duke’s robust graduate programs. Duke’s West Campus, the heart of the university, was designed in the Gothic style and includes the Duke Chapel, one of the university’s landmarks. The East Campus, just over a mile away, houses all first-year students on 172 acres. This campus includes residence halls, research labs, tennis courts, a dining hall, café, convenience store, library, theater, and gym. In addition to this separate residential home, Duke offers a number of first-year programs to aid in the transition from high school to college. First-year students take a writing course and a seminar that build critical thinking and help form community.

Trinity College of Arts & Sciences

Every Duke undergraduate student takes classes in Trinity College, the liberal arts core of the university where 80% of undergraduates are enrolled. Within Trinity College there are 44 departments and programs, 137 areas of study, and 668 faculty members. Students are encouraged to combine academic pathways and explore diverse disciplines through the flexible liberal arts curriculum. In addition to its 53 majors and 52 minors, Duke students can pursue one of 23 interdisciplinary certificates in topics like “Civic Engagement & Societal Chance,” “Human Rights,” or “Innovation & Entrepreneurship.” Students can also design their own major through “Program II,” an individualized degree program. Incoming Trinity College students may apply to the Focus Program (FOCUS), an interdisciplinary learning experience centered on a common theme or topic within a cluster. First-semester students in each cluster live in the same residence hall and work closely with faculty. The unique Focus Program admits about 20-25% of the incoming first-year Duke class.

Duke students have many opportunities to engage in service-learning courses or study abroad during their four years, including 41 “Duke-In” programs on six continents. These programs are taught by Duke faculty and allow students to earn in-residence Duke credits while exploring a particular topic in depth off campus. For example, the “Duke in London” program focuses on drama and performance through coursework and live performances in central London. The “Duke in Sri Lanka” program examines health and health disparities in a global context.