Duke University is a selective, private research university that calls Durham, NC, home. Founded originally as Trinity College in 1838, it was renamed by tobacco tycoon James Buchanan Duke in 1924 and became the “Gothic Wonderland” campus it is today. Duke offers two undergraduate academic paths, Trinity College of Arts & Sciences and Pratt School of Engineering, that together offer 53 majors, 52 minors, 23 certificates, as well as “Program II,” which allows students to create their own curriculum. The Duke campus is 9,000 acres, 7,200 of which is forested, and is comprised of 200 buildings, of those, 12 are research institutes. For students interested in expanding their academic playground, Duke Global offers programs in 20 countries.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Private

Not for Profit

Coed

Need Blind

This school does not consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Major city

0

100

6%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineEarly Decision Acceptance is binding so student must attend college if accepted.November 1Fall Regular DecisionJanuary 3May 1

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

13%

Out-Of-State Students

81%

37%

Submitting ACT

49%

Submitting SAT

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Doctorate

Total Number of Students

18,024

Total Number of Undergrads

6,640

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

2-19 Students

69%

20-39 Students

18%

40-99 Students

8%

100+ Students

2%

0

100

88%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

95%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

5:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$26,932

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$63,450

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$63,450

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$17,458

Books and Supplies

$1434

Aid & Grants

0

100

100%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

14%

Average Aid Per Year

$58,019

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

14%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$5,805

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$49,011

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

22%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$8,494

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$12,000

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$120

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

48%

52%

Student Organizations

737

Size of Town

Major city

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

Yes

On Campus Women's Center

Yes

Housing

0

100

85%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

Yes

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Blue Devils

School Colors

blue and white

Varsity Athletics Association

NCAA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Atlantic Coast Conference

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

Yes

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

Durham

New York

Washington

San Francisco

Boston

Employed

6 mos. after graduation

73%

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$114,500

What Students Are Saying

Duke is an amazing school with an incredible, if sometimes overwhelming, number of opportunities available every day. Duke administration and students work to be academically, artistically, and socially open to new things and representative of the incredibly diverse student body. A Duke student is sure to have a one of a kind experience and is sure to find a place they feel at home.

Autumn from Spring, TX

there is no other place in america where you will tap into a richer infusion of pioneering professors in their fields, fully-funded research and civil service opportunities both at home and overseas, and a fabled athletics program enveloping a worldwide fan base than at duke university. from developing single-sound multispeakers to researching glioblastoma-curing applications with renowned faculty in electrical engineering and cancer medicine, duke students are contributing to the world's next breakthroughs in communications and medicine by day, before donning the blue and white body paint to senselessly cheer for one of the most iconic and winningest athletics program in all of sports history, by night. for these reasons and many more, it's no wonder why any aspiring eighteen-year-old difference maker wouldn't want to spend four years of his or her life on this incredible campus.

robert from phoenix, md

Duke's a diverse school with students of all sorts of races and backgrounds. The education is vigorous, so you'll get out whatever you put in. There are hundreds of student groups, academic opportunities and living environments to choose from, so once you've found your niche you'll have discovered that Duke is more than just a university, it's an entire college experience.

Elisabeth from Durham, NC

Duke is the located on the most beautiful campus in America, right in the great state of North Carolina. Duke students are the ones who coined the term work hard, play hard, as you will never find a place as challenging but rewarding as you will find in Duke University. If you love basketball, you have to come to Duke- we are the school that most recently won that thing.

KZ

Duke's campus is absolutely beautiful. The professors are great and the academics are very rigorous. Also, school spirit is huge.

Ariana from Fort Myers, FL

Duke is a top-notch research university with a massive amount of school spirit. There is no typical Duke experience - each student makes it his or her own. However, the most successful students are entrepreneurial types who are not afraid to take advantage of all Duke has to offer.

BlueDevil

Similar Colleges

Philadelphia, PA

Providence, RI

Nashville, TN

Stanford, CA

New Haven, CT

Baltimore, MD

Cambridge, MA

Princeton, NJ

New York, NY

Ithaca, NY

New York, NY

Chapel Hill, NC

See All