Established in 1838, the Duke University is a non-profit private higher education institution located in the urban setting of the small city of Durham (population range of 50,000-249,999 inhabitants), North Carolina. Officially accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, Duke University (DUKE) is a large-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 15,000-19,999 students) coeducational US higher education institution formally affiliated with the Christian-Methodist religion. Duke University (DUKE) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and doctorate degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 186-year-old US higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. The acceptance rate range is 0-9% making this US higher education organization an extremely selective institution. International applicants are eligible to apply for enrollment. DUKE also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has Duke University a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades.

Admission Rate

Duke University's acceptance rate range is 0-9% making this institution an extremely selective higher education institution.

Sport Facilities/Activities

This institution features sporting facilities and organizes sports activities for its students.

Institutional Hospital

This institution has an institutional hospital that is owned and operated by the university. Institutional hospitals are typically affiliated with medical schools and provide a range of medical services to patients, while also serving as a teaching hospital for medical students and residents.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.

In particular, this institution offers some courses via distance education at the undergraduate level and at the graduate level. Source: IPDES.

Academic Counseling

This institution offers students academic guidance and support to assist them in their academic pursuits.

Career Services

This institution offers career counseling, career assessments, job and internship postings, career events, alumni networking or other career-related services to assist students transition successfully from academic life to professional life.