Following their acclaimed, sell-out performances recreating The Band's The Last Waltz concert at the Belgrade Theatre in 2011, the Mustard and Blood Band return to the B2 auditorium in 2016 with three very special live shows this June.

The Mustard and Blood Band are a collective of some of the finest musicians in the region who have come together to present a unique festival of themed music nights at the Belgrade this summer. From the cinematic landscapes of French 'chanson' to the sweeping scores of John Barry by way of Tarantino's unforgettable film soundtracks, this highly original festival runs in the Belgrade's B2 auditorium for three nights only from Thurs 16 to Sat 18 June.

Kicking off the festival is Bring Out The Gimp on Thurs 16 June at 8pm and Sat 18 June at 2.15pm, a musical celebration of the soundtracks of Quentin Tarantino. Combining cult classics such as Miserlou, Stuck In The Middle With You, Jungle Boogie, Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down) and Son Of A Preacher Man with lesser known gems from Tarantino's endlessly inventive cinematic repertoire, this perfectly pitched tribute to the Godfather of modern cinema is the ideal choice for any Tarantino devotee.

This will be followed by Francophile on Fri 17 June at 8pm, an exuberant journey through the soundscapes of French 'chanson' featuring the music of Edith Piaf, Serge Gainsbourg and Jacques Brel. At times whimsical and at times majestic, this heartfelt celebration of the genre brings together memorable classics such as Piaf's Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien and Ne Me Quitte Pas with the best of Serge Gainsbourg's genre-defying musical output.

Completing the trio of concerts is Shaken not Stirred, an homage to John Barry and the music of the James Bond movies. Taking listeners on an epic journey through the sweeping soundscapes of the hit 007 movie franchise, this unique night of music brings together recognizable Bond hits including We Have All The Time In The World, You Only Live Twice and Sky Fall with a selection of memorable numbers from John Barry's extensive musical back-catalogue including Midnight Cowboy, the Theme from The Persuaders and many more.

Musical Director Johnny Nicholds said: "I suppose the idea for Mustard and Blood originated from my friends and I wanting to start something that wouldn't just feel like a conventional 'gig'. Every band that we were around seemed to have one, white male singer, an electric guitar, a bass and a drummer...that wasn't us. Since 2003, we've been putting on nights of themed music around the city. In recent years, we've hosted a night of 'biblical' proportions which explored the dark side of the bible through some of its best-known stories. We also did a Tom Waits night and a Nick Cave night which went down really well with audiences. Most recently, we performed as part of Coventry Cathedral's outdoor festival 'Dusk' which was an incredible experience for us.

"Our ethos is all about giving the audience more than just a gig. It's about giving them something that was more akin to a theatrical experience which makes the Belgrade an ideal space in which to perform. I think it's fair to say that, with all of our gigs, whatever the space, the audience become part of the band. You can't hide how much fun we're having on stage and we don't try to."

The Mustard and Blood Band visit the B2 auditorium from Thurs 16 to Sat 18 June. For more information and to book tickets, call the Belgrade Box Office on 024 7655 3055 or visit www.belgrade.co.uk

Comments

To post a comment, you must register and login.