BIOGRAPHY OF OLA RAPACE

Ola Rapace (full name: Pär Ola Rapace) is a Swedish film actor and producer known for works like Sjätte dagen (1999), Skyfall (2012) and Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets (2017).

OLA RAPTOR AGE

Rapace is 47 years old in 2018. He was born on December 3, 1971 in Tyresö, Stockholms län, Sweden.

PARENTS OLA RAPACE

Not much is known about Rapace’s family, but he was raised by his father after his parents separated when he was a one-year-old. They lived in Vallentuna, a middle-class suburb of Stockholm. He played football as a child and loved to listen to heavy metal. He went to the University of Montpellier in France where he studied philosophy. While there, he found he could do it.

OLA RAPACE WIFE

Rapace is not married. He was, however, previously married to Swedish actress Noomi Rapace. The former couple exchanged wedding vows in 2001, but in 2011 they divorced. They share a son named Lev Rapace.

Ola was born as Pär Ola Norell but changed his surname to Rapace, which means “bird of prey” in French and Italian. The name was chosen by Ola and Noomi after their marriage. Even after their divorce, the surname remained.

OLA RAPTOR KIDS

Rapace is the father of two children: a daughter named Line Rapace and a son named Lev Rapace. Line was born in 1999 and is her daughter with Malin Morgan, also an actress. His son Lev was born in 2003, the fruit of his marriage to Noomi Rapace.

Photo by Ola Rapace

ACTOR OLA RAPACE

Ola’s first screen role was in Lukas Moodysson’s film Together, a bittersweet comedy about the hippie-socialist values ​​of a Stockholm commune. The film won several awards at international film festivals, including the Paris Film Festival Special Jury Prize and the Philadelphia Film Festival Jury Prize.

His big breakthrough came with the television series Tusenbröder about a group of handymen involved in organized crime. Immediately followed the role of Stefan Lindman in Wallander, based on the books by Kurt Wallander by Henning Mankell.

He continued with several police and crime-related television series, such as portraying Daniel Nordström in the Danish police television show Anna Pihl, Crimes of Passion, a crime drama set in rural Sweden in the 1950s, Farang on a Scandinavian former convict living in Thailand and Hassel, an updated dark and gritty crime show based on a classic book series from the 70s and 80s. It was a crime show that he also executive produced.

Her first film in English was the 2004 independent film Rancid starring Matthew Settle (of Band of Brothers and Gossip Girl). A much bigger project was the 2012 James Bond film Skyfall, in which he played hitman ‘Patrice’.

In 2015 he moved to Paris, France and has since worked on Swedish, French and international projects. In 2016 he starred in the French sci-fi film Ares and soon after he followed Section Zéro, a French television series about a paramilitary police squad in the near future.

Rapace had a supporting role as Major Gibson in Luc Besson’s 2017 big-budget sci-fi comic/movie Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets. In 2018, Raptor was the main antagonist of season 3 of the popular Netflix/BBC Viking drama The Last Kingdom as “Jarl Sigurd Bloodhair”.

When Below the Surface (Gidseltagningen), a Danish drama about 15 innocent people held hostage underground on a subway train, returns for a second season in 2019 and Rapace will join the cast as “Yusef”.

MOVIES AND TV SHOWS OLA RAPACE