Darius Jones has created a recognizable voice as a critically acclaimed saxophonist and composer by embracing individuality and innovation in the tradition of African-American music.

Shahzad Ismaily is an American musician and composer of Pakistani descent. His main instrument is the electric bass. He is active in the fields of rock and jazz , including in the New York downtown scene.

Ryan Sawyer is a musician deeply rooted in the New York improvisation scene. As a drummer and percussionist he plays in a wide range of idioms. A career spanning more than 25 years Sawyer has played with a dizzying amount of collaborators.

Samara Lubelski, born and bred in NYC, is a singer and multi instrumentalist of song and experimental music. Samara has recorded and performed solo, and in numerous bands and projects including Hall of Fame, Thurston Moore, The Sonora Pine, and Metabolismus.

Barry Weisblat is a musician/engineer from Brooklyn, working with self-made and modified live electronics.

Bob Bellerue is a sound artist, experimental musician, sound/video curator, and creative technician based in Ridgewood NY. Over the last 30+ years he has been involved in creating and presenting a wide range of sonic activities – experimental music, sound art, noise, junk metal percussion ensembles, soundtracks for dance/ theater/ video/ performance art, and sound / video installations. Bob’s electronic sound work is focused on resonant feedback systems, using amplified instruments, objects, recordings, and spaces, in combination with electronics and software written in the Supercollider audio synthesis programming language. He curates and produces the annual Ende Tymes Festival (13th edition next Spring), and is the Technical Director for Pioneer Works and the Cultural Services of the French Embassy

Rump State: touring together as a duo for the first time, guitarist-vocalist Mark C. Morgan (ex-Sightings, ex-Silk Purse) has been jamming with The Mysterious Norwegian (electronics, loops, vocals) for a period of time, the length of which is none of your damn business. You’re allowed to know that The Mysterious Norwegian is conservatory-trained but doesn’t care about it at all (which is precisely why you should). All five people at Remember The Ümlaüt, a Nü Metal Surrealism festival held annually in a different sketchy dude’s basement, raved about Rump State’s merging of high-brow dream theory with fractured clang and fidelity-challenging dirt. They have a full-length album due any minute on the Paris-based label No Lagos.

Scott Kiernan is a multi-disciplinary artist living and working in New York City. Through his video, photo and installation works, electronically synthesized and photographic elements interact to address their own materiality and means of distribution. He is co-director of live televisual performance project E.S.P. TV and director of Various/Artists Records.