William F. Allen OBITUARY

ALLEN William F. Allen of Braintree, MA passed away September 21, 2014. He was born in 1919, the son of the late William and Anita (Freeman) Allen in the then country village of Wickford, RI. From his parents, who he held in great esteem, he learned about work, education and regard for the community you live in. Mr. Allen graduated from Brown University where he later worked as an instructor in mechanical engineering. He was a decorated US Navy Veteran of WWII, having participated in the occupation of Japan. His commanding officer wrote that his work on the largest radio station in Japan changed the face of a considerable piece of the Japanese Empire and that he handled large groups of skilled and unskilled workers with equal facility. After leaving the military, Mr. Allen attended Harvard University under the GI Bill. Soon after graduating from Harvard, Mr. Allen joined Stone & Webster Engineering Corporation where he stayed for the rest of his career. A licensed engineer in 46 States and Canada, Mr. Allen was the long time CEO of Stone & Webster and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. Mr. Allen, who participated in many engineering and construction projects throughout the world, was noted for his commitment to technical excellence. He was also known for caring about the people who worked with him. Mr. Allen participated on many boards and charitable organizations including Northeastern University and Mass Eye & Ear Infirmary. Mr. Allen was known as a stalwart leader of his business organization. A dear friend to many, devoted to his family, community and church, he will be remembered for his intellect, generosity, sincerity, charm and wit. He is survived by his wife Doris (Pendoley) Allen: children, William and his wife Melina, Thomas and his wife Karen, Janet Fraser and her husband Greg and Paul Allen. Grandfather of Martha, James, Matthew, Katherine and Joseph. A Funeral Mass will be held on Friday, September 26 at 12 P.M. in the Church of St. Clare, 1244 Liberty St., Braintree Highlands. Relatives and friends are respectfully invited to visit the McMaster Funeral Home, 86 Franklin St (Rt.37) BRAINTREE, Thursday from 5:00-8:00 P.M. Interment Blue Hill Cemetery. In lieu of flowers donations in his name may be made to the Sisters of Charity of Nazareth, P.O. Box 9, Nazareth KY 40048. For information and directions please visit McMasterfh.com.