This article is about Donetsk. You may be looking for Luhansk.

Donetsk is a releasable, located in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine, and part of Europe .

Sitting directly on the Ukrainian border with Russia, Donetsk faces the almost unavoidable threat of annexation from the country if it ever does break away. While it does have Severe Winter to provide it a defensive advantage at certain points, it is unlikely to escape the grasp of a Russian player.

Background[]

The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

The Donetsk People's Republic is a disputed entity created by Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. It began as a breakaway state (2014–2022) until annexed by Russia (2022–present). The DPR claims its borders to be all of Ukraine's Donetsk Oblast. The city of Donetsk is the contested administrative centre of the region.

Base Statistics[]

Economy[]

Donetsk has a starting income of about $204,733. $157,093 from tax and $47,640 from resources.

Resources[]

Resources of Donetsk Aluminum +1.22 Copper +2.42

Military[]

Base Manpower Capacity of Donetsk per Conscription Law Disarmed

[1% RP] Volunteer

[2% RP] Limited

[5% RP] Extensive

[10% RP] Required

[25% RP] 60,000 60,000 121,362 242,723 606,807

Geography[]

Terrain[]

Donetsk is entirely flat.

Biome[]

Donetsk has no unique biome, with an exception of it being affected by Mild Winter in November, by Severe Winter in December and January, and it returns to Mild Winter in February.

Borders[]

It borders Luhansk (if released from Ukraine) to the northeast, Ukraine to the west and north, Russia to the southeast, and the Sea of Azov to the south.

Cities[]

Donetsk has 5 cities. The capital is Donetsk sitting at 988k population, which becomes square after a short while. The second biggest city is Mariupol at around 480,000 people. The nation has a total population of around 2,420,000 people.

Strategy[]

If Ukraine and is AI and all releasables are released[]

You should enable the policy Ignore Safety Regulations and quickly build a steel and motor factory( Remember to only purchase the needed resources when the factories are almost complete to save resources). While the factories are being built you can justify on Luhansk and Crimea and set your military doctrine to Massed Attack. After the justification Donetsk should have been a square city already and you can make tanks on them. When they are finished you can take over the previously said countries and with the money you received you should make fortifications (Only if Russia is a player and is not your ally), fertilizer, electronics and consumer factories to balance your stability and then you are free to expand into Ukraine and potentially conquering east and central Europe.

If Ukraine and is AI but no releasables are released[]

The steps are the same except that you are building an electronic factory at the start to trade to AI countries for money and make the rest of the factories first and making around 6-10 units of tanks before invading Ukraine.

If Ukraine is a player[]

Same as above except that after the factories are finished and you got your money, spend all your manpower on tanks, build fortifications and hold on for as long as you can before your allies come or the player quits.

Threats[]

Russia colonizing you to form either the Soviet Union or the Russian Empire.

Ukraine wanting to reintegrate you.

Any Ukrainian releasable planning to reunite Ukraine.

Poland or Lithuania annexing Ukraine's core territories for the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.

Crimea needs parts of Ukraine and Donetsk for the Crimean Khanate.

Any country wanting to form the European Union.

Trivia[]

The Donetsk People's Republic, along with Luhansk, though de-facto independent in 2019, the game's start date, no longer hold that status due to an unrecognized September 2022 annexation by Russia.

Although shown in-game, the DPR doesn't own all of the Donetsk Oblast.

It is one of the only de-facto independent releasables, alongside Abkhazia, Ambazonia, Artsakh, Kosovo, Luhansk, Northern Cyprus, Transnistria, Somaliland, South Ossetia, and Western Sahara.

North America Alaska • Alberta • Aztlan • Baja California • Barbuda • California • Cascadia • Confederate States of America • Nevis • New England • Puerto Rico • Quebec • San Andres • Saskatchewan • Texas • Yucatan South America Amazonia • Espirito Santo • Mendoza • Nordeste • Patagonia • Rio de Janeiro • Santa Cruz • Sao Paulo • Sul • Wallmapu Europe Abkhazia • Aland • Alsace • Andalusia • Aragon • Astrakhan • Asturias • Avaria • Balearic Islands • Balkaria • Bashkortostan • Basque • Bavaria • Brittany • Budjak • Carpathian Rus • Catalonia • Chechnya • Chuvashia • Circassia • Cornwall • Corsica • Crimea • Don • Donetsk • Emilia • Erzya • Flanders • Frisia • Friuli • Galicia • Ingria • Ingushetia • Kaliningrad • Kalmykia • Karachay • Karelia • Komi • Kosovo • Kuban • Kumykia • Lezgistan • Liguria • Lombardy • Luhansk • Mari El • Mercia • Moksha • Naples • Northumbria • Occitania • Ossetia • Piedmont • Pomorje • Provence • Romagna • Romandie • Saint Petersburg • Sardinia • Savoy • Saxony • Scania • Scotland • Sicily • Tatarstan • Terek • Transnistria • Transylvania • Trieste • Tuscany • Udmurtia • Valdosta • Valencia • Venetia • Wales • Wallonia Asia Aceh • Al-Ahwaz • Anhui • Arakan • Artsakh • Arunachal Pradesh • Assam • Assyria • Balawaristan • Bali • Balochistan • Bangsamoro • Buryatia • Degar • Dravida Nadu • East Turkestan • Far Eastern Republic • Gorkhaland • Guangdong • Guangxi • Guizhou • Hai-nam • Hakkaland • Hazarajat • Hexi • Hok-giong • Hubei • Hui • Hunan • Jiangsu • Johor • Kachin • Kangleipak • Karakalpakstan • Kashmir • Kayah • Khalistan • Khyber Pakhtunkhwa • Kirat • Kongsi • Kurdistan • Madhesh • Manchuria • Meghalaya • Minahasa • Mizoram • Nagalim • Northern Cyprus • Pattani • Riau • Ryukyu • Sabah • Sarawak • Shan • Shandong • Shanghai • Shanxi • Siberia • Sichuan • Sindhudesh • South Azerbaijan • South Maluku • South Turkestan • South Yemen • Southern Mongolia • Talysh-Mughan • Tamil Eelam • Tibet • Tripura • Tuva • Ural Republic • Yakutia • Yogyakarta • Yugra • Yunnan • Zhejiang • Zhongzhou Africa Afar • Agadez • Ambazonia • Anjouan • Azawad • Barotseland • Bas-Congo • Biafra • Cabinda • Canary Islands • Cape Republic • Casamance • Darfur • Kabylia • Katanga • Kivu • Logone • Lunda-Tchokwe • Mombasa • Mthwakazi • Mwali • Oduduwa • Ogaden • Oromia • Rif • Somaliland • South Congo • Tigray • Volkstaat • Western Sahara • Western Togoland • Xhosaland • Zanzibar • Zululand Oceania Bougainville • Hawaii • New Munster • Tasmania • West Papua • Westralia