Rupaul Andre Charles sits in the corner of a SoHo loft, dressed in a T-shirt and chinos, looking for all the world like a shy and lanky graduate student. His head is shaved. On closer inspection, his eyebrows are, too. After a three-hour toilette -- one and a half if time is tight, which is usually the case these days -- he is ready to join the ranks of single-named, single-minded chanteuses like Cher and Madonna.

Larger than life at nearly 7 feet tall -- "but with hair, heels and attitude, honey, I am through the roof" -- RuPaul is the summation of everything he has always wanted to see in a disco star: costumes, hair, funny one-liners. RuPaul is also the first full-fledged drag queen to land a debut single and an album on the Billboard charts. Taking dance music one step further than did the disco queen Sylvester and the defiantly gay singers Jimmy Sommerville and Andy Bell of Erasure, RuPaul transforms pop's sex-as-subtext underpinnings into a forum for personal, cultural and sexual politics.

That first single, "Supermodel (You Better Work)," which recently ended a five-month run in the Hot 100, is a frisky house ditty that gently spoofs the fashion industry and added a few new catch phrases to the contemporary lexicon. Its success was fueled by a video that paid riotous homage to movies like "Sunset Boulevard," "Mahogany," "Mommie Dearest" and "The Wizard of Oz."

"Supermodel of the World," RuPaul's recent debut LP, wisely departs from pure parody, covering a wide range of dance-music styles, from sprightly ("All of a Sudden") to sultry ("Supernatural"). It suggests that as a songwriter and vocalist, RuPaul possesses a pop craftsmanship that will transcend drag's flamboyant visual presentation.

Pop music thrives on theatrical sexuality, whether it is elliptical (the androgyny of glam rock) or leering (most hip-hop and heavy-metal artists). As a pop figure, RuPaul, who has been doing drag for 11 years, is an amalgam of two distinct sexual archetypes: gender benders and soul divas.

The gender bender appropriates feminine dress and behavior (often skirting the issue of personal sexuality) as a gesture of rock-and-roll rebellion. The soul diva exaggerates femininity as a matter of birthright and a show of power. RuPaul bends gender well past the breaking point and caricatures the diva without ever becoming one. "I am a drag queen," he says. "I don't have to explain myself. My frequency is very common, and it's open to anybody who wants to tune in."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.