Amir Johnson is a seasoned professional basketball player who has enjoyed 13 seasons and counted in the National Basketball Association (NBA) since his 2005 second-round draft by the Detroit Pistons. With the Pistons, he previously teamed with the Toronto Raptors, Bolton Celtics and currently plays as a power center for the Philadelphia 76ers.

Biography of Amir Johnson

His mother gave birth to him on the first day of May 1987 in Los Angeles, California and he was named Amir Jalla Johnson. Johnson was blessed with rare athletic traits in both physique and the abilities needed to create a star. Despite this, he did not find a place on a high school basketball team until his sophomore year.

The 76ers forward may have had foresight of what the future held for him and likely discovered that a college education wouldn’t be part of it. He enrolled in various high schools, perhaps, to make up for the time he will also miss in higher education and a college career.

He attended Pacific Hills and Narbonne highschools in his freshman year, but enrolled in Verbum Dei High School as a sophomore in 2002. In Verbum Dei, he saw action on the court and had a strong inaugural basketball season at high school. Soon after, he set sail and transferred to Westchester High School. He missed games during his junior year as he was forced to sit out, but he might as well have spent time honing his skills and preparing for a great senior season.

In his senior year, he stepped up his game and put his name on Westchester’s standout list. He averaged 21 points, 15 rebounds and eight shots on goal per game and also led the team to a state title and a national top-five ranking. Amir Johnson, in turn, has received several accolades like being named California Mr Basketball 2005, McDonald’s All-American Player of the Year, Los Angeles Player by the Los Angeles Times, as well as being in the 2005 Boys Game.

Amir Johnson marked the basketball team, so he should be a top rookie. He was considered a four-star recruit and was ranked as the No. 7 forward and No. 29 player in the nation in 2005. As a result, he became a sought-after player. He committed to playing for the University of Louisville, but changed his mind and instead decided to forgo college to pursue his athletic dreams.

NBA Career

He declared for the 2005 NBA high school draft and was ultimately selected by the Detroit Pistons in the second round with the 56th overall pick. With his selection, he remains the last recruit to be selected at the end of high school. During the 4 seasons he would play for the Pistons, he was assigned to two NBA developmental leagues – Fayetteville Patriots and Sioux Falls Skyforce. Despite this, he returned to the Pistons on a three-year, $12 million deal in July 2007 and became a valuable asset off the bench.

Johnson was traded to the Toronto Raptors on August 18, 2009, but re-signed with them on July 8, 2010 on a five-year, $34 million deal. With the Raptors, he had a massive career and also increased his dominance and overall production. He also had a best season in 2012–13 where he averaged 10 points per game and scored a career-high 32 points in a 106–94 win over the Los Angeles Lakers on December 8, 2013. .

Over time, Johnson has become an on-court basketball hybrid. He does a bit of everything and is recognized for his culture of teamwork and respect. With such a resume, he can fit into any team and as such, the Boston Celtics signed him to a two-year contract worth $24 million in July 2015. 2015 to 2017 he pitched his tent with the team, he played in 159 games and posted a career-high three-pointer in a 107-100 win over the Chicago Bulls on November 2, 2016.

After 12 NBA seasons with plenty of experience and solid play around the hoop, the 6-foot-9, 240-pound moved to the Philadelphia 76ers after signing a one-year contract with them on July 8, 2017. At the 2018 NBA Awards, he became the recipient of the NBA Hustle Award on June 25, 2018. A year after signing with the 76ers, Amir Johnson re-signed with the team.

Family life, business, relationships

Amir was born to Anthony Johnson and DeneenGriffon. He was raised alongside his sister, Indi, who is also athletically inclined and played college basketball for the Southern University women’s basketball team. The duo is not the only athlete in the family, however. Their cousins, Kevin and Kaelin Burnett, both played linebacker in the NFL.

Athletes are no strangers to business and sometimes, several romantic relationships. While Amir Johnson may not have earned a reputation as a double dater like Lou Williams and Tristan Thompson, he’s had his fair share of business.

He dated model Alana Jung who gave birth to his daughter Amelia in September 2013. Although he claimed that they had an affair of almost 2 years for being just a casual sexual relationship, Jung reckons they had something more during his 2015 court battle over increased child support.

The veteran basketball player is currently dating Daria Marie Mitchell.