Amir Johnson is such a blue-collar basketball player that you could easily imagine him taking a literal lunch pail to work with him at the TD Garden. However, considering Johnson will be earning $12 million this year, it’s pretty unlikely that he packs his own lunch.

To earn his paycheque, Amir doesn’t put up gaudy numbers, he doesn’t stuff his stat sheet, and he doesn’t have a lot of highlight-reel plays. What he does do is punch in, do his job, and punch out. As a result it’s easy to underestimate Johnson’s contributions to the Celtics. But Amir Johnson has a unique combination of experience and energy that makes him a real glue guy on the current Celtics roster. While Amir’s old-school hustle might not gain a lot of fanfare, he proved to be a consistent contributor last season. On the whole, Johnson provides a lot of the little things that can help a team succeed moving forward.

A sneaky acquisition

Amir Johnson came to Boston pretty quietly. After another overhyped offseason, the Celtics made fewer moves than expected during the 2015 break, and the signing of Johnson went relatively unnoticed. Some saw it as one of the best signings of the summer, but overall it wasn’t seen as a move that would make much of a difference.

The outpouring of emotions by Raptors fans upon Johnson’s departure from Toronto should have been some indication to the Celtics faithful that Amir was the kind of guy you want on your team. Yet South of Canada few viewed Amir signing with the Celtics as particularly consequential.

So when Amir came to Boston, he did what he always does—he went to work.

A solid contributor

Johnson didn’t start the season for the Celtics. Rather, David Lee and Tyler Zeller had that honour, albeit briefly. But it didn’t take long for Amir to work his way into the starting lineup, where he set about doing the dirty work and helping to elevate the team around him.

Much of what Johnson does never appears in the box score. He’s another one of those guys with a lot of intangibles. He sets screens, provides help defense, is always fighting for position and generally plays with a lot of intensity, often diving on loose balls and pulling down his fair share of rebounds.

Johnson’s numbers certainly don’t leap out at you, but besides a period where he was dealing with plantar fasciitis, he was one of the Celtics’ more consistent contributors last season. Over the course of the season, Johnson managed 7.3 points per game in 22.8 minutes, along with 6.4 rebounds, 1.7 assists and 1.1 blocks—not exactly superstar numbers. But Amir’s presence on the court provided support to his teammates in a number of ways. While numbers don’t lie, they can be deceptive, especially when a team relies heavily on its backcourt for scoring, playmaking and defense.

At 29, Johnson is one of the Celtics’ oldest players. Considering that he started playing professional ball at 18, he’s got plenty of miles on the odometer already. But Johnson’s experience in the league means that he more than makes up for any flat-footedness with solid court vision and the type of strong positional play that only comes from years of seasoning. Amir also showed on several occasions last season that, despite any possible wear and tear, he’s got plenty of hustle left in him.

Some Celtics fans might have been hopeful for an upgrade at Amir’s position this offseason, particularly with the extra incentive of avoiding the second year of Johnson’s contract in which his wage goes way up. But Johnson earned his raise with a solid season on a team that improved around him.

An all around good guy: Praise for Amir

One of the reasons Amir was so beloved by Raptors fans was because he embraced the city and its culture, enjoying his downtime by getting involved in community events and even becoming a regular participant in Toronto’s zombie walk.

Since joining the Celtics, Johnson has spent a lot of time with his teammates, including rocking out at Isaiah Thomas’s wedding, where Johnson showed he has some serious style. On the court Johnson brings a lot of positivity too, with Stevens attributing no small part of the Celtics’ success to Amir’s consummate professionalism and team-first approach.

"He's really important," Stevens said. "He's really important to our offense too, with his rolling, getting to the rim, making himself available at the rim, those types of things. But really in the last two months I feel like he's played at a high, high level... He's been impactful and his mobility is critical against their bigs." - from Masslive.com

Another season as a Celtic

This season the Celtics look to be vastly improved. With Horford joining the frontcourt and some promising prospects on the bench, the Celtics look ready to make the leap to true contender status.

Even though all eyes will likely be on new arrival Al Horford, Johnson’s presence could prove just as pivotal for the Celtics this season. If Amir starts alongside big Al, then he can give guidance to Horford on how to fit in with the Celtics’ system, providing continuity in a frontcourt that’s seen its fair share of shakeups over the last few seasons. On the other hand, if Amir is moved to a bench role, he’s likely to be the go-to backup for Horford as the only big on Boston’s roster with comparable skill and versatility. Either way, Johnson’s presence could prove crucial to Boston’s ability to start the season strong, particularly with Kelly Olynyk unlikely to be ready to play at the beginning of the season.

In some ways, the recent signing of Horford echoes Johnson’s singing a year ago. Both players were beloved by the cities they left behind for Boston, both players can be seen as somewhat underappreciated for all the skill they offer, both are hard-working, two-way players that do all the little things, and both help provide a solid foundation and veteran leadership to the Celtics frontcourt.

After adding Amir to the starting lineup, the Celtics improved their win-loss record and looked a lot more competitive as a unit. If Horford adds even more of what Amir has already brought to Boston, then this season should see the Celtics challenging for dominance in the Eastern Conference and maybe even making some noise in the West.

Amir Johnson was an undervalued part of the Celtics’ improved form last season. Alongside or backing up Horford, Johnson is likely to be an afterthought again this season. That’s okay—Amir is used to being underestimated. Like a lot of his teammates on the Celtics, part of what drives Johnson is the perception that he’s not a truly great player. But greatness is easy enough for some people to achieve and too often squandered on those who buckle under expectations. In short, greatness can be easy to attain but almost impossible to maintain. Just as hard and equally impressive is being consistently good. And ultimately, consistent goodness is akin to greatness.

Amir Johnson is a consistently good player. He can be easy to underestimate and easy to dismiss, but Amir’s positive attitude, veteran leadership, solid fundamentals and old-school hustle makes any team he’s on better. In the end, that’s what you want from your players.