AUBURN HILLS -- The Detroit Pistons will have even more money to spend on free agents this summer after a three-team trade Tuesday that sent Amir Johnson to Milwaukee in exchange for Fabricio Oberto.

San Antonio had sent Oberto, Bruce Bowen and Kurt Thomas to the Bucks for swingman Richard Jefferson.

"I think this will be a great situation for Amir," said Bill Duffy, Johnson's agent. "(Milwaukee Bucks GM) John Hammond really pushed for him, which is something we talked to Amir about. He's going to a team that really wants him.

"He learned a lot while he was in Detroit. He grew up as a player in Detroit, and that was a great experience for him. But this is a great situation for him to be going to."

For the Pistons, the trade gives them added flexibility when dealing with potential free agents.

Oberto is in the final year of a contract worth $3.5 million. However, Detroit probably will waive him and then be on the hook for the guaranteed portion of his contract, which is worth $1.8 million -- a savings of more than $1 million.

The exact salary cap for the 2009-10 season will not be set until sometime next month, but the Pistons will be among the few teams with significant salary-cap space to pursue free agents.

When Detroit finished a disastrous 39-43 season, Johnson was among the players most likely to be traded. After spending his first three seasons as a seldom-used backup, the 22-year-old worked his way into the role of a starter.

He appeared in 62 games with 24 starts, averaging 3.5 points and 3.7 rebounds. But as the season wore on, Johnson's role gradually diminished. Once the playoffs arrived, he was a non-factor. Detroit was swept in the first round by Cleveland. Johnson played a total of just 13 minutes in the series.

Duffy said Johnson will benefit from a fresh start in Milwaukee as well as a familiar face in Hammond, who is a former vice president of basketball operations in Detroit.

"John knows him and believes in him, that's why he pursued him," Duffy said. "John has confidence in him, and for a young player such as Amir, that's important. It's amazing what a little confidence can do for a young player."