When it comes to the debate around the NBA's age limit, forward Amir Johnson holds a unique place.

Back in 2005, Johnson was chosen out of Westchester High School in Los Angeles with the 56th pick, by the Detroit Pistons. After that year, the league raised its age requirements, effectively ending the practice of drafting players out of high school.

That makes Johnson the last NBA player drafted out of high school. "I am the Jeopardy question," he says now. "Who is Amir Johnson?"

That's something Brooklyn Nets fans have been asking after Johnson's Game 2 performance for the Toronto Raptors.

Johnson struggled in the opener, unable to contain smaller Nets star Paul Pierce and leading many to wonder whether he should be moved to the bench in favor of Patrick Patterson. But in Game 2, Johnson bounced back with 16 points and nine rebounds in helping to lead the Raptors to the franchise's first playoff win in six years.

For Johnson, that is particularly rewarding. He and DeMar DeRozan are the longest-tenured Raptors on the roster, DeRozan arriving via the draft in 2009 and Johnson coming by trade months later. DeRozan has become the Raptors' go-to guy and All-Star. Kyle Lowry has become the team's engine at point guard.

Johnson brings a certain amount of heart to the club, a ball of boundless energy with an anything-for-the-win mentality.

Coach Dwane Casey points out that he never calls plays for Johnson, but Johnson averaged a career-high in scoring (10.4 points) while shooting 56.2 percent from the field and grabbing 6.6 rebounds. He also points out that, when the Raptors were struggling back in December, just before making the Rudy Gay trade that turned the team's season around, Johnson came to him and volunteered to come off the bench in hopes of boosting overall team performance.

"That's just the kind of player and person Amir is," Casey said. "That's always his approach. If something isn't working he is willing to help fix it, even if it cuts into his playing time or shots or whatever it may be."

Johnson has a history of that sort of thing. As a rookie in 2006, the Pistons sent him to the D-League for 18 games. The following season, with Detroit using a roster that included Rasheed Wallace, Antonio McDyess and Jason Maxiell, Johnson was again not playing much. So he went into Joe Dumars' office and suggested that he be sent to Sioux Falls to get playing time.

It's a rare thing for a player to volunteer to give up the luxuries of life with an NBA team to ride buses in South Dakota.

"He is the kind of guy who is not happy unless he is playing," said Johnson's agent, Kevin Bradbury of BDA Sports. "I think he caught Joe Dumars off guard by asking to go down to the D-League, but he does not have that kind of ego. He really just wanted to play, he didn't care where it was going to be. He went down there and put up some big numbers (18.9 points, 9.6 rebounds)."

Of course, under current rules, Johnson would not have made the leap to the NBA — he would have instead wound up at Louisville, where he had been recruited by coach Rick Pitino and assistant Reggie Theus. If he had gone, that 2005-06 Louisville team — the last Cardinals bunch not to make the NCAA Tournament — would have been a pretty imposing group. In addition to Johnson, Louisville might have had point guard Sebastian Telfair, who also skipped college and was drafted in 2004.

"I would do it the same way," Johnson said. "I don't regret the way things went. I would have been good in college, I would have gone to Louisville, worked hard there, I would have gotten drafted. Playing for Pitino, that would have been fun. I would have been a good college player. We would have had a good team, with me and Sebastian Telfair, he was supposed to go there at the time. I wanted to play with a good point guard like that, with him. So when he didn't go, I had to think about it again and I decided to go to the NBA."

It's worked out for him. Not only is Johnson still firmly planted in the NBA, but he has embraced Toronto like few other players have. He seems genuinely confused about the complaints players in the past lodged against playing in Toronto. He appeared on the Canadian version of Top Chef and has an annual tradition of taking groups of fans out for dinner through his "I Roll with Amir" event. He brought 70 fans to Medieval Times this year, and dressed up in a king's regalia for the event.

That's a far cry from the initial reaction to Johnson among Raptors fans — many were critical when general manager Bryan Colangelo gave Johnson a five-year, $34 million contract in 2010, after Johnson averaged 6.2 points and 4.8 rebounds in his first season with the Raptors.

But, at the time, Johnson had been heavily courted by the San Antonio Spurs, and when Colangelo found out that Johnson had dinner with Spurs representatives, he knew he had to act. In retrospect, the deal, which runs through next season, has been a good one for both Johnson and the Raptors.

The capper, though, would be if Johnson and his teammates could lift the Raptors somewhere the team has been once in franchise history — out of the first round of the playoffs, something it did back in 2001.

"It has been a long time," Johnson said. "It is big for the city, for the country. It is going to be huge. We have got to embrace it, we want to raise this organization to the next level."