Amir Johnson

Boston Celtics forward Amir Johnson (90) dives for a loose ball during the second quarter of an NBA basketball game against the Detroit Pistons in Boston, Wednesday, Feb. 3, 2016.

(AP Photo/Charles Krupa)

BOSTON -- The Boston Celtics should not have needed to worry as much as they did. They should not have required crunch-time minutes from their starters. They should not have contributed to the collective uneasiness in the TD Garden as the Detroit Pistons mounted a major second-half comeback.

But they did, and they still escaped with a 102-95 victory because of a dominant first half.

Before Ersan Ilyasova got hot, Reggie Jackson came to life and the Celtics offense fell off, Boston had pulled away so instantly, so steadily, so thoroughly, that early in the third quarter the most intriguing story line (I thought) took place on the opposite bench.

Four minutes into the period, Avery Bradley (15 points, 7-for-15 shooting) pushed the Celtics ahead by 24 points with a putback layup in transition. His team had dominated the first half on both ends, scoring a heap of points in the paint, keeping Andre Drummond off the offensive glass and forcing the Pistons into a bundle of low-percentage opportunities. Pistons head coach Stan Van Gundy did not appreciate the game's path.

Van Gundy doesn't instruct his team like everyone else. He hisses until part of his voice disappears and he cusses like somebody threatened his baby cousin. He paces up and down the sideline with his belly protruding, his arms waving and his head constantly ready to shake in any direction. His face couldn't be seen from the media section in the TD Garden, but it probably matched the red stripes on his team's road jerseys.

He was mad because the Celtics were throttling his team. Boston's early dominance could be best explained by two pictures:

Celtics head coach Brad Stevens didn't stay so pleased forever. He couldn't have enjoyed his team's second half. With less than two minutes left, the Pistons actually had a 3-point attempt to cut their deficit to four. But Darrun Hilliard's long-ball missed, Marcus Smart responded with a make at the other end, and the Celtics held on.

Van Gundy did survive the night. He must have respected his team's lack of quit, if not its early execution (or an inadvertent second-half horn, which sent him into a fit).

The Celtics didn't give themselves the easiest time, but have now won seven of their last eight games and 10 of their last 13.

Celtics jump on the Pistons

Paint touches, paint touches, paint touches. With the amount of penetration Isaiah Thomas managed in the first quarter, I could almost hear Van Gundy shouting at his players to form a bleeping wall. Even if he wasn't cussing out the Pistons, Van Gundy could not have been pleased with their inability to keep Thomas out of the paint. The Celtics point guard didn't do a ton of scoring early, but opened easy layups for his big men. He and Boston took a 27-16 lead with a really nice first quarter.

Midway through the second, the Celtics held a 10-point advantage when I thought to myself, "They should really lead by more." The Pistons were launching bad shots on almost every possession, and I thought Boston's lack of separation might be an ominous sign.

Not exactly. A short while later, Thomas drilled a three from the top of the key to send the Celtics into halftime with a 56-36 lead. The Celtics defense deserved plenty of credit for holding Detroit to 36 first-half points on 29.5-percent shooting, but the Pistons offense helped. So many of their possessions ended with a contested jump shot by Stanley Johnson, Brandon Jennings or Marcus Morris - all the guys Boston wanted to be shooting the ball.

Smart gets ambitious

When Marcus Smart caught a pass from Evan Turner and instantly fired a transition 3-pointer, my initial thought was, "Probably not the best idea." It went in, though, making Smart 3 for 3 from behind the arc, including a pair of off-the-dribble long-balls to end the first quarter. He started feeling himself a little too much after that. On the ensuing defensive possession, he soared to grab a rebound, dribbled up the court, and launched a 27-foot pull-up with a defender pretty close. It bricked, but at least he made the three triples before it.

For the game, Smart finished with 12 points on 4-for-10 shooting, including 4-for-7 from behind the arc. Not a monster night, but another promising showing from outside. He was one of six Celtics in double figures. Thomas led the way with 17 points, seven assists and five rebounds.