Via the press releases.

Amir Johnson signed:

"Amir is a proven, young veteran and an exciting addition to our team," said Danny Ainge, Celtics President of Basketball Operations. "His length, athleticism, rebounding and shooting ability will help us on both ends of the court."

Johnson, a 6'9" forward, spent the previous six seasons in the NBA with the Toronto Raptors. Last season, he appeared in 75 games and averaged 9.3 points, 6.1 rebounds and 1.6 assists in 26.4 minutes of action. Johnson shot a career-high 41.3 percent (19-46) from the three-point line. He matched his career-high with six assists against the Minnesota Timberwolves on April 1. Johnson tallied a season-high 27 points on 11-15 (.733) shooting from the field, seven rebounds, four assists and one steal in 27 minutes against the Cleveland Cavaliers on December 5, 2014.

Jonas Jerebko re-signed

"Jonas' versatility, non-stop energy and contributions on both ends of the court quickly endeared him to his teammates, coaching staff and our fans," said President of Basketball Operations Danny Ainge. "We are very excited to welcome him back."

Jerebko was acquired by the Celtics from the Detroit Pistons on February 19, 2015. He averaged 7.1 points, 4.8 rebounds and 1.0 assist in 18.2 minutes per game, while shooting 40.6 percent from beyond the arc, in 29 contests with Boston. The 6'10" forward tallied a season-high 20 points on 7-10 (.700) shooting from the field, five rebounds, two assists and one steal in 21 minutes of action on February 25 against the New York Knicks.

This probably means that the old cap holds and TPEs have been renounced.

You'll notice that the Jae Crowder deal hasn't been announced yet. Nor has the David Lee trade been made official. This was expected and it indicates that Ainge is still looking for ways to maximize his flexibility for additional moves.

Isaiah Thomas even hinted at more moves earlier this evening.

Isaiah Thomas likes Boston Celtics moves so far, thinks Danny Ainge might not be done | masslive.com

The logjam makes him think Ainge hopes to pull off at least one more trade this summer.

"I think he does," Thomas said

"For the most part, I like the moves we have made," Thomas said. "And I know Danny is probably trying to make more to get better or more players to fit whatever he's trying to do. I'm down for what he's doing and I like the new guys."

So, maybe more moves coming?