Sebastian Arcelus

On 5-11-1976 Sebastian Arcelus (nickname: Sebastian) was born in New York City, New York, United States. He made his 3 million dollar fortune with Ultimate Muscle, Shaman King - Yoh Asakura, Turtles Forever. The actor & musician is married to Stephanie J. Block, his starsign is Scorpio and he is now 47 years of age.

Sebastian Arcelus Facts & Wiki

Where does Sebastian Arcelus live? And how much money does Sebastian Arcelus earn?

Birth Date 5-11-1976 Heritage/origin American Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Non-religious Residence He owns a house in New York City, New York, United States.

Sebastian Arcelus Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 3 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Product Endorsements Brioni Colleagues Sakina Jaffrey & Gerald McRaney

Houses

Cars

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Sebastian Arcelus: Wife, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Sebastian Arcelus dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married (Since 2007) Sexuality Straight Current Wife of Sebastian Arcelus Stephanie J. Block Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Has any kids? Yes, father of:

Will the marriage of American actor & musician Sebastian Arcelus and current Wife, Stephanie J. Block survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family photo of the actor & musician, married to Stephanie J. Block, famous for Ultimate Muscle, Shaman King - Yoh Asakura, Turtles Forever.

Friends

Vicki Noon

Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This friendly fun attractive actor & musician originating from New York City, New York, United States has a slim body & square face type.

Hair color Black Hair type Wavy Hair Length near-shaved Hair Hairstyle Bohemian Distinct feature eye color Skin Tone/Complexion Type I: Light skin Skin Type Combination Beard or Mustache Beardless Eye Color Blue Does Sebastian Arcelus smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers

Sebastian Arcelus - 2024 Black hair & Bohemian hair style.

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos & Style

Height 175 cm Weight 71 kilo Clothing style bohemian Favorite colors black Feet size 9 Biceps 29 Waist size 79 Buste size 106 Butt size 91 Does Sebastian Arcelus have a tattoo? NoThese 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

Does Sebastian Arcelus have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Sebastian Arcelus!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.