The Lord of the Rings: War in the North is a role-playing video game developed by Snowblind Studios and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and PC. It is based on the events taking place in northern Middle-earth, in the background of the plot of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, more specifically, Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings films. Players take control of a hero of the war, and are able to play through the game alone or cooperatively with up to two other players.

The Mac OS X version was developed and published by Feral Interactive and released on September 18th 2013.[1]

The game features stronger graphic violence than previous Lord of the Rings games, and is the first of such games to receive an ESRB rating of M.

Gameplay[]

Players have customizable characters, upgradeable skills, and engage in dialogue.

Farin, a dwarf champion, Eradan, a human ranger, and Andriel, an elf lore-master. All characters have light and heavy attacks, and can roll, block and counter enemy attacks. Players can also issue orders to their AI companions if they are playing solo. There are hubs in the game which functioning as resting points for the party where they accept new quests, speak with people, or obtain new supplies. Hubs are towns or villages.

Each class also has a unique ability. The dwarf, for example, can mine for gems which can be used for crafting purposes, and he can also smash walls down where hidden treasure can be found. The game also features unlockable difficulty modes such as a nightmare difficulty. You can replay through the game and keep all your equipment and skills from the previous playthrough. The dialogue will normally present a few choices where the player can get just the facts, delve deeper into the lore or get optional side quests. The gameplay also relies upon the player working with friends (or with AI companions) to use tactics to defeat certain enemies.

Synopsis[]

Locations[]

Many locations that are not featured in the movies are in the game. Confirmed locations include the Ettenmoors,

Fornost, Mirkwood and Mount Gundabad. Locations from the movies also appear in the game. Players can explore Bree and Rivendell and interact with the characters there which include Gandalf, Elrond, Frodo, Bilbo, Legolas, Arwen and Aragorn. Characters from the books can also be encountered to appear in the game, such as the Ranger Halbarad, Radagast, and Elrond's sons Elrohir and Elladan.

Characters[]

The War in The North features three playable protagonists. Each character has different classes from one another, but each character's class is adaptable. You gain experience when killing enemies, and when you get enough experience, you gain a new level. You can then improve your stats (strength, will, stamina, dexterity), and use skill points to receive or upgrade special abilities. For example, Eradan is a Ranger and thus excels with a sword and his strength is way better than Farin’s. He can be leveled up to be an expert and also can use a bow but he is mostly preferred for melee combat. Farin is an expert with melee weapons but can use ranged weapons and can be leveled up to use such. He can also be leveled up to be tough and is strong but not as good as Eradan. Andriel is a mage, but she can wield two swords at once and level up in melee attacks, supportive magic or offensive magic.

Eradan is the Ranger class - he is one of the Dúnedain.

He is the most skilled, and has many powerful abilities for attacking multiple enemies at once. He can use a sword and a bow but he is best when with a sword. Eradan also has many stealth abilities allowing to sneak up on enemies.

Andriel, from Rivendell, is of the Elven Loremaster class, and has been taught by Elrond. She uses magic as her defense and offense but can dual-wield a one-handed weapon, such as her staff. Her abilities include offensive spells and supportive spells, but she also has melee abilities and can be leveled up to be a battlemage if the player wishes. She also has the ability to create potions from alchemy ingredients found by the player.

Farin is of the Champion class; he hails from Erebor. He the most adaptable playable character and is adept at using any weapon. He can use a crossbow to simply attack foes from afar, and is a good fighter. With his ability "War-Cry," he can boost and revive himself and his companions, while damaging enemies. He can also mine for gems.

Appearances[]

Playable characters[]

Eradan

Farin

Andriel

Non-playable characters[]

Kilaren

Luin

Silanna

Maradan

Hador

The Witch-king of Angmar

Bruni

Nordri

Beleram

Arwen

Legolas

Frodo Baggins

Glóin

Elladan

Elrohir

Gimli

Boromir

Bilbo Baggins

Radagast

Elrond

Agandaûr

Gwaihir

Baranthor

Armenel

Tharzog

Bargrisar

Wulfrun

Saenathra

Úrgost

Creatures[]

Orcs

Wargs

Great Eagles

Trolls

Barrow-wights

Stone-giants

Fellbeasts

Great Spiders

Dragons

Locations[]

Middle-earth

Bree

The Prancing Pony

Fornost

Sarn Ford

Brandywine

Barrow-downs

Rivendell

Lórien

Mount Gundabad

Nordinbad

Carn Dûm

The Lonely Mountain

Organizations and titles[]

Dúnedain

Rangers of the North

Black Riders

Gallery[]

Translations[]

Foreign Language Translated name Afrikaans Die Here van die Ringe: Oorlog in die Noorde Albanian Zoti I unazave: Lufta në veri Amharic የቃሮቹ ጌታ: በሰሜን ውስጥ ጦርነት Arabic سيد الخواتم: الحرب في الشمال Armenian Օղակների Տերը. Հյուսիսում պատերազմը Assamese দ্য লৰ্ড অৱ দ্য ৰিংছ: উত্তৰত যুদ্ধ Azerbaijani Üzüklərin Rəbbi: Şimali Müharibə Belarusian Cyrillic Уладар кольцаў: Вайна на Поўначы Bengali রিং লর্ড: উত্তর যুদ্ধ Bhojpuri द लॉर्ड ऑफ द रिंग्स: उत्तर में युद्ध Bosnian Gospodar Prstenova: Rat na sjeveru Bulgarian Cyrillic Властелинът на пръстените: Войната на север Cambodian ព្រះអម្ចាស់នៃចិញ្ចៀនអាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍: សង្គ្រាមនៅខាងជើង Catalan El Senyor dels Anells: Guerra al Nord Chinese 指环王：北方的战争 Corsican U Signore di I Anelli: Guerra in u Nordu Croatian Gospodar prstenova: Rat na sjeveru Czech Pán prstenů: Válka na severu Danish Ringenes Herre: Krigen I Norden Dogri द लॉर्ड ऑफ द रिंग्स: उत्तर च युद्ध Dutch De Heer der Ringen: De Oorlog in de Noord Estonian Sõrmuste isand: sõda põhjas Filipino Ang Panginoon ng Singsing: Digmaan sa Hilaga Finnish Taru sormusten herrasta: Sota pohjoisessa French Le Seigneur des anneaux: La Guerre du Nord Galician O Señor dos Aneis: Guerra no Norte Georgian ბეჭდების მბრძანებელი: ომი ჩრდილოეთით German Der Herr der Ringe: Der Krieg im Norden Greek Ο Άρχοντας των Δαχτυλιδιών: Ο Πόλεμος στο Βορρά Gujarati ધી રિંગ્સ ભગવાન: ઉત્તર બાજુનું યુદ્ધ Hebrew שר הטבעות: המלחמה בצפון Hindi द रिंग्स ऑफ द रिंग्स: वॉर इन द नॉर्थ Hungarian A Gyűrűk Ura: Észak-háború Icelandic Ringar Drottins: Stríð í norðri Indonesian Tuan dari Cincin: Perang di Utara Irish Gaelic An Tiarna na bhFáinní: Cogadh sa Tuaisceart Italian Il Signore degli Anelli: La Guerra del Nord Japanese リングの主：北の戦争 Kannada ಲಾರ್ಡ್ ಆಫ್ ದಿ ರಿಂಗ್ಸ್: ಉತ್ತರದಲ್ಲಿ ಯುದ್ಧ Kazakh Cyrillic Сақиналардың иесі: Солтүстік соғысы Konkani द लॉर्ड ऑफ द रिंग्स: द वॉर इन द नॉर्थ Korean 반지의 제왕: 북쪽에서의 전쟁 Kurdish پەروەردگاری ئەڵقەکان: جەنگ لە باکوور (Sorani) Begê Gustîlan: Şerê li Bakurê (Kurmanji) Kyrgyz Cyrillic Тегеректердин чексиз: Түндүк-жылы согуш Laotian ພຣະຜູ້ເປັນເຈົ້າຂອງແຫວນໄດ້: ສົງຄາມໃນພາກເຫນືອ Latvian Gredzenu pavēlnieks: karš ziemeļos Lithuanian Žiedų valdovas: karas šiaurėje Macedonian Cyrillic Господарот на прстените: Војна на север Malagasy Ny Tompon 'ny Peratra: Ady amin'ny Avaratra Malayalam ദ ലോർഡ് ഓഫ് ദ റിംഗ്സ്: ദി വാർ ഇൻ ദി നോർത്ത് Malaysian Tuhan Cincin: Perang di Utara Maltese Il-ħakkiem ta ' l-anelli: gwerra fit-tramuntana Marathi रिंग प्रभु: उत्तर युद्धात Mongolian Cyrillic Бөгжний Эзэн: Умард хэсэгт болсон дайн Nepalese अंगूठियहरुको प्रभु: उत्तर मा युद्ध Norwegian Ringenes Herre: Krigen I Norden Pashto د حلقو څښتن: په شمال کې جګړه Persian ارباب حلقه‌ها: جنگ در شمال Polish Władca Pierścieni: Wojna na Północy Portuguese O Senhor dos Anéis: A Guerra no Norte Punjabi ਰਿੰਗ ਦੇ ਪ੍ਰਭੂ: ਉੱਤਰ ਵਿਚ ਜੰਗ Romanian Stăpânul Inelelor: Războiul din Nord Russian Властелин колец: Война на севере Samoan Le Alii o le Mama: Taua I le itu I Matu Sanskrit द वलयस्य स्वामी: द उत्तरे युद्धम् Scottish Gaelic Tha a Tighearna nam Fàinnean: Cogadh ann a Thuath Serbian Господар Прстенова: Рат на северу (Cyrillic) Gospodar Prstenova: Rat na severe (Latin) Sindhi زنگن جو خداوند: اتر ۾ جنگ Sinhalese ද රින්ග්ස් සමිඳාණන්: උතුරේ යුද්ධය Slovak Pán prsteňov: Vojna na severe Slovenian Gospodar prstanov: Vojna na severu Spanish El Señor de los Anillos: La Guerra en el Norte Swahili Bwana wa pete: Vita Kaskazini Swedish Ringenes Herre: Krig I Norr Tajik Cyrillic Парвардигори зиреҳҳои: Ҷанги дар шимол Tamil லோட் ஒவ் த ரிங்க்ஸ்: வடக்கில் போர் Tatar Йөзекләр Хуҗасы: Төньякта сугыш Telugu ది లార్డ్ ఆఫ్ ది రింగ్స్: వార్ ఇన్ ది నార్త్ Thai ลอร์ดออฟเดอะริ: สงครามในภาคเหนือ Turkish Yüzüklerin Efendisi: Kuzey Savaşı Turkmen Üzükleriň Lordy: Demirgazykdaky söweş Ukrainian Cyrillic Володар кілець: війна на півночі Urdu دی لارڈ آف دی رِنگز: دی وار ان دی نارتھ Uzbek Йüзüклерин Эфендиси: Чимолда уруш (Cyrillic) Yüzüklerin Efendisi: Shimolda urush (Latin) Vietnamese Chúa tể của những chiếc nhẫn: Chiến tranh ở miền Bắc Welsh Arglwydd y modrwyau: rhyfel yn y Gogledd Yiddish די האר פון די רינגס: מלחמה אין די צפֿון

[]