“The Master of Suspense” Alfred “Hitch” Hitchcock was a fantastic movie director and lived an interesting life. Alfred Hitchcock was born in London, England, on the day of August 13,1899 and died on April 29,1980. Hitchcock was a relatively quiet person since childhood, and to show his discipline his father had him arrested at the age of five and put him in a jail cell for five minutes. After this moment Hitchcock developed an interest in guilt, this interest was developed further during his time at St. Ignatius College, which was a very strict school. He also attended the University of London where he thought he was going to pursue a career in electrical engineering. Upon leaving this university he worked with telegraphs and advertisement. Later, he found that he had a very big interest in the motion picture production business; he got a job working for the Famous Players-Lasky Company as a title card writer. He then started to direct movies of his own starting out with The Pleasure Garden. Likewise, his other British movies were outstanding films and he also created the first non-silent British movie called Blackmail. In nineteen-thirty nine he moved with his family to Hollywood, California making five movies in the first ten years of living there. At the end of his career he created fifty one movies and appeared in around 39 of them (Maines). “Hitch” created many memorable quotes that referred to his entertaining movies and to the audience themselves. He was knighted in 1979 and died soon afterwards in 1980. At the end of the day Alfred Hitchcock will be remembered for his fantastic movie techniques.

One of the techniques that Hitchcock used was adding humor into his movies to create tension in the scene. Hitchcock f...

... middle of paper ...

...ues of Alfred Hitchcock - Suspense, Camera Angles, Style, Editing, Basics."

Film Techniques of Alfred Hitchcock - Suspense, Camera Angles, Style, Editing, Basics. N.p., n.d.

Web. 17 Dec. 2013

Darren. "What Makes Hitchcock So Good?" Alfred Hitchcock Films RSS. N.p., 29

Oct. 2012. Web. 18 Dec. 2013.

Maines, Kari. "World Biography." Alfred Hitchcock Biography. N.p., 10 July 2009.

Web. 18 Dec. 2013.

"PSYCHO ALFRED HITCHCOCK FILM STARRING ANTHONY PERKINS AND

JANET LEIGH A TO Z DIRECTORY." PSYCHO ALFRED

HITCHCOCK FILM STARRING ANTHONY PERKINS AND JANET LEIGH A

TO Z DIRECTORY. N.p., 2008. Web. 18 Dec. 2013.

Skramstad, Per-Erik. "High Angle Shots in Hitchcock's Movies." Alfred Hitchcock.

N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Dec. 2013.

Springer, Mike. "Alfred Hitchcock Explains the Plot Device He Called the

‘MacGuffin’." Open Culture. N.p., 9 July 2013. Web. 18 Dec. 2013