Sergio Osmeña

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Sergio Osmeña Sr.)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article is about former President of the Philippines. For the municipality, see Sergio Osmeña Sr., Zamboanga del Norte. For son, see Sergio Osmeña Jr. For grandson, see Sergio Osmeña III.

In this Philippine name for natural children, there is no middle name nor paternal family name, but the surname is Osmeña.

Sergio Osmeña Sr.

PLH

4th President of the Philippines

In office 1 August 1944 – 28 May 1946

Vice President Vacant

Preceded by Manuel L. Quezon

José P. Laurel (de facto)

Succeeded by Manuel Roxas

1st Vice President of the Philippines

In office 15 November 1935 – 1 August 1944

President Manuel L. Quezon

Succeeded by Elpidio Quirino

Secretary of Public Instruction, Health, and Public Welfare

In office 1941–

President Manuel L. Quezon

Preceded by Jorge Bocobo

Succeeded by Carlos P. Romulo

Secretary of Public Instruction, Health, and Public Welfare

In office 1941–

President Manuel L. Quezon

Preceded by Juan Nolasco

Succeeded by Mariano A. Eraña

Secretary of Public Instruction, Health, and Public Welfare

1st Speaker of the Philippine House of Representatives

In office 16 October 1907 – 11 February 1922 Speaker of the National Assembly (1907–1916)

Preceded by Office created

Succeeded by Manuel Roxas

Member of the Philippine House of Representatives from Cebu's 2nd District

In office 16 October 1907 – 1922 Member of the National Assembly (1907–1916)

Preceded by Office created

Succeeded by Vicente Sotto

Governor of Cebu

In office 1904 – 16 October 1907

Preceded by Juan F. Climaco

Succeeded by Dionisio A. Jakosalem

Personal details

Born Sergio Osmeña Sr.

9 September 1878 Cebu City, Cebu, Captaincy General of the Philippines

Died 19 October 1961 (aged 83)

Quezon City, Philippines

Resting place Manila North Cemetery, Santa Cruz, Manila,

Philippines

Political party Nacionalista Party

Spouse(s) Estefania Veloso

(m. 1901; died 1918)

Esperanza Limjap

(m. 1920; his death 1961)

Children 13 (including Sergio Jr.)

Education Colegio de San Carlos (grade school)

San Juan de Letran College (high school)

Alma mater San Juan de Letran College (AB)

University of Santo Tomas (LLB)

Profession Lawyer, soldier

Signature

Military service

Allegiance Philippines

Branch/service Philippine Revolutionary Army

 6.1 Cabinet 1944–  6.1 and judicial appointments 1945– o 6 o 6 policies  6.3 of the Commonwealth  6.3 reorganization  6.3 of the Philippine National Bank  6.3's court o 6 policies  6.4 Nations Charter  6.4 Relations Office  6.4 banking  6.4 Trade Act o 6 presidential election  7 Post-presidency and death  8 Personal life o 8 o 8  9 Notes  10 References  11 External links

Early life and career[edit]

Osmeña was born in Cebu City to Juana Osmeña y Suico, who was reportedly only 14 years of age at the time. Owing to the circumstances of his birth, the identity of his father had been a closely guarded family secret, surnamed &quot;Sanson&quot;. Although carrying the stigma of being an illegitimate child – Juana never married his father – he did not allow this aspect to affect his standing in society. The Osmeña family, a rich and prominent clan of Chinese Filipino heritage with vast business interests in Cebu, warmed to him as he established himself as a prominent figure in local society. Osmeña received his elementary education at the Colegio de San Carlos and graduated in 1892. Osmeña continued his education in Manila, studying in San Juan de Letran College where he first met Manuel L. Quezon, a classmate of his, as well as Juan Sumulong and Emilio Jacinto. He took up law at the University of Santo Tomas and was second place in the bar examination in 1903. He served on the war staff of General Emilio Aguinaldo as a courier and journalist. In 1900, he founded the Cebu newspaper, El Nuevo Día [English: 'The New Day'] which lasted for three years.

Public service in Cebu[edit]

When Cebu Governor Juan Climaco was sent as a member of the Board of Commissioners of the St. Louis Purchase Expedition, Osmeña was appointed acting governor. When Climaco returned, he was appointed as provincial fiscal. His stint there elevated him in politics when he was elected governor of Cebu in 1906.

Congressional career[edit]

House of Representatives[edit]

While governor, he ran for election to the first National Assembly of 1907 and was elected as the first Speaker of that body. Osmeña was 29 years old and already the highest-ranking Filipino official. He and another provincial politician, Manuel L. Quezon of Tayabas, set up the Nacionalista Party as a foil to the Partido Federalista of Manila-based politicians. In his first years as Speaker, he was plagued with organizational burdens as the National Assembly is still organizing. The Members of the Assembly sought to establish legislative procedures which were constantly rejected by the American superiors because they still perceive that Filipinos are incapable to be independent. Three important bills from the Assembly were rejected by the Philippine Commission:

the repeal of the Sedition law which imposed penalties on any Filipino who advocated independence;

the repeal of the Flag law which banned display of the Filipino flag;

the grant of more powers to the local governments.

However, it did not stop him from presiding over the important legislation the Assembly has passed. The creation of the Council of State and the Board of Control enabled the Philippine legislature to share some of the executive powers of the American Governor- General.

In 1916, the Jones Law was passed replacing the Philippine Commission with a Philippine Senate.

Quezon-Osmeña rivalry[edit]

Osmeña was friends and classmates with Manuel Quezon, who was the Majority Floor Leader under Osmeña's speakership. When the Jones Law was passed, Quezon was elected as Senate President and Osmeña remained Speaker.

Senate[edit]

In 1922 Osmeña was elected to the Senate representing the 10th Senatorial District. He went to the United States as part of the OsRox Mission in 1933, to secure passage of the Hare–Hawes–Cutting Independence Bill which was superseded by the Tydings– McDuffie Act in March 1934.

Juan Sumulong with nearly 82% of the vote. Re-elected in 1941, Osmeña remained vice president during the Japanese occupation when the government was in exile. As Vice-President, Osmeña concurrently served as Secretary of Public Instruction from 1935 to 1940, and again from 1941 to 1944.

The outbreak of World War II and the Japanese invasion resulted in periodic and drastic changes to the government structure. Executive Order 390, 22 December 1941 abolished the Department of the Interior and established a new line of succession. Executive Order 396, 24 December 1941, further reorganized and grouped the cabinet, with the functions of Secretary of Justice assigned to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.

Quezon-Osmeña Impasse[edit]

By 1943, the Philippine Government-in-exile was faced with a serious crisis.[1] According to the amendments to the 1935 Constitution, Quezon's term was to expire on 30 December 1943, and Vice-President Sergio Osmeña would automatically succeed him to serve out the remainder of term until 1945. This eventuality was brought to the attention of President Quezon by Osmeña himself, who wrote the former to this effect. Aside from replying to this letter informing Vice-President Osmeña that it would not be wise and prudent to effect any such change under the circumstances, President Quezon issued a press release along the same line. Osmeña then requested the opinion of U. Attorney General Homer Cummings, who upheld Osmeña's view as more in keeping the law. Quezon, however, remained adamant. He accordingly sought President Franklin D. Roosevelt's decision. The latter chose to remain aloof from the controversy, suggesting instead that the Philippine officials themselves solve the impasse. A cabinet meeting was then convened by President Quezon. Aside from Quezon and Osmeña, others present in this momentous meeting were Resident Commissioner Joaquin Elizalde, Brig. Gen. Carlos P. Romulo, and Cabinet Secretaries Andres Soriano and Jaime Hernandez. Following a spirited discussion, the Cabinet adopted Elizalde's opinion favoring the decision and announced his plan to retire in California.

After the meeting, however, Vice-President Osmeña approached the President and broached his plan to ask the U. Congress to suspend the constitutional provisions for presidential succession until after the Philippines should have been liberated. This legal way out was agreeable to President Quezon and the members of his Cabinet. Proper steps were taken to carry out the proposal. Sponsored by Senator Tydings and Congressman Bell, the pertinent Joint Resolution No. 95 was unanimously approved by the Senate on a voice vote and passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 181 to 107 on 12 November 1943.

Presidency[edit]

Presidential styles of Sergio Osmeña

Reference style His Excellency

Spoken style Your Excellency

Alternative style Mr. President

Osmeña became president of the Commonwealth on Quezon's death in 1944. He was sworn in by Associate Justice Robert Jackson in Washington, D. He returned to the Philippines the same year with General Douglas MacArthur and the liberation forces. After the war, Osmeña restored the Commonwealth government and the various executive departments. He continued the fight for Philippine independence. For the presidential election of 1946, Osmeña refused to campaign, saying that the Filipino people knew of his record of 40 years of honest and faithful service. He lost to Manuel Roxas, who won 54% of the vote and became president of the independent Republic of the Philippines.[citation needed]

Administration and cabinet[edit]

War Cabinet 1944–45[edit]

President Osmeña with members of his cabinet. Front row; left to right: Jaime Hernandez, Secretary of

Finance; President Osmeña; Col. Carlos P. Romulo, Resident Commissioner and Secretary of Information.

Back row, left to right: Col. Mariano A. Erana, Judge Advocate General of the Philippine Army and Secretary of

the Department of Justice, Labor, and Welfare; Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce;

Ismael Mathay, Budget and Finance Commissioner; Colonel Alejandro Melchor, Undersecretary of National

Defense, representing General Basilio Valdes, Secretary of National Defense.

On 8 August 1944, President Osmeña issued Executive Order 15-W reorganizing and consolidating the Executive Departments of the Commonwealth government. The reorganization of the government after it was reestablished on Philippine soil was undertaken with Executive Order No. 27; 27 February 1945.[citation needed]

OFFICE NAME TERM

President Sergio Osmeña 1944–

1945

Alfredo Montelibano Sr. 12 July 1945 – 27 May 1946

Secretary of Health and Public Welfare Basilio Valdes 1945

José Locsin 1945–

Secretary of Public Instruction Maximo Kalaw 27 February 1945 – 4 May 1945

Jose Reyes 5 May 1945 – 7 January 1946

Francisco Benitez 7 January 1946 – 27 May 1946

Secretary of Public Works and Communications Sotero Cabahug 1945–

Secretary of the Budget Ismael Mathay 1944–

Secretary to the President José S. Reyes 1945–

Secretary of Labor Marcelo Aduru 1946

Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States Congress Carlos P. Romulo 1945–

Liberation[edit]

Off Leyte, October 1944 Left to right: Lieutenant General George Kenney, Lieutenant General Richard K.

Sutherland, President Sergio Osmeña, General Douglas MacArthur.

President Sergio Osmeña together with General Douglas MacArthur during the historic landing at Leyte in

Osmeña accompanied U. General Douglas MacArthur during the landing of U. forces in Leyte on 20 October 1944, starting the liberation of the Philippines during the Second World War. Upon establishing the beachhead, MacArthur immediately transferred authority to Osmeña, the successor of Manuel Quezon, as Philippine Commonwealth president.

Domestic policies[edit]

Restoration of the Commonwealth[edit]

With Manila liberated,[1] General of the Army, Douglas MacArthur, on behalf of the United States, turned over the reins of government of the Philippines to Commonwealth President, Sergio Osmeña, on 27 February 1945, amidst brief, but impressive, ceremonies held at the Malacañang Palace. President Osmeña, after thanking the United States through General MacArthur, announced the restoration of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and worked out the salvation of the Philippines from the ravages of war.[1]

Government reorganization[edit]

President Osmeña proceeded with the immediate reorganization of the government and its diverse dependencies. On 8 April 1945, he formed his Cabinet, administering the oath of office to its component members. Later, President Osmeña received the Council of State to help him solve the major problems confronting the nation. Government offices and bureaus were gradually reestablished. A number of new ones were created to meet needs then current. Also restored were the Supreme Court of the Philippines and the inferior courts. The Court of Appeals was abolished and its appellate jurisdiction was transferred to the Supreme Court, the members of which were increased to eleven – one Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices – in order to attend to the new responsibilities. Slowly but steadily, as the liberating forces freed the other portions of the country, provincial and municipal governments were established by the Commonwealth to take over from the military authorities.[1]

Rehabilitation of the Philippine National Bank[edit]

Following the restoration of the Commonwealth government, Congress was reorganized. Manuel Roxas and Elpidio Quirino were elected Senate

Commissioner, with cabinet rank. In this connection, President Osmeña also entered into an agreement with the United States Government to send five Filipino trainees to the U. State Department to prepare themselves for diplomatic service. They were sent by U. State Department to the United States embassies in Moscow and Mexico City and consulates in Saigon and Singapore.[1]

International banking[edit]

On 5 December 1945, President Osmeña appointed Resident Commissioner Carlos P. Romulo as his representative to accept Philippine membership in the International Monetary Fund and in the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which bodies had been conceived in the Bretton Woods Agreement, in which the Philippine had also taken part. Romulo signed said membership on 27 December 1945 on behalf of the Philippines.[1]

Bell Trade Act[edit]

On 30 April 1946, the United States Congress, at last, approved the Bell Act, which as early as 20 January had been reported to the Ways and Means Committee of the lower house, having been already passed by the Senate. President Osmeña and Resident Commissioner Romulo had urged the passage of this bill, with United States High Commissioner, Paul V. McNutt, exerting similar pressure.

The Act gave the Philippines eight years of free trade with the United States, then twenty years during which tariffs would be upped gradually until they were in line with the rest of the American tariff policy. The law also fixed some quotas for certain products: sugar – 850,000 long tons; cordage – 6,000,000 pounds; coconut oil – 200,000 long tons; cigars – 200,000,000 pounds. This aid was coupled with that to be obtained from the recently passed Tydings Damage bill, which provided some nine hundred million dollars for payment of war damages, of which one million was earmarked to compensate for church losses. The sum of two hundred and forty million dollars was to be periodically allocated by the United States President as good will. Also, sixty million pieces of surplus property were transferred to the Philippines government.[1]

1946 presidential election[edit]

Main article: 1946 Philippine presidential election

Soon after the reconstitution of the Commonwealth government in 1945, Senators Manuel Roxas, Elpidio Quirino and their allies called for an early national election to choose the president and vice president of the Philippines and members of the Congress. In December 1945, the House Insular Affairs of the United States Congress approved the joint resolution setting the date of the election on no later than 30 April 1946.

Prompted by this congressional action, President Sergio Osmeña called the Philippine Congress to a three-day special session. Congress enacted Commonwealth Act No. 725, setting the date of the election on 23 April 1946. The act was signed by President Osmeña on 5 January 1946.

Three parties presented their respective candidates for the different national elective positions. These were the Nacionalista Party – Conservative (Osmeña) wing, the Liberal wing of the Nacionalista Party and the Partido Modernista. The Nacionalistas had Osmeña and Senator Eulogio Rodriguez as their candidates for president and vice president, respectively. The Modernistas chose Hilario Camino Moncado and Luis Salvador for the same positions. The standard bearers of the Liberals were Senators Manuel Roxas and Elpidio Quirino. On 3 January 1946, President Osmeña announced his re-election bid. On 22 January 1946 Eulogio Rodriguez was nominated as Osmeña's running mate for Vice President, in a convention held at Ciro's Club in Manila. According to the Manila Chronicle:

The convention opened at 10:15 in the morning when the acting secretary of the party, Vicente Farmoso, called the confab to order. Congressman José C. Romero [sic], who delivered the keynote speech accused Senate President Manuel Roxas and his followers &quot;of fanning the flames of discontent among the people, of capitalizing on the people's hardship, and of minimizing the accomplishment of the [Osmeña] Administration. These men with the Messiah complex have been the bane of the country and of the world. This is the mentality that produces Hitlers and the Mussolinis, and their desire to climb to power. they even want to destroy the party which placed them where they are today.&quot;

Senator Carlos P. Garcia, who delivered the nomination speech for President Sergio Osmeña, made a long recital of Osmeña's achievements, his virtues as public official and as private citizen.

A statue of President Osmeña in front of the Osmeña Museum in Cebu City.

Entering the convention hall at about 7:30 p, President Osmeña, accompanied by the committee on notification, was greeted with rounds of cheer and applause as he ascended the platform. President Osmeña delivered his speech which was a general outline of his future plans once elected. He emphasized that as far as his party is concerned, independence is a close issue. It is definitely coming on 4 July 1946[2]

Post-presidency and death[edit]

Tomb of Sergio Osmeña

After his electoral defeat, Osmeña retired to his home in Cebu. He died of pulmonary edema at age 83 on 19 October 1961 at the Veterans' Memorial Medical Center in Quezon City. He was buried at Manila North Cemetery, Manila on 26 October 1961.[4]

MacArthur and Osmeña

Personal life[edit]

Family[edit]

 On 10 April 1901, he married Estefania Chiong Veloso, the couple had ten children: Nicasio Veloso Osmeña, Vicenta Veloso Osmeña, Edilderto Veloso Osmeña, Milagros Veloso Osmeña, Emilio Veloso Osmeña, Maria Paloma Veloso Osmeña, Jesus Veloso Osmeña, Teodoro Veloso Osmeña, José Veloso Osmeña, and Sergio Veloso Osmeña Jr.  In 1920, two years after the death of his first wife, Osmeña married Esperanza Limjap, the couple had three more children, namely, Ramón Limjap Osmeña, Rosalina Limjap Osmeña, and Victor Limjap Osmeña. [5][circular reference]

Descendants[edit]

Several of Osmeña's descendants became prominent political figures in their own right:

 Sergio Osmeña Jr. , son and former Senator  Sergio Osmeña III , grandson and former Senator  John Henry Osmeña , grandson and former Congressman and former Senator; former Mayor of Toledo, Cebu  Tomas Osmeña , grandson and former Mayor of Cebu City; former 2nd District representative  Emilio Mario Osmeña , grandson and former governor of Cebu  Rogelio Veloso Osmeña , grandson and former Councilor of Cebu City  Renato Veloso Osmeña , grandson and former Vice Mayor of Cebu City