New York, NY – July 8, 2013 — 21st Century Fox today announced it has realigned its television syndication and distribution unit Twentieth Television, formerly part of Fox Television Stations, under Twentieth Century Fox Television, the Company’s television production studio. Twentieth Television will continue to be led by President Greg Meidel, who will now report to Gary Newman and Dana Walden, Chairmen, Twentieth Century Fox Television.

Under this new structure, Mr. Meidel and his team at Twentieth Television will continue to handle all domestic broadcast and cable television syndication, distribution and barter deals for Twentieth Century Fox Television’s broad portfolio of hit shows. These include “Modern Family,” “Glee,” “How I Met Your Mother,” “New Girl,” “Family Guy” and “The Simpsons” as well as Fox 21’s “Homeland” and Fox Television Studios’ “The Americans,” among many others. In addition, Twentieth Television will manage distribution for Twentieth Century Fox Film’s motion picture library, as well as shows produced by FX Productions and Fox Television Stations.

Fox Television Stations will continue to develop and produce first-run programming, which will now be overseen by Stephen Brown, Executive Vice President, Programming and Development, reporting to Jack Abernethy, Chief Executive Officer of Fox Television Stations.

“This reorganization underscores the changing landscape of the syndication TV business, more closely aligning the distribution of our shows with our content creators,” said Chase Carey, President and Chief Operating Officer, 21st Century Fox. “I am confident that Greg will continue to be a driving force in capturing revenue opportunities for the programming we produce, including Twentieth Century Fox Television powerhouse brands like ‘Glee’ and ‘Modern Family.’”

Carey continued, “Fox Television Stations has achieved great success over the recent years and built a real position of leadership, expanding its footprint in key markets and bringing innovative programming to its millions of loyal viewers with investments in first-run production as well as news, live event TV and talk.”