The Walt Disney Company (Disney for short) is an American multimedia conglomerate mostly known for their film studio, iconic cartoons such as Mickey Mouse and its film franchises from Disney's brands. Even though it was a competitor to 21st Century Fox until its acquisition, it is often parodied, homaged and referenced on The Simpsons.

Acquisition of 21st Century Fox[]

On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it would acquire copyrights and distribution rights to the majority of 21st Century Fox's assets. This would include 20th Century Fox, National Geographic, FX Networks, X-Men, Star Wars, Futurama, Family Guy, and of course, The Simpsons. 20th Century Fox Television would still produce the shows as a unit of Disney Television Studios. The deal did not include the FOX network, the Fox News Channel and its Sports channels. The deal was completed on March 20, 2019.

On April 11, 2019, it was confirmed that The Simpsons would be added to the upcoming Disney+ streaming service, which launched in the United States, Canada and the Netherlands on November 12, 2019, with all the episodes, (with the exception of "Stark Raving Dad" due to it being pulled from rotation after headlines were made about the Michael Jackson scandal)[1][2], which effectively replaced FX's "Simpsons World" streaming service.[3] A Simpsons short titled "Welcome to the Family, The Simpsons!" was released by the company on April 11, 2019, with the Simpson family not only promoting Disney+, but also lampooning Disney's corporate synergy and media consolidation, indicating that, much like the show's previous corporate parent Fox before it, Disney will continue to be a target of the show's satirical humor. Another short was released by the company in November 2019, with the Simpson family dressed as characters representing the library presented on Disney+ (a reluctant Bart Simpson as Mickey Mouse (representing Disney), Marge Simpson as Bo Peep (representing Pixar), Homer Simpson as Tony Stark/Iron Man (representing Marvel), Maggie Simpson as The Child (representing Star Wars) and Lisa Simpson as an iceberg (representing National Geographic). All 30 seasons of the series debuted on Disney+ on November 12, 2019, but is instead presented in a non-HD format. Instead of presenting them in their original aspect ratio, they were either cropped to fit widescreen televisions or were stretched out in the same manner. FXX's now-defunct "Simpsons World" streaming service was similarly criticized when it launched. In response, Disney stated they would make the ability to watch the episodes of the first 19 seasons and some from season 20 in either the 4:3 or 16:9 aspect ratio in early 2020.

On May 28, 2020, Disney+ officially made episodes of The Simpsons from episodes of season 1 to some episodes of season 20 available in their original 4:3 aspect ratio.

References in The Simpsons[]

SimpsoncalifragilisticexpialaD'oh-cious[]

The character Shary Bobbins is an obvious spoof of Mary Poppins, and the episode features songs parodying ones from Mary Poppins. The episode title is also a reference to Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious, a song from the film.

"Two Dozen and One Greyhounds"[]

The episode title and plot is a parody of Disney's One Hundred and One Dalmatians. The scene where Santa's Little Helper and his girlfriend are eating pasta is a spoof of Lady and the Tramp, and Mr. Burns's song See My Vest is a parody of the song Be Our Guest from Beauty and the Beast.

"Homer Badman"[]

Homer imagines living underwater in a sequence parodying the song "Under the Sea" in Disney's The Little Mermaid.

"Lisa the Beauty Queen"[]

Principal Skinner uses the slogan "The happiest place on Earth" for his school's carnival, but the Blue-Haired Lawyer tells him that it is a registered Disneyland copyright.

"Brother, Can You Spare Two Dimes?"[]

One of the homeless men recalls owning Mickey Mouse Massage Parlors, which Disney shut down due to copyright infringement.

"Treehouse of Horror II"[]

In the opening, gravestones for Bambi's Mom (from the Disney film Bambi) and Walt Disney can be seen.

"Selma's Choice"[]

The Little Land of Duff, a ride at Duff Gardens, features animatron puppets which represent all parts of the world and sing the "Duff Beer for me, Duff Beer for you" song. The ride is a reference to the It's a Small World ride at Disneyland.

Duff Gardens has a group of costumed mascots (called The Seven Duffs) who are an obvious spoof of the Seven Dwarfs from Snow White. The Duffs' names are Sleazy, Queasy, Edgy, Surly, Tipsy, Remorseful, and Dizzy.

"Treehouse of Horror IV"[]

Two Disney references are shown in this episode:

When the Devil Flanders gets angry at Homer at the nuclear power plant, the form he assumes is exactly like the demon Chernabog in "A Night on Bald Mountain" segment from Fantasia.

Lionel Hutz combs his hair the way Ariel combs her hair from The Little Mermaid.

"Itchy & Scratchy Land"[]

The entire Itchy & Scratchy Land theme park is a parody of Disneyland.

The short film "Nazi Supermen are Our Superiors" reference the rumors that Walt Disney was anti-Semitic.

"Scratchtasia" is a parody of the Disney film Fantasia and Fantasia 2000, particularly "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" segment within the film.

"Itchy & Scratchy: The Movie/The Day the Violence Died"[]

The "Steamboat Itchy" short in these two episodes is a reference to the Mickey Mouse short "Steamboat Willie."

"Old Money"[]

Abe Simpson visits Diz-Nee Land, which claims not to be associated with Disneyland, Disney World, or anything else from the Walt Disney Company.

"The Boy Who Knew Too Much"[]

Dr. Hibbert claims that Walt Disney had the "evil gene."

"'Round Springfield"[]

Mufasa from Disney's The Lion King is among the characters that appears in the clouds with Bleeding Gums Murphy.

"The PTA Disbands"[]

At the beginning of the episode, there's a school field trip to the "Diz-Nee Historical Park," an obvious reference to Disney.

"The Last Temptation of Homer"[]

In the former episode, Homer and Mindy eat the opposite ends of a hot dog, a reference to the scene in Lady and the Tramp where the titular characters eat the opposite ends of a piece of spaghetti.

"A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love"[]

The same scene is referenced again, this time with Mr. Burns and Gloria eating spaghetti.

"Bart on the Road"[]

Bart, Nelson, Milhouse, and Martin consider going to Disney World before deciding on Knoxville.

"You Only Move Twice"[]

Lisa reads that a redwood tree can provide enough sawdust to cover up an entire day's worth of vomit at Disneyland.

"The Secret War of Lisa Simpson"[]

To get Bart to go to military school, Homer and Marge lie that they are going to Disneyland. Later on, Homer and Marge use the same trick when bringing Bart and Lisa to the dentist.

"Bart to the Future"[]

Ralph remembers getting a spider bite at Disneyland, which apparently led to a lawsuit.

"Large Marge"[]

Marge and Maggie listen to Radio Disney, which plays a cover of "Who Let the Dogs Out" remade into "Who Left the Milk Out."

"Three Gays of the Condo"[]

Bart recalls having a bad experience at Disneyland, and attempts to suppress the memory.

"My Mother the Carjacker"[]

Homer suggests he and his mother go where there's no one around for miles - to Disney's California Adventure.

"Love, Springfieldian Style"[]

The Shady and the Vamp segment is a parody of Disney's Lady and the Tramp, starring Homer and Marge.

"A Star is Burns"[]

Barney Gumble's film in the Springfield Film Festival is (unfortunately) entitled Pukahontas, a pun on Pocahontas.

"The Joy of Sect"[]

When trying to come up with a logo for his new religion, Mr. Burns briefly considers the Disney logo, which consist of the Mickey Mouse ears.

"When You Dish Upon a Star"[]

The sign outside of 20th Century Fox Studios is labelled "20th Century Fox: A Division of Walt Disney Co." Notably, this gag was made decades before 21st Century Fox sold its film and television studios to Disney. The title is even a parody of "When You Wish Upon a Star".

"Make Room for Lisa"[]

Lisa cites The Little Mermaid as her favorite movie before Homer taped it over.

"Mom and Pop Art"[]

Disney merchandise is among the objects Homer uses to make unusual art.

"D'oh-in' in the Wind"[]

When Barney Gumble drinks hallucinogenic vegetable juice, he sees a three-eyed monster, which frightens him. He then quickly drinks some Duff Beer, and a pink elephant comes to his aid and stomps on the monster. Barney's elephant resembles the pink elephant that Dumbo the Flying Elephant (the title character from Dumbo) sees when he mistakenly becomes drunk.

"Sunday, Cruddy Sunday"[]

Wally Kogen claims to have heard nothing but bad things about Disneyland.

"HOMЯ"[]

Mickey Mouse's sorcerer's hat from Fantasia and Fantasia 2000 can be seen in the background at the animation convention. Later, the Disney Store is among the places where the now-intelligent Homer feels he would not fit in.

"Simpson Safari"[]

A scene features that spoofs the "Circle of Life" sequence from The Lion King. It similarly revolves around African animals assembling. When the jeep is traveling through the Savannah, Pride Rock can be seen in the background.

"The Great Louse Detective"[]

The Simpsons agree that a tour of prison is preferable to Disney's California Adventure. The episode's title is a pun on The Great Mouse Detective.

"Brawl in the Family"[]

Mr. Burns says that Storm Thurmond will live another century thanks to the magic of Disney animatronics.

"Jaws Wired Shut"[]

The gay pride parade includes a "Lesbians of the Caribbean" float which parodies the Pirates of the Caribbean ride at the Disney theme parks.

"The Fat and the Furriest"[]

In Homer's nightmare, Winnie the Pooh and Baloo are seen with the other bears march angrily towards Homer. When Homer is imagining all the bears attacking him the "Pink Elephants on Parade" parodies it.

"Special Edna"[]

The plot of the episode takes place at EFCOT Center, a parody of Epcot. At the end of the episode, Homer leaves his family to go to Walt Disney World.

"Dude, Where's My Ranch?"[]

The Blue-Haired Lawyer warns Homer not to use certain notes in the song he plans on writing because they are owned by Disney.

"Fat Man and Little Boy"[]

Bart creates a line of novelty T-shirts and sells them at Goose's Gags and Gifts. Goose Gladwell later sells the T-shirt line to Disney (and tries to keep Bart from receiving any of the profits from the sale).

"Mypods and Boomsticks"[]

In Homer's dream he is flying on a magic carpet. He finds the Magic Lamp, rubs it and the Genie pops out of it. He quotes, "You rubbed? You must like me! Really, really, like me!" This is a reference to Disney's 1992 film, Aladdin. The episode's title also parodies Bedknobs and Broomsticks. Dan Castellaneta, in addition, also voiced the Genie in The Return of Jafar, the animated series and the Kingdom Hearts series.

"The Burns and the Bees"[]

Lisa tells Homer that without bees there will be no honey. Homer then imagines what the future would be like without honey. In Homer's imagined version of the future, it is a wastleland. Then, WALL-E shows up with the last bottle of honey, which Homer then drinks, and WALL-E shoves Homer into him and makes him into a cube. This is a reference to Disney•PIXAR's 2008 film, WALL-E.

"Gone Maggie Gone"[]

Lisa tells Homer to come into the kitchen where many rats are scurrying. One rat climbs onto Homer's head and begins pulling his hair, which controls Homer's movements. Homer says, "Ah, it's just like that movie I taped in the theaters." The rat begins pulling on his hair and helps Homer make a soup. Homer then tastes the soup and says, "Needs more rat poison." Then all the rats scurry away. The whole sequence is a reference to Disney•PIXAR's 2007 film Ratatouille.

"The Wandering Juvie"[]

Gina tells Bart that she got arrested for pushing Snow White off the Parapet at Disneyland, Showing him a newspaper with the news tittle "It's a fall world".

"Treehouse of Horror XI"[]

When the witch casts a spell to Homer makes him grow donkey ears, he has the same reaction as Pinocchio when he discovers that he too becomes a donkey.

"Waverly Hills 9-0-2-1-D'oh"[]

Homer and Marge put a Winnie the Pooh doll and a picture of Tigger in the apartment to make the Inspector believe that Lisa and Bart live there.

"Four Great Women and a Manicure"[]

Lisa tells Marge a story parodying Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, with herself in the title role, and staring Homer and friends as the Dwarfs.

"Coming to Homerica"[]

When Lenny and Carl are floating in the sky by balloons, Mr. Fredricksen's house can be seen floating across the sky. This is a reference to Disney•PIXAR's 2009 film, Up.

"Stealing First Base"[]

Many kisses from films including the scene where WALL-E is kissing EVE. This is a reference of Disney•PIXAR's 2008 film WALL-E.

"The Simpsons Movie"[]

On the train, Bart is looking through people's luggage. He puts a black bra on his head (a sight gag on Mickey Mouse, as Bart looks like he's wearing "mouse ears") and says, "I am a mascot from an evil corporation!" Also, Homer and Marge's love scene parodies many Disney films, with Disney-style animals helping them undress.

"The Daughter Also Rises"[]

The cover of a book Disney's Pyramus and Thisbe by Disney appears. Also, a talking parrot from the book is a reference to Iago from Aladdin.

"Flaming Moe"[]

Bart is playing a Buzz Spaceyear action figure, which references Buzz Lightyear from Disney•PIXAR's Toy Story.

"Angry Dad: The Movie"[]

An animator claims that meeting Homer and Bart is like meeting Mickey Mouse and Walt Disney. Homer then proceeds to make noises similar to Mickey Mouse. Mr. Carrot Head is a parody of Mr. Potato Head and Randy Newman is seen singing the song, "You've Got an Enemy" which is a parody of the song, "You've Got a Friend in Me" from Toy Story. Wall-E makes a cameo as well. Also, Luxo, Jr. from the PIXAR logo is seen in the background.

"Lisa Goes Gaga"[]

Milhouse confesses to sleeping under his bed due to his fear of the cars in the Disney•PIXAR movie Cars.

"Disney's Official Couch Gags"[]

This couch gag was created by Disney Animator Eric Goldberg, who is known for creating the Genie, Phil, and Louis, before Disney acquired 21st Century Fox twenty years ago, as seen in the 1998 episode "When You Dish Upon a Star".

Maggie Simpson as 1920s Minnie Mouse (Mickey Mouse)

Lisa Simpson as Cinderella (Disney's Cinderella)

Marge Simpson as Snow White (Disney's Snow White And The Seven Dwarfs)

Homer Simpson as Baloo (The Jungle Book)

Bart Simpson as Sorcerer's Apprentice Mickey Mouse (Fantasia)

"The Man Who Came to Be Dinner"[]

This episode featured the Diz-Nee Land theme park, in reference to the Disneyland Resort and Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom Park, and also including some of its attractions, including Mr. Bug's Slow Crawl, in reference to Mr. Toad's Wild Ride, but styled after Alice in Wonderland and the "politically correct" version of Pirates of the Caribbean, referencing the removal of two scenes, one scene of drunk pirates chasing women and the other, which was the auction scene of tied-up women being auctioned off as brides. The acquisition of Lucasfilm and the Star Wars franchise by The Walt Disney Company was parodied with Diz-Nee owning the rights to Cosmic Wars and incorporating it to some attractions, including the Country Storm Trooper Jamboree, a reference to the Country Bear Jamboree, Jim-Jam Bonk's Wild Ride, referencing the character Jar-Jar Binks and Mr. Toad's Wild Ride and Jabba the Tiki Hutt, in reference to Jabba the Hutt and Walt Disney's Enchanted Tiki Room.

"Marge the Lumberjill"[]

The opening to the episode featured a Billboard gag showing a solemn-looking Krusty the Clown advertising his show, but with the caption "The only thing not on Disney+". This billboard gag was made days before the launch of the streaming service.

"Welcome to the Family, The Simpsons!"[]

The short, released after the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by The Walt Disney Company, features references reflecting it, including statues of Star Wars antagonist Darth Vader and former CEO of The Walt Disney Company, Bob Iger, a portrait of Rupert Murdoch in a garbage can, the FOX logo on the balloons covered with tape holding the banner "WELCOME SYNERGY", the Simpson family wearing Mickey Mouse ears, with one of them hitting Dumbo, who lands on Homer, and Maggie, in the role of Tinker Bell, to end the short.

"Bart the Bad Guy"[]

Serving as a parody of the Marvel Cinematic Universe and the Avengers films, with Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige voicing Chinnos, a parody of Thanos, Infinity War and Endgame directors Joe and Anthony Russo and MCU actress Cobie Smulders as voice cameos, with Vindicators Crystal War and Vindicators 2 Crystal War: Resurgence, serving as parodies of Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame and of the spoiler phenomenon of the two films, the bomb under Homer and Marge's bed being disarmed after Bart promising not to reveal the ending to the film, a minor key rendition of the song When You Wish Upon a Star plays, while the text on the screen reads "Disarmed", in Waltograph.

[]

The opening shot features an appearance of Mickey Mouse's head, which then transitions to Homer with two donuts, which he then eats. The opening credit's card also reads "Disney welcomes The Simpsons". The Gracie Films logo at the end of the short replaces one of the patrons in the audience with Mickey Mouse. All of these references reflect Disney's acquisition of 21st Century Fox on March 20, 2019.

"Treehouse of Horror XXXI"[]

In the second segment of the episode "Into the Homerverse", Homer encounters Disney Princess Homer, serving as a parody of the Disney Princessess.

"The Good, The Bart, and The Loki"[]

In the Springfield Avengers scene, Rainier Wolfcastle, assuming the role of Giant Man, holds up a sign saying, "This Is What Happens When Disney Buys Marvel And Fox", referencing the company's acquisitions of Marvel Entertainment and 21st Century Fox.

"Bart's In Jail!"[]

Bill Cipher from the Disney animated series Gravity Falls appears as an alias of Loki.

"Plusaversary"[]

Various characters from Disney's brands appear in this short film, released on Disney+ Day.

"Welcome to the Club"[]

Released on September 8, as part of its second annual Disney+ Day, the short film features Loki, the Disney Villains (The Wicked Witch, Captain Hook, Scar, The Queen of Hearts, Cruella De Vil, Hades, Jafar, Ursula, Kaa and Maleficent), two of the Seven Dwarves, the Disney Princes and Mickey and Minnie Mouse.

Gallery[]

References[]

[]