20th Century Studios, Inc., (stylized as 20th Century Studios and formerly Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation or 20th Century Fox), is an American film studio that produced and distributed The Simpsons Movie.

It, along with the FOX Network, has been referenced many times in the show. The Simpsons has taken many swipes at their home network. FOX was part of the Motion Picture Association. In 2013, following the split of News Corporation and 21st Century Fox, the byline "A News Corporation Company" was removed.

It is a subsidiary company of The Walt Disney Company, under The Walt Disney Studios division. The Fox Studios lot is currently owned by Rupert Murdoch and Fox Corporation. This studio, along with 21st Century Fox-related assets (including 20th Century Animation, Blue Sky Studios, Searchlight Pictures, and FX Networks) are now owned by Disney.

On January 17, 2020, Variety reported that The Walt Disney Company was rebranding some of its acquisitions from the now-defunct 21st Century Fox to avoid confusion with the part of Fox that remains an independent company. Along with the change in names to 20th Century Fox, FOX Searchlight Pictures has been renamed without "FOX" in front of it and 20th Century Fox Animation was renamed 20th Century Animation.[1][2] The television divisions were not renamed.

History[]

20th Century Fox was founded on May 31, 1935 as the result of the merger of Fox Film Corporation, founded by William Fox in 1915, and Twentieth Century Pictures, founded in 1933 by Darryl F. Zanuck, Joseph Schenck, Raymond Griffith and William Goetz.

After being owned by the News Corporation from 1984 to 2013, the studio was bought by The Walt Disney Company for $71.3 billion in 2018,[3][4] a deal that was completed on March 20, 2019.

20th Century Studios was a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA) before its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company.

Citations[]

Episode – "Kamp Krusty" Not exactly implied, but:

Bart: I want the whole world to know this was a really crappy camp. Can I say "crappy" on TV?

Kent Brockman: Yes, on this network, you can.

Episode – "Cape Feare" When remarking about how Rainier Wolfcastle's talk show was horrible, Lisa mentions that the FOX network has sunk to a new low.

Episode – "Krusty Gets Kancelled" When Krusty identifies Luke Perry as being Krusty's "worthless half brother" and Lisa explains that Perry is a big TV star, Krusty scoffs that he is one... on FOX.

Episode – "Mr. Plow" While waiting for his "Mr. Plow" commercial to air on TV, Homer comments "It may be on a lousy channel, but the Simpsons are on TV!"

Episode – "Marge in Chains" When the Osaka flu hits the Flanderses, Ned Flanders flashes back to what he could've done to deserve punishment: watching "Married..... with Children" and actually laughing at it. In the present, Ned says "Oh, the network slogan is true! Watch Fox and be damned for all eternity!"

Episode – "Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy" Lisa doesn't want to watch Fox because they own chemical weapon plants in Syria.

Episode – "Deep Space Homer" At the end, Bart imagines Homer as the Star Child from 2001: A Space Odyssey getting hit with a Fox Network satellite. Also, a NASA employee points out popular personalities on television by using Peg from "Married..... with Children" complaining to Al about sex and Al flushing the toilet.

Episode – "Bart Gets an Elephant" Mr. Blackheart's past profession includes being the Fox Network president.

Episode – "Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song" In the couch gag, Homer spots the Fox onscreen bug, peels it off, and him and his family step on it.

Episode – "Bart of Darkness" When Bart tells Homer Ned Flanders killed Maude, Homer replies nobody would kill her because she is a fox and Marge looks at Homer making Homer say, "What is on Fox tonight?"

Episode – "Lisa's Wedding" In the future, Marge is watching TV in and remarks "You know, Fox turned into a hardcore sex channel so gradually I didn't even notice."

Video game – The Simpsons Game

THOH – "Treehouse of Horror VIII" In the opening, a FOX censor is seen cutting out various scenes from the show, only to be stabbed to death by the TV-rating screen bug.

Episode – "The Joy of Sect" The family is brainwashed at the end by the FOX network.

Episode – "Homer to the Max" The family watches FOX's Mid-Season show lineup, then finds some of the shows terrible.

Episode – "Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo" Homer makes various investments on a computer at the "Java Server". Upon learning that one of his investments was FOX, he quickly undoes his action. Also, during the TCFTV logo at the end, Homer yells "AHH! UNDO! UNDO! OH!", like in the episode.

Episode – "Missionary: Impossible" Fox Network president Rupert Murdoch appears as a telephone operator at the end.

Episode – "HOMR" When listening to the stock placements over the phone, Homer mentions the word "crap" and is told FOX's stock, which is down by 8 points.

Episode – "The Frying Game" Carmen Electra appears as a co-host of Fox's new reality show, Frame Up, and announces that it's Fox's latest hit, right after No-Pants Island and Fart Date.

Episode – "The Heartbroke Kid" Homer owns a plush doll named Foxy the FOX Network Fox that wears a shirt with the Fox Network logo.

Episode – "Million-Dollar Abie" The Simpsons are watching the newest Fox series Boobs staring Carmen Electra as a teacher who has big boobs and gets no attention because of them.

Episode – "You Kent Always Say What You Want" Lisa asks how the Fox Network can be conservative if they air raunchy shows.

The Simpsons 20th Anniversary Special - In 3-D! On Ice!: Near the end of the special, the family is upset that there was no figure skating to which Bart responds "Stupid lying FOX!".

– The Simpsons Movie Ralph stands on the 20th Century Fox logo at the beginning of the movie and sings in time to the music.

Episode – "MoneyBART" In the couch gag, the shot zooms out to reveal that sweatshop is contained within a grim version of the 20th Century Fox logo, surrounded by barbed wire, searchlights, and a watchtower

Simpsorama: The 20 in the logo gets changed to a 30 in reference to Futurama.

Episode – "Cue Detective" The 1956 "Standard 0" logo is seen in the film of Doctor Dolittle in Springfield Elementary.

The Complete Tenth Season - The theme of this box set is Bart causing havoc at the 20th Century Fox studio lot.

Gallery[]

See also[]

20th Century Fox Television

20th Television

20th Century Fox Home Entertainment

References[]

[]