In memory of those who have Crossed the Bar

HECTOR, Gordon Irving - Born February 26, 1923. It is with great sadness that the family of Gordon Hector announce his passing on February 3, 2022 following a brief illness at University Hospital, London, Ontario. Predeceased by his wife Donnie Hector (Dec.2, 2019), following 72 years of marriage. Loving father to Pat Teasdale (Butch 2000), Don Hector (Joanne), Paul Hector (Donalda Patenaude) and Melanie Grabowski (Jim). Predeceased by his brother and lifelong friend Russell. Dear Grandpa to Joyanne Beckett, Tim Beckett (Maggie), Laura Schauer (Jeff), Eric Hector (Erin), Ken Teasdale (Deb), Kathy Kohls (John), Terry Teasdale, Natalie Videka, and Peter Videka (Laura Casuccio). Dearest Great Grandpa to Brittanie (Josh), Sara, Sean, Logan, Rachel, Abby, Hannah, Luke, Maddy, Emma, Jaxon, Willow, Levi and Colt. Great-Great Grandpa to Landon. An extra thank you to the staff at the Village of Glendale Crossing especially the Lambeth floor for their outstanding service and care during his final years. The family greatly appreciated the care and compassion of caregiver Maureen (Mo) Nisbet for her ability to bring out the best in him. Gord's journey began in Hamilton Beach, Ontario where he grew up, attended elementary school, secondary school (Burlington Central High) and was a newspaper carrier for the Hamilton Spectator. He was employed as a steel worker with STELCO on the open hearth furnace for a year. He then enrolled in Queen's University studying Electrical Engineering and obtained his degree in 1946. At the same time he was enlisted as a Reserve member of the RCAF and then the RCN. At the end of the war, during the Victory over Japan (VJ) Day celebrations, he met the love of his life, Donnie Locke. They were married in Hamilton, on Sept. 6, 1947. They raised their family in Hamilton, Wiarton and North Bay. Following brief employment stints with Bell Canada and in the Pulp and Paper industry, Gord returned to Hamilton Beach and started an Electrical Contracting Business. In 1962, it was time to change career direction again. His new career as an educator lasted until his retirement where he taught briefly at Wiarton District High School and then Chippewa Secondary in North Bay. Gord and Donnie travelled to Australia, New Zealand, Spain and Portugal in the 1990's. They went on annual family camping trips throughout their childrens' early year. Later Gord built a family cottage on Georgian Bay which became a family focal point for over 55 years. They retired to a permanent home on Georgian Bay in 1990 and had many happy years there with family and friends. Christmas in July get togethers, bonfires, boating, horseshoe tournaments (Gord was usually the winner ), card tournaments, Sibs weekends, cross country skiing and walks around Kettle's Lake in Awenda Provincial Park. They also travelled around Ontario to square dancing meetups. Their final years were spent at Bayfield House Retirement Residence (Penetanguishene), Richmond Woods Retirement Residence (London) and the Village of Glendale Crossing (London). Gord was an avid curler both in North Bay and in the Penetanguishene area and coached a high school curling team that would go on to the Dominion school boy finals in St. Johns Nfld. in the late 1960's. He followed the Blue Jays closely throughout his life. Gord was the original McGyver and master of home-made solutions generally working with readily available materials at hand. This involved anything from moving rocks at the Georgian Bay waterfront property, installing boat dock systems and a unique boat launch and retrieval system. Gord had the good fortune of both growing up and retiring along the Great Lakes, as a child on Lake Ontario (Hamilton Beach and Burlington Bay) and later in life at the waterfront home on Georgian Bay. He had a fascination and love for the water and all the things that came with it, fishing, boating, sailing, swimming and snorkeling. In recent years he often reminisced about his Hamilton Beach youth adventures with his brother Russ. Gord was kind, honest and a true gentleman. He had a great sense of humour and a ready smile for everyone. He loved his family dearly and was remembered fondly by anyone who met him. Cremation has taken place with a funeral service and interment to follow at St. James-on-the Lines Anglican Church, Penetanguishene, June 18 at 2:00 p.m. Contact a family member for more details. Donations to Georgian Bay General Hospital Foundation (Midland) would be appreciated. (Simcoe County News 22 Feb 2022)

Crossed the Bar Index