We invite you to a personal and in-depth introduction with a man who greatly influenced the shaping of the State of Israel. Menachem Begin, the initiator of peace with Egypt, who opened the door of Israeli society, to all of its member, asked to be remembered, above all else, as someone who prevented a civil war. He was a brave soldier, who proudly worked for the future and security of the Jewish people in Israel. A humble and valued leader, who in his will requested to be buried alongside his fellow soldier on the Mount of Olives.

The Menachem Begin Heritage Center holds cultural and educational activities, museum tours and outdoor tours, and research activities at its campus in Jerusalem and its branches in the north, south and center of the country. You’re welcome to join our journey! The Begin Museum: The museum tour lays out the story of Menachem Begin's life and legacy. Come and take part in an exceptional audio-visual experience that invites you to get toi know the fascinating life story of one of the most prominent leaders in the history of the country. This is an invitation to a personal, unmediated journey with Menachem Begin, where you can hear his voice and read from his writings. Together we will go through the different chapters of his life: we will walk with him through the streets of his childhood in Europe, we will attend a meeting of Irgun leaders, sit on the couch in his living room, hear his famous speeches in the square, join an election rally and accompany him in his dramatic moments as Prime Minister. Pieces of the history of the State of Israel are woven throughout the visit.

A walk in the museum is not just an encounter with Menachem Begin's personal journey, but an encounter with the story of us all! Experiential activities for the general public: Content and practical experience come together on an activity day with a Jerusalem feel. In the beating heart of Jerusalem, before a magical view, fascinating layers of history are folded. The Begin Center is a perfect place to start your tour around the city and enjoy a variety of activities throughout Jerusalem. The streets surrounding the Begin Center are revived with a variety of activities offered to groups and private visitors: Walking tours combining actors or musicians, Bar / Bat Mitzvah celebrations, cultural performances, team-building days and more.

Contact us and together we can build an exciting, enriching and experiential day, tailored to the needs of the group. Content and cultural events: A crossroads of cultures, perspectives, and people in an array of cultural events. The Begin Center is a vibrant cultural center which invites an encounter with the human diversity that only Jerusalem can offer ... The Center continuously hosts a variety of events for the public including lectures, seminars, cultural evenings, book launches, tours, courses, and more.

We strive to offer the public a wide selection of lectures and in-depth series, from the best lecturers and researchers in the fields of history, security and the military, Zionism, religion, law, and more. The lectures, for Hebrew speakers and English speakers, are also held in various cities around the country from Be'er Sheva to Kiryat Shmona. To this end, the department holds seminars for groups of researchers which explore Menachem Begin's teachings and its relevance to belonging today, lectures for the general public, and conferences in collaboration with universities and research institutions. The center also publishes the writings of Menachem Begin and other national-liberal thinkers, and awards prizes for outstanding academic work as part of an annual competition.

Convention Center: The perfect combination of location in the heart of Jerusalem, a unique view of the Old City, and a selection of halls for your event! The center provides a variety of solutions for business events and conferences, while customizing to the customer's needs. We offer a wide selection of halls for rent, including classrooms, conference and seminar rooms, and an auditorium which seats 300 people. All halls are equipped with advanced ICT equipment that enables high end conferences and offers complex technological solutions for each conference. You may add refreshments, receptions and full meals. The centers’ staff will accompany you, paying utmost attention to detail, all the way to the perfect event. Public parking is available near the Begin Center, as is public transportation from all over the city.