Maria von Trapp, a member of the musical family whose escape from Nazi-occupied Austria was the basis for "The Sound of Music," has died, her brother said Saturday.

Von Trapp, 99, died at her home in Vermont on Tuesday, Johannes von Trapp said.

"She was a lovely woman who was one of the few truly good people," he said. "There wasn't a mean or miserable bone in her body. I think everyone who knew her would agree with that."

Maria von Trapp was the last surviving member of the seven original Trapp Family ChoirSingers made famous in "The Sound of Music." Their story was turned into the film and Broadway musical.

She was the third child and second-oldest daughter of Austrian Naval Capt. Georg von Trapp and his first wife, Agathe Whitehead von Trapp. Their seven children were the basis for the singing family in the 1959 Broadway musical and 1965 film, which won the Oscar for best picture. Maria von Trapp was portrayed as Louisa in the film and musical.

"The Sound of Music" was based loosely on a 1949 book by von Trapp's second wife, also Maria von Trapp, who died in 1987. It tells the story of an Austrian woman who married a widower with seven children and teaches them music.

In 1938, the family escaped from Nazi-occupied Austria. After they arrived in New York, the family became popular with concert audiences. The family eventually settled in Vermont, where they opened a ski lodge in Stowe.

Von Trapp played accordion and taught Austrian dance with sister Rosmarie at the lodge.

Rosmarie von Trapp, Johannes von Trapp and Eleonore Von Trapp Campbell were born to Georg von Trapp and Maria von Trapp.

The Trapp Family Singers spent much of their initial Vermont period out of state — on a bus.

Their expeditions lasted months a time, with bookings from coast to coast. Maria Augusta, the famous matriarch, wrote a book about it: "A Family on Wheels: Further Adventures of the Trapp Family Singers" (1959).

She described what she brought with her on the bus, which was emblazoned "Trapp Family Singers": suitcase, books, guitar, dictaphone, typewriter, mechanical blender (for grinding vegetables into liquid vitamins on the road), carrots and other vegetables, and finally, "my heart's treasure, the Dormiphone — a find instrument designed to teach languages by gently playing language records through one's sleep."

The more than 120 performances scheduled in 1947 elevated the Trapps "to the position of America's most heavily booked concert attraction," the Burlington Free Press pronounced.

The baron died in Stowe that May, not long after the tour ended. The family's performance tours continued through 1955. Maria A. von Trapp died in a Vermont hospital in 1987 at age 82.

The von Trapps left their beloved Austria in 1938, the year Hitler occupied the country. Captain von Trapp, commander of a German U-boat, was under pressure to join the Nazis. The von Trapps took a train from Austria to Italy en route to America; they did not climb over the Alps, as depicted in the movie.

On their arrival in the United States, the von Trapps settled first in Philadelphia, before purchasing the Stowe property in 1942.

"Vermont was similar to Austria," Johannes von Trapp said. "It had villages, with churches with steeples. The villages were surrounded by farms, and the forested mountains went up from there. So my family felt at home here."

Led by Maria, the von Trapps formed a singing group in 1936, the Trapp Family Singers, and performed together until 1956.

"The Trapp family singers was one of the first commercially successful family singing groups from Europe in the post-War period," said David Neiweem, professor of music at the University of Vermont and head of vocal studies.

"A lot of people got exposed for the first time to fine European choral singing through their tours throughout the country and the world," Neiweem said. "They were certainly well known, prior to 'The Sound of Music.' It was their business, one of the ways that they made money when they got here, exploring what gifts they had."

The family was based in Stowe during the years it toured as the Trapp Family Singers. "When we stopped singing together, the various family members went about doing their own things," Johannes von Trapp said.

In 2008, 70 years after fleeing the Nazis, Maria von Trapp returned to Austria to visit her former home at the age of 93.

"I'm back home again," von Trapp told reporters in Salzburg Friday after spending several nights in her childhood house, which has been transformed into a hotel.

Located in a posh part of Salzburg, the "Villa Trapp" once belonged to the von Trapps, who gained global fame in the 1965 blockbuster starring Julie Andrews, which tells the story of an Austrian woman who marries a widower with seven children and teaches them music.

Maria von Trapp — who was flown in from the United States for the hotel's inauguration Friday along with several relatives — was enthusiastic about the endeavor.

"I'm sleeping in the room where my brother slept ... it's very nice to be back again," she said in televised remarks.

Free Press writer Sally Pollak contributed to this report.