James Joseph Brown II is the son of James Brown, the late African-American musician, actor, and record producer. James Joseph Brown II was born June 11, 2001, and is 22 years old presently. He has followed in the footsteps of his late dad and is also a musician.

James Brown’s musical legacy earned him a fair amount of recognition and accolades, as well as several honorific nicknames, including Godfather of Soul, the Hardest Working Man in Show Business, Mr. Dynamite, and “Soul Brother No. 1. The dramatic effect of his personality was not absent from his personal life as the late singer reportedly fathered at least 9 children from different women. This article focuses on the youngest of those children in the person of James Joseph Brown II.

James Joseph Brown II’s Bio

AGE: 22 Years Old

BIRTHDAY: June 11, 2001

BIRTHPLACE: South Carolina, United States

BIRTH SIGN: Gemini

ETHNICITY: Mixed (Half Caucasian, Half African American

FATHER: James Joseph Brown

MOTHER: Tomi Rae Hynie

SIBLINGS: At least 10, including Teddy Brown (half-brother, deceased), Terry Brown (half-brother), Larry Brown (half-brother), Daryl Brown (half-brother), Michael Deon Brown (alleged half-brother), Lisa Brown (half-sister), Dr. Yamma Noyola Brown Lumar (half-sister), Deanna Brown Thomas (half-sister), Venisha Brown (half-sister), and LaRhonda Pettit (alleged half-sister)

How Old Is James Joseph Brown II?

James Joseph Brown II is currently 22 years old. He was born on June 11, 2006, most likely in South Carolina, United States. His birth sign is Gemini, and he is an American citizen by birth as well as through parental heritage.

Also known as James Brown Jr., the celebrity child’s ethnic identity is not as straightforward as his national heritage in the sense that his mixed ethnic heritage is down to his late father being African American while his mother belongs to the Caucasian ethnic group.

Speaking of parents, James Brown Jr. is the youngest progeny of the late African-American singer, actor, and record producer James Brown. Born James Joseph Brown on May 3, 1933, in Barnwell, South Carolina, United States, James Brown’s musical legacy saw him spend over five decades in the music industry and picked up several awards, including a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 34th Annual Grammy Awards Show on February 25, 1992.

Even after his death caused by heart failure on Christmas day 2006, James Jr.’s father’s impact on the music industry was still recognized through the posthumous accolades he received, such as being honored and inducted into the R&B Music Hall of Fame at a ceremony held at the Waetjen Auditorium at Cleveland State University, on August 17, 2013, almost 7 years after his demise.

James Joseph Brown II’s Mother Is Also A Musician

James Brown Jr. came into this world through the womb of a woman named Tomi Rae Hynie. She was born on May 21, 1969, somewhere in the United States. Not much is known about her family history though, as her major link to the spotlight remains her relatively long association with the late Godfather of Soul.

That association began in 1997 after the late singer hired Hynie to become a backup singer in his band. Before that, she had worked as a Janis Joplin impersonator in Las Vegas, Nevada. James Brown Jr.’s parents were not married at the time of his birth in 2001 but they had become intimately involved with each other at least 4 years prior in 1997.

They officially tied the knot on December 23, 2002, around a year and a half after the birth of James Jr. That marital union was later deemed to be invalid by the South Carolina Supreme Court because Hynie had failed to annul her previous marriage to a man from Bangladesh named Javed Ahmed, whom she claimed had used his marriage to her to obtain a Green Card.

James Jr. was just over two years old in August 2003 when his father announced, via a full-page public notice in Variety featuring the celebrity child, his mother, and the late musician on vacation at Disney World, that he and James Jr.’s mother were ending their relationship, effectively ending what then became a six-year partnership.

James II Is The Only Child Of His Parents Together

Focusing entirely on the relationship between his biological parents, James Joseph Brown II is the only child his parents had together. While it is quite possible that his mother had other relationships after the one she had with his dad ended, none of those subsequent relationships led to the birth of another child for her.

On his father’s side, James II was also the last child his late dad fathered. Nonetheless, long before the birth of James II, the late singer had given birth to at least 11 children, nine of whom he acknowledged, including four daughters, Lisa Brown, Dr. Yamma Noyola Brown Lumar, Deanna Brown Thomas, Venisha Brown, and LaRhonda Pettit.

He did not acknowledge Pettit, but she claims her mother told her that he was her father. James Jr. also has five half-brothers, including Teddy Brown, Terry Brown, Larry Brown, Daryl Brown, and Michael Deon Brown.

Teddy Brown was James Brown Jr.’s oldest sibling, having been born in 1954. Unfortunately, he died at 19 in a car crash on June 14, 1973. Michael Deon Brown is also legally recognized as James Brown’s son after the late icon pleaded no contest to a paternity suit brought against him in 1983. Brown never acknowledged him as his son, though.

James II Appears To Be Following In His Father’s Footsteps

Certain aspects of James Joseph Brown’s early life have been redacted, but we can confirm that he was five years old when his father died and that the late musician had left instructions for a DNA test that confirmed James II’s status as his son to be conducted.

Not much is known about where he grew up, and there is also little information about the details of his formal educational background. One thing that seems apparent despite the gray areas in his early life is that he had a lot of love from both parents growing up.

Somehow, though, James Jr. was not named in his father’s will, but that has not changed his view of his father, whose pictures he still posts on his social media pages. An Instagram post in 2020 detailed his love, affection, and devotion to his father’s memory.

Career-wise, it probably comes as very little surprise that James Brown Jr. is currently expressing his creative side through music, given that his father was in the world of music. It remains to be seen whether he can match his father’s achievements in that arena, but he appears to be on the right track.

The musician is quite visible across several social media platforms, including Instagram, where he posts regular pictures of himself being involved in the art of making music.

ncG1vNJzZmiglZ60qcDLoqWeZpOkunDDx6hkoqtdn66usdJmoairlaW1bq7RqK6nZZmeequtzJ6qZpqipMSvv4yspqdn