856 relations: A cappella, A Midsummer Night's Dream, A Tale of a Tub, A Trip to the Moon, A Void, A.M.A.N. (TV series), Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls, Action film, Administratium, Aeneid, Ahmed Best, Airplane!, Aisling, Al Murray, Alan Partridge, Alan Whicker, Alex Karras, Alex Kidd in Shinobi World, Alexander Pushkin, Alexei Sayle, All About My Mother, All Aussie Adventures, Allan Sherman, Allusion, Alt.binaries.slack, Alvin and the Chipmunks, America (The Book), American Express, American Gothic, Amjad Khan (actor), Anagram, Analytical Society, Anastrophe, Andre the Giant Has a Posse, Andrew Sachs, Andy Partridge, Angus Deayton, Anime International Company, Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier, Anthony Kiedis, Anti-LGBT rhetoric, Antioch, Antoine de Rivarol, Antonio Salieri, Aphrodite, Archie Bunker, Archpoet, Aritha Van Herk, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Art Buchwald, ..., Art Paul Schlosser, Arthur (TV series), Arthur Sullivan, As Nasty As They Wanna Be, Atlantic Records, Atlantis, Attacks on High Wood, Augustan poetry, Auguste Rodin, Austin Powers in Goldmember, Autobiographical comics, Bad Hair Day, Ban This Filth, Barbie, Barry Mann, Batangas, Bathos, Batman, Batmobile, Battle Hymn of the Republic, BattleBots, Beach Blanket Babylon, Beetlejuice (TV series), Benjamin Franklin, Benny Hill, Benson (TV series), Bert (Sesame Street), Betty White, Between the Lions, Bicycle Thieves, Biggles, Bill Bailey, Bill Nye the Science Guy, Bill O'Reilly (political commentator), Bill Oddie, Bill Tidy, Black Mass, Blazing Transfer Student, Blood Simple, Bob and Doug McKenzie, Bob Rivers, Boba Fett, Borås, Bradley Whitford, Brian Bolland, Brian Dennehy, British humour, British literature, Brobdingnagian Bards, Bruce Willis, Brujeria (band), Buddy DeSylva, Burlesque, Buster Keaton, Cabbage Patch Kids, Cadence Records, Call Me Madam, Cannibal! The Musical, Carl Michael Bellman, Carol Burnett, Carrie Donovan, Casey at the Bat, Castlevania, Cat Claw, Cathryn Damon, Cecil Turtle, Celebrity Deathmatch, Celebrity sex tape, Cerebus the Aardvark, Chanson de geste, Charles Beaumont, Charles Napier (actor), Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset, Charlie Drake, Cheapass Games, Chespirito, Chicken Tonight, Children's Hour with Armstrong and Miller, Ching chong, Chris Morris (satirist), Chris Moyles, Chuckle Brothers, Chyna, Civil disobedience, ClayFighter 63⅓, Clodagh Rodgers, Clone High, Cock rock, Codex Seraphinianus, Colleen Moore, Colley Cibber, Comic Party, Comic Relief, Common starling, Compatible Time-Sharing System, Conan the Librarian, Cone of Silence (Get Smart), Conker's Bad Fur Day, Connie Willis, Coolio, Copyright, Corazon Aquino, Corey Clark, Cosgrove Hall Films, Counterculture, Cracking joints, Crazy Eddie, Crime fiction, Crossover (fiction), Cultural depictions of Napoleon, Culture of Greece, Cutey Bunny, Dalek, Danger Mouse (1981 TV series), Danny Hellman, Danny Strong, Dare to Be Stupid, Darrell Waltrip, Dave Barry, Dave Sim, David Foster Wallace, David Horowitz (consumer advocate), David Langford, David Renwick, David Walliams, Détournement, Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid, Dean Malenko, Dean Martin, Death (Discworld), Del's, Demi Moore, Derek Nimmo, Despair, Inc., Desperate Housewives, Diabelli Variations, Dick & Dom in da Bungalow, Dick Tracy, Disgaea: Hour of Darkness, Disumbrationism, Doctor Who, Doctor Who: The Curse of Fatal Death, Dom Joly, Don Imus, Don Quixote, Down and Out in Paris and London, Down Periscope, Dr. Demento, Dr. Seuss, Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem, Dracula: Dead and Loving It, Dragnet (franchise), Dragon Ball (manga), Drawn Together, Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century, Dune (franchise), Dwarfs (Discworld), Dysfunctional Family Circus, E. L. Doctorow, Eamon Dunphy, EarthBound, Eat It, Ed Wood (film), Eddie Vedder, Edgar Guest, Edward Platt, Efrem Zimbalist Jr., Eh, El Chapulín Colorado, El Mariachi, Electric Light Orchestra, ELIZA, Elvis impersonator, Embryons desséchés, Empress Elisabeth of Austria, English novel, Enter the Dragon, Entertainment, Eric (novel), Eric the Unready, Ernie Kovacs, Ernst Stavro Blofeld, Esoteric programming language, Ethel Merman, Even Worse, Excel Saga, F.E.A.R., Fair use, Farscape, Father Ted, Fear of a Punk Planet, Fear of the Dark (Iron Maiden album), Fearless Fosdick, Ferdinando Galiani, Fernando Meirelles, Festivus, Fictional country, Fictional universe, Fictitious entry, Figure of speech, Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children, First Amendment to the United States Constitution, Fishbone, Fitzcarraldo, Flaming Carrot Comics, Folsom Street Fair, Ford Popular, Formula fiction, Foul Play (1978 film), Frank Frazetta, Frédéric Chopin, Freakazoid!, Fred Karno, Fred Wedlock, French and Saunders, Friedrich Schiller, Fritz Spiegl, Frode Øverli, Frozen Peas, Futurama, Gallagher (comedian), Garbage Pail Kids, Garrison Keillor, Garth Marenghi, General Protection Fault (webcomic), Genre, George Kennedy, George Topîrceanu, Get Smart, Ghettopoly, Giant Robo (OVA), Giles Goat-Boy, Giv'at Halfon Eina Ona, Glenn Beck, Goatse.cx, Gohan, Goodness Gracious Me (BBC), Google bomb, Gossip Girl (novel series), Green Hornet, Greg Costikyan, Gremlins, Greyshirt, Groland, Gumshoe (film), Gwen Ifill, HackMaster, Hal Douglas, Hamilton College (New York), Haré+Guu, Hardcore punk, Harold Ramis, Harry Harrison (writer), Harry Palmer, Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law, Hee Haw, Henry Carey (writer), Herb Alpert, Hero and Leander (poem), Hidden text, High School High, Hilaire Belloc, Hipponax, History of Saturday Night Live (1980–85), History of the World, Part I, Hocus pocus (magic), Hollywood Potato Chip, Home Taping Is Killing Music, Horace, Horror film, Hot Shots!, Hound Dog (song), Hounds of Tindalos, Howard Berman, Howard the Duck, Howie Mandel, Hurricane Helms, I Know What You Did Last Summer, I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud, I'm OK – You're OK, If—, Impressionist (entertainment), In Living Color, Index of literature articles, Ingmar Bergman, Intentional infliction of emotional distress, INTERCAL, Intertextuality, Ion Luca Caragiale, Iris Tree, Ironic (song), Isaac Hayes, Isaac Watts, J. C. Squire, J. M. Barrie, Jackie Chiles, Jacques Benveniste, Jaime Bergman, James Bond, James Gould Cozzens, James T. Kirk, Jasper Carrott, Jasper Fforde, Jaws 3-D, Jay Ward, Je t'aime John Wayne, Jean Shepherd, Jean-Baptiste Rousseau, Jeff Bezos, Jenna von Oÿ, Jennifer Saunders, Jentina, Jerry Holkins, JibJab, Jim Abrahams, Jim Carrey, Jimmy Driftwood, Jimmy Savile, Jingle Bells, Joan Lindsay, Joan Rivers, Joe Hill, Joe Orton, Johan Herman Wessel, Johannes Brahms, John Barth, John C. Reilly, John Candy, John Facenda, John Landis, John M. Ford, John of Gaunt, John Stamos, John Taverner, John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester, Johnny Cage, Johnny English, Jonah, Jorge de Montemor, José Sarria, Joseph Andrews, Joseph Losey, Judicature Acts, Judy Sheindlin, Julee Cruise, Julie Walters, Kaput and Zösky, Karl May, Kenneth Cope, Kevin Bloody Wilson, Kill Doctor Lucky, Kingdom of Loathing, Krapp's Last Tape, Kunimitsu Tezuka, La bohème, Lacey Chabert, Land of Black Gold, Larry Hovis, Last Action Hero, Late Spring, Laurel and Hardy, Leave It to Beaver, Lee Marvin, Les Barker, Les Charlots, Les Guignols, Li'l Abner (musical), Licensed to Ill, Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them, Lin Carter, List of Beavis and Butt-Head episodes, List of fictional diseases, List of fictional doomsday devices, List of French-language Canadian television series, List of musicals: M to Z, List of narrative techniques, List of open-source video games, List of Russian people, List of Saturday Night Live commercial parodies, List of scandals with "-gate" suffix, List of songs that retell a work of literature, List of styles of music: N–R, List of wikis, Literary genre, Little Nemo, Loaded Weapon 1, Lobo (DC Comics), Lois Griffin, Look Back in Anger, Look What the Cat Dragged In, Louder Than Love, Louis Wain, Love and Death, Luciano Bottaro, Lucky Luke, Ludovic Halévy, Luke Ski, Machinima, Mack the Knife, Mad (magazine), Malcolm McDowell, Manu Dibango, Marcel Duchamp, Marcel Janco, Mario Vargas Llosa, Mark Russell, Martian Successor Nadesico, Marvel Comics, Marvin the Martian, Marxist film theory, Mary Gentle, Max Beerbohm, Max Frisch, Maya the Bee, Mayor Quimby, Medieval poetry, Meditation Upon a Broomstick, Medusa: Dare to Be Truthful, Megatokyo, Mel Brooks, Menippean satire, Meredith Vieira, Merton College, Oxford, Metal umlaut, Miami Vice, Michael Moore Is a Big Fat Stupid White Man, Michael Richards, Mickey Mouse, Middleburg, Virginia, Mighty Mouse, Mihail Sadoveanu, Mike Levey, Mike Tyson, Minstrel show, Mircea Eliade, Misfits of Science, Mister Fantastic, Mobile Suit Gundam, Mock-heroic, Modernism, Molvanîa, Monica's Gang, Monsterpiece Theater, Monstrous Regiment (novel), Monty Python's Life of Brian, Morris Kline, Mount Holyoke College, Mr. Bill, Mr. Bungle, Mrs. Puff, Mulready stationery, Murasaki Shikibu, Murder by Death, Murray Rothbard, Music of Newfoundland and Labrador, Music of the United States, Mutant Aliens, My Bonnie Lies over the Ocean, Namby-pamby, National Lampoon (magazine), National Lampoon's Doon, Népomucène Lemercier, Near v. Minnesota, Neko Majin, Net.art, Newsreaders, Next Position Please, Nineteen Eighty-Four (UK TV programme), Ninja Burger, Nipper, No Woman, No Cry, Noli Me Tángere (novel), Northanger Abbey, Nose-picking, Not the Nine O'Clock News, Nuclear blackmail, Nullsoft, Obscurantism, Oera Linda Book, Off-model, Office Assistant, Oh! What a Lovely War, On the Hour, Once a Thief (TV series), Outline of literature, Panel show, Papillon Rose, Parallel universes in fiction, Parody advertisement, Parody film, Paruresis, Pasquino, Pastiche, Patrick Dennis, Paul Klee, Paul Winfield, Payasos en la lavadora, Peggy Mitchell, Penny Arcade, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, Peter Graves, Peter Griffin, Peter Richardson (British director), Peter Schickele, Peter Sellers, Petunia Pig, PG Tips, Phaic Tăn, Pierrot, Pimp My Ride, Pixie and Dixie and Mr. Jinks, PlainTalk, Plena, Pogo (comic strip), Police Squad!, Polka Party!, Pop art, Postmodern art, Postmodern dance, Postmodern literature, Postmodernism, Postmodernity, Princess Leia, Prisoner (TV series), Progress Quest, Project Steve, Prosh (University of Western Australia), Pseudonym, Puff, the Magic Dragon, Pun, Pyst, Quartetto Cetra, Quest for Glory II: Trial by Fire, Radclyffe Hall, Ramsey Campbell, Rapallo, Real Life (1979 film), Real World (TV series), Red vs. Blue, Reduced Shakespeare Company, Renegades (Rage Against the Machine album), Rhode Island, Ricardo Montalbán, Richard Brautigan, Rick Dees, Right to Censor, Ring Lardner, Ripping Yarns, Rob Lowe, Robert Benchley, Robert Garran, Robert Loggia, Robin Hood Daffy, Robin Hood: Men in Tights, Rockapella, Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose, Rose-Marie, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, Rough for Theatre II, Round the Horne, Rove (TV series), Rove McManus, Rowlf the Dog, Roy Lichtenstein, Running with Scissors ("Weird Al" Yankovic album), Russ Meyer, Russell Crowe, Sam Kinison, Samaire Armstrong, Sancho Panza, Satire, SatireWire, Saturday Night Live Samurai, Saturday-morning cartoon, Satyricon, Scaramouche, Scary Movie, Scary Movie 3, Schott's Miscellany, Science wars, Scooter (band), Scramble band, Scrooge McDuck, Sealab 2021, Second Class Male/Time to Go, Self-help, Senryū, Sentinel (comics), Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, Sex (book), Sharon Watts, Sherlock Holmes, Sherri Martel, Showgirls, Silent Movie, Sim Brick, Simon the Sorcerer, Sir Thopas, Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence, Skippy the Bush Kangaroo, Slade, Slasher film, Slayers, Smashie and Nicey, Soap opera, Son of the Beach, South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut, Soy Sauce Warrior Kikkoman, Spartacus (film), Spermicide, Spider-Man, Spoof, Spoonerism, Spy fiction, Square One Television, Squib (writing), Stan Freberg, Staples Inc., Star Wars, Star Wreck, Stephanie de Sykes, Stephen Foster, Stock character, Straight Plan for the Gay Man, Straight to Hell (film), Subvertising, Suit (cards), Superboy, Sutton Foster, Sweatin' to the Oldies: The Vandals Live, Switch (ad campaign), Talk show, Tannhäuser, Tanya Grotter, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Telethon, Television presentation, Temple garment, Tentacle erotica, Terry Pratchett, Test Card F, Tex Avery, That Peter Kay Thing, That Thing You Do!, That Was the Week That Was, The $1.98 Beauty Show, The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr., The Adventures of Tintin, The Adventures of Willy Beamish, The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents, The Ambiguously Gay Duo, The Antichrist (book), The Apprentice (franchise), The Arrogant Worms, The Bad News Bears, The Barron Knights, The Battle Hymn of the Republic, Updated, The Beautifull Cassandra, The Boomer Bible, The Brak Show, The Burkiss Way, The Chimp Channel, The Choirboys (novel), The ClueFinders 3rd Grade Adventures: The Mystery of Mathra, The Conqueror Worm, The Conquest of Granada, The Crying of Lot 49, The Dark Side of the Sun, The Defiant Ones, The Detectives, The Dunciad, The Family Circus, The Famous Five (novel series), The Firesign Theatre, The Flower Pot Men, The Framley Examiner, The Gallopin' Gaucho, The Graham Norton Effect, The Great Mouse Detective, The Hilarious House of Frightenstein, The Hollow, The Independent, The Joy of Painting, The Kentucky Fried Movie, The Kids in the Hall, The Knight of the Burning Pestle, The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou, The Little Drummer Boy, The Lost Skeleton of Cadavra, The Magic Mountain, The Matrix, The Merv Griffin Show, The Moog Cookbook, The Muppet Show, The Name of the Rose, The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, The Number of the Beast (novel), The Nutty Professor, The O'Reilly Factor, The Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards, The Operative: No One Lives Forever, The Order of the Stick, The Oregon Trail (video game), The Petrified Forest, The Rape of the Lock, The Raven, The Red-Headed League, The Rehearsal (play), The Rocky Horror Picture Show, The Scarlet Pimpernel, The Second City, The Silence of the Lambs (film), The Singing Ringing Tree, The Song of Hiawatha, The Spanish Inquisition (Monty Python), The Sunday Format, The Tall Guy, The Third Reich 'n Roll, The Threepenny Opera, The Tubes, The Tuxedo, The Twelfth Man, The Unknown Citizen, The Wind Done Gone, The Woman Who Did, Thick as a Brick, This Be The Verse, This Hour Has 22 Minutes Direct Hits, This Is Dom Joly, This Morning with Richard Not Judy, Thomas Percy (bishop of Dromore), Thou, Three Laws of Robotics, Thumb Wars, Tick (comics), Time Warp (song), Titus Andronicus, To Kill a Mockingbird, Today Today, Todd Rundgren, Tom Strong, Tom Thumb, Topps, Tower of Babel, Toy Dolls, Tracey Ullman, Translation (rhetoric device), Trigger Happy TV, Tristan chord, Tristan Tzara, Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star, Ulysses (novel), Undercover Brother, Underwater basket weaving, Unicode, United States Secret Service, United States trademark law, University of Florida, Vernon Duke, Veronica Geng, Vexations, VG Cats, Vitamin C (singer), Wacky Packages, Walter Cronkite, Walter Moers, Wannabe, Washoe County, Nevada, We Didn't Start the Fire, We Will Rock You, Weekend Update, Wendy Cope, What Would Brian Boitano Do?, Whirlpool (website), Whistler's Mother, Whodunit, Whole Foods Market, Why Bother? (radio show), Why did the chicken cross the road?, Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner, Will Ferrell, William Devane, William Hone, William Mulready, Windowlicker, Witch Hazel (Looney Tunes), Wonder Twins, WrestleMania 21, WUBL, Www.tism.wanker.com, Yaoi, Yatta (song), Yvon Deschamps, Zaphod Beeblebrox, Zarah Leander, ZeD, Zelig, Zorro, 1066 and All That, 1607 in literature, 1868 in music, 1885 in literature, 1968 in literature, 1994 in music, 2000 AD (comics), 23 skidoo (phrase). Expand index (806 more) » « Shrink index

A cappella

A cappella (Italian for "in the manner of the chapel") music is specifically group or solo singing without instrumental accompaniment, or a piece intended to be performed in this way.

See Parody and A cappella

A Midsummer Night's Dream

A Midsummer Night's Dream is a comedy written by William Shakespeare in 1595/96.

See Parody and A Midsummer Night's Dream

A Tale of a Tub

A Tale of a Tub was the first major work written by Jonathan Swift, arguably his most difficult satire and perhaps his most masterly.

See Parody and A Tale of a Tub

A Trip to the Moon

A Trip to the Moon (Le Voyage dans la Lune) is a 1902 French adventure film directed by Georges Méliès.

See Parody and A Trip to the Moon

A Void

A Void, translated from the original French La Disparition (literally, "The Disappearance"), is a 300-page French lipogrammatic novel, written in 1969 by Georges Perec, entirely without using the letter e (except for the author's name), following Oulipo constraints.

See Parody and A Void

A.M.A.N. (TV series)

A.M.A.N., is a Greek television parody show and the natural continuation of another TV show called Comfusio that was aired by ERT3 in the early 1990s.

See Parody and A.M.A.N. (TV series)

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (also known as Ace Ventura 2 or Ace Ventura 2: When Nature Calls) is a 1995 American comedy film and the sequel to Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (1994).

See Parody and Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls

Action film

Action film is a film genre in which the protagonist or protagonists are thrust into a series of challenges that typically include violence, extended fighting, physical feats, and frantic chases.

See Parody and Action film

Administratium

Administratium is a well-known in-joke in scientific circles and is a parody both on the bureaucracy of scientific establishments and on descriptions of newly discovered chemical elements.

See Parody and Administratium

Aeneid

The Aeneid (Aeneis) is a Latin epic poem, written by Virgil between 29 and 19 BC, that tells the legendary story of Aeneas, a Trojan who travelled to Italy, where he became the ancestor of the Romans.

See Parody and Aeneid

Ahmed Best

Ahmed Best (born August 19, 1973) is an American actor, voice actor, and musician.

See Parody and Ahmed Best

Airplane!

Airplane! (alternatively titled Flying High!) is a 1980 American satirical disaster film written and directed by David and Jerry Zucker and Jim Abrahams, and produced by Jon Davison.

See Parody and Airplane!

Aisling

The aisling (Irish for 'dream, vision'), or vision poem, is a poetic genre that developed during the late 17th and 18th centuries in Irish language poetry.

See Parody and Aisling

Al Murray

Alastair James Hay Murray (born 10 May 1968), is an English comedian and TV personality.

See Parody and Al Murray

Alan Partridge

Alan Gordon Partridge is a character portrayed by English actor and comedian Steve Coogan.

See Parody and Alan Partridge

Alan Whicker

Alan Donald Whicker (2 August 1921 – 12 July 2013) was a British journalist and television presenter and broadcaster.

See Parody and Alan Whicker

Alex Karras

Alexander George Karras (July 15, 1935 – October 10, 2012) was an American football player, professional wrestler, sportscaster, and actor.

See Parody and Alex Karras

Alex Kidd in Shinobi World

Alex Kidd in Shinobi World is a side-scrolling action game produced by Sega that was originally released for the Master System in and later re-released for the Wii Virtual Console in.

See Parody and Alex Kidd in Shinobi World

Alexander Pushkin

Alexander Sergeyevich Pushkin (a) was a Russian poet, playwright, and novelist of the Romantic eraBasker, Michael.

See Parody and Alexander Pushkin

Alexei Sayle

Alexei David Sayle (born 7 August 1952) is an English stand-up comedian, actor, author and former recording artist, and was a central figure in the alternative comedy movement in the 1980s.

See Parody and Alexei Sayle

All About My Mother

All About My Mother (Todo sobre mi madre) is a 1999 Spanish drama film written and directed by Pedro Almodóvar, and starring Cecilia Roth, Marisa Paredes, Antonia San Juan, Penélope Cruz and Candela Peña.

See Parody and All About My Mother

All Aussie Adventures

All Aussie Adventures (also known as Russell Coight's All Aussie Adventures), is an Australian mockumentary television series that parodies the travel-adventure genre.

See Parody and All Aussie Adventures

Allan Sherman

Allan Sherman (born Allan Copelon; November 30, 1924 – November 20, 1973) was an American comedy writer, television producer, singer and actor who became famous as a song parodist in the early 1960s.

See Parody and Allan Sherman

Allusion

Allusion is a figure of speech, in which one refers covertly or indirectly to an object or circumstance from an external context.

See Parody and Allusion

Alt.binaries.slack

alt.binaries.slack is a Usenet newsgroup created for the purpose of posting pictures, sounds, and utilities related to the Church of the SubGenius, making them available for everyone to see and hear.

See Parody and Alt.binaries.slack

Alvin and the Chipmunks

Alvin and the Chipmunks, originally David Seville and the Chipmunks or simply The Chipmunks, is an American animated music group created by Ross Bagdasarian Sr. for a novelty record in 1958.

See Parody and Alvin and the Chipmunks

America (The Book)

America (The Book): A Citizen's Guide to Democracy Inaction is a 2004 humor book written by Jon Stewart and other writers of The Daily Show that parodies and satirizes American politics and worldview.

See Parody and America (The Book)

American Express

The American Express Company, also known as Amex, is an American multinational financial services corporation headquartered in Three World Financial Center in New York City.

See Parody and American Express

American Gothic

American Gothic is a painting by Grant Wood in the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago.

See Parody and American Gothic

Amjad Khan (actor)

Amjad Khan (12 November 1940 – 27 July 1992) was an Indian actor and director.

See Parody and Amjad Khan (actor)

Anagram

An anagram is a word or phrase formed by rearranging the letters of a different word or phrase, typically using all the original letters exactly once.

See Parody and Anagram

Analytical Society

The Analytical Society was a group of individuals in early-19th-century Britain whose aim was to promote the use of Leibnizian notation for differentiation in calculus as opposed to the Newton notation for differentiation.

See Parody and Analytical Society

Anastrophe

Anastrophe (from the ἀναστροφή, anastrophē, "a turning back or about") is a figure of speech in which the normal word order of the subject, the verb and the object is changed.

See Parody and Anastrophe

Andre the Giant Has a Posse

Andre the Giant Has a Posse is a street art campaign based on a design by Shepard Fairey created in 1989 in Providence, Rhode Island.

See Parody and Andre the Giant Has a Posse

Andrew Sachs

Andreas Siegfried "Andrew" Sachs (7 April 1930 – 23 November 2016) was a British actor.

See Parody and Andrew Sachs

Andy Partridge

Andrew John Partridge (born 11 November 1953) is an English singer, songwriter, guitarist, and record producer from Swindon.

See Parody and Andy Partridge

Angus Deayton

Gordon Angus Deayton (born 6 January 1956),is an English actor, writer, musician, comedian, and broadcaster.

See Parody and Angus Deayton

Anime International Company

, often abbreviated as AIC, is a Japanese animation studio with headquarters in Nerima, Tokyo, Japan.

See Parody and Anime International Company

Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier

Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier, (–) known as La Grande Mademoiselle, was the eldest daughter of Gaston d'Orléans, and his first wife Marie de Bourbon, Duchess of Montpensier.

See Parody and Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier

Anthony Kiedis

Anthony Kiedis (born November 1, 1962) is an American musician who is the lead singer and lyricist of the band Red Hot Chili Peppers, which he has fronted since its conception in 1983.

See Parody and Anthony Kiedis

Anti-LGBT rhetoric

Anti-LGBT rhetoric and anti-gay slogans are themes, catchphrases, and slogans that have been used against homosexuality or other non-heterosexual sexual orientations and to demean lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people.

See Parody and Anti-LGBT rhetoric

Antioch

Antioch on the Orontes (Antiókheia je epi Oróntou; also Syrian Antioch)Ἀντιόχεια ἡ ἐπὶ Ὀρόντου; or Ἀντιόχεια ἡ ἐπὶ Δάφνῃ, "Antioch on Daphne"; or Ἀντιόχεια ἡ Μεγάλη, "Antioch the Great"; Antiochia ad Orontem; Անտիոք Antiok; ܐܢܛܝܘܟܝܐ Anṭiokya; Hebrew: אנטיוכיה, Antiyokhya; Arabic: انطاكية, Anṭākiya; انطاکیه; Antakya.

See Parody and Antioch

Antoine de Rivarol

Antoine de Rivarol (26 June 175311 April 1801) was a Royalist French writer during the Revolutionary era.

See Parody and Antoine de Rivarol

Antonio Salieri

Antonio Salieri (18 August 17507 May 1825) was an Italian classical composer, conductor, and teacher.

See Parody and Antonio Salieri

Aphrodite

Aphrodite is the ancient Greek goddess of love, beauty, pleasure, and procreation.

See Parody and Aphrodite

Archie Bunker

Archibald "Archie" Bunker is a fictional character from the 1970s American television sitcom All in the Family and its spin-off Archie Bunker's Place, played by Carroll O'Connor.

See Parody and Archie Bunker

Archpoet

The Archpoet (1130 – c. 1165), or Archipoeta (in Latin and German),Jeep 2001: 21.

See Parody and Archpoet

Aritha Van Herk

Aritha van Herk,, is a Canadian writer, critic, editor, public intellectual, and university professor.

See Parody and Aritha Van Herk

Arnold Schwarzenegger

Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger (born July 30, 1947) is an Austrian-American actor, filmmaker, businessman, investor, author, philanthropist, activist, politician, and former professional bodybuilder and powerlifter.

See Parody and Arnold Schwarzenegger

Art Buchwald

Arthur Buchwald (October 20, 1925 – January 17, 2007) was an American humorist best known for his column in The Washington Post, which in turn was carried as a syndicated column in many other newspapers.

See Parody and Art Buchwald

Art Paul Schlosser

Art Paul Schlosser (born January 4, 1960) as Arthur P. Schlosser is an artist, cartoonist, comedian, journalist, musician, poet, singer, and songwriter based in Madison, Wisconsin.

See Parody and Art Paul Schlosser

Arthur (TV series)

Arthur is a Canadian/American animated educational television series for children ages 4 to 8, created by Cookie Jar Group (formerly known as Cinar) and WGBH for PBS.

See Parody and Arthur (TV series)

Arthur Sullivan

Sir Arthur Seymour Sullivan MVO (13 May 1842 – 22 November 1900) was an English composer.

See Parody and Arthur Sullivan

As Nasty As They Wanna Be

As Nasty As They Wanna Be is the third album by Miami bass group 2 Live Crew.

See Parody and As Nasty As They Wanna Be

Atlantic Records

Atlantic Recording Corporation (simply known as Atlantic Records) is an American major record label founded in October 1947 by Ahmet Ertegün and Herb Abramson.

See Parody and Atlantic Records

Atlantis

Atlantis (Ἀτλαντὶς νῆσος, "island of Atlas") is a fictional island mentioned within an allegory on the hubris of nations in Plato's works Timaeus and Critias, where it represents the antagonist naval power that besieges "Ancient Athens", the pseudo-historic embodiment of Plato's ideal state in The Republic.

See Parody and Atlantis

Attacks on High Wood

The Attacks on High Wood near Bazentin le Petit in the Somme département of northern France took place between the British Fourth Army and the German 1st Army during the Battle of the Somme.

See Parody and Attacks on High Wood

Augustan poetry

In Latin literature, Augustan poetry is the poetry that flourished during the reign of Caesar Augustus as Emperor of Rome, most notably including the works of Virgil, Horace, and Ovid.

See Parody and Augustan poetry

Auguste Rodin

François Auguste René Rodin (12 November 1840 – 17 November 1917), known as Auguste Rodin, was a French sculptor.

See Parody and Auguste Rodin

Austin Powers in Goldmember

Austin Powers in Goldmember is a 2002 American spy action comedy film.

See Parody and Austin Powers in Goldmember

Autobiographical comics

Autobiographical comics (often referred to in the comics field as simply autobio) are autobiography in the form of comic books or comic strips.

See Parody and Autobiographical comics

Bad Hair Day

Bad Hair Day is the ninth studio album by "Weird Al" Yankovic, released on March 12, 1996.

See Parody and Bad Hair Day

Ban This Filth

Ban This Filth was a spoof television programme aired on Channel 4 in October 2004.

See Parody and Ban This Filth

Barbie

Barbie is a fashion doll manufactured by the American toy company Mattel, Inc. and launched in March 1959.

See Parody and Barbie

Barry Mann

Barry Mann (born Barry Imberman; February 9, 1939) is an American songwriter, and part of a successful songwriting partnership with his wife, Cynthia Weil.

See Parody and Barry Mann

Batangas

Batangas, officially known as the Province of Batangas (Lalawigan ng Batangas) is a province in the Philippines located in the Calabarzon region in Luzon.

See Parody and Batangas

Bathos

Bathos (Oxford English Dictionary, 1st ed. "bathos, n. Oxford University Press (Oxford), 1885. βάθος, "depth") is a literary term, coined by Alexander Pope in his 1727 essay "Peri Bathous", to describe amusingly failed attempts at sublimity (i.e., pathos).

See Parody and Bathos

Batman

Batman is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics.

See Parody and Batman

Batmobile

The Batmobile is the fictional car driven by the superhero Batman in American comic books published by DC Comics.

See Parody and Batmobile

Battle Hymn of the Republic

The "Battle Hymn of the Republic," also known as "Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory," outside of the United States, is a lyric by the American writer Julia Ward Howe using the music from the song "John Brown's Body." Howe's more famous lyrics were written in November 1861, and first published in The Atlantic Monthly in February 1862.

See Parody and Battle Hymn of the Republic

BattleBots

BattleBots is an American robot combat television series.

See Parody and BattleBots

Beach Blanket Babylon

Steve Silver's Beach Blanket Babylon is the world's longest-running musical revue.

See Parody and Beach Blanket Babylon

Beetlejuice (TV series)

Beetlejuice is an animated television series that ran from September 9, 1989 to October 26, 1991 on ABC and on Fox from September 9, 1991 to December 6, 1991.

See Parody and Beetlejuice (TV series)

Benjamin Franklin

Benjamin Franklin (April 17, 1790) was an American polymath and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States.

See Parody and Benjamin Franklin

Benny Hill

Alfred Hawthorne "Benny" Hill (21 January 1924 – 20 April 1992) was an English comedian and actor, best remembered for his television programme The Benny Hill Show, an amalgam of slapstick, burlesque, and double entendre in a format that included live comedy and filmed segments, with him at the focus of almost every segment.

See Parody and Benny Hill

Benson (TV series)

Benson is an American sitcom that originally aired on ABC from September 13, 1979, to April 19, 1986.

See Parody and Benson (TV series)

Bert (Sesame Street)

Bert is a muppet character on the long-running children's television show, Sesame Street.

See Parody and Bert (Sesame Street)

Betty White

Betty Marion White Ludden (born January 17, 1922), known professionally as Betty White, is an American actress and comedian, with the longest television career of a female entertainer.

See Parody and Betty White

Between the Lions

Between the Lions is an American children's television series designed to promote reading.

See Parody and Between the Lions

Bicycle Thieves

Bicycle Thieves (Ladri di biciclette; sometimes known in the United States as The Bicycle Thief) is a 1948 Italian film directed by Vittorio De Sica.

See Parody and Bicycle Thieves

Biggles

James Bigglesworth, nicknamed "Biggles", is a fictional pilot and adventurer, the title character and hero of the Biggles series of adventure books, written for young readers by W. E. Johns (1893–1968).

See Parody and Biggles

Bill Bailey

Mark Robert "Bill" Bailey (born 13 January 1965) is an English comedian, musician, singer, actor, TV and radio presenter and author.

See Parody and Bill Bailey

Bill Nye the Science Guy

Bill Nye the Science Guy is an American half-hour live action science program that originally aired on PBS from September 10, 1993 to June 20, 1998 and was also syndicated by Walt Disney Television to local stations.

See Parody and Bill Nye the Science Guy

Bill O'Reilly (political commentator)

William James O'Reilly Jr. (born September 10, 1949) is an American journalist, author, and former television host.

See Parody and Bill O'Reilly (political commentator)

Bill Oddie

William Edgar Oddie, (born 7 July 1941) is an English writer, composer, musician, comedian, artist, birder, conservationist, television presenter and actor.

See Parody and Bill Oddie

Bill Tidy

William Edward "Bill" Tidy, MBE (born 9 October 1933), is a British cartoonist, writer and television personality, known chiefly for his comic strips.

See Parody and Bill Tidy

Black Mass

A Black Mass is a ritual characterized by the inversion of the Traditional Latin Mass celebrated by the Roman Catholic Church.

See Parody and Black Mass

Blazing Transfer Student

is a manga written and illustrated by Kazuhiko Shimamoto.

See Parody and Blazing Transfer Student

Blood Simple

Blood Simple is a 1984 American neo-noir crime film written, edited, produced, and directed by Joel and Ethan Coen.

See Parody and Blood Simple

Bob and Doug McKenzie

Bob and Doug McKenzie are a pair of fictional Canadian brothers who hosted "Great White North", a sketch which was introduced on SCTV for the show's third season when it moved to CBC Television in 1980.

See Parody and Bob and Doug McKenzie

Bob Rivers

Robert Rivers (born July 7, 1956 in Branford, Connecticut) is a retired American rock and roll radio on-air personality in the Pacific Northwest, as well as a prolific producer and songwriter of parody songs, most famous for his Christmas song parodies.

See Parody and Bob Rivers

Boba Fett

Boba Fett is a fictional character and bounty hunter in the ''Star Wars'' franchise.

See Parody and Boba Fett

Borås

Borås is a city (officially, a locality) and the seat of Borås Municipality, Västra Götaland County, Sweden.

See Parody and Borås

Bradley Whitford

Bradley Whitford (born October 10, 1959) is an American actor and political activist.

See Parody and Bradley Whitford

Brian Bolland

Brian Bolland (born 26 March 1951)Salisbury, Mark, Artists on Comic Art (Titan Books, 2000), p. 11 is a British comics artist.

See Parody and Brian Bolland

Brian Dennehy

Brian Manion Dennehy (born July 9, 1938) is an American actor of film, stage, and television.

See Parody and Brian Dennehy

British humour

British humour is shaped by the relative stability of British society and carries a strong element of satire aimed at "the absurdity of everyday life".

See Parody and British humour

British literature

British literature is literature in the English language from the United Kingdom, Isle of Man, and Channel Islands.

See Parody and British literature

Brobdingnagian Bards

The Brobdingnagian Bards were a Celtic music group from Austin, Texas, United States.

See Parody and Brobdingnagian Bards

Bruce Willis

Walter Bruce Willis (born March 19, 1955) is an American actor, producer, and singer.

See Parody and Bruce Willis

Brujeria (band)

Brujeria is a Mexican extreme metal band formed in Tijuana, Mexico in 1989.

See Parody and Brujeria (band)

Buddy DeSylva

George Gard "Buddy" DeSylva (January 27, 1895 – July 11, 1950) was an American songwriter, film producer and record executive.

See Parody and Buddy DeSylva

Burlesque

A burlesque is a literary, dramatic or musical work intended to cause laughter by caricaturing the manner or spirit of serious works, or by ludicrous treatment of their subjects.

See Parody and Burlesque

Buster Keaton

Joseph Frank "Buster" Keaton (October 4, 1895 – February 1, 1966) was an American actor, comedian, film director, producer, screenwriter, and stunt performer.

See Parody and Buster Keaton

Cabbage Patch Kids

Cabbage Patch Kids are a line of soft sculptured doll-like creatures sold by Xavier Roberts and registered in the United States copyright office in 1978.

See Parody and Cabbage Patch Kids

Cadence Records

Cadence Records was an American record company based in New York City whose labels had a picture of a metronome.

See Parody and Cadence Records

Call Me Madam

Call Me Madam is a musical based on a book by Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse with music and lyrics by Irving Berlin.

See Parody and Call Me Madam

Cannibal! The Musical

Cannibal! The Musical (originally known as Alferd Packer: The Musical) is a 1993 American independent black comedy horror musical film directed, written, produced, co-scored by and starring Trey Parker while studying at the University of Colorado at Boulder, before reaching fame with South Park alongside his friend Matt Stone who also stars in and produced the film.

See Parody and Cannibal! The Musical

Carl Michael Bellman

Carl Michael Bellman (4 February 1740 – 11 February 1795) was a Swedish songwriter, composer, musician, poet and entertainer.

See Parody and Carl Michael Bellman

Carol Burnett

Carol Creighton Burnett (born April 26, 1933) is an American actress, comedian, singer and writer, whose career spans seven decades of television.

See Parody and Carol Burnett

Carrie Donovan

Carrie Donovan (March 22, 1928 &ndash; November 12, 2001) was an American fashion editor for Vogue, Harper's Bazaar and The New York Times Magazine.

See Parody and Carrie Donovan

Casey at the Bat

"Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic Sung in the Year 1888" is a baseball poem written in 1888 by Ernest Thayer.

See Parody and Casey at the Bat

Castlevania

Castlevania is a series of gothic fantasy action-adventure video games created and developed by Konami, centered on the Belmont family, a clan of vampire hunters, and their fight with Dracula.

See Parody and Castlevania

Cat Claw

Cat Claw is a fictional comic book superhero created by Serbian artist Branislav Kerac and writer Svetozar Obradović.

See Parody and Cat Claw

Cathryn Damon

Cathryn Lee Damon (September 11, 1930 &ndash; May 4, 1987) was an American actress, best known for her roles on television sitcoms in the 1970s and 1980s.

See Parody and Cathryn Damon

Cecil Turtle

Cecil Turtle is an animated cartoon character in the Warner Bros. Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies series of films.

See Parody and Cecil Turtle

Celebrity Deathmatch

Celebrity Deathmatch is an American stop-motion animated series created by Eric Fogel for MTV. A parody of sports entertainment programs, Celebrity Deathmatch depicts various celebrities engaging in highly stylized professional wrestling matches. The series is known for its large amount of bloody violence, including combatants employing different abilities and weapons to deliver particularly brutal attacks, resulting in exaggerated physical injuries. Two television pilots were broadcast on MTV on January 1 and 25, 1998. The series proper premiered on May 14, 1998, and ended on October 20, 2002, airing for 75 episodes. A television special, Celebrity Deathmatch Hits Germany, aired on June 21, 2001. For a brief period during that year, reruns of the series aired on broadcast network UPN. Professional wrestler Stone Cold Steve Austin portrayed a fictionalized version of himself as a guest commentator. Early in 2003, a film based on the series was announced by MTV to be in production, but the project was canceled by the end of the year. In 2005, MTV2 announced the revival of the show as part of their Sic 'Em Friday programming block. Originally set to return in November 2005, the premiere was pushed back to June 10, 2006 as part of a block with two other animated series, Where My Dogs At? and The Adventures of Chico and Guapo. The revival series was produced without any involvement from Fogel. The series' fourth and fifth seasons were produced by Cuppa Coffee Studios, and the premiere drew over 2.5 million viewers, becoming MTV2's highest rated season premiere ever. It was canceled again in 2007. In April 2015, MTV2 announced a reboot of the series. However, in November 2016, Fogel stated via Twitter that MTV did not pick up the pilot to series.

See Parody and Celebrity Deathmatch

Celebrity sex tape

A celebrity sex tape is typically an amateur pornographic video recording involving one or more famous people which has, intentionally or unintentionally, been made available publicly.

See Parody and Celebrity sex tape

Cerebus the Aardvark

Cerebus (also Cerebus the Aardvark) is a comic book series created by Canadian cartoonist Dave Sim, which ran from December 1977 until March 2004.

See Parody and Cerebus the Aardvark

Chanson de geste

The chanson de geste, Old French for "song of heroic deeds" (from gesta: Latin: "deeds, actions accomplished"), is a medieval narrative, a type of epic poem that appears at the dawn of French literature.

See Parody and Chanson de geste

Charles Beaumont

Charles Beaumont (January 2, 1929 – February 21, 1967) was an American author of speculative fiction, including short stories in the horror and science fiction subgenres.

See Parody and Charles Beaumont

Charles Napier (actor)

Charles Lewis Napier (April 12, 1936 – October 5, 2011) was an American character actor and voice actor in film and television, known for his prolific career playing memorable supporting and leading roles in genre cinema, often in the role of a cop, soldier, or authority figure.

See Parody and Charles Napier (actor)

Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset

Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset and 1st Earl of Middlesex, KG (24 January 1643 &ndash; 29 January 1706) was an English poet and courtier.

See Parody and Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset

Charlie Drake

Charles Edward Springall (19 June 1925 – 23 December 2006), known professionally as Charlie Drake, was an English comedian, actor, writer and singer.

See Parody and Charlie Drake

Cheapass Games

Cheapass Games is a game company founded and run by game designer James Ernest, based in Seattle, Washington.

See Parody and Cheapass Games

Chespirito

Roberto Gómez Bolaños (21 February 1929 – 28 November 2014), more commonly known by his stage name Chespirito, or "Little Shakespeare" was a Mexican screenwriter, actor, comedian, film director, television director, playwright, songwriter, and author.

See Parody and Chespirito

Chicken Tonight

Chicken Tonight is a brand of sauce intended to be added to chicken pieces in a skillet, available in flavors such as Honey & Mustard, Country French and Thai Green Curry.

See Parody and Chicken Tonight

Children's Hour with Armstrong and Miller

Children's Hour with Armstrong and Miller is a British four-part comedy programme broadcast on BBC Radio 4 between 2 December 1998 and 30 December 1998.

See Parody and Children's Hour with Armstrong and Miller

Ching chong

Ching chong and ching chang chong are pejorative terms sometimes employed by speakers of English to mock or play on the Chinese language, people of Chinese ancestry, or other East Asians perceived to be Chinese.

See Parody and Ching chong

Chris Morris (satirist)

Christopher J Morris (born 15 June 1962) is an English comedian, writer, director, actor, voice actor, and producer.

See Parody and Chris Morris (satirist)

Chris Moyles

Christopher Moyles (born 22 February 1974) is an English radio and television presenter, author, and presenter of The Chris Moyles Show on Radio X. Previously he has presented The Chris Moyles Show on BBC Radio 1 from 2004 to 2012 and Chris Moyles' Quiz Night between 2009 and 2012 on Channel 4.

See Parody and Chris Moyles

Chuckle Brothers

Barry David Elliott (born 24 December 1944) and Paul Harman Elliott (born 18 October 1947) are English children's entertainers, better known as Barry Chuckle and Paul Chuckle as the double-act the Chuckle Brothers.

See Parody and Chuckle Brothers

Chyna

Chyna (born Joan Marie Laurer; December 27, 1969 – April 20, 2016) was an American professional wrestler, glamour model, pornographic film actress, and bodybuilder.

See Parody and Chyna

Civil disobedience

Civil disobedience is the active, professed refusal of a citizen to obey certain laws, demands, orders or commands of a government or occupying international power.

See Parody and Civil disobedience

ClayFighter 63⅓

ClayFighter 63⅓ is a fighting video game developed and published by Interplay Productions for the Nintendo 64 (N64) video game console in 1997.

See Parody and ClayFighter 63⅓

Clodagh Rodgers

Clodagh Rodgers (born 5 March 1947) is a singer and actress from Northern Ireland, best known for her hit singles including "Come Back and Shake Me", "Goodnight Midnight", and "Jack in the Box".

See Parody and Clodagh Rodgers

Clone High

Clone High (occasionally referred to in the U.S. as Clone High U.S.A.) is a Canadian–American adult animated television series created by Phil Lord, Christopher Miller and Bill Lawrence.

See Parody and Clone High

Cock rock

Cock rock is a genre of rock music that emphasises a form of male sexuality.

See Parody and Cock rock

Codex Seraphinianus

Codex Seraphinianus, originally published in 1981, is an illustrated encyclopedia of an imaginary world, created by the Italian artist, architect, and industrial designer Luigi Serafini during thirty months, from 1976 to 1978.

See Parody and Codex Seraphinianus

Colleen Moore

Colleen Moore (born Kathleen Morrison, August 19, 1899 &ndash; January 25, 1988) was an American film actress who began her career during the silent film era.

See Parody and Colleen Moore

Colley Cibber

Colley Cibber (6 November 1671 – 11 December 1757) was an English actor-manager, playwright and Poet Laureate.

See Parody and Colley Cibber

Comic Party

, sometimes abbreviated to ComiPa, is a romantic adventure and dating sim video game by the Japanese game studio Leaf.

See Parody and Comic Party

Comic Relief

Comic Relief is an operating British charity, and an independent sister organization of the United States-based Comic Relief Inc. It was founded in 1985 by the comedy scriptwriter Richard Curtis and comedian Lenny Henry in response to famine in Ethiopia.

See Parody and Comic Relief

Common starling

The common starling (Sturnus vulgaris), also known as the European starling, or in the British Isles just the starling, is a medium-sized passerine bird in the starling family, Sturnidae.

See Parody and Common starling

Compatible Time-Sharing System

The Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS), was one of the first time-sharing operating systems; it was developed at the MIT Computation Center.

See Parody and Compatible Time-Sharing System

Conan the Librarian

Conan the Librarian is a common and perennial parody of Robert E. Howard's Conan the Barbarian that has become a literary trope, and has appeared in various media, including film, radio, television, comics, and fan fiction.

See Parody and Conan the Librarian

Cone of Silence (Get Smart)

The Cone of Silence is one of many recurring joke devices from Get Smart, an American comedy television series of the 1960s about an inept spy.

See Parody and Cone of Silence (Get Smart)

Conker's Bad Fur Day

Conker's Bad Fur Day is a platformer video game developed by Rare and released for the Nintendo 64 console in 2001.

See Parody and Conker's Bad Fur Day

Connie Willis

Constance Elaine Trimmer Willis (born December 31, 1945), commonly known as Connie Willis, is an American science fiction and fantasy writer.

See Parody and Connie Willis

Coolio

Artis Leon Ivey Jr. (born August 1, 1963), known professionally as Coolio, is an American rapper, actor, chef, and record producer.

See Parody and Coolio

Copyright

Copyright is a legal right, existing globally in many countries, that basically grants the creator of an original work exclusive rights to determine and decide whether, and under what conditions, this original work may be used by others.

See Parody and Copyright

Corazon Aquino

Maria Corazon "Cory" Sumulong Cojuangco Aquino (January 25, 1933 – August 1, 2009) was a Filipina politician who served as the 11th President of the Philippines and the first woman to hold that office.

See Parody and Corazon Aquino

Corey Clark

Corey Delaney Clark (born July 13, 1980) is an American singer.

See Parody and Corey Clark

Cosgrove Hall Films

Cosgrove Hall Films (also known as Cosgrove Hall Productions) was a British animation studio founded by Brian Cosgrove and Mark Hall; its headquarters was in Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Manchester.

See Parody and Cosgrove Hall Films

Counterculture

A counterculture (also written counter-culture) is a subculture whose values and norms of behavior differ substantially from those of mainstream society, often in opposition to mainstream cultural mores.

See Parody and Counterculture

Cracking joints

The act of cracking joints means bending a person's joints to produce a distinct cracking or popping sound, often followed by a feeling of satisfaction or relaxation to the person.

See Parody and Cracking joints

Crazy Eddie

Crazy Eddie was a consumer electronics chain in the Northeastern United States.

See Parody and Crazy Eddie

Crime fiction

Crime fiction is the literary genre that fictionalises crimes, their detection, criminals, and their motives.

See Parody and Crime fiction

Crossover (fiction)

A crossover is the placement of two or more otherwise discrete fictional characters, settings, or universes into the context of a single story.

See Parody and Crossover (fiction)

Cultural depictions of Napoleon

Napoleon I, Emperor of the French, has become a worldwide cultural icon generally associated with tactical brilliance, ambition and political power.

See Parody and Cultural depictions of Napoleon

Culture of Greece

The culture of Greece has evolved over thousands of years, beginning in Mycenaean Greece, continuing most notably into Classical Greece, through the influence of the Roman Empire and its successor the Byzantine Empire.

See Parody and Culture of Greece

Cutey Bunny

Cutey Bunny is a funny animal superheroine created by Joshua Quagmire for a humorous line of American underground comic books that first appeared through Army Surplus Komikz, which ran sporadically for five issues from 1982 to 1985.

See Parody and Cutey Bunny

Dalek

The Daleks are a fictional extraterrestrial race of mutants principally portrayed in the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who.

See Parody and Dalek

Danger Mouse (1981 TV series)

Danger Mouse is a British animated television series produced by Cosgrove Hall Films for Thames Television.

See Parody and Danger Mouse (1981 TV series)

Danny Hellman

Danny Hellman (born August 2, 1964).

See Parody and Danny Hellman

Danny Strong

Daniel W. Strong (born June 6, 1974) is an American actor, screenwriter, television director, film director, and producer.

See Parody and Danny Strong

Dare to Be Stupid

Dare to Be Stupid is the third studio album by "Weird Al" Yankovic, released on June 18, 1985.

See Parody and Dare to Be Stupid

Darrell Waltrip

Darrell Lee Waltrip (born February 5, 1947) is an American motorsports analyst, author, national television broadcaster, and former racing driver.

See Parody and Darrell Waltrip

Dave Barry

David McAlister Barry (born July 3, 1947) is a Pulitzer Prize-winning American author and columnist who wrote a nationally syndicated humor column for the Miami Herald from 1983 to 2005.

See Parody and Dave Barry

Dave Sim

Dave Sim (born 17 May 1956) is a Canadian cartoonist and publisher, best known for his comic book Cerebus, his artistic experimentation, his advocacy of self-publishing and creator's rights, and his controversial political, philosophical and religious beliefs.

See Parody and Dave Sim

David Foster Wallace

David Foster Wallace (February 21, 1962 – September 12, 2008) was an American writer and university instructor in the disciplines of English and creative writing.

See Parody and David Foster Wallace

David Horowitz (consumer advocate)

David Charles Horowitz (born June 30, 1937) is an American consumer reporter and former journalist for KNBC-TV in Los Angeles, whose Emmy-winning TV program Fight Back! would warn viewers about defective products, test advertised claims to see if they were true, and confront corporations about customer complaints.

See Parody and David Horowitz (consumer advocate)

David Langford

David Rowland Langford (born 10 April 1953) is a British author, editor and critic, largely active within the science fiction field.

See Parody and David Langford

David Renwick

David Peter Renwick (born 4 September 1951) is an English television writer, best known for creation of the sitcom One Foot in the Grave and the mystery series Jonathan Creek.

See Parody and David Renwick

David Walliams

David Edward Williams (born 20 August 1971), known professionally as David Walliams, is an English comedian, actor, author, and presenter known for his partnership with Matt Lucas on the BBC One sketch show Little Britain. Since 2012, Walliams has been a judge on the ITV talent show: Britain's Got Talent.

See Parody and David Walliams

Détournement

A détournement, meaning "rerouting, hijacking" in French, is a technique developed in the 1950s by the Letterist International, and later adapted by the Situationist International (SI),Report on the Construction of Situations (1957) that was defined in the SI's inaugural 1958 journal as "he integration of present or past artistic productions into a superior construction of a milieu.

See Parody and Détournement

Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid

Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid is a 1982 comedy-mystery film directed by Carl Reiner.

See Parody and Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid

Dean Malenko

Dean Simon (born August 4, 1960) is an American retired professional wrestler, better known by his ring name Dean Malenko.

See Parody and Dean Malenko

Dean Martin

Dean Martin (born Dino Paul Crocetti; June 7, 1917 – December 25, 1995) was an American singer, actor, comedian and film producer.

See Parody and Dean Martin

Death (Discworld)

Death is a fictional character in Terry Pratchett's Discworld series and a parody of several other personifications of death.

See Parody and Death (Discworld)

Del's

Del's is a brand of frozen lemonade typically found in Rhode Island and southeastern Massachusetts during the summer months.

See Parody and Del's

Demi Moore

Demi Gene Guynes (born November 11, 1962), professionally known as Demi Moore, is an American actress, former songwriter, and model.

See Parody and Demi Moore

Derek Nimmo

Derek Robert Nimmo (19 September 193024 February 1999) was an English character actor, producer and author.

See Parody and Derek Nimmo

Despair, Inc.

Despair, Inc is a company based in Austin, Texas, that produces posters and souvenirs that satirize the motivational indoctrination common in corporate environments. They are known for their cynical and ironic "Demotivator" items, which parody the grandiose imagery and solemn language of Successories, a range of motivational products. Examples.

See Parody and Despair, Inc.

Desperate Housewives

Desperate Housewives is an American television comedy-drama and mystery series created by Marc Cherry and produced by ABC Studios and Cherry Productions.

See Parody and Desperate Housewives

Diabelli Variations

The 33 Variations on a waltz by Anton Diabelli, Op.

See Parody and Diabelli Variations

Dick & Dom in da Bungalow

Dick & Dom in da Bungalow was a CBBC entertainment television series presented by the duo Dick and Dom (Richard McCourt and Dominic Wood).

See Parody and Dick & Dom in da Bungalow

Dick Tracy

Dick Tracy is an American comic strip featuring Dick Tracy (originally Plainclothes Tracy), a tough and intelligent police detective created by Chester Gould.

See Parody and Dick Tracy

Disgaea: Hour of Darkness

is a tactical role-playing video game developed and published by Nippon Ichi Software for the Sony PlayStation 2 video game console.

See Parody and Disgaea: Hour of Darkness

Disumbrationism

Disumbrationism was a hoax masquerading as an art movement that was launched in 1924 by Paul Jordan-Smith, a novelist, Latin scholar, and authority on Robert Burton from Los Angeles, California.

See Parody and Disumbrationism

Doctor Who

Doctor Who is a British science-fiction television programme produced by the BBC since 1963.

See Parody and Doctor Who

Doctor Who: The Curse of Fatal Death

Doctor Who: The Curse of Fatal Death is a Doctor Who special made for the Red Nose Day charity telethon in the United Kingdom, and was originally broadcast in four parts on BBC One on 12 March 1999 under the title Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death.

See Parody and Doctor Who: The Curse of Fatal Death

Dom Joly

Dominic John Romulus Joly (born 15 November 1967) is an English television comedian and journalist, best known as the star of Trigger Happy TV, a hidden camera show that was sold to over seventy countries worldwide.

See Parody and Dom Joly

Don Imus

John Donald Imus Jr. (born July 23, 1940) is a former American radio host and humorist.

See Parody and Don Imus

Don Quixote

The Ingenious Nobleman Sir Quixote of La Mancha (El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha), or just Don Quixote (Oxford English Dictionary, ""), is a Spanish novel by Miguel de Cervantes.

See Parody and Don Quixote

Down and Out in Paris and London

Down and Out in Paris and London is the first full-length work by the English author George Orwell, published in 1933.

See Parody and Down and Out in Paris and London

Down Periscope

Down Periscope is a 1996 American military comedy film from 20th Century Fox, produced by Robert Lawrence, directed by David S. Ward, that stars Kelsey Grammer, Lauren Holly, and Rob Schneider.

See Parody and Down Periscope

Dr. Demento

Barret Eugene "Barry" Hansen (born April 2, 1941), better known as Dr.

See Parody and Dr. Demento

Dr. Seuss

Theodor Seuss Geisel (March 2, 1904 – September 24, 1991) was an American author, political cartoonist, poet, animator, book publisher, and artist, best known for authoring more than 60 children's books under the pen name Doctor Seuss (abbreviated Dr. Seuss).

See Parody and Dr. Seuss

Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem

Dr.

See Parody and Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem

Dracula: Dead and Loving It

Dracula: Dead and Loving It is a 1995 satirical comedy horror film directed by Mel Brooks and starring Leslie Nielsen.

See Parody and Dracula: Dead and Loving It

Dragnet (franchise)

Dragnet was an American radio, television, and motion-picture series, enacting the cases of a dedicated Los Angeles police detective, Sergeant Joe Friday, and his partners.

See Parody and Dragnet (franchise)

Dragon Ball (manga)

is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Akira Toriyama.

See Parody and Dragon Ball (manga)

Drawn Together

Drawn Together is an American adult animated sitcom that ran on Comedy Central from October 27, 2004 to November 14, 2007.

See Parody and Drawn Together

Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century

Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century (spoken as "twenty-fourth-and-a-half") is a 1952 Merrie Melodies color cartoon from Warner Bros., first released on July 25, 1953, that stars Daffy Duck as space hero Duck Dodgers, Porky Pig as his assistant, and Marvin the Martian as his opponent.

See Parody and Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century

Dune (franchise)

Dune is a science fiction media franchise that originated with the 1965 novel Dune by Frank Herbert.

See Parody and Dune (franchise)

Dwarfs (Discworld)

Dwarfs in Terry Pratchett's Discworld novels are similar to the Dwarves of J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth, to which they largely started out as a homage, and dwarves in other fantasy novels.

See Parody and Dwarfs (Discworld)

Dysfunctional Family Circus

The Dysfunctional Family Circus is the name of several long-running parodies of the syndicated comic strip The Family Circus, featuring either Bil Keane's artwork with altered captions, or (less often) original artwork made to appear like the targeted strips.

See Parody and Dysfunctional Family Circus

E. L. Doctorow

Edgar Lawrence Doctorow (January 6, 1931 – July 21, 2015) was an American novelist, editor, and professor, best known internationally for his works of historical fiction.

See Parody and E. L. Doctorow

Eamon Dunphy

Eamon Martin Dunphy (born 3 August 1945) is an Irish media personality, journalist, broadcaster, author, sports pundit and former professional footballer.

See Parody and Eamon Dunphy

EarthBound

EarthBound, also known as Mother 2 in Japan, is a 1994 Japanese role-playing video game co-developed by Ape Inc. and HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game console.

See Parody and EarthBound

Eat It

"Eat It" is a 1984 song by comedy music artist "Weird Al" Yankovic.

See Parody and Eat It

Ed Wood (film)

Ed Wood is a 1994 American biographical comedy-drama film directed and produced by Tim Burton and starring Johnny Depp as the eponymous cult filmmaker.

See Parody and Ed Wood (film)

Eddie Vedder

Eddie Vedder (born Edward Louis Severson III; December 23, 1964) is an American musician, multi-instrumentalist and singer-songwriter best known as the lead vocalist and one of three guitarists of the American rock band Pearl Jam.

See Parody and Eddie Vedder

Edgar Guest

Edgar Albert Guest (20 August 1881 in Birmingham, England &ndash; 5 August 1959 in Detroit, Michigan) was a prolific English-born American poet who was popular in the first half of the 20th century and became known as the People's Poet.

See Parody and Edgar Guest

Edward Platt

Edward Cuthbert Platt (February 14, 1916 – March 19, 1974) was an American actor best known for his portrayal of "The Chief" in the 1965-70 NBC/CBS television series Get Smart.

See Parody and Edward Platt

Efrem Zimbalist Jr.

Efrem Zimbalist Jr. (November 30, 1918 – May 2, 2014) was an American actor known for his starring roles in the television series 77 Sunset Strip and The F.B.I. He is also known as recurring character "Dandy Jim Buckley" in the series Maverick and as the voice behind the character Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: The Animated Series and associated spin-offs.

See Parody and Efrem Zimbalist Jr.

Eh

Eh is a spoken interjection in English that is similar in meaning to "Excuse me?," "Please repeat that", or "Huh?".

See Parody and Eh

El Chapulín Colorado

El Chapulín Colorado (The Red Grasshopper or as Captain Hopper in the English version of El Chavo: Animated Series) is a Mexican television comedy series that ran from 1973 to 1979 and parodied superhero shows.

See Parody and El Chapulín Colorado

El Mariachi

El Mariachi is a 1992 Mexican-American contemporary western action film and the first installment in the saga that came to be known as Robert Rodriguez's Mexico Trilogy.

See Parody and El Mariachi

Electric Light Orchestra

The Electric Light Orchestra (ELO) are an English rock band formed in Birmingham in 1970, by songwriters/multi-instrumentalists Jeff Lynne and Roy Wood with drummer Bev Bevan.

See Parody and Electric Light Orchestra

ELIZA

ELIZA is an early natural language processing computer program created from 1964 to 1966 at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory by Joseph Weizenbaum.

See Parody and ELIZA

Elvis impersonator

An Elvis impersonator is someone who impersonates or copies the look and sound of musician Elvis Presley.

See Parody and Elvis impersonator

Embryons desséchés

Embryons desséchés ("Desiccated embryos") is a piano composition by Erik Satie, composed in the summer of 1913.

See Parody and Embryons desséchés

Empress Elisabeth of Austria

Elisabeth of Bavaria (24 December 1837 – 10 September 1898) was Empress of Austria and Queen of Hungary, and many other titles by marriage to Emperor Franz Joseph I. Elisabeth was born into the royal Bavarian house of Wittelsbach.

See Parody and Empress Elisabeth of Austria

English novel

The English novel is an important part of English literature.

See Parody and English novel

Enter the Dragon

Enter the Dragon is a 1973 Hong Kong-American martial arts action film, directed by Robert Clouse, and starring Bruce Lee, John Saxon, and Jim Kelly.

See Parody and Enter the Dragon

Entertainment

Entertainment is a form of activity that holds the attention and interest of an audience, or gives pleasure and delight.

See Parody and Entertainment

Eric (novel)

Eric, stylized as Faust Eric, is the ninth Discworld novel by Terry Pratchett.

See Parody and Eric (novel)

Eric the Unready

Eric the Unready is an adventure game developed and published by Legend Entertainment for MS-DOS in 1993.

See Parody and Eric the Unready

Ernie Kovacs

Ernest Edward "Ernie" Kovacs (January 23, 1919 – January 13, 1962) was an American comedian, actor, and writer.

See Parody and Ernie Kovacs

Ernst Stavro Blofeld

Ernst Stavro Blofeld is a fictional character and villain from the James Bond series of novels and films, created by Ian Fleming.

See Parody and Ernst Stavro Blofeld

Esoteric programming language

An esoteric programming language (sometimes shortened to esolang) is a programming language designed to test the boundaries of computer programming language design, as a proof of concept, as software art, as a hacking interface to another language (particularly functional programming or procedural programming languages), or as a joke.

See Parody and Esoteric programming language

Ethel Merman

Ethel Merman (born Ethel Agnes Zimmermann, January 16, 1908 – February 15, 1984) was an American actress and singer.

See Parody and Ethel Merman

Even Worse

Even Worse is the fifth studio album by "Weird Al" Yankovic, released on April 12, 1988.

See Parody and Even Worse

Excel Saga

is a manga series written and illustrated by Kōshi Rikudō.

See Parody and Excel Saga

F.E.A.R.

F.E.A.R. First Encounter Assault Recon is a horror first-person shooter video game developed by Monolith Productions and published by Vivendi Universal Games and Warner Bros. Games.

See Parody and F.E.A.R.

Fair use

Fair use is a doctrine in the law of the United States that permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder.

See Parody and Fair use

Farscape

Farscape is an Australian-American science fiction television series, produced originally for the Nine Network.

See Parody and Farscape

Father Ted

Father Ted is a British sitcom that was produced by British independent production company Hat Trick Productions for Channel 4.

See Parody and Father Ted

Fear of a Punk Planet

Fear of a Punk Planet is the third album by the southern California punk rock band The Vandals, originally released in 1990 by Triple X Records.

See Parody and Fear of a Punk Planet

Fear of the Dark (Iron Maiden album)

Fear of the Dark is the ninth studio album released by English heavy metal band Iron Maiden.

See Parody and Fear of the Dark (Iron Maiden album)

Fearless Fosdick

Fearless Fosdick is a long-running parody of Chester Gould's Dick Tracy.

See Parody and Fearless Fosdick

Ferdinando Galiani

Ferdinando Galiani (2 December 1728, Chieti, Kingdom of Naples – 30 October 1787, Naples, Kingdom of Naples) was an Italian economist, a leading Italian figure of the Enlightenment.

See Parody and Ferdinando Galiani

Fernando Meirelles

Fernando Ferreira Meirelles (born November 9, 1955) is a Brazilian film director, producer and screenwriter.

See Parody and Fernando Meirelles

Festivus

Festivus is a secular holiday celebrated on December 23 as an alternative to the pressures and commercialism of the Christmas season.

See Parody and Festivus

Fictional country

A fictional country is a country that is made up for fictional stories, and does not exist in real life, or one that people believe in without proof.

See Parody and Fictional country

Fictional universe

A fictional universe is a self-consistent setting with events, and often other elements, that differ from the real world.

See Parody and Fictional universe

Fictitious entry

Fictitious or fake entries are deliberately incorrect entries in reference works such as dictionaries, encyclopedias, maps, and directories.

See Parody and Fictitious entry

Figure of speech

A figure of speech or rhetorical figure is figurative language in the form of a single word or phrase.

See Parody and Figure of speech

Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children

Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children is a 2005 Japanese computer-animated film directed by Tetsuya Nomura, written by Kazushige Nojima, and produced by Yoshinori Kitase and Shinji Hashimoto.

See Parody and Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children

First Amendment to the United States Constitution

The First Amendment (Amendment I) to the United States Constitution prevents Congress from making any law respecting an establishment of religion, prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, the freedom of the press, the right to peaceably assemble, or to petition for a governmental redress of grievances.

See Parody and First Amendment to the United States Constitution

Fishbone

Fishbone is an American band formed in 1979 in Los Angeles, California, which plays a fusion of ska, punk rock, funk, heavy rock, and soul.

See Parody and Fishbone

Fitzcarraldo

Fitzcarraldo is a 1982 West German adventure-drama film written and directed by Werner Herzog and starring Klaus Kinski as the title character.

See Parody and Fitzcarraldo

Flaming Carrot Comics

Flaming Carrot Comics is a comic book series by cartoonist Bob Burden.

See Parody and Flaming Carrot Comics

Folsom Street Fair

Folsom Street Fair (FSF) is an annual BDSM and leather subculture street fair held in September, that caps San Francisco's "Leather Pride Week".

See Parody and Folsom Street Fair

Ford Popular

The Ford Popular, often called the Ford Pop, is a car from Ford UK that was built in England between 1953 and 1962.

See Parody and Ford Popular

Formula fiction

In popular culture, formula fiction is literature in which the storylines and plots have been reused to the extent that the narratives are predictable.

See Parody and Formula fiction

Foul Play (1978 film)

Foul Play is a 1978 American comedy mystery-thriller film written and directed by Colin Higgins, and starring Goldie Hawn, Chevy Chase, Dudley Moore, Burgess Meredith, Eugene Roche, Rachel Roberts, Brian Dennehy and Billy Barty.

See Parody and Foul Play (1978 film)

Frank Frazetta

Frank Frazetta (born Frank Frazzetta; February 9, 1928 – May 10, 2010) was an American fantasy and science fiction artist, noted for comic books, paperback book covers, paintings, posters, LP record album covers and other media.

See Parody and Frank Frazetta

Frédéric Chopin

Frédéric François Chopin (1 March 181017 October 1849) was a Polish composer and virtuoso pianist of the Romantic era who wrote primarily for solo piano.

See Parody and Frédéric Chopin

Freakazoid!

Freakazoid! is an American animated television series created by Bruce Timm and Paul Dini and developed by Tom Ruegger for the Kids' WB programming block of The WB.

See Parody and Freakazoid!

Fred Karno

Frederick John Westcott (26 March 1866 – 18 September 1941), best known by his stage name Fred Karno, was an English theatre impresario of the British music hall.

See Parody and Fred Karno

Fred Wedlock

Fred Wedlock (23 May 1942 &ndash; 4 March 2010) was a folk singer best known for his UK hit single "The Oldest Swinger In Town".

See Parody and Fred Wedlock

French and Saunders

French and Saunders is a British sketch comedy television series written by and starring comic duo Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders.

See Parody and French and Saunders

Friedrich Schiller

Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller (10 November 17599 May 1805) was a German poet, philosopher, physician, historian, and playwright.

See Parody and Friedrich Schiller

Fritz Spiegl

Fritz Spiegl (27 January 1926 – 23 March 2003) was a musician, journalist, broadcaster, humorist and collector who lived and worked in Britain from 1939.

See Parody and Fritz Spiegl

Frode Øverli

Frode Øverli (born August 15, 1968 in Bergen, Norway) is a Norwegian comic strip cartoonist, considered one of the most successful in Scandinavia.

See Parody and Frode Øverli

Frozen Peas

Frozen Peas is the colloquial term for a blooper audio clip in which American filmmaker Orson Welles performs narration for a series of British television advertisements for Findus.

See Parody and Frozen Peas

Futurama

Futurama is an American animated sitcom created by Matt Groening for the Fox Broadcasting Company.

See Parody and Futurama

Gallagher (comedian)

Leo Anthony Gallagher Jr. (born July 24, 1946), known as Gallagher, is an American comedian and prop comic, known for smashing watermelons as part of his act.

See Parody and Gallagher (comedian)

Garbage Pail Kids

Garbage Pail Kids is a series of trading cards produced by the Topps Company, originally released in 1985 and designed to parody the Cabbage Patch Kids dolls which were popular at the time.

See Parody and Garbage Pail Kids

Garrison Keillor

Gary Edward "Garrison" Keillor (born August 7, 1942) is an American author, storyteller, humorist, voice actor, and radio personality.

See Parody and Garrison Keillor

Garth Marenghi

Garth Marenghi (born July 13, 1950) is a fictional horror author and actor, created by English comedians Matthew Holness and Richard Ayoade, and played by Holness.

See Parody and Garth Marenghi

General Protection Fault (webcomic)

General Protection Fault (GPF) is a webcomic created by Jeffrey T. Darlington.

See Parody and General Protection Fault (webcomic)

Genre

Genre is any form or type of communication in any mode (written, spoken, digital, artistic, etc.) with socially-agreed upon conventions developed over time.

See Parody and Genre

George Kennedy

George Harris Kennedy Jr. (February 18, 1925 – February 28, 2016) was an American actor who appeared in more than 200 film and television productions.

See Parody and George Kennedy

George Topîrceanu

George Topîrceanu (March 20, 1886 &ndash; May 7, 1937) was a Romanian poet, short story writer, and humourist.

See Parody and George Topîrceanu

Get Smart

Get Smart is an American comedy television series that satirizes the secret agent genre that was popular at the time.

See Parody and Get Smart

Ghettopoly

Ghettopoly is a parody of Monopoly released in 2002.

See Parody and Ghettopoly

Giant Robo (OVA)

is a 1992 to 1998 original video animation series based on Mitsuteru Yokoyama's manga series Giant Robo.

See Parody and Giant Robo (OVA)

Giles Goat-Boy

Giles Goat-Boy (1966) is the fourth novel by American writer John Barth.

See Parody and Giles Goat-Boy

Giv'at Halfon Eina Ona

Giv'at Halfon Eina Ona (גבעת חלפון אינה עונה, lit: "Halfon Hill Doesn't Answer"), also titled Giv'at Halfon, is a cult Israeli comedy film produced in 1976.

See Parody and Giv'at Halfon Eina Ona

Glenn Beck

Glenn Lee Beck (born February 10, 1964) is an American conservative political commentator, radio host and television producer.

See Parody and Glenn Beck

Goatse.cx

goatse.cx ("goat sex"), often referred to simply as "Goatse", was originally an Internet shock site.

See Parody and Goatse.cx

Gohan

is a fictional character in the Dragon Ball manga series, created by Akira Toriyama.

See Parody and Gohan

Goodness Gracious Me (BBC)

Goodness Gracious Me is a BBC English-language sketch comedy show originally aired on BBC Radio 4 from 1996 to 1998 and later televised on BBC Two from 1998 to 2001.

See Parody and Goodness Gracious Me (BBC)

Google bomb

The terms Google bomb and Googlewashing refer to the practice of causing a website to rank highly in web search engine results for irrelevant, unrelated or off-topic search terms by linking heavily.

See Parody and Google bomb

Gossip Girl (novel series)

Gossip Girl is an American young adult novel series written by Cecily von Ziegesar and published by Little, Brown and Company, a subsidiary of the Hachette Group.

See Parody and Gossip Girl (novel series)

Green Hornet

The Green Hornet is a fictional masked crime-fighter created in 1936 by George W. Trendle and Fran Striker, with input from radio director James Jewell.

See Parody and Green Hornet

Greg Costikyan

Greg Costikyan (born July 22, 1959, in New York City), sometimes known under the pseudonym "Designer X", is an American game designer and science fiction writer.

See Parody and Greg Costikyan

Gremlins

Gremlins is a 1984 American comedy horror film directed by Joe Dante and released by Warner Bros. The film is about a young man who receives a strange creature called a mogwai as a pet, which then spawns other creatures who transform into small, destructive, evil monsters.

See Parody and Gremlins

Greyshirt

Greyshirt is a comic book character in Alan Moore's Tomorrow Stories, published by Wildstorm (a subsidiary of DC Comics), under the America's Best Comics imprint.

See Parody and Greyshirt

Groland

Groland (full name: Presipality of Groland, French: Présipauté du Groland) is a fictional country featured in various humorous programs on French television channel Canal+.

See Parody and Groland

Gumshoe (film)

Gumshoe is a 1971 film, and was the directorial debut of British director Stephen Frears.

See Parody and Gumshoe (film)

Gwen Ifill

Gwendolyn L. "Gwen" Ifill (September 29, 1955 – November 14, 2016) was an American Peabody Award-winning journalist, television newscaster, and author.

See Parody and Gwen Ifill

HackMaster

HackMaster is a fantasy role-playing game produced by Kenzer & Company.

See Parody and HackMaster

Hal Douglas

Harold Douglas (born Harold Cohen; September 1, 1924 – March 7, 2014) was an American voice actor best known for performing thousands of voice-overs for movie trailers, television commercials, and stage plays over the course of a six-decade career.

See Parody and Hal Douglas

Hamilton College (New York)

Hamilton College is a private, nonsectarian liberal arts college in Clinton, New York.

See Parody and Hamilton College (New York)

Haré+Guu

is a Japanese anime, based on an original manga which ran in Monthly Shōnen Gangan.

See Parody and Haré+Guu

Hardcore punk

Hardcore punk (often abbreviated to hardcore) is a punk rock music genre and subculture that originated in the late 1970s.

See Parody and Hardcore punk

Harold Ramis

Harold Allen Ramis (November 21, 1944 – February 24, 2014) was an American actor, director, writer, and comedian.

See Parody and Harold Ramis

Harry Harrison (writer)

Harry Max Harrison (born Henry Maxwell Dempsey; March 12, 1925 – August 15, 2012) was an American science fiction author, known for his character The Stainless Steel Rat and for his novel Make Room! Make Room! (1966).

See Parody and Harry Harrison (writer)

Harry Palmer

Harry Palmer is the protagonist of a number of films based on the unnamed main character in the spy novels written by Len Deighton.

See Parody and Harry Palmer

Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law

Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law is an American adult animated television series created by Michael Ouweleen and Erik Richter for Adult Swim.

See Parody and Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law

Hee Haw

Hee Haw was an American television variety show featuring country music and humor with the fictional rural "Kornfield Kounty" as a backdrop.

See Parody and Hee Haw

Henry Carey (writer)

Henry Carey (c. 26 August 1687 – 5 October 1743) was an English poet, dramatist and song-writer.

See Parody and Henry Carey (writer)

Herb Alpert

Herb Alpert (born March 31, 1935) is an American jazz musician most associated with the group variously known as Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass, Herb Alpert's Tijuana Brass, or TJB.

See Parody and Herb Alpert

Hero and Leander (poem)

Hero and Leander is a poem by Christopher Marlowe that retells the Greek myth of Hero and Leander.

See Parody and Hero and Leander (poem)

Hidden text

Hidden text is computer text that is displayed in such a way as to be invisible or unreadable.

See Parody and Hidden text

High School High

High School High is a 1996 comedy film about an inner city high school in the Los Angeles, California area, starring Jon Lovitz, Tia Carrere, Mekhi Phifer, Louise Fletcher, Malinda Williams, and Brian Hooks.

See Parody and High School High

Hilaire Belloc

Joseph Hilaire Pierre René Belloc (27 July 187016 July 1953) was an Anglo-French writer and historian.

See Parody and Hilaire Belloc

Hipponax

Hipponax (Ἱππῶναξ; gen.: Ἱππώνακτος), of Ephesus and later Clazomenae, was an Ancient Greek iambic poet who composed verses depicting the vulgar side of life in Ionian society in the sixth century BC.

See Parody and Hipponax

History of Saturday Night Live (1980–85)

Saturday Night Live is an American sketch comedy series created and produced by Lorne Michaels for most of the show's run.

See Parody and History of Saturday Night Live (1980–85)

History of the World, Part I

History of the World, Part I is a 1981 American anthology comedy film written, produced, and directed by Mel Brooks.

See Parody and History of the World, Part I

Hocus pocus (magic)

Hocus pocus is a generic term that may be derived from an ancient language and is currently used by magicians, usually the magic words spoken when bringing about some sort of change.

See Parody and Hocus pocus (magic)

Hollywood Potato Chip

Hollywood Potato Chip is the tenth studio album by the Southern California punk rock band The Vandals, released in 2004 by Kung Fu Records.

See Parody and Hollywood Potato Chip

Home Taping Is Killing Music

"Home Taping Is Killing Music" was the slogan of a 1980s anti-copyright infringement campaign by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), a British music industry trade group.

See Parody and Home Taping Is Killing Music

Horace

Quintus Horatius Flaccus (December 8, 65 BC – November 27, 8 BC), known in the English-speaking world as Horace, was the leading Roman lyric poet during the time of Augustus (also known as Octavian).

See Parody and Horace

Horror film

A horror film is a film that seeks to elicit a physiological reaction, such as an elevated heartbeat, through the use of fear and shocking one’s audiences.

See Parody and Horror film

Hot Shots!

Hot Shots! is a 1991 comedy film which stars Charlie Sheen, Cary Elwes, Valeria Golino, Lloyd Bridges, Jon Cryer, Kevin Dunn, Kristy Swanson, and Bill Irwin.

See Parody and Hot Shots!

Hound Dog (song)

"Hound Dog" is a twelve-bar blues song written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller.

See Parody and Hound Dog (song)

Hounds of Tindalos

A Hound of Tindalos is a fictional creature created by Frank Belknap Long and later incorporated into the Cthulhu Mythos when it was codified by August Derleth.

See Parody and Hounds of Tindalos

Howard Berman

Howard Lawrence Berman (born April 15, 1941) is an attorney and former U.S. Representative, last serving, serving in Congress from 1983 to 2013.

See Parody and Howard Berman

Howard the Duck

Howard the Duck is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

See Parody and Howard the Duck

Howie Mandel

Howard Michael Mandel (born November 29, 1955) is a Canadian comedian, actor, and television host.

See Parody and Howie Mandel

Hurricane Helms

Gregory Shane Helms (born July 12, 1974) is an American professional wrestler currently signed to Ring of Honor.

See Parody and Hurricane Helms

I Know What You Did Last Summer

I Know What You Did Last Summer is a 1997 American slasher film directed by Jim Gillespie, written by Kevin Williamson, and starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, and Freddie Prinze Jr., with Anne Heche, Bridgette Wilson, and Johnny Galecki appearing in supporting roles.

See Parody and I Know What You Did Last Summer

I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud

"I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud" (also commonly known as "Daffodils") is a lyric poem by William Wordsworth.

See Parody and I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud

I'm OK – You're OK

I'm OK – You're OK is a 1967 self-help book by Thomas Anthony Harris.

See Parody and I'm OK – You're OK

If—

"If—" is a poem by English Nobel laureate Rudyard Kipling, written circa 1895 as a tribute to Leander Starr Jameson.

See Parody and If—

Impressionist (entertainment)

An impressionist or a mimic is a performer whose act consists of imitating sounds, the voice and mannerisms of people or animals.

See Parody and Impressionist (entertainment)

In Living Color

In Living Color is an American sketch comedy television series that originally ran on Fox from April 15, 1990, to May 19, 1994.

See Parody and In Living Color

Index of literature articles

Articles related to literature include.

See Parody and Index of literature articles

Ingmar Bergman

Ernst Ingmar Bergman (14 July 1918 – 30 July 2007) was a Swedish director, writer, and producer who worked in film, television, theatre and radio.

See Parody and Ingmar Bergman

Intentional infliction of emotional distress

Intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED; sometimes called the tort of outrage) is a common law tort that allows individuals to recover for severe emotional distress caused by another individual who intentionally or recklessly inflicted emotional distress by behaving in an "extreme and outrageous" way.

See Parody and Intentional infliction of emotional distress

INTERCAL

The Compiler Language With No Pronounceable Acronym, abbreviated INTERCAL, is an esoteric programming language that was created as a parody by Don Woods and James M. Lyon, two Princeton University students, in 1972.

See Parody and INTERCAL

Intertextuality

Intertextuality is the shaping of a text's meaning by another text.

See Parody and Intertextuality

Ion Luca Caragiale

Ion Luca Caragiale (commonly referred to as I. L. Caragiale; According to his birth certificate, published and discussed by Constantin Popescu-Cadem in Manuscriptum, Vol. VIII, Nr. 2, 1977, p.179-184 – 9 June 1912) was a Wallachian, later Romanian playwright, short story writer, poet, theater manager, political commentator and journalist.

See Parody and Ion Luca Caragiale

Iris Tree

Iris Tree (27 January 1897 – 13 April 1968) was an English poet, actress and artists' model, described as a bohemian, an eccentric, a wit and an adventurer.

See Parody and Iris Tree

Ironic (song)

"Ironic" is a song by Canadian-American singer Alanis Morissette.

See Parody and Ironic (song)

Isaac Hayes

Isaac Lee Hayes Jr. (August 20, 1942 – August 10, 2008) was an American singer-songwriter, actor, voice actor and producer.

See Parody and Isaac Hayes

Isaac Watts

Isaac Watts (17 July 1674 – 25 November 1748) was an English Christian minister (Congregational), hymn writer, theologian, and logician.

See Parody and Isaac Watts

J. C. Squire

Sir John Collings Squire (2 April 1884 – 20 December 1958) was a British writer, most notable as editor of the London Mercury, a major literary magazine between the world wars.

See Parody and J. C. Squire

J. M. Barrie

Sir James Matthew Barrie, 1st Baronet, (9 May 1860 19 June 1937) was a Scottish novelist and playwright, best remembered today as the creator of Peter Pan.

See Parody and J. M. Barrie

Jackie Chiles

Jackie Chiles is a fictional character portrayed by American actor Phil Morris in the NBC sitcom Seinfeld.

See Parody and Jackie Chiles

Jacques Benveniste

Jacques Benveniste (12 March 1935 – 3 October 2004) was a French immunologist, born in Paris.

See Parody and Jacques Benveniste

Jaime Bergman

Jaime Boreanaz (née Bergman; born September 23, 1975) is an American model and actress who was Playboy magazine's Playmate of the Month in January 1999, its 45th Anniversary issue.

See Parody and Jaime Bergman

James Bond

The James Bond series focuses on a fictional British Secret Service agent created in 1953 by writer Ian Fleming, who featured him in twelve novels and two short-story collections.

See Parody and James Bond

James Gould Cozzens

James Gould Cozzens (August 19, 1903 – August 9, 1978) was an American novelist and short story writer.

See Parody and James Gould Cozzens

James T. Kirk

James Tiberius "Jim" Kirk is a fictional character in the Star Trek franchise.

See Parody and James T. Kirk

Jasper Carrott

Jasper Carrott, OBE (born Robert Norman Davis; 14 March 1945) is an English comedian, actor, television presenter, and personality.

See Parody and Jasper Carrott

Jasper Fforde

Jasper Fforde (born 11 January 1961) is a British novelist.

See Parody and Jasper Fforde

Jaws 3-D

Jaws 3-D (also known as Jaws 3 or Jaws III) is a 1983 American horror and thriller film directed by Joe Alves and starring Dennis Quaid, Bess Armstrong, Lea Thompson, and Louis Gossett, Jr. It is the second sequel to Steven Spielberg's Jaws and the third installment in the ''Jaws'' franchise.

See Parody and Jaws 3-D

Jay Ward

Jay Ward (September 20, 1920 – October 12, 1989) was an American creator and producer of animated TV cartoon shows.

See Parody and Jay Ward

Je t'aime John Wayne

Je t'aime John Wayne (2000) is a ten-minute short film parody directed by Toby MacDonald about a young man in London obsessed with imitating Jean-Paul Belmondo in the film Breathless, who in turn was pretending to be Humphrey Bogart.

See Parody and Je t'aime John Wayne

Jean Shepherd

Jean Parker Shepherd, Jr. (July 26, 1921 – October 16, 1999) was an American storyteller, radio and TV personality, writer and actor.

See Parody and Jean Shepherd

Jean-Baptiste Rousseau

Jean-Baptiste Rousseau (6 April 1671 – 17 March 1741) was a French playwright and poet, particularly noted for his cynical epigrams.

See Parody and Jean-Baptiste Rousseau

Jeff Bezos

Jeffrey Preston Bezos (born Jorgensen; January 12, 1964) is an American technology entrepreneur, investor, philanthropist, and the founder, chairman, and chief executive officer of Amazon, the world's largest online retailer.

See Parody and Jeff Bezos

Jenna von Oÿ

Jennifer Jean von Oÿ (born May 2, 1977) is an American actress and country music singer.

See Parody and Jenna von Oÿ

Jennifer Saunders

Jennifer Jane Saunders (born 6 July 1958) is an English comedian, screenwriter, and actress.

See Parody and Jennifer Saunders

Jentina

Jentina Rose Rees (née Chapman) (born 6 March 1984, in Woking, England) professionally known as Jentina, is a British hip hop/R&B singer, rapper, songwriter and model of Romani descent.

See Parody and Jentina

Jerry Holkins

Keith Gerald "Jerry" Holkins (born February 6, 1976 in the United States) is an American writer.

See Parody and Jerry Holkins

JibJab

JibJab is a digital entertainment studio based in Los Angeles, California.

See Parody and JibJab

Jim Abrahams

James S. Abrahams (born May 10, 1944) is an American movie director and writer.

See Parody and Jim Abrahams

Jim Carrey

James Eugene Carrey (born January 17, 1962) is a Canadian-American actor, comedian, impressionist, screenwriter, musician, producer and painter.

See Parody and Jim Carrey

Jimmy Driftwood

James Corbitt Morris (June 20, 1907 – July 12, 1998), known professionally as Jimmy Driftwood or Jimmie Driftwood, was an American folk music songwriter and musician, most famous for his songs "The Battle of New Orleans" and "Tennessee Stud".

See Parody and Jimmy Driftwood

Jimmy Savile

Sir James Wilson Vincent Savile (31 October 1926 – 29 October 2011) was an English DJ, television and radio personality, dance hall manager, and charity fundraiser.

See Parody and Jimmy Savile

Jingle Bells

"Jingle Bells" is one of the best-known and commonly sung American songs in the world.

See Parody and Jingle Bells

Joan Lindsay

Joan à Beckett Lindsay (16 November 189623 December 1984) was an Australian novelist, playwright, essayist, and visual artist.

See Parody and Joan Lindsay

Joan Rivers

Joan Alexandra Molinsky (June 8, 1933 – September 4, 2014), known professionally as Joan Rivers, was an American comedian, actress, writer, producer, and television host.

See Parody and Joan Rivers

Joe Hill

Joe Hill (Gävle, Sweden, October 7, 1879 – Salt Lake City, Utah, November 19, 1915), born Joel Emmanuel Hägglund and also known as Joseph Hillström, was a Swedish-American labor activist, songwriter, and member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW, familiarly called the "Wobblies").

See Parody and Joe Hill

Joe Orton

John Kingsley "Joe" Orton (1 January 1933 – 9 August 1967) was an English playwright and author.

See Parody and Joe Orton

Johan Herman Wessel

Johan Herman Wessel (6 October 1742 – 29 December 1785) was an 18th-century Danish-Norwegian poet, satirist and playwright.

See Parody and Johan Herman Wessel

Johannes Brahms

Johannes Brahms (7 May 1833 – 3 April 1897) was a German composer and pianist of the Romantic period.

See Parody and Johannes Brahms

John Barth

John Simmons Barth (born May 27, 1930) is an American writer, best known for his postmodernist and metafictional fiction.

See Parody and John Barth

John C. Reilly

John Christopher Reilly (born May 24, 1965) is an American actor, comedian, singer, screenwriter, and producer.

See Parody and John C. Reilly

John Candy

John Franklin Candy (October 31, 1950 – March 4, 1994) was a Canadian comedian and actor known mainly for his work in Hollywood films.

See Parody and John Candy

John Facenda

John Thomas Ralph Augustine James Facenda (August 8, 1913September 26, 1984) was an American broadcaster and sports announcer.

See Parody and John Facenda

John Landis

John David Landis (born August 3, 1950) is an American film director, screenwriter, actor, and producer.

See Parody and John Landis

John M. Ford

John Milo "Mike" Ford (April 10, 1957 – September 25, 2006) was an American science fiction and fantasy writer, game designer, and poet.

See Parody and John M. Ford

John of Gaunt

John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, KG (6 March 1340 – 3 February 1399) was an English nobleman, soldier, statesman, and prince, the third of five surviving sons of King Edward III of England.

See Parody and John of Gaunt

John Stamos

John Phillip Stamos (born August 19, 1963) is an American actor, producer, musician, and singer.

See Parody and John Stamos

John Taverner

John Taverner (c. 1490 – 18 October 1545) was an English composer and organist, regarded as one of the most important English composers of his era.

See Parody and John Taverner

John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester

John Wilmot (1 April 1647 – 26 July 1680) was an English poet and courtier of King Charles II's Restoration court.

See Parody and John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester

Johnny Cage

Johnny Cage is a fictional video game character from the Mortal Kombat fighting game franchise by Midway Games.

See Parody and Johnny Cage

Johnny English

Johnny English is a 2003 British spy comedy film parodying the James Bond secret agent genre, infused with comedy similar to Rowan Atkinson's Mr. Bean character.

See Parody and Johnny English

Jonah

Jonah or Jonas is the name given in the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh/Old Testament) to a prophet of the northern kingdom of Israel in about the 8th century BCE.

See Parody and Jonah

Jorge de Montemor

Jorge de Montemor (Jorge de Montemayor) (1520? &ndash; 26 February 1561) was a Portuguese novelist and poet, who wrote almost exclusively in Spanish.

See Parody and Jorge de Montemor

José Sarria

José Julio Sarria also known as The Grand Mere, Absolute Empress I de San Francisco, and the Widow Norton (December 13, 1922 &ndash; August 19, 2013) was an American political activist from San Francisco, California, who in 1961 became the first openly gay candidate for public office in the United States.

See Parody and José Sarria

Joseph Andrews

Joseph Andrews, or The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews and of his Friend Mr.

See Parody and Joseph Andrews

Joseph Losey

Joseph Walton Losey III (January 14, 1909June 22, 1984) was an American theatre and film director, born in Wisconsin.

See Parody and Joseph Losey

Judicature Acts

The Judicature Acts are a series of Acts of Parliament, beginning in the 1870s, which aimed to fuse the hitherto split system of courts in England and Wales.

See Parody and Judicature Acts

Judy Sheindlin

Judith Susan Sheindlin (née Blum; born October 21, 1942), professionally known as Judge Judy, is an American prosecution lawyer, former Manhattan family court judge, television personality, television producer, and author.

See Parody and Judy Sheindlin

Julee Cruise

Julee A. Cruise (born December 1, 1956, Creston, Iowa) is an American singer, songwriter, actress and musician best known for her collaborations with composer Angelo Badalamenti and film director David Lynch in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

See Parody and Julee Cruise

Julie Walters

Dame Julia Mary Walters, (born 22 February 1950) is an English actress and writer.

See Parody and Julie Walters

Kaput and Zösky

Kaput and Zösky: The Ultimate Obliterators is a Canadian/French animated cartoon series based on the comic book series from the cartoonist Lewis Trondheim called Kaput and Zösky.

See Parody and Kaput and Zösky

Karl May

Karl Friedrich May (also Carl; 25 February 1842 – 30 March 1912) was a German writer best known for his adventure novels set in the American Old West.

See Parody and Karl May

Kenneth Cope

Kenneth Charles Cope (born 14 April 1931) is an English actor.

See Parody and Kenneth Cope

Kevin Bloody Wilson

Kevin Bloody Wilson (born Dennis Bryant on 13 February 1947 in Sydney, Australia) is an Australian musical comedian who performs comical songs with his heavy Australian English accent and often including sexual themes.

See Parody and Kevin Bloody Wilson

Kill Doctor Lucky

Kill Doctor Lucky is a humorous board game designed by James Ernest and released in 1996 by Cheapass Games.

See Parody and Kill Doctor Lucky

Kingdom of Loathing

Kingdom of Loathing (abbreviated KoL) is a browser-based multiplayer role-playing game designed and operated by Asymmetric Publications, including creator Zack "Jick" Johnson with a small team.

See Parody and Kingdom of Loathing

Krapp's Last Tape

Krapp's Last Tape is a one-act play, in English, by Samuel Beckett.

See Parody and Krapp's Last Tape

Kunimitsu Tezuka

is a fictional character in the manga and anime series The Prince of Tennis created by Takeshi Konomi, who described Tezuka as the character with whom he has the least in common.

See Parody and Kunimitsu Tezuka

La bohème

La bohème is an opera in four acts,Puccini called the divisions quadro, a tableau or "image", rather than atto (act).

See Parody and La bohème

Lacey Chabert

Lacey Nicole Chabert (born September 30, 1982) is an American actress, voice actress, and singer.

See Parody and Lacey Chabert

Land of Black Gold

Land of Black Gold (Tintin au pays de l'or noir) is the fifteenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin, the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé.

See Parody and Land of Black Gold

Larry Hovis

Larry Hovis (February 20, 1936 &ndash; September 9, 2003) was an American singer and actor best known for pla