Intro

Hortense de Beauharnais (1783-1837) was Queen Consort of Holland. She was the stepdaughter of Emperor Napoleon I as the daughter of his first wife, Joséphine de Beauharnais.

Hortense married Napoleon I’s brother, Louis Bonaparte, who had been appointed king of Holland, thus becoming her stepfather’s sister-in-law.

She was the mother of the future Emperor of the French, Napoleon III. She also had an illegitimate son, Charles, Duke of Morny, by her lover, the Count of Flahaut.

A child in the midst of the Revolution

Hortense de Beauharnais was born prematurely on 10 April 1783 as the daughter of Alexandre, Viscount de Beauharnais, and Joséphine Tascher de la Pagerie (they had already had a son, Eugéne, in 1781). While most children are wrongly blamed for the failure of their parents’ marriage, in Hortense’s case it was absolutely true. Her parents used her premature birth as an excuse to separate.

When her mother wrote to Alexandre to inform him of the birth, he replied: ‘If I had written to you during my first fit of rage, my pen would have burnt the paper‘. He accused her of adultery and, although he did not believe that Hortense was his daughter, he felt compelled to accept it. He wrote angrily: ‘It is an alien blood that runs through her veins‘. We do not know for sure if Hortense was ever aware of these events, as she always wrote about her father with respect.

At the end of November, Joséphine went to a convent where she stayed for 15 months, while political tensions in Paris increased. In December, the divorce was finalised and Alexandre finally calmed down. In March 1785, he officially recognised Hortense as his daughter.

At the age of 4, Hortense joined her mother on her travels to her native Martinique. They returned to France amidst empty palaces: the French Revolution had begun.

Her father decided that Hortense should go to boarding school, as her education had been very poor until then. Her mother visited her whenever she could. However, Hortense felt lonely and, at only 7 years old, she was the youngest child at the boarding school. Two years later, her mother quickly withdrew her. Paris had reached its breaking point. In January 1793, King Louis XVI was executed, followed by Marie Antoinette in October 1793.

Hortense’s father was arrested and Joséphine did everything she could to get him released. In April, she too was arrested. Hortense wrote: ‘It was the first great sadness of my life‘. Every day, Hortense and her brother went to the prison with clean clothes and letters. On 22 July 1794, their father was executed and his last letter was addressed to Joséphine. Her mother escaped the guillotine when the reign of terror suddenly came to an end.

Young Hortense returned to school. She attended the Institution Nationale de Saint-Germain, a renowned girls’ school directed by none other than Madame Campan, former first lady-in-waiting of the ill-fated Marie Antoinette. Within the protective embrace of the girls’ school, Hortense discovered an atmosphere full of confidence and encouragement. Madame Campan herself could not help but sing her praises, declaring: ‘She [de Beauharnais] is the most enchanting twelve-year-old girl I have ever had the privilege of instructing‘. Hortense excelled at school.

Napoleon’s stepdaughter

One day her mother introduced her to a general she had met: his name was Napoleon Bonaparte. Hortense was initially hostile towards her future stepfather. “If our mother marries him, she will no longer love us so much!” she wrote to her brother.

Joséphine married Napoleon on 9 March 1796. During Napoleon’s conquests in the army, Hortense mostly stayed at school. She was kept informed by the director, to whom she confided: ‘Madame, I do not reproach his conquests, but I will never forgive him for winning my mother’s heart‘.

Hortense had every reason to be sceptical of her new stepfather. Gradually, however, she developed a deep admiration for Napoleon, who showered her with the affection her father (or mother, for that matter) never had. She even reports in her memoirs that he showed her ‘all the affection of a father‘.

Hortense left school and went to live with her mother in Paris when her stepfather became consul. Joséphine’s thoughts turned to finding the right groom for Hortense. Her marriage to Napoleon had produced no children, but if Hortense had married Napoleon’s brother Louis, their bloodlines would still have been united. However, the two had never shown the slightest inclination towards marriage. Hortense was stunned and it took her eight days to decide to marry him but her mother’s fate depended on it.

Louis and Hortense were married on 4 January 1802.

Princess Louis Bonaparte

Their marriage had started well, or so it seemed. However, Louis’ behaviour was unpredictable and this made her insecure. Their first child was born on 10 October 1802 amid cries of “Here is our Dauphin!“.

For the first time, Louis and Hortense were on the same wavelength. Their initial happiness soon turned into marital problems and Louis often accused her of not loving him. Her mood was very erratic due to various physical pains.

At the beginning of 1804, Hortense realised she was expecting a child again. In the same year, Napoleon became Emperor of the French and Hortense became Her Imperial Highness Princess Louis Bonaparte. On 11 October she gave birth to her second child.

Queen of Holland

Napoleon had plans for his brother. He would become King of Holland and she would be his Queen. Holland would be an independent kingdom, albeit under the supervision of France. On 15 June 1806, the new queen left France with her husband.

Once in Holland, Hortense de Beauharnais was pleasantly surprised. The Dutch public warmly welcomed her arrival and showered her with affection. She adapted to life in the Netherlands as best she could and became sincerely attached to the country. She took part in celebrations and official ceremonies, frequented the markets and made large expenditures.

In fact, her popularity with the people further infuriated her husband.

The death of young Napoleon Louis

It is no secret that Hortense de Beauharnais detested her husband, but respected her stepfather/brother-in-law. Soon, sordid rumours began to circulate in Europe. Everyone could not help but notice that Emperor Napoleon lavished affection and attention on Hortense’s eldest son, Napoleon Louis Charles Bonaparte. The child was also the centre of Hortense’s attention. She adored him and also his supposed uncle.

Courtiers all over Europe began to speculate that Hortense’s eldest son was actually the love child of a very secret affair between her and her stepfather/brother-in-law.

The rumours only came to a head when, aged just four, Napoleon Louis Charles Bonaparte died. Emperor Napoleon ignored Hortense’s other children, fuelling speculation that the alleged heir was actually his son.

The tragedy, which occurred in the spring of 1807, left Hortense distraught. She asked for a lock of his hair and left Holland for Brussels, where she met up with her mother. They travelled further south, as far as the Pyrenees and Spain. She would not return to Holland until August.

The end of the Kingdom of Holland and Hortense’s marriage

Napoleon desperately tried to save Hortense’s marriage to his younger brother. In a famous missive of 2 May 1807, he tried in vain to extol the virtues of both parties: ‘You have an excellent wife and you make her unhappy,’ he admonished Louis. ‘He may have unusual ideas, but Louis is a good man,’ he reminded Hortense.

Duty calls her and, for the first time in two years, she and Louis shared their bed. She became pregnant for the third time and on 20 April 1808 a third child was born.

The following year, Napoleon divorced Hortense’s mother to produce an heir with a new wife, Marie Louise of Austria. During the wedding ceremony, Hortense held her train.

Then, as quickly as it had been created, the Kingdom of Holland was dissolved. Napoleon was not satisfied with his brother’s rule and angrily told him: “I will eat up the whole of Holland!“

Shortly before the end of the reign, Hortense returned to Holland but was not well received. At Loo Palace, she wrote her husband a farewell letter. She considered her marriage to be over. Holland had reserved only bad memories for her.

On 1 July 1810, Hortense left Holland and headed for France. That same day, her husband abdicated the throne in favour of his eldest surviving son, who became King Louis II. His reign lasted only 12 days. On 13 July 1810, Napoleon decreed: ‘Holland is reunited with the Empire‘.

Charles de Flahaut’s lover

Hortense was now free to succumb to the charm of Charles de Flahaut, a man she had long admired. When she met him, he was in Geneva and part of her mother’s entourage. They could not be together for long because his military duties obliged him to travel to Paris. Hortense rested before embarking on the journey to Paris, where she arrived at the end of September 1810. Once there, she also met her two sons.

Hortense settled in Paris in a house with little staff in tow. She was allowed to keep her title.

She became accustomed to a routine that consisted of drawing and painting in the morning, lunch with the lady-in-waiting and riding or walking in the afternoon.

Charles de Flahaut became a regular visitor and the two began a passionate love affair, but in early 1811 Hortense began to fear that she had become pregnant by her lover.

The illegitimate son

Hortense de Beauharnais devised a plan to give birth to her illegitimate child in secret. With the help of her brother Eugène and Flahaut’s mother, she took refuge in an inn near Lake Geneva, Switzerland, where she could carry the pregnancy to term and give birth in secret. She just had to keep a low profile.

The Queen of Holland (in name only) used the excuse of ill health to stay on Lake Geneva. Although it wasn’t technically a lie, it wasn’t true either.

And she risked blowing her cover!

When Napoleon had a son by his new wife, he invited Hortense de Beauharnais to the christening. Hortense, then six months pregnant with her secret child, knew she could not refuse the emperor’s invitation, not least because Napoleon had appointed her godmother to the child. But she certainly could not turn up pregnant!

Caught between a rock and a hard place, Hortense had to think fast. In a bold move, she decided to attend the christening but in a disguise of sorts. Using some clever clothing options, she managed to hide her baby bump from the prying eyes of European royalty.

Thanks to her brother and Flahaut’s mother, Hortense managed to give birth to a healthy son in total secrecy on 21 October 1811. The child, Charles Augustus Louis Joseph, would later become the Duke of Morny when his half-brother Napoleon III legitimised his birth.

Hortense left for Dieppe to recover. There she met Madame de Souza, who took young Charles into her care.

Then came an even greater tragedy: her mother died on 29 May 1814 at the age of 50. Hortense was present when Joséphine died and had to be transported to the next room.

End of the Napoleonic era

Shortly afterwards, Napoleon was defeated and the Napoleonic era came to an end.

Hortense went east to her brother and his family. He had married Princess Augusta of Bavaria in 1806.

She soon set off again and returned to France to face the newly restored Bourbon king. He allowed her to stay in France with her two sons, but she was closely guarded by the secret police.

Napoleon’s escape from Elba was brief and he received her coldly. He accused her of remaining in France during his exile. Napoleon was defeated again at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815 and was exiled to St. Helena, where he died.

Exile and the end of her love affair

On 17 July, Hortense received orders to leave France within 24 hours. In Aix-en-Savoie she was reunited with Charles, who, however, could only stay one day. In October, a Parisian lawyer came to request her eldest son. She was told to take the boy to Rome. Hortense and her youngest son remained at home. Finally, she was allowed to stay in Baden, at least for a while.

At the end of 1816, her relationship with Charles de Flahaut ended once and for all. Hortense had never been his only love and in 1817 Charles married Margaret Mercer Elphinstone.

Hortense bought a house on the Swiss side of the Bodensee, the Château Arenenberg. At last she could settle down.

Hortense as composer

Throughout her life, Hortense de Beauharnais always demonstrated a great talent for musical composition. Had she not been so busy finding love and staying away from politics, she could have become a famous composer. However, in her exile she found solace in composing, writing, drawing and painting.

Art, it seems, was her one true love.

During her exile, Hortense composed prolifically. Although she had never received a formal education, she clearly displayed a rare talent. Hortense hosted artistic personalities such as Franz Liszt, Alexandre Dumas and Lord Byron, who expressed their astonishment at her musical talents.

Last trip to Paris

Hortense spent her days writing her memoirs and wrote a lot about her stepfather. The death of her brother in 1824 hit her hard. Her eldest son married a cousin, Charlotte Bonaparte, but died at the age of 26 in 1831.

In the early 1830s, Hortense was finally able to return to Paris. She told the King that they were going to England and he introduced her to his wife, Maria Amalia of Naples and Sicily and her sister, Adélaïde d’Orléans.

Supposedly, while Hortense sat with Louis Philippe, her son Louis Napoleon met with Bonapartist conspirators to overthrow the crown. Unfortunately, Louis Philippe and his supporters discovered the terrible plot and blamed both Hortense and her son for the whole affair. Fortunately, her head was saved but she was ordered to leave France and, this time, never to return.

Later years and death

Banished forever from her beloved Paris, Hortense de Beauharnais settled permanently in Switzerland. She transformed her home, the Château Arenenberg, into ‘a centre for French art and culture‘.

In the last years of her life, she mourned her children and lived only for Louis.

Her health began to deteriorate, although she paid no particular attention to it.

She died of cancer on 5 October 1837 at the age of fifty-four. She is buried next to her mother Joséphine in the church of Saint-Pierre-Saint-Paul in Rueil-Malmaison.

As a fitting tribute, when her son Napoleon III ascended the throne, he made his mother’s composition, ‘Partant pour la Syrie‘, the national anthem of France.

Napoleon’s words

“My brother Louis […]” writes the Emperor in his accounts in the Memoir of St Helena “[…] was a young man seduced by the philosophical maxims of Rousseau. He had only been able to live in peace with Hortense for a very short time; excessive strictness on his side, much levity on Hortense’s side, were the causes of their conjugal diatribes and their mutual wrongs. But it can be said that their union was a knot of love: they wanted each other. This marriage, however, was planned and desired by Josephine, who made her own calculations […]’.

“The affectionate, good, generous Hortense had wronged my brother. I love her, she loves me back, but that must not make the truth bare. Louis loved her very much, however bizarre and unbearable he may be, […] if she had been able to overcome herself and change her character […] Louis would not have run away from her to go to Amsterdam; I would not then have been forced into that act that had damaging repercussions in Europe: namely, to unite the kingdom of Holland to France. Events would then have taken a different direction‘.

For further reading

“Queen Hortense: A Life Picture of the Napoleonic Era” by L. Mühlbach , 2022

“Margaret De Flahaut (1788-1867): A Scotswoman at the French Court” by Diana Scarisbrick, 2019

“Josephine: The Empress and Her Children“, by Nina Epton, 1975

#earnedcommissions