Qazi Mohammad Adeel Abbasi was born in a devout Muslim family in eastern Uttar Pradesh and brought up in a scholarly tradition. Possessing a literary bent of mind, he aspired to become a journalist and a writer. In 1921, at a very young age, he became the Chief Editor of the daily Zamindar, Lahore’s leading nationalist Urdu paper. He soon plunged into nationalist politics, was imprisoned by the British, and never looked back. He had an eventful legislative c

Qazi Mohammad Adeel Abbasi was born in a devout Muslim family in eastern Uttar Pradesh and brought up in a scholarly tradition. Possessing a literary bent of mind, he aspired to become a journalist and a writer. In 1921, at a very young age, he became the Chief Editor of the daily Zamindar, Lahore’s leading nationalist Urdu paper. He soon plunged into nationalist politics, was imprisoned by the British, and never looked back. He had an eventful legislative career in the UP Assembly during 1936-56. He wrote on a variety of subjects in an inimitable style and almost always without the help of recorded notes. He has written in Urdu a study of poet Iqbal, whom he knew intimately during his days in Lahore. This work was hailed by literary critics as a landmark treatment of the topic. He also wrote a history of the Khilafat Movement in the Urdu book Tahreek-e-Khilafat, of which this book is an English translation.

Ali Amjad was once a recognized name in India’s labor movement. Because of his deep involvement with India’s freedom movement and workers’ rights movement, he was often incarcerated for long periods of time. After migrating to Pakistan, he formally chose the field of labor law for the defense of workers’ rights as a senior lawyer of Pakistan’s supreme court. His Urdu novel Kali Mati (‘Black Soil’) is based on the historic labor strike of 1958 at

Ali Amjad was once a recognized name in India’s labor movement. Because of his deep involvement with India’s freedom movement and workers’ rights movement, he was often incarcerated for long periods of time. After migrating to Pakistan, he formally chose the field of labor law for the defense of workers’ rights as a senior lawyer of Pakistan’s supreme court. His Urdu novel Kali Mati (‘Black Soil’) is based on the historic labor strike of 1958 at the Tata Steel plant in Jamshedpur, and is partly autobiographical, as detailed in his Urdu memoir Shakh-e-Nehal-e-Gham (‘A Branch of the Sapling of Sorrow’). The novel also quite brilliantly unpacks the conspiratorial plot leading to the communal violence of Jamshedpur in 1964.

Ali Amjad was once a recognized name in India’s labor movement. Because of his deep involvement with India’s freedom movement and workers’ rights movement, he was often incarcerated for long periods of time. After coming to Pakistan, he chose the field of labor law for the defense of worker’s rights. He is included among the senior lawyers of Pakistan’s supreme court, where he is well renowned. His novel Kali Mati (“Black Soil”), based on the his

Ali Amjad was once a recognized name in India’s labor movement. Because of his deep involvement with India’s freedom movement and workers’ rights movement, he was often incarcerated for long periods of time. After coming to Pakistan, he chose the field of labor law for the defense of worker’s rights. He is included among the senior lawyers of Pakistan’s supreme court, where he is well renowned. His novel Kali Mati (“Black Soil”), based on the historic workers’ strike of 1958 at the steel plant in Jamshedpur, is considered a valuable addition to Urdu literature.

“A breeze blew from a direction unseen,

burned the garden of delight

But a branch of the sapling of sorrow,

they call heart, remained green”

Kazi Jalil Abbasi was born in the village of Bayara, district Basti, in Uttar Pradesh state. He attended schools in Basti, Gonda, and Unnao. He was educated at Aligarh Muslim University, Arabic College in Delhi, and Lucknow University. He was an agriculturist, freedom-fighter, lawyer, and a politician. He represented the Domariyaganj constituency of UP in the seventh and eighth Lok Sabha of the Indian Parliament. This book is an English translation of his Urdu

Kazi Jalil Abbasi was born in the village of Bayara, district Basti, in Uttar Pradesh state. He attended schools in Basti, Gonda, and Unnao. He was educated at Aligarh Muslim University, Arabic College in Delhi, and Lucknow University. He was an agriculturist, freedom-fighter, lawyer, and a politician. He represented the Domariyaganj constituency of UP in the seventh and eighth Lok Sabha of the Indian Parliament. This book is an English translation of his Urdu memoir, Kya Din The!

Memoir of an Indian academic, recounting his life from graduate school till his retirement, in locations in the Middle East and Europe, while maintaining his Indian roots. People interested in anthropology, life of an Indian immigrant in Europe, the politics of oil and the Middle East.

It has been more or less a year since ‘Transience of Life’ volume 1 was published. It is cause for much reassurance that serious-minded Urdu readers, some ven

Memoir of an Indian academic, recounting his life from graduate school till his retirement, in locations in the Middle East and Europe, while maintaining his Indian roots. People interested in anthropology, life of an Indian immigrant in Europe, the politics of oil and the Middle East.

It has been more or less a year since ‘Transience of Life’ volume 1 was published. It is cause for much reassurance that serious-minded Urdu readers, some venerable magazines, and a few dedicated friends and associates have praised the memoir in appropriate words and raised my confidence. Otherwise, in the last half a century, all my books and articles on topics in anthropology that were published are in English, the language that became the tool of my teaching and academic employment. Reading and writing in Urdu had been left behind in Lucknow half a century ago.