Port Louis, the capital city of Mauritius

Port Louis, the capital city of Mauritius, is a vibrant town. Located in the north-west of the country, Port-Louis will touch you for sure. Founded by French Governor Bertrand-François Mahé de Labourdonnais in 1735, the city is the economic hub of the island and is very lively during the day, teeming with life. Visit the colourful market, stroll through the streets, visit museums and other historical and cultural sites, taste the flavours of Mauritian street-food and meet the population … A tour in the capital is a must during your stay in Mauritius, let yourself be impregnated by the local life, the history and the culture of Mauritius. Port-Louis is a cultural melting pot, a city where traditions and the modern go alongside.

An entire day would probably not be enough to see all places of interest in Port Louis. You can start your journey at the Caudan Waterfront, the shopping centre located on the harbour front, and leave your car there before beginning your tour of the capital.

You will be struck by the beautiful avenue bordered with giant palm trees, facing the harbour. It is the Place d'Armes, also called Place Sookdeo Bissoondoyal, which leads to the Government House, built in the early 18th century during the French era, now housing the parliament sessions.

A visit to the Port-Louis market is a must. Embark on a journey for your senses, be amused by the very inspired glibness of vendors, follow the aromatic smells of fruit and vegetables, and taste those exotic flavours that are unknown to you. No doubt you will come out with a smile on your face. The craft and souvenir market next to the vegetable zone is also to be seen, though bargaining is recommended in this part of the bazaar.

To get a real feel of Port-Louis, you must take the time to walk along its streets. Heading north on the Royal Road, you will reach Chinatown, the old Chinese locality that conceals a lot of cultural and culinary treasures. You will find all kinds of shops, from traditional medicine to souvenir shops and grocery stores where you will find ingredients only available in the in the area. If you pay attention, you could even notice a small pagoda nestled between shops and restaurants… The Chinese community in Mauritius comes mainly from Guangzhou. At the end of the 18th century, during colonial times, the Chinese travelled to Mauritius to operate shops and craft workshops on the island. Since then, a community has settled here.

At the entrance of Chinatown sits the Jummah Mosque, an outstanding building constructed at the end of the 19th century for Mauritians of Muslim faith, and which is still open for daily prayers.

The Mauritian street food is also very famous and Port-Louis is the ideal place to taste all the flavours that make up the Mauritian culinary culture. The choice is yours: dholl puris and faratas – large pancakes made with flour and split peas served with various spicy sauces and currys, chilli cakes - small crispy chickpeas cakes with chilli, Chinese dumplings - tasty meat and vegetable balls, Chinese-style stir-fried noodles, and the famous bryani, a rice dish prepared with vegetables and meat with special spices, a delight!

One of the jewels of the capital is its theatre, currently under renovation, which dates back to the 19th century and has seen many theatrical groups performing on stage during its glorious days. It regularly hosted finest operas and operettas in vogue in Europe, and the theatre of Port Louis, one of the oldest in the region, was known for its exceptional acoustics.

Would you like to take a break to cool down before continuing your expedition? The Jardin de la Compagnie, few minutes away from the Government House, will offer you a nice breath of air in the shade of the centenary trees and big Banyan trees. You will come across statues and busts of some men who marked the history of Mauritius such as Léoville L'Homme and Rémy Ollier.

If you want to gain some height, the Citadelle, also known as Fort Adelaide, is the place to go. An old stone fortress built on the hill by the British to defend the capital, the Citadellle now houses shops and serves as a venue for shows and other cultural events. You will have a stunning view of Port Louis and the harbour!

At the foot of the hill sits the Champ de Mars dating back to the early 19th century, one of the oldest horse racing tracks in the southern hemisphere. The Champ de Mars is part of the Mauritian heritage. If you are in Mauritius between May and early December, you should attend a horse racing day and discover one of the many facets of Mauritian folklore.