Vodohod vice-president of marketing Mario Bounas explains why Russia is a great option for clients who want to experience a river cruise with a difference.

From the culture of St Petersburg to the rugged extremes of Siberia, Russia has an incredible amount to offer when it comes to river cruise holidays.

There’s a lot more to the world’s largest country than Tolstoy, tall furry hats and vodka. Russia is home to endless natural landscapes that are as diverse and dramatic as its incredible history.

The linked system of rivers, canals and other water bodies allow passage all the way from the Mediterranean Sea to the Arctic Ocean. The two main cruising rivers are the Volga, the longest river in Europe, and the Yenisei, running for 2,200 miles across central Siberia.

Despite the challenges presented by the pandemic, Vodohod delivered in excess of 400 cruise departures to more than 35,000 domestic Russian guests between May and November last year.

In 2020, the tour operator also launched a brand-new ship, refurbished another and unveiled a new range of destinations and itineraries. What’s more, with a hotly anticipated international market on the horizon for the 2021 and 2022 seasons, things at Vodohod are looking pretty good.

New ships in the Vodohod fleet

The latest addition to the fleet, Mustai Karim, set sail for the first time in August 2020. The 329-capacity vessel carried her first passengers along the Volga from Moscow to St Petersburg.

This route explores some of Russia’s fascinating towns, villages and ancient sites, including the Church of Transfiguration on Kizhi Island. The five-star ship offers incredible views along the way, with floor-to-ceiling windows and private or French balconies in each cabin.

In July 2020, Vodohod launched the world’s first expedition river cruise. This remarkable itinerary explores the unique natural and cultural heritage of Siberia from banks of the Yenisei. Departing from the city of Krasnoyarsk, guests can explore UNESCO World Heritage landscapes, traditional villages and vibrant cities.

The itinerary also includes some spectacular shore excursions. Passengers can view the yawning canyons, towering mountains and endless lakes of the Putorana Plateau by helicopter, or meet the friendly and resilient Siberian locals, renowned for their wonderful hospitality.

All of this is experienced from the luxurious comfort of the Maxim Gorky, a five-star ship carrying just 94 passengers. Guests can take in the views from the top deck solarium or panoramic bar. Alternatively, time can be spent in the reading lounge or enjoying one of Russia’s many craft beers.

For clients looking to rekindle their sense of adventure without sacrificing their desire for safety, a Russian river cruise is the perfect option. Vodohod has implemented a range of health and safety protocols across the fleet, including daily temperature checks, express Covid-19 testing, daily deep cleaning of cabins and common areas, and social distancing measures.