More than a year after Little Red Riding Hood’s Zombie BBQ released in the U.S., the fairy tale-based shoot'em up finally made it to Europe today, and on DSiWare no less. For their patience, PAL gamers need only pay 800 Nintendo Points for the full game.

It’s unlikely that North America’s DSiWare shop will receive Zombie BBQ, as it’s already seen a cart edition, and I remember reading somewhere that Nintendo doesn’t take kindly to retail games jumping onto the download service untrimmed. You can still grab a cart cheap for $14.99 on Amazon/Target, though.

Seeing as we’re a day away from Halloween and we’re celebrating the continued life of this cult favorite, I’ll give you a treat: Zombie BBQ art that didn’t appear in the game or promotional materials. The images are definitely NSFW, though, so turn away, office slackers and minors, lest you sully your eyes with images of a scantily clad Red, undead monstrosities, and reindeer scrotum.

When first concepting Zombie BBQ’s heroes, Spanish design company Ikari Studio approached Red and Momotaro with a cartoonish look, comparing the style to SNK’s Metal Slug series. The final game used a variation of these super deformed mock-ups, but the team also created more “mature” versions for the cutscenes.

Red’s final look gave the machine gun-toting heroine white hair, her outfit’s missing torso, and an extra inch on her dress’s hemline. Real talk, the character design on the right seems almost too scandalous for most M-rated titles.

There’s also artwork for the zombies that didn’t appear in the shipped game (as far as I know):

Whatever situation happened here was super gross. That’s the kind of zombie pile I’d keep on the opposite end of the screen as I walked by it in the game.

And this undead abomination is nuts – look at how terrified all the corpses are to even be a part of it:

It’s unfortunate EnjoyUp didn’t use it in the game. Nor did they expose this frightful sight to players:

And with that, Christmas is pretty much ruined.

If you like shoot'em ups, grab Zombie BBQ; it’s really fun!

Buy: U.S. Nintendo DSi (White, Pink, Black and Blue)

Import: Japanese Nintendo DSi (White, Black, Pink, Red, Lime Green, Metallic Blue)

See also: Tiny Review: LRRH’s Zombie BBQ