While many will soon be reading The Night Before Christmas, Nintendo has its sights set on another classic tale this week.

Leading the pack today is Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ (800 DSi points, or $8) on DSiWare. A shooter from Gammick Entertainment, the title has players killing everything in their path using an assortment of deadly weaponry. It was originally released in 2008 on the Nintendo DS to a cold critical reception.

Switching to WiiWare, Nintendo added three new titles to the download space today, the first of which is Lilt Line (500 Wii points, or $5). From Gaijin Games, the single-player rhythm title has players tapping along to the beat through 15 levels. A free demo version of Lilt Line is also available.

Also out on WiiWare today is Family Games (500 Wii points, or $5). The title is a collection of virtualized pen-and-paper games like Dots, Nine Men's Morris, Safe Cracker, Matchsticks, Tic-Tac-Toe, 4 In-a-Row, Battlefleet, and Hangman. The title also sports numerous game variations and a tournament mode, where up to four players can compete.

The last WiiWare title out today is Violin Paradise (700 Wii points, or $7). The game has players either performing in an orchestral group as a violist, violinist, or cellist, or conducting the ensemble.

Nintendo added one new title to the Virtual Console today, Darius Twin (800 Wii points, or $8). Originating on the SNES, the scrolling shooter casts players as an ace pilot tasked with taking down oncoming enemy forces in the sky. The game also sports a two-player mode, where players can fight together.

The last two titles out today are Jam Space: Pocket Studio (500 DSi points, or $5) and Just Sing! Christmas Songs (200 DSi points, or $2) on DSiWare. The former is a musical app that morphs the DSi into a pocket recording studio, and the latter is a Christmas-themed karaoke game. Players can sing into the DSi microphone and see how well they perform the popular Christmas songs "Jingle Bells," "Silent Night," and others.