It is with great sorrow that the family of Keegan Robert Thomas Bock announce his passing on December 15, 2023, at the age of 27. He was born September 8, 1996, in Rockford, Illinois to Amber (Cole) Roberts and Jeramiah Bock.

Keegan was a gifted athlete and loved all sports. He graduated from Shenendehowa High School in Clifton Park, NY in 2015 where he participated in football (his passion), wrestling, baseball and track. He enlisted in the United States Army and served in the Indiana National Guard for seven years. He earned a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice with a minor in digital forensics from Ball State University in 2019.

After school, he joined his father in the family business. He was able to be creative, use his strength and intelligence, and excelled in all aspects of the business.

Keegan enjoyed attending concerts and music festivals, cheering on the Chicago Bears, and gaming with his friends across the country. He loved playing pranks & scaring anyone who would fall prey to his antics. He was an avid motorcycle rider and relished the freedom of being outdoors and exploring nature.

Keegan had an adventurous spirit and loved traveling. He loved going to the ocean, hiking in the mountains, and being one with nature. When he was not traveling, he would explore local parks and take his beloved Australian Shepard, River, to play frisbee or play in the water. He cherished time with his little sisters who adored their ‘KeeBro’ and meant everything to them.

He leaves a huge hole in the hearts of his family and friends who were always entertained by his stories, quick wit, and hilarious sense of humor. He truly brought life to the party and will be deeply missed by all who were lucky enough to know him. You are so loved Keegan. You will be greatly missed by all of us and forever live in our hearts.

Keegan is survived by his mother Amber (Cole) and Stepfather Ryan Roberts of Arkansas, Father Jeramiah Bock and Stepmother Gwyneth Bock of Fishers, sisters Samantha (3) and Allison (1) of Fishers. He also is survived by his maternal grandmother Jewel Cole of Queensbury, New York and paternal grandfather Randy Bock of Rockford, Illinois along with numerous uncles, aunts, cousins and friends from near and far.

Keegan is now at peace joining his maternal grandfather Robert Cole, paternal grandmother Mary Bock, maternal uncle Timothy Simpson and maternal aunt Jacqueline Narulski.

Please use this space as a place to share memories, photos and/or videos of Keegan as we all grieve his loss together.

He will be honored with a celebration of life to be held at a later date in the way he would want to be remembered – as a loving, caring man who enjoyed life to the fullest.

Memorials gifts in Keegan’s memory may be made to one of the following:

Peyton Manning Children’s Hospital: https://give.stvincent.org/PMCH

Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer: https://www.komen.org/

Hamilton County Humane Society: https://www.hamiltonhumane.com/how-to-help/memorial

‘Spread kindness and live life to its fullest.’

~ Keegan Bock