Thailand's Crown Prince Vajiralongkorn is set to divorce his wife Princess Srirasmi Akrapongpreecha. HELLO!'s sister publication HOLA! has confirmed that the couple have finalised their separation with the consent of the country's monarch King Bhumibol Adulyadej.

"The king has granted permission to announce that Princess Srirasmi, the wife of Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn, has informed in a written document that she has resigned from her royal status," the palace said in a statement.

Prince Vajiralongkorn and Princess Srirasmi Akrapongpreecha have been married since 2001

The split comes after news emerged that the princess's family were involved in a corruption case which has seen some of her relatives arrested. Prince Vajiralongkorn and Princess Srirasmi, who met the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in May 2012 at a lunch held as part of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee celebrations, have conducted fewer official engagements together in recent months.

The royal couple with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in 2012

In April 2013, Prince Vajiralongkorn attended King Willem-Alexander and Queen Máxima of the Netherlands' inauguartion with his sister, Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn.

Prince Vajiralongkorn and his sister Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn

Prince Vajiralongkorn and Princess Srirasmi's union is the first-in-line to the throne's third marriage. In January 1977 he married Princess Soamsavali Kitiyakara and they had a daughter, Princess Bajrakitiyabha, in 1978. The couple divorced 15 years later although the former princess and her daughter continue to take part in official ceremonies.

Vajiralongkorn then married aspiring actress Yuvadhida Polpraserth, with who he has four sons and a daughter, in February 1994. On 10 February 2001 the prince tied the knot again, this time with Princess Srirasmi Akrapongpreecha and the royal couple later welcomed Prince Dipangkorn Rasmijoti.

Sign up to HELLO Daily! for the best royal, celebrity and lifestyle coverage

Email Address

By entering your details, you are agreeing to HELLO! Magazine User Data Protection Policy. You can unsubscribe at any time. For more information, please click here.

More Royalty

See more

GalleryWhere the British royals went to school and university

See where the likes of King Charles and the Prince and Princess of Wales were educated

GalleryRelive the royals' first Trooping appearances in glorious photos

The King's birthday parade - known as Trooping the Colour - sees the royals gather on the Buckingham Palace balcony

Princess Lilibet's milestones - everything Prince Harry and Meghan have shared

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex welcomed daughter Lilibet in June 2021

What will Princess Kate be called when Prince William is King?

The Prince of Wales will be known as King William V

GalleryRoyal arrests and court cases from Prince Marius Borg Høib to Princess Anne

From court cases to royally rebellious dogs...

Prince Harry was teased for this surprising habit picked up from King Charles

The Duke of Sussex lives in Montecito with his wife Meghan Markle

Queen Camilla to star in powerful first documentary since coronation

Her Majesty has worked to raise awareness

King Charles meets bereaved families of Southport attack victims

His Majesty made a poignant visit to Southport on Tuesday