Madeline Alice Spohr was born to Heather and Mike Spohr at St. John's Hospital in Santa Monica in 2007. She was named after her great-grandma Mary Alice. Maddie was 15 ¾ inches in length and weighed 3 lbs, 1 oz, and she was transferred to UCLA. Within hours of giving birth, Heather checked herself out of St. John's Hospital to go to UCLA to be by her daughter's side. In those first days, the March of Dimes pioneered treatments that saved Maddie's life. While Maddie spent 68 days in the neonatal intensive care unit at UCLA, her parents visited every day to touch her and love her. Madeline had wonderful nursing care as her parents held her and played Beatles Lullaby CDs for her to hear. Her father, Mike, plays guitar and shared his love of classic rock with Maddie from birth. Her mother, Heather, loved more popular songs and shared those songs with her daughter, as well as sang to her, giving her a love of music. A few weeks before she came home, the family painted the nursery purple and hung framed rock albums that featured babies and children on their covers.

In January 2008, young Madeline came home with her parents and was loved by her grandparents, Kirk and Linda and Tony and Kathy, aunts Monica and Leah, uncles Kyle and Sheridan, as well as many other relatives and friends. There were rocky times and breathing treatments, but the family managed every challenge and Maddie responded. Mike stayed home with Maddie for the first ten months of her life and Heather stayed home with her full-time since October. As parents, they were really careful with her health, but they also found a healthy balance by letting her live life. In every sense, Maddie knew she was loved as every moment was appreciated with her. In fact, Madeline loved to smile and really enjoyed everything life had to offer. Heather documented every moment of Maddie's life on her blog, The Spohrs Are Multiplying (www.remembermaddie.com), and shared Maddie's story with the world. Maddie was a really snuggly baby and she mostly slept between her parents at night. Even as she grew, she'd just turn and kick her way to comfort, taking over the middle of the bed. But, she also liked to curl up next to her parents, as she felt loved and protected. Although Madeline was tiny physically, mentally she was ahead of the bar. She was really smart and the happiest baby. She was curious about everything and everyone. She especially loved the family's little white Maltese, Rigby. Heather and Mike's friends loved Maddie as well. In fact, Maddie was the first baby that many of Mike's friends ever held. She had many "boy friends," as they all adored her.

Heather, Mike and the family celebrated the 11th day of every month since Maddie's birth, appreciating the gift they'd been given. They were so grateful to have her, know her and love her. When she woke up in the morning, Maddie always had a big smile. Her parents and grandparents read books to her such as, "Goodnight, Moon," and "Madeline." Wherever they took Maddie, everyone always said, "That's the most beautiful baby." With her beautiful blue eyes, she was always noticed. She was a mini-celebrity and she'd smile to people and say, "Hi!"

A few days before her first birthday, the family threw a Halloween themed birthday party where everyone wore costumes. The four Spohrs dressed up as the Flintstones – Mike and Heather were Fred and Wilma, Rigby wore a Dino costume, and Madeline was dressed as Pebbles, with a bone in her curly hair. Maddie was smiling from ear-to-ear in the photos. On the day she actually turned one, Heather and Mike bought her a cream puff. It was her first non-baby food and she devoured it.

At home, Madeline loved dancing to music. Mike played guitar for her and she loved listening to classic rock, waving her arms around. When she was asked, "What do the single ladies do?" Maddie answered and danced, "Uh-oh-oh-oh…" She did it just like the singer Beyonce. Maddie was good at blowing kisses and when you asked her how old she was, she held up one finger.

There were fun times at Christmas visiting with Mike's family in the Bay area and trips to see Heather's parents and family west of the San Fernando Valley. Maddie also enjoyed going to Dodgers & Giants baseball games and USC football games. A few weeks ago, Maddie took her first plane ride with her parents and family members to Arizona to see her first baseball spring training. It was only a few days, but it was wonderful.

When Maddie met other babies, she developed a greater understanding and would gently pat their heads. Maddie loved watching kids and she especially loved babies. She would even say, "Baby." By the time she was 17-months-old, Madeline could say "Dada up," "Hi baby," or if the dog barked too much, she said, "Stop." She was cruising furniture and she could walk with help of only one hand. Her favorite TV song was the theme song to "Ellen," while her favorite male voice was Matt Lauer's from the Today Show. In fact, the Today Show Family Blog featured the story about Maddie's crush and a photo of Maddie looking at Matt Lauer and smiling. She just loved his voice and even if she was fussy, she'd stop and listen to his voice. She took her first swim at her grandparents' house and she loved it. She was always fascinated by the swings. She had a baby swing after she was born and later loved the swing at the park. She loved riding in her pink car when she tired of her stroller. She was growing up so quickly, seemingly older than her age. Her parents never treated her like glass. Instead, they let her enjoy her world, embracing her curious nature. So smart, when she saw an entertainer singing "Itsy Bitsy Spider," she gave her a doubting look that said she knew there was no spider there.

Maddie's favorite color was purple, as her nursery was painted purple and decorated with purple bedding. Her favorite drink was chocolate milk and she loved Gerber Puffs. She had five baby teeth that were coming in and she was teething. Madeline was an energetic toddler, who liked turning things upside down and enjoyed climbing. She crawled and cruised all over the furniture. Maddie had amazing features, beautiful big eyes and a personality bigger than life. Her parents told her, "I love you," many, many times a day, and they never took a moment for granted. They appreciated and loved every day with her.

Maddie's final days were filled with joy. She attended a friend's birthday party and really loved eating a colorful cupcake. She also spent time with her family. Although her passing was unexpected by everyone including her doctors, in the end, she was told how much she was loved as she was surrounded by the family that she loved so very much. Her family has chosen a purple urn and Maddie will come home to rest. Madeline will be remembered as a beautiful girl who loved being tickled, as she'd shriek with glee. She was perfect and her parents wonder how they got so lucky to have her in their lives. She had the best energy and she displayed endless positivity, as she was so happy. Her family will miss her smile, her voice, playing with her curls, holding her, and kissing her. Maddie's spirit in enjoying life reminds everyone to live life to the fullest. Regardless of whether you are a having a mundane day or an exciting one, have fun and appreciate every moment. While the family had 17 months with Maddie, they hope another baby born prematurely will live many years longer. Maddie is loved by her parents Heather and Mike; grandparents; extended relatives; friends; and a worldwide audience on the web through www.TheSpohrsAreMultiplying.com.

The family will participate in the April 2009 fundraiser March of Dimes March for Babies. For more information visit the March for Babies www.marchforbabies.org/marchformaddie.

Memorial donations in Madeline Alice Spohr's name may be made to the March of Dimes www.marchforbabies.org/marchformaddie.