A self-described, yet not-so-serious “classically trained vocalist rescued from the clutches of the opera world”, Heather Michele came to circus after a career in classical music (but also dreamt of running away with the circus at age 7).

In her days with traditional opera, she was especially at home with Britten and Mozart, and made her professional debut as the Governess in The Turn of the Screw.. Her other operatic engagements included the Countess (Le Nozze di Figaro), Ellen Orford (Peter Grimes), Donna Elvira (Don Giovanni), First Lady (The Magic Flute), Lisbe (Spohr's Zemire und Azor), and Vitellia (La clemenza di Tito), among others.

Within the last decade, Heather has focused almost exclusively on the works of living composers. She has premiered works by Jeremy Howard Beck, John David Earnest, Daniel Felsenfeld, Jennifer Griffith, Kamran Ince, Paula Kimper, Roxanna Panufnik and Kamala Sankaram, just to name a few. Additionally, she has produced two of her own recitals that have included commissions and existent works by composers such as David T. Little, William Bolcom, and Bernard Rands.

Some of the organizations and venues she has performed with include the Park Avenue Armory, National Sawdust, José Limón Dance Company at Joyce Theatre, Le Poisson Rouge, HERE Arts Center, NYC Fringe Festival, Paola Prestini's Ferus Festival at The Stone, American Opera Projects, The Curiosity Cabinet, Opera on Tap, and the NY Composers Circle.

Now, as a circus artist and teacher trained in multiple disciplines including aerial silks, corde lisse, and aerial sling, she enjoys creating pieces that fuse aerial movement with 21st century classical vocal techniques, and loves to explore multi-disciplinary collaborations that allow room for more varied theatrical narratives than traditional opera.

She has trained with Lisa Natoli, Jordann Baker, Terry Beeman, Elizabeth Munn and Nicki Miller, among others. To date, she has had the pleasure of performing at Dixon Place with Lisa Natoli, The Muse Brooklyn, Duane Park, and with Bindlestiff Family Cirkus, as a part of their weekly Open Stage virtual showcases during 2020-2021.

During the 2022-23 season, she performed at Dixon Place with New Camerata Opera with a new rope and singing piece to an aria by Kamala Sankaram, was seen at the cell theatre in a new dance opera work by J.L. Marlor and Cassandra Rosebeetle, made her Slipper Room debut on hammock dressed as a shark, and was part of the opening cast of Circus Moxie at the new venue Brooklyn Art Haus. Most recently, she combined three of her disciplines (acting, silks and singing) in the new immersive theater work The Tiger’s Bride, which debuted at the cell theatre in February 2024.

Currently, you can find her on teaching and managing staff at Aerial Arts NYC, as well as extolling the virtues of excellent wine and glassware for Winemonger Imports, since she also happens to be an educated wine professional specializing in the wines of Austria. Check out her dedicated wine bio.

DOWNLOADS:

BIOGRAPHY

SHORT BIOGRAPHY

RÈSUMÈ/CV

HEADSHOT

for composers: