Share

Tweet

Share

Email

Singer/Songwriter Charlene Nelson Scott has always been unique in the music she makes. Her leadership style was guided by a genuine desire to acknowledge, appreciate and respect every individual. Charlene is the complete package; songwriter, producer, arranger, and artist. She has the talent of writing more than a chorus or loop, so often heard today, but a complete composition with lyrical depth and meaning highlighted by unexpected characteristics tailored to each track. Her music has received critical acclaim, whether recording it herself or by another artist. The vast number of songs currently shared on all music streaming sites is an indicator of the ‘well of musical wealth and spiritual depth’ she brings forth. Charlene has written, recorded and produced over 100 songs in multiple genres; yet, the character of each is never stale or repetitious sharing fresh tracks that uplift and inspire listeners worldwide – all leading to Jesus – the source of Charlene’s being! As she geared up for the release of her amazing single ‘God is at the Wheel’ from the album ‘In God we Trust’ We decided to catch up with Charlene for an exclusive interview with Camden Monthly Newspaper.

What inspired you to get into music?

Sang as early as 3. As an introvert singing was a better way to express my voice than speaking. Started recording at 14 and when the group was finished putting down our tracks, I begged the production team to let me stick around during mixing/mastering (although I had no idea what was going on but the music itch was not to be silenced!). I’ve been actively engaged with music since then :).

How would you describe your music?

Inspirational, honest, broad in range and content, an enjoyable experience

What would you say is your recording and songwriting style?

Great questions.

Recording – I’m never without a method to record as trinkets often evolve in my day-today. I get those initial thoughts recorded immediately and then as the work develops (composition, arrangement, etc,) I’m in the lab. I’m adventurous in the Studio allowing the music to be created organically; which is much different from the more rehearsed traditional Recording style I grew up doing.

Songwriting – One day while I was sitting at my desk in school, I was singing a song I’d never heard before – it was my very 1st songwriting venture. Sometimes it’s music first and sometimes it’s lyrics first. Other times, I hear just a melody with no words – I allow myself to flow with the purity of creativity as opposed to having a ‘songwriting session.’ (not that there’s anything wrong with that) This freedom has afforded me a discipline to approach projects or songs without strain or the need to force something to happen. (Very grateful and excited to now have 100+ songs featured in my Catalog)

Where would you like to see your music career in 5 years’ time?

Mainstream and on the lips of every music lover that’s drawn to my expression. Also, (and I say this optimistically), I’d like to tour extensively, worldwide.

Where can music fans listen to your music?

Fortunately, we’re available on all major music streaming services including iTunes, Spotify, Pandora, Amazon music, iHeart Radio.