25th January 2019 saw singer/ songwriter Charlene Soraia unleash her 3rd album Where’s My Tribe via Peacefrog Records. To coincide with this date it was announced that she’ll be performing at 3 Rough Trade stores. These being Rough Trade East in London and Rough Trade in both Nottingham and Bristol. So being a firm admirer of Soraia’s work resulted in myself pre ordering the record straight away. Fast forward to 11th January, I took a trip to Rough Trade to pick up a record attached to my order, I was actually pleasantly surprised to see Where’s My Tribe the shelves. When I arrived home later that day I immediately gave it a spin and all I can say is WOW. Now I loved both Moonchild and Love Is The Law but what Charlene has here is an absolute masterpiece. No wonder it was one of Rough Trades album of the month.

At 7.05pm the lights went down and Soraia then graced the stage accompanied by her acoustic guitar. Well this sensational set comprised of 9 tunes, 8 of which feature on the new LP and the other being a song which didn’t make the cut. “Hello. I’m Charlene and my tuner is broken so I’m going to have to use my phone. I’m very very cold so forgive me if my fingers look blue” Charlene mentioned before kick starting this performance with Where’s My Tribe. This exquisite number was perfectly delivered, the guitar strumming was mesmeric whilst Soraia’s beautiful vocal tones were super sweet. Just witnessing her right in front of me left me utterly transfixed, Where’s My Tribe was well written gem which well and truly hooked me. From these whimsical words, I assume that this track is about feeling separate from the world and you are chasing that dream so you feel that you are somewhere you belong. The live version differentiates to the actual studio version and this being purely down to the fact there’s an additional middle 8. “It’s been quite a while since I’ve actually played a gig so if you’ve got your rotten vegetables be prepared to lob them at my face” Soraia then quipped, yes it has been 7 months since the last London performance but Charlene sailed through this showcase at ease. Her angelic vocal tones could sing the phone book and I’ll still be completely captivated. Anyhow the second tune of the evening was Temptation. Sleekly delivered, the tantalising Temptation was deliciously dark. Soraia’s ear pleasing tones were soothing whilst the lyrics focused on a girl whose succumb to temptation and she’s now involved with a married man. Infused to the ending of Temptation was Now You Are With Her. Despite enjoying the whole record this has to be my personal favourite. Charlene’s vibrant vocals sent shivers down my spine whilst those lyrics were drenched in plenty of emotion. Anyhow this number painted a picture of best friends whom drift apart because the guy has other priorities as he has a new partner. Also it could centre down unrequited feelings which remained unsaid. I found the upbeat Beautiful People to be rather relaxing. Soraia’s sumptuously sweet vocals were literally a breath of fresh air, whilst those luscious lyrics left me utterly enthralled. “Those last 3 songs, when I recorded them for this album I literally recorded them with just me and a guitar in front of one mic. The next one I basically wrote just to kind of play around my little finger. Cause I realised that I was writing stuff that wasn’t including that finger. At the same time I was living above some neighbours that were very Jeremy Kyle, so this is kind of about them and my little finger” Charlene mentioned before getting stuck into Far Beyond The High Street. Considering this was the first outing of this song, Soraia sailed through it at ease. Anyhow this was both short and sweet, then you had those crystal clear lyrics which told how this situation was doing Charlene’s health no good “I wonder if the neighbours/ Ever press their ears to the walls to hear me cry“. Actually there was a feeling of seclusion hence the line “I never venture far beyond the high street”. It was the onto Charlene Soraia’s favourite song off the album and this being Tragic Youth. If I was to sum up this track in one word it has to be mesmerising. Everything about this was simply spot on, Charlene’s vocals were literally a ray of sunshine and those lyrics compelled me. I assume that this song is about laying the past to rest before focusing on the future “Must I commit my tragic youth to history/ Am I not still to recall when I need/ In my lonely hours they wonder like a vicious mystery/ Can I rewrite the tale that often makes me travel blindly”. Before delving into Saboteur Tiger, Soraia mentioned how the album was almost named after this track. Delivered at a fast pace, the upbeat Saboteur Tiger was an contagious number aided by Charlene’s spellbinding vocals “No more time/ No more space/ I can’t always tell if you’re lying/ We both lost faith/ No more crying lover/ No more wasting our time/ Making mistakes/ Au Revoir/ Saboteur Tiger”. The final song of the set came in the shape of Likely To Kill. “I just went to stomp my phone as if it was my tuner. My tuner broke earlier hence why I’m struggling to see because I’m meant to wear glasses. What else can I say about the album? It was actually just a bunch of demos that I recorded at home on my own” Soraia mentioned before saying that the album was a happy accident (the songs featured were mastered straight away). The incredible Likely To Kill was performed at a steady pace. The lyrics painted a story of a broken relationship. Basically girl loves guy but she’s had enough of all the arguments “I love you/ But I can’t fight you anymore/ Heal before I’m at my wicks end/ Resign from all of this suffering/ And if we stay in this together/ I’ll be more likely to kill you/ And me and most of the people that we know”. This sensational set was literally over in a flash, these songs performed were so impeccable. Charlene truly knows how to pen pristine songs, the finger plucking was whimsical and then ear pleasing vocal tones ooze folkish vibes. Moments later Charlene mentioned there was time for one last song and this being something which failed to make the album cut. Now the upbeat Giants ended what had been a spellbinding set. Now this was a well crafted song with fantastic lyrics which left me hooked “If living is a nervous means to an end/ I’ll shed my skin”.

Having been an admirer of Charlene’s work for the past 8 years, she always amazes me. The songs showcased this evening were incredible, Soraia literally sailed through it without a hitch. Even Far Beyond The High Street sounded incredible live. I really hope she performs the like of Harms and The Journey (which is in fact the oldest song on the album) at the Paper Dress Vintage show. As for the non album track, I previously witnessed Giants live back in 2015 and it actually showed a lot of promise. Four years later it’s still sounding incredible. Actually it heightens my anticipation for album number 4. I guess the saying Third Time’s A Charm is true as this record had a smooth release.

SET LIST