Charlene released their self-titled debut way back in November, its ten tracks set up as a vigorous chaser to the handful of comp cuts and seven-inches the Boston duo had already put out on their Sharkattack! label. Though the record's liner notes claim it was recorded intermittently between September 2001 and May 2002, Charlene seem oddly synched up to the early August ethos of right now, suggesting (with boyish, hands-in-pockets smugness) that we're all about to ram, unknowingly, into the beginning of the end-- that something stricter is poised to infringe upon loopy summertime bliss in big, dramatic ways.

Conceptually, it's sorta old news: the incorrigible melding of melody and noise, of disintegration, of static and gnashing feedback interrupting otherwise charming, palatable hooks. But Charlene's screechy intrusions are soothingly organic and deeply foreboding at the same time, thick with inevitability; reverb-heavy drums (and lots of drum machines), white noise, keyboards, guitars, and smooth, plaintive vocals build persistently repetitive verse/chorus tracks that never properly climax or transition, but keep worming around, making suggestions, promising things.

Muscular and sometimes heaving, Charlene's overarching sound might be vaguely reminiscent of the heady spin of bands like Catherine Wheel or the Jesus & Mary Chain, but Charlene's take on noise-pop is an oddly evasive one, and it's almost impossible to figure out which of the sounds here are real and which have been coyly synthesized-- each track unfolds like a spacey, fuzz-heavy jostle through a closet full of noisemakers, where everything is perfectly fine until, groping around in the dark, you knock something over and can't get it to shut the hell off.

Opener "Ripoff" is steady and controlled, featuring dull, pounding beats and consistently reeling guitars that (while not exactly rousing) are pretty far from complacent-- their intermittently squealing bursts break scene well. The track finally culminates in a maddening drum machine hammer that doesn't age brilliantly from listen to listen, but still makes its point about the songs that follow: pretty doesn't always last very long.

"Shot Down" is a lit-up electronic rain, a simple, clean keyboard melody loping along over shaky beats and disembodied guitar whine, while "Sugarblocker" is a blurry soundscape of trilling beats and earnestly breathed vocals. The half-acoustic "Ender" shows that Charlene aren't necessarily wedded to their formula: a soft, subdued dirge, its lush keyboard and docile guitar melody prove Charlene have the songwriting prowess to exist without tricks, that they can pull off slow-burning, sleepy sincerity in a way that's both tender and unexpected.

The band deserves credit for infusing a familiar formula with weight and tension, and for brewing a lingering unease. It's not exactly a seasonal record, but Charlene is suffused with the kind of awkward, transitory disorientation that marks our calendar year. Autumn inches closer.