For the hosting of the Presidency, an Independent Office was set up, under Law 4148/2013, at the Foreign Ministry’s Central Service, under the competent Deputy Foreign Minister and overseen by the Foreign Minister, with a special budget board and the Head of the Office serving as the competent manager.

The fifth Hellenic Presidency of the Council of the European Union concluded its mission and handed over to Italy. The Hellenic Presidency conducted its work at a period heavily affected by the ongoing economic crisis and its devastating effects in the social sphere. It was a period characterized by severe criticism of the EU and its way of functioning. This criticism and discontent were rather eloquently demonstrated during the recent European Parliament elections, when EU citizens proved to be quite vocal in their demand for a better Europe.

Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras reviewed the Greek Presidency at the European Parliament plenary session, today (2.07.2014) in Strasbourg. Prime Minister Samaras also held a press conference with EP President, Martin Schulz.

Read below PM Samaras’ Opening and closing statements at EP.

Upon the conclusion of the Greek Presidency of the Council of the EU, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Evangelos Venizelos held at Zappeion Megaron, on Monday, 30 June 2014, a press conference, during which he reviewed the main achievements of the Greek Presidency.

Read below DMP & FM Venizelos' opening statements

The European Council convenes today for a two-day summit. Today, the heads of state or government will gather in Ypres for a commemoration to mark the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War and then they will have an exchange of views on the strategic agenda for the Union in the coming years.

Minister of Justice, Transparency and Human Rights, Charalampos Athanasiou and Minister of Public Order and Citizen Protection, Vassilis Kikilias chaired, on 25 June, in Athens, an EU–US Ministerial meeting on Justice and Home affairs (JHA). A number of issues critical to the European Union and the United States were discussed, such as data protection, migration, terrorism and judicial cooperation.

The Greek Presidency of the Council of the EU is drawing to a close with flying colours in the area of gender equality, having promoted gender mainstreaming across the board of EU policies.

A Foreign Affairs Council meeting, chaired by the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton, took place today (23.06.2014) in Luxembourg.

The Council took stock of developments in Ukraine, on which several conclusions were adopted. Ministers also exchanged views on Libya and discussed the latest developments in Syria and Iraq.

A press conference was held at the end of the meeting.