Prishtina, February 19, 2014

Statement of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosovo Hashim Thaci at press conference after meeting with Greek Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Evangelos Venizelos

It was a special pleasure to welcome today in Prishtina the Greek Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Greece Mr. Venizelos, in his dual capacity as representative of the state of Greece, and of the EU.

I wish to thank the Greek Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Greece, Greek citizens, for their full support given to Kosovo in the process of democratic transition, in this process of the safe Euro-Atlantic perspective.

I thank the Greek State for the presence of their troops within KFOR, and the rounds of duty of Greek soldiers in Kosovo as well as the presence of Greek experts in EULEX, OSCE and all other international mechanisms.

I informed the Greek Deputy Prime Minister on the progress achieved in Kosovo, on democratic reforms that we are making in politics, economics or legislation, for our European agenda for visa liberalization process and the stabilization and association process.

I would like to acknowledge the full Greek support for dialogue to normalize relations between the state of Kosovo and Serbia, for the April 19 agreement, for the steps taken to implement this agreement and the agreement reached in principle for the functioning of the justice system in the north.

I hope that this process will continue in the future, and we will soon open the liaison office in Athens in order to have even faster, more frequent and more productive communication, but also attract the presence of many Greek investors in Kosovo, who have had complete success. And, we will deepen our bilateral cooperation between Kosovo and Greece.

Once again, thank you esteemed Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Venizelos.

*************

Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Greece, Evangelos Venizelos initially thanked Prime Minister Thaci for the reception and the friendly reference to bilateral relations between Kosovo and Greece.

Mr. Venizelos said that he met with Prime Minister Thaci in his dual capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Greece, and as President of the Council of Ministers of the European Union.

In the bilateral aspect, the meeting was an excellent opportunity for both sides to deepen and strengthen bilateral relations and to move forward towards a shared vision that is the European and Euro-Atlantic perspective for Kosovo and all Western Balkan countries, said Mr. Venizelos.

“For us the main goal is the European and Euro-Atlantic integration of Kosovo. This is an important project and during the transitional period we have time to process all the necessary steps,” said Mr. Venizelos.

In his capacity as president of the Council of Ministers of the European Union, based on the conclusions of the last meeting of the Council of Ministers of the EU, Mr. Venizelos underlined the commitment to Kosovo’s European perspective, in line with the European perspective of the Western Balkans and added that “the strengthening of relations between Kosovo and the EU, and promotion of economic and social development of Kosovo are important for the process of European integration of Kosovo”.

The conclusions of the Stabilization and Association Agreement between Kosovo and the EU, which we believe that will be implemented this year, will be a historic moment for the European integration process of Kosovo and the whole region, said Mr. Venizelos.

The Greek Deputy Prime Minister, in his capacity as representative of the European Union also stressed the clear message that reforms, good neighborly relations, strengthening the rule of law, promote stability and regional economic development and integration into the European Union.

Stay on the right path and continue to work for the European and Euro-Atlantic future and we will stand by your side” said Mr. Venizelos.

The Greek Deputy Prime Minister highly praised the process of interstate dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia to normalize relations between the two countries.

He also welcomed the Prime Minister’s gratitude for Greece’s contribution within KFOR forces, as well as within the EULEX Mission.

At the press conference held at the Kosovo Government building, the Greek Deputy Prime Minister spoke about Greek economic and financial presence in Kosovo, which he praised as powerful, and stressed that is the political will of the Government of Greece for Greek companies to always participate actively in the economic life of Kosovo.

Last modified: July 31, 2022