Ever since the dawn of time we've had the likes of heroic protagonists and sidekick shadow-dwellers buddying up to take down a greater evil with a combined effort. When it comes to video games, it's all about pulling out the right card and hoping you aren't left with the moron who can't tell their arse from their elbow. That's half the fun when booting up a brand new adventure for the first time; preying that you don't get left with the village idiot, who ends up being more of a burden than an assistant. Not mentioning any character in specific—*cough* Ashley *cough* Resident Evil 4*cough cough*.

We need somebody who can not only juggle the bags, but who is also capable of pulling off a pretty good shot when it comes down to facing an enemy horde. We need companions who can lend advice, and show us the way for when we stray too far from the beaten path. We need friends who would take a bullet for us and not ask questions in the process. None of these things should be a problem, right? We're not asking a great deal, are we?

It's safe to say that we've seen a rather diverse bag of sidekicks over the endless years of gaming. From the early days of wacky and wonderful forrest fairies to fluorescent tribal masks that grant us second lives; we've seen some favourable qualities, and some straight up idiotic ones that provide no real benefit to our arsenal.

So when we face the horizon and gear up for a solid campaign, we sure as hell hope for the best, and expect that little partner of ours to pull their own weight for the duration of the journey. Because should they be the type to stumble and fall for every gust of wind that so much as bristles past them, then we've got a major problem. So spouting from that additional task of keeping them alive, you're also undoubtedly faced with trying to keep your sanity intact, as you plough your way through to the final curtain call with them dragging at your heels.

Some are useful. Some are pathetic. Some are relatively handy, but structurally weak. Some are so timid and quiet that we barely even realise they exist beneath our enormous ego clouds. Either way, they're all along for the ride, whether we like it or not. So chances of swiping them aside and leaving them in a bush somewhere are somewhat slim.

It takes a lot to be a recognisable sidekick, so unless you've got an alluring quality, chances are you'll be dropped faster than Lydia was in Skyrim; what with her four miles-per-hour pace and monotone dialogue nobody gave two shits about.

But now, let's talk about the better types of sidekick; the types of sidekicks we walked alongside proudly as we marched into every battle through to the bittersweet end. With a warm toasty feeling in our hearts and a gleeful cheer fluently in our voices, we were proud to call them not only our sidekicks, but also our friends.

I present to you; TOP 10 LOVEABLE SIDEKICKS IN VIDEO GAMES.

(In no particular order.)

#10 - 'THE LAST OF US' - ELLIE

It's no doubt the majority of us all thought the exact same thing when we first met Ellie in The Last of Us. Like a sudden sinking feeling that she'd be nothing more than the anchor to pull us down, and capsize us in a blood-red sea of undead monsters.

With an escort mission on the lips of the quest giver, we immediately connect the dots and whine and moan about the fact we have to guide this defenceless little goblin through a city so overwhelmed by zombies and crack-addled maniacs.

But looking past the tedious segments of helping Ellie swim or having to locate a ladder so she can climb up it, there's a loveable charm that sparks warmly, after pacing through a great portion of the game. And slowly, over the course of the seasons, the shell cracks ever so slightly and reveals this kindhearted kid that wants nothing more than to just be a kid, regardless of being a scientists wet dream as a potential cure to the infection.

As you battle your way through the scourged lands as emotionally-scarred Joel, you begin to feel the shimmer in his eyes sparkle once again, for every conversation had between himself and Ellie whilst on a road to tranquility.

With memorable battles and nail-biting stealth segments, you slowly build the fear of potentially losing Ellie at any moment. It's almost as if she becomes this guardian angel to you that can still suffer the affects of a bullet wound.

Like a fatherly figure, you adapt to her surroundings and become so entwined with her methods that eventually you feel this bond between you that seems almost unique and somehow unbreakable.

Ellie, in some ways, becomes the daughter that every father would wish for when facing the final days of the apocalypse and the collapse of modern-society. With a personality so diverse and enchanting, it's no wonder we feel the urge to keep her on her feet and oddly comforted.

#9 - 'GOD OF WAR' - ATREUS

There's something awfully off-putting about seeing Kratos with a companion that isn't dressed in skimpy outfits and packed to the chest with larger than life breasts and platinum blonde frilly locks. It's almost like witnessing a friggin' warlord of Metal rocking out to a string quartet under a parasol of fairy lights and paper chains. It just doesn't work.

When encumbered with a new addition to the family, you are tasked with raising your one and only son, Atreus, or better known by his actual name, 'BOY', across a path of self-discovery and soul-searching, as he looks to become a man similar to his unearthly father. In a land dismally fractured and swarming with foul creatures, finding your way through to the peak of the mountains where Atreus wishes to lay his mothers ashes is deemed almost impossible. Oh, yeah, he wants to do that as well.

I mean, if Kratos was the sole occupant on this little voyage, then chances are he'd be at the very apex of the mountains and back home again before dinner time. But with your son, who urges you to push harder and train him to become just as great as his Godly and idolised father, those goals are swept aside, in order to play a game of 'monkey see, monkey do' for twelve hours straight, before so much as facing the thought of hiking those rocky trails.

With a rather rocky start, full of close calls and bow and arrow misfires from Atreus and his careless ways, we are led to believe that teaching this boy would be like asking a stroppy teenager to tidy their room for the first time in eight months. But then, as Kratos levels with him, and shows some minor sign of emotion towards his one and only child, a certain light emerges through Atreus' eyes, as he receives a harsh reality kick to the face. He listens to his father, and more importantly he learns about what it takes to become not only a survivor, but a warrior, and a good one at that.

By mid-game you find yourself so engrossed with Atreus' character growth that you become more inclined to max out his skill tree, as oppose to your own. With an increasing accuracy in shot and bond between father and son on a massive quest to survive the dangers of the tainted wasteland, you quickly learn to love Atreus and his ways.

He's useful in combat. He'll step in and deliver a killing blow in a stylish fashion. And he'll keep you entertained for hours on end with a monologue so diverse that no story can ever be heard twice.

#8 - 'BIOSHOCK: INFINITE' - ELIZABETH

It's not very often we come across an escort mission where the one being escorted actually turns out to be a rather valuable asset to our journey. With a history packed full of bland gameplay of picking up and reviving worthless NPC's from dusk 'til dawn, we've grown used to the idea that everybody will be the same.

When meeting Elizabeth in the picturesque floating city of Columbia, we do the regrettable thing of judging a book by its cover, and continue to trickle down the path of thinking she'll be nothing more than an arrow in our backs.

At first, we choose to believe that the remainder of the story will be nothing more than a lengthy escort mission from point A to point B. But as the enemies grow more powerful and our confidence wears thin, we suddenly meet the new Elizabeth that holds an entire fleet of abilities that seemed almost impossible when first meeting her.

With the power to control and pause time, she gives us the winning edge over any battle and proves herself as a useful tool in any situation. That as well as always being a helpful little vendor that will gladly provide you with a wheel of endless ammo, and health packs throughout every encounter. Another note worth mentioning is that Elizabeth is essentially invisible, and whilst I stormed through the largest armies with odds so incredibly stacked against me, I never once had to worry about her holding me back or suddenly requesting immediate assistance. This meant being able to do what I had to do without the stress of keeping a second eye firmly on her.

She'll throw you money. She'll keep you stocked on ammo and health. She'll provide you with a cheeky memorable quote or gesture. And she'll be the sidekick every hero dreams of having when powering through a city with nothing but the clothes on your back and a minimal chance of survival.

#7 - 'UNCHARTED: A THIEF'S END' - SAM

When looking back over the years and syphoning out all great gaming franchises, I always seem to think of Uncharted as being the centrepiece to the spire. Mainly because it provides us with an enormous amount of satisfaction that no other game can dare challenge. With iconic characters that resemble every emotion in the book, and well-scripted scenes that make us feel as if we're living through the very eyes of the protagonist, it's no wonder it always manages to win every award in the book.

Playing through Uncharted as the beloved Nathan Drake is a lot like playing Tomb Raider as Lara Croft. Only it's whole lot more than that. And unlike Lara, and as much as I respect her godly aura, there's still something that Nathan manages to bring to the table and beat Lara on every single time. Perhaps it's his attention to detail and love for the history, as opposed to just wanting to steal it. Or maybe it's his happy-go-lucky courage, as he dishes through puzzles and armies, as if the rain has never once touched his scalp. Whatever it may be, Nathan brings a certain joy to our faces when we get to take control of him on any adventure.

After seeing the world as Nathan, we come to learn that his brother, Sam, had emerged from the smoke after several years of being apart. So when they relink one afternoon and talk of memories past, we suddenly feel that bond between two brothers. We feel that connection, as they laugh and joke about life and discuss future antics like any couple of brothers would do when merely kids.

As memories are told and plans of action are laid out to uncover 'the big score' in one epic quest to scavenge the long lost treasure of once renowned pirate, Captain Henry Avery, we are suddenly thrown head first into a whole world of adventure and excitement.

Walking beside your long lost brother, you'll come to learn that a siblings bond is almost impossible to shatter, and that no matter how small your circle may be, there is always room for a brother to stand alongside you.

He'll fend off your enemies. He'll clue you in on where to go next, when you're just about ready to tear your own arm off in anger. He'll provide a laugh or two, and he'll back you up through thick and thin, as any older brother would in reality.

Without our Samuel, the thrill of hunting pirates treasure might've seemed a little lonely, as if missing the counterpart to our hero's wit and remarkable pride. It almost makes you wonder how the franchise might've turned out if he had popped up three games earlier, doesn't it?

#6 - 'BEYOND: TWO SOULS' - AIDEN

Although not the most chatty sidekick in the world, there's a certain alluring quality about Aiden, and his devoted love for Jodie, as he lingers in the air and watches her through every chapter of her life.

There's a connection between the two of them that you feel instantly, and even though you cannot really see him, you are still able to sense his aura floating between your shoulders of every waking moment, as you shift through the world as a poorly treated test subject under the roof of a mad scientist.

For those who are not aware of the story behind Beyond: Two Souls, it is essentially a supernatural journey through the life of Jodie, and her link to the mysterious entity known as Aiden; a presence that always hangs over her and pulls her through all situations, both good and bad. Like a guardian angel, or perhaps a conscience that always makes you think twice about any scenario, maybe.

Possessing such powers and having this rare gift that so many government officials wish to exploit, you can only imagine the thrill of the chase, as she tries so desperately hard to live a normal life without having the strings of her puppet-like self tugged at.

From going to birthday parties to sneaking out at night to a local bar, Aiden follows in your shadows and becomes a playable character on occasion; allowing us to either make or break a situation. Whether being a kind-hearted spirit or a demonic entity that only wishes to corrupt, it is YOU who pulls the strings and builds the bridge between yourself and Jodie.

He'll either be your best friend or your worst enemy. Either way, at least he has... spirit.

I'll show myself out.

#5 - 'MAFIA 2' - JOE

For every heroic lead there is a moronic accomplice. Or in Mafia's case, there is a Joe Barbaro to a Vito Scaletta. That doesn't technically mean it's a bad thing, though. I mean, Joe acts a brother to Vito from beginning to finish, and although he acts as a gateway drug to a life of crime, he always manages to stand tall and keeps a promise; especially to his long-term friends.

Joe is one of the most loyal men in the Mafia series, and that's really saying something since it's so infested with corrupt families and backstabbing wise guys. But when it comes to those close to him, he becomes more than a friend to those in need, but more or less a brother in arms that would be willing to lay down life and limb for the sake of loyalty and respect.

Taking Vito in from the streets and bringing him up to speed in a life of gangsters and crime-based antics, Joe quickly climbs the ladder and still makes sure to pull Vito up with him, no matter the consequence. He's thoughtful like that, and you come to see that over time as you go through Hell and back together, in a shared dream of reaching the summit of the criminal underworld.

Joe is an undoubtedly a funny guy, with an entire log of Dad jokes and face-palm one-liners that'll make you cringe from start to finish. But that's the beauty of it, because without him being there to make you chuckle, the environment would suddenly become a whole lot more mundane and unbelievably bleak.

Mafia, in itself, is a dramatic story, so filled with violence and darkness that it becomes this obvious melancholy drama that wants you to engage in its realistic themes. But with Joe there to balance out the Scales of Justice, you are almost thankful for him being around to iron out the creases and remind you that there can still be some form of light from beyond the spiraling tunnel abyss.

#4 - 'GEARS OF WAR' - DOM

Just because our character is metal to the core and more badass than any of us ever dream to be, it doesn't technically mean they're completely resistant to slushy emotions and contagious smiles.

It doesn't matter if you're slashing your way through sandstorms of bullet clusters or acid refluxes being spat out of a locust's teat. You are still, surprisingly, a human being with a whole frying pan full of feelings, and those go a long way when you devote them to sworn brothers like our good friend, Dom, from the Gears series.

Playing through the Gears of War series as Marcus and his spleen-tearing squadron of bandits felt like being involved in a troop a whole lot more enticing than most box-standard shoot 'em up titles. We had this attachment to each of the characters, as we built everlasting relationships with each of them personally. From the world-class Cole to loveable dimwit Baird, gullible Carmine to brother in arms, Dominic.

A very personal friendship blossomed with Dom over the course of three games; a friendship I couldn't compare to any other. And just hearing that familiar narrative and general chit-chat made you feel like you'd known him your entire life. So by the end of the first game you knew as much about Dom as you did Marcus. That's something video games struggle to do these days; build that special bridge between characters, especially in video games that are supposed to be all teeth and no smile.

Dom will have your back to the very end. He'll always be there, not only as a second gun, but also as a brother, and an emblem on the sidekick pedestal for all contenders to admire and live up to.

#3 - 'BORDERLANDS' - CLAPTRAP

In the early days of Borderlands the beloved Claptrap was nothing more than a sarcastic little know-it-all with an attitude for mocking you, and essentially pointing you in every wrong direction imaginable. With only a few select scenes in the first base game, he was almost forgettable, to say the least. And even now, when I look back at those first couple of hours of gameplay, I still feel the need to go back and shoot him in the eye all over again.

But from the genetic code of a potentially great sidekick came a new and improved version that would be introduced to us in Borderland 2. With a glossy new interface and a voice still as tediously patronising, Claptrap was back to take a second swing at us, with a whole new bunch of useless information. That, as well as a series of 'your mama's so fat' jokes, that literally had no input towards the plot other than to make us smile. So, what did we do? Well, we ignored him again, of course. Either that, or we shot him repeatedly until he spat out some other worthless crap. But deep down we hoped that he'd be given a third chance, and a small part of us wanted him to emerge from his cowardice ways and come out guns blazing in the next installment.

So that's exactly what happened when Borderlands: The Pre-Sequel hit the consoles in 2014. And although not technically a sidekick in-game, he still became a playable character that finally reached the spotlight, after so many years of pretending to be worthy of recognition.

Claptrap made us laugh more times than we can count, and for that he earned a worthy spot as a sidekick in the Borderlands franchise, despite the fact he tried to kill us countless times and spent several hours referring to us as 'his minions,' whilst escorting us through his possessions.

He may not be the most courageous sidekick on the roster, but he sure is loveable and quite simply a one of a kind creation that I'd never get tired of pointlessly shooting at.

#2 - 'JAK & DAXTER' - DAXTER

One of the most loveable hero's of the PlayStation 2 era, for sure. Daxter of the Jak series had that spark that every great sidekick needed in a platform video game. His comedic values and ability to act as a navigation system, as we crawled through the suburban dwellings of Haven City or sandstorm-riddled deserts of the Spargus Wastelands; not once did he lead us astray. Always sitting upon our shoulders and pointing us in the right direction, he was essentially a friendly compass that kept us on our toes and always moving forward.

With a comment for most things, whether being mission-based or slating some NPC in a snide remark, Daxter sure as hell made things a little more entertaining for us, as we journeyed through a whole ocean of worlds.

Daxter did however eventually go on to have his own game in 2006 on the PSP. However, in ways, it just didn't feel the same without Jak being around. It was like Yin without Yang; it just didn't balance well.

Jak and Daxter have become such an iconic duo over the years that they're still well remembered in todays generation. With remastered titles and gossip of a potential fourth installment, it's quite clear we aren't ready to let go of the beloved team just yet.

Without Daxter, there's no Jak. That's just the way it is. So let's hope we'll be seeing them return to our screens in the near future!

#1 - 'NI NO KUNI: WRATH OF THE WHITE WITCH' - DRIPPY

When it came to thinking of the perfect sidekick candidate for a JRPG, so many came to mind that I couldn't quite think of one in specific. So I dove deeper into my mind and reminisced about the countless hours of epic quests and memorable heart to hearts I'd had with thousands of characters.

Eventually, one came to mind, and although at first I couldn't put a name to the face, I knew exactly who I wanted to feature on this list. And what made him more of an appealing choice was his iconic Welsh accent that screeched in the back of my brain. Something about that just made me laugh and remember a whole bunch of segments from my initial play through of Ni No Kuni.

Our beloved, slightly annoying sidekick, Drippy. What a character Studio Ghibli created there. With a lantern for a nose, and a thick Welsh tinge for an accent. That's something you don't see everyday. But the developers really pulled it off when it came to creating a little counterpart to our protagonist, Oliver. And without Drippy, we'd feel a slight emptiness in our hearts that would leave a void unfillable.

Yes, technically he is USELESS in combat, but he makes up for it with his comedic genius, and his competence to act as a walking, talking, squishy little conscience to Oliver. Without that, we'd spend half the time aimlessly roaming and wondering what we should even be doing.

So, Drippy, we thank you for not being incredibly worthless. You earned our love on this one.

WHERE WOULD WE BE WITHOUT THEM?

In a generation where solo campaigns are thriving and couch co-op is taking a final bow in the distance, we have to feel a slight piece of sadness in our hearts, as we look back at all the great sidekicks we've seen over the years.

These days the whole world is accustomed to online gaming and one-player experiences that the thought of a second character shadowing us seems somewhat ludicrous. With an array of titles that focus solely on your character and your character only, it seems as if nobody has time to develop a solid sidekick anymore. But with a few rare titles like Borderlands, couch co-op urges to make a comeback and deliver a whole banquet full of fresh and likeable characters that'll gladly stand alongside us.

There have been some amazing tales over the years that have developed friendships unlike any other. Humans, robots, spirits, and monsters; all of which have had a backstory and quality that made us feel a strong bond with them that we never wanted to break or come to an end.

As video games continue to expand and go above and beyond our wildest expectations, we can only cross our fingers and hope there's a small space for a sidekick in an enormous future where anything is possible.

- J Tury

(HONOURABLE MENTIONS BELOW)

Jordan Tury

Of course, I couldn't miss out some of these guys. I knew I had to include them somewhere in the article, otherwise I'd probably never hear the end of it from a select few fans.

The last thing I want is a death threat for not including somebodies life-long favourite sidekick, so here is a small list of honourable duo's that didn't quite make the cut.

Sorry in advance if I still missed out your favourite.

There quite a lot of games out there.

HONOURABLE MENTIONS

'RATCHET & CLANK' - CLANK

'SUPER SMASH BROS.' - LUIGI

'FABLE 2' - DOG

'DONKEY KONG' - DIDDY KONG

'FALLOUT' - DOGMEAT

THAT'S ALL FOR NOW, GUYS!

Thanks for taking the time to read this article. I really do appreciate your continued support and will aim to publish between one and three stories a week. So be sure to check back on my Vocal page for new lists and features!

For a full showcase of my work; including novels, poems, articles and photography, please check out my site.

Thanks guys.

- J Tury