Dak'kon was better than Morte. I mean, he was the last wielder of the Karach blade. What was Morte? The last wielder of Ingrid's teeth?

Of the games with sidekicks I've played, only Deekin (in SoU, not HotU) was somewhat entertaining. In a very infantile way, I admit, but what the hell.

Morty comes close, but only as 'better than most'.

Crooked Bee said:

FFIX was my favourite in the series. That makes the choice all the more difficult.

Still, Morte wins, just because, well, it's goddamn Planescape. Although all the characters in it are awesome, only Morte has this particular "sidekicky" quaility in himself.

made said:

He was so adorable. Only Deekin made NWN bearable.

Please die.

My favourite was Vhailor. His make believe thing was way cooler than Karach blade.

made said:

http://images3.wikia.nocookie.net/__cb20070427023002/forgottenrealms/images/a/ac/Deekin_portrait.jpg

He was so adorable. Only Deekin made NWN bearable.

He was a li'l bro, the only henchman in HotU to stand up to the final boss. And he had more wit, charm and intelligence than that other naive outcast idiot, Merrill. Which, admittedly, isn't saying much.

Also, Morte.

I entered this thread expecting someone to mention Boo & Deekin followed by a "go die" reply during the first 10 posts.

I remember Vivi being an alright character, though. His background had all the elements to make him emo as fuck, but he was at worst somewhat sad and insecure.

edit:

Cherokee_Jack said:

Always err on the side of the JRPG character.

Agreed with VoD. Also, Morte became very annoying at times. Dak'kon was, were the real shit was. Poor motherfucker forced to follow you around etc. Still have fond memories of reading this disc of zerthimon and later seeing the Illithids as enemies in other games thinking "no wonder that guy hates them". :D

Morte. I played PS:T three times and I never had the hearth to left him in the pilllar of skulls. He is just way too cool. "Don't hurt female zombies, Chief." "I think she was looking at me!!"

I love the incredibly ignorant idea getting thrown around in the comments on that page, about how people will auto-vote for Vivi because PST is soooooooooooo much older than FF!X and, thus, is irrelevant.

Morte may never have been my favorite Planescape Buddy, but I love his little arc and he's so well written that he is--in every play through--with me from beginning to end.

The poll is also pointless because 99% of the shitbags coming to that site don't even know PS:T.

I'm glad I'm one of the 1% elite who doesn't have a clue who this vivi is.

I don't even know who is Morte's adversary.

I quit playing FF when the franchise transitioned from the SNES to the PSX. The advent of CDROM and the FMV triggered the beginning of the of JRPGs

other than dak'kon I have soft spot for cassidy, bao-dur(PERFECT voice acting just like dak'kon) and of course sephiroth-sama

http://asia.gamespot.com/greatest-video ... art&page=2

oh sweet jesus Iolo I'm so sorry you even lost to some fucking dog called missile