Will Patton – Garrett Randall

Born in Charleston, South Carolina in 1954, William Rankin Patton has enjoyed an exciting career in film, series, and voice work. The actor grew up on a farm where his Lutheran priest father and mother ran a foster home. Interestingly, his father had some experience as a playwright and play director.

Will Patton would follow in his father's footsteps, starring in films such as “Romeo Is Bleeding” and “Armageddon” as well as series like “Falling Skies”. As said, the actor also has done voice work like narrating the books of authors such as Stephen King.

Garrett Randall

In Season 3, we will learn an interesting secret about Jamie Dutton’s background – one that involves Garrett Randall. Of course, we’re not going to give away anything, but we have to say that Garrett Randall is one mean man.

After killing his own wife, Randall was sentenced to life. Back in the present, he has done his time, but he still seems to be harboring a deep hatred for the Duttons, save for Jamie Dutton. Thirty years is a long time to hold onto anger and want to enact vengeance on someone.

Dabney Coleman – John Dutton II

Dabney Wharton Coleman was born in 1932. His film career took off in the 80s with movies like 1980's "9 to 5," and 1982's "Tootsie." In the 90s he was in "The Beverly Hillbillies," "You've Got Mail," and "Inspector Gadget."

On TV, he was Burton Fallin in "The Guardian," and Louis 'The Commodore' Kaestner in "Boardwalk Empire." He was married twice but both marriages fell apart. He has four children.

John Dutton II

As the name itself would suggest, John Dutton II was John Dutton III's father. He was the and the former proprietor of Yellowstone Dutton Ranch. John Dutton III took control of the business after his father retired. John Dutton II died of a disease in the mountains.

This happened a couple of years before the show's beginning. Before he passed away his last wish was that his job will never up the ranch and their land.

Neal McDonough – Malcolm Beck

We’re guessing you have seen this actor before. Doesn’t his face seem just a bit too familiar? That’s because Neal McDonough has had a career spanning many decades both in cinema and TV. For example, he has starred in “Minority Report”, “Star Trek: First Contact”, and “Flags of Our Fathers”.

On TV, he has had main roles in “Desperate Housewives” and “Boomtown”. Born in Dorchester, Massachusetts, McDonough studied for a Bachelor of Fine Arts at Syracuse University. Since then, he has just gone from strength to strength.

Malcolm Beck

According to audience votes, Malcolm Beck is the most favorite villain of “Yellowstone”. Out of 844 votes, 26% named Malcolm Beck as the best villain of the show — at least for season 2.

Beck and his brother, Teal, aim to grow their business but Thomas Rainwater and the Broken Rock Indian Reservation as well as Dan Jenkins prove to be a thorn in their backside. The Becks also get on the wrong side of the Duttons, which ended up being a very costly mistake. Malcolm Beck ended up paying the highest cost for that error.

Isabel May – Elsa Dutton

Born in Santa Monica, California, Isabel May has a promising future ahead of her. She started out pretty young, getting booked for roles in film and TV since the young age of 17.

Though her acting range still needs time to reach its true capacity, Isabel May has starred in westerns, sitcoms, actions, thrillers, and romantic comedies. For instance, she had a role in The Daily Wire production “Run Hide Fight” and was the main protagonist of “Yellowstone” origin story “1883”. We are sure to see plenty more of this actress in the future.

Elsa Dutton

We don’t encounter this character in the main series. However, if we go watch the origins story, “1883” we learn more about Elsa Dutton. This tomboy cowgirl was made for the wild wild west. Only her Aunt Claire could be said to have been tougher than her.

She left her family for Fort Worth, Texas where she met her future husband, Ennis. A group of bandits put an end to their romance, but Elsa had a chance at love again when she met a Comanche Warrior called Sam. She was later killed by a Native American.

Karen Pittman

Willa Hayes was born in Nashville, Tennessee. She then moved to New York to study acting at NYU. This actress has yet to make a big splash on the big screen as she has starred in only a couple of productions including “The Bourne Legacy” and “Custody”.

However, she has made a solid impression in the world of TV. Some of her standout performances include that of Mia Jordan in “The Morning Show” and Lisa in “The Americans”. For now, her career in series appears to be on the rise as she has also been cast in “Yellowstone”.

Willa Hayes

This character is known for her practical and determined attitude, captured memorably in her most famous line, “Should is a useless word, almost as useless as hope”. Willa Hayes was the CEO of Market Equities, a company that has big plans for Bozeman. It is not good news for the Broken Rock Reservation or Yellowstone.

For Willa, her plans never come to fruition as a scandal blows up based on an accusation of sexual harassment against Hayes. We certainly smell a rat – one living on Yellowstone Ranch.

Josh Holloway – Roarke Morris

We’re betting you recognize this actor. This actor is most famous for his role as the mysterious bad guy, Sawyer, on “Lost”. Born in San Jose, Josh Holloway and his family soon moved to Georgia. On leaving high school, Holloway took up modeling – it is not hard to see why.

He soon became involved in acting, with one of his first appearances being in an Aerosmith song. Holloway now is married to his wife Yessica Kumala and the couple has two children. Interestingly, the actor is a distant relative of Confederate General, Robert E. Lee.

Roarke Morris

We see a different perspective on the Market Equities deals with Roarke Morris. Also, a native to Montana, the Morris family owns the Cross Creek Ranch. Roarke Morris works for and with Market Equities to buy out the resident farmers and ranchers so that the company can build an airport.

The thing is — John Dutton won’t sell. Unfortunately, Roarke meets the much nastier side of the Dutton family – and we’re not only speaking about Beth here. Although, she gives him as much grief as pleasure.

Jacki Weaver – Caroline Warner

Jacki Weaver has an incredible acting history. The actress was born in Sydney, Australia, and has been in everything from classic theater productions like “A Streetcar Named Desire” to numerous films including the critically acclaimed “Silver Linings Playbook”, to TV series such as “Secret City” to talk shows and games shows.

The actress has demonstrated her versatility by taking on roles like the mother in the recent film “Father Stu” alongside the conniving businesswoman in “Yellowstone”. The actress’s love life can probably inspire its own TV show, as she is currently married to her fourth husband.

Caroline Warner

The Dutton family has made enemies with all kinds of individuals – and one of them happens to be Caroline Warner, a woman determined to have her way no matter the cost. Warner is the CEO of Market Equities, a company that plans to build an airport and ski resort in Bozeman.

The problem is they need land and some of the local ranchers will make sure they hold onto their land for as long as possible. The Duttons prove to be the most stubborn and for two seasons Warner comes head-to-head with this family.

Tanaya Beatty – Avery

This actress has an interesting background. She was born to a mother of the Awaetlatla First Nations in Canada and her father was of Himalayan ancestry. She was then raised and adopted by an Italian family living inland in British Columbia. Tanaya Beatty then studied at Vancouver Film School and has enjoyed a successful acting career.

She has starred in the TV series, “Arctic Air” and “The Night Shift”. She has also had added appearances in the films “Hostiles” and “Through Black Spruce” to her repertoire.

Avery

Many of the Yellowstone ranch hands came from difficult backgrounds and often made up the outcasted members of society, and Avery is no exception. This one-time exotic dancer was recruited by Rip Wheeler.

Like many of the Yellowstone ranch hands, Avery is a tough character and is not to be trifled with. Though she will share the bunkhouse with male employees, she warns them not to mess with her. Except, this young lady takes a liking to one of her own – and she could not have made a worse choice.

Gretchen Mol – Evelyn Dutton

This Connecticut-born actress has had plenty of onscreen time, both in terms of film and TV. During high school, the actress took to starring in school productions. After leaving school, she began working in summer stock theater. Some of her early stand-out roles include Spike Lee’s “Girl 6” and “Rounders”.

Since then, the actress has added some notable films and series to her acting credentials including “3:10 to Yuma”, “Manchester by the Sea”, “Boardwalk Empire”, and “Mozart in the Jungle”. Despite her few appearances on “Yellowstone”, Mol as Evelyn Dutton shows the hardness of ranch life.

Evelyn Dutton

This character’s death has repercussions for the family years later. Evelyn Dutton and her two kids, Beth and Kayce, go on a horse ride around the ranch. Her daughter is frightened of horses and is not able to control hers during the trip.

When her own horse catches a fright, it accidentally causes Evelyn’s horse to panic and collapse on its rider. Instead of sending her son to seek help, the mother, hardened by ranch life, makes her daughter search for her father. However, only by nightfall, did they find the body – a bit too late for Evelyn Dutton.

Kelly Rohrbach – Cassidy Reid

Kelly Rohrbach was born in 1990. While she is best known for playing C.J. Parker in the 2017 film "Baywatch," she's also an avid golfer, who played for her college team. After graduating from college in 2012 she enrolled at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art.

In 2014 and 2015 she booked some notable modeling jobs for Gap, Old Navy, and even Sports Illustrated. In 2015, at the age of (how surprising) 25, she dated Leonardo DiCaprio. Today, she is married and has a baby boy.

Cassidy Reid

The recurring role of the character Cassidy Reid only lasted four episodes, but it has definitely left an impression on us. She's a past prosecutor and rodeo queen. John Dutton advocated for her to become Montana's Attorney General.

She finally got the position after Jamie Dutton stopped his campaign. But, alas, she later stepped down. Her first appearance was in the episode "A Thundering," while her last was in "Touching Your Enemy."

Wendy Moniz – Governor Lynelle Perry

You have probably spotted this actress somewhere before. Wendy Moniz was born in Kansas City, Missouri but went on to study at Siena College in Loudonville, New York. It was landing the role of Dinah Marler in the soap opera, “Guiding Light” that gave Moniz her big break. The actress scooped in several awards for her part.

Ever since she has been a regular actress on TV, her list of acting roles just kept getting longer. Her credits include playing Laura Moretti in “House of Cards”, Elaine McAllister in “Betrayal”, Jill Burnham in “Damages”, and Anne Frasier in “Law & Order: Organized Crime”.

Governor Lynelle Perry

From our first meeting with Governor Lynelle Perry, we can see the traditional and conventional way of doing things in Bozeman, Montana.

While she is not one of the main characters, she makes appearances throughout the seasons. Not only does she have a similar mindset to John Dutton, but they have both experienced deep losses, like Perry’s loss of her husband and Dutton’s of his wife. They grow close, but nothing really takes off between them. Later, we see this governor moving to higher places.

Dave Annable – Lee Dutton

It is almost impossible to recognize this actor as for the role of Lee Dutton his physical appearance experiences a dramatic change. The man behind Lee Dutton is Dave Annable, noted for his roles in series such as “Brothers and Sisters”, “What If”, “666 Park Avenue”, and “Red Band Society”.

He has also starred in films like “Little Black Book”, “What’s Your Number?”, and “You May Not Kiss the Bride”. Currently, Annable is married to actress, Odette Annable, and the couple has one child.

Lee Dutton

Not only was Lee the oldest Dutton son of the current generation, but he was the most devoted to the Yellowstone Ranch of all of John Dutton’s children. This makes his death even more difficult for John Dutton to accept.

His death and Robert Long’s death are the catalysts that give the series the momentum to keep going. It is the reason the Dutton family grows close, but also the cause of their private suffering. With Lee, we see a family united by their love for each other and their ease with the ranch lifestyle.

Rudy Ramos –Felix Long

Rudy Ramos was born in Oklahoma in 1950. He's not only an actor but also a talented musician. He's had a long acting career, spanning over six decades. Some of his most notable roles include 1976's "Helter Skelter" and 1986's "Quicksilver" as well as 1987's "Beverly Hills Cop II."

In November of 2020, which was Native American Heritage Month, he was spotlighted in a story for the Television Academy Emmys.

Felix Long

Before becoming Robert and Monica Long's grandfather he served in the military, touring in Vietnam. In the show he lives with his wife and is visited a lot by Kayce who is his grandson-in-law.

He's had a tragic life, with his grandson Robert dying in a cattle dispute, his granddaughter Monica getting injured while trying to break up a school fight, and his wife confined to a wheelchair. While he was absent for a lot of seasons two and three, he made a comeback in the fourth season.

Taylor Sheridan – Travis Wheatley

His name is all over so certainly the screenplay writer and creator gets a cameo on his own show. It is an excellent easter egg for the fans, especially the die-hard Taylor Sheridan and die-hard “Yellowstone” fans. Born in Texas, the first time Sheridan became more familiar with audiences was with “Veronica Mars” and later with “Sons of Anarchy”.

Sheridan has also had an appearance on “Walker Texas Ranger”. Acting is not actually Sheridan’s claim to fame, though. The writer/creator has come up with his own brand of Sheridanesque films and series.

Travis Wheatley

This character may have had only several cameo appearances, but he definitely leaves an impression, especially with his memorable t-shirt bearing the line, “your girlfriend keeps looking at me”. While modesty might be the last thing Travis is known for, he is a cowboy through and through.

The thing Travis likes best are horses, rodeos, and buying and selling horses. This Texan businessman also lends a hand to the Duttons by taking Jimmy under his wing, giving the young man an opportunity to tour with him in the west.

Jake Ream – Jake

Taylor Sheridan has a habit of giving his characters their actors' given names. Jake Ream is no exception. It is little wonder why Jake in “Yellowstone” is such a hands-on trainer and excellent ranch hand. The actor, Jake Ream, worked as a horse trainer for 27 years at EE Ranches.

Writer and creator Taylor Sheridan met Ream after Ream sold him a horse and Ream, all the while having no idea to whom he had just sold it. The rest was history as Ream joined the cast as a ranch hand.

Jake

Here we meet another ranch hand simply known as Jake. Unlike some of the others, we do not get to know much about the character, but we do see him throughout all the seasons.

Ranch work is tough and often dangerous, but like the other ranch hands, Jake is a perfect fit and possibly one of the best at his job. As the seasons progress, we get to see a softer side of him. He is a devoted employee of the Duttons, and his loyalty means heading south to Texas when a bitterly cold winter strikes.

Moses J. Brings Plenty – Mo

The role as Mo on “Yellowstone” was made for Moses Brings Plenty and we’re not simply saying that because the character shares a name. Moses Brings Plenty was born in the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota and is related to the Oglala warriors.

The actor has starred in “Cowboys & Aliens”, “Jurassic World: Dominion” and the TV mini-series “The American West”. “Yellowstone” has revived the actor’s career as Moses Brings Plenty was about to call it quits right before he was offered the role.

Mo

Like many of the characters, Mo has suffered from a difficult background. After her vehicle ran out of gas, Mo’s mother accepted a lift with a group of white strangers. Unfortunately, his mother’s troubling circumstances and trusting nature put her in the hands of dangerous men.

She was killed by the men. Mo was only found three days after it happened. Back in the present day, he works as Thomas Rainwater’s assistant and driver. His troubled background has given him a reason to become loyal to Rainwater.

Ian Bohen – Ryan

This actor is definitely in new territory with “Yellowstone”. Born in Carmel-by-the-Sea, California, this actor’s work has taken him away from the serene beach city. He landed his first role as the young Hercules in “Hercules: The Legendary Journeys”. The popularity of the show led to the spin-off of the TV film “Young Hercules”.

Since then, the actor has gone from strength to strength landing minor roles in “Wind River” and “Sicario: Day of Soldado”. His career on TV has seen the actor in many roles like in “CSI” and “The Mentalist” and a standout performance in “Teen Wolf”.

Ryan

With Colby, Teeter, Lloyd Pierce, and Walker, Ryan makes up the Yellowstone ranch hands. By the end of the third season, we see Colby, Teeter, and Ryan joining the Yellowstone ranch and vowing their loyalty to the ranch. Unlike the others, we don’t see much of Ryan’s backstory but we he works as a Livestock Agent.

That job in itself can get pretty grueling, and it gets even more grueling as he and Rip and other ranch hands prepare to move to Texas during a particularly difficult winter.

Gil Birmingham – Thomas Rainwater

Please don’t say that you know him from the Twilight saga. Anything but the Twilight Saga! There are plenty of other acting credentials Gil Birmingham has under his belt including Taylor Sheridan’s “Wind River” and “Hell or High Water”.

It is clear that Gil Birmingham is one of the writer/director’s favorites. Birmingham was born in San Antonio, Texas, and is of Comanche descent. The actor enjoys playing music. Despite making the cast for some big productions like the Saga That Must Not Be Named, he maintains a low profile.

Thomas Rainwater

Considered a leader to the Native American people in the Broken Rock Indian Reservation, Rainwater’s plans involve getting the Native American people’s land back the legal way, using a casino as the cash cow that will fund his operation.

For many years Rainwater believed he was Mexican, though he never really fitted in, and something always felt wrong. When he came of age, he learned that he had been adopted and was actually of Native American ancestry. Rainwater’s ambition makes him a rival to the Duttons but many audience members can see where the man is coming from.

Kylie Rogers – Young Beth Dutton

This young and promising American actress was born in 2003, but her tender age has not stopped her from already booking many roles. On TV, you might have seen her on "Days of Our Lives," and "Private Practice."

In 2020 she booked a main role in Apple TV's "Home Before Dark." At the age of 10, she booked a role in the science fiction drama "The Whispers" which was produced by Steven Spielberg.

Young Beth Dutton

How could a show that tells us the chronicles of so many charterers whose lives are intertwined not have flashbacks? What would give us insight into their pasts? Good thing "Yellowstone" knows better.

In the flashbacks of young Beth, we get to see what this fierce woman used to be like as a child and a teenager. In season five we get to see Beth and Rip as teenagers, and we learn all about the way she acted the day before she went to college. You can bet it was wild.

Q'orianka Kilcher — Angela Blue Thunder

Q'orianka Waira Qoiana Kilcher is more than just an emerging actress. She's also a singer, a dancer-choreographer, and an activist. She's best known for her roles in 2005's "The New World" where she played Pocahontas and 2009's "Princess Kaiulani" where she played the titular role.

The multi-talented star was born in Germany. When she was two her family moved to Kapaʻa, Hawaii. Her mother is an American activist of German descent while her father is amongst the Indigenous people of Peru.

Angela Blue Thunder

Only avid watchers will remember Angela Blue Thunder. Appearing only in four episodes, Angela was hired by Thomas Rainwater as a business consultant. Her job was to help Thomas in his fight against threats to both Yellowstone Dutton Ranch and Broken Rock Reservation. Her motives and agenda remained mysterious and unclear.

While she was gone for the entirety of season four, she came back during the show's fifth season. We wish we would have gotten to see more of her, even if just because of her really cool name.

Piper Perabo – Summer Higgins

If you are a bit older, you would definitely have seen this actress before. One of her major performances to date include “Coyote Ugly”, “Slap Her…She’s French”, “Imagine You and Me” and “The Prestige”. The actress was born in Dallas, Texas, but grew up in New Jersey.

She did her studies in theater and was soon taken by experimental theater. Perabo and director Stephan Kay have been married since 2014. The actress has also taken more interest in activism such as protesting during the Brett Kavanaugh hearing.

Summer Higgins

This character adds a unique twist to “Yellowstone” and brings out another side to John Dutton. Raised as a vegan, Summer believes that consuming meat and any product from animals is essentially cruel.

The fact that she is an environmental activist simply means she won’t fit in well with the Bozeman residents, except John who forms some kind of odd relationship with her. Summer organizes an environmental protest, but it only lands her and her fellow protestors in a lot of trouble. This is Bozeman after all.

Katherine Cunningham – Christina

This actress has a long history of acting. Her roots are to be found on stage where her parents and siblings took part in local theatrical productions. Interestingly, Cunningham majored in Biology at Illinois University, but we can see her true passion has always been acting.

On stage, she acted in “The Turning of the Screw” and on the silver screen, she made the cast of “Condor”, “Mind Games”, and, of course, “Yellowstone”. She has made a few cameos on other series such as “Timeless” and “NCIS”. The actress is currently married to Mark Anthony Rutledge.

Christina

We meet this character in season 1. She starts off as a romantic interest for Jamie Dutton, but don’t think that this is the only purpose of this character. Christina aims to promote liberal policies, except in Bozeman it is harder than it looks, especially since the town is stubbornly stuck in the past.

When Jamie Dutton turns his attention to politics, Christina becomes his political advisor. We’re pretty sure her hate for John Dutton is one of her motives for doing so. Christina adds a new element to the show and her subplots spice things up.

Kathryn Kelly – Emily

“Yellowstone” was the break this actress needed. Born in 1979 in Atlanta, Georgia, Kelly has captured the hearts of audience members with her tender on-screen romance. To this date, the actress has appeared in the TV series “Powers” and “Nashville”. She has also made some cameos in the film “Fist Fight” and “The Originals”.

As said, "Yellowstone" was really when audiences saw some of Kelly’s acting abilities and hopefully, it will not be the last. There is also a British actress called Katherine Kelly. Thank goodness their names are not spelled the same else that would be confusing.

Emily

We only met this character towards the end of Season 4, so we did not really get to know her. However, we loved the sweet relationship that developed between her and Jimmy Hurdstrom.

Emily is a vet working at 6666 Ranch. She helps at Yellowstone when they need her, which brings her close to Jimmy, and the two hit it off. No spoilers, but the two together departed for Texas at the close of the season so we are not sure we will see them back in Season 5.

Josh Lucas – Young John Dutton

Despite playing a younger version of John Dutton, the actor himself has been a working actor for over three decades. Lucas was born in 1971 to a couple of hippie parents who moved around a lot. In fact, he moved over 30 times before he celebrated his 13th birthday!

The actor started off in 1990 in the TV show "True Colors." He also participated in notable projects such as "American Psycho," "A Beautiful Mind," and "Sweet Home Alabama."

Young John Dutton

Even John Dutton III, the ultimate patriarch of the family, was once young. Whenever there's a need to give us all some flashbacks and history, that's when we get to see young John Dutton show up.

Getting to see him in his younger days helps to give us context as to who he is today and what is going on in Yellowstone in the present and how it interacts with the past.

Eden Brolin – Mia

Does this actress’ surname sound familiar? Yep, you guessed it! She is the daughter of the extremely talented Josh Brolin – who happens to be a familiar cast member in the storylines written by Taylor Sheridan like “Sicario”. Looks like she is following in her father’s footsteps.

She has starred in “Beyond”, “Blood Bound” and “Emerald City”. Considering that she was the main star of “Emerald City” and that the movie received generally good reviews, it looks like it's not only her father’s reputation landing her acting gigs.

Mia

After suffering an injury during a rodeo, Mia starts dating Jimmy Hurdstrom. Mia was also a member of the rodeo and was one of its horse riders – meaning she is a perfect fit for the Yellowstone ranch, where she eventually turned up.

She is known for her bright and cheerful spirit and for her inability to keep quiet during road trips – which irks Rip Wheeler to point of making threats to Jimmy’s life. Jimmy seems elated to listen to Mia and witness her interesting antics. Sadly, Mia and Jimmy did not continue dating and the two split up.

Jefferson White – Jimmy Hurdstrom

Though starting fairly late in terms of show business, Jefferson White is slowly carving a place for himself in American productions. In 2014, the actor made his debut in “The Americans”. Since then, he has also made up the cast of “How to Get Away with Murder”, “House of Cards”, and “Manhattan”.

White has also been featured in series such as “Elementary” and “Blue Bloods”. However, his being on the cast of “Yellowstone” has really given the actor the momentum he needed for his acting career. We will see him on our screens again soon as he is working on several upcoming projects.

Jimmy Hurdstrom

This is one of those characters who grow on us. Initially, we meet him as a kind of washed-out lowlife who is on the end of Rip Wheeler’s cruel side.

Yet, as Jimmy makes Yellowstone ranch his home and begins to adopt the ranch lifestyle, we end up cheering for him. His affection for Mia is sweet and though he is shy and awkward for the most part, we want him to succeed. Although his father may have put Wheeler up to having Jimmy move to Yellowstone, we have to agree it did a world of good for him.

Finn Little – Carter Dutton

This actor who looks so comfortable around horses, horse stalls, and ranch life in fact is not American. He is from Australia. It would make sense if he were from the outback, but actually, he hails from Brisbane and he has added several acting credentials to his resume.

When he was 14 years old, he had already had parts in “Storm Boy”, “Angel of Mine”, and “Those Who Wish Me Dead”, all receiving fair ratings. He has also been featured in numerous short movies.

Carter Dutton

The Duttons have a habit of adopting children of washed-up individuals who severely neglect their children. This tendency continues with the second generation as Beth Dutton decides to adopt Carter Dutton.

Beth may have saved him from being the son who abuses illicit substances, but living on the Yellowstone ranch proves to have some challenges, and having Beth as a mother cannot always be easy for Carter. However, the little Dutton does find his feet. He develops a knack for poker and his attraction to Halie creates a sweet subplot.

Brecken Merrill – Tate Dutton

This is one of the youngest members of the “Yellowstone” cast. Starting back in 2018, Merrill has grown up in front of the audience’s eyes spanning four seasons. He is also one of the few Dutton characters to only be played by one actor.

“Yellowstone” has introduced Merrill to audiences, and he has shown a great acting range, especially as the character has to contend with more and more. The actor was born in California and had some other credentials to add to his acting career including “This is Us” and “We All Got Up to Dance”.

Tate Dutton

Growing up as a Dutton and on the Yellowstone ranch, we see a different perspective of the shenanigans and violence on the ranch. John Dutton and Tate spend time and start to bond after Kayce makes the decision to include his father in Tate’s life. Except that Tate has to grow up a bit too quickly.

In fact, Tate faces a very rocky growing up one where he suffers from PTSD from a young age. He is also personally conflicted as his mother is a Native American and his father is a Dutton. It is not easy for this fellow.

Hassie Harrison – Laramie

This Texas-born actress is the perfect fit for a modern western. Many of the actress’s credentials are based in a similar setting including “Hart of Dixie”, “Tacoma FD”, and “The Iron Orchard”.

The actress has also starred in the horror TV anthology, “Southbound” and the science fiction “A.X.L” showing she is starting to branch out. As said, Harrison is just starting to spread her wings so “Yellowstone” was one of her major productions to this date, but we’re sure to see more of this Dallas actress.

Laramie

Though Laramie is not one of the main characters, she definitely gives the audience much excitement and drama. Before joining the Yellowstone bunch, Laramie worked as a barrel racer in rodeos. Leaving that life behind, she joined her friend Mia in Yellowstone.

However, Laramie soon gets caught in a love triangle between the ranch hands, Lloyd and Walker. Before long it becomes clear who really has stolen Laramie’s heart, which is a real pity for Lloyd. With Laramie’s presence on the ranch, Walker evolves, and we see how Laramie influences the ex-prisoner.

Forrie J. Smith – Lloyd

You might have seen this actor, Forrie J. Smith, in TV series and movies during the 1990s. He starred as “Jesse James” in the TV series “Legend” and in the 1987 TV film “Desperado”.

Though this actor has been acting since the 1980s, he actually worked and lived as a cowboy and was featured on rodeos. This was before his acting career. Little wonder Forrie J. Smith seems perfectly suited to the cowboy setting. He is literally doing what he is paid to do — or rather was paid to do.

Lloyd Pierce

In season one, we are introduced to one of the older ranch hands, Lloyd. Things start looking up for this ranch hand when Laramie joins her friend, Mia, on the ranch. Except, things don’t go Lloyd’s way.

Love triangles are never pleasant and even more unpleasant for Lloyd, as Laramie finds her way into Walker’s arms. The only thing that ensues is what typically ensues: Lloyd takes out his anger on Walker and Walker’s guitar. What would modern cowboy stories be without love triangles? We do get to see his much darker side here.

Ryan Bingham – Walker

George Ryan Bingham is no stranger to the western genre and country life. The actor was born in New Mexico and since has become a familiar figure in the western/country genre including “Crazy Heart” and “Jackie & Ryan,” where he plays a cowboy’s brother.

Bingham has a not-so-hidden talent and is more known for his Americana and rock music. The actor, or rather, the musician has released six studio albums. His song “The Weary Kind” was featured on the “Crazy Heart” soundtrack. We’re sure to see Bingham around for more western films, especially those that overlap with music.

Walker

In the first season, we meet Walker. We won’t exactly say that Walker has come from the right side of the tracks because the ranch hand has spent some time in prison. That being said, Walker gives audience members plenty of things to discuss.

Walker enjoys playing some music in his spare time – something he will come to regret when he has a short romance with Laramie and his guitar is smashed in a fight with Lloyd. That’s what happens when you go for the same woman as your fellow ranch hand.

Jennifer Landon – Teeter

While many viewers will know Jennifer Landon for her portrayal as Teeter on “Yellowstone”, this actress’s career spans several decades. Some of you might recognize her from the soap opera, “As the World Turns”.

The Daytime Emmy Awards certainly did because in 2007 Landon took home the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actress in a Drama Series. The actress has not let us down since she dazzled playing Teeter, showing that Landon is capable of playing diverse characters while at the same time, giving these characters true depth.

Teeter

We’re introduced to this character, Teeter, only in season 3. She joins the Dutton family enterprise as a ranch hand. Not only from her appearance but her behavior, Teeter is a tomboy or has more cowboy in her than many cowboys. She can fight and drink with the men, but she also wears her heart on her sleeves – even when it can easily get broken.

While Teeter hails from either Texas (or Arkansas) and is an outsider, she fits right in with the Yellowstone bunch and is branded, becoming an accepted member of their workforce.

Denim Richards – Colby Mayfield

This actor may not be a household name yet, but he still has an impressive list of acting credentials. Recent productions Richards has featured tend to have a historical nature, but Richards is by no means a one-trick pony. In his career, he has worked in productions such as the “County Line” franchise and “The Book of G.A.M.E”.

Furthermore, he has joined the cast of “Good Trouble” for a short spell. We’re sure that “Yellowstone” will not be the last we see of this actor. Not much is known about Richards’ personal life.

Colby Mayfield

Here we have another interesting character on the show, Colby Mayfield. From the first season, Mayfield is seen as a committed and loyal worker at the Yellowstone ranch. This is confirmed when he is branded with the ranch’s signature “Y”.

Though a ranch hand, Mayfield drew much of the audience’s interest when another ranch hand joined, namely Teeter. Their relationship sometimes leaves Mayfield at a loss, so it is expected that we were not too sure whether the two were an item. Still, the couple captured our hearts and we rooted for Mayfield and Teeter to pair up.

Danny Huston – Dan Jenkins

It couldn’t have been too hard for Mr. Daniel Sallis Huston to play the character of Dan Jenkins. They literally have the same first name. That is why Huston’s performance was stellar.

Interestingly, Huston was born in Rome, Italy. He was born to a showbiz family as his father was a director, his mother an actress, and his half-sister is the actress Anjelica Huston. Danny Huston has had several amazing acting credentials to his name including “The Aviator”, “21 Grams”, and “Marie Antoinette”. It’s just too bad we won’t see him anymore in “Yellowstone”.

Dan Jenkins

Initially, we’re not so sure about this character. Dan Jenkins is an outsider and seems like a shrewd businessman. which is completely true. However, as the series progresses, we learn to see his side — he came to Bozeman to make a better life for himself and his family. Jenkins is a devoted family man.

The problem is he wanted to make a better life for himself, but Bozeman is not exactly the kind of place open to outsiders, especially those who want to reinvent the so-called wheel. Sadly, we didn’t get to see much of Jenkins.

Kelsey Asbille – Monica Dutton

While this actress portrays the Native American Monica Dutton, she is actually of Asian/European ancestry. Her father is of Chinese descent while her mother is from South Carolina.

Kelsey Asbille is just starting out in Hollywood so she doesn’t have so many credentials to her name, but you will probably recognize her from “One Tree Hill” which put the actress on the map. She has also starred in “Teen Wolf” and “Pair of Kings”. The real treat is that she has been in “Wind River” – the film directed and written by “Yellowstone” writer, Taylor Sheridan.

Monica Dutton

We are not sure who is wearing the pants in the marriage, but we have an idea that it may be Monica. Sometimes, it is Mrs. Dutton’s savvy to forgo the pants that give her the upper hand when it comes to negotiating with Mr. Dutton. At least, Mr. Kayce Dutton is so incredibly in love with her that he will do just about anything.

That is a bit of the problem because Monica’s selfishness often hurts the Dutton family. True, she has reasons not to be loyal to the Duttons, but even her loyalty to Kayce wavers.

Cole Hauser – Rip Wheeler

This actor has been around for quite some time in Hollywood so you will probably recognize the name. However, when Hauser plays Wheeler, you won’t because he is so good at portraying the hardened cowboy.

One of the first films the actor made an important appearance in is the teen movie “Dazed and Confused”. Later, he went on to star in “Good Will Hunting”, “Pitch Black”, and more recently “Olympus Has Fallen”. His career in TV has not yet taken off, but with his dazzling performance in “Yellowstone”, we’re bound to see him make the line-ups again.

Rip Wheeler

They don’t come any tougher than Rip Wheeler. Even his name suggests something dangerous – something not to be trifled with. Branding small-time thieves is nothing for Wheeler.

Mr. Wheeler may come across as possessing true grit, but ironically, the man has a soft side, and you see it come out when Beth Dutton is around. We dare say he has suffered much heartbreak with his romantic interest but deep down he is the only one in her heart, as stony as it may be.

Kelly Reilly – Beth Dutton

Born Jessica Kelly Siobhán Reilly in the United Kingdom, Kelly Reilly has started to make a name for herself in Hollywood. She has now made the line-ups for some major productions including “Flight” and “Bastille Day”. When it comes to series, this is Reilly’s true forte as she has been cast in “True Detective”, “Britannia”, and “Above Suspicion”.

In 2012, the British actress married the Texas-based financier, Kyle Baugher. Thanks to their marriage, we have seen Reilly getting much screen time in the USA.

Beth Dutton

Do not mess around with this woman. No one else in Bozeman would. Those who do often come off as second-best. From the pilot episode, we learn that Beth can quickly and accurately size people up and is not afraid to speak her mind. She is also fiercely loyal to her family and employer.

Though the others take to ranch life, we soon realize Beth stays as far away as possible, especially from horses. The reasons are only revealed much later, allowing us to see that Beth has experienced a lot of loss and pain.

Wes Bentley – Jamie Dutton

You might recognize Wes Bentley from his role as the misfit teenager Ricky Fitts in “American Beauty” – an iconic character who spent much of his time recording plastic bags. Since then, Bentley has added several impressive films to his credentials including “Interstellar”, “Knight of Cups”, and “Mission Impossible: Fall Out”.

The actor was originally born in Arkansas but went to study at Julliard for one year. He is now married to TV producer, Jacqui Swedberg. As Jamie Dutton, Bentley shows he can handle more complex characters — not just one simply obsessed with plastic bags.

Jamie Dutton

Our introduction to Jamie Dutton is in the courtroom. When it comes to conflict in the courtroom, Jamie shines. And Jamie did not need his father’s name or his father’s ranch to create his own success. He spends most of his time being the son his father couldn’t ever have.

However, he receives little recognition for that until soon he learns a devastating secret. We wouldn’t want to add any spoilers but during the series, Jamie learns not only about where he comes from but who he really is.

Kayce Dutton – Luke Grimes

You might have seen this actor before in the “Fifty Shades” trilogy or Clint Eastwood’s “American Sniper”. Born in Dayton, Ohio, Grimes soon hit the streets of New York City to study at the American Academy of Dramatic Study.

His role as Christian Gray’s younger brother might have not needed the actor to display his full acting range, but Grimes has more than proved himself as a capable cast member with “American Snipers” and in the series “Brothers and Sisters”. And, of course, his portrayal as the conflicted but well-meaning, Kayce Dutton, blew audiences away.

Kayce Dutton

There is no character that represents the concept of “torn” more than Kayce Dutton. His love for Monica has brought on a serious rift in the family, but the youngest Dutton will do everything for his family. The only problem is despite his efforts, Kayce Dutton’s marriage to Monica has placed him right into the middle of an intense age-old rivalry.

The only person who suffers more than Kayce Dutton is us the viewers. The character is serious eye candy. Who doesn’t love eye candy that suffers from personal conflict? Did we also mention that he was an ex-navy seal?

John Dutton – Kevin Costner

This actor is a familiar face in Hollywood. Kevin Costner has been in everything from comedies to dramas, and action movies. With “Yellowstone” he could add a neo-Western to his list of genres as well as the Emmy award he received for Best Actor – Television Series Drama for his portrayal of John Dutton.

Few actors could show Dutton’s grit but also bring to screen his fierce love for his family and hard work. Costner captures that perfectly. Right from the first scene, the audience is entranced with John Dutton.

John Dutton

The patriarch of the family, John Dutton, aka John Dutton III, has dedicated his entire life to the Yellowstone ranch and built a rather successful empire. As one expects, life is not easy in the outlands of Bozeman, Montana, but it does not mean that this rancher is not up to the challenge.

Obstacles include territorial and legal disputes, small-time thieving, and a bitter rivalry with neighbors. Right from the first scene, Dutton's composure becomes apparent, as he calmly shoots a seriously injured horse. What really gets Dutton down is the strained relationships with his family members.