Sheldon Reynolds, guitarist for the legendary music group Earth, Wind & Fire, has died at the age of 63.

Current band member, Philip Bailey, confirmed the news on Twitter.

“This news of Sheldon Reynolds’ transition is very sad for all of us who knew and worked with him,” Bailey wrote on Wednesday.

The message continued, “Sheldon vocally had Reese down. Sheldon was an excellent addition to the band, a great writer and producer, and a kind, loving person. He will be missed. Our condolences to his family.”

A cause of death was not provided.

The Post reached out to the band for further comment.

Popular for their hit songs like “September” and “Shining Star,” Reynolds was part of the music group from 1987 to 2002, according to Fox News.

The band was first formed and founded in 1969 by Maurice White.

Reynolds was a lead guitarist and vocalist for the hit band, which played genres of R&B, disco and jazz music.

Born on Sept. 13, 1959, in Cincinnati, Ohio, Reynolds was seen as a “child prodigy” on the guitar, according to the Independent.

Before Reynolds joined EWF in 1987, he toured with blues performer Millie Jackson, according to his bio on the band’s website.

He was also a performer in the band the Commodores for four years before he joined EWF.

During his time with EWF, he played on the albums “Touch the World” in 1987, “The Best of Earth, Wind & Fire, Vol. 2,” in 1988,1990’s “Heritage,” 1993’s “Millennium” and “In the Name of Love” in 1997.

He received an Image Award for Lifetime Achievement while he was a part of Earth, Wind and Fire.

In 1994, Reynolds was also nominated for a Grammy Award for his song, “Sunday Morning,” which he wrote and recorded with the band. He was nominated for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group With Vocal.

The band itself has won a total of six Grammy Awards and 17 nominations.

Throughout his career, the musician has worked with fellow iconic stars such as Eric Clapton, Lenny Kravitz, Sting and Santana, among others.

The band’s music featured different components of genres, like funk, soul, pop and rock music, according to their bio on the Hollywood Walk of Fame website, of which they were awarded the prestigious star in 1995.

The group also plays the kalimba thumb piano on all of their albums, which is a musical instrument that was invented about 3,000 years ago in West Africa, according to Kalimba Dream.

The band’s original members featured Bailey as the co-lead singer, as well as Ralph Johnson, who played the drums, according to CBS News.

Its current members include originals Bailey, Verdine White, Johnson, as well as Myron McKinley, Philip Bailey Jr., B. David Whitworth, Morris O’Connor, Serg Dimitrijevic and John Paris.

Reynolds also co-wrote and sang on the 2008 song “Always Remember” on artist Brian Culbertson’s CD, “Bringing Back the Funk,” according to his bio on the band’s website.

He was married to Janie Hendrix, who is the adopted sister of Jimi Hendrix, according to the Independent, but the two got divorced in 2007.

The band is currently on tour around the United States with Lionel Richie.