Parnell provided the music for shows such as Sunday Night At The London Palladium and wrote the theme tunes to programmes including The Golden Shot during his long spell as musical director at ATV.

Parnell had a musical career stretching almost seven decades, which saw him declared best drummer in the annual Melody Maker awards for many years and a distinguished stint as drummer in the renowned Ted Heath Band, during which he former his own ensemble.

He continued to perform until three years ago, playing jazz in venues near his home in Southwold, Suffolk.

His wife Veronica said: ''He just used to love to tap away.''

Parnell died just two days after his birthday for which he raised a glass of champagne with his family.

His son Will - also a composer - said: ''He was determined to make it to see his birthday.''

London-born Parnell had performance in his blood - his father was a music hall artist while his uncle Val ran a string of theatres including the London Palladium.

He began to study piano as a child but found his niche on the drums, making his debut as a teenager on the seafront at Scarborough.

While serving in the RAF he became part of a band performing at the RAF Bomber Command HQ in High Wycombe.

He went on to join Ted Heath, playing on dozens of recordings and Forces broadcasts, and occasionally adding his vocals. Others among the line-ups included eminent jazz players such as Kenny Ball and Ronnie Scott.

During his decades at the broadcaster, he worked with legends such as Ella Fitzgerald, Sammy Davis Jr, Lena Horne and Nat King Cole.

In the late 1970s he began his association with The Muppet Show, for which he conducted the orchestra and frequently appeared on screen. He was instrumental in getting the jazz great Buddy Rich on the show.

Parnell retired from ATV in 1982, when it became Central Television, moving to Southwold but continuing to perform with the all-star veterans group Best Of British Jazz with trumpeter Kenny Baker and trombonist Don Lusher. He also played with his small group for weekly shows at the Green Man in Rackheath, Norfolk.