In memory of Ruth Barnes

Founder, inspiration, and guiding spirit of Sigma Delta Pi;

we remember with gratitude and appreciation

Sigma Delta Pi, the National Collegiate Hispanic Honor Society (La Sociedad Nacional Honoraria Hispánica), was established on November 14, 1919, at the University of California at Berkeley. The Society's insignia is the royal seal of Fernando and Isabel, representing Castille, León and Aragón. Sigma Delta Pi's colors are red and gold, its flower is the red carnation, and its motto is the Greek phrase "Spanías Didagéi Proágomen," meaning "Let's go forth/continue forth under the teaching/guidance of the Spanish language." The national headquarters is located at the College of Charleston in South Carolina. The Society has expanded its activities and now has over 600 chapters in 49 states.

A diverse number of colleges and universities form the Sigma Delta Pi family: University of Notre Dame, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Virginia Military Institute, Johns Hopkins University, University of Hawaii, Oral Roberts University, University of Texas at Austin, Hood College, Brigham Young University, Truman State University, College of William and Mary, Howard University, Friends University, Georgia Southern University, California State University San Marcos, Auburn University, the United States Air Force Academy and the University of Wyoming.

The Pi Theta Chapter of Arkansas State University had an extraordinary return after its reactivation in 2014. Following 27 years of inactive status, the chapter rose from the ashes to begin a new era of growth and initiatives under the mission of Sigma Delta Pi. Under the leadership of its chapter advisor at the time, Claudio Eduardo Pinto, Pi Theta has hosted service opportunities on Arkansas State University’s campus and in the community through organizing fundraisers to help children in need, conversation tables, and movie festivals. Dr. Vicent Moreno has taken over advising the chapter and looks forward to continuing to provide opportunities for students to engage with Spanish-speaking cultures and peoples.