U of A

Greek Life

Interfraternity Council

The North-American Interfraternity Conference (IFC) is composed of 64 member organizations nationally with over 5500 chapters on 800 campuses. At the University of Arkansas, 14 chapters are currently represented; Alpha Gamma Rho, Beta Theta Pi, Farmhouse, Kappa Alpha Order, Kappa Sigma, Lambda Chi, Alpha, Phi Delta Theta, Phi Gamma Delta, Pi Kappa Alpha, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Sigma Chi, Sigma Nu, Sigma Phi Epsilon, and Sigma Pi. IFC interacts among its members and the campus through meetings, social outlets, and philanthropic events.

The first meeting of the IFC was conducted on November 27, 1909. Twenty-six fraternities met at this conference to discuss the issues facing fraternities at the time. However, it was not until 1910 that there was a formal organization. The mission of the IFC is to advocate the needs of its members through enrichment of the fraternity experience, advancement, and growth of the fraternity community, and enhancement of the educational mission of the host institutions. The IFC is also committed to enhancing the benefits of fraternity membership.

IFC has enjoyed success over the last few years and has seen increased numbers of young men going through recruitment each year. Our member fraternities have many different offerings and values to instill in these men. It is a testament to our fraternities and their impact on these young men that IFC has enjoyed revitalization in the last few years. Academic achievement has remained a focus of the fraternities, and the All-Fraternity GPA has continued to beat the All-Men's GPA. IFC continues to reach out to the community through various philanthropic events that help develop and instill values into the young men that become involved in our member organizations.

Mission Statement

The Interfraternity Council (IFC) at the University of Arkansas strives to unify and represent its member fraternities by advocating for their collective interests to enhance the overall fraternity experience. Our council actively promotes leadership development, brotherhood, academic excellence, community service, and social responsibility. We will continue to positively enhance campus life as well as foster working relationships within the University community and beyond.