Father Jan Długosz (1 December 1415, Stara Brzeźnica – 19 May 1480, Kraków; also known as Joannes, Ioannes or Johannes Longinus or Dlugossius) who was a Polish priest, chronicler, diplomat, soldier, and secretary to Bishop Zbigniew Oleśnicki of Kraków. He is shown here working on his twelve volume "Historia Polonica", which took a quarter of a century to complete.

The Gothic Basilica of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Mariacki Church) is a Brick Gothic church re-built in the 14th century (originally built in the early 13th century), adjacent to the Main Market Square in Kraków, Poland. Standing 80 m (262 ft) tall, it is particularly famous for its wooden altarpiece carved by Wit Stwosz.

------------------

The reinforced concrete construction of the Our Lady of Czestochowa Church is supported by huge posts leaning against the front wall and on pillars connected to the apse. Because of this, it was possible to design great stained-glass compositions measuring forty by fifty feet. This monumental work is considered one of the largest in the United States. Entering the shrine, the history of America unfolds to the right, on the east wall, while on the left, on the west wall, is depicted in beautiful colors the 1000 year history of Poland. Each of the stained-glass windows has seventy-five panels.

The subject of the composition of the stained-glass windows was designed by Father Michael Zembrzuski, architect Jerzy Szeptycki, and their co-workers. The artistic composition was done by Jerzy T. Bialecki from Morristown, New Jersey.

In 1966, Jerzy T. Bialecki began work on the stained-glass window project at the National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa in Doylestown. His project was accepted by the Willet Studio of Stained Glass Windows in Philadelphia, which produced all the stained-glass windows under the direction of the designer. Mr. Bialecki died in 1987. He is buried in the honor section of the Cemetery of Our Lady of Czestochowa in Doylestown.

National Shrine of Our Lady of Czestochowa - 654 Ferry Road in Doylestown, Pennsylvania 18901 - Google Map Additional views