REMEMBER ME. My name is Jan Dlugosz, I was born on Dec. 1, 1415 in Stara Brzeznica, Kingdom of Poland. I was educated at the University of Krakow as a canon. I was sent by King Casimir IV Jagiellon of Poland on diplomatic missions to the papal and imperial courts and involved in the king's negotiations with the Teutonic Knights during the Thirteen Years' War as well as peace negotiations.

Considered Poland's first historian, I was a Polish priest, diplomat, chronicler, soldier and secretary to Bishop Zbigniew Olesnicki of Krakow. In 1434, my uncle, the first pastor of Klobuck, appointed me to take his position as canon of St. Martin church.

The town was in the Opole territory of Silesia, but had recently been conquered by Wladyslaw II Jagiello. I stayed here until 1452 and while here, founded the canonical monastery.

In 1450, I was sent by Queen Sophia of Halshany and King Casimir to conduct peace negotiations between John Hunyadi and the Bohemian noble Jan Jiskra of Brandys and after six days of talks convinced them to sign a truce. However, in Krakow 1455, a fire spread which destroyed much of the city and castle, but spared my house.

I was part of the Polish delegation which met with emissaries of George of Podebrady in Bytom, Silesia in 1461. After six days of talks concluded an alliance between the two factions. In 1466, I was sent to the legate of Wroclaw, in order to attempt to obtain assurances that the legate was not biased in favor of the Teutonic Knights. I was successful and sent in 1467 entrusted with tutoring the king's son.

I declined the offer of the Archbishop of Prague, but shortly before his death was nominated Archbishop of Lwow. This nomination was only confirmed by Pope Sixtus IV on June 2, 1489, two weeks after his death.

My work "Banderia Prutenorum" of 1448, is the description of the 1410 Battle of Grunwald which took place between villages of Grunwald and Stebark. I am best known for "Annales seu cronici incliti regni Poloniae" (Annuals of the Famous Kingdom of Poland) in 12 volumes in the Latin language covering events in southeastern Europe, but also in Western Europe, from 965 to 1480.

I died on May 19, 1480 in Krakow at the age of 64.

My first work was printed in 1701-1703. It was originally printed at the Jan Seliga printing house in Dobronyl financed by Jan Szczesny Herbert.

OF INTEREST. The Greeks knew that when you rubbed amber, it would become magnetic and begin to draw feathers and strings and other light objects to it. Little more than this was known about electricity until recent times. The ancients used to make love amulets out of amber, and guaranteed that wearing one would attract a lover. Since friction can make amber give sparks, the Greeks named it electron, "the beaming sun."

CURIOUS. In early Christian times, combing hair was part of religious ceremonies, in a ritualistic manner similar to washing the feet. Careful directions exist for the proper way to comb a priest's hair in the sacristy before vespers. Christian martyrs brought combs with them into the catacombs, where many implements of ivory and metal have been found.

Historians suspect that the comb at one time had some special symbolic meaning. During the Middle Ages, many of the stained glass church windows contained images of combs. In parts of Europe it was accepted that graying hair could be restored to its original color by frequent strokes with a lead comb. There is more evidence to suggest that the comber dyed his hair, then attributed the results to the instrument.

There were no real changes in comb design until 1960, when the first home electric styling comb originated in Switzerland.

MUSEUM. The museums are starting to open with limited visitors. The Ashmolean Museum, founded in 1677 from the personal collection of Elias Ashmole, was set up in the University of Oxford to be open to the public and considered by some to be the first modern public museum. His collection included antique coins, books, engravings, geological and zoological specimens, one of which was the stuffed body of the last dodo ever seen in Europe. However, by 1755 the stuffed dodo was so moth-eaten that it was destroyed, except for its head and one claw. The Long Island Polish American Museum located at 16 Belleview Ave., Port Washington is open to the public on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Other days by appointment, call 516-883-6542.

POL- INTEREST. Humans wear ornaments on their ears for as many reasons as they wear ornaments anywhere else – for status identification and for attracting the opposite sex. They pierce their ears for the same reason that many Asian and African women put similar holes through their noses. The flesh at those areas of the body may be pierced easily and generally without infection.

But there is another reason for wearing earrings that makes them interesting and that may account, indirectly for their popularity in our own culture. According to the chronicles of English superstition E. and M.A. Radford, earrings are often worn as charms among the general population because they are thought to cure bad eye sight, and among sailors as a protection against drowning. This may explain the traditional popularity of long loop earrings among pirates.

TRADITION. As summer comes to an end, the Polish Feast of Greenery takes place on Sept. 8. The farm folks bring to church bouquets of herbs, vegetables and corn, interwoven with some flowers from the garden which are blessed by the priest. These bouquets are carried home and kept until the following year. Where there is sickness in the household, the herbs are brewed and used for medical purposes, not only for the farm folk, but also for the livestock.