Belarussian Max Mirnyi has outduelled his doubles partner and second seed Roger Federer 5-7, 6-3, 6-4 to reach the World Indoor tournament final in Rotterdam.

The towering Mirnyi savaged his friend in three brutal sets to snap Federer's 10-match winning streak and reach only the second final of his career.

"I didn't feel too good out there, felt a little pressure because he knows my game so well," world number five Federer said.

"I wasn't as relaxed as I'd been in my other matches. He deserved to win because he played better than me."

Gunning for his second trophy in as many weeks after capturing the Marseille Open last Sunday, the Swiss got off to a flying start by breaking Mirnyi in the opening game.

But with the unseeded Mirnyi ominously stalking Federer's every move, he grabbed the break back in the sixth game with a series of scorching service returns.

Even when Federer bagged the first set through a Mirnyi double fault on set point, the world number 46 refused to let his opponent dictate play.

The defending doubles champion here with Federer, Mirnyi gradually dug his claws into a frustrated Federer and levelled the match after 66 minutes with a thundering ace.

There was little to separate the players in the first eight games of the final set as both refused to give an inch.

But Mirnyi, who had not won back-to-back matches this year before his arrival in Rotterdam, moved in for the kill in the ninth game when Federer momentarily lost his focus.

At 15-40, he forced the Swiss to hit a lame forehand into the net to gain the break, leaving Federer to smash his racket into the ground in disgust.

An emphatic ace on his first match point sealed Mirnyi's passage into a final for the first time since the 2001 Stuttgart Masters.

"I've been playing pretty consistent tennis this week and believe the way I've played in the last two matches should help me to win my first title," the 25-year-old Mirnyi said.

Despite the defeat, Federer barely had time to hold a grudge as he and Mirnyi were back on court less than 90 minutes after their singles clash for the doubles semi-final against Martin Damm and Cyril Suk.

At least on this occasion Federer, looking to capture a hat-trick of doubles titles here, had something to smile about since he and Mirnyi saved five match points before securing a three-set win over the Czech pair.

Rotterdam-born Raemon Sluiter, who played less than four games in his quarter-final on Friday after top seed Juan Carlos Ferrero was forced to retire with an ankle injury, meets Sebastien Grosjean in the other semi-final.

Grosjean is bidding to continue the French domination of the event. Cedric Pioline triumphed here in 2000 while Nicolas Escude was victorious for the last two seasons.

The exit of Yevgeny Kafelnikov and Escude on Friday means that a new name will join the roll of honour at the tournament, which is celebrating its 30th anniversary this year.