IN ''Jake Speed,'' which opens today at Embassy 1 and other theaters, a fictional hero from a pulp novel comes to life to help a woman who is in desperate, not to say ridiculous, straits. Her sister has been kidnapped by white slavers in Paris, transported to Zimbabwe and sold to what appears to be rich Arabs - a rough situation from any point of view, not to mention jet lag and culture shock. Jake Speed rescues the kidnapped victim, wins the heart of her sister and, with bullets whizzing, packs them safe and sound aboard yet another airplane headed for home in the U.S.A.

This, director and co-writer Andrew Lane must have thought, is great stuff for a spoof. It's a circular, wheels-within-wheels sort of concept: Take an idea for a bad novel, use its one-dimensional characters, far-fetched adventures and exotic (but inaccurately rendered) locales and make a film about it. But what kind of film could he have hoped to make with this material? At best it might have been a lightweight satire, or the cinematic equivalent of a successful pulp novel - a grade B adventure film. Such movies are often artistically unredeeming, but nonethless fun to watch because the viewers can get lost in the fantasy, suspend disbelief and enjoy the adventure.

Unfortunately, nothing redeems ''Jake Speed'' - not even John Hurt as the evil Sid Wigway, who provides a few moments of wicked vitality. Most of the possibilities for humor or tension, either sexual or dramatic, are badly botched by the flat performances of the other lead actors and the consistent bad timing of the director - everything misfires or misconnects, leaving too many long, dead moments that prove that even an adventure film with lots of running and shooting can be boring.

TO A PULP - JAKE SPEED, directed by Andrew Lane; written by Wayne Crawford and Mr. Lane; director of photography, Brian Loftus; edited by Fred Stafford; music by Mark Snow; produced by Mr. Lane, Mr. Crawford and William Fay; released by New World Pictures. At Embassy 1, 46th Street and Broadway; Manhattan Twin, Third Avenue at 59th Street; 86th Street East, at Third Avenue; 34th Street East, 241 East 34th Street. Running time: 104 minutes.