Get ready for the Indian/American singer song writer Biba Singh to release Akhian a modern rendition of Surinder Kaur’s classic Akhiyan’ch tu vasda. Biba who was found by the legendry Bollywood and Bhangra singer, Daler Mendhi who pushed her to release her first pop album in 2009 titled ‘Biba.’ The album was produced by Bollywood music director Santokh Singh (Channa Veh Ghar Aja) and launched in India by Bollywood singer Mika Singh. The album hit the charts across the globe bringing overnight success to this young starlet. She then went on to releasing her second album in 2011 ‘Biba For You’ this was launched by Bollywood maestro singer Bappi Lahiri in Mumbai. Since then Biba Singh has toured around India, USA, Canada and opened for acts like RDB, Imran Khan and Bollywood Singers. She was born and raised in New York, but very often travelled back to the UK and India, and parents always stressed about culture and knowing their roots Biba is already to release the first single to her third album and already had a number of singles recorded ranging from the Punjabi dance numbers “Nachne da Cha” to the more love ballad of “Tere bina nahi jeena.” PTC award-winning video director Sandeep Sharma has shot her video for “Aja Nachle,” in Agra, India. Biba has been signed with India-based record labels, Worldwide Records and Hamara Music and Moviebox in UK Her forthcoming release Akhian a rendition from Late Surinder Kaurs folk classic, this song touches a chord with Biba and she decided to re sing it. “ It’s such a popular song, it’s one of my favourites I wanted to make a modern version for the younger generation to hear the song too” ~ Biba Singh. The song is produced by talented singer and producer Mandeep Dhaliwal, from Calgary, Canada who has released multiple albums of his own with Jugni records. Akhian also has a remix produced by – Sorin Pavelesco, talented producer and part of BTB music productions from Montreal, Canada and features rapper Mr. Bolly who is also a well-known upcoming artist. Look out for a totally different concept directed by Hemant Thavathia and shot in USA at beautiful ‘Wing’s Castle’ in upstate NY. Biba is not just a pretty entertainer but a Doctor by profession and specializes in psychiatry. “Education was always very important in my home, but I always had a strong passion for music as well. When I completed my education, I decided that now I could pursue my music professionally as well as being a Doctor by day. I love both my professions and I’m thankful to God for giving me the opportunity to utilize both” ~ Biba Singh. Akhian is out NOW on Itunes!