Owen Barfield was a member of the Inklings, the famous literary group that included J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis. Barfield wrote the first “fey” novel that influenced the two other writers to pen their own works of fantasy. He also was instrumental in Lewis’ conversion to Christianity after many years of the “Great Debate” engaged in on long walks. Lewis’ Surprised by Joy mentions him by name and many of the speaking engagements Barfield had in the U.S. were from Lewis fans, thanks to Lewis’ endorsements. He had more of a popular audience than an academic one, just as was the case for Lewis’ Christian apologetics.

Barfield’s parents were secular, but made sure their children were exposed to music and literature; playing the piano to them and reading classic literature out loud. He also received a classical education at Highgate high school where a friend, Cecil Harwood, contributed to his love of language and introduced him to the writings of Rudolf Steiner who he felt had managed to disentangle himself from the materialist philosophy that predominated then and now.

Plato had written that a beautiful thing participates in the Form of Beauty; a just act participates in the Form of Justice, and a true statement in the Form of Truth. The Forms have the quality of mind and the logos emanating from the Form of the Good (Spirit). For Barfield, the world of nature is what it is because it is “participated by” consciousness. Consciousness, on this view, is the inside of nature, not just of human beings and other sentient creatures. Barfield appeals to Aristotle’s concept of the three kinds of soul. The nutritive, belonging to plants. Plants “inwardize” the principles of generation and propagation. Made from dust, they nonetheless resist environmental forces and attempt to maintain their integrity. The sensitive soul is possessed by animals, and the rational soul by humans. The human interior is a microcosm of the macrocosm, since it includes the nutritive, and sensitive souls, but also extends to the upper reaches of reality. Aldous Huxley thought of individual minds as filtering and drawing on mind at large, selecting and excluding elements of it. Similarly, for Barfield, life itself draws from life at large existing as cosmic potential. “Humanity individualized the cosmic logos, the nous, the intellectus, from out of its transcendent potentiality.” Human intelligence individualizes cosmic intelligence.

Continue reading at Voegelinview. Write comments here at the Orthosphere.