A representative selection from the major writings of the man C. S. Lewis called "the wisest and best of my unofficial teachers."

Owen Barfield was one of the most original and stimulating thinkers of the twentieth century, the man that C.S. Lewis said could not speak on any subject without illuminating it, the man whose writings have won praise from figures as diverse as T.S. Eliot and Saul Bellow, Walter de la Mare and Howard Nemerov, W.H. Auden and Marshall McLuhan. This comprehensive overview supplements major selections with numerous short supporting passages form the whole corpus of his writings and provides a short glossary of Barfieldian terms and useful primary and secondary bibliographies.

A respected philosopher, jurist, and student of the nature of language and human consciousness, OWEN BARFIELD's many books published by Wesleyan include Saving the Appearances (1988), Poetic Diction (1984), and Worlds Apart (1971). He lived in East Sussex, England, at the time of his death in 1997 at the age of 99. A longtime friend of Barfield's, G.B. TENNYSON is Professor of English at UCLA, editor of A Carlyle Reader (1984), and author of Owen Barfield on C.S. Lewis (Wesleyan, 1989) and other books.

"Among the extraordinary group of English scholars, The Inklings, C. S. Lewish and J. R. R. Tolkien were more famous in the time but none thought more rigorously and clearly about language and meaning than Owen Barfield. His intellectual performance is filled with luminous delights."

~Samuel R. Delany, author of The Motion of Light in Water

"I wish that I could press A Owen Barfield Reader into the hands of every questing youth on every continent. Barfield's explorations of 'participation' and 'imagination' in the 20th century can b thought of as the first of many Steps To An Ecology of Mind (G. Bateson) and a guide to the kinds of consciousness humans will need to survive the next century."

~Charles Keil, author of Urban Blues

"A splendid reader by one of the most important and creative thinkers in our time, whose thought has far-reaching implications across the fields of literature, philosophy, and the philosophy of science."

~Douglas Sloan