I am talking about Kosova and not Vlora or Albania proper. I am not sure how nationalist sources from the 17th century are cheap nationalist propaganda. None of these sources support that Albanians in Kosova are Ottoman transplants or loyal servants. It is completely rubbish. They talk even of Serbs in Kosova joining Ottoman forces. You did not provide a single historical evidence for any of your claims. Albanians in Kosova and Northern Albania led an anti-Ottoman resistance in 1690 and later. They do not speak of vast majority of people joining Ottoman forces. The Albanian Catholic Archbishop led an anti-Ottoman resistance yet in Serbian sources it is claimed it was the Serbian Orthodox Arsenije who then supposedly led 30,000 - 40,000 Serbsa out of Kosova, in some sources they claim 100,000's yet there is no historical evidence for this.

None of these sources mention the Serbian Arsenije.

Clementa = Kelmendi .... There is no mention of any Arsenije. Other sources mention the Archbishop of Albania. Prizren is mentioned as capital of Albania.

The Balkan Wars came after an Albanian revolt in Kosova in 1912 which weakened the Ottoman Empire https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albanian_revolt_of_1912 , The Ottoman Empire in Kosova and Macedonia was practically defeated by Albanians according to other sources.

In Kosova is where the Albanian national movement began such as the League of Prizren, League of Peja etc, it first seeked greater rights within the empire then later independence. None of these sources support that we were loyal servants or the only servants or that we terrorized Serbs or that we were transplanted in Kosova.

Those Pashas and people you are talking about mainly took advantage of their circumstances, they served the Ottoman empire to get a carrier within the military or as officers then when the time came they also changed sides. It was like this with all nationalities. I don't think you even understood the word 'loyal servant' here. The Austrians also mistreated people. They burned down Skopje. In Skopje there were recorded 3,000 Jews that fled because of the Austrians. Yes many of these Albanians that revolted had been paid wages as soldiers by Ottomans but they weren't 'loyal servants' , they were people that adopted to their circumstances to make a life.

Just like people joined the Roman Empire when the Romans occupied the Balkans, people adopted Latin and served the Romans eventually despite they had revolted against the Romans, the Roman Empire eventually also collapsed. This does not make you a 'loyal servant' . People joined based on their interests.

None of these sources support the Balkans had supposedly ethno-nationalist conflicts before the 19th-20th century.

Loyal servant or “Sadik” is a consideration that should be seen with the eyes of Turks/ottomans not Albanians. For that you should read ottoman archives. With all the evidence you provided, It seems that only Albanians from Albanian were loyal servants not Albanians Kosovars. Albanian from Albania declared independence and two years latter asked for a Turkish prince, lowered the Albanian flag in Durres and raised the Turkish one, if this is not a proof worth considering, I don’t know what is.

Sent from my iPhone using Eupedia Forum

Once again I have to repeat myself,

In Kosova/Northern Albania far more people supported the Austrians than Ottomans. You can just look at the numbers.

Prizren was an Albanian town. Western Kosova had an Albanian majority yet you claim this is nationalistic nonsense when we are literally using sources from the 17th century ? It seems Serbian propaganda really got into your head. There is no evidence that our people were ever loyal Ottoman servants while people like the Serbs were supposedly oppressed people who constantly fought the Ottomans. This is exactly what is complete nationalistic nonsense actually and is based on nothing but racism, depicting us as some kind of terrorist alien Islamic people while the 'Chrsitian Serbs' as oppressed and Europes chosen people that were pushed out from Kosova. Many Christians served the Ottomans. In fact they preferred them to stay Christian so they would also pay taxes.

Catholics among the Ottomans came to be despised largely because the Austrians were Catholics and the Albanian Catholics of Northern Albania and Kosova that led some of these revolts with both Christian and Muslim Albanians.

There is a difference between being a servant and being a loyal servant, just because you're a servant doesn't make you loyal.

When Albanians fought Skanderbeg under the Ottomans they were 'loyal' servants ? Why would we be 'loyal' when they committed attrocities ? When the Austrians committed crimes people stopped being loyal to the Austrians.

Balkan Wars happened largely thanks to the Albanian revolt of 1912. It's true that we didn't seek initially independence from the Ottomans but more rights. You seem to be unaware of many of the revolts against Ottomans that happened in Albania and Kosovo in the 1800's and 1900's.

You pulled out some Pashas of Albania as supposedly some evidence and some people that served in the Ottoman ranks. Yes many Albanians served in Ottoman ranks as did Janissaries, many Albanians moved to Turkey, this certainly has absolutely no proof that Albanians were loyal servants while other Balkan nations such as Serbs supposedly were oppressed people that constantly fought against Ottoman occupation, many Albanians also opposed the Ottomans when given chance. Many Balkan Slavs served in the Ottoman ranks too even if the number of Albanians was greater, it is certainly no proof that Albanians are Ottoman transplants and the 'Christian Serbs' oppressed and rebellious people.

If you had actually bothered reading what I wrote it was a response to Tim Judah's claim that this revolt in 1690 was a Serbian revolt and that after 1690 the demographics began to change into Albanian thanks to 'loyal Albanian servants' of the Ottomans. The texts I provided prove this is rubbish yet you claim this is all nationalistic nonsense ?

You are mixing two different periods with over 200 years in between. For the period we are talking about, Albanians in Kosove were predominantly Catholic. Especially in the rural regions.

Many Albanians in Kosova were already Muslims actually. Prizren in Kosova was mostly Muslim Albanian, so was Vushtrri etc. Many of these people who revolted were Muslim and they are mentioned as Muslim who had formerly fought in the Ottoman ranks and were paid wages, some are mentioned as faithless, some sources mention them as both Muslim and Christians. There are Serbs mentioned also and they also mention Serbs in the Ottoman ranks.

Though you are right there were also Catholics. But there were also Catholics from Northern Albania that came assist if you read Noel Malcolm's essay on this.

The guy has absolutely no idea what he is talking about. In Serbian and Western media this whole revolt is depicted as Serbian, while Albanians were people who supported the Ottomans. It is then claimed Serbs departed. The texts of these periods easily prove this is nonsense.

Serving in the Ottoman ranks certainly does not make you a loyal servant. They were paid wages and all Balkan people did this to some degree.

They chose side based on their interests when the time came down to it. National unity etc did not exist at the time.

Not much historical evidence that supports our people were constant 'loyal' Ottoman servants while the Serbs were rebellious liberators that were pushed out. In fact, many Serbs settled Kosova during the Ottoman period, 1700's, 1800's etc. Also some Vlachs. I am not sure what the guy is even trying to get at. One can easily read texts from these periods to prove this is nonsense.

In Kosova we did not become the absolute majority until the mid/late 1800's for example when they expelled Albanians from what is today South-Eastern Serbia.

Prizren was mostly Muslim, Vushtrri etc was mostly Muslim. The guy who led the anti-Ottoman resistance was Bogdani, a Catholic, but there were both Muslims and Catholics in the ranks. The 5,000 Arnauts mentioned were mostly Muslim, many if not most of the 20,000 Arnauts mentioned were also Muslim as were many of the 6,000. Arnaut was also a term for a Muslim Albanian.

So much for 'loyal servants' , the guy has swallowed too much Serbian and Western propaganda that seems to confuse religious affiliation with being pro-Ottoman. These texts clearly mention Christian Serbs in the ranks among the Ottoman army, texs also mention Christians on the Ottoman side in the battle of Kosovo 1389 and 1448.

Seems like I am having a debate with a guy who has absolutely no idea about Albanian history. Does not even seem to be aware of the Albanian national awakening or the various revolts against the Ottomans.

Balkan Wars would of never happened had it not been for these revolts first of all. It is pretty much what allowed the Serbs to invade Albanian lands since it pretty much weakened if not practically defeated the Ottoman Empire. Yet claims we would of never had our independence...

QUOTE:

''

And a further complication is introduced by

the term 'Arnaut', which could be used

as a synonym for Albanian but tended

to suggest those Albanians (in the ethnic-linguistic sense)

who acted as soldiers for the Ottomans-though these it should be noted

included Catholic Albanians as well as Muslim ones.

Piccolomini then moved to Prizren, where he was met by the Catholic

Archbishop Pjeter Bogdani. This was not

their first meeting: soon after the arrival of the Austrians in Kosovo,

Bogdani had gone to see Piccolomini to request that the soldiers

would not molest members of his flock. No doubt

their discussion at that previous meeting had

included suggestion that Bogdani rally the population

of Prizren in support of the Austrians;

and so it was that, in Contarinis words,

Near Prizren, as Piccolomini was approaching

, the inhabitants came out to meet him with festive

shouts: they were 5,000 in number and were led by their Archbishiop,

holding a banner with an image of the Holy Cross.

In 1624, Pjeter Mazrreku reported that Prizren had roughly

200 Catholic inhabitants and 600 Servani. But the great bulk

of the population, 12,000 people in 1624 - were Muslims, almost

all of them Albanians.

No doubt the 5,000 who came out to welcome Piccolomini

did include many of the local Christians, both

Catholic and Orthodox, but they can hardly have accounted

for more than fifth of that crowd..

It is surely significant that one of the earliest printed accounts of

these events, an anonymous text based on original documents, refers to

Piccolomini being greeted at Prizren by '5,000 Arnauts, who were partly Christian

Albanians and partly Muslim Albanians

Mazrreku also noted that the conversion to Islam was quite supperficial;

in 1671 another report on this area stated

that '28 years ago there were many Christians[Catholics] now there remain

300 women and very few men, the rest having abjured their faith

in order to escape impositions and taxes.

''

Many Albanians in Kosova were already Muslims actually. Prizren in Kosova was mostly Muslim Albanian, so was Vushtrri etc. Many of these people who revolted were Muslim and they are mentioned as Muslim who had formerly fought in the Ottoman ranks and were paid wages, some are mentioned as faithless, some sources mention them as both Muslim and Christians. There are Serbs mentioned also and they also mention Serbs in the Ottoman ranks.

Though you are right there were also Catholics. But there were also Catholics from Northern Albania that came assist if you read Noel Malcolm's essay on this.

The guy has absolutely no idea what he is talking about. In Serbian and Western media this whole revolt is depicted as Serbian, while Albanians were people who supported the Ottomans. It is then claimed Serbs departed. The texts of these periods easily prove this is nonsense.

Serving in the Ottoman ranks certainly does not make you a loyal servant. They were paid wages and all Balkan people did this to some degree.

They chose side based on their interests when the time came down to it. National unity etc did not exist at the time.

Not much historical evidence that supports our people were constant 'loyal' Ottoman servants while the Serbs were rebellious liberators that were pushed out. In fact, many Serbs settled Kosova during the Ottoman period, 1700's, 1800's etc. Also some Vlachs. I am not sure what the guy is even trying to get at. One can easily read texts from these periods to prove this is nonsense.

In Kosova we did not become the absolute majority until the mid/late 1800's for example when they expelled Albanians from what is today South-Eastern Serbia.

Look at the register of 16th century (1571). Muslims in the rural regions were still rare. This changes however drastically after the Bogdani campaign. But yeah, Vushtrri, Prizren, Peje and Prishtine were the centres that were pred Muslim from the early days. Most of the city dwellers later on also considering themselves to be Turks too.

Sure, this is also the time when animosities rise between Albanians and Serb communities in Kosove - after the Serbian atrocities in South-Eastern Serbia. Prior to that there were conflicts, but mostly local isolated incidents.

regardless of ethnic-linguistic or

religious identity; and if the Ottomans

did seek out particular groups for

specially harsh treatment, they would have

targeted above all the Catholics

(co-religionists of the Austrians),

most of whom were ethnically Albanian.

(The Catholic population of Kosovo, said

to be roughly 1,000 households-well

over 5000 people-by Bogdani in the

early 1680s, was estiimated at 2,800

people in 1693)

But on the other hand there is evidence

of a quite large drop in the population

of the towns, most of which did not

regain their pre-1690 levels until

the nineteenth century; and the towns-of

which this part of the Balkans possesed an unusually

dense network-were overhelmingly

populated by Muslim Albanians.(Jovan Cvijic's claim

about the departure of 35,000 - 40,000 Serb

families from Kosovo were implausible not only on

numerical grounds, but also because he described those families as mostly

urban.) When an observer such as Joseph Muller

considered the small size of the Serb

Orthodox population of Peje in the 1830s-just 130 households,

compared with more than 2,000 Muslim

households-he attributed this sorry state of affairs

to the 'Great Exoduses' of the past; but if he had

been able to consult Bogdani's detailed report

of 1681, he would have found at that time the Serbs had

just 100 households, and the Muslims 1,000

...............................

As for the fighting men who

subsequently brought the total

(at least in theory)

to 20,000, some of these may also have

been inhabitants of Prizren (which

in 1670 had a population of roughly 50,000)

but the evidence suggests that others

were drawn from further afield. Contarini's account

refers to Piccolomini, on his sickbed in Prizren,

receiving 'the chiefs of the neighbouring peoples, who came

to pay tribute to the Emperor with oaths of fealty.

If, as seems likely, some of these chiefs

had been summoned by Bogdani, we might expect them

to have included leaders of Catholic clans in

the nearby parts of the Malesi; and, indeed,

an Ottoman document written in February 1690(just three months later)

does refer to a large group of mostly

Catholic clans from that area ( including the warlike Fandi)

who had allied themselves with the Austrians.

But the pledge of the total of 20,000 may well have included other

Albanians from areas close to Prizren

who were no longer Catholic, having

been converted to Islam within the previous two or three generations-for example,

the Shulla or Has region, where as Mazrreku reported in 1634,

there had previously been 50 Catholic parishes

but were now only five. Mazrreku also noted that the

conversion to Islam was quite superficial; in 1671

another report on this area stated that

'28 years ago there were many Christians[sc.Catholics]: now

there remain 300 women and very few men, the rest

having abjured their faith in order to escape impositions and taxes.

The point here is not that such people nursed

a burning desire to restore,

one day, their Catholic identity(this may have been true in some cases,

those of the crypto-Christians, but these

seem to have been few in number); rather, it is that

recent attachment to Islam may not have involved

anything like religious conviction, and that it is therefore wrong to assume that such

people would have felt any special duty to support

the Ottoman state merely because they were Muslims.

What was going on in the mind of any local person when he or she

decided to support the Austrians is difficult to reconstruct,

and impossible to prove; but a modern approach which

converts religious identities automatically into some sort of equivalent

of national identities, and then expects blocks of people

to have behaved along those fixed lines,

is unlikely to give us a true picture of seventeenth-century provincial Balkan realities.

The very small educated elite-the Christian clergy, above all-may have understood what Austria was,

and what coming under its rule might mean; but ordinary

people, including clan elders, probably had only haziest idea.

Their recent experience of Ottoman rule was(contrary to what is implied in Stanford Shaw's account)

extremely negative. Taxes and other exacations had, as always, risen sharply during the anti-Habsburg war;

and, what is more, in 1687-9 the beylerbeyi of Rumeli, Yegen Osman

pasha, had treated the territories under his rule as a personal fiefdom

to be milked of its riches, and had employed armies

of personal retaines to plunder it. That

many local people might have welcomed as an alternative

a largely unknown power-one that promised to respect

their local rights, and one that was being

promoted by a local figure, the Catholic Archbishop,

whose moral authority extended beyond his own flock-should

not greatly surprise us.

However, when we recognize that such attitudes could cut across

religious distinctions, this does not mean that we should fall back

into the categories of most nineteenth- and twentieth-century Serbian

or Albanian historians, with their axiomatic assumptions about a 'national' identity

that always strove to throw off Ottoman rule. That

many Albanians continued to serve in the

Ottoman forces opposing the Austrians should not surprise us, even though we cannot

reconstruct the precise combination of factors (economic interest, personal loyalty, local affiliation,

codes of honour, and so on) that may have been involved.

Similar considerations may apply to the case of the Slav Orthodox villagers of the Lume region

South-west of Prizren, whose villages were burnt down by Holstein

because he regarded them as hostile. One early account

described Mahmut Begolli's army as consisting of 'Rascians' as well as Albanians;

some of these 'Rascians' may also have been Orthodox Slavs.

........................

I personally don't see what this thread has anything to do with many Albanians being loyal to the Ottomans (Something many other Balkan people were too, used to even be lots of Greek Muslims, Turkified Muslims, Bulgarian Muslims, Serbian Muslims if you wanna relate religious affiliation to political ones, these nations also had a population exchange with Turkey exporting Muslims and Importing Orthodox) or serving in the Ottoman ranks or how it proves such theories. I am not even sure what you are trying to tell us here nor what it has to do with Kosova.

The claim here is that most Albanians were loyal Ottoman servants while most Serbs were a people that constantly fought to throw off Ottoman rule. These are clearly false narratives. Another claim is that the Serbs, since the beginning of the Ottoman occupation, were genocided and oppressed by Albanians which there is no evidence for. What they have done is that they have taken modern national identities and political conflicts and projected this into these past events.

What has that to do with our independence or many Albanians serving the Ottoman Empire ?

Many Albanian claims are absolutely exaggerated too but the Serbian ones have had the most impact.

Show me evidence of loyal Ottoman Albanian servants being transplanted in Kosova between period of 1448 to 1690, that supposedly genocided and terrorized Serbs ? I would prefer also to see sources from these periods, not nationalist drivel written hundreds of years later.