Area: 250 m2

Land area: 500 m2

Bedrooms: 3

Bathrooms: 4

Pool 4×8

Newly built, luxury designed villa is located in a beautiful peaceful village Orahovac, part of the UNESCO protected Kotor municipality.

Villa is nice example of contemporary architecture fitted into historical ambience of Kotor Bay landscape.

Villa is fully equipped with all needed the high quality furniture and equipment for enjoyment and recreation.

Structure of the house:

Ground floor: At villa backyard there is a garage (45m2) for 2-3 vehicles and fitness room (10m2) equipped for some of cardio and weightlifting workouts.

After entrance and entry hall there is a spacious living and dining room, guest toilet, great apartment bedroom (~35m2) with bathroom fitting up 2-4 people, great front yard with again living, dining and beach pool front relaxing areas, swimming pool (4m x 8m) and barbecue surrounded by greens and views of Boka Bay.

First floor: Upstairs hallway with library area, two great apartment bedrooms (2 x ~35m2) with a own bathrooms and each fitting up to 2-3 people, laundry room, all surrounded by amazing Boka Bay views.

The house is positioned so that it has an extraordinary view of the sea and the bay in all directions. Everything is built from the highest quality materials. The facade is partly made of stone, and partly a “demit” facade. The ceramics are Italian, the parquet is made of first-class ash. The exterior woodwork is made of Siberian white pine, and the interior woodwork is made of oak. The villa is for sale fully furnished.

The distance from the Old Town in Kotor is 8.5 km, while the nearest airport is in Tivat, 20 km away

Orahovac, Kotor, Crna Gora

Orahovac is a small former fishing village that has recently become more and more a tourist destination. The village is quiet and located near Kotor in the direction of Perast. It has a beautiful pebble beach with crystal clear sea which due to its purity the locals use to grow shellfish. Along the coast there is a pontoon with anchored boats, old stone fishing houses which is a real paradise for a quiet holiday away from the city crowds. The settlement is full of typical Mediterranean vegetation. A large number of sunny days and warm sea make the season of sunbathing and swimming long and pleasant. It is connected with the main road with all cities in the bay and on the entire Montenegrin coast. Fishermen's houses, modern villas and cottages have been built in recent years, which is a sign that an increasing number of investors are paying attention to the settlement.