''Everybody's Famous,'' which was nominated for an Oscar as best foreign film this year, might be described as a cuddly Flemish remake of Martin Scorsese's ''King of Comedy.'' The clammy chill of desperation that made that film as creepy as it was funny is replaced, in Dominique Deruddere's new movie, by antic, compassionate good cheer. Mr. Deruddere, who both wrote and directed this picture, occasionally glances toward the troubling underside of our obsession with celebrity, but he waves away the sharp, satirical potential of his story in favor of plucky, genial optimism.

Jean Vereecken (Josse de Pauw) is a factory worker whose greatest ambition is that his plain, heavy-set daughter, Marva (Eve Van Der Gucht), will become a pop star. A classic stage father, he enters her in karaoke-style song contests in which her affectless impersonations of singers like Vanessa Paradis and Madonna are met with ridicule. For his part, Jean fancies himself a songwriter, humming virtually tuneless melodies into a tape recorder. Meanwhile a leading Flemish chanteuse named Debbie (Thekla Reuten) has grown weary of the stresses of stardom and fantasizes about settling down to pursue her real passion, automobile repair.

In short, almost plausible order Jean -- laid off from the bottle plant -- kidnaps Debbie and enlists the help of a young co-worker named Willy (Werner de Smedt) to help him guard his hostage. In lieu of ransom Jean demands that one of his tunes be turned into a single, to be sung by Marva, who knows nothing of her father's scheme.

With its likable blue-collar characters and its unpretentious exuberance, ''Everybody's Famous'' is reminiscent of recent British comedies like ''Brassed Off'' and ''The Full Monty.'' Its view of showbiz -- the word is the same in Flemish -- is soothing and benign, despite the presence of a cynical manager (Victor Löw), with feathered hair and shiny shirts he never buttons over his sternum.

The movie delivers an innocuous dose of pop wish fulfillment, in which the machinery of fame, from the record industry to the television news, is ultimately benign, able to make everybody happy. The moral seems to be that sincerity is more important than talent, and that even a cheesy piece of Euro-pop like ''Lucky Manuelo,'' Jean and Marva's would-be hit single, can be a smash if sung with conviction and feeling. It's a lovely idea, whose only flaw is that it isn't true. If it were, ''Everybody's Famous'' would be a great movie, rather than a sweet, silly, not-bad one.

''Everybody's Famous'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for brief nudity and sexual situations.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.