A star of the film 1917 read on set about a paralysed machine gunner's heroism in the First World War - without realising it was his own great-great grandfather.

Dean-Charles Chapman told how he was reading diaries from the Western Front while researching the conflict for his role in the new film by director Sir Sam Mendes.

He learned about machine gunner David Peers, who spent four days in intense pain behind enemy lines after being shot through the hip in Loos in October 1915.

Private Peers, 20, was paralysed in both legs in battle but dragged himself through the mud and drank water from his fallen comrades' bottles to survive.

Chapman, 22, then learned that the dramatic account was about his own relative, telling The Sun: 'I read that book pretty much every day before I walked out on set.

'It was only after I spoke to my mum and dad, who then spoke to their parents, that it became clear that my great, great grandad had an entry in it.

'Just reading snippets of the story of my great, great grandfather and knowing I had an ancestor who was there made me feel so much more connected to Blake.'

Chapman stars alongside George MacKay in 1917 as two lance corporals who race across no man's land to deliver a message to save the lives of 1,600 British soldiers.

Private Peers was an apprentice fitter who joined his home regiment in Grimsby, Lincolnshire, and landed in France in March 1915 before fighting at Ypres.

He was then sent south to coalfields near Bethune, where thousands of British soldiers died, and was chosen to go over the top and retake a German stronghold.

On October 13 that year at 2pm after a two-hour bombardment, Private Peers and more than 600 comrades attacked the Germans in hand-to-hand combat.

He was one of 217 men counted as missing from an original total of 659 from 5th Lincs, but was severely injured by a bullet which paralysed him from the waist down.

According to the Sun, Private Peers later told the Red Cross: 'I was lying out for four days until I was found by a young German officer who said to me, 'Englander?'

'And when I said, 'Yes', he spat on the ground and said, 'Swine'. Then his superior officer came up and treated me well.'

Private Peers was taken to a field hospital and then by train to a hospital in Aachen, Germany, where he was later transferred to a prisoner of war camp in Cologne.

Six months after the attack he was put on a prisoner-exchange train to Brussels and finally got to the Queen Alexandra Military Hospital in London in May 1916.

He was later transferred to Ralston Hospital in Glasgow and discharged, before getting a job making Remembrance wreaths in Richmond, South West London.

Private Peers married Kathleen in 1917 but died in 1935 aged 40. Four years later their daughter Evelyn Ruby married Sidney Chapman - Dean-Charles's great-grandfather.

The actor also appeared in Game Of Thrones as Tommen Baratheon, the youngest son of the fearsome Cersei Lannister, and played Billy Elliot in the West End.

1917, which also stars Benedict Cumberbatch, Andrew Scott and Richard Madden, received nine Bafta nine nominations yesterday, including for best film.

The First World War epic was inspired by a story told to Sir Sam by his paternal grandfather, Alfred Mendes, about two young soldiers at the height of the conflict.

1917 will be released in UK cinemas on Friday, having come out in the US last month