June 21–A Vallejo sports legend went down memory lane Saturday as he visited his former middle school.

Jeff Gordon, 43, walked the hallway of Springstowne Middle School, now Vallejo Charter School, where he used to break dance — and avoid getting caught by a teacher.

“Who I have become today on the track, and off the track, started in Vallejo,” Gordon said.

The race car driver was born and raised in Vallejo before moving to Pittsboro, Ind., at 14 years old with his family.

Before Springstowne Middle School, Gordon attended Pennycook Elementary School.

The “Homecoming Tour” is part of an event before Gordon retires from being a full-time race car driver.

Gordon is a four-time NASCAR Cup Series champion, three-time Daytona 500 winner, and five-time Brickyard 400 winner, among many other wins over his career.

Before visiting his former school, Gordon also stepped on to the Rio Linda quarter-midget track where he first raced.

Gordon and his stepfather, John Bickford, raced at other venues around the Bay Area and California in those early years, including tracks in Visalia, Hayward and Sunnyvale. But the Rio Linda oval, formerly known as the Cracker Jack Track, was where Gordon, as a 5-year-old, first began to race against drivers his age or older.

“He had the idea of what it was going to take to win, and he knew that the right pedal was go fast and the left pedal didn’t accomplish very much,” Bickford said. “But we practiced a lot.”

Bickford said his wife Carol, Gordon’s mother, estimated that at a facility at the Solano County Fairgrounds in Vallejo, Gordon ran over 2,000 laps around a flat asphalt surface in a little car long before they came to Rio Linda to race.

The Saturday visits brought back many memories to Gordon.

“I never had an opportunity to do something like this,” he said. “This is a real treat to me.”

Gordon also observed that the lockers did not look as great back when he attended the school.

“This is definitely fresh paint,” he added with a smile.

Growing up in Vallejo also influenced his taste in music and his love for break dancing, Gordon said.

The racer also fielded questions from his young fans during his Vallejo visit, answering tough questions, including religion and his favorite Vallejo memory.

Chris Rose, of Vallejo, brought his three children to the event. The family was waiting for their favorite race car driver at the entrance of the school to wait for autographs at the end of the event.

“I thought it was great,” Rose said. “He answered the kids’ questions with truthfulness.”

Rose and his son Nathan has been going to the Sonoma Raceway to watch the races regularly.

His father Billy Gordon was also at the Saturday event.

“I’m most proud of his work with the cancer foundation,” Billy Gordon said.

In 1999, Jeff Gordon founded the Jeff Gordon’s Children Foundation, which is dedicated to pediatric cancer research. He also later built the Jeff Gordon Children’s Hospital in North Carolina.

However, Billy Gordon said he’s always known his son was interested in racing.

“He always wanted to go fast, couldn’t stand if someone take us over,” Billy Gordon said.

Jeff Gordon will be racing at the Toyota/Save Mart 350 at the Sonoma Raceway on June 28. For more information, visit www.racesonoma.com/tickets/toyota–save–mart–350/.