Luxembourg, officially the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is one of the smallest countries in Europe. This landlocked West European country has a population of 524,853 and is bordered by Belgium, France, and Germany. Luxembourg City is the capital.

The Luxembourg Football Federation (Fédération Luxembourgeoise de Football) is the governing body of football in Luxembourg. The FLF administers the Luxembourg Football League and the Luxembourg national football team. The organisation is based in Mondercange, to the south of Luxembourg City. It was founded in 1908 and became affiliated to FIFA in 1910 and UEFA in 1954.

The National Division is the highest football league in Luxembourg. The competition was first held in 1910, and has been held every year since, with the exceptions of 1913 and four seasons during the Second World War. The competition was originally called Championnat Luxembourgeois and later became the Premiere Division and the Division d'Honneur. Since the 1957–58 season, the competition has been called the Division Nationale.

The most successful Luxembourgian club is Jeunesse Esch who far outstrip CA Spora Luxembourg, Stade Dudelange and F91 Dudelange in championship wins.

Below the top tier the league structure comprises Division d'Honneur (1 section of 14 clubs), 1. Division (2 sections serving 28 clubs), 2. Division (2 sections serving 28 clubs) and finally 1. Division (2 sections serving 22 clubs). The leagues are administered by the FLF and there is a system of promotion and relegation between the tiers.

​

Footnote: Full recognition and acknowledgement is made to the work of Karel Stokkermans and contributors to the Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation who have catalogued many tables, results and listings that are referenced in League321.com. At the same time sincere gratitude is expressed to Soccerway, Sofascore.com and FCTables.com for their superb league tables, along with other providers of football content, including Footystats.org and Livescore.in. Finally a special thanks to those independent statisticians and enthusiasts that continue to maintain historical soccer databases and archives. Despite every possible effort to ensure the accuracy of our listings, we accept no responsibility for any form of use of data and information provided by this site. Do not miss another top site in our football family namely Finlandfootball.net.