Yes, the wait is over. The Luxembourg darts league kicked off again tonight after the summer break.

I know you’ve all been eagerly anticipating the resumption of hostilities, rest assured, your faithful Benelux correspondent will keep you up to speed and in the loop with all the thrills, spills and excitement of the greatest darts league in the world and the progress of the forum’s favourite darts team, Game Over.

As there are 18 teams registered in total, the decision was taken at committee level to have 3 divisions of 6 teams each, with two separate seasons - one pre-christmas, and one post-christmas, with relegation and promotion at the end of each season.

After our fine maiden season in Division 1 last season, Game Over finds itself among the elite once again. This winter season promises to be extremely difficult due to the smaller number of teams.

There are no duds or handy points to be had any more. If anything, we are odds-on favourites to drop down a division when the dust settles.

Anyway, we beat on…

MATCHDAY 1

Thargs v Game Over

Venue: 7 rue Dicks, L1417 Luxembourg

Present tonight: 1 Irish, 1 English, 1 Scotch, 1 Pole

Team roster news: We’ve lost Leeds Bob. He was poached by one of our divisional rivals, but we have gained Pete, who is a decent pegger. Apart from that, all the old stock is on board again.

Ethnic make-up of panel: 3 Irish, 3 Scotch, 1 English, 1 Pole, 1 Romanian, 1 French, 1 Belgian

Our first fixture of the season was against the Thargs who we lost to and beat last season. Hopes weren’t high though, as we basically haven’t picked up a dart since the end of last season, and these other cunts go all year round.

We got the night underway at Decibel bar, our new/old home ground for the season to check out the renewed darting facilities that await us when we play our first home game there in two weeks time. Most impressive set up, I think we’ll be very happy there.

We then went to the chicken/crack house for our traditional feed of piri-piri chicken and it being a lovely balmy evening, the crackheads and brassers were all resplendent in their summer best.

Onward then to the White Rose for the eagerly awaited contest. The big man from Poland went first against Thomas and lost 2-0.

I threw the second, and played reasonably well, but the old failing on doubles let me down again. Missed chances to win both legs. As a result, Romain nipped in and won both legs, giving the Thargs a 2-0 lead.

Having renounced the captaincy, the Spear went third and despite a blistering 123 start, he couldn’t continue in the same vein and went down 2-0 to Erwin, leaving us 3-0 down.

Mr 143 got us off the mark though. He is giddy with excitement over the vote tomorrow but threw well and won 2-0 against Serge.

So, at 3-1 down, we had to win the team game in order to have any hope of taking the points on the night. We didn’t. Not even close to be honest. 4-1 then, done and dusted as far as the match was concerned.

We played the doubles games and lost them as well. The banter between Mr 143 (cellic fan) and the big Pole (Legia fan) was getting entertaining at that stage, so our focus was well off, but the craic was good despite the crushing 6-1 final scoreline.

A bad start then, and things will not get any easier between now and christmas. If we get the full compliment of players out, we could hold our own if we all play well. If not, we’ll be waving goodbye to the top echelon and be back down to division 2 for the spring season in 2015.

All I know is, you will only find the in-depth updates here, exclusively live on TFK

Real darts

Real people.

MATCHDAY 2

The Others v Game Over

Venue: 28 montee du Grund, L1645 Luxembourg

Present tonight: 2 Irish, 1 English, 1 Scotch

Only four of us in attendance last night as the second round of matches in the greatest darts league in the world took place. The chicken meal at the crack den was sacrificed for some pre-match practice. Didn’t go well to be honest so we weren’t too confident. The Others are a decentish team but a loss against them would do our prospects of survival a great deal of harm.

The Spear led off against Steve, and threw pretty well. The old failing on doubles let him down though, and the 2-0 loss put us behind from the off.

Next up was the Westmeath Wizard, making his first appearance of the season. Hell of a battle he put up too. Scored well considering he hasn’t fired an arrow since May. Lost the first but won the second after an excruciatingly long game. He was stuck on 5’s, his opponent on madhouse. The rest of us were seriously considering asking them to go nearest the bull to decide it. Eventually the Wizard got it. He could have taken the third leg as well but the doubles let him down.

So 2-0 down then. I played the third match and played really well. Unfortunately the bloke I was playing was just that bit better. He took the first leg in 18 darts. I got to the double after he did but didn’t get a chance as he nailed his at the first time of asking. Got down the board before him in the second leg but missed the double. He nipped in immediately and hit his first time round again. Pisser after playing so well.

As with last week, it was left up to Mr 143 to keep us alive. Unlike last week, he played poorly and couldn’t get the win. A 2-1 loss finishing the tie off as a contest.

We proceeded with the team game and doubles as the consumption of alcohol increased. Lost the team game, but we won both doubles matches to leave the final score on the night 5-2 to The Others.

We didn’t deserve to win, but had we played a little better we could have. Things are looking grim at the moment and it’s a long way to safety from here.

All I know is, you will only find the in-depth updates here, exclusively live on TFK

Real darts

Real people.

MATCHDAY 3

Game Over v Brooklyn Zoo I

Venue: 42-44 rue de Hollerich, L1740 Luxembourg

Present tonight: 1 Irish, 1 English, 1 Scotch, 1 Polish, 1 Belgian 1 French

Two losses from our first two matches of the season had left us in serious trouble, as earlier tonight, we faced the might of Brooklyn Zoo I in our new/old home ground of the Decibel bar. The new set up is lovely and we arrived early for a bit of practice and immediately felt at home.

Our opponents are the most consistent and successful team in the history of the league, so hope, rather than confidence was the overriding feeling of the evening. They battered us last season, 6-1 and 7-0 and are all very good players. A famous fictional character once said that hope is a dangerous thing. We preferred to see it as a good thing, perhaps the finest of things, as we steeled ourselves for the challenge ahead.

Mr 143 led off against Manu and played very well, his best showing of the season so far. Scored well and his finishing was solid too. He won 2-1 to give us a great start.

I took the second tie against Leeds Bob. The traitorous Leeds Bob,who wasn’t all that impressed with the set up in Decibel before the season started. Despite our assurances that the place would be cushty by the time we took our home bow, he defected anyway.

As a result, there was no way he was going to take the win in his singles tie at the very least. I won the first leg convincingly enough. Bob got down to the double before me in the second but faltered badly and let me in to sneak it and take the win 2-0.

Yo, our top player, then made his season debut after a grand holiday with his missus in Thailand and Cambodia. They had a great time except for that he cracked a tooth on the second day while eating squid. Chomped into the squid and bit the beak which should have been taken out. Nasty.

Anyway, he played well against Christian and duly won 2-0, giving us a 3-0 lead and a shot at a huge upset.

Magic, the big Pole took the final singles tie against Steve. Steve took the first leg handily enough but was made battle for the second. Big Magic had chances at doubles but couldn’t capitalise and so, the visitors had their first point of the evening.

So, at 3-1 up we faced into the team game. As usual, we lost it. Our mojo from the singles seemed to desert us while Brooklyn Zoo I improved. 3-2 then, with two doubles ties to go.

It was decided to put the Spear and Mr 143 up first. They faced Manu and Steve who won 2-0 to leave things on a knife edge at 3-3.

So it was down to myself and Yo to try and bring us our first win of the season against Leeds Bob and Christian. We knew we needed to play well to have any chance. And we did play well as a team. I scored well and Yo nailed the doubles in both legs to give us the win, 2-0, and victory in the match by 4-3.

A stunning win that will send shockwaves around the league. Our first of the season, my first as captain, and a glimmer of hope in the battle for survival in the upper echelon of the most prestigious league in darts.

We will return to Decibel next week for our next match.

You will kept updated, only here, exclusively live on TFK

Real darts

Real people.

LDL CUP - 1ST Round

Game Over v Notorious PYG

Venue: Decibel Bar, 42-44 rue de Hollerich, L1740 Luxembourg

Present tonight: 2 Irish, 2 Scotch, 1 Polish, 1 Belgian

As Phil’s darts club play their massive trebles and doubles tournament in Citywest, the LDL rolls on, with the first round of knockout matches taking place earlier this evening.

The cup is a competition that has not been kind to us in the past, in fact, our form over the last few seasons has been dismal when it comes to the knockout format. We were fairly confident that we would win tonight though. Our opponents were the Notorious PYG. A third division outfit, a new name, but players we had played against in the past, and good craic with it too, a sound bunch.

We started early at the request of the PYG’s captain, Kevin. He being a sound lad from Fermanagh, and they being a sound team, we were happy to accommodate. As a result, there was no chicken or crack starter to the evening, but luckily enough, the restaurant next door to Decibel is more than happy to take orders and drop food into anyone that wants it.

Away we went anyway, I played the first match against Craig, a decent pegger with previous top flight experience. I played well in the first leg and took it comfortably enough. Standard slipped in the second and Craig took it before I had a chance at a double. Things picked up again in the third, which I assuredly took to give Game Over a 1-0 lead on the evening.

Yo took the second bout by 2-0 over our opposing captain, Kevin. Kevin played alright but to be honest, our Yo is a cut above, a class player, and he gave us a healthy 2-0 lead after the opening two singles games of the evening.

Big Maciej was up next against Laura. The first leg was a good game too…until the doubles. Both scored well, but Laura nicked it with a madhouse finish to put her one up. The second leg she won as well. Maciej scored well in the first leg - as well as he has done for a while - but it deserted him in the second.

So at 2-1 up, Mr 143 finished off the singles round against Torbin. Won convincingly as well, 2-0, leaving us in a very nice position after the singles matches, 3-1.

Onto the team game then, the Westmeath Wizard and - making his Game Over maiden appearance - Pete, our latest Scottish addition, joined Mr 143 and Yo to try and win, and therefore, seal the tie for us.

And so they did, handily enough too. Good start for Pete too, a fine player with an odd style. As someone said tonight, it almost looks like he’s blessing the board before he throws the dart.

With the score at 4-1 to us, the doubles were played for the sake of posterity. Maciej and Pete took on Craig and Kevin and won 2-0.

Myself and the Wizard then took on Laura and Torbin, and despite losing the first leg, came back to win 2-1 to round off a comfortable win for Game Over by 6-1 on the night.

A good game all round and grand oul banter with the PYG lads. The Vedett was flowing freely at this stage. We played a beer leg and we won that as well, fair play to the lads, they got the shots in before we all hit the road.

The next round is pencilled in for November 19, dunno who we’ll be playing.

The league returns next week. We will welcome the defending champions, Rusty Darts I to the cauldron that is Decibel. After two wins on the spin, we will be hoping to kick on and climb the table.

You will hear about it, only here, exclusively live on TFK

Real darts

Real people.

MATCHDAY 4

Game Over v Rusty Darts I

Venue: 42-44 rue de Hollerich, L1740 Luxembourg

Present tonight: 1 Irish, 1 English, 1 Scotch, 1 Polish, 1 Belgian

The reigning champions made the short trip down rue de Hollerich last night to face Game Over as the biggest darts league in the universe moved inexorably on. We had beaten them in the penultimate match of last season. They didn’t take it well, one of their main men pissed off in a huff after the team game that gave us the win, so they were out for revenge last night.

We had to stall proceedings as long as possible as we only had 3 players confirmed for the official throw in time. Mr 143 was due to arrive at the 9pm mark, so we had to drag things out for as long as we could. They, on the other hand had about 10 fuckers there. The numbers haven’t been great for us, but yesterday, we had one lad sick in hospital, another nursing a slipped disk and we didn’t know if the Disaster was alive or not - his last contact with any of us was a message asking us if he knew which hotel he was staying in in Gelsenkirchen.

Anyway, Yo led off against Gerald and threw very well. Won 2-0 to give us a great start. A bit too good though, he finished both games quickly, us watching the clock and the doorway for Mr 143.

I went second against Mike. We’ve met twice previously and the score was 1-1 before last night. As of today, it’s 2-1 to Mike due to me playing like an absolute fucking melon. Got to the double first in the first leg but missed my chance. Mike got his first time though and took the second on his first double as well.

The Magic Pole went third and played as well as I’ve seen him play. Lost the first leg but stormed back to take the second and was pipped at the post in the third.

So, we were 2-1 down and luckily enough we didn’t have to concede the 4th match as Mr 143 arrived just in time to take on Joel. Joel played badly, unfortunately, our lad played worse and lost 2-0.

So at 3-1 down, we headed into the team game. The Spear had arrived and took the place of Magic for a game we had to win to keep hope alive.

And win we did, by a fuckin mile too. It was like a switch was flicked. We left them with 330 odd on the board. My first 3 visits were a ton, a ton and 99 and I took out 4’s with the first dart to bring us right back into it.

3-2 down then and we fancied our chances of taking the 2 doubles to pull off the come from behind (ooh matron) victory.

Yo and the Spear went first against the husband and wife team of Laurent and Tina and threw brilliantly in the first leg. They were on double 10 while the opposition were still in the 200’s. They missed it, and missed it, and missed it, and missed it. Unbelievable. I’ve never seen so many darts land on the wire without going in. A couple of bounceouts as well. This allowed Laurent and Tina, who didn’t play well to creep down the board and take the leg. buoyed by that most unlikely of wins, they took the second lag as well. The lads missed a few doubles again, and so the tie was over, 4-2 to Rusty Darts.

Myself and Mr 143 played the final match of the evening and performed ok but lost the dead rubber by 2-1, leaving the final score on the night, 5-2 to the defending champions.

A disappointing loss then, especially as we had really fancied ourselves after winning the team game. Our record now stands at P4 W1 L3.

Things are looking grim, but with teams taking points off each other all over the place, all is certainly not lost and it is far from Game Over for Game Over.

Next week sees us taking the trip to Scotts bar to face Brooklyn Zoo II.

You will read all about it, only here, exclusively live on TFK

Real darts

Real people.