By Rebecca Tseng

Brand new this fall, Eyewitness Encyclopedia of Everything—yes, everything!—is the ultimate compendium to discovering our extraordinary world. This next-generation, all-encompassing encyclopedia for kids ages 9+ bursts with breathtaking photography and is packed with the topics young readers love most (we know because we asked them!): the mysteries of space and beyond, the world’s strangest plants and unusual animals, surprising facts on the human body, history’s heroes and villains, science’s most incredible breakthroughs, and so much more!

With 400 pages filled with facts and stats, jaw-dropping photography, quizzes, interviews with experts from astronauts to zoologists, and more than 1,500 images, Eyewitness Encyclopedia of Everything opens the door to a universe of incredible knowledge.

This stunning encyclopedia is the pinnacle of 35 years of collaboration and innovation from researchers, editors, photographers, and artists working on the DK Eyewitness series, which has covered just about every subject under the sun (including astronomy!). With the publication of Eyewitness Encyclopedia of Everything, all of kids’ favorite topics from the series will be packed into one awe-inspiring book for the first time.

In celebration of this landmark publication, we’re stepping back in time to explore the history of this beloved series. Get the inside scoop on the creation of this series and how DK Eyewitness redefined nonfiction literature for a generation of children. Let’s dive in!

The Modernization of a Classic Series

Did you know scientists have found fossils of more than 800 species of dinosaurs? Or that a cat’s purr is made when a set of bones at the base of its tongue vibrates?

Whether you’re into raptors or rocks, planets or National Parks, Ancient Greece or Ancient Egypt, DK Eyewitness books keep curious minds learning and growing, both inside and outside the classroom. Since the publication of Eyewitness Guides: Bird in 1988, more than 41.4 million copies of DK Eyewitness books have been sold in 50 countries, publishing in 40+ languages and covering 150+ topics.

In 2021, the Eyewitness books were relaunched. Though refreshed with a new look, more facts, and more fun for today’s kids, these books still maintain the same well-loved, immersive approach.

Perfect for kids ages 9 to 12 and packed with detailed images and bite-size facts, Eyewitness books immerse young readers in their favorite curriculum-aligned topics, from dinosaurs to trains to the human body.

The relaunched series includes:

New, bold jacket designs

Modernized fonts and formatting for a better flow

Up to 20% new photography and updated diagrams

All information updated by expert consultants

New “eyewitness” feature boxes that provide expanded information from experts

A glossary at the back to reinforce key concepts

Extraordinary Research Makes Extraordinary Books

When readers flip through an Eyewitness book, they become beneficiaries of years of authority, expertise, and research. A team of specialists will have worked on this one book for many months—even years!

DK’s editors and designers scour the globe for the very finest examples, work with major institutions and organizations such as national museums, private collections, and research centers around the world, and consult the most distinguished authors in the field. The DK team has even nurtured flowers for time-lapse sequences, investigated mummy storage vaults, and trained fish to get the perfect close-up image of an archerfish capturing its prey.

Whatever the subject covered, no effort or expense is spared to make the Eyewitness titles the most outstanding range of information books for kids out there!

Whether to discover their latest passion or to help teachers deliver an engaging lesson, the DK Eyewitness series captures the imagination of inquisitive minds on topics from the unseen creatures of the deep sea to the strange intricacies of the human body, and so much more.