Background

LeBron Raymone James was born on December 30, 1984, in Akron, Ohio. His zodiac sign is Capricorn, and his ethnicity is African-American. He is the son of Anthony McClelland and Gloria Mae James, and he was their only child. James’ father was absent from his life, and he was primarily raised by his mother and a man by the name of Frank Walker, a local youth football coach. James was allowed to move in with Walker’s family after his mother decided he would do better in a more stable home because of financial issues.

James has enjoyed basketball since he was young, but he started playing organized basketball in fifth grade. James attended St. Vincent–S.t. Mary High School, where he joined the basketball team. During this time, his talent began to be recognized and talked about, gaining constant media attention, like appearing on the cover of “Sports Illustrated” and being named Gatorade National Player of the Year. He entered the 2003 N.B.A. Draft and got selected by his hometown team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, as the first overall pick. In 2004, he received the N.B.A.’Rookie of the Year’ award. He was named the N.B.A. All-Star Game Most Valuable Player at the 2006 All-Star Game. In the 2007–08 season, James was named All-Star Game M.V.P. for the second time. In 2009, James finished second in N.B.A. ‘Defensive Player of the Year Award’ voting and made his first N.B.A. All-Defensive Team. In 2010, he became a free agent and got contacted by several teams. James then announced that he would sign with the Miami Heat and in the 2011-12 season, he was named M.V.P. for the third time.

In the 2012-13 season, James was named M.V.P. for the fourth time and was named Finals M.V.P. for the second straight season after the 2013 N.B.A. Finals. In 2014, he opted out of his contract with the Heat and became a free agent, announcing his intent to return to the Cavaliers, signing with the team officially in July. In 2018, he opted out of his contract with the Cavaliers and became an unrestricted free agent once again, and his management announced he would sign with the Los Angeles Lakers.