Chittagong, Kalurghat, Bangladesh. 2nd Aug, 2023. Centenary Kalurghat Bridge in Chittagong, Bangladesh has been closed for renovation. Over ten lakh people of Boalkhali upazila are facing extreme suffering after crossing Karnaphuli river. Due to the effect of the full moon, the ferry route has been submerged in the tidal water of the river. Vehicles have to board the ferry dangerously as the passageway of the ferry is submerged in water. The railway engineering department said that the bridge will be closed till October 31 for renovation work. (Credit Image: © Mohammed Shajahan/ZUMA Press Wir

Captions are provided by our contributors.

RMID:Image ID :2RFCCEP

Image details

Contributor :

ZUMA Press, Inc. / Alamy Stock Photo

Image ID :

2RFCCEP

File size :

22.1 MB (841.8 KB Compressed download)

Open your image file to the full size using image processing software.

Releases :

Model - no | Property - noDo I need a release?

Dimensions :

3400 x 2267 px | 28.8 x 19.2 cm | 11.3 x 7.6 inches | 300dpi

Date taken :

2 August 2023

Photographer :

ZUMA Press

More information :

This image could have imperfections as it’s either historical or reportage.

August 2, 2023, Chittagong, Kalurghat, Bangladesh: Centenary Kalurghat Bridge in Chittagong, Bangladesh has been closed for renovation. Over ten lakh people of Boalkhali upazila are facing extreme suffering after crossing Karnaphuli river. Due to the effect of the full moon, the ferry route has been submerged in the tidal water of the river. Vehicles have to board the ferry dangerously as the passageway of the ferry is submerged in water. The railway engineering department said that the bridge will be closed till October 31 for renovation work. (Credit Image: © Mohammed Shajahan/ZUMA Press Wire) EDITORIAL USAGE ONLY! Not for Commercial USAGE!

Available for editorial and personal use only. Get in touch for commercial uses.

You can only use this image in editorial media and for personal use. Editorial media includes use as a visual reference to support your article, story, critique or educational text. Personal use allows you to make a single personal print, card or gift for non-commercial use. Not for resale.

It shouldn't be used for commercial use which includes advertising, marketing, promotion, packaging, advertorials, and consumer or merchandising products.

Taxes may apply to prices shown.