Research Proposal Topic

Good Governance in Health Service Delivery at Upazila Health Complex under Health, Population and Nutrition Development Program (HPNSDP) : A study on Boalkhali Upazila Health Complex.

Submitted To

####### AKA FIROWZ AHMAD

Professor Department of Public Administration University of Dhaka.

Submitted By

Anjuman Ashad Class Roll: SN 13 8 th semester, 4th batch. Department of Public Administration. University of Dhaka.

Date of Submission

10.

1.

2. Background of the study

Bangladesh is a mostly rural, developing country of South Asia, located on the northern shore of the Bay of Bengal, covering 147,570 square km. People of this country are known as hardworking, with proven capability to preserve mental strength in the event of unexpected extensive loss due to natural calamities, such as floods, cyclones, epidemics, etc. But their basic needs have remained unfulfilled.

Health is a basic requirement to improve the quality of life. National economic and social development depends on the status of a country9s health facilities. A health care system reflects the socio-economic and technological development of a country and is also a measure of the responsibilities a community or government assumes for its people9s health care. The effectiveness of a health system depends on the availability and accessibility of services in a form which the people are able to understand, accept and utilize. The Government of Bangladesh is constitutionally committed to <the supply of basic medical requirements to all levels of the people in the society= and the <improvement of nutrition status of the people and public health status= (Bangladesh Constitution, Article- 18). The health service functions were initially restricted to curative services. With the development of modern science and technology, health services emphasize promotive and preventive rather than curative health care. Yet, a large number of people of Bangladesh, particularly in rural areas, remain with no or little access to health care facilities. It would be critical for making progress in Bangladesh9s health services to improve the people9s participation in the health sector. The Government therefore seeks to create conditions whereby the people of Bangladesh have the opportunity to reach and maintain the highest attainable level of health. Bangladesh has a good infrastructure for delivering primary health care, but the full potential of this infrastructure has due to lack of adequate logistics never been utilized.

health, nutrition and reproductive health, including family planning status of the people, particularly of vulnerable groups, including women, children, the elderly, and the poor with the ultimate aim of their economic emancipation and physical, social, mental and spiritual well being. Three sub-sectoral policies, i., National Health Policy, National Food and Nutrition Policy, and National Population Policy duly approved by the government from time to time are under implementation by the MOHFW.

Government leaders frequently speak of ensuring better health services for the people, but in practice very little is done in this regard. It goes without saying that food, Clothing, Shelter, Education and Medical care are the five basic needs of life. Without these none can lead a normal life. But in Bangladesh not a single of these is easily available for all. Specially, proper medical care and treatment of various diseases are, in fact, beyond the reach of the common people due to different reasons. The most important reason is that the health sector itself is suffering from a number of acute diseases and so unable to provide necessary services for the people.

The infrastructure of the health sector is not strong enough to face the challenge of time and meet the growing needs of the huge population. The situation is aggravated further by widespread corruption and misuse of the limited funds made available for this sector.

The health care Bangladesh people get from the government is quite unsatisfactory. Not to speak of the developed countries, even India and Pakistan spend more and provide more facilities for the medical care of their people compared to Bangladesh. Moreover, the cost of medical check-up, test and treatment is much higher in Bangladesh than that in any other country of the region. True, a number of new medical colleges and hospitals have been established in the country in the recent past. But this too has not yet been able to contribute substantially to bring about a qualitative improvement in the country's medical care system.

The miserable condition of the country's health sector is perhaps due to the fact that medical care is considered here as a commercially sellable commodity instead of a noble service to suffering humanity. The people spend a good amount of money for every medical student till he

becomes a doctor and the entire health sector is run with the help of public money. But the people do not get the much-needed medical care from the State and enough sympathy of the doctors. It is perhaps an irony of their fate.

The State is apparently incapable of coping with the peoples' growing need of medical care. Because, our health sector is running short of Personnel. Press reports suggest that Posts of thousands of officers and workers including doctors and nurses are lying vacant in the government hospitals of the country. And as a result, the normal functioning of the hospitals is being affected seriously. The health sector is largely crippled by inertia, inefficiency, negligence, wrong treatment, ill-treatment, mismanagement, irregularities, opportunism and corruption. Scores of instances in this regard can be sighted from reports published in Newspapers. These reports indicate that in many cases the doctors and nurses working in government hospitals behave in an unfriendly manner with the people and remain busy in serving themselves instead of the patients while the specialists spare more time and energy for the patients at their personal chambers or Private clinics than for those languishing in the hospital beds. Reports also suggest that many of the government hospitals are centers of theft and misappropriation of public money almost freely. For example, it is alleged that in order to make money concerned people in some government hospitals purchase outdated and sub-standard medicines and supply those to the patients. And it is now an open secret that the markets are over-flooded with outdated, adulterated, sub-standard, spurious and contraband medicines and those are being sold and used freely causing much harm to the patients.

Irregularities and mismanagement are found almost everywhere in the country. But these are most acute in the field of medical treatment of the people. Indifference to the patients and negligence of their treatment are very common in the government hospitals where the atmosphere is usually nasty and unhealthy. Against this backdrop, it has become essential to arrange urgent 8treatment9 for the ailing health sector itself.

With a view to make health service accessible and participatory to the people of all strata of the society The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been implementing sector wide approach (SWAp) since July 1998 focusing on pro-poor essential service packages, which have resulted in reducing gap between the rich and the poor. However, demand and supply gaps

upazila are the lowest level of administrative tier. The main target of the present government9s national health policy is th provide the rural masses with primary health care services through upazila Health complex.

There are many research conducted on the effective and efficient functioning of Public health sector. Some important literature that I review are following:

Zulfiqar Ali (Divergent Maternal & Child Health outcomes in Bangladesh: A tale of Two Upazilas) highlights on health performance in respect of maternal and child care. He tried to draw the attention on maternal and child mortality and morbidity through conducting research on 2 upazila.

A study of Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) namely <A tale of two wings= (Health and Family Planning Program in an upazila in Northern Bangladesh) looked at the existing domiciliary health and family planning services in the rural areas and attempted to identify areas where BRAC could facilitate for improvement.

Ferdous Arefina Osman, Professor of Dhaka University, Department of PUBLIC Administration in the article < Public- Private Partnership: Lessons from Bangladesh= outlined that partnership can be a straightforward solution to address the growing public health problems in Bangladesh. She is of opinion that partnership is required to exploit the strengths of all the sectors toward fulfilling the basic health needs of the people, which is always challenging.

A.K. Eamin Ali Aknada and Dr. Kazi Mostak Gausul Hoq in <Public Health Information Service in the northern region of Bangladesh: an Exploratory study= focuses on the crucial role of information services in upgrading health status of the population of any country by providing valuable information like health, sanitation, nutrition, family planning etc.

A study by Bangladesh Development Research Center (BDRC) <People9s Participation in Health services: A study of Bangladesh Rural Health complex= aims to explore the sequence of the development and people9s participation in Bangladesh9s health services.

My proposed research is a little bit different from the literatures discussed above. As we group members are going to work on 11 different Upazila Health Complex in assessing Good

Governance in health service delivery our research report will be very unique as there was no research conducted in the past covering all components of Public Management with all indicators of Good Governance.

5. Theoretical Framework

Public management is a term that considers that government and non-profit administration resembles private-sector management in some important ways. As such, there are management tools appropriate in public and in private domains, tools that maximize efficiency and effectiveness.

Features of public management:

➢ Emphasizes on the achievement of results and personnel responsibility of manager. ➢ Making organizations, personnel and employment terms and conditions more flexible. ➢ Organizational and personal objectives are to be set clearly with performance indicators and evaluation mechanism for ensuring 3Es economy, efficiency and effectiveness. ➢ Politically committed senior officials for a hindrance free management of policy cycles. ➢ Governments are to more likely to be market oriented. ➢ Downsizing of government through privatization.

Components of public management

➢ Strategy ➢ Management of internal components  Organization & Human Resource Management  Finance & Financial Management ➢ Managing external constituencies  Political Force, Pressure Group, Press & Media.  External Unit.

Good Governance

Governance has by now become a familiar term in academic arena and the international donor circles. The familiarity has, among other things, resulted in numerous efforts to define governance in recent years. But these efforts have not resulted in any universal consensus as to the precise meaning of governance. Governance has been viewed from different angles focusing on various dimensions of it. In general, sense governance means exercising political power to manage a nation9s affair. Today governance is seen as a reflection of the role of the state in giving direction to the development, a country and political regime.

7. Enforcement of Rule of law and judicial system: Independence of the judiciary; removal of judges for cause; adequate remuneration; promotion of judges; independent prosecutors; improved access to justice

8. Privatization: Monopolies as a vehicle for corrupt practices; privatization procedures; transparency in government procurement.

9. Participation: Participation of citizens in decision making and implementation;

10. Enforcement mechanisms: Independent anti-corruption agencies; prosecutorial powers; civil and criminal penalties.

Characteristics of good governance:.

Much has been written about the characteristics of efficient government, successful businesses and effective civil society organizations, but the characteristics of good governance defined in societal terms remain elusive. The characteristics are: 1. Participation – People should have a say in decision-making, either directly or through legitimate intermediate institutions that affects their life and represent their interests. Such broad participation is built on freedom of association and speech, as well as capacities to participate constructively. 2. Rule of law – Legal frameworks should be fair and enforced impartially, particularly the laws on human rights. Rule of law is ensured in every sphere. People9s human rights and fundamental freedom are respected, allowing them to live with dignity. 3. Transparency – Transparency is built on the free flow of information. Processes, institutions and information are directly accessible to those concerned with them, and enough information is provided to understand and monitor them. 4. Responsiveness – Institutions and processes try to serve all stakeholders. 5. Consensus orientation – Good governance mediates differing interests to reach a broad consensus on what is in the best interests of the group and, where possible, on policies and procedures. 6. Equity – People are free from discrimination based on race, ethnicity, class, gender or any other attribute. All men and women have opportunities to improve or maintain their well-being. Women are equal partners with men in private and public spheres of life and decision-making. 7. Effectiveness and efficiency – Processes and institutions produce results that meet needs while making the best use of resources. 8. Accountability – Decision-makers in government, the private sector and civil society organizations are accountable to the public, as well as to institutional stakeholders. This accountability differs depending on the organization and whether the decision is internal or external to an organization.

Strategic vision – Leaders and the public have a broad and long-term perspective on good governance and human development, along with a sense of what is needed for such development. There is also an understanding of the historical, cultural and social complexities in which that perspective is grounded and the needs of future generations are reflected in current policies.

Public Management & Good Governance

Good Governance is the result of operational success of public management practice. Through proper management of the components of public management it is possible to bring a sustainable check and balance in the public service in developing countries like Bangladesh. With a view to measure the state of Public Management in Bangladesh, it is therefore mandatory to assess the indicators of good governance in aspect to Bangladesh.

In health care delivery the term good governance focuses on the relationship between the government health service provider and the beneficiary.

Governance in Health is increasing regarded as a salient theme on the development of agenda. The increased interest in governance has been driven by the need for greater accountability, arising from increased funding and a growing demand to demonstrate results. An intrinsic aspect of governance, therefore, is accountability. Here Public Management concerns the relationships between various stakeholders in health including individuals, households, communities, firms, governments, non-governmental organizations, private firms, and other entities which have the responsibility to finance, monitor, deliver, and use health services.

In Public Management of Health Service Delivery, accountability involves:

a) Delegation or an understanding (either implicit or explicit) of how services will be supplied; b) F inancing to ensure that adequate resources are available to deliver services; c) P erformance around the actual supply of services; d) Receipt of relevant information to evaluate or monitor performance; and, e) E nforcement which concerns the imposition of sanctions or the provision of rewards for performance.

Figure: Analytical Framework

7. Scope & Limitation of the study

The area of my intended study is Boalkhali Upazila of Chittagong district Bangladesh. The reason behind considering Boalkhali Upazila as an opportunity for conducting study is Acces and convenience to the area as it is my own area from my maternal side. The people of the locality are likely to help me listening that I am their own representative. The people will be likely to provide me with more information as I am familiar with them.

The study also have some limitations. The limitations that I think in conducting my intended study are following:

❖ Covers small sample. ❖ Lack of unwillingness of people in providing information. ❖ People’s unconsciousness. ❖ Time and Time Constraint. ❖ Reliability of information obtained. ❖ Insufficient source of secondary data. ❖ Lack of access to the research area as there exist a large bureaucracy and the service provider might unwillingly to talk about the study.

8. Research Objectives

The objectives of this study are following:

 To see what sorts of health care facilities are available at the particular Upazila Health Complex.

 To see to what extent people are satisfied with the services provided by UHC.  To scrutinize why UHC is not being able to achieve people9s satisfaction.

 To find out what are the barriers of UHC and how these can be abolished.

9. Research Questions

 Is UHC is being able to deliver people with primary health care services?  Is good governance is being achieved?  Is there exist irregularity, nepotism and corruption present in the health officials at UHC?

10. Research Hypotheses

<Upazila Health Complex is being able to provide with primary health care facilities to some extent but is failed to achieve peoples trust and satisfaction due to irregularity, nepotism, corruption exist there in=.

11. Methodology

10. Study Area

Boalkhali is a famous & development Upazila in the Chittagong District. It is 15 km away from Chittagong town. It has 10 Unions with 43053 households. The population is around 2,49,341. Agriculture and manufacturing are the two major economic sectors in Boalkhali. The Upazila Health complex is located in the center of the Upazila Sadar. Boalkhali Upazila has 50 bedded Upazila health complex. This has also equipped for EmOC Service. There are 6 Sub center run by Doctors And medical Assistant. Out of 27 Community Clinic 24 are Functional.

10. Sample Size

As my research is confined only within Boalkhali Upazila, this homogeneinity ensures that a sample size of 50 is sufficient to successfully represent the whole upazila.

My sample also include the health officials, UNO and the Upazila Chairman.

10.3 Type

As my research is confined within the service delivery aspect of Boalkhali Upazila Health Complex first of all I have to categorize my sample in 2 categories which are following:

able to acquire primary qualitative data, but also quantitative data which will help me to

compare mathematically and analyze statistically.

 Focus Group Discussion:

Due to high level of access and convenience to reach my target population, I can easily

arrange a session of focus group discussion. At least 6 people will be randomly chosen

from the population. I will act as moderator of the discussion. Open ended questions will

be thrown to the participants, one at a time, providing an open, fairly unrestricted manner

to bring out heterogeneous opinions.

I think Focus Group Discussion will provide me with useful insights about true

impressions of the local people on health care services available at Upazila Health

Complex.

 Interview:

As I have proper access to the research area, I will take interview of respondents whom I

consider crucial. This method is very important because questionnaire or other method of

data collection usually do not cover detail information on a matter.

 Case Study:

The last method of my data collection from the respondents is case study method. Using

this method, I will be able to know heterogeneous opinion and incidents from the

respondent and this will help me to determine whether they are satisfied with the Upazila

Health Services or not. If not, what are the causes behind not being satisfied.

References

 Constitution of Peoples republic of Bangladesh.

 National Health Policy 2011.  Health and Population Sector Program Third Service Delivery Survey, 2000, Project Report of CIET.

 Policy Brief on <Health & Population Sector Policy=, August 2001, Task Force report by Center for policy dialogue.

 Osman, Ferdous A. (2004) Policy Making in Bangladesh: A Study of the Health Policy Process, AH Development Publication House, Dhaka.  Osman, Ferdous A. (2004) Public-Private Partnership in Health Service Delivery: Lessons from Bangladesh.

 Perry, H. (2005) Health for All in Bangladesh: Lessons in Primary Health Care for the Twenty First Century, UPL, Dhaka.

 OED, World Bank (2005), Maintaining Momentum to 2015? An Impact Evaluation of Interventions to Improve Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition in Bangladesh, Operations Evaluation Department (OED), The World Bank, Washington, D.

 BDHS (Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey) 2007, Preliminary Report, National Institute of Population Research and Training Dhaka, Bangladesh, Mitra Associates Dhaka, Bangladesh, MEASERES DHS, Macro International Calverton, Maryland, USA.  Government of People9s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Management Information System (MIS), Directorate General of Health Services, Health Bulletin 2009.  Field Visit Notes and Future Thoughts by DFID, CLP, and Engender Health on October 14, 2009 (meeting at Jamuna Resort and NDP Office at Belkuchi).