How do we describe Third Way when it comes to how we relate to one another?

We like to say it requires good table manners. Having good table manners is expressed whenever we choose to walk together in love and humility. We willingly give deference to others for the sake of love and we treat others as being better than ourselves. Jesus modeled this way for us. [1]

In practical terms:

We listen.

We show respect for one another’s point of view and honor their willingness to open up and share their story.

We’re vulnerable.

We’re honest as we allow ourselves to be seen and known.

We show empathy.

We are curious, not judgmental. We ask questions.

We might not agree at the end.

And that’s ok. We can still be at the table together – “in essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in all things, charity.”

Does Third Way mean I need to change my beliefs to belong?

Embracing a Third Way posture does not require one to change their beliefs, but rather to challenge any negative attitudes towards those who do not share their beliefs.

At Newsong we desire to cultivate a community of people who love Jesus, and try to love each other despite our differences. We choose to love each other with a commitment to honor one another wherever we may be in our individual life journeys.

Is Newsong an affirming church?

When we say Newsong, it is not only the board, the pastors and the leaders, it is also those who call Newsong home. With this in mind, yes, in large part we are affirming, but still there are those who are not. Yet, we are a church who protects and affirms the participation of the LGBTQIA+ community in the full life of our church. We are fully committed to provide an environment of safety and love for all.

Is Newsong a political church?

Yes, we are in the sense of the meaning of the world political which means we have meaningful conversations about the concerns of the city. We are not partisan.

Do you support DACA, dreamers, refugees and the undocumented?

Yes, we believe each person is made in the image of God and as followers of Christ, we are called to love generously to those who don’t have access to human rights.