What We Believe

NEWSONG is a Holistic Missional Christian Community called to serve and represent Jesus. We proclaim the good news of His Kingdom with words and actions locally and across the globe. By the power of the Holy Spirit, we follow the example of Jesus by loving sacrificially and fearlessly.

We are people of the Bible. We believe the Bible to be the inspired Word of God; His self-revelation in the words of people throughout history.

We offer this statement of our convictions with humility and without any illusions about our ability to capture the fullness of God’s truth in any document.

We embrace and celebrate the mystery of faith, even as we look forward to the day when our Savior returns. Then, we will know fully as we are fully known.

We believe in the triune God: the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

We believe in God, the Father: the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth, the seen and the unseen, and pronounced it all good; who graciously calls out a people for His own possession to courageously fight the powers of darkness and bless all the peoples on earth; who keeps His promises to Abraham, David, and His covenant people; who spoke through the prophets; who speaks through the Holy Scriptures; and who revealed Himself definitively in and through Jesus.

We believe in Jesus Christ: Our Lord, Alpha, and Omega, the risen, reigning and returning King, the object of our faith; who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, the eternal Word made flesh; who was crucified, died, and was buried; who was resurrected on the third day; who now sits in glory at the right hand of God the Father; who will return to judge the world and consummate the fullness of His Kingdom; who meets us in the bread and wine as we celebrate the victory of the cross, anticipating His triumphant return.

We believe in the Holy Spirit: The giver of life, liberator, and enabler, who was poured out at Pentecost; who unites us in one body; who gives us wisdom and discernment; who gives us gifts for service; who gives us the power to be loving and faithful; who calls us to holiness; who fills us for worship; who guarantees our glorious destiny. We believe in the gifts of the Spirit. The one supernatural gift that is far above all other gifts is LOVE. Love guides us especially as we consider our very own families. What would we do if this was our child, brother or sister, husband or wife?

We Believe in the Church: We are a “called out people.” We are called out from captivity to freedom, death to life, and complacency to faithfulness and service. We are baptized into the community of the Liberating King, the body of Christ. We are called and equipped to be ambassadors of God’s passions and priorities to this world.

We are a missional community, serving our King, one another, and the world according to the gifts that the Spirit has graciously distributed among us.

We believe in the Holy Scriptures. We affirm the divine inspiration and truthfulness of both Old and New Testament as the written word of God; His revelation of Himself, given to men and women through the patriarchs, prophets, and apostles. Through the Scriptures, the Holy Spirit illumines the minds of God’s people in every culture to perceive its truth freshly through their own eyes and thus discloses to the whole Church ever more of the many-colored wisdom of God.

We believe in the forgiveness of sins. Through the faithfulness of Jesus Christ. We were alienated, dead, enslaved, proud, deceived, and hopeless. God rescued us in and through Jesus who died for our sins and who became sin on a Roman cross. We do not understand this cosmic transaction, but we know that, through faith in Him, our sins have been forgiven, our lives have been altered, the curtain has been torn, the walls have been demolished, and the shackles have been removed. Jesus died for us to set us free to live for Him.

We believe in life everlasting. Jesus came to rescue us from the power of sin and death and offer us life, abundant, authentic, and eternal. It is the life of the Kingdom, the life of the age to come, but we taste it here and now through the Holy Spirit as we eagerly look forward to the fullness of the Kingdom. Because we have this life, our citizenship is in Heaven, our ultimate loyalty is to our Liberating King, and we live as sojourners in a fallen and rebellious world. Because we have this life, we seek to be a blessing in the world, demonstrating the justice, love, and shalom of Jesus through service to the poor and to the poor in spirit, and by actively sharing the good news, with others, of salvation through Christ.