The Nobel Prize in Literature

You may have read some of his works or seen one of his plays.

Jon Fosse is a Norwegian novelist, poet, and playwright who has published some 40 plays, as well as novels, poetry, essays and children’s books. Not least, he is famous for winning the 2023 Nobel Prize in Literature, “for his innovative plays and prose which give voice to the unsayable”.

Anders Olsson, chairman of the Nobel literature committee, also praised “Fosse’s sensitive language, which probes the limits of words”.

Slow prose

"You don’t read my books for their plot," Fosse has said. But over the past two decades, his 'slow prose' and unique way of writing fiction has gained him a cult following in around 50 different languages. He has won almost every award going in Norway and the Nordic countries, and two of his former novels have been nominated for the International Booker Prize. As if that was not enough, he is also among the world’s most widely performed living playwrights.

His international readership has been growing, largely thanks to Septology, an extraordinary series of three novels that track an ageing artist's reckoning with the divine.

Former Norwegian winners

The Nobel Prize in Literature has been awarded every year since 1901, with a few exceptions. It is 95 years since a Norwegian writer last won the prize. Fosse added his name to the legacy of former laureates Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1903), Knut Hamsun (1920), and Sigrid Undset (1928).

In the footsteps of Fosse

For those wishing to dive deeper into Fosse's life and works, a visit to the Fosse House in Strandebarm where he grew up by the picturesque Hardangerfjord is a must. It was here in the lush nature by the fiord that he first found inspiration in his early years. Today he commutes between his home in Frekhaug in the Western part of the country, and Oslo, where he lives in Grotten, a residence for artists located in Slottsparken, the Palace Park in Oslo.

The tranquil fjord landscapes in the Hardangerfjord region are also the perfect place to rent a cabin by the fjord and read his meditative, mesmerising poetry!

More famous Norwegian writers

Norway is home to many more intriguing writers who have left their mark on the world. Read more about legends like Henrik Ibsen and the great writers of today, including Nordic crime writer Jo Nesbø below.