The Bjørnson Prize 2010 of NOK 100.000 was divided between the authors Einar Már Gudmundsson of Iceland and Milan Richter of Slovakia. The prize was awarded during the Academy’s seminar in Molde on 30 August.

Einar Már Gudmundsson received the prize for his authorship and his efforts to reveal reasons and responsibility circumstances behind the interanational financial crisis. On the other hand, Milan Richter was awarded for his poetry and his efforts within the democracy movement in former Czechoslovakia and for his present commitment for the freedom of expression.

Prize winners:

2004: Vivian Fouad Fahmi and Samir Morcos of the Coptic Church in Egypt for their effort to build bridges between the religions in the Middle East.

2005: The Rom artist Ezma Redzepova, The Republic of Macedonia, for her work for the Rom people’s culture and for her humanitarian work for children.

2006: Editor Hrant Dink, Turkey, for his effort to improve the Armenians’ situation in Turkey.

2007:The poet Adonis (Syria/Lebanon) for his contribution to develop poetry as a literary genre.

2008:The author Ola Larsmo, Sweden, for his contribution to throw light on the anti-Semitism in the Nordic countries in a historic and contemporary perspective.

2009:The philosopher Grigorij Pomerants and the poet Zinaida Mirkina, Russia for their extensive contribution to strengthening the freedom of expression in Russia.

2010:The authors Einar Már Gudmundsson of Iceland and Milan Richter of Slovakia.

The Norwegian Academy for Literature and Freedom of Expression

Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson-Akademiet, The Norwegian Academy for Literature and Freedom

of Expression, was established in December 2003 with the purpose of giving Norway a literary academy apart from two academies based on different language policies.

The academy bears the name of the Norwegian author and Nobel Prize Laureate in literature, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1832-1910), who was also renowned for his indefatigable struggle against political suppression of several nations throughout Europe.

According to its statutes, the academy intends “to work for the promotion of literature and knowledge of literary and cultural forms of expression for freedom of expression in the spirit of Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson. In this frame, the academy intends, on an annual basis, to award a prize of NOK 100 000 plus a statuette and a diploma to a person or institution that has contributed considerably within the area which is comprised by the Academy’s purpose in an international context.