Soldiers involved in the most controversial incident in recent Australian military history should be formally acknowledged as innocent of any wrongdoing, according to the former head of the Army, Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie.

Lieutenant General Gillespie was commenting on the case of two reservists charged with manslaughter after a horrific night raid by commandos in 2009, in which five Afghan children were killed.

"I think there is an opportunity for those people [the soldiers] to be brought in and spoken to by the Chief of the Defence Force and others, if that's what's needed for them to get on with their lives," he said.

One of the soldiers at the centre of the raid, a former lance corporal identified as Dave, spoke for the first time in an interview with Australian Story last week.

After being charged with manslaughter by the Director of Military Prosecutions (DMP), his mental state became erratic and his marriage broke down, he said.

A military judge subsequently found the charges against the two soldiers were defective and referred them back to the DMP, who then declined to proceed further.

Despite this, the soldiers claim they have never been formally exonerated by the Australian Defence Force (ADF).

"There was immediate relief when those charges were thrown out, but only brief," Dave told Australian Story.

"We have never received a formal letter to say, 'This case is over and you will not be charged further'."

As a result of the Afghanistan incident and the subsequent charges, Dave is suffering from anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

He has recently been medically discharged after almost 20 years in the army reserves.

Soldiers have 'no case to answer'

Lieutenant General Gillespie told Australian Story that at the time the case was dismissed, he should have thought more about a "formal acknowledgement of their innocence" in his capacity as head of the army.

He went further, saying if it has been found the soldiers have no case to answer, they should be commended.

"I think anybody who puts on a uniform for our country and goes to places like Afghanistan and confronts all of the uncertainty and risk that comes operating there … is worthy of commendation. Including them," he said.

"They've been found [with] no case to answer, therefore why not them?"

Another former commando involved in the tragic raid, Geoff Evans, said he was disappointed that what he called "the facts of the raid" had never been publicly aired until broadcast by Australian Story.

"Unfortunately narratives were allowed to exist that said we'd just murdered those children," he told the program.

"Defence never made any attempt to correct the record, so we really wanted the facts of the case to come out."

The charging of the soldiers was highly controversial and sent shockwaves through the military.

'Private counselling sessions accessed by ADF'

Soldiers from the commando regiment also told Australian Story that after the raid they spoke to military psychologists and were told that the sessions were confidential, only to learn later that their psychological records had been accessed by ADF investigators.

"So they were looking for some admission of guilt or something to use against us," Dave said.

The disclosure of the records to the investigators still angers some of the commandos.

"It was a massive invasion of my privacy and had a massive impact on me psychologically," stated one of the soldiers, Corporal W.

Corporal W wrote a letter to the then vice chief of the Defence Force (now Chief of Defence), Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin, asking for an explanation.

He said he received a written apology six months later that said: "I believe you should have been told about the disclosure before the issue was reported ... I apologise for this unfortunate and regrettable circumstance."

Family of dead children wants answers

This disclosure of their psychological records was yet another misstep in a highly controversial chain of events, many of which are still shrouded in secrecy.

Numerous questions about how the tragic February 2009 incident occurred, and who authorised the commando raid, remain unanswered by the ADF.

A spokesperson for the Afghan family whose children and an adult male were killed in the raid has called for a detailed explanation of the incident.

"The Chief of Defence [Sir Angus Houston] promised back in 2010 that there would be a thorough investigation into this matter," said Farid Popal.

"The family want answers as to why their father and their children and other members of the family were attacked, and why did they die?"

Freedom of Information requests made by Australian Story have resulted in the release of some documents that shed light on the events of that night, but large sections of these documents remain heavily redacted.

One notable example released this week was a 39-page document detailing the company and platoon orders for the operation, codenamed Operation Pakula.

The entire document is blacked out except for the weather report on the night of the raid.