Chief of Army Ken Gillespie says he has no qualms about allowing women to serve in all frontline roles in the Defence Force.

Defence Minister Stephen Smith has launched a series of reviews into the way women are treated in the ADF in the wake of the cadet sex scandal at the Australian Defence Force Academy.

As part of one of the reviews the Federal Government has told Defence to expedite moves to remove bans on women in some military positions.

Some commentators and retired officers say that will erode discipline and mateship in fighting units but Lieutenant General Gillespie says he is comfortable with the changes.

"I don't believe this is a gender argument. Specific jobs in the military require people with specific physical and mental and intellectual capabilities," he said.

"If any person, regardless of gender, can match those three criteria for the job they want to apply for, they should be able to apply for it."

Announcing the reviews earlier this week, Mr Smith said there were serious cultural problems in parts of Defence.

Lieutenant General Gillespie says he fully supports the reviews, but the problems are not limited to Defence.

He says the vast majority of personnel are good people who do the right thing.

"When we let ourselves down we deserve to be reminded over our shortcomings and do it," he said.

"But 99.9 per cent of our people are out there doing fabulous work and they don't deserve to be thrown in with the few people who cause us the sort of grief that we get."

Lieutenant General Gillespie also denies there is a breach between top Defence Force officers and Mr Smith.

Mr Smith fiercely criticised the head of ADFA over his handling of the sex scandal.

There have been reports Chief of Defence Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston threatened to resign over the matter, although that has been denied by both him and the Minister.

Lieutenant General Gillespie says there is no friction between top brass and Mr Smith.

"My relationship with the Minister is strong. It's cordial. We deal with some major issues confronting our service today and into the future," he said.

"I think that line of thought that we're in conflict with our Minister is very incorrect."