Monica Attard: The death this month of two young Australian soldiers, sappers Jacob Moerland and Darren Smith, have again reminded the Australian public of the high cost of our involvement in the war against the Taliban in Afghanistan, a war which might be unwinnable.

Hello, I'm Monica Attard, and my guest on Sunday Profile is the head of the Australian Army, Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie.

Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie was also a sapper, which in Afghanistan, mostly involves clearing IEDs, improvised explosive devices - dangerous handmade bombs.

But as Australia enters its tenth year of engagement against the Taliban and insurgents in Afghanistan, is the war any closer to being won?

Prime Minister Rudd has said the war would become more and more unpopular. Certainly, deaths of Australian soldiers makes that more than a mere possibility.

But what about support for the Afghanistan effort amongst Australia's soldiers?

Ken Gillespie: I think the Prime Minister is right. There's no doubt about the breadth of feeling in our country about whether we should or we shouldn't be in some of these engagements. The fact of life is I think it's still a 50/50 proposition, or close to that.

The real question, of course, is whether or not our troops think that they're involved in something that's important, and that they think that what they're doing is important, both to our nation and in world affairs. And I think the answer to that is most definitely yes.

Monica Attard: Well, I wanted to explore that with you a little bit. But we'll just for the moment talk a little bit about the very recent deaths of Sapper Moerland and Smith.

I suppose they're very, very real reminders of not just how dangerous the Afghanistan mission is, but how big a sacrifice Australia is making to support the war on terror. Is that how you see it as well?

Ken Gillespie: Yes, it is. You know, we've been quite upfront for all the time we've been involved in Afghanistan and Iraq and those places, that our troops aren't there in any token way, and that the activities that they're involved in are inherently dangerous.

I think compared to other nations, our sacrifice has been much less. I think some of that is potentially a little bit of good luck. But then good soldiers make their own luck.

But we've now lost thirteen of our finest in Afghanistan, and that's a major contribution in anybody's language.

Monica Attard: And you've met with the widows and the families of Sapper Moerland and Smith, and that must take a huge toll on you as Head of Army, personally.

Ken Gillespie: It's never difficult to look people in the face when they're suffering the sorts of grief that those families are going through at the present time, because ultimately I'm the one that commits troops to the Chief of the Defence Force to work in these places, and so there's an accountability that goes with that.

But I would say that in many ways, despite the grief, the engagements with some of the families that I've had over time, have been some of the more uplifting engagements. And when you see the quality and nature of those families, you understand why our soldiers are as good as they are.

Monica Attard: And do you think that after the funerals are over, and the medals on the coffins have been placed, and the officials walk away, that families might slump back into a feeling that perhaps it wasn't worth it for their sons and their lovers and their husbands and their fathers?

Ken Gillespie: Monica, at times I guess that would fall to families. I mean, life is going to be difficult for young widows, for mums who haven't got their son. But it's not as though we fade into the background when the funerals are finished. The army is a family. You know, people think we're probably talking in cliched terms when we say that, but we feel many of the emotions that close family relatives feel.

And the units and the commanding officers and those people will continue to engage with those families for a long time to come. And we will keep bringing them into our extended army family so that they actually understand that we're there for them in the long term, and that we care. And we'll involve them in unit activities and celebrations for a long time to come.

Monica Attard: So you think they are consoled by being told their loved ones paid with their lives for the greater good, or when they hear the Prime Minister in Parliament say Australia lost two of its bravest sons. They don't hear those as empty words, when you're left behind to raise a child alone or live without the person that you love?

Ken Gillespie: No, I don't think they're empty words at all.

I mean the term 'heroes' gets thrown around a lot, but in reality, all of our young people who are working in those places, where every day when they drive outside the wire of the compound in which they're working, confront a whole lot of fears and phobias about operating, and they do that in a really - what's a very cheerful and matter of fact way - but they do it.

So, you know, all of these young people are brave, and the term 'hero', I think, fits quite nicely. I think families appreciate hearing that.

But really, to many of the families, it's just recollecting what they really think about their sons and daughters and husbands anyway. I don't know any of them who don't think that those people involved in those operations aren't brave. And when we say it, it's just a reconfirmation of what the families actually think.

Monica Attard: Have you ever, in your quieter moments, felt that the price is too big in Afghanistan?

Ken Gillespie: No, I don't think I've ever felt that. I'm like a lot of my soldiers. I actually believe that the reason we're there is a just reason. I think we are looking after the interests of another people. We're making sure that we take a part in trying to stop the spread of terrorism and the sorts of activities that are out there. And I know that that requires sacrifice. I don't like that sacrifice.

Being Chief of the Army is not like being the CEO of a company. It's ... you know, I've been at this game going on 43 years now, and I see myself more as the grandfather of the army family, than I do as a general manager, or something like that.

And so I feel these losses. But I still feel that the organisation is doing something noble in the service of our nation.

Monica Attard: I suppose in these situations, particularly when you're speaking to grieving families, there's probably no more salient a reminder of how difficult it is to actually lead an army.

Ken Gillespie: Yeah, I mean, it's a wonderful organisation. It has a proud history. It has a very high standing in our community. And you know, I have several challenges as the Chief. I think one of them is to make sure that the organisation under my command continues to reflect all of those values that I just spoke about.

But I also, as the Chief, have three - I think - really principle tasks on me at the present time: one is to make sure that the Army of today is equipped and fit and trained to do things that we ask of it. And I think it is.

And, in fact, in many ways, if you talk about risks - that's not a high risk, because our people are really first class. Our training is very good. And you can see that the results that the ADF, and the army, and the other two services are getting in the tasks that the government gives them, is just testament to that.

Monica Attard: And do you think that the numbers are right in Afghanistan?

Ken Gillespie: Well, the numbers in Afghanistan are really a matter for the government and its policy on how it wants to deploy our military. And, you know, that's played out through our parliamentary processes. So I'm pretty comfortable with where we stand on that at the present time.

But I was saying that I have two other priorities. And one of those is a priority to make sure that the army, as well as being ready for what's on its plate today, is also continuing to be agile and morphing into the army that we're going to need in five years' time, and that we can still have the same sort of success that our government would demand of us in that sort of timeframe.

And then I think potentially the more difficult challenge that I have in that space, is to make sure that the army is on a transition path to being the army that we'll need in fifteen or twenty years' time. And some of the decisions that we're making today will have some pretty profound effects on the institution in that timeframe.

And so they're the three, sort of, key pressures I think are on me as the Chief of the Army. And, by and large I think it's the latter two that will see me judged in history as to my effectiveness as the Chief, rather than the current one, because the reality of it is that currently I'm blessed with a magnificent workforce of young people.

Monica Attard: And what sort of army do you think you will need in five years or fifteen years' time?

Ken Gillespie: You know, the white paper that the government produced last year indicates that the sort of operational tempo, the sorts of tasks that we're doing today, are likely to be the sorts of tasks that we'll do over the next decade.

And so the real issue there is that the tempo is probably well-known to us. But in each of the theatres that we could become engaged in over that time, there will be a number of rapidly changing factors, not the least of which is technology, and how that technology is available to the sorts of adversary that we could find.

And our army has got to be an organisation that is constantly on the move, ready to transform itself, ready to take new ideas. And I think I've used the term during my time in command: "the adaptive army". And I think that's a very appropriate term, because our Army is one of those organisations, that while it has many conservative traditions and customs at its heart, if it's going to be effective over all of that time, has got to be prepared to transform and continue to renew itself to face the challenges of the future.

Monica Attard: I'd just like to ask you a final question about the two sappers who were killed in the last fortnight. Is the army any closer to determining what actually happened that morning in the Mirabad Valley? I mean, do you yet know whether it was a mobile detonation or whether one of the soldiers, or indeed the dog, Herbie, may have stood on it and activated the device?

Ken Gillespie: No, I don't yet know that. The investigation into that process is ongoing at the present time.

And I take great care not to push to know more than I should know at a particular point in time, because I think what's really important to us here is that we take the time and the most appropriate people do the investigations. And at a point in time, they'll tell us exactly what happened.

Monica Attard: And I suppose that sort of information and detail is pretty important to the families, isn't it?

Ken Gillespie: Well, it's important to the families, but more importantly, it's important to the troops who will continue the day-to-day tasks over there, because out of that incident there will be the need to learn a number of lessons, to check that our tactics and techniques are correct, and that we don't need to make changes as a result of the lessons we've learned from that incident.

Monica Attard: And is morale being affected at all by the fact that the Afghan mission started out with a pretty simple plan - you know, topple the Taliban, that was accomplished, and the Taliban just keeps regrouping? One imagines it will just regrouping (sic) ad infinitum.

I mean, do you have concerns for the morale of your troops, that they may think that that will just keep on happening, and that the Afghan Army might never actually have the will and the skill to keep the Taliban permanently at bay?

Ken Gillespie: No, Monica I don't have that concern. The one thing I know for a fact is that the morale of the army at the present time is very high. And that's not just me saying that.

One of the processes that we go through, you may or may not know, is that we psychologically screen our people immediately at the end of their deployments, and then at periods of time after the deployments.

And one of the things that comes from that screening, and the contribution that every soldier and officer who goes through that process makes, is that reconfirmation that they believe that the experience that they've had is positive, that they believe very strongly in the quality of the junior leaders of the army, and that the morale of the organisation is very high.

Monica Attard: I know that there's a lot of effort put into what's termed 'psychological resilience training' - I presumed, as you say, to make sure that soldiers are up to the task of handling the fear and the stress of worrying about IEDs amongst other things - fighting an enemy on the ground.

But do you find that many soldiers actually fail that first hurdle?

Ken Gillespie: No, and you shouldn't be surprised at that answer. You know, I make the point and I don't make it simply because I'm the Chief, we just have fabulous young people in the organisation. They do have a very strong sense of service. They are very well educated. They take their role very seriously.

If we go back to the Afghan context, and the sort of the hopelessness that you outlined to me a few moments ago, they don't see that. They believe very strongly that they're making an important contribution. And the measures that they use indicate that they're making quiet, but steady, progress in that regard.

I've just been in Afghanistan recently. I've been going back since I led the first group away after September 11, probably on a six-monthly basis.

And in the area that our troops are working in at the present time, in the last six months I've seen a substantial change. I've seen the agriculture of the region that we're in improve dramatically. I've seen building going on. I've seen people reaching out more and more to us than they've done in the past.

So the soldiers are seeing quite tangible signs of steady progress being made. Now that doesn't mean to say that the job is over; in fact, far from it. But the soldiers do think they're making a difference, and they can see in a tangible way where that difference is occurring.

Monica Attard: Well, reporters on the ground would certainly agree with you, because they have been reporting a noticeable improvement in the Uruzgan Province where Australian soldiers are.

But Australia's exit strategy relies in very, very large part on training local troops to take control of the province. But most of the Afghan recruits are not in the south, are they, where Uruzgan is. Is that a problem for morale in the army? Does that affect morale?

Ken Gillespie: No, I don't think it does. The Afghan Army is growing quickly and well ahead of expectations. We are trying to grow a national force not a regional force. A pride in the nation of Afghanistan rather than, sort of, regional issues indicate that I think that those developments are going pretty well.

Monica Attard: Now, there was an opinion poll in Afghanistan in 2008 which showed that those who wanted the foreigners out of their country outnumbered those who wanted them to stay, or come in, in greater number. Has that changed? Has that attitude changed from what you can see and feel on the ground?

Ken Gillespie: I don't think I'm really well qualified to do that. My trips, as I said, are on a six-monthly basis. The troops certainly would indicate to me, as they did on the last venture, that they're getting closer to the population, that there's much more trust in that area. That doesn't mean to say that the population are looking forward to a large foreign military occupation in their country, you know, well into the future.

But they do actually see the essentiality of it to create the security environment necessary for them to make progress in so many other areas that are important, like in health, like in education, like in governance, like in establishing a legal system - all of the things that are necessary to unify a country.

Monica Attard: Now, can we talk very briefly again about the issue of ongoing care for the families who have lost their loved ones?

There have been complaints in the past from wives. Breanna Till is one who comes to mind. Her husband Brett died in a bomb blast in Afghanistan. She was pregnant at the time, caring for children from a previous relationship, left to live on a small weekly pension. She complained that she was also left to deal with various strands of the federal bureaucracy to sort things out.

Has that now been streamlined? Are you happy with where that's at, at the moment?

Ken Gillespie: It's a constant area of work for us. Looking after families is an important issue. Looking after not only the families of those who are deceased, but looking after the families and members of those who have been wounded and have ongoing rehabilitation, has been a key focus of Defence's leadership over the last few years. And I think we're making some significant progress in that regard.

I think that there is a little bit of an urban myth about Breanna Till, which wasn't helped with some reporting at times. And Breanna is a very strong lady, and she has received considerable support from not only Defence but other organisations, the Defence Community Organisation, the Army. Her unit keeps very close contact with her. Angus Houston, the Defence Chief, and I have had personal dealings with Brea in that sense.

And I think she copped a little bit of press that was unfair to her, when she participated in a symposium to see what it is that we could do to make things better along that process. And she had some points that she wanted to raise there. And some of the points that she was making, I think, were theoretical. Some of the points were personal. But I don't think she was reported in the sense that she wanted to go there.

So she's a very strong lady. She's one of those that inspires you. She's focussed on looking after the memory of her husband and the future of their child and his children. And she's an awesome young lady.

Monica Attard: You mentioned also dealing with troops who come back from areas of conflict, and you have to deal with those issues.

I suppose with time and experience, the Army has become better at dealing with veterans. I mean, for starters, you now accept post traumatic stress disorder, don't you? And even those who don't have physical disability, can be classified as totally and permanently disabled.

Are you finding that the number of returning soldiers with post traumatic stress disorder is creeping up?

Ken Gillespie: I don't think the figures are there enough to support that at the present time. I do agree with you that we are seeing post traumatic stress as an issue across the organisation, and we do recognise it.

And we do work hard to (a) further our knowledge, because I don't think in the area of mental health, yet, our knowledge is yet good enough to do what we do well in the military is decide on a course of action necessary to address the problem and move quickly to do that. I think it's one of those areas where we're continuing to be far more cautious.

But the whole approach of the army and the services has changed over the last few years. So, you know, in the past, people returned broken and they left the service and the Department of Veterans' Affairs took after their interests and they went on.

We have a very different approach today. And that approach is that we want to save every person in our Army that we can. And that means that we work really hard, rather than pushing them out of the system because they're injured, trying to reintegrate back into the system, even if that takes us some years to do. And I think we're making some significant progress there.

There will be times, of course, where continued service isn't an option. And we're working very hard, as an organisation, at the present time, to make sure that we work with the member and their families before they transition out of service, so that many of the roadblocks that they faced in the past are removed before they actually discharge, and then start to be supported by the Department of Veterans' Affairs.

In other words, we're working with the Department of Veterans' Affairs to have a much more robust handover of those people who need ongoing support.

Monica Attard: So there you're talking about basically making sure that debriefing is adequate? Because that's been a problem in the past, hasn't it?

Ken Gillespie: Well, debriefing is adequate, that they're introduced to all of the entitlements that they might have under the Department of Veterans' Affairs or the Veterans' Affairs Act, that we have submitted and substantiated claims for compensation before they leave the service, those sorts of things.

In the past, they left the service and then they started that path of trying to look after their interests under the Veterans' Affairs Act. And so we're trying to be much more proactive so that that transition is much more smooth, and that it happens whilst they're in the organisation, rather than trying to reach back - sometimes many years later - and finding that it's a very difficult reach back.

Monica Attard: Because, of course, sometimes those who need the most help don't actually ask for it. That must be a challenge, particularly for those whose psychological problems are evidenced years down the track after they've left the army.

Ken Gillespie: That's one of the parts of this mental robustness that we're trying hard to address.

One of the problems that we do have is there is this, sort of, iconic non-complaining Aussie who keeps those sorts of things to themselves. And what we find in so many areas is that's a really dangerous icon to promote, or to allow to continue.

So talking to very young soldiers right at the enlistment stage about the pressures of life, the pressures of service, needing to understand that your best mate ... when he goes quiet, might actually need you to talk to him, to offer a shoulder.

And what we're finding in things like post traumatic stress is that if the problem is dealt with early, and we can get people to talk about their experiences and share what their issues are, then the prognosis for coming out of it is very, very good.

But if you are one of those people that bottle it up and don't talk about it, and it simmers for a long time, then the chances of success in that area are much more difficult.

Mateship involves potentially trespassing into your friend's thoughts or actions when you can see him or her doing something that's out of character, and trying to understand why. If somebody is abusing alcohol and talks about issues to do with their mental health or their stability, that you intervene in that process or tell somebody so that the organisation can intervene, because we have a very strong view that if we can change that culture, then Army and the services can potentially lead society through a development I think is essential.

Monica Attard: And the $83 million over four years to implement the recommendations of Professor David Dunt, who produced two reports for Defence on how to improve the mental health of veterans, is that going to be enough to care for those who are back and who will be coming back from theatres in the next four years?

Ken Gillespie: I think it's enough for implementing the Dunt recommendations, all of which we accepted in that regard. But it's a little bit more than just about the dollars that are necessary.

Some of the things that I've been talking about are individual and organisational cultural change. And not all of it is actually a money requirement. A lot of it is to do with the cultural change and a different view. And that's what I'm working particularly hard on at the present time.

Monica Attard: A final question, Lieutenant General Gillespie, if I might.

There are reports that returning soldiers will be trialled through what's called a 'third location decompression', which will see them debriefed and unwinding for four days - according to the media and this may be wrong - in resorts, to find ways of incorporating their deployment experience as part of their return home.

Can we expect to see this trial begin here any time soon, and where will it begin?

Ken Gillespie: It's an issue that we're looking at at the present time. And I think in the not too distant future we will trial that. I don't think the trial will necessarily be decompression in five-star resorts and those sorts of things. That's really not what's necessary.

What's necessary is to get the whole of the organisation that's been involved in these activities together, and give them a chance to talk amongst themselves, to talk about their experiences, to start that process of talking to the silent ones and getting them to come out of their shell, to reconnect with them, tell them about the importance of some of the pressures that they'll find when they get home, to understand that their families have actually been doing it tough while they were away.

So I think we'll probably move into a trial of that in the not too distant future. Where that trial will be, I'm as yet not certain. But I don't think it will be in five-star resorts.

Monica Attard: And there will be enough money, in terms of what's been allocated in this year's budget, to do that?

On that point you're going to have to find some $900 million within your own budget for extra protection and weapons for Afghanistan. That again according to reports is going to affect your capacity for future acquisitions. Is that of concern to you?

Ken Gillespie: None of those things are beyond our organisation.

Monica Attard: It won't affect future acquisitions?

Ken Gillespie: I don't expect it to at the present time. We work very closely as a defence corporation at the present time to understand where our pressures are, and that before we start to attack things like capability, in terms of saving, there are many cultural, procedural process issues in our organisation that can realise significant savings before we even go looking in that space.

Monica Attard: And that was the Head of the Australian Army, Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie, ending Sunday Profile.

I'm Monica Attard, talk to you next week.