Preaortic Lymph Nodes

True to their name, these lymph nodes are found anterior to the abdominal aorta. They are arranged in clusters around the branches of the abdominal aorta. This large group of nodes is further subdivided into the following nodes (based on their relationship to the similarly named artery):

celiac lymph nodes,

superior mesenteric lymph nodes and,

inferior mesenteric lymph nodes,

The preaortic nodes receive lymph from both primary and accessory gastrointestinal organs ranging from the abdominal oesophagus to the anus. The nodes then drain to the intestinal trunk (see below) before draining to the cisterna chyli.

Celiac lymph nodes

The celiac trunk, or celiac axis, is the first and largest branch from the anterior surface of the abdominal aorta. The artery subsequently trifurcates into the left gastric, common hepatic and pancreaticosplenic arteries. Surrounding this large artery and its branches are the celiac nodes. They are the terminal nodes of the preaortic and regional lymph nodes (those associated with the branches of the artery).

The gastric nodes (surrounding the right/ left gastric artery) drain lymph from the abdominal oesophagus, stomach, proximal duodenum and greater omentum.

Hepatic nodes are those surrounding the hepatic arteries and biliary tree. They receive lymph from the liver, gallbladder and biliary tree.

The pancreaticoduodenal nodes are associated with the pancreaticodunal arteries, and as their name suggest, drain portions of the duodenum and head of the pancreas.

Finally, the pancreaticosplenic group of nodes drain the pancreas, spleen and a portion of the stomach.

Mesenteric lymph nodes

The mesenteric nodes are the most caudal of the preaortic lymph nodes. They are further subdivided into the superior and inferior mesenteric nodes.

The superior mesenteric nodes are responsible for lymph drainage of the midgut (i.e. from the duodenojejunal flexure to the watershed area of the transverse colon).

The afferents to the superior mesenteric nodes arise from the juxtaintestinal nodes (found between the layers of the mesentery), ileocolic nodes (found along the ileocolic artery and its branches) and the mesocolic nodes (within the mesocolon along the transverse colon). The distribution of these nodes and their associated arteries are almost identical.

Likewise, the inferior mesenteric nodes receive lymph from the same areas supplied by the artery for which it was named (i.e. the distal third of the transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon and proximal rectum). This cluster of nodes include smaller groups associated with the sigmoid and left colic arteries, another cluster surrounding the superior hemorrhoidal artery and sigmoid mesocolon and a final pararectal cluster that is found next to the rectum.

The inferior mesenteric nodes will drain to the more superior preaortic lymph nodes, or the lateral aortic lymph nodes (see below).

Lateral aortic nodes

As mentioned above, the lateral aortic lymph nodes are located to the left of the abdominal aorta, anterior to the left diaphragmatic crura, sympathetic trunk and medial border of the left psoas major muscle.

Tributaries to these nodes include structures that are perfused by the dorsal and lateral branches of the abdominal aorta. These include the left kidney and left suprarenal(adrenal) glands, ureters, as well as the left testis (in males), or left ovary, uterine tube and cranial portion of the uterus (in females). The deep tissues of the left posterior abdominal wall also drain to this group. The lateral aortic nodes also receive lymph from the common iliac nodes, which receive lymph drained from the pelvis and lower extremities.

Clinical significance

Trauma

The abdominal lymph trunks along with the cisterna chyli are large vessels that carry a large volume of lymph. This makes it particularly difficult for them to automatically seal following trauma.

Consequently, surgical procedures may be complicated by this factor owing to the close relationship between the lymphatic trunks and the abdominal aorta. Iatrogenic injury of this nature may give rise to a chylous ascites (i.e. ascites secondary to lymph extravasation). It should be noted, however, that this is a rare condition that has several aetiologies.

Cancer

The lumbar lymph nodes receive lymph from the lower limbs, genitals, pelvic viscera and retroperitoneal structures (including, but not limited to, the suprarenal glands, ureters, ascending and descending colon, kidneys and oesophagus). Tumor metastasis to these nodes from the afore-mentioned sites is not uncommon.

In some cases of testicular carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma and upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma and other urologic malignancies, a procedure known as retroperitoneal lymph node dissection can be conducted as both a diagnostic and therapeutic procedure.