Joey came into the world in 1980 and was named after his father Joe, who died before he was born. He grew up as a Buchanan after having been adopted by his mother Viki's husband Clint. Joey had a pretty normal childhood and traveled throughout Italy after graduation. Upon his return to Llanview, Joey had a steamy affair and lost his virginity to Viki's rival, Dorian Lord. He fell in love with Dorian and was devastated after receiving her breakup letter, which Viki's alter Jean made Dorian write while she held her captive.

Joey dated Dorian's niece Kelly before having a fling with Cameron Wallace, who was hired by Dorian in an attempt to gain access to the family business, Buchanan Enterprises. He briefly dated Kelly again then took off for Paris, where he later broke things off with her. Though he tried to win Kelly back after returning to Llanview, Joey fell in love with Barbara Graham who was obsessed with his brother Kevin. She later tried to kill Joey but ended up murdering his cousin Drew instead.

Kelly and Joey end up back together and even married. However, after Kelly admitted she was in love with Kevin, Joey tried everything, even hiring a hitman in order to protect her, to hang on to her. Joey eventually agreed to a divorce then moved to London with Clint before his next return to Llanview where he decided to become a minister in training. Joey grew close to a runaway named Flash, and even gave in to a few kisses, before finding out she was actually his cousin Sarah Roberts.

Joey fell for Jen Rappaport who couldn't deal with a life as a minister's wife. Jen became pregnant, had a miscarriage and an affair with Rex Balsom, which ended their marriage. Joey moved back to London and made a few visits to Llanview over the years, his last being to attend the funeral of his grandfather Asa in 2007.

On November 24, 2010, Joey returned to Llanview and stunned his parents by proposing to his girlfriend Aubrey, who had met Kelly on the plane and had no idea she was in love with Joey. That soon became apparent when the two women realized who the other was. Kelly tried to fight her feelings for Joey but ended up admitting she was still in love with him. Though Joey clearly still felt the same about Kelly, he married Aubrey and ignored Kelly's warnings that Aubrey was hiding something.