Last January, I was waiting behind a velvet rope on a red carpet at the Adult Video News Awards at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas. Steps away from the slot machines, photographers and video crews lined up next to me. Adult film stars like Nina Hartley, Jessica Drake and even Stormy Daniels, whose legal name is Stephanie Clifford, paused and posed for the cameras.

Except on this red carpet, unlike the hundreds I’ve stood on to cover film premieres, theater openings and fashion galas, begging everyone from Al Gore to Rihanna for a minute and a half of their time, the honorees at the AVN Awards weren’t being pulled away by publicists. Instead, the adult film stars wanted to talk.

I was at the AVNs on assignment for a previous employer, New York Magazine. At the time, I was writing about topics like sexual violence, consent, Title IX and the anti-rape movement on college campuses. The theory that adult film was shaping modern sexuality came up often in conversation. But, in the same breath, pornography was often dismissed as a subject that was too big, unwieldy, taboo and icky to tackle.

But as I started reporting on adult film, I approached it as a beat like any other, and I found that performers wanted to talk. They understood their significance in American culture, even if no one else did.

Whatever you think about adult film, it is one of the most consumed forms of media in the world. Pornhub, the popular pornography website, draws 80 million visitors a day. Exact figures for the size of the industry are scarce, but experts put total sales around a billion dollars a year. Plus, studies show that adult film has become a form of sex education for young people around the world.

It is also, now, a regular subject in the news. A top adult film star, Jessica Drake, is one of the women who has accused President Donald J. Trump of sexual assault (he has denied the allegations). And of course, Stormy Daniels, whom I profiled with two colleagues, Matt Flegenheimer and Rebecca R. Ruiz, in a front-page story yesterday, is suing Mr. Trump, with whom she claimed she had a consensual affair, in order to be released from a nondisclosure agreement signed shortly before the 2016 election.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.