John Adams died on July 4th, 1826, exactly 50 years after signing the Declaration of Independence which he helped to write. On the same day as the death of Thomas Jefferson, John Adams' death was a double blow to the number of remaining Founding Fathers with only one signee of the Declaration of Independence left alive. For John Adams, Thomas Jefferson's death hours earlier was news that did not reach him in time and his last words were recorded as, "Thomas Jefferson survives." The men had been fierce political rivals between earlier and later years of friendship and had shared over 300 letters throughout their lives. John Adams' date of death is a remarkable coincidence that has made this event memorable as a piece of United States history and folklore.

How did John Adams die? John Adams' cause of death was recorded as debility at the age of 90 years and was likely due to heart failure related to arteriosclerosis. He died during the second year of his eldest son's presidency, living just long enough to see John Quincy Adams triumph in the 1824 election. John Adams had spent the last years of his life at his family home in Quincy, Massachusetts. His wife, Abigail Adams, had died of typhoid in 1818 and his third son, Thomas Boylston Adams, along with his wife and children had moved in to live with John Adams and care for the family home. John Adams' birth and death were both in the same area as Quincy had only recently been incorporated from a section of Braintree, his hometown. Born as a Congregationalist with a Puritan heritage and the son of a Deacon, Adams converted to Christian Unitarianism in his middle age and was vocal about his personal beliefs on the divinity of Jesus Christ. Adams was a strong critic of the Roman Catholic Church but attacked Thomas Paine for his criticism of Christianity as a whole. Adams was buried first at the Hancock Cemetery before being reinterred across the road at the United First Parish Church. Eventually this church would be known as the Church of the Presidents because John Quincy Adams was also buried here along with both of the former Presidents' wives.