MARYLAND ARMY NATIONAL GUARD

The Maryland Army National Guard provides combat troops to the U.S. Army, and engineer, transportation and medical units, and military police for State service. The Guard is comprised of five major commands. These include the 58th Troop Command; the 70th Regiment (Leadership), a military training academy; and under the 29th Infantry Division (Light): the Combat Aviation Brigade, and the 58th Battlefield Surveillance Brigade.

Origins of the Maryland Army National Guard trace to 1634 when two militia captains disembarked with the early settlers at St. Clement's Island in St. Mary's County. All able-bodied men were obliged to serve in the militia, and volunteers were organized to protect the settlement. The militia expanded as the colony grew and volunteer units, known as "Maryland Forces", fought with the British from 1756 to 1763 to secure the frontier during the French and Indian War. By the end of the conflict, participation in the militia lapsed but was revitalized in 1774 as relations between the colonies and England became more strained. Several Maryland militia units fought with Washington's Continental Army and later became known as the Maryland Line.

After the Revolution, Maryland maintained a militia force which saw action in the War of 1812, distinguishing itself at the Battle of North Point.

From 1846 to 1848, many members of the militia enlisted in the army to form a Maryland Battalion in the Mexican-American War. Later, Maryland militiamen were among those troops who stopped John Brown at Harper's Ferry in 1859.

MARYLAND DEFENSE FORCE

Pikesville Military Reservation

610 Reisterstown Road, Pikesville, MD 21208 - 5197

The Maryland Defense Force originated in 1917 as the Maryland State Guard (Chapter 26, Acts of 1917). To make way in the armories for the return of the Maryland National Guard, the State Guard was disbanded in 1920. It reformed as the Maryland State Guard in 1941 (Chapter 33, Acts of 1941). As the Maryland Defense Force, it reorganized in 1990 (Chapter 239, Acts of 1990).

As commander-in-chief of the militia, the Governor has the power to organize and maintain additional military forces, known as the Maryland Defense Force. The Force is separate and distinct from the Maryland National Guard. The Force is composed of officers, commissioned or assigned, and all able-bodied citizens of the State who volunteer and are accepted for service. They may be ordered to active duty in the State by the Governor whenever the National Guard has been called into the military service of the United States. Members of the Force are uniformed as prescribed by the Governor, who also may reduce or disband such forces (Code Public Safety Article, secs. 13-101, 13-501 through 13-508).

MARYLAND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

State Emergency Operations Center

Camp Fretterd Military Reservation, 5401 Rue Saint Lo Drive, Reisterstown, MD 21136

The Maryland Emergency Management Agency provides for a civil defense system to protect life and property from attack and offer relief and assistance to people struck by natural disasters. Although it is organized within the Military Department, the Agency reports directly to the Governor (Chapter 24, Acts of 2010).

Functions of the Agency originated during World War I when the Preparedness and Survey Commission and the Maryland Council of Defense organized in 1917. They continued under the Council of Defense and Resources, formed by the Governor in August 1940. That council was followed by the Maryland Council of Defense created by statute in 1941, which operated during World War II (Chapter 567, Acts of 1941).

In 1950, duties of the Council devolved to the Maryland Civil Defense Agency (Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950; P.L. 920). In 1970, it reorganized as the Maryland Civil Defense and Emergency Planning Agency within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (Chapter 401, Acts of 1970). The Agency was renamed the Maryland Civil Defense and Disaster Preparedness Agency in 1975, and became the State Emergency Management and Civil Defense Agency in 1981 (Chapter 666, Acts of 1975; Chapter 505, Acts of 1981). As the Maryland Emergency Management Agency, it transferred to the Military Department in 1989 (Chapter 674, Acts of 1989).

From 1950 to 1970, the Agency was concerned primarily with statewide nuclear attack preparedness (Chapter 563, Acts of 1949). Later, it addressed disaster relief and emergency resources management. Duties covered floodplain management, flood insurance initiatives, community preparedness for weather emergencies, earthquake hazard reduction, dam safety, emergency broadcast system, emergency warning, and terrorist incidents.

When the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency was established in the U.S. Department of Defense in 1972, the Population Protection Program (PPP) also was developed. The Program is adaptable to natural disasters, peacetime emergencies, and nuclear attack.

In 1979, the Three Mile Island Incident turned federal attention to radiological emergency planning. In 1980 and 1981, the Agency produced radiological emergency plans to cope with accidents at Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant in Maryland, and Peach Bottom Atomic Power Station near Maryland's northern border in Delta, Pennsylvania. These plans were tested in 1981 and 1982. Annually, the State Radiological Plan is tested with a full-scale operational exercise.

Since 1981, the Governor has been responsible for emergency management in Maryland. The Governor has emergency powers to suspend State statutes temporarily, direct evacuations, control access, clear debris, and use private property if necessary. When the Governor declares a state of emergency, the Agency Director coordinates the emergency acts of State government and those local governments included in the declaration. The Agency plans and executes the disaster and emergency preparedness response between State and local agencies. It coordinates emergency services with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), other state emergency management agencies, and public utility and other private agencies.

To aid another state in time of emergency, the Governor may authorize the use of State and local resources (Chapter 193, Acts of 1993). In the event of an emergency in Maryland, the Governor also may accept aid from another state.

The Comprehensive Emergency Management Program (CEMP) is the responsibility of the Agency. At all levels of government statewide, the Program outlines emergency preparedness, response and recovery responsibilities for all hazards (natural, technological, terrorist & attack-related emergencies & disasters). It also uses similarities that exist in planning and response functions for all hazards. The Program consists of four components: preparedness; response; mitigation; and recovery (Code Public Safety Article, secs. 14-101 through 14-1004).

To help local governments respond to an emergency, the Agency Director may form a Rapid Response Team (Executive Order 01.01.1991.02). The Team evaluates emergencies on site and provides State resources to assist local jurisdictions. To local emergency management agencies, the Agency distributes federal emergency management grants. The Agency also distributes federal emergency disaster assistance to State and local agencies for disaster relief and recovery services.

The Director of the Maryland Emergency Management Agency is appointed by the Governor (Chapter 24, Acts of 2010; Code Public Safety Article, sec. 14-104).

Under the Maryland Emergency Management Agency are the Emergency Management Advisory Council, the Maryland State Emergency Response Commission, and three directorates: Administration, Operations, and Preparedness.

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL

The Emergency Management Advisory Council started in 1950 as the Civil Defense Advisory Council (Chapter 563, Acts of 1949). In 1975, it was renamed the Civil Defense and Disaster Preparedness Advisory Council (Chapter 666, Acts of 1975). It became the Emergency Management Advisory Council in 1981 (Chapter 505, Acts of 1981). The Council advises the Governor on matters of State emergency management and civil defense (Chapter 505, Acts of 1981).

The Council is appointed by the Governor and includes representatives from State and local government, and volunteer organizations, such as firefighters and rescue squads (Code Public Safety Article, sec. 14-105).

MARYLAND STATE EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMISSION

To protect people and the environment from hazardous chemical material, the Governor in 1987 designated the Emergency Management Advisory Council to serve as the Maryland State Emergency Response Commission (Executive Order 01.01.1987.11). The designation was made in accordance with Title III of the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (P.L. 99-499).

Fulfilling its federal functions, the Maryland emergency response commission established emergency response planning districts and local emergency planning committees. The Commission receives and distributes certain material safety data sheets, hazardous chemical inventories, and toxic chemical release forms.

STRATEGIC INITIATIVES

Strategic Initiatives was formed in 2012. It directs and monitors implementation of the Agency's strategic plan for emergency management. To measure progress toward its goals, the office is developing a "MEMA-stat" process that will coordinate data-gathering with the Governor's StateStat Office. Strategic Initiatives also develops legislative initiatives to support the mission and vision of the Agency.

ADMINISTRATION

Administration started as the Budget, Fiscal, and Logistics Division. The Division became Personnel, Fiscal and Logistics in 2002. Reformed at the Logistics Directorate in 2004, it was abolished in 2007. Functions of the Logistics Directorate were restructured in 2008 to form Administration.

Administration oversees budget, maintenance and personnel activities, Grants Management; Public Assistance; and Technology Support.

GRANTS MANAGEMENT

Grants Management oversees the distribution of federal Homeland Security Grants to local governments and first responders. Assistance is provided to build emergency response capabilities and is used to buy protective equipment for emergency personnel, improve critical infrastructure, and build interoperable communications systems.

TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT

In 2002, Technology Support was created as the Office of Technology. It reformed as the Technical Support Directorate in September 2004, and under its current name in 2008.

OPERATIONAL SUPPORT

Operational Support organized as the Operations Division, and was renamed the Readiness Division in 2002. The Division reformed as the Operations Directorate in 2004, became Operations in 2008, and received its present name in 2012.

Operational Supprt oversees the Maryland Joint Operations Center, the State Emergency Operations Center, and the Regional Liaison Officer Program.

MARYLAND JOINT OPERATIONS CENTER

The Maryland Joint Operations Center was initiated in 2004. The Center is staffed continuously by emergency management professionals and members of the Maryland National Guard who coordinate communications for first responders, and monitor local, State, national and international events for indications of hazardous situations that could threaten Maryland. The Center functions as a communications, warning, and message center by providing a way to disseminate emergency information to local emergency managers and to alert decision makers when a threatening situation arises.

STATE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER

In response to an event that requires large-scale State involvement and support, the Director may activate the State Emergency Operations Center as a command and control station for emergency and disaster management. Representatives of federal and State agencies, as well as private and volunteer organizations, assemble at the Center to coordinate action and allocate resources for emergency response.

PREPAREDNESS

Preparedness was created in November 2012. It oversees Active Learning and Exercise; Adaptive Planning; and Resilience and Public Outreach.

ADAPTIVE PLANNING

Originally formed as the Planning Division, Adaptive Planning reorganized as the Planning Directorate in 2004. It was dissolved in 2005, and was reconstituted as Planning in 2009. As Adaptive Planning, it reorganized under Operations in 2012.

MITIGATION & RECOVERY PROGRAM

To reduce or eliminate the impact of future disasters, the Maryland Emergency Management Agency works with local jurisdictions and other State agencies in developing responsible land-use programs, upgrades to building codes, and suitable routes for transporting hazardous materials in the State. The Agency works with federal agencies to identify actions that over the long term can avoid repeated damage and loss.

Maryland Constitutional Offices & Agencies

Maryland Departments

Maryland Independent Agencies

Maryland Executive Commissions, Committees, Task Forces, & Advisory Boards

Maryland Universities & Colleges

Maryland Counties

Maryland Municipalities

Maryland at a Glance

Maryland Manual On-Line

Search the Manual

e-mail: mdmanual@mdarchives.state.md.us

Maryland Manual On-Line, 2013

Note: In this past edition of Maryland Manual, some links are to external sites.

View the current Manual

© Copyright August 01, 2013 Maryland State Archives