This article is currently under construction. It may contain little or inaccurate information.

The United States Army is the main land combat branch of the United States Armed Forces.

The primary mission of the Army is "to fight and win our Nation’s wars by providing prompt, sustained land dominance across the full range of military operations and spectrum of conflict in support of combatant commanders." The Army is a military service within the Department of the Army, one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense.

Components featured in the Battlefield Series[]

The 1st Cavalry Division is one of the most famous and most decorated combat divisions of the United States Army. Presently, it is a rapidly deployable heavy armored division of the United States Army with base of operations in Fort Hood, Texas.

The 5th Cavalry Regiment is a historical unit of the United States Army that began its service in the decade prior to the American Civil War and continues in modified organizational format in the U.S. Army.

The 7th Cavalry Regiment is a United States Army cavalry regiment, whose lineage traces back to the mid-19th century. Its official nickname is "Garryowen", in honor of the Irish air Garryowen that was adopted as its march tune.

Task Force Kodiak is an American armored unit that assisted Bravo-2 with on an operation to secure Russian agent Kirilenko in Battlefield: Bad Company 2.

The 101st Airborne Division is a United States Army modular light infantry division trained for air assault operations.

The 1st Engineer Battalion is the oldest and most decorated engineer battalion in the US Army, tracing its lineage to the original Company of Sappers and Miners organized at West Point, New York in 1846. It was cut from Battlefield Vietnam.

The 222nd Army Battalion is a fictional battalion of the United States Army in the games Battlefield: Bad Company and Battlefield: Bad Company 2

The 32nd Armored Division is a fictional armored unit that plays a key role in Acta Non Verba.

The 369th Infantry Regiment - also known as the Harlem Hellfighters - were an infantry regiment of the U.S. Army National Guard during World War I comprised of African Americans that were known for their toughness and the fact that they never lost a trench, foot of ground, or a man through capture to the enemy

Battlefield 1942[]

In Battlefield 1942, the US Army is a part of the allies, and one of two American factions along with the United States Marine Corps. In the base game, they fight exclusively on the Western front against the German Wehrmacht in France and the Low Countries, alongside the Canadian Army. In the Road to Rome expansion, the US fights the Royal Italian Army and Wehrmacht on the Italian front. In Secret Weapons of WWII, the US Army fights the Wehrmacht and German Elite Forces in both France and within Germany itself.

Engagements[]

VS Team Map Wehrmacht

Omaha Beach

Market Garden

Bocage

Battle of the Bulge

Salerno (RtR)

Gothic Line (SWoWWII)

Mimoyecques (SWoWWII)

Peenemünde (SWoWWII)

German Elite Forces

Eagle's Nest (SWoWWII)

Royal Italian Army

Anzio (RtR)

Player Kits[]

The US Army uses a mixture of British and American equipment with identical loadouts to the base game British Army.

The US Army wears olive drab uniforms, with pocketed jackets and dark green trousers and helmets, as well as brown ankle boots with puttees. Their webgear consists of a dull green harness, with a belt that can hold ammunition pouches and a sidearm holster. Their Assault kit carries an additional shovel slotted into their backpack.

Kit

Scout

Knife

No 4 Sniper

Colt

Grenades

Binoculars

Assault

Knife

BAR 1918

Colt

Grenades

Anti-Tank

Knife

Bazooka

Colt

Grenades

Medic

Knife

Thompson

Colt

Grenades

Medical Bag

Engineer

Knife (Bayonet in Road to Rome)

No 4

Colt

Wrench

Landmines

ExpPack

Vehicles[]

The US Army is issued predominantly American made vehicles, again identical to their British Army counterparts in terms of vehicles used; with the exception of their fighter, with the US Army using the P-51 instead of the Spitfire.

Their vehicles have a solid green paintjob.

Armor[]

T95 (Heavy Tank/SWoWWII)

M10 Wolverine (Heavy Tank)

M4 Sherman (Light Tank)

T34 Calliope (Light Tank/SWoWWII)

M3 Grant (Armored Car/RtR)

Priest (Artillery)

Light Vehicles[]

M3 Half-track (APC)

M3 GMC (Tank Hunter/RtR)

LVTP (APC/SWoWWII)

Willys MB (Scout Car)

XA42 (Motorcycle/SWoWWII)

Emplacements[]

M2 Browning (Machine gun emplacement)

40mm Bofors (AA Emplacement)

AT-25 (Anti-tank emplacement/RtR)

Planes[]

P-51 (Fighter)

F-85 Goblin (Fighter/SWoWWII)

B-17 Flying Fortress (Bomber)

Mosquito (Level Bomber/RtR)

C-47 Skytrain (Transport Aircraft/SWoWWII)

AW-52 (Fighter/SWoWWII)

Naval Vessels[]

Fletcher (Destroyer)

LCVP (Landing craft)

Commando Raft (Inflatable Boat)

Gallery[]

Battlefield Vietnam[]

In Battlefield Vietnam, the United States Army fight the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army. It is one of the three playable American factions, the others being the United States Marine Corps and the US Special Forces.

Engagements of the US Army against the Viet Cong[]

Operation Irving: 1st Battalion, 5th Cavalry vs. 2nd Viet Cong Regiment

Saigon - 1968: 101st Airborne Division vs. C-10 Saigon Sapper Battalion

Engagements of the US Army against the North Vietnamese Army[]

The Ia Drang Valley: 1st Battalion, 7th Cavalry vs. 66th N.V.A. Regiment

Landing Zone Albany: 2nd Battalion, 7th Cavalry vs. 33rd N.V.A. Regiment

Soldier models[]

Player Kits[]

Battlefield: Bad Company[]

Singleplayer[]

In Battlefield: Bad Company, the player is part of the 222nd Army Battalion. They fight the Russian Army and the Middle Eastern Coalition in a fictional war between the United States against the Russian Federation and the Middle Eastern Coalition.

Engagements against the RGF[]

Welcome to Bad Company

Battle of Zabograd

Crash and Grab

Engagements against the MEC[]

Battle of Sadiz

Engagements against Sadaristani Military[]

Crossing Over

Par for the Course (singleplayer)

Air Force One

Multiplayer[]

The US Army is one of the three factions in multiplayer and engages the RGF and MEC.

Versus Map Russian Army

Par for the Course

Ascension

Deconstruction

End of the Line

Harvest Day

Over and Out

Acta non Verba

Crossing Over

Valley Run

Middle Eastern Coalition

Oasis

Final Ignition

Ghost Town

Assault[]

M416

M203

5 HG-2s

LIFE-2

Demolition[]

Model 870

M136 AT4

5 HG-2s

ATM-00

Recon[]

M24

M9

3 MTN-55s

LZ-537

Specialist[]

SCAR-L

TRCR-357

5 HG-2s

3 DTN-4

Support[]

M249 SAW

MDK-132

PWR-200

MRTR-5

Vehicles[]

Light Vehicles[]

HMMWV

Tanks[]

M1 Abrams

M3A3 Bradley

Helicopters[]

AH-64 Apache

Naval Vessels[]

Patrol Boat Light

Emplacements[]

TOW

XM312

ZU-23-2

Battlefield: Bad Company 2[]

Singleplayer[]

In the Battlefield: Bad Company 2 campaign, the player is again playing as Preston Marlowe where he is part of "Bad Company" of the 222nd Army Battalion for the first level Cold War.

Engagements against the RGF[]

Image Mission Cold War

Multiplayer[]

In Battlefield: Bad Company 2 multiplayer, the United States Army fights against the Russian Ground Forces. It is one of the only two multiplayer factions, the other being the opposing Russian Ground Forces, and is also the only playable faction in the Onslaught expansion. Their voices are provided by Chris Bennison (Assault), Arlie Cummins (Medic), Josh Lenn (Recon) and Jason Naso (Engineer).

Multiplayer[]

Engagements against the RGF[]

Arica Harbor

Atacama Desert

Laguna Alta

Laguna Presa

Nelson Bay

Panama Canal

Port Valdez

Valparaiso

White Pass

Oasis

Harvest Day

Cold War

Heavy Metal

Vehicles[]

Light Vehicles[]

Image Name HMMWV 4WD (Neutral) Quad Bike (Cold War MP Only) M939 Truck (Neutral) CAV

Tanks[]

Image Name M1A2 Abrams M3A3 Bradley

Helicopters[]

Image Name AH-64 Apache UH-60 Black Hawk (Neutral) UAV-1

Naval Vessels[]

Image Name Patrol Boat Light (Neutral) Personal Watercraft

Emplacements[]

Image Name XM312 BGM-71 TOW ZU-23-2 VADS

Battlefield: Bad Company 2: Vietnam[]

In Battlefield: Bad Company 2: Vietnam, the United States Army fights the NVA. They do not use a specific set of infantry weapons, but they use their own vehicles. The soldiers' voices are provided by Trevor White and Ryan McCluskey.

Engagements against the NVA[]

The US fights against the NVA on maps based on real-life operation. With Operation Hasting being a remake of a level.

Image Map Phu Bai Valley: In an all out clash in this swampy valley, both teams have the full arsenal of vehicles and will be dealing with longish range combat on the roads but denser close quarters in the buildings and flags. The rice patties will keep the soldiers full but the battle will never fill the war. Hill 137: Hamburger Hill is appropriately named in this medium ranged map, as the whole side of the hill is now a flaming killing floor. Infantry combat will sizzle up with close quarters trench warfare and longer range light jungle warfare. Occasional boat support will also help. Cao Son Temple: This ancient temple now serves as a new battleground, isolated on an island, away from the war. While one team spawns near the temple, it is both of their duties to take it on this close quarters map. Naval support from the middle flag will help decide the victor though. Vantage Point: A hill stands in the center of this symmetrical map, providing a (appropriately named) vantage point over either side. Close quarters defines the hill while medium to longish ranged combat defines anything within sight of it. Vehicles are restricted to ground and tight movement lanes. Operation Hastings: The jungles guard this river from all sides. A large bridge spans the entire river giving an excellent vantage point on this long rangish map. Vehicles will do their best to try and combat anything that stands in their way.

Vehicles[]

The US Army in game uses the appropriate vehicles of American origin in the DLC.

Renders Vehicles (Neutral) UH-1 Iroquois M48 Patton M151 MUTT (Neutral) Patrol Boat River (Neutral) Tuk-tuk

Gallery[]

Battlefield 1[]

This item has a Codex entry: The United States

The American Expeditionary Force is featured in Battlefield 1.

Singleplayer[]

The 369th Infantry Regiment, known as the Harlem Hellfighters, appear in the first chapter of the singleplayer campaign, Storm of Steel. The Harlem Hellfighters are outfitted with the Adrian helmet due to their attachment to the French Army.

Multiplayer[]

The United States appears as one of six factions initially featured in Battlefield 1, and is part of the Allies alongside the United Kingdom, France, and Italy. They wear British uniforms and insignia, with drab tunics and beige webbing with minor changes.

Assault - Wearing scarfs covering his face and a green Brodie helmet. With smaller details such as ammo pouches that adorn the front part of his torso

Medic - Wearing a peaked cap and a blanket that wraps around his body from the right shoulder. Additional details include ammo pouches on his waist, a backpack, and a pair of crutches on his back, like most other medics.

Support - Wearing scarfs and the experimental Model 8 helmet. Additional details include ammo pouches on the front part of his body, a Model 1918 grenade carrier vest, a backpack, and a pistol holster on his hip.

Scout - An African American soldier, he wears a trench coat and the "Overseas Cap". Additional details include ammo pouches that adorn the front part of his body and a sheath on his torso belt.

Cavalry - Wearing a peaked cap, a scarf, and armor on his torso. Smaller details include a sidearm holster on his chest and ammo pouches at the end of his armor.

Tanker - Wearing a brown jumpsuit with sidearm holsters on their chest and a green Brodie helmet with a splinter mask.

Pilot - Wearing aviator goggles and leather helmets, with brown gloves/boots and khaki jackets. Scarf is striped with light and dark blue.

The American Expeditionary Forces participate only in battles against the German Empire on the Western Front of northern France.

Vehicles[]

SPAD S.XIII

Salmson 2

Caproni Ca.5

Gallery[]

Identification markings[]

Artwork[]

Campaign[]

Classes[]

Engagements[]

VS Team Map German Empire

Argonne Forest

Ballroom Blitz

Battlefield V[]

Singleplayer[]

The Twelfth Army Group appears during the Battlefield V singleplayer war story The Last Tiger, where the are the primary enemy force encountered by protagonist Peter Müller and his German tank crew. The faction uses a mixture of American, British and captured German equipment, as well as randomised soldier uniforms.

There are several soldier types:

Assault - uses an M1928A1 with a 30-round magazine. They can throw Mills Bombs, Smoke Grenades and, when the player is in a tank, Anti-Tank Bundle Grenades.

Medic - equipped with an M1A1 Carbine. Can revive wounded friendlies.

Support - uses a M1928A1 with a 50-round drum magazine, and can fire Panzerfausts.

Recon - issued an iron sighted Lee-Enfield No.4 Mk I and a Flare Gun to call in mortar strikes. Only one soldier of this class appears in the foot section of war story but can be seen rarely during the vehicle sections.

Unlike the Germans, the US have no elite soldier types.

Vehicles used by the US Army include 75mm M4A3 Shermans and 76mm M4A3E8 tanks, T34 Calliope rocket artillery and Staghound T17E1 armored cars, in addition to Mosquito and C-47 aircraft. The force's emplaced weapons consist of PaK 40 anti-tank guns, Flak 38 anti-air guns and Vickers heavy machine guns.

Multiplayer[]

Main article: United States#Battlefield V

The US Army also makes a minor appearance in multiplayer as part of the United States Armed Forces faction added with War in the Pacific. Certain vehicles are marked with US Army designations, implying the force is involved with the faction along with the United States Marine Corps and US Navy.

In addition, the United Kingdom-based Allied faction makes use of many US Army-related cosmetic items in-game, including the explicitly named G.I. and Yankee outfit sets, which are based on United States gear. Some items such as the Pit Crew, Flim-Flam and Wild Eagle outfits have US infantry Markings on them, with the latter two sporting the 101st Airborne Division insignia. In addition the Death In The Afternoon torso includes a 2nd Infantry division insignia.

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

Battlefield Vietnam[]

One of the selectable soldier models is identical to one of the U.S. Marines.

Battlefield: Bad Company 2[]

In Bad Company 2, some soldiers in Multiplayer will shout "Let the bodies hit the floor". This is a possible reference to the song "Bodies" by Drowning Pool.

Battlefield 3[]

Although the US Army does not appear in Battlefield 3, the USMC versions of the multiplayer "Ranger," "Paratrooper," and "Dr. Pepper" camouflages reflect the real-life US Army camouflage patterns of UCP, Multicam, and UCP-Delta respectively.

Some Battlelog descriptions erroneously use the term "US Army" instead of "US Marines." This is simply an error, as the US Army has no presence in Battlefield 3.

Battlefield 4[]

In Battlefield 4, a camouflage pattern called UCP (Universal Camouflage Pattern) can be found, which is a uniform pattern used by the US Army.

Battlefield 1[]

The US Army voiceovers in Battlefield 1 are done by Jared Zeus.

With "Standard Issue Rifles" enabled, the United States faction is issued the M1903.

The US flag used to capture objectives only has 48 stars, as Hawaii and Alaska only became states after World War 2.

Battlefield V[]