MARYLAND AIR NATIONAL GUARD

The Maryland Air National Guard started on June 29, 1921 when the 104th Observation Squadron was recognized federally in Baltimore. After World War I, the Squadron was the first National Guard unit to be equiped with its own aircraft. With the rest of the Maryland National Guard, the Squadron was mobilized for federal service on February 3, 1941. From 1941 to 1942, it flew anti-submarine patrols out of Atlantic City, New Jersey, before personnel were transferred to other units. In late 1942, the Squadron was inactivated and its personnel transferred to the 517th Bombardment Squadron (later designated the 12th Anti-Submarine Squadron) at Langley Field, Virginia.

Today, the Maryland Air National Guard is a separate reserve component of the U.S. Air Force. The Guard is composed of the State Command and the 175th Wing Command (including the 104th Fighter Squadron, the 135th Airlift Group, and the 235th Civil Engineer Flight). It provides air combat forces and airlift aircraft, as well as emergency support, to the U.S. Air Force and other unified commands.

The Governor appoints two Assistant Adjutant Generals for the Maryland Air National Guard (Code Public Safety Article, sec. 13-303).

MARYLAND ARMY NATIONAL GUARD

Origins of the Maryland Army National Guard trace to 1634 when two militia captains disembarked with early settlers at St. Clement's Island in St. Mary's County. At that time, all able-bodied men were obliged to serve in the militia, and volunteers were organized to protect the settlement. The militia expanded as the colony grew.

Volunteer units, known as "Maryland Forces", fought with the British to secure the frontier during the French and Indian War from 1756 to 1763. By the end of the conflict, participation in the militia lapsed but was revitalized in 1774 as relations between the colonies and England became more strained.

Several Maryland militia units fought with Washington's Continental Army and later became known as the