The Butcher of Baghdad is no more.

Former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein – clutching a Koran as he was led to the gallows – was hanged today in the city he ruled with an iron fist for decades at 6 a.m. Baghdad time, officials said.

His death was greeted with elation by those present at the execution, which included dancing over Hussein’s body, witnesses said.

A handcuffed Hussein was clad completely in black, with a jacket, trousers, hat and shoes – not the orange prison garb he was expected to wear.

Shortly before the execution, Hussein’s hat was removed and he was asked if he wanted to say something, said Sami al-Askari, the political adviser of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.

” ‘No I don’t want to,’ ” al-Askari, who was present at the execution, quoted the ousted despot as telling him.

He then repeated a prayer told to him by a Sunni Muslim cleric.

“Saddam later was taken to the gallows and refused to have his head covered with a hood,” al-Askari said. “Before the rope was put around his neck, Saddam shouted: ‘God is great. The nation will be victorious and Palestine is Arab.’ ”

The predawn hanging was necessary because Iraqi law prohibits executions on holy days. The Muslim holiday Eid al-Adha, the Festival of Sacrifice, began at sunrise.

In November, Hussein, 69, was convicted of crimes against humanity after ordering the murders of 148 Shiite villagers from Dujail after a failed assassination bid in 1982.

Saddam’s two co-defendants, his half-brother Barzan al-Tikriti and former Iraqi chief judge Awad Hamed al-Bandar of the Revolutionary Court, will be hanged at a later time, officials said.

Iraq’s Prime Minister Nuri al- Maliki urged Saddam Hussein’s fellow Sunni Baathists today to reconsider their tactics and join the political process.

“I urged followers of the ousted regime to reconsider their stance as the door is still open to anyone who has no innocent blood on his hands, to help in rebuilding an Iraq for all Iraqis,” Maliki said in a statement issued hours after Saddam was executed.

Meanwhile, jubilant Shiites – oppressed under Saddam – danced in the streets of their holy city of Najaf while cars blared their horns in procession through Baghdad’s Shiite-ruled Sadr City.

The execution took place at a specially built gallows close to Camp Cropper, near Baghdad International Airport, where the former dictator was being held. It was reportedly overseen by at least seven witnesses, including the Iraqi National Security Advisor Mowaffeq al-Rubaie, Justice Minster Hashim al-Shilbli, the judge who presided over his trial, and a Sunni Muslim cleric.

Al-Rubaie told Iraqiya that Hussein appeared to be a “broken man” before he mounted the scaffold.

He said Hussein “totally surrendered” and did not resist.

When he stood in the execution room, photographs and video footage were taken, al-Rubaie said.

“He did not ask for anything. He was carrying a Koran and said: ‘I want this Koran to be given to this person,’ a man he called Bander,” he said.

Al-Rubaie also said he did not know who Bander was.

“Saddam was treated with respect when he was alive and after his death,” al-Rubaie said. “Saddam’s execution was 100 percent Iraqi and the American side did not interfere.”

“Saddam was taken by force to the gallows but he was composed when taken to execution,” said al-Askari.

Then, “we heard his neck snap,” said al-Askari at the exact moment of Saddam’s death.

The officials said the government had not yet decided what to do with Saddam’s body.

The Iraqiya television station aired national songs after the first announcement of Hussein’s death and had a tag on the screen that read, “Saddam’s execution marks the end of a dark period of Iraq’s history.”

In a farewell message to Iraqis posted Wednesday on the Internet, Saddam said he was giving his life for his country as part of the struggle against the U.S.

“Here, I offer my soul to God as a sacrifice, and if he wants, he will send it to heaven with the martyrs,” he said.

Even as the brutal strongman’s final moments ticked away, there was a torrent of activity in Baghdad and Washington in the hours proceeding Saddam’s death:

* Hussein gave his will and personal belonging to two of his half-brothers in a final jailhouse meeting, one of his lawyers said.

* Hussein’s daughter and a member of his defense team also asked for a chance to say goodbye but were denied.

“His daughter in Amman was crying, she said, ‘Take me with you,’ ” lawyer Najeeb al-Nueimi said.

She later asked that “his body be buried in Yemen temporarily until Iraq is liberated and it can be reburied in Iraq,” a source close to the family said.

* U.S. and Iraqi officials agreed during a meeting yesterday on an execution time after daylong speculation that it would be put off for religious or other reasons.

* U.S. and Iraqi forces were put on high alert and braced for violent reactions to the execution.

“We will put all our forces on the streets so that no lives are jeopardized,” said Iraqi Brig. Gen. Abdel Karim Khalaf.

* The State Department cabled all U.S. embassies to warn them to be prepared for terrorist attacks. Although as of late last night there was little violence – just rejoicing.

* Defense lawyers filed papers at a federal appeals court in Washington seeking an emergency restraining order to block the execution.

* Nevertheless, Munir Haddad, a judge on the appeals court that upheld the death sentence, said all documents required for the execution were ready.

That includes the infamous “red card” – an order of condemnation that was created during Hussein’s regime and was to be given to a death row inmate on his final day.

Hussein had been in U.S. custody since he was found in late 2003 hiding in a “spider hole” near Tikrit .

Nueimi said the U.S. wanted to prevent Hussein from being humiliated before his execution and want to prevent the mutilation of his corpse, as has happened to other deposed Iraqi leaders.

If Hussein is humiliated publicly or his corpse ill-treated “that could cause an uprising, and the Americans would be blamed,” he said.

The identity of Hussein’s hangman, who was be hooded, was a closely guarded secret.

A doctor was also present to certify Saddam’s death.

A photograph of Hussein’s body is expected to be released later today to prevent rumors that he is still alive.

The death of Hussein, a Sunni, was greeted with rejoicing by Iraq’s Shiite majority.

It is “God’s gift to Iraqis,” Sheik Sadralddin al-Qubanji said in his sermon yesterday in Najaf.

“Oh, God, you know what Saddam has done! He killed millions of Iraqis in prisons, in wars with neighboring countries, and he is responsible for mass graves.”

But Hussein’s death sentence has drawn condemnation from a wide range of critics, on political and moral grounds.

International human rights groups criticized the year-long trial, during which three defense lawyers were killed and a chief judge resigned complaining of political interference.

“The test of a government’s commitment to human rights is measured by the way it treats its worst offenders,” said Richard Dicker, Director of Human Rights Watch. “History will judge the deeply flawed Dujail trial and this execution harshly.”

The United Nations and many of Washington’s Western allies had called on Bush and Maliki not to go ahead with the execution. With Post Wire Services