War and its aftermath dominated the headlines in 2003. The invasion of Iraq split the world, the country and even Southeastern North Carolina, where hundreds marched in demonstrations. And it put readers on a roller coaster, between peaks of seemingly early victory and the lows of daily death.

Saddam Hussein's capture added fresh hope for an end to violence, but for many, the year had taught them caution.

The war reached the Cape Fear region, too. Familiar faces disappeared from police departments, paramedic units and other jobs, as reservists were called up. And death and injury came, including to Camp Lejeune Marines.

But for good or bad, life went on here - if not as normal, then close, though the news of the day could always end in surprise.

An inmate's death in custody snowballed into questions about the competence of the New Hanover County's Sheriff's Office. A political newcomer took down one of the Port City's most familiar faces to become mayor. And a Wilmington councilwoman sued Wilmington police officers for allegedly violating her civil rights.

How closely were you watching? The following questions and answers will take you back to the big local news stories of 2003.

A local handyman who worked part-time at the Star-News, Mr. Rummer was jailed Jan. 10 for failing to complete community service related to a drunken driving conviction. Six days later, he was dead of injuries suffered in the New Hanover County jail.

An autopsy found blunt force head trauma and a broken neck, though internal investigations cited no wrongdoing in the handling of the inmate. District Attorney John Carriker said the injuries occurred when Deputy Billy Ray Hudson was handcuffing an unruly Mr. Rummer, but he refused to release his report.

A State Bureau of Investigation report has not been made public. And a FBI inquiry is ongoing.

Friends and family of Mr. Rummer remain unsatisfied. They filed a wrongful death lawsuit in U.S. District Court on Monday, claiming "excessive, unreasonable and unjustified force" on the part of the jailers.

Spence Broadhurst. Promising to be a consensus-builder, the banker unseated Mayor Harper Peterson in a rout, winning by more than 4,000 votes.

Jan. 20 was a tragic day in the Cape Fear region, with six people found dead in three unrelated incidents. In the deadliest, Joseph Cook of Pender County shot his girlfriend's son and the son's girlfriend as they lay in bed. He then took off in his truck, forcing people off the road, shooting one woman in the face (she survived) and leading law enforcement on a high-speed chase that ended in suicide near Greenfield Lake.

The same morning, New Hanover County deputies found the bodies of Kathleen and David Seyford in a parked car on Blue Clay Road. Mrs. Seyford had earlier taken out a restraining order against her estranged husband after he left a phone message threatening to kill her. Mr. Seyford, who drove from Florida to commit the crime, beat his wife motionless in front of their two children, before driving off to kill himself.

And in Wilmington, Michael Borneman found the body of his elderly father in his Camden Circle home. Buren Borneman, 76, had been stabbed to death. Police arrested Joseph M. Johnson of Wrightsboro, but later dropped charges after a key witness refused to testify.

Police Chief John Cease was fired by City Manager Sterling Cheatham, who cited differences in management philosophy. Mr. Cease, however, said he refused to resign at the city manager's request after Mr. Cease gave some of his employees more than $60,000 in bonuses. Mr. Cheatham had approved the bonuses.

A 1996 Pender High graduate and an Army reservist, Cpl. Bibby died this summer when his convoy was attacked north of Baghdad while on a humanitarian mission to a water treatment plant. In November, Pender High School renamed its JROTC building in his honor.

The war had strong local impact in other ways, from peace marches to military convoys rolling to the state port to the many dead and injured from Camp Lejeune. In early 2004, the struggle will feel even closer to home when the 120th Mechanized Infantry deploys. The Wilmington-based National Guard regiment has about 700 citizen soldiers from throughout Southeastern North Carolina.

Both are former employees of Brunswick County schools convicted of inappropriate behavior with students.

In August, Mr. Schwenker, a former math teacher at South Brunswick Middle School, pleaded guilty to six counts of assault on a female after accusations including kissing, grabbing and making some of the girls sit in his lap. He received two years of probation and had to give up his teaching certificate.

Two months later, Ms. Hair, a former teacher's aide and cheerleading coach at North Brunswick High, pleaded no contest to one count of taking indecent liberties with a child and two counts of contributing to the delinquency of a juvenile.

She was accused of fondling a student and sending him love letters and partially nude pictures of herself. Ms. Hair, who claimed that financial hardship forced her plea, was ordered to stay away from children and register as a sex offender and was given 35 months of supervised probation.

The Cape Fear Club. Mr. Broadhurst quit the elite club, known for having only white male members, saying his membership in the club had become a distraction. Some had criticized the new mayor for belonging to the exclusive downtown organization.

General Electric announced in October it would relocate its nuclear energy global headquarters from San Jose, Calif., to Castle Hayne, bringing about 200 new jobs - most well paying - to the Wilmington area and committing $4 million to expansion.

By wide margins, the House and Senate passed a law allowing "electrofishing" on the Waccamaw and Lumber rivers. The bill limited the practice to fish-hungry flathead catfish, which can grow to 5 feet in length and up to about 75 pounds.

The fishing usually requires what anglers call "telephone gear": wire leads in the water connected to a simple crank generator and capacitor. A quick zap stuns nearby fish, which float to the surface. Then it's just a simple matter of scooping.

Marc Sosne announced he would step down as superintendent of Pender County Schools after an eight-year tenure in which the school system went from one of the lower-performing districts in Southeastern North Carolina to one of the best.

In 1997, less than 66 percent of Pender County students were proficient in reading, compared to nearly 85 percent last year. The percentage of students proficient in math rose from nearly 70 percent to just over 90 percent.

Choice. The airport added nonstop flights to New York and Washington, D.C., to its existing Charlotte and Atlanta options.

Nobody, though you had to be paying attention to figure that out in an embarrassing episode for the county. In August, First Baptist Church made a $1 million bid for the property, with plans to use it as a church headquarters and, more controversially, a homeless shelter.

Developer Gene Merritt then topped that bid by $50,000, which the county accepted only to discover they had incorrectly figured and the bid was $50 short of the amount needed to upset the church's offer.

Then ensued almost daily twists and turns, which ended when a majority of the County Commissioners determined they did not have a binding contract with the church because the commissioners' chairman had not signed the paperwork.

Councilwoman Katherine Moore filed a civil lawsuit against the city, former police Chief John Cease and several officers. The suit claims her civil and constitutional rights were violated when she was stopped in November 2002 and charged with driving while impaired, even though she blew a 0.00 on the breath-alcohol test. Ms. Moore has had at least five confrontations with law enforcement in the past decade - including a run-in with airport security in June. She contends that the police target her, her family and black people in general.

Rosemary DePaolo. She took over July 1 with a three-year contract and a $205,000 salary. She was selected from among more than 100 applicants from 36 states and two foreign countries.

Before coming to UNCW, the Long Island, N.Y., native spent six years as president of Georgia College & State University. Before that, Dr. DePaolo served as dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at Western Carolina University in Cullowhee, one of the 16 campuses in the UNC system.

Nothing other than the N.C. House of Representatives. The General Assembly's lower chamber first made history by failing throughout January to elect a speaker. It made history again in early February when it elected two to lead the chamber.

The co-speakership system was unprecedented in North Carolina history but was seen as part of a trend of shared government that has touched other states.

The unusual relationship connected Rep. Jim Black, a Democrat who had been House speaker through much of the 1990s, with Republican Rep. Richard Morgan, a shrewd parliamentarian who used his own vote and that of four close supporters to lever the rest of the Republican caucus out of the way.

The new arrangement seemed to solidify the often-squabbling 60-seat Democratic caucus and cause no end of consternation for the 40 or so Republican representatives not party to the power-sharing agreement.

The Federal Trade Commission began investigating the sale nearly a year ago, according to hospital officials. The commission is trying to determine whether the merger raised regional health-care costs by eliminating competition between the two Wilmington hospitals.

In May, Gov. Mike Easley cracked up a Jimmie Johnson Chevrolet while driving practice laps for a charity event. The Democratic governor lost control coming out of a turn and slapped the car against a soft foam wall.

Gov. Easley emerged unhurt, joking with track officials and aides and even autographing the crumpled car.

The incident lead to widespread ribbing of the governor in the press, and political commentators were split over whether the incident made him look goofy or endeared him to voters.

Nancy Wigley. In July, she claimed other board members had falsely accused her of sexual harassment and of revealing confidential information to the public.

Steve Bilzi, school board chairman, subsequently accused Ms. Wigley of being drunk in public. In an e-mail, he said the board had received several requests from administrators, teachers, parents and other public officials to ask Ms. Wigley to refrain from visiting their venues in such a state.

Ms. Wigley, who has served on the board since 1996, denied ever visiting a school while intoxicated. She acknowledged, however, drinking during a couple of months early in 2003 when she was getting divorced after 27 years of marriage.

Mayfaire. The $200 million shopping, business and residential development on Military Cutoff looks pretty spiffy. But gas leaks and construction traffic made traveling the overburdened road even worse. And it's not even finished yet.

The shopping center is scheduled to open in March, and the state expects to begin widening Military Cutoff by next summer - meaning motorists probably can't expect relief until the road work is completed in 2005.

Yes, the long-running teen drama Dawson's Creek left Southeastern North Carolina after filming the series here for six years. But in a big coup for Wilmington and surrounding areas, the new WB series One Tree Hill decided to set up shop here soon after the Creek's series finale.

Of course the decision to film here did take offering some incentives on the state, county and city's part.

Because of the economic importance the show would have - and because the series was looking seriously at filming in Canada - Johnny Griffin, director of the Wilmington Regional Film Commission; Frank Capra Jr., president of Screen Gems Studios; and a group of politicians pulled together funds to keep the production here.

The $750,000 package included $500,000 from the state and $125,000 each from New Hanover County and the city of Wilmington.

And it looks as if One Tree Hill could be around for awhile: In November, the cast and crew were informed that the series was picked up for a full season.

Staff writer Sam Scott compiled this year-end review with contributions from staff writers Bettie Fennell, Millard K. Ives, Sherry Jones, Ken Little, Gareth McGrath, Trista Talton and Cheryl Welch and Raleigh Bureau Chief Mark Schreiner.

City Desk: 343-2312

citydesk@starnewsonline.com