He is close to several former leaders including Julius Nyerere Jim Callaghan Jimmy Carter and Helmut Schmidt and has particularly warm relations with Nelson Mandela’s government...

The latest appeal came on 29 November from the embargo's most fervent supporter Julius Nyerere...

Annual meetings between officials from the UN and OAU secretariats chaired by the two secretaries general and a UN coordination office at OAU in Addis Ababa to agree policy and deployments; for example the UN has supported Togo's mediation efforts in the Bakassi Peninsula dispute between Cameroon and Nigeria and the mediation efforts of Tanzania's former President Julius Nyerere in Burundi...

It is now agreed that he'll give up politics for an elder statesman role similar to that of Tanzania's ex-President Julius Nyerere...

When Tanzania's founding President Julius Nyerere went to China in 1965 he came home and tried to build his country on Chairman Mao Tse Tung's model...

The Southern African Development Community dispatched Tanzanian ex-President Julius Nyerere; he was allowed to see Kaunda persuaded him to break his fast and got him transferred into house arrest in his Lusaka home...

A mission from the International Assembly of French- speaking Parliamentarians including Guy Penne who used to advise the late President François Mitterrand on African affairs visited Bujumbura in January and denounced the embargo with harsh words for the peace-making efforts of ex-President Julius Nyerere...

In Arusha Mwalimu Julius Nyerere's son Makongoro Nyerere was stopped from standing for NCCR; the Electoral Commission insists registration documents must be signed by both party chairman and secretary general but Mrema and Marando would not cooperate...

Many first met in the 1970s in Tanzania under the auspices of former President Julius Nyerere and his political circle...

It sent a battalion to the UN peace-keeping force in Rwanda in 1994-96 promised troops for the Burundi peace- keeping force proposed by ex-President Julius Nyerere and last November offered units for a neutral force in eastern Zaïre...