Saturday, April13th 2024. Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC) – Makerere University

Concept and Programme

Mwalimu Nyerere’s Legacy: Servant Leadership and Unity for Building the Africa we Want.

Mwalimu Julius Nyerere born on April 13th 1922 will mark 102 years on April 13th 2024. On April 13th 2024, The Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC) will join the broader Tanzanian community in Uganda consisting of students, business women and men, entrepreneurs, as well as public servants to celebrate “Mwalimu Nyerere@102”. The Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC) in partnership with the High Commission of the United Republic of Tanzania – Kampala and Tanzania Students Association in Uganda (TSAU) will mark the day with a celebration in honour of Mwalimu Nyerere’s life, philosophies and ideals on Leadership, Unity, Development and Pan-Africanism.

Mwallimu Nyerere’s birthday celebration is being marked by a keynote address by His Excellency Maj. Gen. Paul Kisesa Simuli, the High Commissioner of the United Republic of Tanzania to Uganda. His address on Servant Leadership and Unity: The EnduringLegacy and Gift of Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyereres will provide the platform for a conversation with student leaders on “Servant Leadership and Unity for Building the Africa we Want”. The celebration is being held at the Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC) Premises, Plot 111, Pool Road, Makerere University, starting at 11:30am on Saturday, April 13th 2024.

About Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC)

Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC), named after the former President of Tanzania, the late Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere is a Presidential initiative. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to honour the legacy of the late Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere, launched the Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre (JNLC) on October, 6th 2018 as a focal point for intergenerational dialogue, knowledge production and research. The JNLC is jointly hosted by Uganda Management Institute, and Makerere University, with its administrative office responsible for programme coordination, administration, and management located at Plot 111 Pool Road, at Makerere University.

Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, a product of Makerere University is one of Africa’s most prominent post-independence leaders. Between 1943 and 1945 Mwalimu Julius Nyerere attended Makerere University, where he obtained a teaching certificate. It was also during his time at Makerere that Julius Nyerere took his first steps into political activism when he formed an East African group to discuss the political problems faced by these countries, which at the time were still under British rule.

The event to celebrate his 102nd birthday will bring together university students and expose them to the works of Julius Nyerere. This opportunity will provide a platform for students to exchange ideas and discuss leadership and Pan-African-oriented solutions championed by Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. The proposed activities, including the launch of the Basic Kiswahili curriculum, developed for JNLC to complement its leadership curriculum will also provide a platform to attract, nurture and mentor a new generation of young people that are responsive to the needs of their communities on the issues of leadership, governance, patriotism and Pan-Africanism.

‘Without Unity, There Is No Future for Africa’