Watching “The Smiling Lieutenant” is like being present for the birth of the movie musical. Never one to allow for too solemn an occasion, director Ernst Lubitsch uses the moment to crack a ‘does the curtain match the drapes’ joke.

“Lieutenant” amounts to one of the most joyfully irreverent ‘process pictures’ ever. In 1931, Lubitsch and other directors were still working over the wrinkles in talkie technology, and the entire idea of a musical was a twinkle in “Showboat’s” eye. Lubitsch’s contribution to the grand experiment of both was “Lieutenant.”

From the moment the movie begins, with Maurice Chevalier serenading the camera as if it was his favorite paramour, it’s clear that Lubitsch was onto something. “Lieutenant” is limited in movement…

While there seem to be a few competitors for the title Ernst Lubitsch is regularly credited with the first musical of the talkie age 1929’s ‘Love Parade’. There had in fact been earlier films where the movie was played alongside a concert recording and others that had musical interludes alongside silent action. Lubitsch’s movies, often based on Viennese operetta, were huge hits and made stars of Maurice Chevalier and Jeanette MacDonald. McDonald apparently tired of Chevalier before the public did and by this 1931 film he was being paired opposite rising stars Claudette Colbert and Miriam Hopkins.

Set in an undefined pre-First World War period this film sees Chevalier as an Austrian guards officer and lothario who falls for violinist…

9th Ernst Lubitsch (after Heaven Can Wait, Trouble in Paradise, One Hour with You, I Don't Want to Be a Man, The Merry Widow, The Doll, The Oyster Princess and Design for Living)

Even lesser Lubitsch still has some sparkle. This glossy little Pre-Code musical allowed Depression-era audiences bask in the fantasy world of turn of the century Mitteleuropa, all sex and sin but with a certain taste and refinement. Chevalier is up to his usual tricks as the permanently randy Lieutenant of the title, whose sprightly love affair with Claudette Colbert winds up with him marrying Miriam Hopkins's dowdy rural princess after accidentally smiling at her during a military parade. Lubitsch in this period is still mastering the techniques…

Me: So, lieutenant, why are you smiling?

Mo: Because I’m in a Lubitsch picture.

Me: He’s good, isn’t he?

Mo: But of course.

Me: Does this film have any of his famous touches?

Mo: A young woman enters my apartment, before I’ve even appeared, and Ernst cuts to a closeup of a light coming on, fade, and then the light going off.

Me: What does that suggest?

Mo: Romance is in the air.

Me: Any others?

Mo: We see Claudette Colbert in my apartment one night, and she’s still there for breakfast.

Me. I see. Another suggestion of “romance”?

Mo: But of course.

Me: Any more, Mo?

Mo: Later on, Claudette and Miriam Hopkins burn Miriam’s bloomers.

Me: OK, but…

"First tea…and then dinner…and then maybe—maybe breakfast."

Finally a movie that makes the distinct connection between music…and lingerie. Maurice Chevalier is back (love him or hate him). Miriam Hopkins is on board (in her breakthrough role). Charlie Ruggles is here (briefly). Claudette Colbert (with her big anime eyes) is a beer garden violinist. I was hooked immediately.

Lubitsch tones down the actual music in this er, musical, finally hinting at the straight-up comedy masterpiece he was capable of (Trouble in Paradise). Chevalier's Niki, our boudoir brigadier and accidental smiling lieutenant, is mistaken for laughing at the visiting king’s daughter (Hopkins). To save his neck he woos the young and naïve princess, setting up the inevitable showdown between his girlfriend Franzi…

Thank God Lubitsch and Miriam Hopkins got to make a few pre-Code sex comedies together!

There a few nice lil double entendres about what men mean when they wink, step out, etc—but the joy of this film is a champagne cork explosion of the last 20 minutes when Claudette Colbert burns Hopkins' undergarments, teaches her how to jazz up her life, outfits her with shimmering nighties, and delivers a note to her husband that she's a blonde (and y'know that Lubitsch wanted you to see the britches burnt first, implying she ain't talking about the top of her head). The Hayes Code was probably made especially for Lubitsch and his nighties and this was the highest grossing film of the…

Maurice Chevalier's screen persona was about 50% accent, but he also seems to exhale charm like carbon dioxide. It's largely thanks to his characters' capabilities to defuse tense situations with wit and humor (at one point, he enchants a group of five judgemental aristocrats through spelling alone), that he became the first titan of rom-coms, and that his work shines brighter than so many other pre-Code films - the plot is driven forward on a sense of timeless levity and charisma. Much of the plot of The Smiling Lieutenant seems to be patterned after an earlier film, The Love Parade, and while both are solid this one seems to lag a bit in terms of pace even though the same…