ST JAMES’ CHURCH, POOLE

For over 850 years, people have worshipped here at St James Church, originally built in 1142, demolished and rebuilt starting in 1819. Below is some information about our building.

The Pine Columns

In groups of four they support the vaulted roof. These were brought over from Trinity, Newfoundland, on the decks of Poole sailing brigs in 1820. During the Victorian era they were covered with plaster and the original wood was not rediscovered until 1911.

The Movable Font: This was carved in mahogany around 1770, and is unique in Dorset.

Stained Glass Windows:

East: Installed to mark the 60th year of Queen Victoria’s reign (1897)

South: The Goff Memorial Window (1957) shows Christ and His disciples and a fishing boat.

The Crucifixion Window was removed from St Paul’s Church in the High Street before it was demolished in 1963. The reinstallation costs were met by the Yeatman family.

The Colombos Memorial Window depicts Christ looking out over Poole Quay as it was in 1960.

Artist Gordon Webster.

The Tilsed Memorial (1999) by John Callan represents God’s love reaching even the depths of the sea. A net encompasses 153 fish (as caught by the disciples, John 21).

The Six Heraldic Shields: At the East end of the north gallery is the old Arms of Poole with the three scallop shells of St James symbolising pilgrimage and the dolphin on the wavy bars, representing the sea. The second shield on that side is the crest of St Paul and the third is that of the Province of Canterbury. On the south side, the most eastern shield is the Arms of England, the second is that of St James and the third that of the Diocese of Salisbury.

The fine Royal Coat of Arms over the West Doors are the Arms of King George IV and were given to the church in 1821 by George Ledgard, Mayor of Poole.

The Pulpit was presented on St James’ Day, 25th July 1894, in memory of Revd. John Lewis Williams of Longfleet and Canford.

The Lectern was presented in 1887, the year of Queen Victoria’s Jubilee in memory of Charles Schreiber M.P. for Poole, who died in 1884.

The Oak Choir Stalls and Canopies, formerly of Canford Church, were adapted and installed in memory of the Rt Hon. Sir Ivor Bertie Guest DL JP, one the Patrons of the living at that time. He died on 22nd February 1914.

The Flags

The Union Jack was presented by the late Cdr Tom Sherrin, ex- Mayor of Poole, and was the first British Flag flown over Paris after its liberation by the allies in 1945.

The American Flag was presented by Naval Forces who were based in Poole in the 1939–45 war and used this church for their Sunday Divisions. This flag flew on board a U.S. Coastguard 83 foot Cutter stationed at Poole during the Normandy landings. Rescue Flotilla Two saved more than 1,400 allied troops from the English Channel.

The Fire Service and British Legion Standards are also from the World War 11 period.

The Royal National Lifeboat Institution Flag reflects our close association.

The Flag of Newfoundland and Labrador was presented by Mr Calvin Saunders of Gander, Newfoundland, in 1989, to commemorate the close links of Newfoundland with Poole.

The Banner of The Society of Poole Men (south corner) was hand embroidered by a disabled First World War soldier, Mr Bert Tilsed.

Church Bells: The eight original bells date from 1821. The largest bell weighs nearly one ton. Two more bells were added in September 1937 to commemorate the Coronation of King George V1 and Queen Elizabeth.

The Georgian Reredos, given to the Church in 1736 by Richard Pennel, a wealthy Poole Merchant. On this is recorded the Creed, The Ten Commandments and the Lord’s Prayer.

The Organ: Much of the pipework dates back to the famous organ builder, John Snetzler, who built it for

St John-at-Hackney about 1740. It was later rebuilt by G.P.England but it was Joseph William Walker who installed it at St James, Poole, in 1799. It was a gift from Benjamin Lester, a Poole merchant who made a fortune in the fish trade. Originally it stood in the centre of the gallery at the West End of the church. It has been rebuilt many times.

Prior to an organ, the congregation was led by a five piece orchestra consisting of two fiddles, bass viol, flute and drum.

William Knapp, the composer of the well known hymn tune ‘Wareham’ was Precentor and Parish Clerk for nearly 40 years. He died in 1768 and is remembered by a plaque in the North Aisle.

St Paul’s Chapel (North side) was constructed in 1964 and commemorates the demolished St. Paul’s Church, previously in the High Street. Its reredos incorporates the old oak panelling removed from the former

St James’ Church.

The Vestibule contains Charity Boards commenced in 1805 through the influence of John Sydenham giving details of the various charities and benefactions to the church and town.

Reverend Peter Jolliffe’s portrait hangs in the porch. Responsible for the rebuilding of the church, he was Rector of Poole 1791-1861, a record of 70 years!

Weathervane: surmounting the flagstaff on top of the Tower is a dolphin, used as a weathervane; again, the symbol of Poole.