St. James’ Church is a community that actively shares the love of Jesus Christ with each other, our city, and the world.

Founded in 1810 as a summer chapel in the countryside north of what was then considered to be New York City, St. James’ Church has always stood as a house of prayer for Christians living on and around Lenox Hill, in the part of Manhattan we now call the Upper East Side. As the city grew up around it, St. James’ grew and changed to meet the needs of its neighbors. The current building was built in 1884-5, and dramatically reconfigured in 1924 by Ralph Adams Cram. Completely renovated in the early 2000s, St. James’ is prepared for another 200 years of gathering the community for worship and prayer in order to faithfully fulfill its mission of sharing the love of Jesus Christ with each other, our city, and the world.

St. James’ celebrated its bicentennial year in 2010 with a guest preacher series, an organ dedication concert, a panel on global reconciliation with Bishops Desmond Tutu, Gordon McMullan and Hays Rockwell, a new history book, a children’s ABC book, exhibits, a CD recorded by the choir, a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, a youth mission trip to Malawi, and an entire week devoted to mission with and for its neighbors in New York.

The parish welcomed Katharine Jefferts Schori, Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church, for a festive service marking the culmination of the bicentennial year on November 14, 2010.

2019 marked the 400th anniversary of the first enslaved African arriving in Virginia, and we find ourselves in the midst of an important and long-overdue national conversation about race. As we seek to be Christ’s Beloved Community in and for the world, we must acknowledge and confess our own participation in America’s Original Sin and recommit ourselves to be “repairers of the breach, restorers of streets to live in” (Isaiah 58:12). The Diocese of New York has asked each parish to explore its historical connection to slavery, and parishioner Sarah Cunningham took up that work on our behalf.

On Sunday, November 24, 2019, St. James’ acknowledged the ways in which enslaved labor helped create the wealth necessary for the construction and operation of our church in its early years in the form of a new memorial plaque near the Madison Avenue entrance. The plaque reads:

Jesus said, “You shall know the truth and the truth shall set you free.” — John 8:32

In solemn remembrance of the enslaved persons whose labor created wealth that made possible the founding of St. James’ Church, Hamilton Square, 1810

Christ, have mercy.

2019