11306 Old Georgetown Road

City Directories and History: Constructed in 1768 in the Georgian style. Also known as: The Brick Church at Wambaw

St. James’ Church, erected in 1768, is an excellent example of the effort made in the last third of the 18th century to give South Carolina’s small

Georgian brick crossroad churches, with typical rectangular plans, a more sophisticated exterior design. The building and its interiors, including a revised seating plan, appear to be original. The exterior includes architectural features not found in earlier brick country churches built on similar rectangular plans. The hipped-roof Georgian body of St. James’ is preceded, both front and rear, by classic pedimented porticoes, each three bays wide.

The eight brick columns have molded bases and capitals, and the shafts, built up in perfect circles, display both diminution and entasis. The main entrance is located in the center of the long south elevation and there is a side door in the center of the west end. Originally there may have also been a center door in the long north side, at the point now occupied by the brick vestry room. The doors and windows are topped by fanlights and brick round arches, a Palladian window is situated in the center of the east end. Listed in the National Register April 15, 1970; Designated a National Historic Landmark April 15, 1970. (The building measures 58 – 37 feet)

View the complete text of the nomination form for this National Register property. (Courtesy of the SC Dept. of Archives and History) B&W images below, courtesy of the Library of Congress – HAB Collection

Saint James’ Parish, Santee, is popularly known as Wambaw Church and the “Brick Church.” An-other of the original ten parishes of 1706, it con-sisted largely of French Huguenots, who had come into the Church of England. It was also referred to as French Santee in contrast to English Santee in the St. Stephen’s area. (Information from: Names in South Carolina by C.H. Neuffer, Published by the S.C. Dept. of English, USC)

Stay Connected

Explore history, houses, and stories across S.C. Your membership provides you with updates on regional topics, information on historic research, preservation, and monthly feature articles. But remember R&R wants to hear from you and assist in preserving your own family genealogy and memorabilia.

Visit the Southern Queries – Forum to receive assistance in answering questions, discuss genealogy, and enjoy exploring preservation topics with other members. Also listed are several history and genealogical researchers for hire.

User comments welcome — post at the bottom of this page.

Please enjoy this structure and all those listed in Roots and Recall. But remember each is private property. So view them from a distance or from a public area such as the sidewalk or public road.

User comments always welcome - please post at the bottom of this page.