Developed an Adobe Photoshop plug-in for the Macintosh and Windows platforms that would create a folder on the user’s desktop based on the name of the client’s company (if not already present) in which would be saved a copy of the frontmost window’s graphics file in the CMYK color space and the EPS file format.

Developed an Adobe Photoshop plug-in for the Macintosh and Windows platforms that performs the same operation as the Paste command.

Developed an Adobe Photoshop plug-in for the Macintosh and Windows platforms that performs the same operation as the Delete Current Channel command.

Designed, coded, and tested cross-platform and platform-specific code to be used in Aldus Persuasion 3.0 and the Aldus Persuasion Player 3.0 using THINK C.

Discovered bugs in the Apple Macintosh ToolBox/operating system and developed workarounds in areas such as QuickTime, modal dialogs, and command keys under System 7, and the unique GWorld offscreen requirements of the Quadra 700.

Implemented callback functions for the Aldus FreeHand team for use with Aladdin’s Stuffit InstallerMaker.

Tested, debugged, and added cross-platform and platform-specific code to the Aldus Table OLE applet included with Aldus Persuasion 3.0 using MPW C++ as well as the THINK Class Library.

Developed a gallery-style template for the web site of an artist that paints watercolors and uses them to create stationery designs and cross-stitch patterns.

Developed all navigation images used by the web site using a color scheme of “Honey” based on the artist’s chosen logo and name of the company.

Developed code in JavaScript for roll-over effects of navigation images.

Designed a template for a listing of stores that carry the artist’s work.

Designed a template for an online newsletter.

Designed a template for an online guestbook.

Graphically cropped, touched-up, and framed product images for optimum display on the web site using a well-proportioned and standard size for online viewing within the designed templates.

Developed animated GIFs to illustrate the “evolution” of the artist’s work from paintings to stationery design and cross-stitch patterns.

Developed a web-based contact form using Perl.

Developed a “favorite icon” (favicon.ico) to match the web site.

View the portfolio version of this web site

Hired and managed seven contract, intern, and regular employees for the company’s web development team.

Purchased and/or leased the necessary hardware and software for the web developers.

Designed and deployed sixteen staging/development, one intranet/documentation, and eleven production web sites utilizing HTML, CGI, Java, JavaScript, Perl, Sybase database, Netscape Enterprise Server 3.0, Netscape Messaging Server 3.0, VeriSign’s Digital Certificate technology, and Sun Solaris 2.51 UNIX on multiple Sun clone machines.

Trained employees on aspects of graphics, Adobe Acrobat PDF, HTML, Perl, CGI, and database issues.

Educated clients’ IS departments on the configuration of web server technologies for Windows NT (MS IIS 3.0).

Discussed with and provided recommendations to prospective and current clients the aspects concerning development of their desired web sites and other Intranet and database issues.

Procurred, configured, and managed the assignment of Internet IP addresses along with physical connections to offices for CyberQuest and two other organizations (bid4ICs and Michael & Partners) subleasing office space.

Developed a database in Apple FileMaker Pro to track the members of the 20’s and 30’s Singles Departments of the Fellowship Church, including specialized queries and reports for weekly attendance customized to request particulars missing from individuals, name tags customized to include special birthday announcements and specialized name tags for persons who have volunteered in certain ministries of the class, and a directory which printed only the members who wished to be included out of the full membership count.

Developed specialized queries for single parents and department volunteers.

Developed a customized e-mail list forwarding function that used Netscape Messaging Server and LDAP protocols to allow easy communication between different ministry groups in the singles department; the web application also allowed an administrator to add or subtract recipients as desired.

Converted the database to use Microsoft Access once administrative staff was available at the church to do the required week-to-week maintenance.

Designed a web site for an independent insurance agent with content supplied by the agent and modified as needed to provide an intuitive navigational format.

Developed the web site with a color scheme of “Sky Blue” based on the agent’s decision to portray her “Sky’s The Limit” service, as well as the fact that blue is a color portraying peace and relaxation.

Incorporated original photography from the agent with stock art and graphical effects to produce unique graphical images symbolizing the agent’s international experience as well as illustrating her prospective customers.

Created a multilingual design of the web site to accomodate multiple language versions (English, Polish, and Russian) with no changes required to the original web site design.

Designed templates specialized for each area of the web site’s content that would need timely updates.

Developed code in JavaScript for roll-over effects of navigation text designed to look like graphical buttons.

Developed a web-based quote-request form using Perl that checks values based on unique inputs selected.

Developed a web-based contact form using Perl.

View the portfolio version of this web site

Trained and assisted IBM software engineers in the skills of Macintosh software development using Metrowerks CodeWarrior, THINK Project Manager, Symantec C++, Visual Architect, and the THINK Class Library, to port an IBM client/server product, Time and Place, to the Macintosh platform from the OS/2 and Windows platforms.

Discovered and reported bugs in the THINK Class Library and the PowerPC version of the Macintosh ToolBox to their respective vendors, and worked with them to come up with workarounds or solutions.

Developed a number of innovative user-interface widgets in C++ in order to simplify the process of scheduling a user’s events for their Time and Place calendars.

Developed the C++ framework for the Macintosh version of LearnStar’s teacher application based on the Carbon API set so it would run on Mac OS 8.6, 9.x, X 10.x, and later.

Developed a set of C++ classes to interface with the third-party libraries WASTE (an edit text field replacement) and CodeBase (a database management library), as well as fixed issues in the source code of each so they would work successfully with the project and its own unique needs.

Set up the cross-platform CVS source code control system so it could be used to maintain revisions of the application’s source code.

Modified the existing Macintosh version of the LearnStar student application so it would use the Carbon API set so it would run on Mac OS X natively rather than in the Classic environment.

Designed a web site for an independent insurance agent partnership with content supplied by the agents and modified as needed to provide an intuitive navigational format.

Developed all navigation images used by the web site using a color scheme of “Rose Red” based on the agents’ choice of a rose as the company’s symbol.

Incorporated stock art and graphical effects to produce unique graphical images symbolizing the agents’ international experience as well as illustrating their prospective customers.

Designed templates specialized for each area of the web site’s content that would need timely updates.

Developed code in JavaScript for roll-over effects of navigation images.

Developed a web-based quote-request form using Perl that checks values based on unique inputs selected.

Developed a web-based contact form using Perl.

View the portfolio version of this web site

Assisted the manager of Nortel ICS in department staffing by performing interviews for positions involved with graphics creation, HTML coding, web software development, and system administration, negotiating contract rates with consulting agencies, suggesting the future needs for staff in relation to projected work, and orienting new staff to department procedures and assisting staff in initial customer contact.

Researched pricing and placed orders for staff equipment and software needs for Macintosh and Windows operating systems, work space organization, and telephone and networking connections.

Configured Intranet and Internet web servers on Sun Netras running Solaris 2.5.1 and Netscape Enterprise Server 2.0 and Netscape Mail Server 2.0 for customers requiring InterNIC domain name registration and non-DNS named sites.

Configured the servers with Vosaic Media Server 1.04 to serve pre-packaged video for both Intranet and Internet clients.

Installed Perl 5.003, Java 1.02, Oracle, WebLogic’s JDBC drivers for Oracle, Washington University’s FTP Server, a form-mailing script for all customers’ use with extensible options (modified from a freeware product), and a graphical counter for all customers’ use (coded using the freeware GD graphics library for Perl).

Researched and assisted the installation of Netscape Merchant System and Netscape Publishing System for the Dallas Cowboys’ web site and Vosaic Media Server 1.04 for the Indy Racing League’s web site.

Investigated the use of Nortel’s Entrust product for certificate protection of web services, and suggested site design issues concerning database resource sharing in relation to firewall issues.

Developed customized server applications to handle HTML-hosted FTP services, HTML-hosted news forums, database applications to serve web pages based on the identity of the user accessing the site, a transparent web proxy pass-through server, site-storage and site-access statistics based on the customer’s identity, extensible mail, counter, and bar graph programs for all customers’ use, automated creation and management scripts to handle new customers, server storage requirements, online site-access statistics configuration, and customized site search engines.

Developed new, revised, and prototype web sites for customers using HTML, Java (utilizing Metrowerks CodeWarrior and Sun JDK 1.02), graphics (utilizing Adobe Illustrator 6.0, Adobe Photoshop 4.0, GIFBuilder), JavaScript, and document conversion (utilizing Adobe Acrobat 3.0, Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft PowerPoint, Macromedia Fontographer, Adobe PageMaker).

Discussed with current and potential clients the facilities and capabilities of the Nortel ICS department in servicing their needs, including pricing for services, backup schedules, on-call status, standard capabilities provided, such as HTML conversion, web software development, and graphics conversions and creation, and potential capabilities for their needs, such as FTP sites for their customers, HTML-hosted news forums, database-created web pages, video serving, document serving issues, site storage and access statistics, and personal web server hardware and software on Windows NT and Macintosh operating systems.

Designed a web site for a company specializing in health concerns for the whole person with content, including PowerPoint presentations and print-ready art, supplied by the company and modified as needed to provide an intuitive navigational format.

Developed all navigation images used by the web site utilizing the company’s logo and a different color for each successive web page, symbolizing the different facets of health compared with the different color facets of light when seen through a prism.

Developed code in JavaScript for roll-over effects of navigation images.

Developed a web-based seminar-sign-up form using Perl.

Developed a web-based contact form using Perl.

View the portfolio version of this web site

Designed and developed an object-oriented application using C++ (under the Metrowerks CodeWarrior IDE), PowerPlant class libraries, and the ColorSync operating system toolbox, to allow testing of eye patients using a variety of stimuli mapped onto computer monitors, featuring:

The ability to choose one of the many monitors connected to the system using a graphical interface very similar to what is available in the Montiors control panel

The changing of the color depth of the monitor to the resolution chosen by the user

The parsing of a color calibration table using a finite state machine syntax checker

Calculation windows to allow a user to convert between the color spaces of monitors, such as RGB, to the color spaces of the CIE standards, such as CIE XYZ, CIE Yxy, and the Judd normalizations of these, and the color spaces recognized by the human eye, such as LMS and lsy

Developed a stimulus testing C++ class that can be used by future developers to add in a modular way new tests with little extra coding. The class takes care of the fundamentals of calling the correct logic in preparing a subject for the coming stimulus, asking for parameters for a test, producing the stimulus on the monitor, reporting feedback to a disk file and printed output, and providing final output of the results of the test