Trusted Partner

As a Trusted Partner for sustainable test rig solutions, we not only install new systems for our customers, but also take care of all the service activities required for the smooth operation of a test rig. We also take on the servicing of systems not supplied by RENK, including a wide range of modernisation measures. Because a sensible extension of the service life of existing systems is climate-friendly and cost-saving.

The Instytut Kolejnictwa is the most renowned Polish research organisation operating in the field of rail transport. The research institute, which has been operating for 70 years, has its own research track and numerous facilities required for research and scientific work in the field of rail transport. The Instytut Kolejnictwa is also recognised by the Polish Centre for Accreditation as a product certification body and a calibration body. To test the friction properties of brake components, the Rolling Stock Testing Laboratory attached to the institute has an aged flywheel brake dynamometer, which was modernised by RENK Test System GmbH (RTS) and adapted to today's testing standards.

In order to guarantee the future viability of its range of tasks, the Instytut Kolejnictwa decided in favour of a complete electrical/digital modernisation of the test rig built in 1997. While the mechanical components of such test rigs are often still in an acceptable condition decades later with appropriate maintenance, the electrical and electronic assemblies are no longer up to today's standards and pose a high risk to the reliable operation of the test rig due to a lack of spare parts.

The complete modernisation of the flywheel brake dynamometer was carried out by RENK on a turnkey basis.

The control and monitoring system is responsible for monitoring the operation of all components on the test bench and the correct running of the correspondingly designed test programmes.

Using RDDS, these can be automated and monitored centrally. If a fault occurs in a component, the entire test rig reacts correctly and reliably. The complete digitalisation of the test process also enables automated processes in the interaction with the test rig. Automatic monitoring reduces the risk of operating errors and also enables autonomous operation of the test rig.

On the modernised flywheel brake dynamometer, the RDDS system mainly controls and monitors the following system components:

Drive motor

flywheel masses

brake cylinder

Air duct

Wet test device

Using RDDS, the Rolling Stock Testing Laboratory now also has completely new options for designing test programmes.

The engineering of test runs can be carried out independently of the test rig in order to save valuable test rig time. The multi-client and multi-user functionalities available in RDDS enable the parameterisation of new brake tests in the database while the test rig is still busy processing another brake test. This preliminary work can be carried out at any designated workstations inside or outside the test rig. External engineering is an important component for maximising test rig availability.

Automatic programmes in RDDS offer a comprehensive option for creating automatic test sequences. The graphical editor makes it easy to convert manual tests into automated sequences and thus achieve reproducible results.

For optimum utilisation of the brake dynamometer, different test specimen types with associated test programmes can be stored in RDDS and loaded as required.

The complete digitalisation of the test rig and the test run enables RDDS to reliably monitor and diagnose all critical components and processes centrally. In the event of a fault in a subsystem, the entire test bench reacts correctly and the predefined safety routines are initiated automatically. The current system status is displayed to the test rig operator at all times. In the event of an emergency shutdown, RDDS uses the post-mortem recorder to automatically provide the previous and subsequent measured values at the time of the fault for fault analysis.

In combination with the monitoring safety controller, long-duration test runs with the flywheel mass brake dynamometer can now also be carried out autonomously and safely at night or on Sundays and public holidays (24/7)