Limelight Networks has acquired Clickability, a software-as-a-service (SaaS) provider.

The deal includes both Limelight Networks common stock and cash. It was valued at about $10 million.

Through Clickability, content can be managed and published, visitors can be tracked; and branding can be implemented, according to a story carried on TechZone360.

"Clickability is a perfect complement to our Limelight Video Platform business, where we are seeing strong traction and where revenue has doubled since we acquired it six months ago,” Jeff Lunsford, chairman and CEO, Limelight Networks, said in a company press release.

“Traditional IT services and software applications are migrating into the cloud for better scale, higher performance, and global reach. With the addition of web content management, Limelight can now help customers capitalize on this important trend by handling the complete website lifecycle in the cloud, including publishing workflow, website hosting, site acceleration, video publishing, mobile and tablet distribution, and effective monetization utilizing closed-loop marketing," he adds.

In addition, the acquisition extends “Limelight's total addressable market in cloud-based services by $1 billion, and the web content management segment is expected by Gartner to grow to $1.7 billion by 2014,” according to Lunsford.

Clickability's web content management and web marketing tools complement the “Limelight video platform, site acceleration, mobility, and EyeWonder advertising services,” according to the press release.

"In joining Limelight, we will be able to accelerate our growth and product innovation cycle, as well as have additional resources and global cloud computing capacity to scale with our growing customer base," Jeff Freund, CEO, Clickability, said in the press release.

Clickability was founded in 1999 and is headquartered in San Francisco.

More than 1,800 customers use Limelight's software services.

The news about the deal follows several other SaaS acquisitions in the last year, including EyeWonder and Delve Networks, reports The Hosting News.

Ed Silverstein is a TechZone360 contributor. To read more of his articles, please visit his columnist page.

Edited by Chris DiMarco