On Demand Web Content Management Provider Extends Market Leadership with Significant Customer Win, Unprecedented Growth, and Three Executive Additions to Software Association Council Board

SAN FRANCISCO, May 20 /PRNewswire/ — Clickability, Inc., the global leader in on demand Web Content Management (WCM), today announced a multi-year agreement with Journal Communications, Inc. (NYSE:JRN) , one of the nation’s most influential media companies, for development, hosting, and support of Journal’s online enterprises. When complete, this implementation will represent one of the world’s largest Software as a Service (SaaS) deployments to date.

Further underscoring the company’s momentum, Clickability executives are joining three Executive Council Boards of the Software and Information Industry Association (SIIA). Earlier this month, Clickability also saw the successful conclusion of its third annual User Conference, where the company hosted more than 200 attendees, a 250 percent increase over last year’s event.

These achievements follow the recent launch of the Clickability On Demand Web Content Management Platform — the only end-to-end WCM solution that combines implementation, software, support, and innovation as a service to enable non-technical users to create, manage, publish, deliver, measure, and adapt Web sites easily and efficiently.

“Our deal with Journal Communications further highlights Clickability’s position as the dominant leader in enterprise Web Content Management for media companies,” stated John Girard, chief executive officer of Clickability. “This role has resulted in significant growth, with the company continuing to see success on all fronts. We are excited to partner with Broadcast Interactive Media to execute on our agreement with Journal Communications and work with them to link up local newspapers and broadcasters in a single metro market. It will be an industry first and has the potential to serve as the model for all local news going forward.”

Journal Communications (http://www.jc.com/) is a Milwaukee-based, diversified media company with operations in publishing, radio and television broadcasting, interactive media and printing services. It publishes the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, which serves as the only major daily newspaper for the Milwaukee metropolitan area, and 52 community newspapers in Wisconsin and Florida. Journal Communications owns and operates 35 radio stations and 11 television stations in 12 states and operates an additional television station under a local marketing agreement. The company’s interactive media assets include 121 online enterprises, including sites associated with its daily and community newspapers and television and radio stations.

Under the new agreement, Clickability will develop, host, and provide the content management system for all of Journal Communications’ media and niche portal websites. For Journal’s sites associated with its Milwaukee television and radio stations, Clickability will partner with Broadcast Interactive Media (BIM) to provide these services. BIM uses Clickability as the content management system for its broadcast clients’ sites.

Based in New York City and Madison, Wisconsin, Broadcast Interactive Media (http://www.broadcast-interactive.com/) is a leading provider of locally-focused Web solutions for more than 120 television and radio broadcast station Web sites. Offerings include a comprehensive suite of revenue-generating programs and national sales support, video streaming, content feeds and technology development.

“Our goal at Journal is to have a common platform for all of our online media publishing, making it easy to share news content and feeds across multiple brands and sites,” said Carl Gardner, vice president, Digital Media for Journal Communications. “Clickability’s technology is better, faster and easier to use. Their partnership with Broadcast Interactive Media adds broadcast-specific value to the mix, which is very important to us as a cross-media company. We’re excited to roll the new platform out and give an improved experience to our users and advertisers.”

Other Key Clickability Highlights

In addition to securing this major deal with Journal Communications, the company is seeing dramatic success with its on demand Web Content Management platform, including:

* Clickability interactive tools are on approximately one billion pages

per month.

* Clickability interactive tools are used nearly 7.5 million times per

month.

* Clickability’s on demand WCM platform is serving 250 million pages per

month.

* Clickability is approaching 5 million digital assets under management.

* In April alone, Clickability’s customers collectively added more than

175,000 content items.

Furthering the company’s momentum in the software industry, three of the company’s executives have been selected to participate in three councils of the Software Division of SIIA, a principal trade association for the software and digital content industry. More specifically, the SIIA Software Division provides a forum for companies developing the applications, services, infrastructure and tools that are driving the software and services industry forward. Through the division, executives of top companies meet to brainstorm, collaborate and discuss the industry’s latest challenges. Respectively, founder and CEO John Girard, founder and CTO Jeff Freund, and Vice President of Marketing Robert Carroll hold positions on the SIIA Corporate Strategy, Research and Development, and Marketing Executive Councils.

About Clickability, Inc.

Clickability(TM) is the global leader in on demand Web Content Management (WCM), with the largest single Software as a Service (SaaS) deployment in the world. The Clickability platform combines SaaS and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) to support the complete content lifecycle. It enables businesses of all sizes to manage their marketing and media solutions more effectively in “the cloud.” Enterprise customers such as Amcor, Cantor Fitzgerald and the Hoover Institution, as well as media and entertainment leaders such as CNN, Philadelphia Inquirer, Smithsonian.com, Time, the Tribeca Film Festival, and the Wall Street Journal, rely on Clickability to reduce costs, increase revenues, build global brands, and foster stronger customer relationships. Clickability’s hosted, multi-tenant delivery model also ensures organizations mitigate their environmental impact by maximizing energy efficiency and minimizing waste. Founded in 1999, privately held Clickability is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in New York and London. Due to its legendary customer service, innovative technology, and strategic partnerships, the company is a finalist for the Software and Information Industry Association’s 2008 CODiE Award for best content management solution. More information is available by calling 866-276-4580 or visiting http://www.clickability.com/.

(C)2008 Clickability, Inc. Clickability is a trademark of Clickability, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. Other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Information is subject to change without notice. All rights reserved.

First Call Analyst:

FCMN Contact:

Source: Clickability, Inc.

CONTACT: Media, Shira Frantzich of Sterling Communications for

Clickability, +1-408-884-5156, sfrantzich@sterlingpr.com