Lilian Cananea Velez-Clímaco was a Filipina film actress and singer. Her 1948 murder by fellow actor Narding Anzures scandalized the post-war Philippines.

Lilian Velez was born on March 3, 1924, in Cebu City, Central Visayas, Philippines. Her birth geographical coordinates are 10° 19’ 0” North latitude and 123° 53’ 27” East longitude. Lilian Velez passed away at the age of 24 in 1948.

Astrologically, Lilian Velez falls under the Sun sign of Pisces, with Gemini as her Ascendant, Aquarius as her Moon sign, and Taurus as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Pisces Moon Aquarius Ascendant Gemini Midheaven Pisces Mercury Aquarius Venus Aries Mars Sagittarius Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Scorpio Uranus Pisces Neptune Leo Pluto Cancer Ceres Pisces Chiron Aries Eros Scorpio Hygiea Aries Juno Libra Pallas Aquarius Vesta Capricorn Black Moon Lilith Taurus North Node Virgo South Node Pisces Part of Fortune Taurus Vertex Libra

Sunin Pisces12° 19’ 29”

The Sun in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a sensitive and mystical healer. You are aligned with your subconscious wisdom and can be […] Read more »

Moonin Aquarius11° 12’ 5”

The Moon in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you a humanitarian with instincts related to fairness and equality. You are intuitively attracted to group […] Read more »

Ascendantin Gemini19° 52’ 49”

Gemini Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your ideas. You are talkative and open up quickly about your ideas. You can be […] Read more »

Midheavenin Pisces13° 13’ 49”

Pisces Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and intuitive in your career path. You are emotional and can be sensitive to other people’s […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aquarius26° 34’ 22”

Is Mercury in Aquarius good or bad? Mercury in Aquarius is an intense placement that enhances your intuition and intellect. The Aquarius Mercury placement brings […] Read more »

Venusin Aries22° 37’ 17”

Aries Venus in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your desires. You are assertive and willing to pursue your dreams. You seek satisfaction by […] Read more »

Marsin Sagittarius27° 42’ 36”

Sagittarius Mars in the Natal Chart makes you focused and expressive. You can be spiritual and philosophical. You are eager to follow your ideals and […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius18° 9’ 52”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio1° 57’ 12”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Pisces17° 12’ 42”

Pisces Uranus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement indicating people born at this time are on a Karmic mission to bring breakthroughs in […] Read more »

Neptunein Leo18° 22’ 34”

Leo Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to bring healing and compassion to others. You are artistic and passionate about your dreams. You […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer10° 19’ 39”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Pisces16° 5’ 42”

Ceres in Pisces in the Natal Chart indicates a loving and mystical generation. You are part of a cohort that follows your ideals and can […] Read more »

Chironin Aries18° 19’ 47”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Scorpio4° 28’ 50”

Eros in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and overwhelming. You are passionate and dramatic as you pursue your sexual desires. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Aries2° 19’ 48”

Hygiea in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about health and wellness. You are health-conscious and have an active, rigorous routine that maintains […] Read more »

Junoin Libra15° 33’ 40”

Juno in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for romance and marriage. You are eager to settle down with your partner and […] Read more »

Pallasin Aquarius23° 24’ 30”

Pallas in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you explosive and creative. You can be eager to pursue your futuristic vision and motivated by your […] Read more »

Vestain Capricorn25° 14’ 35”

Capricorn Vesta in the Natal Chart makes you predictable and consistent. You are old-fashioned and look to the past for comfort and fulfillment. Work brings […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus27° 44’ 56”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

North Nodein Virgo1° 43’ 19”

Virgo North Node in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for research and analysis. You are methodical and use your gifts to set a […] Read more »

South Nodein Pisces1° 43’ 19”

Pisces South Node in the Natal Chart makes you mystical and intuitive. You can be generous and use your instincts to heal others. You are […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Taurus18° 45’ 25”

Taurus Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you genuine and trusting. You are transparent and can be reliable and patient. You are grounded […] Read more »

Vertexin Libra21° 37’ 58”

Libra Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intelligent and friendly. You are charming and can easily manifest love and romance. You can be peaceful […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Eighth House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Seventh House Jupiter Sixth House Saturn Fifth House Uranus Tenth House Neptune Third House Pluto First House Ceres Tenth House Chiron Eleventh House Eros Fifth House Hygiea Tenth House Juno Fourth House Pallas Ninth House Vesta Eighth House Black Moon Lilith Twelfth House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Fifth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 27 major aspects, alongside 13 minor aspects, as well as 3 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Trine Neptune Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Quincunx Pluto Mercury Sextile Mars Jupiter Square Uranus Uranus Quincunx Neptune Sun Trine Pluto Jupiter Opposite Ascendant Neptune Sextile Ascendant Venus Sextile Ascendant Uranus Square Ascendant Pluto Trine Midheaven Uranus Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Sextile Venus Venus Trine Jupiter Venus Trine Neptune Mars Sextile Saturn Sun Conjunct Uranus Jupiter Square Midheaven Mercury Trine Saturn Venus Trine Mars Sun Square Jupiter Moon Opposite Neptune Ascendant Square Midheaven Mercury Trine Ascendant Uranus Trine Pluto Mars Opposite Ascendant

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Lilian Velez’s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Plutoorb: 1°

Someone with the Moon quincunx Pluto in a Natal Chart will likely be secretive, emotionally intense, and self-destructive. They typically have inner thoughts and feelings […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Marsorb: 1°

Mercury sextile Mars in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person is confident, passionate, and outspoken. Mars’s direct and assertive nature works well with […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 1°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Sun Trine Plutoorb: 2°

The Sun trine Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you self-assured and intense. You have a magnetic personality and exude charm. You may be mysterious […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Ascendantorb: 2°

Jupiter opposite the Ascendant in a chart can create growth opportunities, but only through acknowledging any inauthentic aspects of the Ascendant. Someone needs to discover […] Read more »

Uranus Conjunct Midheavenorb: 4°

Uranus conjuncts the Midheaven in a chart, which can give a person an exciting and free-spirited personality. They do not conform, which can be liberating […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 4°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Mars Sextile Saturnorb: 4°

Mars sextile Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is patient and willing to wait for the things they want, but also knows […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Uranusorb: 5°

The Sun conjunct Uranus in your Natal Chart impacts your personality in unusual ways. You can be innovative and creative. You are known for being […] Read more »

Mercury Trine Saturnorb: 5°

Mercury trine Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is reliable, expressive, and diligent. They are ambitious, and they’re able to easily communicate […] Read more »

Sun Square Jupiterorb: 6°

The Sun square Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you stifle your unique and independent nature. You crave freedom, but you may be grandiose. You […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Neptuneorb: 7°

When the Moon is opposite Neptune in a Natal Chart, this can cause a person to be completely confused and entirely unaware of themselves. They […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Ascendantorb: 8°

Mars opposite the Ascendant in a chart can result in impulsive, aggressive behavior and confrontations. Someone might project their inner issues onto others or find […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Jupiter Trine Chiron Saturn Quincunx Hygiea Saturn Sextile North Node Saturn Trine South Node Neptune Trine Chiron Neptune Square Part of Fortune Mercury Square Black Moon Lilith Venus Sextile Pallas Venus Opposite Vertex Jupiter Quincunx Part of Fortune Uranus Conjunct Ceres Ascendant Trine Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Lilian Velez’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilithorb: 0°

Mars quincunx Black Moon Lilith in a chart indicates that Mars’ passion and assertiveness are not aligned with Black Moon Lilith’s desire for freedom, expression, […] Read more »

Uranus Conjunct Ceresorb: 1°

Uranus conjunct Ceres in a chart creates a strong connection between the unconventional and outspoken nature of Uranus and Ceres’ forms of self-care and providing […] Read more »

Ascendant Trine Vertexorb: 2°

The Ascendant trine the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you fortunate and open to exploring your purpose. You are in the right place at […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Quincunx Juno Hygiea Quincunx North Node Pallas Trine Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Lilian Velez’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.