Who Is Jill Scott Child Daddy? Reply. Jill Scott child daddy is Lil John Roberts. John is a performer, maker, and Jazz drummer.

Born on April 4, 1972, as Jill Heather Scott, the 51-year-old Philadelphia local is a very much respected vocalist musician. Beside music, she likewise does displaying, and acting and is likewise a writer.

Scott has been in the music business beginning around 1999. Endorsed with the Atlantic Recording Partnership, Jill is principally known for her R&B and Soul tunes. She has five studio collections, four gathering collections, and two live collections in her discography.

Jill has a strong web-based entertainment presence with 2.8 million devotees on Instagram, 4.4 million on Facebook, and 368K endorsers on her authority YouTube channel.

She likewise has a significant arrive at on music streaming stages with 1,676,287 supporters and 1,256,712 month to month audience members on Spotify. Jill additionally has 156,344 fans on Deezer.

Jill Scott family follows its underlying foundations to the Jola or Diola ethnic gathering of Guinea-Bissau from her mom’s side. She experienced childhood in North Philadelphia.

Scott grew up with her mom and grandma. Raised by a single parent, Joyce Scott, Jill was the lone kid in her loved ones. Joyce used to take her to various shows, ballet performances, and clubs since she was exceptionally youthful.

Her mother and grandmom raised her as a Jehovah’s Observer. Growing up, the vocalist reviews her life as a youngster being an exceptionally cheerful one and cases to be especially cherished.

In a meeting with Steve Harvey, Jill focused on her grandma Cajolery Danage. She ascribes her prosperity to the resilient ladies in her day to day existence and guaranteed that it was her grandma who showed her how to be solid and strong consistently.

Despite the fact that we don’t be aware exhaustively who Jill’s dad was, In one more meeting with Jemele Slope, she opened up that she experienced childhood in a family that had a touch of brutality connected to it.

Jill referenced that her dad was genuinely vicious to her mother, which makes sense of why her folks isolated and she experienced childhood in a solitary parent family. Jill Scott spouse Lyzel Williams was in a conjugal relationship with the well known R&B star from 2001 to 2007. Jill is at present single.

Beside Lyzel, the artist was likewise momentarily hitched to another man named Mike Dobson. Jill and Lyzel Williams were hitched for quite a long time until they separated in 2007. The two had been seeing someone seven years before they marry.

Jill and Lyzel’s wedding service was held in a confidential function in Hawaii. She had no posterity with her most memorable spouse.

Lil John Roberts was the drummer for Jill Scott. They were together from 2007 until 2009. During one of her shows in New York on June 20, 2008, at Carnegie Corridor, she and Lil John shared a long kiss in front of an audience. This was trailed by the disclosure that the couple was locked in.

Jill imparts a child to her now-previous accomplice. The two isolated on June 23, 2009.

Jill Scott and her ex Mike Dobson secured the bunch on June 2016 in Tennessee in a mysterious service. The couple isolated on September 5, 2017.

Their marriage endured just a brief time in the wake of being seeing someone six years earlier. Scott reached out to Mike Dobson in 2010, after she had said a final farewell to her previous sweetheart and the dad of her youngster, Lil John.

They dated for quite some time before they had their commitment to 2014. Scott and Dobson have no kids from their marriage and are currently isolated forever.

Does Jill Scott Have Any Children? Jill Scott has one youngster Jett Hamilton Roberts whom she imparts to her previous accomplice Lil John Roberts. Jill and John co-parent their youngster together.

Notwithstanding being in a few connections, her youngster from her previous drummer during their short two-year relationship is her main posterity.

Jett Hamilton Roberts Jill child Jett Hamilton was born on April 20, 2009. He will before long praise his fourteenth birthday celebration in the not so distant future.

Jett lives with his mother in their home in Nashville, Tennessee. The mother-child pair shares an exceptionally unique bond. In a meeting with Jemele Slope, Scott referenced that she shows her child that nobody is above them and nobody underneath them. Thus, she maintains that her child should be deferential to all.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tcLGrqCdnaSeuqZ6wqikaKiVpL2tsY6wn6hlmah6q7XLpWSsm5%2BpwW6uwJuwZpyRmbG6ecuio2ain527br7Om5yrrKNig3KCk21wZ6Ckork%3D