Who Is Jill Scott Child Daddy? Reply. Jill Scott baby daddy is Lil John Roberts. John is a performer, maker, and Jazz drummer.

Born on April 4, 1972, as Jill Heather Scott, the 51-year-old Philadelphia native is an excessively much respected vocalist musician. Beside track, she likewise does displaying, and acting and is likewise a author.

Scott has been within the track trade beginning around 1999. Endorsed with the Atlantic Recording Partnership, Jill is basically identified for her R&B and Soul tunes. She has five studio collections, four accumulating collections, and two are living collections in her discography.

Jill has a powerful web-based entertainment presence with 2.8 million devotees on Instagram, 4.4 million on Facebook, and 368K endorsers on her authority YouTube channel.

She likewise has a significant arrive at on music streaming stages with 1,676,287 supporters and 1,256,712 month to month audience individuals on Spotify. Jill moreover has 156,344 lovers on Deezer.

Jill Scott family follows its underlying foundations to the Jola or Diola ethnic collecting of Guinea-Bissau from her mom’s aspect. She skilled youth in North Philadelphia.

Scott grew up along with her mom and grandma. Raised through a single mother or father, Joyce Scott, Jill was the lone child in her family members. Joyce used to take her to various presentations, ballet performances, and golf equipment since she was exceptionally younger.

Her mom and grandmom raised her as a Jehovah’s Observer. Growing up, the vocalist evaluations her lifestyles as a teenager being an exceptionally cheerful one and cases to be particularly loved.

In a gathering with Steve Harvey, Jill fascinated by her grandma Cajolery Danage. She ascribes her prosperity to the resilient ladies in her daily existence and guaranteed that it was once her grandma who showed her be solid and strong consistently.

Despite the fact that we don’t be aware exhaustively who Jill’s dad used to be, In one more assembly with Jemele Slope, she unfolded that she skilled youth in a circle of relatives that had a marginally of brutality connected to it.

Jill referenced that her dad used to be truly vicious to her mother, which makes sense of why her other people remoted and he or she experienced childhood in a solitary parent circle of relatives. Jill Scott partner Lyzel Williams was once in a conjugal dating with the well-known R&B big name from 2001 to 2007. Jill is at the moment single.

Beside Lyzel, the artist used to be likewise momentarily hitched to some other guy named Mike Dobson. Jill and Lyzel Williams were hitched for moderately a very long time until they separated in 2007. The two have been seeing any individual seven years ahead of they marry.

Jill and Lyzel’s wedding ceremony provider was held in a confidential function in Hawaii. She had no posterity with her maximum memorable partner.

Lil John Roberts used to be the drummer for Jill Scott. They had been in combination from 2007 until 2009. During certainly one of her shows in New York on June 20, 2008, at Carnegie Corridor, she and Lil John shared a long kiss in entrance of an target audience. This was once trailed by way of the disclosure that the couple was once locked in.

Jill imparts a kid to her now-previous companion. The two remoted on June 23, 2009.

Jill Scott and her ex Mike Dobson secured the bunch on June 2016 in Tennessee in a mysterious provider. The couple isolated on September 5, 2017.

Their marriage persevered only a brief time within the wake of being seeing someone six years previous. Scott reached out to Mike Dobson in 2010, after she had mentioned a last farewell to her previous sweetheart and the dad of her teenager, Lil John.

They dated for rather some time prior to that they had their dedication to 2014. Scott and Dobson haven't any kids from their marriage and are recently remoted without end.

Does Jill Scott Have Any Children? Jill Scott has one teenager Jett Hamilton Roberts whom she imparts to her preceding accomplice Lil John Roberts. Jill and John co-parent their teen together.

Notwithstanding being in a couple of connections, her teenager from her preceding drummer right through their short two-year courting is her main posterity.

Jett Hamilton Roberts Jill little one Jett Hamilton used to be born on April 20, 2009. He will earlier than long praise his fourteenth birthday celebration in the no longer so distant future.

Jett lives along with his mom of their home in Nashville, Tennessee. The mother-child pair shares an exceptionally unique bond. In a gathering with Jemele Slope, Scott referenced that she presentations her child that nobody is above them and no person underneath them. Thus, she maintains that her youngster should be deferential to all.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tcLGrqCdnaSeuqZ6wqikaKiVpL2tsY6wn6hlmah6q7XLpWSsm5%2BpwW6uwJuwZpyRmbG6ecuio2ain527br7Om5yrrKNig3KCk21wZ6Ckork%3D