The octopus in a box—Marine stations, regeneration and cephalopods

Only 3 years after Steenstrup’s plea, the first European marine station was founded, at Concarneau (in 1859), on the Atlantic coast of France (Caullery, 1950). By 1900, there were more than sixty stations throughout the world (Dayrat, 2016), arguably an ideal infrastructure for pursuing Steenstrup’s programme. By the end of the XIX century, however, Steenstrup’s comparative-morphological approach had been superseded by a decidedly experimental one, with marine stations such as those of Naples (Italy) and Woods Hole (United States) playing a central role in the shift (Allen, 1975). On the one hand, regeneration became ever more firmly entrenched in a developmental framework, which entailed a focus on general “molecular” mechanisms (in animals, plants, and even crystals. Cf. Morgan, 1901) and a preference for simpler models, like the sea urchin embryo or the starfish, in addition to the traditional ones (e.g. salamanders and hydras; cf. Churchill, 1991). On the other hand, seashore laboratories contributed to the growing popularity of cephalopods mostly as physiological models, thanks to a level of organisation comparable to that of vertebrates (especially the closed circulatory system, unique among invertebrates, the complex nervous system, etc. Cf. Steiner, 1898), their tolerance to surgery and the remarkable viability of the explanted organs (Grimpe, 1928). In 1909, Bauer announced that “inkfish, and especially octopodes [were] about to rival frogs and rabbits” as physiological models (Bauer, 1909: p. 150). Just 2 years before, in his review of regeneration in the animal kingdom, Hans Przibram had remarked that knowledge of regeneration in cephalopods was limited to observational evidence, mentioning only Riggenbach’s, 1901 work on autotomy in O. defilippii (accepted name Macrotritopus defilippi Vérany, 1851) (Riggenbach, 1901) as the only experience with a bearing on the problem, under controlled conditions (Przibram, 1909: p. 130). It would indeed take the best part of a decade for a young scholar, by the name of Mathilde Margarethe Lange to devise the first systematic investigation of cephalopod regeneration in “standardised” conditions.

Lange was especially qualified for the task. Since 1910, she had read Zoology at Leipzig, Freiburg i. B, and Jena, attending the courses of the teuthologists Carl Chun (her first doctoral advisor), and Georg Grimpe. At Zurich, where she moved in 1917, she was supervised by Karl Hescheler, and attended the lectures of Adolf Naef, the authority in cephalopod systematics.

Lange experimented on live O. vulgaris, Eledone moschata and Sepia officinalis, at the Naples Zoological Station (in 1914), and the Musée Océanographique of Monaco (in 1915), providing macro- and microscopical description of all the stages of the process (cicatrisation, de- and regeneration), drawing comparisons between regeneration and embryonic development in cephalopods, and with the current results in invertebrates and vertebrates.

Cytological investigation yielded challenging results, especially as regarded the crucial mechanism of blastema formation. Since the 1880s, several competing theories of blastema formation had been proposed (Liversage, 1991). The prevailing one, named “epimorphosis” by Morgan (1901), had it derive from the dedifferentiation of neurones and muscle cells. These de-differentiated cells constituted the initial mass of the blastema, divided mitotically and re-differentiated returning to their original identity. What Lange observed in the octopus was instead a “double blastema”, as she named it. The “primary blastema” appeared to derive from the leucocytes carried by the blood vessels to the site of injury, where they phagocytised the cellular debris and formed the protective scar by agglutination (as cephalopod blood does not contain fibrin). After the regenerating skin had covered the site, the leucocytes appeared to transform, perhaps directly, into fibrocytes, the units of connective tissue. Lange’s “secondary blastema” (what we would today regard as the proper one) only began to appear after two or more days, displacing the primary without mixing with it.

Hescheler, Lange’s supervisor, was especially critical of her hypothesis of a direct transformation of one cellular type into another, as he made clear in his assessment of the dissertation 1 . The US zoologist, however, was unshaken by this opposition and concluded that the dermal connective constituted an exception to the accepted view that like tissues derive from like precursors.

As the differentiation process was concerned, Lange remarked how it was directly dependent on the contact with the regrowing tip of central axons, thus confirming the regulative role of nerves in regeneration, another hotly debated topic at the time (cf. Reiß, 2022).

By the time her dissertation appeared on the Journal of Experimental Zoology, Lange had moved back for good to the United States, where she made a career as Professor of Biology at Wheaton College (a women’s college in Massachusetts. McCoy, 2016, 139ff). She returned to Naples only once (November 1927-May 1928, at the American Women’s Table), to pursue further research on cephalopods, but no information is available either at the Zoological Station Archive, nor at Wheaton College about the activities she conducted during this visit 2 .

Surely, her first, ground-breaking stint had left open fronts. She had not followed the regeneration of suckers, passingly mentioned that of the eye lens, and only just raised the possibility of a different regeneration mechanism for the tip of the arm, where she had observed a permanent reservoir of undifferentiated embryonic cells. Finally, she had not really pursued a comparison between octopods and decapods, despite the general title of her dissertation (referring to the “arms of cephalopods”). Cuttlefish, Lange admitted, had proven too difficult to keep long enough. Nevertheless, she reported two intriguing cases of “compensatory regulation”, shown to her by Adolf Naef at Naples.

By the time Lange visited Naples for the first time, the Swiss zoologist Adolf Naef (1883-1949) was already well-known in the Station’s community, where he had been working since 1910 on a monograph on cephalopods for the series Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel.

To Naef, the comparative study of the anatomy and embryology of a whole class afforded the possibility of an epistemological and methodological reassessment of morphological science, against two extremes: Haeckel’s phylogenetic morphology, with its emphasis on the recapitulation of developmental stages, and the excessive centrality of the phenotype and proximal causes preached by developmental mechanics (cf. Breidbach, 2003; Rieppel et al., 2013).

The debate between these two opposite positions had developed around the proper method for identifying homologies among organisms, and the very use of homology as a criterion in classification (cf. Laubichler, 2000). Since the early 1900s, the phenomenon of regeneration had taken centre stage in this debate. In a 1902 experiment, Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold had extirpated the eye lens of a salamander embryo, and watched it regenerate completely, but from a different layer of tissue than its original precursor. This result disproved Haeckel’s theory of the Gastraea, a gastrula-like common progenitor of all animal forms (cf. Hoßfeld and Olsson, 2005). To Spemann, it also had wider consequences. If, as he argued in a later theoretical paper (Spemann, 1915), the regenerated lens had to be considered homologous to the extirpated one, then the very concept of homology had to be revised, and risked to lose most of its meaning. The problem was not only of explanatory frameworks, but also of methodology and approach: once accepted that ectopic regeneration was not an aberration, but true regeneration, then the proper way of elucidating the links between phylogeny and development was the study of the local conditions and mechanical processes that determined the phenomenon. This represented a complete reversal of Haeckel’s view on the relations between phylogeny and ontogeny, in which the latter became the basis for explaining the former. In methodological terms, this entailed the superiority of the experimental analysis of the mechanisms of development, over the systematic comparison of developmental stages.

Naef took an intermediate stand. On the one hand, he acknowledged the importance of Entwicklungsmechanik to morphology, and the criticism of Haeckel’s dogmatism. On the other hand, he found Spemann’s devaluation of homology too rush a conclusion to be drawn from a single experiment. To Naef, only a critical combination of all three approaches (comparative anatomy, plus descriptive and experimental embryology) could conclusively tell if regenerates of the kind observed by Spemann and Mangold were actually aberrations, or true homologies. The class Cephalopoda was of the right size for such an endeavour: large enough to allow empirical definition of homologies, but also small enough to be worked out by a single researcher, on the basis of a well-defined epistemic strategy. Comparative study of cephalopods held promise of yielding general concept of “type” and “typical stages” of development, based on the comparison between adult forms, to which he devoted the first volume of his work (Naef, 1972 [1921-1923]), and of developmental series of the greatest possible number of species (object of the second volume. Naef, 2000 [1928]: p. 342). Naef (1972) [1921-1923] Naef framed the phenomenon of regeneration as one element of a complex epistemological edifice, with the purpose of assessing the proper hierarchy of the different perspectives on morphology. To him, a science of form could only be founded on a comparative outlook, and the generalisation of results from single experiments, was misleading (Naef, 2000 [1928]: p. 342). Far from having consigned the problem of homology to the dustbin of history, experimental embryologists had to accept that an appropriate grasp on developmental mechanisms rested on a proper assessment of the relation between local, mechanical forces and typical, inherited developmental mechanisms (Naef, 2000 [1928]: p. 343). The brief experimental coda, attached to his great systematic effort, was meant to show just how this could be done.

In the succinct section two of the second volume (On Disturbed and Abnormal Morphogenesis and Its Relation to Normal Development), Naef built the case for cephalopods as a unifying model for morphology, by providing some hints on their proper use in the laboratory. The section opened with regeneration of the outer organs, followed by two parts on abnormal development (naturally occurring and experimentally induced). Naef noted the ubiquity of regeneration within the class (including, most clearly, arms and tentacles of decapods), the relative ease of obtaining it experimentally (Naef, 2000 [1928]: p. 343), and the possibility of contrasting several species-specific patterns of regeneration. He mentioned autotomy in O. defilippii (M. defilippi), as well as the interesting case of the loss of one dorsal arm in the argonaut, in which the remaining arm takes over the function of generation and repair of the shell. As Steenstrup had done before, Naef also warned of the possible misleading effect of arm regeneration on the identification of freshly caught specimens (p. 344).

If Naef’s coverage of regeneration in octopods was an orderly summary of the state of knowledge, the part on decapods offered new, first-hand observations, which he thought had potential for opening a few fronts of research. He noted that, apart from arms and tentacles, also small parts of the fin, arm membranes, eyelids and mantle regenerated easily, and that the phenomenon was easily controllable in the laboratory. Abnormal regenerates (heteromorphoses) were also often encountered in decapods, and in this connection Naef provided a lengthy description of the two extraordinary specimens mentioned by Lange in 1920. Probably because of the special position of the injuries, very close to the base of the arm, and to the buccal lappets, both specimens presented some mechanism of compensation (the “compensatory regulation” mentioned by Lange): the injured arms had not regrown, but in their stead, the corresponding buccal lappets had grown, slightly changed their position, fused with the injured stumps and started to develop suckers. The result was an intermediate condition between prehensile and buccal arms, confirmed by histological examination of their muscular connections. To Naef, the value of these exceptional instances was epistemic, in the first place. Sound knowledge of “the animal studied or developmental stage in all its details and […] multiple relationships with other members of the greater framework of order” (Naef, 2000 [1928]: p. 343), of the kind his monumental work had provided, allowed to determine whether these were cases of atavistic regeneration, or the expression of a “normally existing tendency” (p. 346). A firm experimental science of the mechanisms of adaptation, therefore, was critically dependent on the distinction between typical and atypical phenomena, which could only be rooted in comparison.

Naef intended to publish a more detailed study on the two cuttlefish specimens, but this promise, to the best of our knowledge, remained unfulfilled. He was never to see the Naples Station again, after his last 10-month visit in 1926 to complete the volume, and never to return to cephalopods (cf. Boletzky, 1999; Rieppel et al., 2013).

In their diversity, Lange and Naef’s takes on cephalopods as models for regeneration studies nicely complement each other. The former broke the ground for an experimental study and mechanistic interpretation of appendage regeneration in a so-far neglected animal class. The latter tried to reconcile two apparently opposing epistemic stands, by fashioning cephalopods as research models allowing the convergence of the comparative-anatomical and experimental-physiological approaches to morphology. Yet, both conspicuously failed to make any impact on contemporary regeneration research.

Lange’s dissertation was published in 1920, in the Journal of Experimental Zoology, which counted among its editors the US authorities on regeneration: Ross G. Harrison, Jacques Loeb, and Thomas H. Morgan. None of them seemed to take notice, however, for their way of framing regeneration was different. Although all of them researched on a variety of organisms, they did so mostly on account of the experimental advantages these offered towards a general physico-chemical, or at least mechanistic interpretation, rather than in a traditional comparative spirit. As Loeb put it in 1924, “We are already in possession of a number of enigmatic though often interesting observations on regeneration”, relic of a “stage of blind empiricism”, which made it difficult to discern whether one was getting lost in “a jungle of futile experiments”. What was needed, instead, were models amenable to precise quantitative work (Loeb, 1924: vi-vii), or well-chosen examples of generalizable mechanisms (Cf. Maienschein, 1991; Maienschein, 2010, on Harrison; Sunderland, 2010 on Morgan). The comparative approach loosely informing Lange’s study, and the interesting peculiarities she highlighted, were not what the US-American masters of the field cherished most. Nor did their European counterparts, reared in the same experimental-embryological tradition (cf. Barfurth, 1923; Przibram, 1926).

The fate of Naef’s synthesis is more nuanced. His Fauna und Flora monograph was saluted upon appearance as “the Bible of Theutologists” (Boletzky, 1999), and his epistemological stance was taken seriously and developed by a number of German-speaking scholars (from Adolf Portmann to Willi Henning), eventually constituting one pillar of the cladistics approach in the 1950s (Williams and Ebach, 2008). Yet, his ecumenical program for comparative and experimental embryology, centred on cephalopod regeneration, went completely unnoticed, as it fell in-between different audiences. On the side of systematics, the rise of the Evolutionary Synthesis, between the 1930s and the 1950s (Huxley, 1942), marked a disciplinary shift, consolidating around a nexus between the genetic, palaeontological and populational approaches, at the expense of the developmental. Despite occasional attempts of “translation” and introduction to Anglophone audiences (e.g. Zangerl, 1948), systematic morphology was actively side lined by the leaders of the Synthesis as a rear-guard approach (cf. Williams and Ebach, 2008: p. 62-63): Naef’s works were only translated into English from the 1970s (Naef, 1972 [1921-1923]).

As for the morphological disciplines of comparative anatomy and developmental mechanics, Naef’s call to collaboration, and his idea of cephalopod regeneration as a common field, also fell on sterile ground, because of the diverging paths of regeneration research, on the one side, and the perception of cephalopods as models, on the other side. On both shores of the Atlantic, regeneration was more than ever entrenched in an embryological framework, encompassing explanatory paradigms, methodology and the whole organisation of experimental systems, including animal models. Already before Mangold and Spemann’s spectacular demonstration of the “organiser effect” (Churchill, 1991: p. 116), and even more so after it (and Spemann’s 1935 Nobel Prize), the experimental object of choice for regeneration research were amphibians, especially urodeles. Apart from their very long association with regeneration since Spallanzani, salamanders and other germane species represented the perfect point of encounter between many different takes on regeneration. They afforded observation of normal and disturbed development at three different stages (embryo, larva, adult), and comparison among different species, which were not overly difficult to rear in captivity. Finally, and crucially, it was on such models that the practices of homo- and heteroplastic transplantation had been developed and perfected (what Reiß, 2022 calls “the practices of the cut and paste”). Cephalopods, on the contrary, raised many difficulties of management and interpretation. They were much harder to breed in captivity; their developmental stages were not as uniform and well understood as those of amphibians (Young and Harman, 1988), their taxonomy was constantly under revision, and even their age was extremely difficult to assess. Finally, such extreme experimental procedures were not possible, either because the animals were not resistant enough (this is the case for cuttlefish), or because those that were, like the octopus, presented peculiar problems: their arms could reach any part of the body, and boycott the recovery process (Boycott et al., 1965). A basic approach like Lange’s, or even the more refined one, only sketched by Naef, could not compete at the same level with Spemann’s experimental system. Moreover, the times of intense discussion of the evolutionary origin of the regeneration capacity (c.f. Goss, 1992) were long gone. Proximal causes and environmental influences were the name of the new game, and wide comparison across classes was a luxury that, perhaps, only a few, well equipped marine stations (like those of Naples or Woods Hole) could offer. Even there, knowledge of the material and methods for long term, comparative studies of regeneration were limited to a narrow circle of connoisseurs.

This is not to say that cephalopods had not consolidated their position as laboratory animals, on the contrary. A curious work, published in 1928 by Georg Grimpe, testifies to the growing demand of cephalopods as physiological and zoological models. A chapter of Emil Abderhalden’s encyclopaedic “Handbook of biological work-methods” (Handbuch der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden 1911-1939. Cf. Grote, 2018; De Sio et al., 2020, suppl. mat.) bore the title Pflege, Behandlung und Zucht der Cephalopoden für Zoologische und Physiologische Zwecke (“Care, Treatment and Rearing of Cephalopods for Zoological and Physiological Purposes”). What is revealing of this highly technical precis on methods and techniques is its focus on the demands of inland research aquaria—a sign of the growing fame of these “marine Guinea-pigs”, as he called them (Grimpe, 1928). Pupil and successor of Chun, Grimpe was a frequent guest of the Naples station and of many others, and could rely on the wisdom of the greatest teuthologists of the time. In fact, a great share of the technical information conveyed by Grimpe came from personal experience, or personal communication, but the overall picture he painted was one of great progress, especially in prolonging the survival of both captive octopods and decapods. Significantly, the concluding section (Grimpe, 1928: pp. 388-402), was devoted to the rearing of animals from the egg, a feat that had been tried with varying success since the 1880s (c.f. Joubin, 1888; Gravely, 1908; Drew, 1911) and to which Naef (1928) had attached a great importance as a means for turning cephalopods into the connecting link between systematic and experimental approaches. Although the rearing techniques for cephalopods (especially octopods) were nowhere near the level of development necessary for competing with amphibians or echinoderms in embryological studies, Grimpe’s summary conveyed the hope that, with a wider, planned effort, the difficulties could be overcome. In this voluminous chapter (mostly focussed on the common Mediterranean species), however, regeneration appears only marginally, and mostly in connection with the care of the animals. Lange’s procedures are duly described, and there is mention of regeneration of the eye lens, as well as of autotomy in O. defilippii (M. defilippi), but no treatment of regeneration experiments is provided, comparable to the much-better developed descriptions of physiological and psychological experimental systems. Moreover, Grimpe fell victim to the same misinterpretation of decapod regeneration as Lange. Although he gratefully listed Naef among his confidential sources, Grimpe (1928) bluntly stated that “no reliable proof of a natural regeneration has yet been adduced”, and, therefore “that Sepia, and even the more so the other decapods, are not suitable for experiments of this kind”.