Dr. Laura Wade

DVM, ABVP (Avian), Founder/Owner Specialized Care for Avian & Exotic Pets, Clarence, NY

Dr. Wade is the sanctuary’s lead duck doctor.In April, 2018, I met Shawn and her sweet duck Olive, who had been suffering from reproductive disease. Shawn was referred to me by my friend and colleague Brian Speer, another avian specialist practicing in California. Shawn could not find a solution for Olive with the veterinarians in her area. She traveled quite a distance from Vermont to our practice in New York (over 7 hours) to have Olive evaluated.

Right away, I could see a kindred spirit duck lover in Shawn (I grew up with pet ducks and they were my favorite pets as a child). Shawn told me the story of rescuing over a hundred ducks and that she was doing her best to keep them all on her farm, hiring caretakers to look after them, all the special arrangements made for them in the barn and yard.

Shawn had been medicating and tube feeding Olive for a number of weeks as she was not eating well. Not an easy task for any owner, but it was obvious Shawn was very dedicated and would do whatever was needed.

We found out that Olive needed a life-saving spay. Her uterus was infected and was leaking fluid into her abdomen. Because we couldn’t do the surgery right away, Shawn drove home and returned in early May with Olive and a companion duck Carly to stay with her during her hospitalization (we find ducks are much more comfortable with another duck and we prefer them to come with a buddy).

Olive’s surgery was very challenging but she did very well and both ducks returned home after several days. Both visits, Shawn stayed over in town, which meant others back at the farm had to take care of things. Shawn provided me with lots of pictures and updates of how happy Olive was after her ordeal.

Not long after, I got a lovely package from Shawn that had some seaberries in it. Intrigued, (never heard of seaberries), I looked up SHO, Shawn’s farm and was amazed at the beautiful landscape and obvious extreme attention to caring for the environment, which didn’t surprise me, given Shawn’s same approach to Olive’s medical care. What lucky ducks (literally) this flock are.

In the 21 years I have been a veterinarian, there are some really special people that cross my path. Shawn is a one-of a kind animal guardian who embraces opportunity and doesn’t let anything stop her. Her kindness and passion for life spills over in every arena of life. Although I hope her ducks stay healthy, I look forward to seeing her again!

allison vernon

Senior Duck Caretaker - September 2019 - March 2020

Working and living at SHO has been the most unique experience of my life. Five days a week, my time is dedicated to the care of the flock of Khaki-Campbell ducks that have been given sanctuary here. Caring for them is my greatest privilege. In exchange for my time, they’ve taught me what it means to be resilient, they’ve challenged me to be a bit more carefree, and encouraged me to take on each day with unbridled enthusiasm. Observing them, learning from them and caring for them continues to be my favorite thing about living and working here at SHO.In addition to the work with the larger flock, I have also been fortunate enough to take part in two separate local duck rescues. I’ve gained valuable knowledge of the planning and execution required for a successful rescue, as well as the larger, long-term care that comes afterwards. It takes so much heart, compassion, determination and responsibility to care for these animals, and I’m so grateful to be learning alongside the the incredible team here at SHO.When I’m not in the barn, the land offers a constant education. There is a sense of holistic connection here, which serves as a reminder that I am apart of the story that the natural world continues to tell. The values, ethics and mission lived by the team at SHO challenge me to question and evaluate the kind of role I want to play in that story. I’m grateful for the people, the animals and the natural systems at SHO for constantly encouraging me to stand up for what is important, and to give what I have to offer to the ongoing vision of this project.

Mia jung

Senior Duck Caretaker + Permaculturist - 2010 - 2018

Working at SHO Farm for 8 years was a deeply meaningful and rewarding experience.

In addition to working with the permaculture system, I spent the last few years living on the farm caring for SHO Farm Sanctuary’s Khaki Campbell ducks. While physically demanding, this work was also incredibly satisfying in that my workdays consisted of caring for a flock of rescued ducks, each with a distinct personality, all of them endlessly entertaining as they enjoyed their indoor and outdoor digs. Feeding, giving water, cleaning pens, giving medical care, and guiding the ducks to their outdoor yards were at times challenging and yet surprisingly fulfilling tasks. Knowing that I was assisting in providing these wonderful beings a home and a sanctuary to live out their life fed my soul.

And, as invaluable bonuses, I learned about permaculture, foraging for wild plants and preparing these plants into wonderful meals, sustainable building, wildlife tracking, earth care, and so much more.

When I look back on living in Vermont, I think of the farm with the stunning view of Camel’s Hump Mountain, the endless trails on the farm, the beautiful meals and conversations, the Khaki Campbells, and the countless memorable experiences I had while working and living at SHO. Melissa and Shawn, as well as the land and animals at SHO Farm, gifted me an unforgettable experience that will forever inform and shape my life.

Amelia horn

Senior Duck Caretaker - March 2019 - March 2020 I have worked and lived at SHO for nearly a year. My companions have been a family of deer, fox, songbirds, black bear, and of course, 100+ ducks. Like them, I was drawn to the peace and safety of the land.

The Sanctuary at SHO offers sacred space to deepen our understanding of the natural world, self, and reminds us that we are not separate entities. Every living being contributes to the harmony of the whole system.

SHO not only holds safe space for non-humans, but for humans who believe every being has value and purpose. Each task I have been assigned has offered a wealth of knowledge and has widened my vision of how working with the land can be.

The non-exploitative practices implemented at SHO are awe-inspiring. As humans, we are taught controlling our surroundings is priority. We are at a pinnacle turning point of climate crisis where our survival depends on working with the land and other non-humans rather than continuing to ravage them.

Working with the land and creatures at SHO has revealed to me that this vision of harmonious co-existence is not only a dream. It is entirely possible. And, immensely fulfilling.

possible to combine ecologically just systems and veganism, but that the two are inextricably connected.

Being a part of the team at SHO means sharing in a mission that seeks to create a paradigm shift in the way we relate to each other and the land. It means asking the questions: ‘what does it look like to take direct action against the exploitation of others?’ and ‘how can we create systems that both nourish our communities and heal the Earth?’ Integrating the sanctuary duck flock into the productive perennial system is just one way that SHO has displayed that we can accomplish this.

Despite the challenges of working with animals that were bred with health issues, as well as dealing with the limitations that come with the language barrier between us, it is such a joy to work with the ducks at Sanctuary at SHO. Whether it’s listening to the quacks of sheer delight that echo through the barn upon discovering a mound of freshly fluffed hay, or peeking in on a pair of tuckered-out drakes cuddling together in their pen, it is an incredibly rewarding feeling to know that they will get to grow old— happy and free.

Emily su

Duck Caretaker Intern - September - November 2017

The best part about SHO Farm was you guys. You were welcoming, loving, fun and had tons of knowledge and views to share. You inspired me and taught me knowledge I couldn’t learn any where else.

The nice thing about SHO is the relaxing energy it has. It’s not a 9:00am to 5:00pm day. You never know what to expect, which gives a nice variety to the week with different hours a day. The schedule can be flexible, and you are really nice about when I would like to work, and also what kind of work I want to do. I had a choice, and I also had privacy and time to myself. Which is nice after a day of duck duty.

Shawn is very good at explaining why they do things the way they do, this way I learned a whole lot. We also had one-on-one sessions where we talked about different subjects. The sessions were a great way to learn about running a sanctuary. I also enjoyed that you guys wanted me to learn and benefit from the experience. I loved that I could do the other advanced tasked as I got more experienced, this way I got challenged and learned more.

I learned about using natures benefits when it comes to food, and building renewable homes.

Passive and active systems - when building a home you want to have as many passive systems as possible, because it’s «free». You also want to build a «envelope» for the house, and take perspective on the gravity and the sun. You want to live with nature, not outside it.

When an obstacle comes your way regarding wildlife, you want to work with them and not against them. Also, focus on how to give back to the wildlife.

I learned how to be partners with the animals. How can we benefit from them when they live the way they are supposed to live. Animals should be surrounded with the setting closest to their natural habitat. Here we can implement a permaculture system to grow food and shade for the animals at the sanctuary, as well as food for the predators. How to «handle» the emotional waves that comes with caring for animals is also something that I gained insight in.

I learned about finance and the importance of it. Now I am eager to solve the question: «How can we sustain ourselves without donations?».

I gained knowledge about mustard seeds, how to harvest blueberries and apples, mushrooms and the process of making cheese.

And of course I learned a lot about DUCKS and their care. I learned that you don’t want to impose your own feelings and wishes on to the animal. You need to listen to the animals for their needs. This way I learned the beauty of eye contact and connecting with the animals in different ways than just cuddling.

Now, I have knowledge about the farm sanctuary lifestyle. THANK YOU!

matt deen

Advisory Board Member, Volunteer, Union Seminary School, NYC

Spent the past two days getting to know two of the most wonderful people one could hope to meet. Melissa and Shawn have so generously shared their Edenic vision of a world in which all life thrives together, reciprocally enriching and thriving from the abundance that permeates our Earth. What began (and today continues) as a vegan permaculture farm in 2003, suddenly and unexpectedly also became a sanctuary for 116 ducks in August 2016. A local rice farmer was going to sell them for meat, so Melissa and Shawn did what even the most loving among us often can’t: They disrupted this cycle of violence, welcomed these ducks in, and made a glorious home for them. I will never forget their deep care and familial concern for these ducks (to say nothing of the countless others of their neighbors), nor can I forget what absolute bliss it was to serve these characters—feeding them, giving them fresh grit and water, mucking out their abodes, laying fresh hay for them. It was for me the rarest kind of contentment, one that sates the human need to serve, yes, but one which also confirms that this impulse to nurture a vision that seems like so much sentimentality and foolishness to most people is well worth affirming. Again, and again. Because I have the gift of knowing that on at least these 1,300 acres, life and life-more-abundantly are being daily co-created. Thank you for baptizing me in your beautiful vision.