Laura Lee Eaton of Arlington went peacefully to her heavenly home on Sunday February 12, 2023

Laura was born on March 12, 1934 to Lade and Stella Stevens in Ashland KY. On September 20, 1952 she married Ben R. Eaton, also of Ashland, KY & they were married for 55 years until his death in 2007. Laura had 3 children Vicki Woody of Weatherford, Ron Eaton of Alvarado and Valeri Kane of Arlington. She raised her family in Kentucky and Michigan before settling in Texas where she lived since 1977.

In addition to being a homemaker, a loving mother and Nanny, Laura was an active member of Lake Church 39ers Sunday School group. She spent many years helping in Vacation bible school and cooking at Falls Creek Youth camp .She enjoyed shopping, planting flowers, baking and cooking big meals for family and friends.

She especially liked Christmas, it was her favorite holiday. She LOVED to decorate for Christmas. Her home hosted many, many Christmas events!

Throughout her entire life, Laura had unwavering faith and love for God that was felt by all who knew her.

John 16:22 says, “So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you.”

She is survived by her children, Daughter Vicki Woody and Husband Tom of Weatherford, Son Ron Eaton and wife Stella of Cleburne, daughter Valeri Kane of Arlington.

Five grandchildren: Lisa Dozier of Weatherford, Chad Woody of Aledo, Jaymie Milan of Arlington, Janelle Eaton of Arlington and LB Kane of Denver Colorado.

Ten great grandchildren, Nathan, Skylar, Colton, Ashlyn, Kreed, Elizabeth, Kate, Lincoln, Catalina and Sophia.

One great great grandson Beckham.

Also, one sister-Nora Goodwin of Cattletsburg, KY.

Funeral: 2 p.m. Thursday, February 16, at Wade Family Funeral Home, 4140 W. Pioneer Parkway, Arlington. Visitation: 1-2 p.m. prior to the service at the funeral home. The service will be live-streamed at wadefamilyfuneralhome.com. Interment: Emerald Hills Memorial Park, Kennedale TX