Southwest (also referred to as SW airlines or SWA) is a major US airline that provides low-cost passenger flights. The airline is based at Dallas Love Field airport and operates an extensive network across the US, as well as to international destinations in North and Central America. Overall, the airline flies to more than 100 destinations. At its most popular time of year, Southwest flies more than 4,000 daily flights (pre-Covid-19 pandemic)

Southwest Airlines was established in 1967, and originally only flew between Texas' three of its biggest cities: Houston, Dallas, and San Antonio. The airline has grown massively since then and is now one of the biggest carriers in the US. It's regularly within the top 3 airlines in the US for the number of passengers carried, behind Delta and American Airlines. It's the most popular low-cost carrier in all of North America.

The airline is known for its cheap basic fares, which are sold as seat-only tickets for very affordable prices. Passengers that want extra for their flight can add on to their fare to give them what they need. Southwest is unique in that it's one of the only airlines to use open seating. Open seating is when passengers aren't assigned a seat at check-in and choose their seat as they board the flight, on a first-come-first-serve basis.

Looking to book Southwest Airlines flight tickets?

Alternative Airlines is an online flight search and booking site, which offers competitive Southwest Airlines airfare prices. We make it easy to pay the way you want, whether that is using Apple Pay, PayPal, or splitting the cost with Sezzle, Affirm, or one of our other payment plan options.

Southwest has a booking fare called Business Select, which allows passengers certain privileges when flying with this airline. Although the onboard seating arrangements will be the same as every other passenger, such as being in the same cabin, Business Select passengers get priority features that enhance their experience.

Business Class Facilities

Passengers will get guaranteed priority boarding, which is perfect for the open-seating plan, as passengers can enter the plane first, choose their seat and settle before the rest of the passengers are permitted on the plane. Check-in is also quicker, with lines all being fast-tracked for security and check-in. Passengers in Business will also receive a complimentary premium drink voucher to use on the day of travel, which includes options for alcoholic beverages.

What is the Business Class Seats Like?

The seats for business class are just the same as economy class, which are described above.

The extensive fleet consists of Boeing 737-700s, Boeing 737MAXs, and Boeing 737-800s, delivering more than 4,000 SW Airlines flights per day in peak season. Southwest is the largest operator of the Boeing 737 worldwide. In total, the airline has a fleet of over 800 aircraft and carried more than 134 million passengers in 2019. Below is a more accurate list of all the aircraft in Southwest's fleet:

Boeing 737-700 - Southwest has almost 450 in service, with each aircraft seating up to 143 passengers.

Boeing 737-800 - Just over 200 in service, seating up to 175 passengers per aircraft.

Boeing 737 MAX 8 - Over 150 in service, with 200 more orders of this aircraft to be added to the fleet.

Boeing 737 MAX 7 - None in the fleet just yet, but Southwest has 192 orders of this particular aircraft and deliveries are expected to begin in 2023.

With Alternative Airlines we make it incredibly easy for you to search for and book your flights with any airline that flies to Las Vegas, including Southwest Airlines! Southwest is one of the most popular US-based airlines that operates frequent flights to Las Vegas from all over the United States.

Using our search form at the top of the page, you can search for Southwest flights to/from Las Vegas. If you're booking through Alternative Airlines, you can even choose to spread the cost of your Southwest tickets over time and pay later with popular Buy Now Pay Later options, including Afterpay, Affirm and Klarna, among others.

Flying to and from the US to Las Vegas with Southwest

Las Vegas, situated in the US state of Nevada, is known worldwide for its abundance of casinos and world-class entertainment, accompanied by fine dining, nightlife and luxury shopping opportunities. This city attracts all kinds of tourists from around the world, all seeking an unforgettable, magical experience of a lifetime!

To visit Las Vegas, we suggest flying to Harry Reid International Airport, the city's main airport.

Harry Reid International Airport

Harry Reid International Airport, formerly known as McCarran International Airport, is the primary airport serving the Las Vegas Valley, Southern Utah, Southern Nevada and Northern Arizona. The airport is a base for Southwest Airlines and Allegiant Air and Spirit Airlines, among others. From Harry Reid International Airport, Southwest flies to almost 70 domestic cities in the United States.

Popular routes

Southwest operates direct routes to/from Harry Reid International Airport to/from many cities within the US, including:

Las Vegas (LAS) ✈ to San Francisco (SFO)

Las Vegas (LAS) ✈ to Orlando (MCO)

Las Vegas (LAS) ✈ to Seattle (SEA)

Las Vegas (LAS) ✈ to Atlanta (ATL)

Las Vegas (LAS) ✈ to Dallas (DAL)

If you're planning to fly to smaller cities or somewhere that Southwest doesn't currently fly to, you'll be able to catch connecting flights with a layover at one of the airports listed above/below. You can even book multi-city flights with Southwest and hop from city to city, e.g., New York to Las Vegas to Los Angeles.

Flying to and from Las Vegas on Southwest from outside the US

Unfortunately, with Southwest Airlines, you'll only be able to reach Las Vegas from within the US as it doesn't currently offer any flights to Las Vegas from its international destinations like Central America. For flights outside of the US, we suggest searching for flights to Las Vegas with an alternative airline, such as Frontier Airlines and Delta Air Lines. The other option is to take a connecting flight to Las Vegas with Southwest - some popular connecting flight route examples are below:

Looking for discounts and deals when booking Southwest Airlines flights?

Here at Alternative Airlines, we love making it as affordable as possible for everyone to book flights. If you’re looking to book Southwest Airlines flights and save, we can help. In this guide, discover how you can find our latest discounts and deals. Top Tip: We also offer lots of payment plan options, so that you can spread the cost of your Southwest flights (or flights with any other airline) over time!

The best place to look is our deals and discounts page. This page has our most up-to-date offers, discounts and coupons.

Our discount deals aren’t exclusive to Southwest flights, and can be redeemed against any flight booking with any airline that you can book through Alternative Airlines. We ticket hundreds of airlines! As well as Southwest, you can book flights with American Airlines, Delta, United, Spirit, and many others.

How to use promo codes for Southwest flights

Using the search form at the top of the page, fill in the departure and arrival airports along with the dates you wish to fly, the number of passengers and cabin class. Then, hit the 'Search Flights' button to find the flight you've always dreamed of. Alternative Airlines has created an easy and customisable booking site. You can apply filters to narrow down your search and set out your preferences. if you wish to fly with Southwest, use the airline filter and select Southwest.

Once you've found the perfect flight for you, confirm your selection. Then, enter your contact and personal details and select either PayPal or PayPal Credit in order for the discount code to work.

Enter the discount code into the Promo Code box and select 'Apply'. You'll then be shown how much you've saved by using the discount and the price of you're discounted Southwest flight ticket. If you're struggling with the coupon code, please ensure that you have followed the rules for the discount code to work, by checking if you have selected the right currency and payment method. However, if your still having problems with the coupon, please don't hesitate to contact Alternative Airlines where we'll be able to assist you.

Other ways to save money on Southwest flights

Buy flights on finance

Looking to finance your Southwest flight? Well, you've come to the right spot. Here, at Alternative Airlines you can book flights with 600+ airlines including Southwest and spread the cost over some time. We have partnered with a number of payment plan providers that let you split the cost of your flight in weekly, bi-weekly or monthly instalments. Many of which are interest-free! Some of the most popular payment plans we offer include Afterpay, Klarna, Affirm, and PayPal Credit. To find out more check out our fly now pay later with Southwest.

Use our Best Fare Finder

Alternative Airlines is simply the best way to book your flight. Our best fare finder feature makes it really easy for you to find out what days are the cheapest to fly for the destinations you plan to visit. If you're looking to find the cheapest deals, use our Best Fare Finder when searching for Southwest flights. You can also use the calendar to find out what days are the cheapest to travel. The dates highlighted in green are the cheapest days to fly and the dates highlighted in red are the more expensive. To find out more on how to use this feature follow our Best Fare Finder guide.

3rd February 2021

Southwest Airlines eyes new routes for 2021

Southwest Airlines announced last month that it will be adding an additional route between Kahului (Maui), Hawaii, and Long Beach, Calif. From March, Southwest Airlines will also commence an additional six new routes from Long Beach including Chicago (Midway), Dallas (Love Field), Honolulu (Oahu), Houston (Hobby), Kahului (Maui), Reno/Tahoe, and St. Louis. This news follows a difficult year for the travel industry, due to the Coronavirus pandemic, and suggests that, despite this, Southwest still sees continued growth in the future.

3 September 2020

Southwest Airlines new destinations

Southwest is looking to start its flights to Miami International Airport and Palm Springs International Airport within 2020.

24 February 2020

New destination for Southwest Airlines

Southwest Airlines plans to start seasonal daily flights between Denver and Steamboat Springs. The route is planned to commence in winter 2020. Currently, United Express is the only operator between the two destinations.

27 January 2020

Southwest to grow Hawaii service in 2020

Southwest is focused on growing its Hawaii service in 2020. The airline operates 14 daily flights from California to Hawaii via Oakland, Sacramento, and San Jose. This is in addition to 38 daily departures across its inter-island network.

In March 2020, Southwest will kick off new routes from Sacramento to Kahului, and from San Diego to Maui and Honolulu in April.