Description

Reviews

Description

In Everyday Life in Ancient Rome, Lionel Casson offers a lively introduction to the society of the times. Instead of following the standard procedure of social history, he presents a series of vignettes focusing on the "ways of life" of various members of that society, from the slave to the emperor. The book opens with a description of the historical context and includes examination of topics such as the family, religion, urban and rural life, and leisure activities. This revised edition of Casson's engaging work, originally published in 1975 as Daily Life in Ancient Rome, includes two new chapters as well as full documentation of the sources.

An evocative study of the average Roman: when he got up, when he ate, how he earned a living and why a career in the army was greatly sought after, in spite of the dangers. -- Time Traveler's Guide to the Roman Empire, Channel4.com

About the Author

Lionel Casson is professor emeritus of classics at New York University and has written many books about life in the ancient world, including Travel in the Ancient World,, and Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World, both available from Johns Hopkins.

Reviews

A series of concise sketches of key phases of life in the Roman world during its greatest period, the era of peace and prosperity in the first and second centuries A.D. Of Ages Past Magazine I was reading one of Casson's books [ Everyday Life in Ancient Rome] while waiting for [my daughter]... She was late, which would ordinarily have thrown me into a fever of apprehension, but on this occasion I was so wrapped up in the book, I didn't notice. In fact, when she did come back, quite late, I was annoyed because she had interrupted me before I had finished the book. I told Casson this, and he was infinitely pleased. -- Isaac Asimov I. Asimov: A Memoir

Book Information

ISBN 9780801859922

Author Lionel Casson

Format Paperback

Page Count 184

Imprint Johns Hopkins University Press

Publisher Johns Hopkins University Press

Weight(grams) 227g

Dimensions(mm) 216mm * 140mm * 11mm

Reviews

No reviews yet Write a Review