‘TONIA MARKETAKI’, Warehouse D

On October 13, 14, and 15, there will be live screenings of two two-hour sessions at Warehouse D in the Port.

Screening times:

17:00-19:00

20:00-22:00

Tickets for screanings at Warehouse D:

Two screenings per day: €7

One screening per day: €5

Purchase your ticket at the ticket booths at the entrance of the venue.

Α’

WENDIGO

Félix Bouffard-Dumas, Canada

14′

Through an exploded mosaic, the film proposes an experimental interpretation between the Wendigo’s legend and the Quebecers’ insecurities of their identity.

Director Biography – Félix Bouffard-Dumas

~

FABRIK

Sverre Aune, Germany

19′

Shot entirely in Digital Infrared, FABRIK follows a lone humanoid creature, fighting for survival in a forsaken world – living off oil-spills from self-operating factories. Her quest for oil takes her across the desert and into an unknown world of steam and machines.

Director Biography – Sverre Aune

Sverre Aune was born in Trondheim, Norway, in 1994.

Growing up in the Norwegian countryside, he started experimenting with film and video by himself at an early age, and at 19 he moved to Denmark to study at European Film College. A year later he moved to Berlin to finish a BA in Practical Filmmaking at MET Film School Berlin. He joined the German Film and Television Academy Berlin in 2017, where he’s currently studying Film Directing. As well as directing, Sverre works as an Editor, co-owns a film club, co-hosts a film podcast and writes most of his own scripts himself.~

DEMI-GODDESSES

Martin Gerigk, Germany

7′

‘Demi-Goddesses’ is the second essay about still dominant dark aspects of our modern society. It is conceived as a surreal anti-patriarchal thought experiment and raises important questions about gender, power, and social change, prompting us to reflect on how historical patterns of discrimination and oppression might be either repeated or overcome in a reversed gendered world. It challenges the viewer to confront their own assumptions and biases, and to consider the possibilities of a more equitable society.

Overall, the intention of the film is that it will spark conversations and inspire the viewer to imagine a world where gender is not a limiting factor. At best, the audience will leave the theater with a greater awareness of the issues and a sense of possibility for a just future.

Director Biography – Martin Gerigk

~

I KILLED YOU A DOZEN TIMES

Kris De Meester, Belgium

6′

I killed you a dozen times, but you won’t go away. Maybe it’s because you’ve killed me first. Out in the cold, on a strange new globe.

“I Killed You a Dozen Times” immerses viewers in a captivating exploration of the aftermath of a traumatic breakup. The protagonist, driven to erase the other person from their existence, finds themselves exiled to a chilling and unfamiliar realm. As they confront the relentless echoes of their pain, the boundaries between reality and imagination blur, creating a surreal and introspective experience.

“I Killed You a Dozen Times utilizes its title as a refrain, spoken by the narrator, as they bemoan a fruitless relationship. The film plays with the audience’s senses, both audibly and visually, keeping them constantly on edge. The camera voyeuristically passes over partially clothed women, lying motionless on the floor. The women, exposed and fragile, are a visualization of the emotional toll endured by the narrator. Moreover, the soundtrack emits a constant whirr, creating a palpable tension that’s never broken. Again, this mirrors the narrator’s perpetual, unanswered inquiry into why. All in all, the film exhibits an equal parts disturbing and eye-opening look at the post-breakup healing process. The combination of violent imagery, poignant narration, and acute sound design construct a unique, tangible representation of one’s incorporeal inner struggle.”

Shane McKevitt – Venice Film Week

“I Killed You a Dozen Times expertly uses the power of visual language and sound to communicate complex emotions and experiences. Through its striking imagery and sound design, together with the emotive poetry recited by the narrator, the film masterfully portrays the agony and emotional struggles stem from toxic relationships, a subject that is often challenging to express in words. The film’s ability to vividly visualize and depict such complex emotions is a testament to its remarkable use of audio-visual storytelling.”

Jane Ching – Sundance Film Festival Hong Kong, Hong Kong Arthouse Film Festival

Director Biography – Kris De Meester

~

SANAA, SEDUCTRESS OF STRANGERS

Jan Eilhardt, Germany

3′

Director Biography – Jan Eilhardt

~

ALL EFFORT OF MEN

Jean-Gabriel Périot, France

13′

BIRDS DON’T LOOK THROUGH THE WINDOWS

Eirini Tampasouli, Greece

7′

If I was a bird, I would look through the windows of the flats all the time. But they choose not to do so. A film partly created in the Academy of Ji.hlava International Documentary Film Festival.

Director Biography – Eirini Tampasouli

~

THE MECHANICS OF LIQUIDS

Gala Hernández López, France

30′

In 2018, an incel called Anathematic Anarchist posted a suicide letter on Reddit entitled “America is responsible for my death”. The Mechanics of Fluids is an attempt to find answers to his words. A virtual drift through the internet in search of his digital traces that ends up being an inner journey between our connected solitudes.

Director Biography – Gala Hernández López

~

SEARCHING FOR UTOPIA

Sotiris Petridis, Greece

5′

A woman tries to study the structure of the modern utopia offered by digital life, but her narrative hides personal traumas..

Director Biography – Sotiris Petridis

~

THE HOUSE WITH NO DOORS

Marina Akarepi, United Kingdom

7′

A man gets lost in the woods and is attacked by various monsters. As he desperately tries to escape he realises he is turning into a monster himself.

Director Biography – Marina Akarepi

Marina Akarepi was born in Athens. She started painting and playing music from a very young age. Her education on classical art, mythology and theatre ignited her passion for storytelling and she soon fell in love with conceptual art and film.

She studied Audio and Visual Arts and worked as a writer for independent magazine 3pointmagazine.gr, where she introduced a cinema- themed column, and later published a poetry collection.

Marina is currently residing in the UK, where she studied Film Production and made her directorial debut with the experimental short film The House With No Doors. She is currently completing a MA in Visual Anthropology at the University of Manchester.

She is a writer, musician, poet, filmmaker and animal rights activist.

~

MY MOTHER’S DOWRY AGREEMENT

Penny Theodoros Kissa, Greece

13′

Director Biography – Penny Theodoros Kissa

~

B’

TO READ THEM POEMS

Alexis Chatzigiannis, Greece

24′

Director Biography – Alexis Chatzigiannis

Born and raised in Athens. Studied Documentary in the University of Aegean. Has directed a lot of documentaries screened in festivals & greek TV and also short fiction films screened in festivals all over the world. To read them poems is his last film.

~

LITTLE SPARTACUS

Sara Ganem, France

28′

Between Eastern blocks and cherry brandies, I navigate around the Danube with Spartacus, my Greek speaking bicycle. But the world is not big enough to drown my pain.

Director Biography – Sara Ganem

~

EUROPEAN MAN…AMERICAN BEACH

Rex Shannon, United States

7′

A European man goes naked to an American beach. A clothed American beachgoer takes offense and a brawl ensues.

Director Biography – Rex Shannon

Rex Shannon began his artistic career as a fiction writer and literary scholar. His first three creative productions were a short story called “Come Up Here” published in Alaska Quarterly Review, an academic article on James Joyce’s “Ulysses” published in Joyce Studies Annual, and an internet novel published on web3. Since 2022, Rex has turned his narrative productions to film. “European Man…American Beach” is his first narrative short: a drama/comedy about a brawl between a naked European and an American who’s deeply offended by the European’s nudity.

~

ACROSS THE SEA

Elad Mukades, Israel

26′

The first flight in my life to a friend’s wedding when I was 31 was for me a multifaceted release experience, an encounter with new landscapes, people and patterns.

My closest partner on the exciting journey was the camera with which I was amazed and together we turned anxiety into pleasure.

I am honored to invite you to join me on the ‘Mission of the Mitzvah’ flight, to Weizmann’s wedding, 12 hours away from Israel, and to return with me with a new look and thoughts.

Director Biography – Elad Mukades

Certificate studies – Jewish Film College

Master’s degree in film studies – Sapir College

~

LA FLOTTE

Jessica Woodworth, Belgium

23′

Tess, Mia, Rok and Tiago fly the skies with La Flotte airline, their hearts full of longings, their true natures bubbling just below the surface of their ultra-groomed appearance. The unthinkable happens in mid-flight, leaving them suspended between heaven and earth, past and future, life and death.

Director Biography – Jessica Woodworth

Jessica Woodworth is a Belgian-American film director, screenwriter and producer based in Belgium. Prior fiction feature films are Khadak, Altiplano, The Fifth Season, King of the Belgians and The Barefoot Emperor, made with Peter Brosens. Her most recent feature film Luka premiered in 2023 in Rotterdam. Her films have screened in over 350 festivals including Venice, Cannes, Toronto and Sundance. She has won over 70 awards, including the Lion of the Future in Venice. Jessica grew up between Belgium, Switzerland and the US and has since studied and worked in Italy, France, China, Mongolia and Morocco. She has a degree in literature from Princeton University and a masters in documentary film from Stanford University. She gives workshops for actors and directors, has been on juries worldwide and is a frequent mentor for film students.

~

MOTHER’S SKIN

Leah Johnston, Canada

20′

Newfoundland, 1971. A neglected six-year-old girl struggles to cope with her mother’s depression and her father’s alcoholic rage. She spends her days alone, fending for herself, as her father works and her mother sleeps. At night, violence erupts around her, threatening to tear her family apart. But when the girl discovers a secret hidden within their home, her dysfunctional world takes on a strange new meaning.

Director Biography – Leah Johnston

LEAH JOHNSTON (WRITER/DIRECTOR) is an award-winning filmmaker from Nova Scotia, Canada. Her most recent short film, INGRID AND THE BLACK HOLE, premiered at Fantasia Film Festival and was showcased at over twenty film festivals, winning eight awards, including Best Canadian Short at Edmonton International Film Festival. She is the recipient of the Corus Fearless Female Filmmaker Award (2015), the $35,000 Bravofact/WIFT Prize (2015) and the National Screen Institute Drama Prize (2013). She graduated with a B.F.A. from New York University’s Tisch School of the Arts and is an alumni of the National Screen Institute, the Reykjavik Talent Lab and the Academy of Canadian Cinema Directing program.

~

MADELEINE

Raquel Sancinetti, Canada

15′

Every week, two friends born 67 years apart share their life stories in a senior home’s living room. The younger friend convinces the 107-year-old lady to join her in an adventure: a road trip to the sea.

Director Biography – Raquel Sancinetti

Raquel is a Brazilian-Canadian filmmaker. With a background in film post production, she earned her degree in Film animation at Concordia University in 2013 and since then has been working on independent films. Her graduation film “Cycle” has played in several festivals around the world and won 4 prizes.

DATÆTERNA

Axel Chemin, France

23′

In the near future, a micro-worker performs tasks that are suggested to her. Between data center maintenance and data processing, she hesitantly searches for ways to feel emotions. Devoid of social links, this world is saturated with data.

Director Biography – Axel Chemin