Saint Raphael Catholic Church in Koloa is a parish of the Roman Catholic Church of Hawaii in the United States. Located in Koloa on the island of Kauai, the church falls under the jurisdiction of the Diocese of Honolulu and its bishop.

The oldest Catholic Church in Kauai, St. Raphael's was founded in 1841; two years after Catholics were granted religious freedom in Hawaii after the French threatened Honolulu. Father Arsenius Walsh established the parish.

The first stone chapel was built by Father Walsh in 1842. In preparation for the Centennial anniversary in 1941, the Chapel sanctuary was rebuilt by parishioners.

The present sanctuary of St. Raphael's Church in Koloa, Kauai was completed in December 1854, however the blessing did not take place until October 24,1856 to coincide with the feast day of St. Raphael the Archangel. In 1933 the bell tower was removed and a permanent adobe tower was added to the left of the sanctuary. In 1936 Father Philibert enlarged and renovated the church to double its seating capacity.

The original rectory was completed in 1850, one of four stone structures built by Father Walsh during his 17 years in Koloa. This structure burned down in 1900. Parishioners decided to restore the historic structure and transform it into a parish hall in 1939. The building is now used for religious education

175th Anniversary Celebration Events

Saturday, July 23rd Koloa Plantation Days - Hapa Trail Walk

Our 175th Celebration Series successfully kicked-off on Saturday, July 23rd as we welcomed over 300 island residents, guests and visitors for the famous Koloa Plantation Days Hapa Trail Walk. The parishioners of St. Raphael Church provided coffee, water, pastries and donuts to all participants.

Saturday, July 30th Koloa Plantation Days Parade

“Planting the Seeds that Nourish the Soul” was the theme of the 2016 Koloa Plantation Days Parade. This year’s parade honored St. Raphael Church as the Parade Grand Marshall as we celebrate our “175 Anniversary” on December 25, 2016. The float won "Best in Parade" award. Watch the video of the parade, to share in the experience of the day. In addition, Millie Curtis and the rest of the performers, entertained the parade goers with their beautiful songs and music. We are hoping that all parishioners were able to experience this spectacular event. Read more

Saturday, December 3rd 175th Anniversary Carnival and Celebration

The Celebration was a joyous event. Thank you to the hundreds of people who came out to help us celebrate under a beautiful calm, sunny day. Father Arlen's offering to St. Clair, the patron saint of weather proved to be highly successful. While flood alerts were issued all around Kauai, we were blessed with a beautiful day. Father's blessing of attendees was followed by a continuous stream of top-notch entertainment. The craft fair had over 30 crafters and the rummage sale had hundreds of items. All were busy from the start. We cannot forget the great food that was available for all to enjoy. We thank the donors to our silent auction - it was a great success! It was great to see priests around the island and our invited dignitaries who helped us celebrate this historic event. Many thanks to all the volunteers who put in tireless hours to make this event a great success. A special thanks goes out to Brenda Same shima and the celebration committee who organized a great event.

Sunday, December 25th 175th Anniversary Celebration

On Sunday, December 25th, we were honored to welcome our parishioners and visitors to mark the 175th Anniversary Celebration of St. Raphael Church. We began our celebration with mass at 11:00 a.m. on Christmas Day followed by our 175th Anniversary Luau on the lawn area. Great food and live entertainment were a blessing for all who joined in. See the article in the Garden Island News for photos and details.

Church Registry Form

If you wish to join our vibrant community, please complete the church registry form and click submit.