Old History Revealed as New Hudson County Courthouse Moves Forward in Jersey City

Demolition work is underway on several Journal Square lots that will eventually host a new courthouse, and a ghost sign from the past was uncovered before being demolished.

Beers and Books: History of the Weehawken Public Library

The majestic building, built into a steep cliff, was originally constructed by a famous brewer and narrowly escaped the wrecking ball before being preserved.

Parking Could Replace a 19th Century Schoolhouse in Downtown Jersey City

Plans to tear down the old Saint Peter’s Grammar School, which partially dates back to 1861, have been met with controversy.

After 157 Years, a Former Jersey City School Could Meet the Wrecking Ball

Part of the Saint Peter’s Grammar School complex was built in 1861 while the other dates back to 1894, but the entire edifice could be torn down soon. Three years before becoming president, Woodrow Wilson delivered his first general election campaign speech inside while running to become New Jersey's governor.

Step Inside a Park-Facing Brownstone Owned by a Succession of Impressive Jersey City Women

This Montgomery Street home has observed the evolution of the neighborhood for nearly a century and a half under the stewardship of several prominent female owners.

New Residences Proposed for Frank Sinatra’s Birthplace in Hoboken

The Monroe Street property where Ol’ Blue Eyes was born could be redeveloped into condominiums under a new plan.

Former Officer Housing at Fort Monmouth Converted to Residential Homes

The former U.S Army post now has townhomes, duplexes, and single-family residences for sale in its century-old buildings.

Saint Lucy’s Church in Downtown Jersey City Among Most Endangered Places in New Jersey

Nonprofit organization Preservation New Jersey just announced their annual list of the 10 Most Endangered Historic Places in New Jersey, advocating awareness and preservation.

84 Essex Street: A Long-Time Community Gathering Spot Bears Witness to 170 Years of...

Built between 1830 and 1840, 84 Essex Street was a storied saloon and boarding house during historic Paulus Hook's industrial heydey and is now being restored.