Town Without Pity Overview:

Town Without Pity (1961) was a Drama - Black-and-white Film directed by Gottfried Reinhardt and produced by Gottfried Reinhardt.

Academy Awards 1961 --- Ceremony Number 34 (source: AMPAS)

AwardRecipientResultBest Music - SongMusic by Dimitri Tiomkin; Lyrics by Ned WashingtonNominated

.

BlogHub Articles:

Town Without Pity (1961)

By Beatrice on May 29, 2017 From Flickers in Time

Town Without Pity Directed by Gottfried Reinhardt Written by George Herdalek and Silvia Reinhardt; adapted by Jan Lustig from a novel by Manfred Gregor 1961/USA/West Germany/Switzerland The Mirisch Corporation/Osweg/Gloria-Film GmbH First viewing/Amazon Prime The story had real potential but is v... Read full article

Town Without Pity (1961)

By Angela on Aug 31, 2013 From Hollywood Revue

When sixteen-year-old Karin Steinhof (Christine Kaufmann) is brutally raped by four drunken American soldiers — Sergeant Chuck Snyder (Frank Sutton), Private Joey Haines (Mal Sondock), Corporal Jim Larkin (Robert Blake), and Corporal Birdwell Scott (Richard Jaeckel) — the residents of he... Read full article

See all Town Without Pity articles

Quotes from

Cpl. Jim Larkin: [to bartender] Give me a coke, okay?

Sgt. Chuck Snyder: Look, kid, if you want to have any fun at all in this town, you're gonna have to buy something stronger than Coca-Cola.

Sgt. Chuck Snyder: I guess I'm a little nervous about how this will look on my record.

Maj. Steve Garrett: [Slams coffee pot down on table] Record! I've seen it. It's enough to gag a hyena. Personally I hate your guts, but I have to defend you.

Maj. Steve Garrett: [to Frank] Don't try to prove you're a man to me. Prove it to the girl. Don't you know she loves you? Take her and leave this town, as quick as you can, and never come back!

read more quotes from Town Without Pity...

Facts about

Mal Sondock, who played the defendant "Private Joey Haines" was a Texas-born American expatriate who was a disc jockey with AFN while serving with the US Army in Germany. After his enlistment ended in the late 1950s, Sondock stayed in Europe and became famous as a master of ceremonies and radio host at Westdeuscher Rundfunk (WDR) in Cologne. He hosted a very popular American music show on WDR, "Mal Sondock's Hit-Parade". His American-accented German endeared him to his vast audience. He passed away from a long illness in Cologne in 2009, aged 75.

Christine Kaufmann's American film debut.

read more facts about Town Without Pity...