The Postal code refers to the code of letters and number or digits used for sorting of emails or letters. In different countries, it has also different names like Zipping Code, PLZ, postcode, PIN Code and postcode. Sometimes punctuation marks are also used as a part of postal codes.

In February 2005, Universal Postal Union had established the postal code system to 117 of the 190 member countries .of the Universal Postal Union had postal code systems.

Based on geographical area, institutions, government agencies, and large commercial companies are given the special postal code service depending upon the demands.

Postal codes service has its own format and the placement rules depending upon the country. In the countries like In Belarus, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Turkmenistan and Ukraine, the postal codes are written at the beginning of an address whereas in most of the English-speaking countries it is written in the last line of the address.

Postal Codes list source: nepalpost.gov.np

The postal code system plays a vital role in the postal system of the country. In our day-to-day life, we need mailing service the postal code system helps to identify the destinations of the person or company easily. If you are receiving the letter from somewhere with a postal code it makes the postman easy to deliver without any confusion. The documents like letters, parcels, and couriers without postal code sometimes make confusion.

If the names are identical in the area the postman may deliver to the wrong person too. So it is always better to mention postal code in the letters. Although there no trend of using postal codes in Nepal, we require that for various purpose. Here is some of the Importance of postal code that will help you to mention postal code at the time of mailing.

The Importance of postal codes

You can locate the address across the region of the whole country.

It can be easy to confirm the address if the name and places are identical.

It will be easy to deliver your letters and couriers for the various postal services

It will be Fast and efficient for the companies to deliver.

It helps to Enhances the quality of the postal services throughout the country.

It helps to reduce the extra efforts for postmen.

Helps to locate targeted address accurately and efficiency.

For Searching cities on the internet.

In some countries like Canada, Postal codes are used to correlated with database information for the geographic profile, censuses, and health registries too.