The Battle of Belleau Wood (June 1–26, 1918) occurred during the German Spring Offensive in World War I, near the Marne River in France. The battle was fought between the U.S. 2nd and 3rd Divisions along with French and British forces against an assortment of German units. The battle has become a key component of the lore of the United States Marine Corps.

Germans advanced through Belleau Wood as part of a major offensive. The commander of the Marine Brigade, Army General James Harbord, countermanding a French order to dig trenches further to the rear, ordered the Marines to "hold where they stand". With bayonets, the Marines dug shallow fighting positions. German infantry attacked the Marine positions through grain fields with bayonets fixed. The Marines waited until the Germans were within 100 yd before opening deadly rifle fire which mowed down waves of German infantry and forced the survivors to retreat into the woods.

United States forces suffered 9,777 casualties, included 1,811 killed. Many are buried in the nearby Aisne-Marne American Cemetery. After the battle, the French renamed the wood "Bois de la Brigade de Marine" ("Wood of the Marine Brigade") in honor of the Marines' tenacity.

▼ Organizational Supporters - HonorStates.org and the National Unified Archive of American Gold Star Veterans is stringently curated. This attention to quality extends to our supporters program. We carefully research and screen prospective organizations we perceive as being suitably aligned with our mission

▶ Walgreens Supported National Memorial Day Parade ▶ National Memorial Day Parade with Spirit of 45 ▶ Balboa Park Veterans Museum ▶ U-Haul Supported National Memorial Day Parade

▼ Research Contributors - Groups and individuals who have been directly responsible for curating content. Some are experienced historians and archivists, others are enthusiastic members of the public who have suggested content additions or corrections.

Honor States Admin Roy "Joker" Sarah Jo "Lady Chaos"

▼ Primary Sources - These are repositories for artifacts, documents, diaries, manuscripts, and other information that serve as original and authoritative sources of information.

National Archives (NARA) Library of Congress (LOC) Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA) Findagrave.com Ancestry.com

Here is Some Important Information!

American Veterans Center 75th D-Day Congressional Reception

On May 7, 2019 the Honor States organization, in conjunction with Spirit of 45, was selected to be a featured content provider at the American Veterans Center hosted event in tribute to the 75th anniversary of D-Day. This took place at the Rayburn House in Washington DC, the center of Congressional Representative offices.

★ Featured National Supporter

We appreciate the generous help + encouragement from our research teams, volunteers, and foundational supporters. Each of them are essential team members contributing to the archive building progress.

Honor States and the National Unified Archive of American Gold Star Veterans has an established policy of developing "most complete" datasets. These are groups, campaigns and actions of special historical significance. Some notable examples include:

Brothers Who Served

Medal of Honor

Pearl Harbor

Normandy Landings

It's required 8+ years, 1000s of skilled labor hours, scores of active contributors, and millions of visitors to realize the value in the National Unified Archive of American Gold Star Veterans. We have not satisfied everyone. That's impossible, considering the unique + personal needs of individuals. However, our annual positivity ratings exceed 95%. It's tough to get that many people to agree on anything. So, we do seem to be on the right track.

None of us would be who we are, or have what we have, if not for the strengths and sacrifices of others. Most of us enjoy lives of relative freedom. Our freedom has come at enormous cost. The price paid by those who gave their all. In service to their country, states and communities. Each of them a beloved member of our global family.

You meet a new friend. Common question. "Where are you from"? Alabama. Ohio. California. Grew up in the Bronx. Family lives in Pasadena. Went to school in Boston. Worked in Chicago. We have roots everywhere. These state and community identities are foundational in defining who Americans are at heart. It's the who and what we fight for when pressed.

Erica - It makes me happy to Honor the fallen while helping research their backgrounds. I'm eager to get my family involved.

Collin - Your site is providing educational benefits. Kids especially really need to know of the supreme gifts of their freedom.

Suzanna - I commend you for creating this resource. And thanks to the volunteers for providing the extra support in crunch time:)

Travis - What an incredibly determined human being. These guys are what make up the backbone of our country. Thanks for your work.

General Disclaimer - This is a private sector project developed by Hello Pineapple LLC. Although we enter into collaborative associations with many supporting organizations, this site is not owned or operated by any Government body. All information found on this site has been obtained through fair use public contributions. We've done our best to craft a valuable and comprehensive product for the benefit of our world's collective history, however we make no claims of 100% accuracy. :)

Furthermore, the information provided on this website is for informational purposes only and is not intended as legal or contractural advice. Parts of this website may include sections that may be considered advertising in a broad sense. All information is current at the time of publication, however it is subject to change by it's very nature.