In a press release today, Hewlett Packard Enterprise (NYSE:HPE) announced it will acquire Cray Inc. (Nasdaq: CRAY) for approximately $1.3 billion. What is most intriguing about the announcement is that it focuses on data. ““Only by processing and analyzing this data will we be able to unlock the answers to critical challenges across medicine, climate change, space and more. Cray is a global technology leader in supercomputing and shares our deep commitment to innovation. By combining our world-class teams and technology, we will have the opportunity to drive the next generation of high performance computing and play an important part in advancing the way people live and work” was the quote provided by Antonio Neri, President and CEO, HPE.

Cray Research was founded by Seymour Cray in 1972 after his long hardware experience at ERA, UNIVAC and Control Data Corporation. They Cray-1 was the first “famous” supercomputer. Through ups and downs, and a brief merger with Silicon Graphics, Cray always continued research into high performance computing (HPC).

What has changed over the decades was the focus for HPC. In the early days, the key was to perform complex computations in a reasonable time frame. Yes, there was a lot of data, but the clear attack vector was in the complex manipulation of that data.

Along came the internet, then the web, then social media, IoT and other modern sectors that massively increased the volume of data. What happened is that even simple data manipulation became bogged down by the large amounts of data to be processed. HPC still has needs to manage complex calculations, but handling large volumes of data in real-time and near real-time has become increasingly important.

The scale of the modern HPC challenge has become increasingly difficult for a smaller company to address. The acquisition makes clear sense from both sides. HPE gains a strong team who have great experience in HPC, while that team gains the resources of a much larger computing company and a way to better link their HPC knowledge into the wider technology infrastructure.

I’m in complete agreement with the advantages the press release describes:

Future HPC-as-a-Service and AI / ML analytics through HPE GreenLake

A comprehensive end-to-end portfolio of HPC infrastructure – compute, high-performance storage, system interconnects, software and services supplementing existing HPE capabilities to address the full spectrum of customers’ data-intensive needs

Differentiated next-generation technology addressing data intensive workloads

Increased innovation and technological leadership from leveraging greater scale, combined talent and expanded technology capabilities

Enhanced supply chain capabilities leveraging US-based manufacturing

Cray, in all its incarnations, has a long and storied history. That it’s being acquired is kind of sad. At the same time, for those of us long in the industry, it is not only a smart move but one that brings the nostalgia that the organizational children of Seymour Cray, Bill Hewlett and David Packard joining forces brings a smile to my face.