NEW CRAY RESEARCH SUPERSERVERS COMBINE STRONG

PRICE-PERFORMANCE, RAS FEATURES, LARGE NUMBER OF

APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND TECHNICAL DATA

CENTERS

With up To 64 Processors, CS6400 Products Are World’s

Fastest SPARC/Solaris Systems

SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 25, 1993 — Cray Research Superservers

(CRS), the Ore.-based subsidiary of Cray Research, Inc.

(NYSE:CYR), today announced a new Superserver product line.

Martin Buchanan, general manager of CRS, said the new CRAY

SUPERSERVER 6400 (CS6400) systems, with up to 64

processors, are the world’s fastest and most expandable

SPARC/Solaris-compliant systems.

“Our’s are the first high-end servers to combine the strong

price-performance of Sun products with the reliability,

availability and serviceability (RAS) features data center

managers expect,” Buchanan said.

“The CS6400 products are enterprise servers aimed at the

rightsizing’ market, especially commercial and technical data

centers concerned about the high cost of upgrading and running

mainframe systems,” he said. The products were developed by

CRS under a Jan. 1992 technology agreement between Cray

Research and Sun Microsystems, Inc., Mountain View, Calif.,

and are a binary-compatible upward extension of Sun’s product

line.

“The SPARC architecture is a powerful foundation for cost-

effective scalability,” said Scott McNealy, Sun chairman and

chief executive officer. “The Sun and CRS product lines will

form a price-performance continuum from SPARCclassics to

SPARCcenter servers to the new CS6400 products. Sun users

who require more power on the network can move to the binary-

compatible CS6400 systems with no migration problems.” The

CS6400 systems run the current version of Sun’s Solaris

operating environment, which is an implementation of UNIX

System V Release 4, he said. “Any program that runs on a Sun

system will run on the new CRS systems without modification,

and vice versa.”

“With the CS6400, CRS will address commercial markets with

non-traditional Cray applications,” said Lester Davis, Cray

Research chief operating officer. “That’s why CRS is

organized as a separate business unit with its own hardware

and software development capabilities. Martin Buchanan has

assembled a strong marketing and sales team with many years

of experience selling into commercial markets, as well as into

the technical computing arena. We’re confident that the

enterprise server market is ready to move to Cray Research

added value, especially when this is available on the same

price-performance curve as Sun products.”

Buchanan said CS6400 systems are expandable and can scale

with customers’ data processing needs. The systems are

offered with four to 64 SuperSPARC RISC microprocessors

(initially at 60 MHz), 256 megabytes (million bytes) to 16

gigabytes (billion bytes) of central memory, 1.3 gigabytes per

second peak memory bandwidth, and more than two terabytes

(trillion bytes) of online disk storage. U.S. pricing begins at

under $400,000 for the four-processor version, and at $2.5

million for the top-of-the-line 64-processor system. He said

CRS expects to sell hundreds of the new systems.

Initial shipments of the new systems will begin in late 1993,

Buchanan said. Volume shipments are scheduled to begin in

first-quarter 1994. CRS is working with customers and

prospects in the traditional Sun and Cray Research markets, as

well as new markets. CRS is in negotiations with several

organizations in the electronic computer-aided design (ECAD),

transportation/distribution, manufacturing, university and

electric utility markets and will announce these customers

when order agreements are signed, Buchanan said. Separately

today, CRS announced that SICAN, a leading German

microelectronics firm, has ordered a CS6400 system. SICAN is

scheduled to receive a 48-processor system by mid-1994.

According to Buchanan, the large number of applications

available on SPARC/Solaris systems was an important

attraction for CRS. “We are leveraging SPARC’s leadership in

the RISC market through binary compatibility with Sun’s

product line. As we work with independent software vendors

to have their products supported, technical ports are not an

issue.” Buchanan cited a 1992 International Data Corporation

study showing SPARC with a 57 percent marketshare for the

UNIX RISC market.

Buchanan said CRS is in discussions with several major

developers of key software packages and connectivity

products, including relational database management systems

(RDBMS), transaction processing monitors, fourth generation

languages, computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools,

report generation packages, hierarchical storage management

(HSM) solutions and mainframe connectivity tools. He said CRS

recently benchmarked Oracle, the most popular database

server, on an early version CS6400 system.

“On the benchmark, which simulated 500 users accessing,

updating and querying data, the CS6400 performed comparable

to a mid-range mainframe system, which would cost more than

$5 million, five times that of the 16-processor CS6400

system benchmarked,” said Darshan Karki, president of

SuperSolutions Corp., Minneapolis, a firm that re-engineers

enterprise-wide applications and system software and

assisted CRS with the recent Oracle benchmark.

Initial target markets for the new systems are: ECAD,

financial service and investment banking, general engineering,

government, petroleum, and telecommunications. According to

A.J. Berkeley, CRS senior director of sales and marketing, CRS

will market and sell the new products through its own

dedicated international sales force, the Cray Research sales

force, a global network of systems integrators and value-

added resellers (VARs), and joint initiatives with Sun. “Sun

has been extremely helpful in pointing us toward some of the

right parties and we’ve supplemented this with our own

contacts. We expect to announce key agreements later this

year,” he said

According to Buchanan, “Our relationship with Sun goes beyond

merely licensing their technology. We are working closely

with several Sun business units on interoperability and general

hardware and software engineering for future systems.”

He said the CS6400 systems bring together Sun hardware and

software technology with Cray Research value-added features

for high performance and system reliability and serviceability.

“The CS6400 delivers features to the open systems

environment that the data center users have enjoyed for

years,” Buchanan said. “The new system has built-in

reliability, availability and serviceability features — a first

in the high-end, open systems server arena.”

For example, should a component fail, the system

automatically reboots, isolates the fault, and reconfigures

itself. Uptime is further maximized with “hot swap”

capabilities, which allow a failed module to be removed and

replaced in the system while it’s still running, Buchanan said.

Upgrades can also be done while the system is online. An

independent service processor performs online and remote

diagnostics, logging, and monitoring functions and data is

protected through features such as disk mirroring, page

isolation, and memory scrubbing, he said.

“There are many exciting aspects about CRS and its

Superserver,” said Jim Johnson, chairman of The Standish

Group, a market research firm based in South Yarmouth, Mass.

“Most important is the availability of Cray’s high-end

technology while following a pricing strategy similar to Sun’s.

The key data center management products…will give the kind

of performance and quality that mission-critical applications

require. The CRS Superserver will have some of the features

that data center managers take for granted that are not in

today’s UNIX servers. These are essential features and people

will look very favorably on them at the kind of price and

performance CRS offers.”

Buchanan said Cray Research was the first high-performance

computing company to embrace the UNIX standard. “Over the

past decade, Cray Research has substantially enhanced UNICOS,

the company’s 64-bit symmetric multiprocessing

implementation of the UNIX operating system. Many key

features of Cray’s supercomputing environment — such as

sophisticated tape management, networked batch processing,

systems management software, program debugging tools and

high-performance compilers — will also be important for

commercial and technical users of the CS6400 systems and

will be available in 1994.”

CRS also announced today that:

o CRS has signed a memorandum of understanding with Sun

Microsystems Computer Corporation for SunIntegration

Services to become a reseller of the CS6400 system;

o Electricite’ de France, the world’s largest electrical

utility, Clamart, France, will be an early customer for

CRS’ new CS6400 system;

o CRS has signed a memorandum of understanding with

Oracle to make Oracle7 available on the new CS6400

systems;

o CRS has signed a memorandum of understanding with the

ASK Group, developers of the ASK INGRES Intelligent

Database system, to make the INGRES database product

available on the CS6400 system;

o INFORMIX-OnLine will be available on the CS6400

systems;

o Sybase, Inc.’s support for Cray Research’s high-end

SPARC/Solaris-compatible strategy;

o CRS has signed an agreement with Brixton Systems, Inc.,

Cambridge, Mass., to make available on the CS6400

system Brixton’s suite of connectivity software, which

links IBM mainframes with open systems computers,

enabling data to be shared between these systems;

o CRS and Information Management Company (IMC) have

signed an agreement for IMC to make Open TransPort for

MVS and TUXEDO transaction processing system available

on the CS6400 system;

o CRS and T-Mass GmbH have signed an agreement for T-

Mass to support and distributed UniTree on the CS6400

systems; and

o CRS has signed an agreement with JYACC, Inc. to provide

its JAM Version 6 Application Development Toolset on

the CS6400.

CRS is dedicated to creating the world’s leading

SPARC/Solaris-compliant computer systems.

Cray Research creates the most powerful, highest-quality

computational tools for solving the world’s most challenging

scientific and industrial problems.

###