Cray Computer Corp. Fundamental Company Report provides a complete overview of the company’s affairs. All available data is presented in a comprehensive and easily accessed format. The report includes financial and SWOT information, industry analysis, opinions, estimates, plus annual and quarterly forecasts made by stock market experts. The report also enables direct comparison to be made between Cray Computer Corp. and its competitors. This provides our Clients with a clear understanding of Cray Computer Corp. position in the Industry.

The report contains detailed information about Cray Computer Corp. that gives an unrivalled in-depth knowledge about internal business-environment of the company: data about the owners, senior executives, locations, subsidiaries, markets, products, and company history.

Another part of the report is a SWOT-analysis carried out for Cray Computer Corp.. It involves specifying the objective of the company's business and identifies the different factors that are favorable and unfavorable to achieving that objective. SWOT-analysis helps to understand company’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and possible threats against it.

The Cray Computer Corp. financial analysis covers the income statement and ratio trend-charts with balance sheets and cash flows presented on an annual and quarterly basis. The report outlines the main financial ratios pertaining to profitability, margin analysis, asset turnover, credit ratios, and company’s long-term solvency. This sort of company's information will assist and strengthen your company’s decision-making processes.

In the part that describes Cray Computer Corp. competitors and the industry in whole, the information about company's financial ratios is compared to those of its competitors and to the industry. The unique analysis of the market and company’s competitors along with detailed information about the internal and external factors affecting the relevant industry will help to manage your business environment. Your company’s business and sales activities will be boosted by gaining an insight into your competitors’ businesses.

Also the report provides relevant news, an analysis of PR-activity, and stock price movements. The latter are correlated with pertinent news and press releases, and annual and quarterly forecasts are given by a variety of experts and market research firms. Such information creates your awareness about principal trends of Cray Computer Corp. business.

About Cray Computer Corp.

Cray Computer Corporation (the Company) was incorporated under the laws of Delaware in 1989, as a wholly owned subsidiary of Cray Research, Inc. (CRI). The company filed a voluntary petition under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Colorado (the Court) in 1995.

The Company was engaged in the design, development, manufacture and marketing of the CRAY-3/Super Scalable System (SSS) and CRAY-4 high-performance computer systems and the marketing of the CRAY-3 supercomputer system. The CRAY-3 and CRAY-4 are modular upgradeable general purpose supercomputers designed to provide balanced, high-performance computing for many types of scientific and engineering applications.

The CRAY-3, CRAY-3/SSS, and CRAY-4 incorporate a modular or building-block architecture designed to allow customers to add processing and memory capability. The CRAY 3/SSS is designed to utilize a 2-processor CRAY-3 in conjunction with Processor in-Memory (PIM) chips developed and manufactured by a third party to provide vector parallel processing, scalable parallel processing, and the combination of both.

The software environment for the CRAY-3 and CRAY-4 was based on the June 1989 version of the UNICOS operating system used by many supercomputers, including the CRAY-2, which was developed and sold by CRI. This compatibility permits most software, including third party software applications, used in the CRAY-2 system to be used with the CRAY-3.

Critical Supercomputing Parameters

The critical supercomputing parameters by which supercomputers are traditionally measured are performance, memory size, and memory bandwidth.

Memory bandwidth (speed) is measured in gigabytes per second and impacts the balance of the system (i.e., the ability of the memory to keep the processors fully occupied). The bandwidth of memory is critical because it defines what "immediately accessible" means in terms of how long it takes data to get from common memory to the processing part of the system and back. A balanced supercomputer system addresses the issue of matching processor performance with memory bandwidth and memory size. The only way to guarantee optimal performance for a given application is to have the data immediately accessible in common memory. Hence, as the model complexity grows, so must the size and speed of the common memory required to support it.

Architecture and Hardware

The essential design parameters of vector processing computer architecture include fast processor speed combined with a large, high speed memory in a dense packaging arrangement.

The CRAY-3 featured a large main memory that was addressable by all the processors in a system. This memory may be as large as 1 gigaword in an 8- processor system. Each processor contains two memory ports for simultaneously reading and writing memory. The Company's present emphasis was on the manufacture and sale of 4- and 8-processor CRAY-3 systems.

Peripheral Equipment and Networking

The CRAY-3 and CRAY-4 were designed to support up to 28 standard HIPPI channels, on a 8-processor CRAY-3. These channels are used to connect to high speed networks, other computers, and peripheral devices.

The CRAY-3 and the CRAY-4 are designed to support a number of peripherals currently used with CRAY-2 systems. This would have facilitated a customer's migration from a CRAY-2 to a CRAY-3 or CRAY-4 system. Initial network connections use the existing CRAY-2 interfaces.

The CRAY-4

The CRAY-4 was designed to provide prospective customers with flexible CPU and memory configurations. The CRAY-4 design uses an extension of the technology developed for the CRAY-3, including the use of similar architecture, hardware, manufacturing techniques, peripheral equipment, and networking.

CRAY-4 Node

The CRAY-4 was the first high-end supercomputer to support the IEEE Floating Point format. Additionally, the CRAY-4 and its system software are designed to support the concept of vector/parallel distributed computing.

CRAY-3/Super Scalable System

The CRAY-3/SSS is a system that combines proven traditional supercomputer vector/parallel architecture with a SIMD massively parallel supercomputer architecture. It is an extension of the supercomputer system's high speed common memory which incorporates thousands of simple yet powerful processors that can be called upon to perform extremely complex functions at extraordinary speeds.

Software

The Company's software provides an effective and efficient program development and execution environment on the CRAY-3 which both supports the migration of codes from other platforms and the rapid exploitation of the CRAY-3 for new problems. This software environment was being extended to provide similar levels of support for the CRAY-4 system.

CRAY-3/Super Scalable System

In 1994, the Company entered into a joint development contract with the National security Agency (NSA) to produce a CRAY-3/SSS offering vector parallel processing, scalable parallel processing, and the combination of both. The CRAY-3/SSS is designed to utilize a CRAY-3 and a large number of Processor-In-Memory (PIM) chips developed by the Supercomputing Research Center of the Institute for Defense Analyses and manufactured by National Semiconductor Corporation.

Competition

The Company's primary competitors for traditional vector supercomputers were CRI, International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), Fujitsu, Hitachi, and Nippon Electric Corporation. These MPP competitors include CRI, IBM, Intel Supercomputer, Convex and Silicon Graphics.

The above Company Fundamental Report is a half-ready report and contents are subject to change.

It means that we have all necessary data in our database to prepare the report but need 2-3 days to complete it. During this time we are also updating the report with respect to the current moment. So, you can get all the most recent data available for the same price. Please note that preparation of additional types of analyses requires extra time.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

DISCLAIMER

1. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. COMPANY PROFILE

1.1. Key facts

1.2. Financial Performance

1.3. Key Executives

1.4. Ownership and Major Holders

1.5. Company History

2. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. BUSINESS OVERVIEW

2.1. Business Description

2.2. Major Products and Services

2.3. Markets and Sales Activities

2.4. Locations, Subsidiaries, Operating Units

3. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. SWOT ANALYSIS

3.1. Overview

3.2. Strengths

3.3. Weaknesses

3.4. Opportunities

3.5. Threats

4. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

4.1. Financial Statements

4.1.1. Income Statement

4.1.2. Balance Sheet

4.1.3. Cash Flow

4.2. Financial Ratios

4.2.1. Profitability

4.2.2. Margin Analysis

4.2.3. Asset Turnover

4.2.4. Credit Ratios

4.2.5. Long-Term Solvency

4.2.6. Growth Over Prior Year

4.2.7. Financial Ratios Charts

4.3. Stock Market Snapshot

5. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. COMPETITORS AND INDUSTRY ANALYSIS

5.1. Cray Computer Corp. Direct Competitors

5.2. Comparison of Cray Computer Corp. and Direct Competitors Financial Ratios

5.3. Comparison of Cray Computer Corp. and Direct Competitors Stock Charts

5.4. Cray Computer Corp. Industry Analysis

5.4.1. Industry Snapshot

5.4.2. Cray Computer Corp. Industry Position Analysis

6. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. NEWS & EVENTS

6.1. News & PR Activity Analysis

6.2. IR Corporate News

6.3. Marketing News

6.4. Corporate Events

7. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. EXPERTS REVIEW1

7.1. Experts Consensus

7.2. Experts Revisions

8. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. ENHANCED SWOT ANALYSIS2

9. UNITED STATES PESTEL ANALYSIS2

9.1. Political Factors

9.2. Economic Factors

9.3. Social Factors

9.4. Technological Factors

9.5. Environmental Factors

9.6. Legal Factors

10. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. IFE, EFE, IE MATRICES2

10.1. Internal Factor Evaluation Matrix

10.2. External Factor Evaluation Matrix

10.3. Internal External Matrix

11. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. PORTER FIVE FORCES ANALYSIS2

12. CRAY COMPUTER CORP. VRIO ANALYSIS2

APPENDIX: RATIO DEFINITIONS

LIST OF FIGURES

Cray Computer Corp. Annual Revenues in Comparison with Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit

Profit Margin Chart

Operating Margin Chart

Return on Equity (ROE) Chart

Return on Assets (ROA) Chart

Debt to Equity Chart

Current Ratio Chart

Cray Computer Corp. 1-year Stock Charts

Cray Computer Corp. 5-year Stock Charts

Cray Computer Corp. vs. Main Indexes 1-year Stock Chart

Cray Computer Corp. vs. Direct Competitors 1-year Stock Charts

Cray Computer Corp. Article Density Chart

1 – Data availability depends on company’s security policy.

2 – These sections are available only when you purchase a report with appropriate additional types of analyses.

The complete financial data is available for publicly traded companies.

SWOT Analysis

SWOT, which stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats, is an analytical framework that identifies the internal and external factors that are favorable and unfavorable for a company.

Enhanced SWOT Analysis

Enhanced SWOT is a 3×3 grid that arranges strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats into one scheme:

How to use the strengths to take advantage of the opportunities?

How to use the strengths to reduce likelihood and impact of the threats?

How to overcome the weaknesses that obstruct taking advantage of the opportunities?

How to overcome the weaknesses that can make the threats a reality?

Upon answering these questions a company can develop a project plan to improve its business performance.

PESTEL Analysis

PESTEL (also termed as PESTLE) is an ideal tool to strategically analyze what influence different outside factors – political, economic, sociocultural, technological, environmental and legal – exert on a business to later chart its long term targets.

Being part of the external analysis when carrying out a strategic assessment or performing a market study, PESTEL gives an overview of diverse macro-environmental factors that any company should thoughtfully consider. By perceiving these outside environments, businesses can maximally benefit from the opportunities while minimizing the threats to the organization.

Key Factors Examined by PESTEL Analysis:

Political – What opportunities and pressures are brought by political bodies and what is the degree of public regulations’ impact on the business?

Economic – What economic policies, trends and structures are expected to affect the organization, what is this influence’s degree?

Sociological – What cultural and societal aspects will work upon the demand for the business’s products and operations?

Technological – What impact do the technological aspects, innovations, incentives and barriers have on the organization?

Environmental – What environmental and ecological facets, both locally and farther afield, are likely to predetermine the business?

Legal – What laws and legislation will exert influence on the style the business is carried out?

IFE, EFE, IE Matrices

The Internal Factor Evaluation matrix (IFE matrix) is a strategic management tool helping audit or evaluate major weaknesses and strengths in a business’s functional areas. In addition, IFE matrix serves as a basis for identifying and assessing relationships amongst those areas. The IFE matrix is utilised in strategy formulation.

The External Factor Evaluation matrix (EFE matrix) is a tool of strategic management that is typically utilised to assess current market conditions. It is an ideal instrument for visualising and prioritising the threats and opportunities a firm is facing.

The essential difference between the above mentioned matrices lies in the type of factors incorporated in the model; whilst the latter is engaged in internal factors, the former deals exceptionally with external factors – those exposed to social, political, economic, legal, etc. external forces.

Being a continuation of the EFE matrix and IFE matrix models, the Internal External matrix (IE matrix) rests upon an investigation of external and internal business factors integrated into one suggestive model.

Porter Five Forces Analysis

The Porter’s five forces analysis studies the industry of operation and helps the company find new sources of competitive advantage. The analysis surveys an industry through five major questions:

What composes a threat of substitute products and services?

Is there a threat of new competitors entering the market?

What is the intensity of competitive rivalry?

How big is the bargaining power of buyers?

How significant is the bargaining power of suppliers?

VRIO Analysis

VRIO stands for Value, Rarity, Imitability, Organization. This analysis helps to evaluate all company’s resources and capabilities and bring them together into one aggregate table that includes:

Tangible resources

Financial

Physical

Technological

Organizational

Intangible resources

Human

Innovation and Creativity

Reputation

Organizational capabilities

The result of the analysis gives a clear picture of company’s competitive and economic implications, answering the questions if the resources mentioned above are:

Valuable?

Rare?

Costly to imitate?

Organized properly?