Duffy Presentation

Carol Ann Duffy is one of the most popular and respected poets of our era. She has won many prestigious awards for her poetry and her status is further confirmed by the inclusion of her work as a key study area for the current A level syllabus. Her style is observantly psychoanalytical, philosophical, surrealist, defiantly varied, challenging and empathetic. She fuses a romanticism of expression with the realism of clarity, simplicity and honesty in her use of language and subject matter. In his introduction to Duffy’s ‘Extracts’, Deryn Rees Jones describes this aspect as her, attempt to “strip bare the linguistic devices of poetic language” (Rees Jones, 2002?, p.1)

Duffy thereby portrays the society we live in, with all its radiant and disturbing elements in a philosophically provocative style. She constantly challenges preconceptions of gender, class, ethnicity, profession and even representation itself. Her renowned poetry collection ‘Selling Manhattan’ contains many examples of her social psychoanalysis with poems such as ‘Model Village’. This explores the psychological deviance of citizens of a village, from their expected social positions and behaviour. She thus, firstly explores the human mind and its hidden truths. Secondly, she reveals the inadequate nature of language as a means of representing human nature; and thirdly, she proclaims our indefinable individualism which defies categorisation.

Duffy’s favourite subject areas include childhood, memory, love, society and the self. As Rees Jones notes, “The snappy sentences, and apparent simplicity of her work, however, do not prevent Duffy from addressing complex philosophical issues about the function of language and the construction of the self” (Rees Jones, 2002?, p.1). As Jane Thomas similarly observes, in her essay, ’The Intolerable Wrestle with Words’, Duffy’s poetry articulates a key contemporary philosophical issue, “The extent to which language constructs rather than reflects meaning” (p. 78). She goes on to explain, “If we inhabit a social order which is dominated by white, heterosexual, middle – class, able – bodied men then the meanings we attach to the words ‘coloured’, ‘homosexual’, ‘disabled’ or ‘female’ will automatically reflect deviation from the norm” (p.78).

Duffy seemingly seeks to challenge the idea of ‘otherness’ either by attempting to represent a wide range of gender, class, nationality and generational perspectives; or by keeping the identity of the ‘speaker’ ambiguous. In Rapture, Duffy adopts the latter approach, hence making the sentiment of the poetry accessible to all and underlining the universality of love. Yet, as the reader progresses through the book, the sense of autobiography and therefore a lesbian love story, is inescapable. Duffy retains ambiguous subtlety in her descriptions of her beloved; yet little clues imply a feminine subject. For example, in ‘Venus’ (p.44) Duffy describes the ‘small pulse’ of her lover’s wrist under her thumb and in ‘Your Move’ (p.55) Duffy describes a goblin greeting her lover with “your servant ma’am”. It is also noteworthy that none of the Rapture poems imply a specifically male subject of the poet’s affection. Yet the identity of either poet or subject is really unimportant here, as Rapture is a journey through the different stages of love that can be felt by all.

Duffy’s journey through love logically begins with a poem which describes the heightened sensations stimulated when we fall in love. This first poem, entitled ‘You’ is, (like most of those which follow) written in the first person. This increases the sense of intimacy and autobiography; the disclosure of the poet’s personal and private thoughts and feelings. Here Duffy describes her lover’s name as being, “like tears, soft, salt on my lips”; using taste to describe the emotional associations we draw from a name. Then she moves to sound, the sound of the lover’s name described like a glowing, musical work of art in its “bright syllables”. Then she explores the effect that the very sound of the name has on her senses, mesmerizing her, “like a charm, a spell”. The exploration of the senses continues in ‘Haworth’ (p.6) which uses all five senses to describe how the poet’s physical experience of a summer’s day in the countryside reminds her of her lover; from the touch of the summer grass mirroring her hair to the sound of a bell echoing her name. Hence Duffy cleverly fuses her characteristically psychoanalytical style with romantic associations which fill the head with beautiful imagery and transport you into a sacred sphere of nature, memory and fantasy.

‘Forest’ and ‘River’ (pp 4-5) take us deeper into this sensual, pastoral world. Here Duffy describes lovers united in the freedom and intensity of wild countryside; nature itself becomes a metaphor for sexual intimacy, the river currents like “clear limbs parting and closing”, for instance. This is much like a line from a poem entitled ‘Sleeping’ in Duffy’s earlier Mean Time poetry collection. This reads, “Under the dark warm waters of sleep your hands part me” and continues to suggest either rape or sexual dreams. Duffy is far more obscure and romantic in her sexual metaphors in Rapture; they contain no dark undertone. She appears unwilling to shatter the romantic mood which runs throughout the book.

The Rapture poems also explore the pain of distance between lovers and time shared and lost. She exclaims the passionate longing for the absent lover in ‘Absence’ and ‘World’, amongst others. ‘World’ echoes ‘Miles Away’ from the earlier Selling Manhattan, and also the recent Katie Tunstall song with its description of the lover who is literally “on the other side of the world”.

Here we get the first of many clues that the true subject of Rapture may be Duffy’s American lover. The poems ‘Hand’, ‘Rapture’ and ‘The Love Poem’ reinforce this idea with descriptions of the poet reaching out to the distant lover with lines like, “Huge skies connect us, joining here to there” (‘Rapture’) and “O my America!” (‘The Love Poem’). These also revive a common theme of Duffy’s poetry, that of alienation and isolation; previously explored in poems such as ‘Foreign’ from Selling Manhattan and ‘Room’ from Mean Time (1999).

Duffy characteristically uses juxtaposition for emphasis within Rapture, something which Jones describes as a surrealist tool. Duffy, for instance, contrasts the joy of love with the pain of mourning by following the optimistic poem ‘Rapture’ with ‘Elegy’; which delicately yet devastatingly describes the agony of the loss of the beloved to intractable death. Yet Duffy softens the blow with the closing lines which imply that the poet is only musing of a future time when they are both dead, saying, “were I alive, I would lie on the grass above your bones till I mirrored your pose” (p.17). This is arguably also characteristic of Duffy’s ability to fuse realism of theme with romanticism of language. This study of the darker side of love becomes increasingly surrealist with ‘Row’, (p.18) which describes arguments which shatter and defile love, sending it ‘running’. Here Duffy describes self – shredding pillows, bruised air and the act of dressing as erasing oneself.

‘Text’, introduces a more contemporary issue. It astutely explores how the medium of mobile texting has become an imperfect but addictive medium for communication. Here Duffy imagines lovers desperately trying to decipher deep meaning in each other’s coded messages. This theme is further explored in ‘Quickdraw’ (p.30) which describes how telephones of all kinds can be used like weapons, words like bullets of love or hate; modern day Cupid’s arrows which Duffy describes as “silver bullets”. Hence Duffy retains the romantic theme whilst injecting a note of contemporary comic realism with her acknowledgement of this modern medium.

The title of the next poem in the book, ‘Name’ reinforces the theme of the importance and influence of the lover’s name on the senses of the poet. This reoccurs in many following poems, not only ‘Haworth’, but also ‘Absence’, ‘Betrothal’ and ‘Ithaca’, to name a few. In ‘Syntax’ Duffy similarly muses on the preferable romance of the historic word ‘thou’ over ‘you’ to describe your beloved (p.53). Hence she explores the application and power of language throughout Rapture.

Language is a common theme for Duffy, discussed by Jane Thomas in her essay ‘The Chant of Magic Words Repeatedly’; in which she describes Duffy’s poetry as being, “concerned with the nature of human identity and its construction in, and by, language” (p.121). She argues that Duffy’s early poems, “express nostalgia for a core individual essence that is ungendered and culturally ‘innocent’” (p.121). She goes on to describe how language itself can produce meaning and construct our identities according to dominant ideologies; yet without it we have no way of conveying our selves. She says, “It is impossible to conceive of a self outside of language” (p.122). Then, imagining Duffy’s perspective, she says, “The issue, therefore, for a feminist and a poet, is how to take part in the symbolic order but at the same time question its values and meanings” (p.122).

Thomas goes on to quote Derrida’s theory that we tend to associate words with the contexts in which they have been previously used and therefore attach those previously signified meanings to them. She quotes Judith Butler who says, “In a sense, all signification takes place within the orbit of the compulsion to repeat” (p.123).

Repetition is another one of Duffy’s characteristic devices and she uses repetition of words, themes and sensations throughout Rapture whenever she wants to emphasize meaning or draw a particular focus. She uses this device most poignantly and markedly in ‘Whatever’ and ‘Midsummer Night’. In ‘Whatever’ the words ‘I’ll take’ are repeated in almost every stanza to show her total commitment to and acceptance of her lover in a poem that seems to echo wedding vows. The desperation this conveys also echoes the lament of a lover whose love is leaving or dying. ‘Midsummer Night’ continues this unsettling theme with the repetition of the words, ‘Not there’. The next poem to follow is ‘Grief’, which more clearly describes the poet mourning the death of the lover. You might think Duffy would finish there, but Rapture continues through a mixture of emotions and romantic imaginings, mixing the theme of death with mythology, art, the American lover, and the culmination of the seasonal theme that runs throughout the book.

Rees Jones identifies many poets as having influenced Duffy; ranging broadly from international poets such as Jaques Prevert and Pablo Neruda, to the more classical British giants such as Wordsworth, Browning and Auden. He argues that she gets her surrealism from Thomas and Hughes and from her interest in philosophy and surrealist art. He sees her characteristic nostalgia in Larkin and her fascination with language in W.S. Graham. He also cites the radical poets of the 1970s, presumably as a political and possibly feminist influence. He describes Duffy’s feminism through her use of “ungendered voices” (p.3, ‘Love Poems’) and declares that, “she refigures heterocentric representations of desire both to affirm and problematize identity” (p. 3, ‘Love Poems’). Yet, Duffy herself is quoted as saying, “I have never in my life sat down and thought, ‘I will write a feminist poem’” (p. 2, ‘Extracts’).

Rapture is a good example of this ungendered approach. With its subject never specifically gendered and its message a universal representation of love, Rapture doesn’t preach feminism. Instead, it merely shows the folly of assigning emotions to specific people by describing feelings which we can all relate to, regardless of gender or any other social categorisation. Rapture explores the highs and lows of love, its obsessive quality, its overpowering intensity, its fears and fantasies, longings and laments, fiery passions and gentle reflections. Yet though it is therefore characteristically psychoanalytical, it is above all a romantic trip into the dreamlike state of rapture that we feel when fully consumed by love. This is often achieved by the use of nature as an analogy for romance, freedom of expression and beauty. It is therefore strongly reminiscent of Wordsworth and Keats.