A mate of mine grew up with Colin (Cozy) Powell and tells a great story of what could have been a one-off supergroup :-

Cozy went back to the area he grew up in and went into their local pub and met up with his "old gang" and over the course of the night he found out that my mates sister (lets call her Janice) was getting married soon and offered as a wedding present to her to play at the wedding reception for free with a "few mates" who he knew were free at that time.

She flatly and politly turned him down as "your stuff is much too heavy and you wont play any disco stuff I like" ......it was left at that and she said she was going to go ahead with using the services of the local "Hot Dave's Mobil Disco" .

Later on in the night are they were at the urinal my mate asked him

"So, Colin what other mates were you thinking of when you made the offer?"

"Oh I know Graham Bonnet is free , so is Keith (Emmerson) , and he'd be up for it...." ........

(He also mentioned some other muso of equal stature who's name I can't for the life of me remember !)

So there you go , she had the chance of a FREE supergroup to play at her wedding and turned it down in lieu of a village-hall bop-around-the-handbags.

You just know it isn't going to go well if Ritchie Blackmore is in the band at your wedding She made a good call.

I was actually pretty impressed with the fusion stuff on Cozy's solo albums. If there was any criticism, it would be that it was a little "old hat" by 1980, in view of that scene covering a lot of ground back in 1972/3.

I think there was also a period where every solo album from an Ex- Deep Purple/Ex Rainbow/Ex-Whitesnake member featured the same old names. It was a little tiresome to see Don Airy Neil Murray, Jon Lord, Bernie Marsden etc all appearing on each others albums and being in each others pockets. I'm really talking about Cozy's stuff, Bernie Marsden's solos albums and Jon Lord's Before I forget. It was all just a little incestuous and bland. (Maybe if Jeff Beck had stepped up and played more).

Good call. I love Cozy's contributions to this album.

I only got to see him live once. Caught him on the Emerson Lake & Powell tour. Unfortunately, he made heavy use of those electronic synth-drums which were en vogue at the time so I did not find his performance very memorable. Ah, the 80's

I never really got into his solo stuff, but he is still my favorite drummer. It always amazed me how I would like something, only to find out he drummed on it.

All of the Rainbow stuff

Whitesnake - Slide It In

Black Sabbath - Headless Cross and Tyr (the best Tony Martin era albums, IMO).

Robert Plant - "Slow Dancer" (better than most of In Through The Out Door)

For those who have never seen Cozy live (like myself), I would suggest acquiring the Rainbow Live In Munich 1977 DVD.

The most iconic image that I have in my mind of Cozy is in the Whitesnake "Slow An' Easy" video. There is a moment right before the handclaps where Cozy flings his right arm across his body from the left to hit a cymbal on the right side of him with incredible force.

He was just the perfect hard rock drummer.

That's a funny story! I would have killed to have Bonnet and Cozy play at my wedding! I would even let them bring Emerson in!