When things reach an end, they should end. Blackadder came to an end in the mud and blood of Flanders Field with the last episode of Blackadder Goes Forth, and from there there could be no more. But people are no longer satisfied with endings. They want more. And in a business that is based on giving the people what they want, they get given more, when they should really be told no: you’ll spoil it.

In both 1988 and 1999, fans of Blackadder were given the more they wanted, in the form of two Specials. Both reunited the actors who’d appeared in the three series written by Curtis and Elton, both had the odd good line here or there but both went for the tactic of dredging up the past in the hope that the audience would fall for reminders. Sadly, the public did. Both Specials are highly acclaimed, but not by me.

Blackadder’s Christmas Carol had an ingenious idea. to parody the Dickens classic by making its Ebeneezer (Blackadder) into a kind, generous, helpful man being taken advantage of left, right and centre, until one single ghost visits him and, showing him how his ancestors behaved, converts him into exactly the kind of mean-spirited, selfish, arrogant and nasty plotter they are. It could have been a neat sketch at, say, fifteen minutes, but instead it ran almost three times that length, as Curtis and Elton laid it on with decorator’s brushes, attempted to replicate both Blackadder II and Blackadder the Third in brief sketches that only emphasised that they had nothing new to contribute to either series and attempted a bizarrely SF future full of incredibly cheapo SF cliches that, in being thought of as satire on the Flash Gordon era of things, betrayed just how ill-informed the writers were.

Add to that the fact that A Christmas Carol has been adapted, presented and lampooned more times than any of us have had hot dinners – I must have been about seven when I saw the Mr Magoo version – and the idea is just cheap and lazy.

Blackadder Back and Forth, revived for the millennium and set on 31 December 1999, was a co-production with multiple partners, including Sky so enjoyed far better production vallues than the series had ever had before, but couldn’t come up with any newer idea than jumping about in past times, though we only revisited the Elizabethan Era this time. The notion was that the contemporary Edmund Blackadder, entertaining familiar faces on Millennium Eve, claims to have built a working Time Machine from Leonardo da Vinci’s original plans. He bets his friends £10,000 each that he’ll bring back authemtic items from the past that they nominate.

Of course it’s a scam and Baldrick has the props waiting but the twist is that Baldrick has actually built a really working Time Machine. The pair bat about the past, turning up here and there, travelling through space in a manner that predates the modern day Doctor Who TARDIS by years. Their blundering interferes with history so that when they finally get back, no-one has heard of Robin Hood or William Shakespeare and Napoleon won at Waterloo so everyone’s French instead.

The writers then bungle the ending by overdoing it. First Edmund goes off to undo everything, thus restoring the status quo ante then he realises the possibilities, goes off again and alters everyrthing so that he’s the King, married to Kate Moss and Baldrick his puppet Prime Minister.

No, it’s more of the same without any effort to be different. What the audience wanted, in respect of which they should have been told to bog off. The limited good lines were not worth the effort, the profanity, of resurrecting something that was perfect of its time, that brought itself to a stunning and still incredibly satisfying conclusion. Never go back, never try to compete with your own past creation. All you can do is repeat yourself, with jokes that you would have rejected as not being funny enough when you were doing it for real.