Overview: Waterloo (Russian: Ватерлоо) is a 1970 epic period war film directed by Sergei Bondarchuk and produced by Dino De Laurentiis. It depicts the story of the preliminary events and the Battle of Waterloo and ...

Release date: 26 October 1970

Genre: Action, Drama, History, War

Director: Sergey Bondarchuk

After defeating France and imprisoning Napoleon on Elba, ending two decades of war, Europe is shocked...

Overview: The Buccaneer is a 1958 pirate-war film made by Paramount Pictures starring Yul Brynner as Jean Lafitte, Charles Boyer and Claire Bloom. Charlton Heston played a supporting role as Andrew Jackson, the ...

Release date: 1 December 1958

Genre: Drama, War, Romance, Adventure

Director: Anthony Quinn

During the War of 1812 against Britain: General Andrew Jackson has only 1,200 men left to defend New...

Overview: Blackadder: Back & Forth is a 1999 science fiction comedy short film based on the BBC period sitcom Blackadder that marks the end of the Blackadder saga. It was commissioned for showing in the specially ...

Release date: 6 December 1999

Genre: Short, Comedy, Sci-Fi, History

Director: Paul Weiland

At a New Millennium Eve party Blackadder and Baldrick test their new time machine and ping pong through history encountering famous characters and changing ...

Overview: The Duellists is a 1977 British historical drama film and the feature directorial debut of Ridley Scott. It won the Best Debut Film award at the 1977 Cannes Film Festival. The basis of the screenplay is ...

Release date: 31 August 1977

Genre: Action, War, Drama

Director: Ridley Scott

Set during the grand, sweeping Napoleonic age, an officer in the French army insults another officer and sets off a life-long emnity...

Overview: The Buccaneer is a 1938 American adventure film made by Paramount Pictures and based on Jean Lafitte and the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812. It was produced and directed by Cecil B. DeMille ...

Release date: 7 January 1938

Genre: Drama, History, Adventure

Semi-fictional account of pirate Jean Lafitte's involvement in the War of 1812.

Overview: Ginger Snaps Back: The Beginning is a 2004 Canadian horror film and a prequel to Ginger Snaps and Ginger Snaps 2: Unleashed. The third and final installment in the Ginger Snaps series takes place in 19th ...

Overview: Sharpe's Waterloo is a British television drama, the 14th part of a series that follows the career of Richard Sharpe, a fictional British soldier during the Napoleonic Wars. The adaptation is based on ...

Overview: Saint Sinner (full title Clive Barker Presents Saint Sinner) is a 2002 horror television film written by Doris Egan and Hans Rodionoff based on a short story by executive producer Clive Barker. It was ...

Release date: 26 October 2002

Genre: Sci-Fi, Horror

Director: Joshua Butler

In 1815 a monk, Tomas Alcala, unwittingly unleashes two female succubi, Munkar and Nakir, upon an unsuspecting 21st century. He is chosen by God to travel ...

Overview: Waterloo is a 1929 German silent war film directed by Karl Grune and starring Charles Willy Kayser, Charles Vanel and Otto Gebühr. It depicts the Allied forces victory over Napoleon at the Battle of W ...

Release date: 1 January 1929

Genre: Drama

Director: Karl Grune

Producer: Max Schach

Waterloo is a German made movie that depicts the soldiers of Belgium + The Netherlands; Brunswick; England, Ireland, Scotland + Wales; Hanover; Nassau; ...

Overview: The Outlaw Michael Howe is a 2013 Australian historical drama film written and directed by Brendan Cowell. Set in the early 19th century, the film is based on the exploits of Michael Howe, an Englishman ...

Genre: History

Director: Brendan Cowell

In 1815 a young convict leads a wretched guerrilla army of outlaws, deserters and bushmen in open rebellion...