Blackadder still stands the test of time 40 years on

Blackadder remains one of the most popular British comedies of all time despite the fact that it only ran on the BBC for four series from 1983 to 1989. Aside from the odd Comic Relief special, there haven't been any new episodes since 1999 when they made a special episode to mark the turn of the century.

It celebrated its 40th anniversary last year and to mark the occasion Tony Robinson reprised the role of Blackadder’s loyal servant Baldrick for a Comic Relief sketch. However, Rowan Atkinson didn't return as Edmund Blackadder for the short skit.

Despite his absence, he did feature in the celebrations after Gold commissioned a special painting. The portrait of him in character from season two, set during the reign of Elizabeth I, was then secretly installed at Audley End House to surprise visitors.

Unusually Blackadder was told across multiple periods of history with the one constant being Blackadder and Baldrick – each new incarnation being a descendant of the original. In 2004 it was ranked the second-best sitcom of all time, beaten only by Only Fools and Horses.

The final scene of the last season, which was set in World War I, saw Captain Blackadder and his fellow soldiers go over the top of the trenches in a scene that remains hugely poignant. With a recurring star-studded cast – iconic comedian Peter Cook was even in series one - who is beloved by fans Express.co.uk takes a look at where they are now.

Rowan Atkinson - Edmund Blackadder

Rowan was already an award-winning comedy actor thanks to his work on Not the Nine O'Clock News when he took on the role of Blackadder the self-serving and cynical lead character of the series. Although probably best known for this role and his other iconic creation Mr Bean Rowan has enjoyed a very varied career.

He starred as James Bond parody, Johnny English, in three feature films and has made appearances in countless other well-known films, including iconic turns in Love Actually and Four Weddings and a Funeral. He also had a role in an actual James Bond movie Never Say Never Again.

On stage, he won huge acclaim when he tackled the role of Fagin in the West End revival of the musical Oliver! Amongst his many accolades is a CBE which he received in the in the late Queen Elizabeth II's 2013 Birthday Honours.

In his personal life, he is an avid car enthusiast and a lover of racing. He divorced his wife makeup artist Sunetra Sastry, whom he met in the 1980s and with whom he shares two children, in 2015. After the break up of his marriage he went public with his relationship with actress Louise Ford, who plays Kate Middleton in The Windsors. The couple now have a child together.

Tony Robinson - Baldrick

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Tony had been working professionally for a decade when he was cast as Baldrick, Blackadder's put upon dogsbody. It brought him to prominence but hasn't defined the now 77-year-old who managed to reinvent himself as a much-loved presenter of history documentaries after it ended.

He presented the hugely popular archaeology show Time Team on Channel 4 for 20 years. He has also presented several other factual history shows such as The Worst Job In History and Tony Robinson's Crime and Punishment.

However, he hasn't abandoned the role that made him famous and just last year he returned to it for a one-off comic relief special to mark the 40th anniversary of the show. He also unveiled a Blackadder portrait at Audley End House which was commissioned to mark the occasion.

In his personal life, he has been married three times and has two children. He married his third wife, Louise Hobbs, who is two years younger than his daughter Laura in 2011. He addressed this during an appearance on Loose Women explaining that his daughter was fine with it. “She was absolutely cool about it. We’ve been married a long time. It is just not an issue for us,” he said.

Ironically, given that he played Rowan Atkinson's servant, he received a Knighthood in 2013, the same year that Rowan received a CBE.

Stephen Fry - Melchett

Stephen, who will soon be seen hosting Jeopardy, appeared in two series of Blackadder playing variations on Melchett. In season two he was Lord Melchett, the sycophantic adviser to Queen Elizabeth I. For series four he took on the role of General Melchett, a blustering buffoon and presumed descendant of the series two incarnation.

Already an award-winning playwright when he made his Blackadder debut he has enjoyed huge success since the show ended. He had a long and successful professional partnership with fellow Blackadder alum Hugh Laurie. He also hosted the popular quiz show QI between 2003 and 2016 before eventually being succeeded by Sandi Toksvig.

Alongside his writing, comedy and presenting work, he has managed to establish himself as a bona fide Hollywood star appearing in hit movies including Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows and V for Vendetta. He won a Golden Globe and huge acclaim for his 1997 portrayal of Oscar Wilde in the biopic Wilde.

Despite his big screen success, he hasn't turned his back on TV acting and has appeared in shows such as It’s a Sin, Bones and he even had a cameo role in Doctor Who.

In his personal life, he has been outspoken about his mental health struggles and wrote and starred in the Emmy-Award-winning Stephen Fry: The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive, which followed his battle with bipolar disorder. In 2015 he married Elliot Spencer, who is 30 years his junior. In 2018, his health hit the headlines when he announced that he’d had his prostate removed after being diagnosed with cancer.

Hugh Laurie - George

Hugh is a rarity among the main Blackadder cast in that his initial roles weren't a character that continued into other series. He first appeared in two parts in season two. He featured as drunk Simon Partridge in an episode called Beer and then later as the villainous Prince Ludwig the Indestructible in the final episode of that series entitled Chains. However, he is mainly associated with the role of George which he played in series three and four.

The first incarnation of the character was a caricature of George, Prince of Wales, who served as one of the three main characters of series three. The second, in series four, was Lt. The Hon. George Colthurst St Barleigh, who was a young officer in the British Army during World War I. Both characters were dim-witted and upper-class twits.

Post-Blackadder, he has had a phenomenal career. His role as Dr. Gregory House on the Fox medical drama House led to other big roles including parts in Disney’s 101 Dalmatians, The Man in the Iron Mask and Arthur Christmas. He also played Richard Roper in the hit BBC drama series The Night Manager opposite Marvel star Tom Hiddleston, which announced a surprise second season recently.

In 1996 he published his novel The Gunseller and he is an accomplished musician who has released acclaimed blues albums.

In his personal life, he married theatre administrator Jo Green in 1989 and the couple share three children, Charlie, Bill, and Rebecca together. Stephen Fry was the best man at his wedding and is godfather to all his children.

Miranda Richardson - Queenie

Although only a regular cast member for series two, in which she played Queenie, a childish spoilt version of Queen Elizabeth I, Miranda did make further Blackadder appearances. In the third series, she played the one-off role of Amy Hardwood a.k.a. The Shadow in the episode Amy and Amiability.

She then went on to play Mary Fletcher-Brown, a dutiful nurse in the episode entitled General Hospital in the fourth series. However, it is Queenie with which she is most associated and she reprised the role for the specials Blackadders Christmas Carol and Blackadder Back and Forth.

Outside of that iconic role, she has starred in blockbusters such as Harry Potter, in which she played reporter Rita Skeeter. She received Academy Award nominations for performances in Damage and Tom & Viv.

Most recently she has been seen in both seasons of Amazon Prime’s Good Omens, which also starred Michael Sheen and David Tennant.

Away from acting she has revealed that she enjoys walking her dogs, gardening and falconry. She also started learning to play the cello in 2013.

Miriam Margolyes - various roles

While she didn't play one of the main characters that ran through all four series Miriam made several appearances in the show. She played the Spanish Infanta in season one, Lady Whiteadder in season two and Queen Victoria in Blackadder's Christmas Carol.

Already well established by the time she joined Blackadder, Miriam has an extensive CV although her most well-known role is probably Professor Sprout in the Harry Potter film series. However, she's also starred in Call The Midwife, Miss Fisher's Murder Mysteries and Trollied, and won a BAFTA for her role in Martin Scorsese's The Age of Innocence in 1993.

In recent years she has become as well known for her outspoken views that have gone viral as she has for her acting. A regular contributor to This Morning you never know what she will say next. During the pandemic in 2020, she sparked nearly 500 Ofcom complaints after saying she "wanted Boris Johnson to die" on Channel 4's The Last Leg.

At Christmas, she popped up in Doctor Who voicing the character of the Meep.

In her personal life, she is in a civil partnership with Heather Sutherland, who likes to keep out of the public eye. The couple have been together since 1968 but don't live together which Miriam attributes as the reason for their long-lasting relationship.

Tim McMcInnerny - Lord Percy Percy and Captain Darling