ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s gross domestic product was estimated to have contracted 11.5 percent in the first quarter of 2023 from a year ago, the state statistics office said.

The agriculture sector expanded 0.8 percent in the first quarter of 2023 compared to a 4.4 percent contraction in 2022.

Industry contracted 23.4 percent on top of a 3.7 percent fall last year.

Services contracted 5.0 percent, on top of a 1.8 percent fall last year.

The first quarter 2023 real GDP estimated at 3,114 billion constant rupees was up from 2,917 billion constant rupees, indicating a quarter-on-quarter growth of 6.7 percent.

Sri Lanka is recovering from the worst currency crisis in the history of its soft-pegged central bank after the rupee fell from 200 to 360 to the US dollar, disrupting imports, energy supplies and bringing the country to a virtual standstill in the second quarter.

Real GDP which was estimated at 3,519 billion constant rupees in the first quarter of 2022 collapsed to 2,680 billion rupees in the second quarter. The second quarter usually records the lowest output. In the third quarter constant GDP was estimated at 2,900 billion.

The first quarter GDP was still below the level seen in 2017. (Colombo/June15/2023)

Nominal GDP meanwhile was grew from 6,575 billion rupees to 7,328 billion rupees.

ECONOMYNEXT – A passenger ferry service between Sri Lanka’s Jaffna and India’s Nagapatnam has resumed on August 16, with 50 passengers arriving in the maiden voyage, the Indian High Commission in Colombo said.

“Future plans include the exploration of additional routes and services that will further expand connectivity and economic collaboration,” the Indian embassy said.

The ferry ‘Sivagangai’ run by a private operator, IndSri Ferry Services, completed the journey between Nagapattinam and KKS in approximately 4 hours.

India is subsidizing the service providing around 25 million Sri Lanka rupees a month for a year to cover fees and operating costs and Nagapatnam port.

Sri Lanka has cut an embarkation tax on passengers.

“The resumption of this service underscores the commitment of both countries to strengthening bilateral relations through improved connectivity,..” the Indian embassy said.

India is also giving a grant of 63.5 million US dollars to upgrade Kankasanthurai Harbour in Jaffna. (Colombo/Aug17/2024)

Continue Reading

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s recent rupee appreciation is due to higher foreign currency inflows compared to the outflows, but there is a possibility for depreciation in the latter part of this year, central bank officials said.

The rupee currency has seen an appreciation in the recent months and traded around 300 rupees per U.S. dollar this week compared to 320 rupee in January this year.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who is also the island nation’s Finance Minister, had expected the rupee to appreciate to around 270 per US dollar by June this year.

“The main reason is we have more inflows,” D. S. T. Wanaguru, Director, at the Central Bank’s International Operations Department told reporters at a media briefing in Colombo on Friday (16).

“The market has more foreign currency liquidity than the outflows. That has facilitated the central bank to purchase more foreign currency from the market.”

The rupee appreciated 12.1 percent against the US dollar last year and 8.1 percent so far this year with the central bank has been on the buying side, she said.

However, the central bank’s inflation projection showed it has included possible rupee depreciation as a risk for inflation to reverse its slowing trend.

“These are the possible risks. It is not certain. The risk assessment is such that we are considering all possible scenarios on the upside as well as the downside. So on the upside is one major possibility is depreciation,” S. Jegajeevan, director at the Central Bank’s Economic Research Department told reporters.

“Currently the exchange rate is decided by the market forces; the demand and supply. So we are talking about some vehicle import relaxation and all. So we may be having some higher import level.”

“In that case if we are not getting enough inflows, there could be possibilities of some depreciation,” she said.

“We have to assume that. We are not certain that there will be a depreciation, but this is a possibility.” (Colombo/August 16/2024)

Continue Reading