Luigi Pirandello (28 June 1867 – 10 December 1936) was an Italian dramatist, novelist, poet, and short story writer whose greatest contributions were his plays. He was awarded the 1934 Nobel Prize in Literature for "his almost magical power to turn psychological analysis into good theatre.". He was an Italian nationalist and supported Fascism in a moderate way, at one point giving his Nobel Prize medal to the Fascist government to be melted down as part of the 1935 Oro alla Patria ("Gold to the Fatherland") campaign during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War. Pirandello's works include novels, hundreds of short stories, and about 40 plays, some of which are written in Sicilian. Pirandello's tragic farces are often seen as forerunners of the Theatre of the Absurd.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Luigi Pirandello has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Intuitive, Creative, Intense, Caring, Strong, Trustworthy, and Sensual.

Intuitive and Imaginative

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Luigi Pirandello is someone who is a highly intuitive, creative and imaginative person who is very loyal, caring and compassionate to others. A person who looks for jobs that tend to reflect their identity.

Helpful and Supportive

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Luigi Pirandello well know them as someone who can be accepting, supportive, and productive, like a garden.

Productive and Perseverent

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Luigi Pirandello as someone who is productive, persevering, deliberate, and direct.

A person who is creative, has good luck with work and money, good listening skills, good relationships with people at work, is a good teacher or counselor, and who is good at organizing groups, teams, or causes.

Stable and Creative

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Luigi Pirandello is someone who thrives in volatile situations, and who tends to be a source of stability and comfort for others who are experiencing challenging times .

They are also someone who is intuitive, imaginative, and an agent of change, and who is always dreaming of life's great possibilities and partnering with people to try to achieve those possibilities.

Traditional and Patient

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Luigi Pirandello tends to be someone who is a patient person that is very emotional, has a very sharp memory, has an ability to understand people, and who tends to be traditional and frugal.

Some of Luigi Pirandello's challenges

While Luigi Pirandello has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Luigi Pirandello can be Stubborn, Emotional, Standoffish, Idle, Hypocritical, Self-centered, and Possessive.

Emotional and Standoffish

One of Luigi Pirandello's key challenges is that they are someone who can be emotional and standoffish.

Possessive and Stubborn

Luigi Pirandello is someone who can be possessive, jealous, inflexible, and stubborn, can have a habit of being a frivolous spender, and who can feel insecure or cynical in romantic relationships and have difficulty forming productive personal and professional partnerships.

Sensitive and Money-oriented

Finally, Luigi Pirandello also can have mood swings, be overly sensititive, and be a bit rigid and materialistic.