In his brief time in a Dodger uniform, Luis Cruz has spoken often about his father, Luis Sr., a power-hitting center fielder in the Mexican League in the 1980s and 1990s.

The younger Cruz, playing his second game of the season for the Dodgers, didn’t need to channel his father Tuesday against the Cincinnati Reds. He might merely have looked down the Dodgers’ bench at Scott Van Slyke or Elian Herrera, his teammates at Triple-A much of this season, who have delivered unexpected clutch hits at opportune times in their rookie seasons.

Cruz belted an RBI double to left-center field in the seventh inning against Reds starter Johnny Cueto, then stole home – the deciding runs in the Dodgers’ 3-1 victory before an announced crowd of 33,834 at Dodger Stadium.

“I didn’t get here to change anything,” Cruz said. “I tried to help the team win and score runs. I’m just happy they gave me a chance to play yesterday and today.”

But maybe it helped the Dodgers, who last week were shut out for 66 consecutive innings, to have an infusion of fresh blood. The 28-year-old got his first major-league call-up of the season Monday, when he was recalled from Triple-A Albuquerque and added to the 40-man roster.

Cruz went 0 for 2 Monday and was 0 for 2 again Tuesday before he delivered the winning hit.

“I felt real good my first two at-bats,” he said. “(Cueto) started me with breaking balls. In the third at-bat he started me with a fastball. I figured he’d throw a breaking ball (on the second pitch). He did.”

Cruz wasn’t even in the starting lineup when the day began. Third baseman Juan Uribe was penciled into the seventh slot, but he woke up sore after spraining his ankle the day before. Cruz was informed around 3:30 p.m. that he would be taking Uribe’s spot in the lineup and the field.

Prior to this season, Cruz’s lone big-league experience came during spot duty for the Pittsburgh Pirates and Milwaukee Brewers in 2009 and 2010, respectively.

“I don’t know about the `fresh blood,”‘ Dodgers manager Don Mattingly said. “But it is nice to get a guy who’s energized about being here, trying to prove himself.”

Cruz wasn’t the only Dodger who fell into that category Tuesday.

Loney, the embattled first baseman who was nearly pushed out of a starting job last weekend before a trade for Houston Astros slugger Carlos Lee fell through, went 1 for 3.

He is 3 for 6 with two runs scored since telling Mattingly he had turned a corner after going 1 for 4 in Sunday’s game against the New York Mets – a hit that ended an 0-for-28 slump.

“I just told him, `Put me in there, I’m going to be good,”‘ Loney said. “I just felt in control. I was pounding balls a lot better. I felt confident that it was going to be a great three months.”

A scoreless stalemate played out between Cueto (9-5) and Dodgers left-hander Chris Capuano, dueling for the unofficial title of “biggest All-Star snub” by National League manager Tony La Russa.

Neither pitcher allowed a run for four innings, characteristic of their excellent seasons to this point.

It was 1-1 in the bottom of the seventh, when Loney singled with one out. Cruz pounded an 0-1 slider to the fence in left-center. The Reds played the relay nicely, getting the ball to catcher Ryan Hanigan in time to meet Loney with the ball in his glove. All Hanigan could do to slow Loney down was stick his leg out and trip him – which Hanigan did – but Loney slid adeptly around the catcher to score the go-ahead run.

The next batter, Tony Gwynn Jr., squared around to bunt. Cruz broke from third base in an apparent suicide squeeze, and Gwynn pulled the bat back as the ball sailed high and toward his hands. Hanigan couldn’t catch the ball; it went all the way to the backstop, allowing Cruz to score.

Cruz’s steal of home was the first by a Dodger since Dee Gordon on June 1, 2011.

jp.hoornstra@inlandnewspapers.com