RIP Alexander Kerst

A striking face, a squeaky voice, and great versatility - for decades, Alexander Kerst was one of the most popular actors in the German television landscape. On Thursday December 9, 2010, he died at the age of 86 in Munich. His daughter said. “He had been ill for some time".

Friedrich Alexander Kerst was born on 2/23/1924 in Kralupy u Chomutova, Czechoslovakia. The Bohemian actor as a TVPioneer: Since the 1950s, he appeared in numerous television productions. In 2005 he played in the ZDFMiniseries "Die Patirarchin" and a year later he was in the critically acclaimed for his appearance on ARDTV movie "Silberhochzeit".

Kerst’s film appearances include Alfred Weidemann's "Stern von Afrika," Frank Wisbar Stalingrad-Film "Hunde, wollte ihr ewig leben" and "Mein Schulfreund" with Heinz Ruehmann. He appeared in numerous television thrillers such as "Tatort", "Derrick" and "Der Alte". Kerst had numerous guest roles, and appeared on entertainment shows like "Das Erbe der Guldenbergs” and in a Rosamunde-Pilcher-With film.

The actor appeared regularly on the theater stage. At the Munich games he acted under Kerst Hans Schweikart in leading roles in plays such as Goethe's "Faust," Büchner's "Woyzeck" and Borchert's "Draußen vor der Tür". In the weeks before Christmas 2008 Kerst had performed in the role of the grandfather Earl of Dorincourt in the musical version of the novel "Little Lord Fauntleroy" in many German theaters.

Kerst was trained at the renowned Max-Reinhardt-Seminar in Vienna. After a theater science and Germanic-Studies, he earned his living first as a radio reporter, but soon he fully concentrated on acting. His first engagement was held at the Vienna Burgtheater, also in Munich, Berlin and Hamburg. In addition to his work in theater or in front of the camera Kerst also worked as a voice actor. He was at one time married to actress Susanne Korda [1940- ].

Alexander appeared using the alias Stanley Kerst in one Euro-western 1965's “The Last Tomahawk” with Anthony Steffen and Daniel Martin.