Rage Against the Machine

Renegades

4.0

excellent

Review

by robnathanson USER (12 Reviews)

January 20th, 2005 | 89 replies

Release Date: 2000 | Tracklist

Rage Against the Machine is (and alweays was)

Zack De La Rocha--Vocals

Tom Morello--Guitars

Tim Commerford (aka-Timmy C. aka-Y Tim K, aka-Tim Bob)--Bass guitar

Brad Wilk--Drums and percussion

This CD has no original lyrics, the music is completely original.

Every song is a cover of bands or individuals who influenced the band.

Although most people ghate this album, I believe the comments are unfounded.

I'll get right into it!

Microphone Fiend--

this Song, originally performed by Eric B & Rakim is redone by RATM to kick off this cd that most people write off as being the wrost, and most unspired cd RATM ever recorded (and it is) but not so bad as most poeple make it out to be. The music sounds original (moreso than some other songs which tend to "borrow" from old RATM songs) the song has a lot of power, and energy, but it gets very repetitive with the chorus. A good song nonetheless

3.5/5

Pistol Grip Pump--

Originally performed by Volume 10 this songs has great bass and drums driven verse and chorus lines, or very bassish guitar, I can't decide which. De La Rocha is really great doing this song. the music and energy is loud and inyour face, cool interlude around 2:15. Straight up, in-your-face lyrics etc.

3.5/5

Kick Out The Jams

Originally performed by MC 5 after seeing the Live At The Olympic Stadium DVD, I've decided that this is much better live. it's raw-er and more energetic and faster paced. My only complaint with this album version, is the speed. It's too slow, and loses my attention pretty easily. i never skip over the track but I think about it. Morello does some awesoem stff with his guitar (as always) I like at the beginning when he just shouts out WE'RE GONNA KICK 'EM OUT

great song though.

4/5

Renegades of Funk

Originally performed by Afrika Bambaataa this song is longer than the radio and video versions which had a few bits cut off of it. Talks about many american (minorities such as native-americans and african-americans) "revolutionaries" if you will (such as Martin Luther King, Malcolm X etc etc etc)

Quote:

"Renegades are the people,

with their own philosophies.

They Change the course of history

Everyday people like you nad me"

This song samples Afrika Bambaataa's version of the song, during the "Jam Sucka" section of the song.

The First single off of this album.

4/5

Beautiful World

Originally performed by Devo

Lyrically this song sounds like it could be an RATM original, but it's doubtful that it ever would be. the song is de la Rocha singing over Tom playing a simple chord based melody. no bass or drums, and some effects coming in at the end. I like this song personally, many don't, but I think it's a great song to slow the pace of the album

3.75/5

I'm Housin'

I always think this is "Bullet in the Head" when the song starts.....to me it sounds the exact same, I dunno, I may just be weird:S

Originally performed by EPMD this song has a lot of energy, but again, it's better live. It has a great tune though, and De La Rocha's vocals are perfect for the song

3.75/5

In My Eyes

Originally performed by Minor Threat , this song opens with a blast and then slows down and blasts again. This is one of my favourites on the album. it's really fast paced, and has a lot of energy in it, and De La Rocha expresses anger, and his usual pissed-off-ness so to say, more often than the previous songs on the album. this in my opinion is one of the Top 3 on the album, but my friends disagree....then again they say the whole cd sucks :S

4.25/5

How I could just Kill A Man

Originally Performed by Cypress Hill this song has a lot of energy and has a nice pacing to it. Again, it's better live, when performed with Cypress Hill...I love it on the Live at the Olympic Stadium DVD when they're with Cypress Hill....Loads of energy!!

My personal favourite on the album, in my opinion the best constructed on the album also. It doesn't get repetitive and the music all sounds totally original

5/5

The Ghost of Tom Joad

Originally by Bruce Springsteen this was originally recorded for release with the single of "Guerilla Radio" (I think) and was then released on this cd. I forget the name of the song, but the music reminds me of a song on the album "Evil Empire" but that's alright....what it lacks in originality it ,more than makes up for in greatness. my 2nd favourite on the CD. This songs is much louder and more inyour face than the almost folk version done by Mr. Springsteen

5/5

Down on The Street

Originally by The Stooges I don't have too much to say about the lyrics here, they aren't bad but they're not that great, the music is really good and catchy though De La Rocha exhibits a lot of energy and it's got a really good beat to it. Not one of the best on the album, but not one of the worst either.

3.5/5

Street Fighting Man

Originally by the Rolling Stones this song has a great beat and de la Rocha's voice is like new, great and inspiring. this is much better than the (original) Rolling Stones version of the song! I love the music. Morello does a lot on the guitar, but it works, I love the sounds and all that good stuff that comes out of his guitar.

4.5/5

Maggie's Farm

Originally by Bob Dylan, this song is good, but by no means the best on the album. I like it more than the Bob Dylan version, but it's still not one of the better songs on the album (I like it, don't get me wrong) it's got a nice beat and sound to it though! it saves the song for me. Come to think of it, I really do like this song!

4/5

BUT WAIT, THERE's MORE!!!!!

Included on the cd are live versions of:

Kick out the Jams

ok, so you can get to hear the live versions of this MC 5 song. It's a lot better than the album version, more energy and more predominant drumming, which makes this version of the song ofr me!

and

How I could Just Kill a Man

now for the creme of he crop, Cypress Hill join RATM on stage in this live version of their song. I prefer the Live At The Grand Olympic Auditorium version, however this definatley does it for me! B-Real and Sen-Dogg (sp?) frm Cypress Hill sing with De La Rocha while Morello, Commerford, and Wilk play their respective instruments (very well might I add)

~~OVERALL IMPRESSION~~

I like this cd, unlike many people. And unlike many people, I gave the cd a chance to grow on me. It turned out not to be half as bad as I expected, and 10 times better than my friends made it out to be! It's defiantley RATM, but it is also definatley lacking something special. What is that something special? Original, politically inspired lyrics!

other than that I like it, catchy music, and great musicianship, combined with great vocals, and 2 "hidden" live tracks make this cd special to me! especially with the reworks of all the different songs. made me want to download the originals to compare them!

OVERALL:

I think this cd merits a solid

3.5/5

Tweet

Recent reviews by this authorRush 2112The Trews House of Ill fameThree Days Grace Three Days GraceGreat Big Sea UpDream Theater AwakeAerosmith Honkin' on Bobo