It is with regret that Newport County AFC has to announce the retirement of Byron Anthony from Professional Football. The County defender has been fighting fitness since a double ankle break during the League Cup tie with Brighton & Hove Albion in August 2013.

Byron started his career with Cardiff City FC spending six years at the club and making eight appearances for Wales U21s before moving on loan to join Forest Green Rovers in February 2006.

Following a release from Cardiff, Byron joined Bristol Rovers in July 2006, making his debut against Grimsby in League Two. Byron was part of the squad to win at Wembley to see Bristol Rovers promoted to League One for the 2007/08 season. Byron went on to make over 160 appearances for Rovers in a spell that lasted through until the summer of 2012.

Following a brief spell with Hereford United in September 2012, Byron joined County, signing for his home town club. Byron was part of the County squad to finish third in the National Conference during the 2012/13 season and was apart of the team to beat Wrexham 2-0 at Wembley to see his home town club promoted to the Football League following a 25 year absence.

Following the return to the Football League Byron was injured during County's historic 3-1 victory over Brighton & Hove Albion in the first round of the League Cup, a victory that both Manager Justin Edinburgh and team mates dedicated to the County defender.

It has been a long road to recovery for Byron and he has taken the difficult decision to announce his retirement from Football, Byron will remain with the Club assisting the Academy set up in his role with the U16s and U18s.

Byron commented "It's been a long hard road since August last year, but I always remained positive and had good people in my family and friends around me. I've tried to get back to full fitness but I was never quite there, even when I returned to play I have been trying to play through the pain."

"It's been a long hard road to try and get back into the first team squad with a lot of rehab over the summer and playing a couple of games during pre-season, unfortunately I have been unable to get back to the level I was at without getting pain."

"I've had an extremely good career and enjoyed my time in the game, getting my home town club back into the football league has been a highlight for me, I have to thank the County fans for sticking by me through this time."

"Special mention must go to my team mates and the back room staff in assisting me during this time, but especially Justin Edinburgh who has looked after me during this period protecting me and supporting me during the difficult times. I cannot thank him enough for what he has done for me during my recovery from injury."

County Manager Justin Edinburgh commented "Byron has been a great servant for this Football Club and it is with regret that we have to see him retire from the game. Byron will remain in and around the Club by assisting in the Academy with the U16s and U18s."

"It has been a long road to recovery for Byron who has remained positive and professional throughout this time. I speak on behalf of everybody at the Football Club when thanking Byron for his commitment to his hometown club."