Byron Anthony is back at Bristol Rovers and he hopes his playing experience and coaching expertise can propel the club's next generation of talent into the first-team.

The 36-year-old has returned to the Gas as an academy coach, eight years after he was released by Mark McGhee.

Anthony had intentions of playing out the rest of his career at the Mem, but it wasn't to be.

The centre-back, who scored 10 goals in 190 games for the Gas from 2006-2012, discussed that, his new role and his Rovers memories in an exclusive interview with Bristol Live.

Hi Byron, thanks for speaking to us. I hear you are back in the mix at Rovers in a coaching capacity?

Yeah, it happened quite quickly, I left Swansea a couple of weeks ago after spending a bit of time there with the academy in a coaching capacity.

I spoke to Aidy (Adrian Harvie) and Chris (Hargreaves) and I started working with the academy Monday last week. It happened quite quickly, but good to be back involved trying to support the development of the players.

I hold the club really dearly to my heart because I spent some good years there and it when the opportunity came up I jumped at it.

I’m looking forward to it and we’ll see what happens. Hopefully at some stage I will be able to come in full time.

Are you working with a specific age group, or is there a role you’re doing across the age groups?

At the moment I’ve been working with the under-14s, and I will also be supporting the other age groups because we’re at the same venue.

I’ll be working with the staff as much as I can and trying to share my experience and knowledge that I’ve managed to pick up over the years and give that back to players and staff within the academy as well.

The first game is this Sunday against Bournemouth, so I’m looking forward to seeing the players in that.

I went to the 18s game last week at Newport and I’m looking forward to seeing some more of the older age groups’ games and hopefully at some point a first-team game.

I’m looking forward to working with the players and sharing my experience and try to give them some sort of reality of what it’s like to come through a system and then go on and play in the Football League.

I know over the past few years some players have come through and we’re trying to develop our own within the city. We’re competing with clubs around the area, but we’re looking to develop players within the football club and hopefully we can get them through the academy and into the first team.

Because Rovers is a unique club in terms of the relationship with the fanbase and having those local lads and people who just ‘get’ the club is important.

Absolutely. I recently passed UEFA Pro Licence in March, so it was a case of how can I use my qualifications that I’ve gained since retiring in 2014 and my playing experience within the Football League to try to help the players.

Absolutely we need an identity, but we also need realism from players that have been in the game. Obviously Chris has been in the game and understands it, so that adds a bit extra to the curriculum and the players’ learning process with the support of coaches in the game that have also played the game. For me, that’s really important.

You must be pleased to be back at the club where you played the best football in your career?

Yeah, it was quite a quick departure in 2012 after spending six really good years with the club. I imagined I would go on and finish my career there even though it was early days and I was only 28.

It’s a great club and there are some great people involved. The fans are absolutely fantastic, they were really warm and welcoming when I arrived and supported me through my journey with the club under different managers and with different players coming and going.

The majority of the time I was a mainstay there and I really enjoyed my time and I’m delighted to be back involved working with some of the players there, and who knows what the future holds, let’s see what happens.

Of the time you were at the club, I think everyone’s first thought is that 2006/07 season. What are your memories of that time? You seemed like a really close bunch of lads who achieved a lot together.

We played in the Martin Belsten charity game not so long ago and got back together then. It was really good times, that group that Trolls (Paul Trollope) and Lennie (Lawrence) managed to put together was a fantastic group, not only of character and people but really good players as well.

They understood work rate and what it was like to develop as a group, and we really hit it off. There’s nothing like the bond of the dressing room and that was one of the better dressing rooms I’ve been involved in and it was a fantastic atmosphere on a daily basis.

It was great to be involved in, and even if you weren’t involved or you weren’t on the bench there was always that fighting desire to try to win. It’s so important that you’ve got a group of players who are all pulling in the same direction. Trolls and Lennie set that environment, and the players bought into it.

That was one of the most pivotal times in the club’s history and there has been a lot of action since then, up and down, but it was definitely one of the highlights of my time at my club, and then spending four or so years in League One playing against some top, top clubs like Sheffield United and Leeds.

It was a really good time, not only the promotion but the journey after that going on to play some of the top clubs around. Some good times.

What made that team so special? You obviously had some supremely talented players, but was it the winning mentality of people like Stuart Campbell that was most important?

Character is the biggest thing in life and if you put those characters together you bounce off each other. It’s important that you’ve got a mix of characters but all ones that are pulling in the right direction.

There was no hairs and graces on anybody, we would all do jobs that we were asked to do, made no fuss and just got on with it. We worked together and we were a group that when we needed to react, we reacted quite quickly.

We went on to have a great run. That was because of the development of the group. We didn’t start great in that season but we gradually picked up momentum. The mainstay of that group had a really good bond and we worked so well together.

It was touching to see at the Martin Belston Memorial Match that everyone just picked up where they left off. The dressing room was very much the same, even though it was seven or eight years later from seeing each other.

It was a really good group and the character drove that, but there was also a lot of quality as well. Rickie (Lambert) and Walks (Richard Walker) jump out, but there were some unsung heroes and Stuart Campbell as well, who was a great leader of that group that managed to push us forward.

What are your memories of the play-off final?

Some great feelings. To take 40,000 Rovers fans to Wembley out of a 64,000 crowd was absolutely phenomenal and from the minute we walked out you could just feel the feel-good factor.

We knew we were on a run and even when we conceded so early on in the game, there was never any fear that we were going to lose.

Richard Walker pops up with two fantastic finishes, one at the near post from a great cross from Ryan Green, and then an audacious lob. If it was in the Champions League, it would have been one of the best goals ever in the Champions League.

Right at the end, with the game almost finished, Shrewsbury get a corner and we break. Sammy Igoe’s little legs managed to get over the halfway line and put it into an empty goal.

There was euphoria and from that day on the support was fantastic and there was a great buzz about the place.

For Sammy’s goal, you’re probably 80 yards away by the time it’s trickled in. I guess you were knackered at that point when you had to sprint to the other end.

You’re right, I think we tried. We managed to get there but we were all absolutely shattered from the shift we put in. We managed to get to the huddle and it just collapsed on top of Sammy, Trolls was celebrating and he’s fallen over.

You’re emotions take over then and we’d emptied the tank. I think we kept 28 clean sheets that year, so we had a real toughness about us and gave everything we could for the football club.

I know the supporters recognised that and that’s why we’re held in high regard.

Fast-forward a couple of years, the Trollope era comes to an end and there’s a big of managerial chaos with Dave Penney, Paul Buckle and Mark McGhee. What are your memories of that time, particularly when you left? It appears it certainly wasn’t your decision.

It’s football I suppose, and when you get a transition it can be quite tough and looking back to the year we ended up coming out of League One, it was a tough season.

We had a change of managers and it didn’t quite go so well. Sometimes there are a lot of players who are changed and they come in and out. There was a lot of loan players, especially towards the end of that time in League One and then there are a lot of inconsistencies.

You can never build up a great consistency within the group and it wasn’t to be and we got relegated.

Then there were two eras with Paul Buckle and Mark McGhee. Yes, it wasn’t great. You’re trying to get back up as quickly as we could, but we could never really move forward as a group for whatever reason.

Paul left and Mark came in. It just didn’t work and he didn’t want me involved. I didn’t play any games under him.

It’s up to him at the end of the day, he’s the manager, he made some decisions and that’s the way it is.

I ended up going on loan to Hereford at the time and I didn’t get a chance to say goodbye to the fans, which was a tough one because I’d built up a good relationship with them over the period of time I was there and I didn’t get to say a final goodbye.

When I moved to Newport and we were back in the league, even though I was injured I managed to get a bit of time on the pitch with both sets of fans at the first home game against Rovers.

It was nice to get back in front of them because I hold them in high regard.

Finally, besides the obvious with the play-off win, are there any other favourite memories you have from the club?

There’s a few. We had an unbelievable run to the FA Cup fifth round. We got beat by West Brom in the end but we beat Southampton along the way.

There was also Andy Williams finish down at Southampton when we won 3-2 with the last kick of the game on a Tuesday night. There was plenty of Gasheads behind the goal and it was great to send them into chaos with the celebrations at the end.

And then probably the Lincoln games. It was a fantastic occasion at a packed Memorial Stadium and we took a 2-1 lead to Sincil Bank and then Campbell set us off with an unbelievable strike which I was right behind.

I had some really good years and I enjoyed being at the club, and I’m enjoying being back there now supporting the development of the next generation of players coming through and looking to help mentor the coaches as much as I can.