Maria Theresa (German: Maria Theresia, see also other languages; May 13, 1717 – November 29, 1780) was a reigning Archduchess of Austria, a Queen of Hungary, Croatia and Bohemia, and a Holy Roman Empress.

Maria Theresa was the oldest daughter of Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel and Emperor Charles VI, who promulgated the Pragmatic Sanction to allow her to succeed to the Habsburg monarchy. Opposition to her acceding to the throne led to the War of the Austrian Succession in 1740. After Emperor Charles VII, who claimed the throne, died in 1745, Maria Theresa obtained the imperial crown for her husband, Francis I. Though she was technically empress consort, Maria Theresa was the de facto ruler of the nation, and she began styling herself Holy Roman Empress in 1745. Maria Theresa had in fact already begun her rule in 1740 during the Austrian War of Succession.

Maria Theresa helped initiate financial and educational reforms, promoted commerce and the development of agriculture, and reorganized the army, all of which strengthened Austria's resources. Continued conflict with the Kingdom of Prussia led to the Seven Years' War and later to the War of the Bavarian Succession. She became dowager empress after the death of Francis and ascession of her son Joseph as emperor in 1765. Maria Theresa criticized many of Joseph's actions but agreed to the First Partition of Poland (1772). A key figure in the power politics of 18th century Europe, Maria Theresa brought unity to the Habsburg Monarchy and was considered one of its most capable rulers. Her 16 children also included Marie Antoinette, queen consort of France, and Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor.

Maria Theresa Walburga Amaliae Christina was born in Vienna, the eldest daughter of Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor and Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, whose sole male heir - his son Leopold Johann - died as an infant in 1716. In 1713 Charles issued the Pragmatic Sanction which guaranteed his daughter the right to succeed to the Austrian throne and inherit his united lands on his death. Initially, many Northern European monarchs agreed to the Pragmatic Sanction when it was issued. One of the few not to sign was Frederick the Great of Prussia who, soon after Maria Theresa assumed the throne upon Charles' death on October 20, 1740, began the War of Austrian Succession.

Maria Theresa was married to Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor, Duke of Lorraine in 1736. He tended to leave day to day administration to Maria Theresa. Unlike many monarchs of her time, she married for love. She had 16 children by him. Their eleven daughters all had the first name "Maria". They also had five sons. The youngest daughter was Maria Antonia, better known under her French name, Marie Antoinette, who would be promised in marriage to the future King Louis XVI of France.

After her husband's death, Joseph II, succeeded in the elective monarchy of the Holy Roman Empire, maintaining the imperial Crown in the Habsburg line, in accordance with tradition. Maria Theresa then made Joseph II co-regent of her Austrian dominions, but she actually kept most of the power to herself, which led to tension between her and her son. It was not until her death that Joseph could fully exercise his powers.

Read the entire wikipedia article here.

Francis I (8 December 1708 – 18 August 1765) (born as François Stephen, also known as Franz Stefan and Francis III Stephen, Duke of Lorraine) was Holy Roman Emperor and Grand Duke of Tuscany. With his wife, Maria Theresa, he was the founder of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty.

He was born in Nancy, Lorraine (now in France), the oldest surviving son of Leopold Joseph, duke of Lorraine, and his wife Elizabeth Charlotte, daughter of Philippe I, duc d'Orléans and Elizabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine. He was connected with the Habsburgs through his grandmother Eleanore, daughter of Emperor Ferdinand III, and wife of Charles Leopold of Lorraine, his grandfather.

Emperor Charles VI favored the family, who, besides being his cousins, had served the house of Austria with distinction. He had designed to marry his daughter Maria Theresa to Francis' older brother Clement. On Clement's death, Charles adopted the younger brother as his future son-in-law. Francis was brought up in Vienna with Maria Theresa on the understanding that they were to be married, and a real affection arose between them.

At the age of 15, when he was brought to Vienna, he was established in the Silesian Duchy of Cieszyn, which had been mediatized and granted to his father by the emperor in 1722. He succeeded his father as Duke of Lorraine in 1729, but the emperor, at the end of the War of the Polish Succession, agreed to compensate the French candidate Stanislaus Leszczynski for the loss of his crown in 1735 and persuaded Francis to exchange Lorraine for the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.

Read the entire wikipedia article here.

Maria Theresia Walburga Amaliae Christina Holy Roman Empress (consort), Queen of Hungary, Bohemia, Croatia and Slavonia, Archduchess of Austria, Duchess of Parma and Piacenza, Grand Duchess of Tuscany (Vienna, 13 May 1717 - Vienna 29 Nove0ber 1780) married in Vienna on 12 February 1736 Franz Stephan, Duke of Lorraine (Lunéville, 8 December 1708 - Innsbruck, 18 Augustus 1765). In 1745 he became the Holy Roman Emperor Franz I and Grand Duke of Tuscany.

Dynasty: Habsburg(-Lorraine)

Reign: 1745 - 1780

Predecessor: Holy Roman Emperor Karl VI

Successor: Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II

Marengo, I don't think you can say it quite that way. Maria Theresia's predecessor as reigning Archduke of Austria, king of Hungary, Bohemia etc. was Karl VI., that is right, but her husband's predecessor as emperor of the Holy Roman Empire was Karl VII. (of Bavaria, son-in-law of Joseph I., Karl VI.'s brother). So IMHO you should edit this message making different entries for Maria-Theresia as souverain of Austria and the other Habsburg-lands and her husband Franz Stephan as Holy Roman Emperor.

This difficult situation (the emperor was not the souverain of the Habsburg-lands, his wife was) created a problem when Franz Stephan died because the other German princes did not want to accept Joseph II. as emperor as long as he was only his mother's heir. So she had to create him her co-regent as a kind of advanced inheriting.

Is it true that the Empress did not favor her daughter Marie Antionette?If it's true than why?It would seem that would emtionally make her feel bad about her self.

Maria Theresa showed favour to 2 of her children: Maria Christina and Karl Joseph (who died at age 15). As for the rest, she kept them on a tight leash and used various methods to keep them in line. She was not above using spies, blackmail, and threats (especially to those who moved away from Vienna after marrying). Although she loved her children, she was suspicious of them and was inconsistent with what she preached and what she had actually done. Of course, her advice wasn't always bad - some of them were very good - but as a whole, her children resented the control and the favouritism, although some of them kept up with appearances and showed outward respect.