Richard Boggs, MA, LPC, NCC, CSAT is a Licensed Professional Counselor in Michigan, a National Board Certified Counselor and a Certified Sexual Addiction Therapist. He is an associate therapist with Kenneth M. Adams & Associates P.C., Royal Oak, Michigan and has a private practice in the Ann Arbor, Michigan area.

He started his career working with a family service agency treating primarily chemical and process addictions, mood disorders and trauma. He also provided therapeutic services for pregnant teens, adoptive couples, pornography addiction support groups, and Adults Molested As Children (AMAC) groups. He has received advanced training in the treatment of sex addiction, complex trauma with emphasis on sexual trauma, as well as compulsive sexual behaviors with children and adolescents. Further, he has completed training for Karpman’s Triangle, Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), and marital counseling. Maintaining the credential of a National Board Certified Counselor signifies his commitment to continuing education and professional development in the field of professional counseling.

Rich holds professional memberships in The American Counseling Association (ACA), The Michigan Counseling Association (MCA), The International Institute for Trauma and Addiction Professionals (IITAP) and Society for the Advancement of Sexual Health (SASH). Rich has been a frequent conference presenter and guest speaker.

He recently authored the chapter on treatment of adolescents for the second edition of, Clinical Management of Sex Addiction, co-edited by Dr. Patrick Carnes and Dr. Kenneth M. Adams.

His philosophy on the treatment of trauma and addiction is that it often must go hand in hand. Historically addiction treatment has not adequately addressed the impact of trauma. The trauma narrative must be clearly understood along with the complex connection to addictive behaviors. Predominant is the depressed and anxious client with self-medicating and self-sabotaging behaviors. If the treatment plan does not adequately tend to the underlying intense emotional issues, long-term sobriety may be impacted.