The Republic of China "Xin XX day Chi" one or two gold ingots, weight 31.4g, very beautiful productsAncient Chinese coins - gold ingots - gold coins

Ancient Chinese coins - Yuan Dynasty - Gold coinsGold or YUAN FIVE two waist type GOLD INgot, weight: 186.7g, waist, INgot beautiful and exquisite, golden gold in red, excellent condition, very rare,

CHINA. Anhwei. Brass 1 Mace 4.4 Candareens (20 Cents) Pattern, Year 23 (1897). NGC MS-61. cf. L&M-194; cf. K-50a; cf. KM-Y-43.1. With the initials "A.T.S.C." in the reverse field. EXTREMELY RARE. A ne

In 17 years of the Republic of Guizhou Province, the government made one yuan silver coin, a car pattern, commonly known as "car coin", gold shield PCGS XF40, please previewAncient Chinese coins - Gui

A fine gold coin, Qing Dynasty, Guangxu period, Chinese. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evoking people's

A fine gold coin, Qing Dynasty, Guangxu period, China. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evoking people's th

A fine gold coin, Qing Dynasty, Guangxu period, China. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evoking people's th

fine gold coin, Hunan Province, Qing Dynasty, Guangxu period, Chinese. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evo

A beautiful gold coin, the Republic of Chinese. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evoking people's thoughts

An exquisite gold coin from the 18th year of the Republic of Chinese. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient atmosphere, evok

An exquisite gold coin, made in Jilin Province, Qing Dynasty, Guangxu period, China. Touching this gold coin, you can feel its heavy weight, as if it carries the weight of time. It exudes an ancient a

Ancient Chinese Xin Dynasty (9-23 AD) Bronze Spade Coin Mounted as a Pendant in 14 Karat Yellow Gold. Stamped 14K. Measures 2-7/8" L, 1-1/8" W. Approx. weight: 16.8 dwt. Estimate: $400.00 - $800.00 Do