George Bernard Shaw (1926-1950) is one of the major writers of Irish literature. Perceived as one of the country’s greatest literary talents, George Bernard Shaw was the author of many politically committed works. Even today, his writings are widely acclaimed by his readers…

Biography of George Bernard Shaw

Growing up in a Protestant family

George Bernard Shaw was born in Dublin on July 26, 1856. Her childhood took place in a difficult climate: her father, a sick alcoholic, abandoned the family home when she was a teenager, and her mother, a singing teacher and musician, struggled to provide for the family.

At the age of 20, George Bernard Shaw and his mother left Dublin for London. It was at this time that he discovered socialism and became a critic of art, music and drama. He also tried his hand at writing, tackling various themes such as art, socialism, philosophy and religion. His works soon came to the attention of London’s literary circle: his style was astonishing, substituting conflicts of passion with conflicts of ideas, always with a sarcastic, humorous air.

Despite the success of his early works, Shaw wrote five novels, none of which found a publisher. Fed up, he tried his hand at theater and published “Pièces Déplaisantes”, a collection of 50 committed plays targeting social abuse: “Maison de veuf, La profession de Madame Warren, Un bourreau des cœurs…”.

Shaw multiplies writing projects

His next plays, however, were less politically-motivated and more satirical and burlesque: “Le Héros et le soldat” (The Hero and the Soldier) and “Le Candidat” (The Candidate) (1894) were grouped together under the heading “Pièces plaisantes” (Pleasant Plays), followed by “César et Cléopâtre” (Caesar and Cleopatra).

It was in 1903 that Shaw wrote “Man and the Superman”, an “Anti Don Juan”, positioning the woman in the role of a leader of men”…etc. The following year, Shaw again politicized his writings, including “John Bull’s Other Island” (1904), “Commander Barbara” (1905), “The Doctor’s Dilemma” (1906), and “Marriage” (1908).

1912 is a landmark in Shaw’s work, as he publishes “Androcles” and “Pygmalion” highlighting the role of culture in social discrimination. Pygmalion has been the inspiration for several films. The first, directed by Anthony Asquith and Leslie Howard, starred Wendy Hiller as Eliza. It gave Bernard Shaw the opportunity to rework the text of the play in 1941.

At a time when his reputation was well established, the First World War plunged the writer into positions that his contemporaries found difficult to grasp. In “The House of Broken Hearts”, he challenges Britain’s political orientation. 1918. Although he never lost the spirit of derision, his style became more whimsical over the years: “Retour à Mathusalem” (1921), “Sainte Jeanne” (1923), “la Charrette de pommes” (1921), “Trop vrai pour être beau” (1931), “l’Idiot des îles imprévues” (1934).

George Bernard Shaw broke his leg in his garden and died at the age of 94, in 1950.

His works