Loading...

The Big U

by Neal Stephenson

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions1,6243411,160 (3.15)35

The New York Times Book Review called Neal Stephenson's most recent novel "electrifying" and "hilarious". but if you want to know Stephenson was doing twenty years before he wrote the epic Cryptonomicon, it's back-to-school time. Back to The Big U, that is, a hilarious send-up of American college life starring after years our of print, The Big U is required reading for anyone interested in the early work of this singular writer.… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Member recommendations

00

The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind by Julian Jaynes (themulhern)

themulhern: "The Big U" has a note about "The Origin" at the front and a plot influenced by the ideas.

0 1

The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire {abridged, Naxos} by Edward Gibbon (themulhern)

themulhern: At least two characters in the novel have been given the names of the Roman emperors Pertinax and Septimius Severus. This has meaning within the framework of the novel.

▾Lists

None

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 35 mentions

▾Other authors

» Add other authors (2 possible)

▾Series and work relationships

▾Awards and Honors

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Canonical title Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Dedication

to John Forssman

Quotations Disambiguation notice Publisher's editors Blurbers Original language Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English

None

▾Book descriptions

The New York Times Book Review called Neal Stephenson's most recent novel "electrifying" and "hilarious". but if you want to know Stephenson was doing twenty years before he wrote the epic Cryptonomicon, it's back-to-school time. Back to The Big U, that is, a hilarious send-up of American college life starring after years our of print, The Big U is required reading for anyone interested in the early work of this singular writer.

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Book description

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Popular covers

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.15)

0.5 11 161.5 72 702.5 173 1353.5 184 1034.5 45 34

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.