JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Facing massive economic, social and political problems, Indonesia's reformist president Monday appointed former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger as a political adviser.

Kissinger said he would confer with President Abdurrahman Wahid at least once a year on political and social policy for the world's fourth most populous nation."I responded to the request of the president out of friendship for the Indonesian people and the importance I attach to the Indonesia nation," Kissinger told reporters after the meeting. "I would like Indonesia to be strong, unified and democratic."

Kissinger was the U.S. secretary of state under presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. He was instrumental in shaping the United State's foreign policy for Southeast Asia.

Wahid, who assumed office last October, has struggled to pull Indonesia out of its worst economic crisis in a generation.

He has also worked to end years of separatist and religious violence while simultaneously reducing the power of the country's military, which propped up the 32-year dictatorship of former President Suharto.

In a move Monday widely seen as an effort to consolidate civilian supremacy over the powerful military, the armed forces announced that a senior general who has backed Wahid in his power struggle with military hard-liners would assume command of Indonesia's elite strategic forces.

Maj. Gen. Agus Wirahadikusumah will take over the army's Strategic Reserves Command on March 1, Air Rear Marshall Graito Usodo said.

The appointment follows the temporary ouster earlier this month of Gen. Wiranto, a former armed forces commander, from his position in Wahid's Cabinet.

Meanwhile, U.N. spokesman Manoel de Almeida e Silva, said security was being tightened ahead of a landmark visit by Wahid to East Timor, which voted overwhelming in August to split with Jakarta after decades of occupation and rule by Indonesia.

Wahid was expected to arrive in the East Timorese capital of Dili on Tuesday as part of an effort to foster reconciliation with the territory.

Following the referendum vote, Indonesian-backed militias unleashed a bloody two-week rampage in East Timor, killing at least 300 people.

Timorese leaders, who want to build bridges with Indonesia's reformist president, have called on the East Timorese people to welcome Wahid and not to stage protests.

Indonesia invaded and occupied East Timor in 1975 after the former colonizer, Portugal, pulled out. Jakarta's brutal rule resulted in thousands of deaths, mainly among civilians, as the army sought to put down a popular resistance movement.