AT 67, with a great career as a particle physicist and teacher already behind him, Dr. James W. Cronin of the University of Chicago has embarked on a new one as a kind of traveling salesman. He is campaigning in a score of countries for help in building a pair of gigantic cosmic-ray telescopes expected to reveal some tantalizing secrets of the universe.

The son of a professor of Greek and Latin, Dr. Cronin has devoted his career to particle experiments at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois and the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Long Island, where in 1963 he and Dr. Val L. Fitch, both professors at Princeton University at the time, discovered a type of particle decay that may explain why the universe survived its violent birth instead of annihilating itself. Dr. Cronin and Dr. Fitch were awarded the 1980 Nobel Prize in physics for the achievement.

Dr. Cronin has spent most of his life searching for subtle insights hidden in thickets of data, and he still loves data and the experiments that produce it.

But in recent years he has also become a spokesman for cosmic-ray research, traveling endlessly and bringing his charm and gift of persuasion to bear on government agencies and institutions in 19 nations. For what he is trying to do he needs money, equipment and scientific talent. No longer a full-time laboratory denizen, he spends as much time on airliners as in the comfortable apartment overlooking Lake Michigan he shares with his wife, Annette, at the University of Chicago.

''Sometimes I have successful fund-raising trips and sometimes I don't,'' he remarked with a wry smile. ''I've become the Willy Loman of cosmic-ray physics.''

Dr. Cronin is selling a kind of particle physics that helps explain what makes the universe tick.

Particle physicists learn from nature by accelerating specks of matter -- protons and antiprotons, for example -- and forcing them to collide with fixed targets or with each other. These collisions produce flashes of energy which convert themselves into new particles of matter, many of them bizarre forms that existed in nature for only an instant after the Big Bang of creation.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.