Multituberculates were in our timeline a highly diverse group of non-therian mammals. They first appeared in the Jurassic, likely splitting off from our therian ancestors as well as the ancestors of monotremes around this time, and came to dominate Cretaceous mammal faunas, in some sites even more common fossils than dinosaurs; they reached an even higher peak during the Paleocene, before plunging to a few relics that lasted for a few tens of million years longer. In this project’s timeline, the last part didn’t happen.

Multituberculates are not as flashy as dinosaurs, pterosaurs or even some other stem-mammals like Dimetrodon or the gorgonopsians, but they are insanely interesting in their own way. This project might as well be an excuse to explain why I think so.

What are those they?

The first multituberculate ever described was Ptilodus mediaevus, by famous time-waster and petty eccentric Edward Drinker Cope, of the famous Bone Wars. While many of his interpretations of extinct animals are hilariously wrong, his initial assumption, that this was some kind of marsupial, wasn’t reasonably wrong at the time. It certainly wasn’t a placental mammal, and had some vaguely marsupial-esque traits like the presence of epipubic bones.

Yet, as more fossils came in and we got a clearer picture at both multituberculates and mammalian evolution in general it became extremely clear these were not marsupials, and indeed not part of Theria. That’s pretty much it, because multituberculates are seriously strange animals, as we will see in a bit.

There are three main interpretations of where multituberculates fit in the tree of life:

As mammals (slightly) more closely related to therians than to monotremes

As mammals (slightly) more closely related to monotremes than to therians

As essentially non-mammals but instead closely related mammaliform synapsids.

In general the first option is favoured by classical studies, but recent ones have shown that alleged straits securing this position are even less strong than previously thought. Therefore, all bets are off until we somehow get DNA samples, which probably will never happen (but I’m willing to do anything to obtain regardless).

Stranger still is if you factor two other extinct groups into the mix, the haramiyidans and the gondwanatheres. They are in some respects very similar to multituberculates, and sometimes they all get lumped together into the broader Allotheria, but several studies have suggested these similarities are the result of convergent evolution. More confusing yet is that haramiyidans first debuted in the Triassic; given that most genetic studies seem to suggest a Jurassic origin for the last common ancestors between monotremes and therians, if multituberculates are closer to haramiyidans then we can rule them out as true mammals altogether. Not helping is the possibility that gondwanatheres may very well nest within Multituberculata, making them an additionally problematic group to figure out.

The most recent studies on these three groups seem to propose a kind of compromise: multituberculates, gondwanatheres and Jurassic haramiyidans (in the proposed clade Euharamiyida) are all true mammals in a branch slightly closer to therians than to monotremes, while Triassic “haramiyidans” are more basal synapsids. But as seen above, the traits used for this conclusion are not guaranteed.

Trivia: if multituberculates are all by themselves then Allotheria essentially becomes synonimous with Multituberculata. Therefore “dead uncle Allotheria” technically still describes multituberculates in some capacity.

Anatomy & Morphology

Though superficially rodent like, multituberculates are insanely alien in terms of skeletal anatomy. Unlike modern mammals, which chew in orthal (up and down, “normal”), lateral (side to side; think cows) and propalinal (back to front; mostly rodents and elephants) ways, multituberculates were only capable of engaging in a chewing style with no modern analogue, the palinal stroke, which involves extending the jaw forward and pushing it back. They were capable of using one or both rows of molars to chew food, but they could not engage in any of the other forms of chewing mentioned previously (most modern mammals are capable of using at least orthal + lateral/propalinal, like for example your pet hamster switching between all free or you trying to replicate them right now).

To these ends, the multituberculate skull is modified in rather odd ways. Scar attachment sites are pretty much inverted from the “normal” condition in most mammals, resulting in strange shapes and angles. The molar teeth not only have cusps pointing backwards but instead of the tribosphenic shape you’re probably more familiar with they instead are brick-like and have many tubercules (hence the group name). While their large incisors may remind you of rodents (and even then most have four upper incisors instead of just two), they are not ever growing and were deciduous like other teeth; the main gnawing tooth is instead a large modified lower premolar known as a plagiaulacoid, used to cut through food as the jaw moves backwards. In earlier species all four lower premolars were modified into a plagiaulacoid saw, but in more derived members only one plagiaulacoid remained with relictual peg-like ones in front of it; this single blade-tooth was non-replaceable and lasted throught the animal’s lifetime.

Most multituberculates had a modern mammalian ear bone structure, which evolved multiple times among mammaliaform synapsids anyways. Less familar are odd parts of the braincase, not seen in modern mammals; in general, multituberculates have larger brain sizes than other Mesozoic mammals (though smaller than the average therian’s), which combined with evidence for complex social behaviours seem to suggest several were fairly intelligent. Contrary to therian mammals, multituberculates seem to have a large premaxilla, though it might actually be some sort of entirely new bone. The latter might be of particular relevance in regards to whereas they had muscular lips or a philtrum, as the aforementioned study cites the reduction of the maxilla in favor of the septomaxilla as the origin for the unique muscular face therian mammals have.

Beyond the skull, the oddities didn’t stop. At least a few multituberculates seem to have lumbar ribs (albeit vestigial ones), and the coracoid, a bone vestigial in therian mammals, is well developed. The forelimb is relatively “modern”, with only a few differences from the normal condition in therians, but the hindlimb has a differently shaped femur head, femur dimensions and spurs similar to those of the male platypus (which were fairly common among early mammals and could imply that mammals were ancestrally venomous); this has lead to several debates on whereas multituberculates had sprawling limbs like a reptile or could raise them beneath the body like therian mammals and dinosaurs. Traditionally multituberculates are interpreted as obligate Gollum-walkers, but footprints from other groups once interpreted as sprawlers like phytosaurs and Dimetrodon imply that they might not have been as restricted. Most complete multituberculate skeletons show them spread horizontally rather than laying on the side like most therian fossils, but at least some multituberculates were digitigrade and the gondwanathere Adalatherium has erect limbs (so if gondwanatheres are multituberculates, there’s at least one unambiguous case).

Multituberculates, like virtually all mammals aside from placentals, have epipubic bones. This means that they could not expand their torso significantly so they were incapable of prolonged pregnancies. Combined with a rather narrow pelvis, this means they either gave birth to small, fetal young like marsupials or laid eggs that hatched into small fetal, young like monotremes do. FALSE ALARM SOME NEW EVIDENCE SUGGESTS MULTITUBERCULATES SOMEHOW HAD LONG GESTATION PERIODS LIKE PLACENTALS OMG I’M GOING TO HAVE TO RE-WRITE EVERYTHING. Tooth replacement is mostly normal for mammals (barring the plagiaulacoid of derived species as mentioned above), suggesting that they drank milk. Via phylogenetic bracketing we can infer that they had a cloaca, no external testicles and a bifurcated penis with two-four heads much as monotremes, marsupials and some basal placentals do today.

In group relations

In spite of their problematic relationships, the in-group structure of Multituberculata has mostly been consistent, barring the presence of absence of gondwanatheres within their ranks. A division between the basal ‘Plagiaulacida’ (always understood to be a paraphyletic rather than natural group) and derived Cimolodonta is well understood and consistently recovered. “Plagiaulacidans” are best distinguished for their less specialised teeth, including abundant incisors and plagiaulacoids, while cimolodonts have more derived teeth including the single plagiaulacoid mentioned above and more rodent-like incisors (which still weren’t ever-growing, as also mentioned above).

Some inner specifics may change from study to study. For example a large variety of ‘plagiaulacidans’ are sometimes lumped into Plaugialacidae (which may not be recovered as a natural group in some studies) or Paulchoffatidae, while kogaionids and taeniolabidoids are often recovered as sister taxa but more recently the former are in a basal position among cimolodonts. But beyond this, things are usually stable and consistent.

Evolutionary History

Multituberculates first debut in the Jurassic, which some take to be a sign of them being true mammals since this is where genetic studies place the division between monotremes and therians – though if they’re not a ghost lineage spanning to the Triassic it is. The earliest unambiguous multituberculates are from the Middle Jurassic (168-166 million years) of Europe and Russia; Indobaatar from the Early Jurassic of India (183 million years give or take) may be even older and imply that the group evolved in Gondwana, but this animal is still of contentious affinities, possibly being a haramiyidan instead. It is possible that multituberculates evolved from haramiyidans, thus making ‘Hamariyida’ paraphyletic in relation to them, though if they’re not related they essentially appear ex nihilo in the fossil reccord, a missing link between them and other mammaliaforms still waiting to be discovered.

‘Plagiaulacidans’ diversified across the northern continents in the Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous, though they’re typically rare barring a few sites. They can be assumed to have been prey of other groups like the carnivorous eutriconodonts, though hilariously there’s evidence of multituberculates scavenging on them. Regardless, everything changed in the mid-Cretaceous, where the spread of flowering plants greatly altered terrestrial ecosystems; as a result, many mammal groups went extinct. This includes all ‘plagiaulacidans’, but the newly nascent cimolodonts not only survived but became the dominant mammals of the Late Cretaceous in the northern continents (though curiously the oldest cimolodont known comes from Australia). In the southern continents there are a few unambiguous multituberculate remains, but for the most part mammal faunas are dominated by gondwanatheres (which again may or may not be multituberculates) and another mammal group entirely, the dryolestoids. Due to the rather incomplete nature of the fossil reccord of the south hemisphere during the Late Cretaceous it is possible there are many gaps in our current knowledge.

Come the KT extinction event, multituberculates took some time to recover, but once they did they not only kept their dominance but exceeded their Cretaceous relatives in diversity, achieving a golden age for the first few million years of the Paleocene. Some, like the North American Taeniolabis taoensis and the European Boffius splendidus, were the largest land mammals for a time, the former in particular possibly reaching as much as 100 kg. So successful were multituberculates they they seem to actually have constrained the expansion of therian mammals during the early Paleocene.

But all good things come to an end. After the Danian (early Paleocene, 66-61 million years), multituberculate diversity crashes while therians and placentals in particular rise. They still lasted until the Eocene/Oligocene boundary some 33 million years ago, but by then they were reduced to a few small carnivorous forms like Ectypodus. If gondwanatheres are multituberculates, then they lasted until the mid-Miocene 21-17 million years ago, though once again as only relictual forms.

Why fortunes turned on multituberculates has been extensively debated. The traditional interpretation is that they were outcompeted by rodents, but this implies a close ecological role that might be overstated. As shown above, multituberculates seem to have constrained placental evolution until after they were gone, implying that rodents and other placentals diversified in response to multituberculates being cleared out of the way. Additionally, its noted that the last unambiguous multituberculates were generalists, quite the opposite of the usual trends of competitive exclusion where specialised animals are the last to go (though the last gondwanathere, Patagonia peregrina, seems to have been a specialised tuco-tuco-like digging herbivore, which is more in line with that).

Possible explanations may include vegetation and climatic changes in the Danian, in which case it’d be very ironic that the very thing that caused cimolodonts to rise would also do them in.

And so…

…we come to an alternate history where this last decline didn’t happen.