MUTAMARRES can bounce back from a narrow defeat at Newmarket last time to claim the valuable Weatherbys Insurance Summer Sprint at Redcar today.

Trainer Sir Michael Stoute is an infrequent visitor to the track, but boasts an impressive strike rate when he does send his runners to the coastal venue, and this Green Desert gelding looks likely to give him another winner.

Successful in a first-time visor under Robert Winston at Ripon, where forcing tactics were used for the first time, he only narrowly failed from the front at the July meeting last time and a 3lb rise in the handicap may not be enough to stop him.

Wiscalitus was unfortunate to bump into the prolific winner Yes Sir at Stratford last time, and his return to that course and distance in the Claydon Horse Exercisers Novices' Chase should prove an easier assignment.

In a race marred by the lacklustre run of the subsequently-retired Intersky Falcon, it was left to Venetia Williams' seven-year-old to make a race of it against Yes Sir and he acquitted himself well, only going down by four lengths.

A fair handicap hurdler at his best, he looks likely to leave that form well behind in chases on fast ground and looks capable of making it two wins out of three over the larger obstacles.

A shock 33-1 winner at Worcester in April, Meehan returned to that track and proved it was no fluke with a battling success last time, and he could notch a hat-trick in the Claydon Horse Exercisers Handicap Chase at Stratford. Formerly with Noel Meade, it took the six-year-old 11 races to break his maiden tag but he did so in fine style, finishing five lengths clear of the field to notch his first Worcester success.

Another win followed in novice company, and although he returns to handicaps off a 15lb higher mark than when first victorious, he is certainly going the right way and could go in again.

Alrafid is not the most reliable of sorts but has been in good spirits of late so should find the North Devon Childrens Holiday Foundation Beginners' Chase at Newton Abbot comfortably within his radar.