It's no mystery: Romantic comedies make the world go 'round (sorry, we don't make the rules). Everyone says we're in a drought, and then out of "nowhere" a rom-com like Anyone But You sells a ton of movie tickets! Combine a sweet love story, your favorite tropes, plenty of laughs, and maybe even a good makeover scene or two, and you've got yourself a flick that's part of clearly the superior genre. So, if you're anything like me and genuinely enjoy watching people catch feelings on screen, congrats, because you've come to the right place.

Though I love me a good thriller or horror movie every now and then, there's a time and place for those. Whether you're having a fun movie night or eating your feelings after a breakup or bad day at work, nothing heals all wounds quite like a rom-com.

Some are absolutely movies you rewatch over and over (hello, When Harry Met Sally). Some are lil gems with a sneaky romantic subplot you might not even have noticed the first time round (looking at you, Booksmart). Some are brand new classics waiting to be discovered (haaaave you met Rye Lane and Palm Springs). Some are movies that helped define the genre but might be a bit...of their time (The Wedding Singer, Pretty Woman, While You Were Sleeping: Dated, but we still love them). If you're watching an old classic for the first time, it's the perfect opp to watch with pals and laugh/groan/cry together. There's no better time to introduce yourself to a classic you missed or an underrated gem you haven't gotten around to watching. Let's get into it, shall we?

1. Notting Hill

Hugh Grant and Julia Roberts will make you believe in love again. London bookstore owner William Thacker's ordinary life is thrown into romantic turmoil when he has a chance encounter with a famous American actress, but can their two lifestyles align in the name of love? Also, not that you care, but this movie is weirdly accurate about what press junkets in hotels are like.

2. She's All That

When a high school jock is dumped by his queen-bee girlfriend, he makes a bet with his friends: he'll take class geek Laney to prom and make her prom queen. What he didn't bet on was actually falling for her (of course). Based on Pygmalion, which was also the inspiration for My Fair Lady!

3. My Big Fat Greek Wedding

Everyone in the Portokalos family is worried about Toula. They think that something is wrong since she's 30 and still unmarried (...the horror). After taking a job at her aunt's travel agency, she falls in love with Ian—tall, handsome, and definitely not Greek. To move forward with their engagement, she tries her best to get her family's approval while coming to terms with her heritage.

4. She's The Man

Stream It

Starring Amanda Bynes, Viola is in a real pickle when complications threaten her scheme to pose as her twin brother and take his place at boarding school. If that wasn't complicated already, she finds herself falling for her/her brother's roommate AND her twin brother returns from London ahead of schedule. Yes, this is based on Shakespeare! How did you guess??

5. Something's Gotta Give

Stream It

When aging womanizer Harry and his young girlfriend arrive at her family's Hamptons getaway, they find that her mother Erica (and founder of the coastal grandma aesthetic), also has plans to stay. Erica isn't too thrilled about Harry's sexist ways, but when Harry has a heart attack and is prescribed bed rest, he finds himself unexpectedly falling for Erica while she takes care of him.

6. The Apartment

This classic black-and-white romantic comedy is also the perfect New Year's Eve movie. It's about a guy named C. C. Baxter who gets promotions at work by loaning his bachelor pad out to married men so they can have affairs without getting a hotel. Things get complicated, however, when his latest boss' mistress is his work crush Fran. (Yes, musical theatre nerds, this is also the plot of Promises Promises.)

7. Fire Island

Joel Kim Booster's modern adaptation of Pride and Prejudice is so perfect. Where has romantic leading man Conrad Ricamora been all my life? He was the best Darcy.

8. The Broken Hearts Gallery

This underrated romantic comedy stars Dacre Montgomery, who you may remember from Stranger Things, as a moody hotel owner who meets a jilted artist played by Geraldine Viswanathan (Blockers) and has mastered the romantic comedy look. You know the one. The soft, yearning, heart-eyed look.

9. It Happened One Night

Romantic comedies don't get much more classic than this film from 1934. It's about a socialite who recently eloped against her father's wishes. She runs away from her father and right into the arms of a charming, rakish reporter who could turn his career around by telling her story. It's also very sexy for something that's (maybe) older than your grandparents.

10. The Half of It

Stream It

This moody little coming-of-age romantic comedy is a loose adaptation of Cyrano de Bergerac. It's just as much about what it's like to realize you really love your friends as it is about unrequited crushes, first loves, and heartbreaks.

11. They Came Together

This spoof of romantic comedy conventions might poke fun of our favorite genre, but it's in a loving way! It's also so funny and has all of your favorite comedy people, from Amy Poehler and Paul Rudd to Randall Park and Cobie Smulders.

12. Friends With Kids

The two last single friends in the group decide to have a kid together. They can beat the system by co-parenting and seeing other people so they don't grow to resent one another. They're definitely not harboring secret feelings for one another. This is fine. Nothing will go wrong. Right?

13. Four Weddings and a Funeral

Sure, Love Actually may be the quintessential rom-com with a frankly unbelievable ensemble cast of U.K. actors. But it's a Christmas movie. For a similar year-round experience, it doesn't get much better than this. Hugh Grant is at his bumbliest. Some of the choices these characters make are absolutely bonkers, but I wallow in their ups and downs nonetheless.

14. Runaway Bride

Julia Roberts, a rom-com queen, plays a woman who's made multiple attempts at walking down the aisle but freaks out and runs away before she makes it to her groom. Will that change when a handsome journalist (Richard Gere) arrives in town? (You can guess where this is going.) And ofc, if you can't get enough of this pairing you can always watch Pretty Woman.

15. Love, Simon

Simon, who's closeted, has fallen in love with an anonymous classmate online who is also gay. Romantic shenanigans ensue: Think mistaken identity, teenage drama, and close-mindedness alongside a heaping dose of supportive friends and family.

16. 13 Going on 30

Stream It

Jennifer Garner plays a 13-year-old girl inside of a 30-year-old’s body (who actually wants to be 30? Jenna Rink, apparently) who has to navigate life as an adult for the first time...and realizes that she didn’t actually end up with her male BFF (played by Mark Ruffalo) in the future.

17. Always Be My Maybe

Stream It

Ali Wong wrote and stars in this Netflix original movie where she and her childhood best friend (Randall Park) meet up as adults and find out that they may actually have chemistry—but of course, it can never be that easy.

18. The Five-Year Engagement

Emily Blunt and Jason Segel play a couple who gets engaged but keep running into mishaps as they try to reach their wedding day. Will they actually end up getting married, or break up thanks to all the stress?

19. The Wedding Singer

Adam Sandler plays a wedding singer who ends up getting left at the altar and falls in love with a bride (Drew Barrymore) who hires him to perform at her wedding. Now he has to figure out how to get her to realize that he's a better pick than her fiancé.

20. 27 Dresses

In a world where someone actually has 27 friends as an adult, Katherine Heigl has always been the bridesmaid and never the bride. Things only get worse when she finds out her sister is engaged to her long-time crush, but a new love might be right around the corner (hey, James Marsden!).

21. Sweet Home Alabama

Now imagine a world where someone would choose their high school boyfriend over a rich dude played by Patrick Dempsey, and there you have the plot of Sweet Home Alabama, which is perfect in the same way all the movies with Reese Witherspoon (another queen of rom-coms) are perfect.

22. Booksmart

Raise your hand if this sounds familiar: You spent all your time in high school studying instead of partying (*sheepishly raises hand*). Such is the case for Amy and Molly, who decide to overcompensate with one epic night of partying. Romance sneaks up on both of them, including an amazing (and kind of surprise) queer hookup that ends hilariously badly.

23. When Harry Met Sally

Nora Ephron wrote a perfect screenplay—this is not up for debate—that at its heart asks, “Can men and women ever really be friends?” In the case of Harry and Sally, the answer is yes, they can be. Friends and soulmates.

24. Enough Said

Eva (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) starts dating Albert (James Gandolfini), and when she realizes one of her massage clients (Catherine Keener) is Albert’s ex-wife, she doesn’t tell either of them about the connection. Instead, she fishes around for information and hilarity (and a lil heartbreak) ensues.

25. Love & Basketball

This is more of a sports-rom than a rom-com, but it’s a love story for the ages regardless (and there are a few chuckles in here). The movie follows Monica and Quincy as they go from ball-playing kids to ball-playing teens to ball-playing lovers to ball-playing exes to “Play me.” “For what?” “Your heart.” Epic.

26. Someone Great

Stream it

When music journalist Jenny gets the perfect job that requires her to move across the country, she and her boyfriend break up on the eve of her move. Her friends decide she needs one last crazy night out in New York City, and their shenanigans do not disappoint. (Also, the side characters do get some fun romantic entanglements of their own, so be on the lookout.)

27. My Best Friend’s Wedding

Julia Roberts and Dermot Mulroney play best friends who made a pact to marry each other if they didn’t find love by 28 (lol, yes, 28). With her birthday fast approaching, he announces an unexpected engagement—and she realizes she is in love with him and must sabotage the wedding. Spoiler-ish alert: It doesn’t end they way you think it will.

28. Sleepless in Seattle

Another Nora Ephron classic (co-written and directed by her). The story follows a widower named Sam (Tom Hanks) who calls into a radio show to discuss his heartbreak and attracts the attention of countless female listeners. Among them is a woman named Annie (Meg Ryan), who is engaged to be married but feels like something is missing in her relationship. With a little scheming by Sam’s son...you see where this is going.

29. Bridget Jones's Diary

We’ve all been Bridget Jones at one point in our life: single, fretting over men, and utterly disgusted by the thought of working out. Renée Zellweger brings the character to life perfectly, and Hugh Grant and Colin Firth as her love interests are not too shabby themselves.

30. Obvious Child

The premise of this movie doesn’t sound comedic—young woman has an abortion after a one-night stand leaves her pregnant—but writer-director Gillian Robespierre’s hilarious script is light. It helps that Jenny Slate is perfect as Donna, a hapless comedian/bookstore clerk who has some very relatable thoughts on what women’s underwear looks like at the end of the day. What also helps? Jake Lacy as her love interest.

31. 10 Things I Hate About You

There have been countless movie adaptations of Shakespeare over the years, but this 1999 classic remains the platonic ideal of Shakespeare adaptations. This one has everything—a fantastic cast (Julia Stiles, Heath Ledger, Gabrielle Union, Joseph Gordon-Levitt), an amazingly ’90s soundtrack (Letters to Cleo, Save Ferris, the Cardigans), and what must be the only successful attempt in cinematic history to make paintball look romantic.

32. Knocked Up

Like Obvious Child, Knocked Up tells the story of a woman who finds herself pregnant after a one-night stand—only in this one, she decides to keep the baby. At first Alison (Katherine Heigl) and Ben (Seth Rogen) don’t seem to work, but by the end of the movie, you’ll be sold.

33. Clueless

Clueless isn’t the first movie the comes to mind when you think of “classic rom-coms,” but there’s no question that it has deep roots in the genre. Jane Austen, author of Emma (on which the movie is based), was the original rom-com queen. Even if you feel a little odd about the fact Cher—spoiler alert—ends up with her ex-stepbrother Josh, you can’t deny that young Paul Rudd is a treasure.

34. Just Friends

Most people don’t carry flames for their high school classmates for 10 years, but most people don’t look like Ryan Reynolds and Amy Smart. Ryan plays Chris, a former nerd who returns to his hometown to find himself still struggling with feelings for Jamie (Amy Smart), the woman who didn’t return his sentiments in his younger days.

35. Away We Go

When Verona (Maya Rudolph) and Burt (John Krasinski) find out that they’re expecting a child, they can’t decide where to raise them. Their solution? Visit friends and family all over the country to see what might suit their new family. Come for Verona and Burt’s quirky and sweet relationship, stay for an incredible supporting cast that includes Allison Janney, Maggie Gyllenhaal, Carmen Ejogo, and Catherine O’Hara.

36. You’ve Got Mail

That “you’ve got mail” voice may have gone the way of the 56K modem, but this second Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks team-up remains eternal. She wanted it to be him! She wanted it to be him so badly!

37. Waiting to Exhale

Based on the novel of the same name by Terry McMillan, Waiting to Exhale was lauded for featuring an all-African-American cast led by Whitney Houston, Angela Bassett, Lela Rochon, and the great Loretta Devine. When their lives are rocked by the men in them, the four women realize the power of their friendship (and the power of fire, which is nice if you want to burn your soon-to-be-ex’s things). Fun fact: Waiting to Exhale was directed by Forest Whitaker, who also directed Whitney in the “Exhale (Shoop Shoop)” music video.

38. The Cutting Edge

Stream It

What happens when you pair a recently retired hockey player with a figure skating star who’s spoiled AF? A dream team that actually might have a shot at gold at the 1992 Winter Olympics. No, really.

39. Look Who’s Talking

What’s cuter than a talking baby voiced by Bruce Willis? Watching Kirstie Alley and John Travolta figure out how to take care of said baby in a sweet, sweet film from Amy Heckerling in her pre-Clueless days. The sequel, Look Who’s Talking Too (directed by Heckerling) is also great fun—even if the premise starts wild and gets wilder as the movies go on.

40. Moonstruck

Nicolas Cage has a prosthetic hand and Cher has great hair in this over-the-top but delicious film about an Italian American woman falling for her fiancé’s younger brother while the fiancé visits his dying mother in Sicily. The movie also popularized Dean Martin’s version of “That’s Amore,” which will now be playing in your head for the rest of the week.

41. Trainwreck

With Amy Schumer writing and Judd Apatow directing, this film perfectly captures the butterflies and dangers of taking things to the next level, i.e., beyond the morning walk of shame. Bill Hader plays the guy Amy seriously falls for, even though her instincts tell her otherwise. LeBron James, Brie Larson, Vanessa Bayer, Tilda Swinton, Daniel Radcliffe, John Cena, and a slew of other famous people are in this.

42. Silver Linings Playbook

Pat and Tiffany’s worlds collide all for the better after he’s released from a mental institution and she deals with the fresh death of her husband. They become friends, rehearse for a dance competition, and for some reason, Bradley Cooper can’t stop wearing a garbage bag.

43. The Wedding Planner

For a chunk of the 2000s, Matthew McConaughey couldn’t stop making romantic comedies, and it was a blessing. In The Wedding Planner, Matthew plays an engaged man who falls for his…WEDDING PLANNER, played by J.Lo, who can’t seem to find “the one” despite her profession. Watch for brilliant performances from the always underrated Bridgette Wilson, Judy Greer, and a bb Justin Chambers, who would star on Grey’s Anatomy four years later.

And if you can't get enough Jenny, I honestly recommend her recent-ish romantic comedy Marry Me. At bare minimum, the soundtrack is sooo good.

44. How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days

Would you ever buy a magazine called Composure? Doesn’t matter. Kate Hudson’s Andie Anderson writes for Composure and while she’d much rather tackle ~real~ topics like politics and poverty, her editor wants something juicy, giving birth to the movie’s silly, silly title. The guy she tries to lose (for journalism) is rom-com king Matthew McConaughey, who also has a scheme of his own when he bets he can make any woman fall for him. Look, it’s not hard IRL either, Matthew.

45. To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before

Stream It

Lara Jean Covey (Lana Condor) has a habit of writing love letters to her crushes in order to get over them. When the letters get sent out by accident, all (good) hell breaks loose. Enter: Noah Centineo’s Peter Kavinsky. Based on Jenny Han’s YA novel of the same name, TATBILB has some decent sequels, too.

46. Crazy Rich Asians

Girl meets guy. Guy turns out to be secretly rich. Like, crazy rich. Girl finds out while en route to meet guy’s seriously loaded family in Singapore, complete with the gossipy relatives and one mother who thinks she knows best for her son. Henry Golding, Constance Wu, Michelle Yeoh, Awkwafina, and a cast of incredibly talented people star in this groundbreaking film based on Kevin Kwan’s bestselling novel of the same name.

47. Palm Springs

Stream It

This rom-com gives a clever and hilarious twist to the time loop movie formula. Andy Samberg plays carefree wedding guest Nyles who finds himself reliving the same day over and over again. Somehow, maid of honor Sarah finds herself stuck in the same situation, and things get complicated.

48. Set It Up

Stream It

Lucy Liu plays a big-time editor who gets set up with a venture capitalist (Taye Diggs) who works in the same building. Such is the work of Harper and Charlie (Zoey Deutch and Glen Powell, respectively), two assistants who hatch a plan to make their bosses fall in love so they can have a social life that begins at a respectable time. If you loved Powell in Anyone But You, and can't wait for Hit Man (which IS low-key a rom-com, BTW) you have got to check this one out.

49. Red, White, and Royal Blue

This rival-to-lovers story based on the popular novel caused kind of a sensation in 2023. Hopefully, this means Hollywood will keep making cheesy, corny LGBTQ+ romantic comedies and never stop!

50. Rye Lane

Stop everything and watch this romantic comedy if you haven't already. It's not so much an instant gem as it is an instant classic. The story, about two people who meet while trying to get over bad break-ups, made me want to fall in love in a way nothing has in a long time. It also made me want to get lost in my neighborhood and mess with my friends.