Hard Back. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Good Slipcase. Binkley, Ric - Illustrations (illustrator). First Edition Stated. 190 Pages. Originally copyrighted by Street & Smith, Inc. in 1919. This is a Polaris Press 1952 copyright. Very, very light age tanning to the binding side of the light gray endpapers. Barely noticeable. Top page edges are dark green. Interior text pages are bright, tight, and white. The silver lettering on the spine is sharp and clear. The slipcase has some sun damage to one side at the top and front. This is one of 1,500 copies printed and intended to be numbered. A place was provided for the copy No. but instead of a number xxxxx is inked in. The Polaris Fantasy Library was a short-lived publishing experiment by Fantasy Press that only lasted through two projects. This was the first one. The Heads of Cerberus is a ground-breaking story by Gertrude Barrows Bennett (1883-1948), writing as Francis Stevens. This dystopian novel appeared in 5 parts in The Thrill Book, 1919-1920, and is said to have been the first published science fiction story presenting a plot about an alternate universe. Bennett has also been credited by some with creating the new genre of Dark Fantasy. Though her work drew praise even from H.P. Lovecraft, she is almost forgotten today. Her body of work was small: Just 5 novels and 8 novellas/short stories, all but one of which were published between 1917 and 1923. Basically, she stopped writing at age 40, even though she lived until she was 65. This volume was designed by L. A. Eshbach the colophon on the title page, used here for the first time, is the work of Hannes Bok. The book was composed in Electra, a modern type face designed by W. A. Dwiggins and introduced in 1937; and in hand set Nicolas Cochin, a face based on an 18th century engraved letter and named for the 18th century designer, Charles Nicolas Cochin. This type face was introduced in 1915. The paper is deckle-edged Antique, manufactured especially for Polaris Press by the Curtis Paper Company, Newark, Delaware. The cloth, Arrestox B, blue-green, was made by the Bancroft Mills, Wilmington, Delaware. The composition and printing were by F. A.,Woerner, Reading, Pennsylvania, and the binding by Arnold's Book Bindery, Reading, Pennsylvania. Completed in March, 1952.

Cloth. Condition: Near Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Good. Ric Binkley (illustrator). First edition. A limited first edition in book form of this early dystopian novel by Francis Stevens, an intriguing sci-fi novel in a dust wrapper and slipcase. A limited edition of fifteen hundred copies, of which this is numbered seven hundred and ninety three.The first edition in book form, previously serialised in 'The Thrill Book' in 1919.In the original unclipped dust wrapper, and original slipcase. Slipcase is in a very good condition.'The Heads of Cerberus' is an early dystopian novel, in which a group of people inhale a mysterious grey dust, and find themselves transported to a totalitarian Philadelphia in 2118.Written by Gertrude Barrows Bennett under the pseudonym, Francis Stevens; she is considered to be "the woman who invented dark fantasy".Illustrated throughout by Ric Binkley.With an introduction by Lloyd Arthur Eshbach.Gift inscription to the recto of the front endpaper. In the original publisher's cloth binding, in the original unclipped dust wrapper, and the original paper covered slipcase. Externally, smart. Spine is faded. Gift inscription to the recto of the front endpaper. Edge wear to the dust wrapper resulting in chips and tears, heavier to the spine. Light spots to the wraps, and spine is age-toned. Internally, firmly bound. Pages are bright and clean. Light edge wear and fading to the dust wrapper, with some light rubbing, in a very good condition. Near Fine. book.

Octavo, cloth. First edition. 1500 copies printed of which this is one of 1490 clothbound copies, this copy is not numbered. The first of the two Polaris Press books. Introduction by Lloyd Arthur Eshbach. Fantasy (in the style of A. Merritt who was once credited with this pseudonym) set in 2118 in Philadelphia where city government has evolved into a religious tyranny. Reprinted from a 1919 Street & Smith pulp, THE THRILL BOOK, this novel is considered to be the first work of fantasy to envisage the parallel time concept. Anatomy of Wonder (2004) II-1085. Sargent, British and American Utopian Literature, 1516-1985, p. 163. Survey of Modern Fantasy Literature II, pp. 718-19. A fine copy in fine dust jacket (supplied on some copies) and paper slipcase. (#160032).

Hardcover. Condition: Near Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Near Fine. Illustrated by Ric Binkley (illustrator). 1st Edition Thus; 1st Printing. B&W Illustrations; This edition is limited to 1500 copies (1490 for sale). This copy is unnumbered. The book is in Near Fine condition, has a Near Fine dust jacket and a near fine slipcase. The book and its contents are in clean, bright condition. The text pages are clean and bright. There is some extremely beginning fading to the spine of the dust jacket. "Groff Conklin called it "perhaps the first science fantasy to use the alternate time-track, or parallel worlds, idea." Boucher and McComas praised the novel as "a slightly dated but still originally imaginative and acutely satiric story." P. Schuyler Miller found Cerberus "dated and old-fashioned", but noted it was "a pioneering variation on the parallel worlds theme." " (from Wikipedia).