The Cerberus (ケルベロス,, Keruberosu?) guns are a series of guns created by a genius "madman" Jyuji Kabane described.

Information[]

Origins[]

The origins of this series of weapons is inspired by Cerberus, a three-headed dog that was said to guard the gates of Hell. It was created by an unnamed "mad genius" that was described by Jyuji, and Beyond The Grave's twin pistols are named "Right Head" and "Left Head", after the hellhound's left and right heads; while Fangoram's was the "Center-Head", named after the Center Head of Cerberus. [1]

Left and Right Head[]

The twin pistols Grave uses consist of the Right Head (Red) and the Left Head (White). Its barrel length is 60 cm and it's loaded with 15mm caliber bullets, which are even stronger than D-Point in terms of destroying undead.

The Center-Head[]

Called the "Center-Head", this specific gun of the Cerberus series are the most powerful one; Jyuji stated that there's only one mad that could actually wield it, meaning that Grave can't even do so. This weapon is shaped like a cross, and was visibly the biggest one of all - even Grave's Cerberus was nothing against this, and he was eventually heavily injured trying to attack the user who could wield this legendary weapon. Jyuji said that this is the last gun of the Cerberus series, and that it is a truly evil weapon. This weapon was so strong that no one could use it, and in fact; only the strongest Deadman could wield it. Fangoram IS that man, he wields it easily and has no trouble using it; Jyuji later described him as the strongest Deadman of all, judging by pure destructive-power alone.[2]

Grave's injury was so bad that his regenerative abilities was damaged, and his wounds wouldn't heal; and was heavily low on blood. However, eventually; with an immense willpower and spirit, Grave was able to recover without a blood-transfusion from Mika.[3]

Users[]

Beyond The Grave (Left and Right Head)

Fangoram (Center Head)

Gameplay[]

Trivia[]

The Center-Head, which looks like a Cross; looks similar to Nicholas D. Wolfwood's weapon, the Punisher from Trigun - another series that Yasuhiro Nightow created.