WORSHIP SERVICES

Sundays | 10:30AM | In-Person or via Livestream

We encourage you to join us for worship every Sunday morning at 10:30 AM, either in person, or via livestream at our church YouTube page.

YouTube Livestream

SMALL GROUPS

If you are interested in joining with others to share life and dive deeper into the sermon and what it means for our lives, please contact Pastor Melissa.

Small Groups at Grantham Church

HOLINESS AND JUSTICE

The Minor Prophets

DEC 4–FEB 26 | A1

Join the Philathean Class Learning Community as we study the twelve biblical books called the “minor prophets” (named so because they are shorter than the other prophetic books). These prophets wrote during the time Israel was a divided kingdom. Some directed their message to the southern kingdom of Judah, others to the northern kingdom of Israel, and still others to neighboring kingdoms. Holiness and justice are the powerful themes of these twelve prophets whose words also speak, “thus says the Lord” to our culture today. Our violent, corrupt, and unjust world desperately needs this prophetic message of holiness and justice.

TEACHER | Glen Pierce, Jonathan Owen, John Yeatts

WOMEN’S BIBLE STUDY

1ST, 3RD, & 5TH THURSDAYS (SEPT 15–DEC. 15) @ 9:30–11AM | C9

For our second year of women’s Bible study, we’ll explore the book of Hebrews, using Jen Wilkins’ video study. We’ll “discover through Paul’s letters that Scripture points to Christ as the new and better covenant for us to have access to God.” We’ll usually begin with an icebreaker and opening prayer, then discuss the questions in the workbooks, followed by watching Jen’s teaching video. Finally, we’ll share prayer requests. It’s OK to stop in a couple times to see what we’re about. Please contact Pastor Melissa if you would like to make use of childcare for children, ages birth through age 5.

LEADER | Sarah Becking

MEN’S BIBLE STUDY

FRIDAYS (beginning SEPT 16) @ 6:45AM | C7

A new men’s discussion Bible study on the gospel of Mark will begin this fall. We intend to meet weekly, although we will discuss the frequency and time of meeting on Sept 16. Join us to dig into the life of Christ as told in this short and compelling book of the Bible. The leaders are Rich Stuebing and John Yeatts from the Discipleship Commission.

LEADERS | Rich Stuebing, John Yeatts

GRANDMOTHERS IN PRAYER

4TH THURSDAYS @ 9:30–11AM | C8–C12

All Grandmothers are invited for a time of fellowship and prayer for our beloved grandchildren. During the time together, we will be studying Philip Yancey’s book Prayer: Does It Make Any Difference? Meetings are on the 4th Thursday of each month. Please contact Velma Yoder.

LEADER | Velma Yoder