Nicknamed “Devbhumi” (“Land of the Gods”), Uttarakhand (formerly Uttaranchal), is a hilly state situated at the foothills of the mighty Himalayas in the northern part of India. Uttarakhand covers an area of 53,483 sq. km, accounting for 1.63% of the country’s geographical area. According to the Indian State of Forest Report 2021, the forest cover in Uttarakhand is 24,305.13 sq. km, which accounts for 45.44% of the state’s geographical area.

The mountainous state of Uttarakhand is rich in forest resources. Currently, 6 National Parks, 7 Wildlife Sanctuaries, and 4 Community Reserves constitute the Protected Area Network of Uttarakhand, covering 3.24% of the state’s geographical area.

State Animal of Uttarakhand – Alpine musk deer

Common Name: Alpine Musk Deer

Local name: Katsura (Hindi)

Scientific Name: Moschus chrysogaster Hodgson, 1839

Description: This reddish-grey colored deer species possess long upper canines, a broad creamy throat and chest, a long grey face, and white stockinged legs. The deer also has a musk sac that is externally visible between the male testes.

Distribution: This musk deer species is mainly found in the coniferous and deciduous forests in the high alpine zones across the Central and Eastern Himalayas of India.

Threats: Poaching for musk, illegal hunting, and habitat loss are some of the threats faced by the Alpine musk deer.

Conservation Status: The Alpine musk deer is listed as “Endangered” in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species and in Appendix I of CITES.

State Bird Of Uttarakhand – Himalayan Monal

Common Name: Himalayan Monal, Impeyan Monal, Impeyan Pheasant

Local Name: Monal (Hindi), Datiwar (Kumaon and Garhwal)

Scientific Name: Lophophorus impejanus (Latham, 1790)

Description: The Himalayan Monal is a relatively large-sized colorful pheasant native to the Himalayan forests. These birds measure about 70cm in length and weigh between 1.8 to 2.3 kg. Himalayan Monal exhibits high sexual dimorphism – the males having a spectacular iridescent plumage with a long stunning green metallic crest, coppery feathers, and a prominent white rump. The female birds have a streaky brown body, a white patch on the throat, and a pale blue eye patch.

Distribution: Himalayan Monals are found in the upper temperate forests and open grasslands at an elevation ranging between 2400 to 4500m. In winter, these birds prefer conifer-dominated forests, while in spring, they prefer sub-alpine oak forests. In India, Himalayan Monals have been recorded from the entire Himalayan region, extending from Jammu & Kashmir to Arunachal Pradesh.

Threats: Hunting, habitat loss, habitat degradation, and pollution are some of the threats faced by Himalayan Monals. As Himalayan Monals are found in the high mountain areas, the local populations are severely impacted by climate change and loss of biodiversity.

Conservation Status: Himalayan Monal is listed as “Least Concern” in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Himalayan Monal has also been designated as the National Bird of Nepal, where it is locally referred to as danphe or danfe. It is also listed in Appendix-I of CITES and protected under Schedule I Part III of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

State Fish of Uttarakhand – Golden Mahseer

Common Name: Golden Mahseer, Himalayan Mahseer

Local Name: Jungapithia

Scientific Name: Tor putitora (F. Hamilton, 1822)

To know more about Golden Mahseer, please refer to the article on the State Symbols of Arunachal Pradesh.

State Butterfly of Uttarakhand – Common Peacock

Common Name: Common Peacock/Chinese Peacock

Scientific Name: Papilio bianor Cramer, 1777

Description: Common Peacock features a bluish-green patch on the upper portion of the hindwing. On the other hand, the upper side of the butterfly’s forewing features a prominent green band. The butterfly has a black-colored body that is covered with green scales. The hindwings have ridged edges with reddish eyespots and are tailed. The male species features black hair on the forewings, which is absent in the females.

Distribution: Common Peacock is found in forests and wooded areas up to an elevation of 1,600m. The butterfly hovers near the lantana and marigold flowers to feed on its nectar. Common Peacock is also found on forest tracks at wet patches, where it can sit and feed for long hours.

State Tree of Uttarakhand – Burans

Common Name: Tree Rhododendron, Rose Tree

Local Name: Lal Buransh (Hindi)

Scientific Name: Rhododendron arboreum Sm.

To know more about Rhododendron arboreum Sm., please refer to the article on the State Symbols of Nagaland.

State Flower of Uttarakhand – Brahma Kamal

Common Name: King of Himalayan Flowers

Local Name: Brahma Kamal (Hindi)

Scientific Name: Saussurea obvallata [DC.] Edgew.

Description: A small perennial herb that grows up to 60 cm high. The stems are erect, 15-45cm long, and usually purplish or reddish brown in color. The whole flower head is covered by big, pale-yellow colored, boat-shaped papery bracts. The flowers bloom from July to August, though they can be seen till mid-October, after which the plant perishes. Brahma Kamal is the only known flower that blooms after sunset and takes approximately 2 hours to bloom to about 8 inches in diameter.

Distribution: Brahma Kamal grows in the alpine Himalayan habitats – mostly at the upper reaches of the mountain ranges between 4500 to 5500m. In India, Brahma Kamal grows in the Himalayan ranges of Kashmir, Garhwal, Chamoli, Hemkund, and Sikkim, with prominence in the Valley of Flowers, Uttarakhand.

Religious Significance: According to Hindu Mythology, Brahma – the Hindu God of Creation, was born from a huge white lotus called the Brahma Kamal. The flower is considered sacred in the entire Indian Himalayan Region and is used as an offering in the holy shrines of Kedarnath, Badrinath, and Tunganath. During the festival of ‘Nanda Asthami’, Brahma Kamal is offered in temples and even distributed as prasad. It is believed that a person who has seen the flower bloom is considered to be very lucky.

Use In Traditional Medicine: Brahma Kamal is used for treating a large number of diseases. The flower is used as a liver tonic and appetizer for its bitter nature. The plant is also used as a cure for liver inflammations, to increase blood volume in the body, to treat urinary tract disorders, etc.

Threats: Due to Brahma Kamal’s mythological significance and ornamental value, it is indiscriminately plucked by both locals and tourists alike. This has led to a decline in the number of these flowers at an alarming rate. In addition to this, a major portion of the natural population of Brahma Kamal has been hunted destructively to meet their demands in traditional medicine.