I had the privilege of being one of the 13 members who attended the colloquium for new major superiors held from 29 October to 11 November at the General Curia in Rome. The participants included three superiors from the Latin American conference (representing Ecuador, Venezuela, and Paraguay), three from the European conference (Ireland, Greater Poland-Mazovia, and Hungary), three from the South Asian conference (Hazaribagh, Bombay, and Sri Lanka), and four of us from the Asia Pacific conference (Cambodia, Malaysia-Singapore, Vietnam, and Myanmar). From the very first day, we formed a strong bond, getting to know each other both through personal and collective conversations.

Fr Jose Magadia, Regional Assistant for Asia Pacific, and his entire team coordinated the gathering so well. It was a significant occasion as it was the first colloquium to bring together the English- and Spanish-speaking major superiors across the Society of Jesus.

We had five major objectives: first, to share and interact among ourselves on major themes to help in the ministry of leadership; second, to establish a personal bond with Father General; third, to gain a deeper understanding of the curia, including its main offices, key functions and processes, and personnel, as well as to spend time with our respective regional assistants; fourth, to strengthen the sense of the universal Society through interaction with our brothers from different continents and cultures; and finally, to step away from our usual environments, find repose at the central headquarters of the Society of Jesus, and visit neighbouring Jesuit institutes.

These objectives were successfully realised through our active participation during and after the sessions. Being present at the colloquium enlightened me about the importance of the curia and the responsibilities undertaken by her members for the entire Society. I often heard curia members say: “We are here to help the discernment process of Father General to govern the universal Society of Jesus.”

My private meeting with Fr General Arturo Sosa went on for an hour. During that time, he showed genuine interest in learning about my family history, vocation narrative, and my experiences in missionary life, first in my original Gujarat Province and then later in the Myanmar Region. He was also interested in knowing about the current crisis in Myanmar and the ways in which we, as Jesuits, are involved in providing support to the displaced and addressing other vulnerable situations. He also asked about the status of the Myanmar Region as a dependent region of the Philippine province. Our entire meeting was characterised by cordiality, care, and affirmation, providing me with invaluable encouragement to continue in the life-mission of my leadership in Myanmar.

It was very evident from the life-mission of Father General and his team that we were in Rome and elsewhere in the world to know, love, and follow the poor and humble Christ and to grow more in our bond as Friends in the Lord and Companions of Jesus. Through this colloquium, we came to realise that it is only through the union of hearts and minds that we will be able to preserve and develop the Society of Jesus for the service of the faith-justice ministries in and for the church, civilians, and creatures. By staying close to the Vatican, we were reminded that we were here and elsewhere to ever think and feel with the global and local church-based ministries by witnessing to His greater glory.

As the major superior entrusted with the governance of the Society of Jesus in Myanmar, I am aware of my limitations, yet I find myself capable of accompanying my Jesuit companions and partners in mission through God’s blessings and the cooperation of those around me. I know that part of my service is to collaborate with the clergy, religious, and various institutions in pursuing God’s Kingdom here on earth. I find these collaborative efforts particularly rewarding, as I engage with all stakeholders, fostering a sense of unity and shared purpose in our collective mission in Myanmar.