This Listing is Out of Date

This product listing is out of date; you can find an updated product listing at Saba Cloud Platform

ENTERPRISE SOCIAL

TALENT MANAGEMENT

– Saba People Cloud Review

Product Snapshot

Technology

Software-as-a-Service

Customer Focus

Saba works with enterprise companies in a variety of fields, including medical, electronics, retail, energy, public sector, and software.

Select Customers

ABN AMRO, ADP, AdvantEdge, Aflac, Air Canada

Saba People Cloud

Saba People Cloud is enterprise social network software that provides a robust catalog of social media features. Users can send out status updates, start friendly dialogues with one another, form groups, write blog posts, hold HD video and VOIP meetings, and more. While People Cloud keeps employees connected, there are additional functions for HR and management. These include sending out reward badges, generating performance reviews, and establishing goals for employees.

About Saba

Saba was founded in 1997 and went public in 2000. The company is headquartered in Redwood Shores, CA. Company growth has allowed Saba to acquire companies THINQ Learning Solutions, Centra Software, and Human Concepts. Saba has won numerous awards, including the Gold Award for Excellence in LMS at Fall 2011 CLO Symposium, the Double Silver at the Brandon Hall Excellence Awards, and many more.

Saba People Cloud Key Features

Boosts employee morale with social and reward systems

Offers numerous solutions for management and HR

Can hold online video conferences with HD and VOIP

Boasts an online workplace tutoring video program

Monitors and reports company social analytics

Creates a searchable company database for any function

Features peer-mentor system for employees

Business-Software.com is your go-to source for business software reviews, free software comparison reports and all of your software needs. Our business software reviews cover top-rated business accounting software solutions, the top 20 ERP software and leading CRM software applications for small, midsize and enterprise companies alike. Browse our software reports for CMS solutions, top HR software and more to meet all of your business software management needs. Use our free business software product search to start your search!

© Copyright 2024 Business-Software.com. All Rights Reserved.