Saba Software, Inc. (Saba) was incorporated in April 1997 and provides software platforms for enterprise learning, collaboration, performance, and talent management, as well as license updates and product support, OnDemand, implementation, training, and consulting services.

When it comes to product and technology leadership, Saba is the only solutions provider that offers large organizations across major industries worldwide a management system for people. Saba’s comprehensive suite of enterprise learning management, performance management, content management, collaboration and analytics solutions enable its customers to improve organizational performance by aligning, developing and measuring the performance of people across the extended enterprise.

Saba has received industry recognition for its solutions, and recently was named again to the leader quadrant position in the Gartner 2004 e-Learning Suite and LMS “Magic Quadrants and was named as a leader in the 2004 METASpectrum report on Learning Management Systems. Saba was also the only vendor to be recognized with an “Outstanding” rating by Training Media Review.

Today, Saba has a track record for creating solutions that deliver a compelling return on investment. This track record is reflected in an impressive customer list that covers major industries including life sciences, manufacturing, high technology, and financial services.

Saba’s customer list includes over 10% of the Global 500, and all of the “big 3” auto manufacturers. Three nations have adopted Saba technology and solutions: Norway, the Netherlands and Scotland. Among the Global 2000, Saba customers include Alcatel, Anheuser-Busch, Cisco Systems, Continental Airlines, DaimlerChrysler, EDS, EMC Corp., Ford Motor Company, Honeywell, Kaiser Permanente, Medtronic, Procter & Gamble, Telecom Italia and VERITAS Software.

Saba offers the Saba Enterprise Suite, the Saba Centra product suite and a range of professional, education and customer support services. The company acquired THINQ Learning Solutions in May 2005 and Centra Software in January 2006.

Saba Key Strengths