Thank you so much for joining us in this interview series. Before we dive in, our readers would love to “get to know you” a bit better. Can you tell us a bit about your ‘backstory’ and how you got started?

I started as a programmer in 1985, and in the early ’90s, I was given the opportunity to design and build a commercial enterprise learning management system. With a little bit of public relations knowledge I learned from a family business, the owner of the small tech company allowed me to market the solution and build a line of business that ultimately grew into a $6M company called TrainingServer, Inc. TrainingServer merged with THINQ Learning Solutions in 2000, and in 2005, THINQ was acquired by Saba Software, a larger talent management company. I stayed with THINQ as their CTO and chief strategist until 2004 just before the Saba acquisition. I left to start ZeroedIn Technologies where I designed and launched our flagship analytics platform. We’re on the second generation of that solution today but still focused on helping clients get more value from the data that’s lying dormant inside their HR, talent, and business systems.

Can you share a story about the funniest mistake you made when you were first starting? Can you tell us what lessons or ‘take aways’ you learned from that?

One of the mistakes I made when starting was trying to give our software solution a catchy product name, something other than the company name itself. As a result, we always had to educate buyers twice, first on the company, then on the solution. Today, we are ZeroedIn People Analytics. Period.

Is there a particular book, podcast, or film that made a significant impact on you? Can you share a story or explain why it resonated with you so much?

Jim Collins, Good to Great. It’s about getting the right people on the bus first then determining what seat they’re in.

Are you working on any new, exciting projects now? How do you think that might help people?

We are working on better ways to allow our technology to uncover and expose important changes, risks, and opportunities through people analytics. Today, clients have to search and discover to understand the patterns and stories in their data. Our goal is to be more prescriptive.

Thank you for all that. Let’s now turn to the main focus of our discussion about empowering organizations to be more “data-driven.” My work centers on the value of data visualization and data collaboration at all levels of an organization. So I’m particularly interested in this topic. For the benefit of our readers, can you help explain what exactly it means to be data-driven? On a practical level, what does it look like to use data to make decisions?

To be data-driven means that you rely on digital evidence collected from a variety of sources to aid in your decision making process. On a practical level, you need to be able to understand the data that you’re evaluating for your decision. Data is just that, data. You need to turn your data into knowledge to inform you of the decision options and their impact. Data can be dirty. Data can be cluttered. Data can be noisy. So to be able to curate that data into meaningful insights that lay out your options is key. That’s data-driven.

Which companies can most benefit from tools that empower data collaboration?

All companies can, and all companies do already. I mean, email is data collaboration, right? But that said, from a decision making process, collaboration helps explain the data and expose insights in ways that you may not see on your own and in ways that you see that others may not. Data collaboration helps share those “ah ha” moments.

We’d love to hear about your experiences using data to drive decisions. In your experience, how has data analytics and data collaboration helped improve operations, processes, and customer experiences? We’d love to hear some stories if possible.

One of our partners, HealthStream, correlates the investments their clients make in learning and development against the quality of care measures they seek to influence. For instance, readmission rates. The question they seek to answer is, does an increase in learning that is focused on reducing patient readmission rates actually reduce readmissions? Collecting, comparing, and analyzing time spent learning in related topics against readmission rates over time provides that answer and gives their clients the information they need to guide their learning investments.

Has the shift towards becoming more data-driven been challenging for some teams or organizations from your vantage point? What are the challenges? How can organizations solve these challenges?

Leaders don’t always like what they find when they pull back the curtain and begin to do deep measurement and analysis. Some leaders are afraid of becoming vulnerable and subjecting themselves to criticism. You have to embrace vulnerability and open yourself to ideas and feedback. You have to measure with purpose. If you have no purpose then why measure?

Ok. Thank you. Here is the primary question of our discussion. Based on your experience and success, what are “Five Ways a Company Can Effectively Leverage Data to Take It To The Next Level”? Please share a story or an example for each.

First, to follow up on that last point, measure with purpose. Know what actions you intend to take based on possible results. If the outcome is higher than expected, what do you intend to do? If it is lower? If it remains the same? Know what business problems you are trying to solve, or what questions you’re wanting to answer. That’s your purpose.

Two. Work with the data you already have. Most business systems are data rich but information poor. All that data is locked up inside them yearning to get out and help you make decisions. There are a variety of tools, techniques, and companies that can help you make use of what you already have at your disposal.

Three. Don’t wait for cleaner data. Nobody’s data is perfect. The source of the data will sometimes dictate how “dirty” or inconsistent the data might be. If manually entered, it’s likely lacking in consistency and format but that doesn’t mean it’s bad data. Again, there are tools and processes that can routinely transform and clean your data based on logic and rules. You just have to get started using it, and you’ll quickly identify ways to help make the data better.

Four. Know your consumer. Not every person in the company needs the same level of information. Some need information at a high level while others need the detail. Start with the less is more principle. If they need more information, they’ll ask. And, if you give them too much detail or too much variety, they’ll get lost and frustrated. This approach will save you time and resources. Some users want to discover, analyze, and get down into the weeds, and others just want the “cliff notes.”

Lastly, use the data to tell a story. It’s easier said than done, but there are subtle things you can do. Don’t make your users have to interpret your charts and graphs to figure out what is going on. If you know the chart is showing an upward trend in turnover at some percentage increase, then title the chart like a newspaper headline “Turnover is increasing by X% year over year.” Add text and callouts for context so you can help explain what the data is showing. Use comparisons and trends effectively.

The name of this series is “Data-Driven Work Cultures”. Changing a culture is hard. What would you suggest is needed to change a work culture to become more Data Driven?

Increasing accessibility to data is important, and leading by example is foremost.

The future of work has recently become very fluid. Based on your experience, how do you think the needs for data will evolve and change over the next five years?

Data privacy and data ethics are becoming increasingly important. Data security is already at the forefront.

Does your organization have any exciting goals for the near future? What challenges will you need to tackle to reach them? How do you think data analytics can best help you?

Automating the data storytelling is something we’re trying to achieve. Using technology to analyze the data automagically and script the headlines and story.

How can our readers further follow your work?

Visit us at zeroedin.com or follow us on LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/company/zeroedin