Joseph Kunst, MBA has a diverse work experience in various industries.

Joseph started their career in 1997 at Cyborg Systems as a Sr. Professional Services Consultant, where they performed technical and programming consulting for customized implementations of HR software for over 30 clients. Joseph also served as the technical lead for the development of an Employee Self Service web-based product.

In 2000, Joseph joined Thinq Learning Solutions as a Sr. Technical Consultant, leading project teams in implementing enterprise-wide Learning Management Systems. Joseph also worked on troubleshooting OS, network, and database issues and conducted training sessions on web-based products.

From 2003 to 2006, Joseph worked at Hewitt Associates as a Sr. Software Engineer. Joseph designed an in-house replacement for Peoplesoft HRMS and led a team of developers. Joseph also modeled a fully normalized DB2 database and designed an extensible data model to support all clients.

Joseph then joined Saba Software in 2006 as a Principal Technical Consultant. Joseph managed budgets, timelines, and expectations for multiple concurrent projects and met with clients to gather requirements. Joseph also analyzed requests for cost, complexity, and impact on existing products.

In 2007, Joseph started working at United Airlines as a Senior Manager - Business Services Product Management. Joseph managed multiple concurrent programs through the full product development lifecycle and led the strategic build-out of staff and teams after a merger.

Currently, Joseph is the Vice President Finance at TeleVox Healthcare since 2015. Joseph develops and executes financial strategies to maximize the company's resources and growth potential in the healthcare patient engagement market. Joseph also converted FP&A from regional processes to a unified global process.

Overall, Joseph Kunst, MBA has demonstrated their ability to lead teams, manage projects, and implement systems in various industries throughout their career.

Joseph Kunst, MBA completed their Master of Business Administration (M.B.A.) in Business Administration and Management, General from the University of Notre Dame - Mendoza College of Business in 2014. Joseph also holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Finance from DePaul University, which they obtained between 1990 and 1993. Additionally, they have obtained a certification as a Microsoft Certified Professional from Microsoft in 2001. There is no available information about their education at Purdue University in 1988-1989.