Introduction

The decision to implement home-grown, open-source or commercial learning technologies can be very difficult for many organizations. Whether the technology is limited in scope (learning management, content management, talent management, remote/virtual learning delivery, etc.) or intended to be “all-inclusive”, there are a number of factors to consider. In Part 1 of this series we reviewed the advantages and issues associated with “home-grown” learning technologies. In Part 2 of this series we reviewed the advantages and issues associated with open-source learning technologies. In this installment we will review the commercial learning technology option.

Background

In the early days of the transition to online learning, capable technology suppliers, including Plateau Systems, Pathlore, Click2learn, Docent and Thinq became market leaders. During this transition, nearly every online course offered by organizations to their employees was a conversion of an existing instructor-led program that was directly related to job performance. In the years that followed, suppliers like Smartforce, CyberU, Learn.com and Books24x7 began generating libraries of mostly generic eLearning content to support “soft skills”, office productivity and human resource compliance programs.

Today, a very small number of suppliers provide the learning and talent management technologies to most organizations. The reason for this is two-fold; 1) there are very few remaining suppliers that have technology that can provide the features and scalability required by an organization with greater than 5,000 personnel to support, and 2) most of the suppliers that could satisfy these requirements have been acquired by investment banks, hedge funds or competitors.

Nearly all the mergers and acquisitions in the learning technology space have been a means for company survival due to poor financial performance. To illustrate the evolution of the market, consider the following:

Plateau Systems was acquired by SuccessFactors which is now owned by SAP

Click2Learn merged with Docent to become SumTotal Systems which is now owned by Skillsoft

Thinq and Pathlore were acquired by Saba which is now owned by Cornerstone On-Demand

Learn.com became Taleo which is now owned by Oracle

In many cases, these acquisitions have caused technology that customers depended on to be discontinued. In many cases, a substitute technology is provided that the customer would have never procured. The end result has been that customers end up with expensive learning platforms with a library of eLearning courses that do very little to train, test and prepare personnel to do their job.

"Today, less than 12% of corporate eLearning courses are related to the jobs of the people making, selling and servicing the company’s offerings."

Defining Requirements

The most important issue that must be addressed before buying a commercial learning technology solution is documenting the requirements for the solutions capabilities. Creation of a detailed requirements document should always include all stakeholders. Any reasonable procurement process will include both high-level and detailed requirements documentation.

Don’t forget your franchises, outside agents, customers, suppliers and independent retail operations when determining the scope of your organizations requirements. This is a common mistake that many organizations make when soliciting proposals from prospective vendors. In many cases, the needs of the external entities is greater than the internal requirement. If these types of requirements exist within your organization, find a supplier that can provide an affordable solution to meet these needs.

Click the image below for example requirements documentation and supporting analysis tools.

Beware of Procurement Consultants

There are a significant number of “learning technology consultants” that offer procurement support services. Many of these consultants and consulting firms have financial entanglements with the technology providers. Some are individuals that have been displaced by the mergers and acquisitions discussed above. These consultants and consulting firms usually come to the table with generic requirements documentation, a list of suppliers that meet the generic requirements and rough pricing scenarios for each solution they represent. A company that charges fees to technology suppliers to be included in their short- list of recommended solutions is not independent. They are essentially outside sales agents for the technology suppliers. Most of the independent consultants offering these services have very limited experience with the technologies available. Some have no direct experience.

Source Selection and the Requests for Proposal (RFP) Process

The best approach to selecting a technology that will meet your organization’s requirements is to define your requirements by leveraging the experience of the personnel in your organization. No consultant is going to be better equipped to identify these requirements than the personnel in your organization that are responsible for the results of your programs.

Once your organization’s “must have” needs are defined, issue a public announcement inviting suppliers that are willing to respond with a letter stating that your “must have” needs are completely and currently satisfied by their solution to demonstrate their ability to meet the “must have” requirements. If time permits, allow the potential suppliers to demonstrate their offering’s additional capabilities and features.

If your requirements documentation is detailed and comprehensive, chances are only few suppliers will step up to the plate to demonstrate their solution. Following the demonstrations, you will have a limited list of potential suppliers to solicit a proposal from. This approach will ensure that your “must have” needs are met and that the pricing and terms offered by potential suppliers will be focused on your requirements, not additional “nice to have” features that may not benefit your organization.

Bundled Solutions

One mistake that many organizations make is assuming that no one supplier can meet their “must have” needs. This mistake not only tends to complicate the evaluation process, but it also tends to drive up the cost of the eventual purchase. Bundled solutions never have a certain future. One of the companies in the bundle will eventually be acquired, go out of business or go off in a direction with their technology that is not consistent with your requirements.

"The more entities that are in the bundle; the higher the risk."

Buying a learning management system from vendor A, a virtual classroom technology from vendor B, a talent management solution from vendor C, a content management system from vendor D and a performance management system from vendor E is a recipe for disappointment. If your organization needs A, B, C, D and E; find a supplier that can satisfy all or most of your requirements and then discuss the add-ons.

Pricing

Many organizations assume that there is not a lot of difference in the pricing offered by the leading technology suppliers. This is not the case. Depending on the size of an organization and the number of personnel that will be required to access the technology, vendor pricing varies to the extreme.

Most learning and talent management technology solutions never generate a return on investment solely because the procuring organization did not understand this wide pricing variance between suppliers. The key to achieving a return on investment is documenting your requirements and then only paying for what you need.

Commercial learning technologies are almost always less expensive than open-source or home grown solutions. See Part 1 and Part 2 of this series for additional information.

About This Newsletter

Tips, Tools and Techniques provides research, new methods and collaborative events for developers, managers and instructors. Topics are selected based on market trends, industry events and subscriber recommendations. Subscribers can also participate in our monthly online events and share their success stories. Click here to subscribe.

About KMSI

KMSI provides learning, talent and performance management software solutions, Internet application hosting and professional services. Our service teams are managed by industry leaders implementing proven processes designed to be leveraged across practices. KMSI has designed performance improvement strategies for many of the largest organizations in the world. KMSI provides training development, instructional content conversion and other specialty and implementation services. Visit www.kmsi.com to learn more.

Upcoming Webinar