The three teams are taken to the Amazon, where their eighteen-hour challenge awaits. One team ends up in deep trouble due to a teammate's poor judgment, giving them their first loss and giving another team their first win. Meanwhile, one contestant begins to realize someone might not return their friendship, but brushes it off after being rescued. After the host reveals the votes, causing someone's heartbreak, he then reveals that the episode was actually a reward challenge, sparing a contestant from elimination.

Plot

The episode opens with Team Victory and Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot in economy class, while Team Amazon is enjoying first-class yet again. In economy class, Noah is fast asleep until a rat falls into his mouth, shocking him enough to wake him up. Owen is shown having a nightmare about the plane crashing, and after overreacting to Alejandro's plea to pipe down, he accidentally punches him in the eye. This gives Alejandro a black eye, and it annoys him, but he dismisses this by saying, "Nothing a little ice and revenge won't fix." Owen appears relieved but does a double-take when he hears the word "revenge." However, Alejandro insists that he misheard him and asks Owen about any life-threatening allergies.

Owen “ Sometimes I get the feeling Al might slightly not totally like me. Punching him in the face? Probably didn't help. Unless he likes that kind of thing. Heh, fingers crossed. ”

Also in economy class, Lindsay is shown comforting DJ about his curse. In first-class, Sierra is shown pretending to use a computer with a pizza box and a drawing of her and Cody on it while using a real mouse as a computer mouse. Gwen worriedly asks what she is up to, and Sierra tells her that she is updating her blog. She asks Gwen if she would like to check her e-mail when she finishes, and Gwen accepts, but then notices the pizza box and actual mouse, which causes her to awkwardly refuse after seeing Sierra eat a slice of pizza from her "laptop." Heather, who is still missing a tooth from when Leshawna attacked her in the previous episode, tries covering up her bruises with makeup. Courtney sarcastically tells Heather that she looks really good, while Heather scoffs and shuts the mirror she was using. Chris then announces that their next destination is the Amazon. Gwen comments that Team Amazon in the Amazon must be a lucky sign, to which Sierra gasps and states that every team who predicts good luck loses. Gwen tries to hide what she said, and Sierra clamps her hand over Gwen's mouth. Chris laughs over the intercom, warning Team Amazon about wishing for good luck.

The three teams exit the plane as Chris welcomes them to Peru. He explains that the challenge is to hike along an ancient Peruvian trail that goes all the way to Machu Picchu. In the ruins, one team must find the golden treasure. The first team to find the treasure will fly first-class to their next location, while the losers will send someone home. Chris begins to list the dangerous animals in the Amazon, and Cody raises his hand. Chris, already knowing the question of Cody's many allergies in the Amazon, pulls out an EpiPen. Cody makes a grab for it; however, Chris tells him that it wouldn't make sense to give it to the person with the allergies in case he passes out. Sierra pleads to be given the responsibility, but after Cody begs Gwen to with puppy eyes, Gwen holds it instead of Sierra. Devastated, Sierra begins to list Cody's deadly allergies to the bugs, but Chris ignores her tirade and gives it to Gwen, making Cody happy. Cody asks Gwen if she knows how it works, and Gwen tells him that she doesn't have a clue. Cody explains that if he goes into anaphylactic shock, Gwen has to inject the EpiPen into Cody's 'naked buttcheek', to which he leers at Gwen. A disgusted Gwen gives Cody the EpiPen. Chris then warns the teams of the Zing-Zings, a tribe that has never made contact with humans. Owen asks how far the trip is and to the teens' dismay, it is an eighteen-hour trip. Chris then gives each team walkie-talkies in case of an emergency.

The hiking trip begins, and Team Victory chooses the left path. Tyler makes his team also choose the left path in order to stay with Lindsay. Gwen suggests that Team Amazon choose the right path, but Sierra thinks that they should choose the left path, as if they chose that path and were wrong, they would still be with the other teams, and Cody ends up agreeing with Sierra.

Sierra “ When Cody agreed with me in front of everyone, I swear I heard wedding bells. (squeals) ”

Heather taunts Gwen and tells her to decide, as she had jinxed the team with her talk about good luck. Team Amazon ends up taking the path on the right. Team Victory reaches the zipline first, and they earn the privilege of using the T-Bar. DJ zip-lines down, while Lindsay rides on his shoulders. Meanwhile, Team Amazon hikes down the right path after separating from everyone else. Cody thanks Gwen for taking his EpiPen, but she confesses that she has no idea how to use it. Cody leers at her and explains that if he gets bitten, then she has to jam it into his naked butt cheek. Gwen, disgusted, tosses the EpiPen back to him. Suddenly, Cody is grabbed by an enormous mosquito, but Sierra knocks it down with a stone. She catches him as he falls and assures him of her devotion towards his safety. Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot reaches the zipline, and Tyler asks where the T-Bar is. Alejandro zip-lines down using his belt, and Owen rides using his hands. He sinks into the water as the zip-line hits a low point and gets bitten by piranhas.

While walking through the forest, Team Amazon is stopped in their tracks as they notice two Zing-Zings sitting around a fire. Cody stops the girls and tells him that he has it covered, although he is too late to tell not look at them as a Zing-Zing appears directly beside him, which frightens him. They are held at spear point, and Gwen desperately calls Chris for help. However, there are no batteries in the walkie-talkie since Chef took them to play video games in a hot tub. Meanwhile, Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot still needs Tyler, Noah, and Izzy to cross the zipline to the bottom. Tyler removes his pants and uses them as a makeshift T-bar. It works for a short while, but his pants catch on fire and break in half, and he falls into the water. Izzy decides to go next and puts Noah in her backpack before sliding across the zip-line, knocking over the damaged Tyler and Owen as she reaches the shore.

The Zing-Zings have tied up Team Amazon to a tree, and Cody suggests that the batteries in the flashlight in his back right pocket could be used inside the walkie-talkie. However, he cannot reach it. Sierra excitedly tells him that she can get it, but Heather rejects the idea because Sierra is obviously too far from him and tells Gwen to, since she's the closest. Gwen tells Cody that he is not allowed to enjoy the moment, fully aware of his attraction to her. Gwen removes many items from Cody's pockets and finds some X-ray glasses. Heather mockingly asks her what color Cody's underwear is, and Gwen checks. However, Cody doesn't have any underwear on, and she ends up seeing a lot more, as Cody awkwardly asks who wears undies in the Amazon. Sierra asks if she can borrow the glasses, while Gwen is aghast.

Gwen continues to search Cody's pocket, but ends up accidentally injecting herself with his EpiPen. Cody calms her nerves by telling her that she will be fine and that the injection is basically a large adrenaline rush. Courtney digs in Cody's other pocket and finds the flashlight, and Cody laughs about getting his pockets confused.

Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot finds a place to set camp, and Owen begins to complain about the lack of food. He asks for nachos, and Noah begins to list the ingredients necessary to make nachos in a sarcastic tone. Izzy tells him to slow down, as she is in the process of making a shopping list. Team Victory runs into Chris, and DJ begs for food. Chris awards them a crate full of bananas for being in first place. Suddenly, his walkie-talkie activates, and Gwen is heard speaking. Chris nonchalantly thinks that she is in trouble, then cuts to a commercial break. As the show returns, Gwen is heard panicking through the walkie-talkie again. Tyler suddenly jumps into the conversation after hearing that Gwen "had her hand in Cody's pants," congratulating Cody. Courtney says that Gwen accidentally used the EpiPen on herself and is now going crazy. Chris doesn't think that counts as an emergency until Heather adds that they are getting held at spearpoint by the Zing-Zings. Lindsay exclaims about Team Victory being in first place and then addresses Tyler, who waves. Chris tells Team Amazon to remain calm, but then the chime for a musical number is heard. Heather is in disbelief, while Owen asks if their team is forced to sing backup. Chris then commands that the song is all Team Amazon and that it must end with a solo from Heather. Team Amazon then sings "Gypsy Rap."

Afterward, the Zing-Zings notice Heather's missing tooth. Heather misconstrues their reaction as an insult, asking Gwen if her missing tooth is that hideous. The Zing-Zings then brush over some large leaves to reveal a tiki of a goddess that resembles Heather with a gold tooth. Cody worries at the fact that since Heather is their alleged goddess, the rest of Team Amazon would be "expendable." With night fallen, Lindsay wakes up to a pattering sound. She shines her flashlight on DJ, and he notices that he had been slapping monkeys who wanted their bananas, not bugs, as he thought. He sighs at the fact that his curse has still not worn away. At Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot's campfire, Owen hears a growling noise. He wonders if it had been the fire, but Noah reminds him that fires don't rarely growl. Owen jokingly mentions that since Alejandro made the fire, it could growl due to being a "Spanish fire." Owen blows on the fire, illuminating their campsite and revealing five large caterpillar-like creatures. Their fire is extinguished by one of the creature's sneezes, and they are ambushed.

Heather “ Even as a child, I knew that someday a large group of people would worship me. I knew. ”

Back with Team Amazon, the two Zing-Zings give Heather a gold tooth in place of her recently lost one, pleasing her. Gwen comments rapidly about the tooth, still undergoing the effects of Cody's EpiPen shot. DJ has bandaged all the monkeys which he had hurt earlier, and begins to walk down the trail with Lindsay. However, he steps on a twig and awakens the monkeys, causing them to attack him, while Lindsay watches in fright. The next morning, Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot wakes up, covered in welts from the recent attack. Alejandro is overly insistent on not doing a headcount, stating that he felt that they were behind to take a headcount; however, in reality, he intentionally leaves Owen behind. Team Victory reaches Machu Picchu first, and Chris, once again, announces that they are maintaining the first-place slot. He worries about DJ's condition; who is scratched and bawling over having hurt another animal. Lindsay points out that in that situation, the monkeys hurt him, and DJ focuses on the challenge. Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot arrives at Machu Picchu second. But Chris does not allow them to begin searching the ruins until their entire team arrives. Alejandro accuses him of making the rules as he goes along, and Chris dismisses it as old news. Alejandro then goes on a search for Owen. Team Amazon, still in the same place as the previous day, is wide awake except for Gwen, who is sound asleep due to the aftermath of Cody's EpiPen. Gwen's snoring begins to irritate Sierra, saying that it's "driving her crazy," but Courtney corrects her and says that it's driving Sierra "crazier." She then orders Heather to get the Zing-Zings to untie them, but Heather defends them, arguing that they might become angry and make a sacrifice on one of them. Cody agrees with Heather in fear.

In another part of the dense jungle, Alejandro finds Owen trapped in a large cocoon. Alejandro asks what happened, but Owen accuses Alejandro of seeing the whole incident, as he was awake while the others were asleep when the caterpillar took him away. Alejandro lies and states that Izzy, Tyler, and Noah all went ahead without Owen purposefully, and that he is Owen's only true friend. Owen comments that he has never been so scared of a friend before. Alejandro then releases Owen from the cocoon, having no concern for Owen falling to the ground, and they head back to Machu Picchu. Alejandro and Owen run back to their team, and Chris allows them to begin searching. Almost immediately after, Tyler announces that he has found the treasure. Chris walks over to Owen and Tyler, who are struggling to remove a small pillar from the ground. Chris tells them that they have the wrong golden treasure, and when Lindsay approaches him with a small golden statue, he crowns Team Victory the winners of the challenge, for the first time. Owen removes the pillar, and as the sun casts upon its ominous blue tip, the ruins begin to shake violently. Chris, Team Victory, and Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot evacuate quickly as the place begins to fall apart.

Chef finds Team Amazon but is stopped by Heather, who orders him to kneel down before the Zing-Zings. Chef disregards her and then slices the ropes that tied Team Amazon and reveals that the Zing-Zings were actually two local Peruvian teenage actors. Heather is disgusted by the fact that they put a gold tooth in her mouth, and Sierra taunts her about not actually being a god. Chef reminds them that they lost the challenge and must vote someone off. Cody is suddenly bitten by a red ant, one of his life-threatening allergies. Sierra goes as far as to try and suck the poison out of his thumb, causing Cody to look away. Heather wonders who to blame for all this, then notices Gwen and addresses her as she wakes up. Gwen asks if they had won the challenge, giving her angry glares from Sierra, Courtney, and Cody.

In the first-class section, DJ and Lindsay relax for the first time. DJ helps himself to a cookie, and Lindsay begins to ask him a question. DJ already knows it, however, and allows her to bring Tyler into the first-class section with her. Lindsay happily thanks DJ and kisses him on the cheek before running off to get him. Meanwhile, Gwen, Courtney, and Sierra are sitting in the dining hall discussing the elimination. Sierra then joins Courtney and Gwen in their plot to vote off Heather, giving that Gwen stops being nice to Cody.

At the Barf Bag Ceremony, Alejandro appears beside Heather. Less than thrilled to see him, he tells her to cheer up, as her departure will help him in the game. Heather lets him know that she knows of his plans, which eliminated both Leshawna and Bridgette. Alejandro admits that even she couldn't resist him if he kissed her, but Heather quickly shoots down the thought and says that she could have easily crushed him in the competition. Chris begins the elimination ceremony and makes a joke about Cody's swollen thumb. He then reveals the votes, which show that Gwen, Courtney, and Sierra all vote for Heather, while Heather voted for Gwen and Cody voted for Sierra.

Sierra “ He voted… for me? President of his fan club? After all I've done for him? Foot rubs, secret hair collection, I mean, it's just so… Cody! (cries) ”

Chris then reveals that the elimination wasn't real and that Heather wouldn't be taking the Drop of Shame, for now, and everyone gasps at this.

Heather “ Now they fear me. And so they should. I will make them all pay for what they tried to do to me, and then… I'll crush Alejandro for dessert! ”

Chris then mocks Heather and signs off the show.

Exclusive clip

In the cockpit of the Total Drama Jumbo Jet, DJ and Lindsay are shown to be flying the plane. DJ says it's a great reward and a great way to end his animal curse. However, he flies into a flock of geese, hitting many of them, which greatly upsets him.

Cast

Voice actor Role(s) Christian Potenza Chris Marco Grazzini Alejandro/Zing-Zing Clé Bennett Chef Hatchet/DJ Peter Oldring Cody/Tyler Emilie-Claire Barlow Courtney Megan Fahlenbock Gwen Rachel Wilson Heather Katie Crown Izzy Stephanie Anne Mills Lindsay Carter Hayden Noah Scott McCord Owen Annick Obonsawin Sierra

Elimination Ceremony

Fake elimination.

Elimination Ceremony 5:

Team Amazon Status Contestant IN

Cody, Courtney, Gwen, Sierra LOW

Heather

Voting Confessionals

Still in the running

Trivia

General

The giant cross on the top of Machu Picchu is replaced with a statue of Chris.

Tyler breaks the fourth wall in this episode by waving at Lindsay, and then glancing at the musical number symbol behind him, through a four-way split-screen.

This is the only episode of Total Drama World Tour where the episode's title is actually said during the show.

Sierra reveals that Cody has allergies to various bug bites, among other things, including goat saliva.

Heather's statement that she will make her teammates pay and crush Alejandro for the dessert foreshadows her outranking all of her teammates and winning to Alejandro in the finale in her ending.

One of Cody's allergies listed by Sierra is the Cithaerias pireta, which is the species name for the Blushing Phantom butterfly.

In the remastered version of the episode, there is no pink tint effect when Gwen uses Cody's X-ray glasses.

Continuity

This is the third time in Total Drama World Tour in which someone attends the elimination ceremony of another team.

This marks Alejandro's second time, as his first was in the previous episode, while the very first was Duncan in "Walk Like An Egyptian - Part 2."

This is the third time Chris doesn't mention the eliminated contestant in the recap.

The first time was Sadie in the recap for "Who Can You Trust?" (Island).

The second time was Geoff in the recap for "Trial by Tri-Armed Triathlon," from the same season.

This is the first episode in which Team Amazon officially comes in last place.

They finished last in the Yukon, but due to a technicality, they placed second.

This is the first time in the Total Drama series that there has been a fake elimination ceremony in which the contestant with the most votes doesn't go home.

The first time there an actual fake elimination, where every remaining contestant was safe, was in "Camp Castaways" (Island), where an object was eliminated instead.

This is the first episode that the winning team allows a member of an opposing team to join them in the first-class section.

This is the first episode to show the winning team in first-class at the end of the episode.

The music that plays when Tyler is about to zip-line is the theme commonly used for Duncan (and later Vito in Revenge of the Island).

This is the first time that the background music isn't related to Duncan.

This is the second time that Cody's pants are shown having hammerspace qualities, for he had in his back pockets a pack of breath mints, a bottle of hair gel, a deodorant body spray, X-ray glasses, an EpiPen for his insect allergies, and a flashlight without having any physical changes to his appearance.

The first time this happened was in "Up the Creek," where Cody stored a loaf of bread, a can of soda, and equipment needed to make a romantic picnic in his pants.

The bottle of hair gel that falls out of Cody's pocket is the same one that Chris left behind in "Hook, Line, and Screamer."

This is one of two episodes in which Team Victory wins the challenge.

The other happens later in "Newf Kids on the Rock."

This is the second time Chris has shown clips from contestants' confessionals to stir up emotions among them. The other times it occurs are in (Island) and "Lies, Cries and One Big Prize" (Pahkitew Island).

This is also the second time he reveals the voting results. The other first time occurring was in "No Pain, No Game".

While arguing with Heather, Gwen sarcastically remarks that Heather's parents must be love Total Drama and are happy that Heather is no longer at home with them. This is a callback to Heather's "Video message from home", where her parents actually celebrate Heather's participation on Total Drama.

References

The title of this episode is a reference to the reality show, The Amazing Race.

Coincidentally, the much later spin-off, The Ridonculous Race, is largely based of that said show.

The Zing-Zings believing that Heather was a goddess could be a reference to the Ewoks in Star Wars, when they thought that C-3PO was their god.

Chris's reference to "The Slap Heard Around the World" in the recap of the previous episode could be a reference to the infamous "Shot Heard 'Round the World," the single gunshot that started the American Revolutionary War.

The bottle of Saw Body Spray that also falls out of Cody's pocket is a reference to the popular men's scent brand, Axe.

The game Chef is playing appears to be Pac-Man, judging from the sound and Chef telling the character to get a ghost.

Chef reveals that the two Zing-Zings that captured Team Amazon are actually Peruvian actors who were practicing for a local "Shakespeare in the Jungle" production of Macbeth.

This may be a parody of "Shakespeare in the Park" productions.

There are several references to the Indiana Jones films in this episode, as:

The golden treasure that Lindsay finds to win the challenge bears a striking resemblance to the golden idol Indiana Jones had to find at the beginning of Raiders of the Lost Ark.

The way Machu Picchu collapses at the end of the episode is similar to how the hidden city collapsed at the end of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.

This is the fourth episode in the series to reference an Indiana Jones film. The others are:

"Full Metal Drama," "Celebrity Manhunt's Total Drama Action Reunion Special" (Action).

"Walk Like An Egyptian - Part 1," "The EX-Files," "Rapa Phooey!" and "Planes, Trains, and Hot Air Mobiles," from this season.

"Scarlett Fever" (Pahkitew Island).

"Ca-Noodling" (The Ridonculous Race).

Goofs

There's a puddle of drool beneath Owen while he is sleeping but it disappears after he punches Alejandro.

When Owen is in the confessional talking about punching Alejandro, the logo for Team Amazon shows up, despite Owen being on Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot.

When Chris announces over the speakers that the jet is about to land, Cody was next to Heather, but when he turns to see Gwen, he is next to Courtney.

When Chris finished explaining the challenge, Izzy was not present.

When Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot arrives at the zip-line, the logo for Team Amazon shows up instead.

Cody's eyebrows disappear when he first meets a Zing-Zing.

When the Zing-Zings point their spears at the frightened Team Amazon, Cody has a full row of teeth.

When Gwen digs through Cody's back right pocket, she finds and drops a broken pack of mints, but both halves have a complete oval on the label where the brand name would be and are the same length each.

When Gwen talks into the walkie-talkie, she finds out that there are no batteries. However, the walkie-talkies that Chris and Tyler were using already had batteries, despite Chef supposedly having all of them.

Chris says all contestants must sing or they are automatically eliminated, but when he made Team Amazon sing, Courtney didn't have a line in the song. This was due to the Zing-Zings interrupting the song when they saw Heather's missing tooth.

When Tyler pulls the piranha off of his tongue, his right arm appears dislocated from its socket and is instead coming out of where his neck meets his head.

Tyler's pants break in half during the zipline, but they're intact after he exits the water.

Lindsay clearly gained weight after eating bananas as her reward, having a round, bloated stomach, but once she and DJ heal the monkeys of their wounds, her stomach has shrunk back to normal size.

When Noah is sitting at the campfire and talking to Owen, the colors on the bottom of his two shirts are reversed.

Whenever Noah goes into a sleeping position, his three-quarter pants extend to his ankles.

When Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot appears, Chris has a watch, but when they think they found the treasure it is gone.

In the wide shot of Chris, Team Chris Is Really Really Really Really Hot, and Team Victory as the temple starts to collapse, Noah is absent. He is also not seen in the next shot of all the contestants and Chris running away.

There are a few moments where Heather's gold tooth appears white like the rest of her teeth.

When Sierra attempts to suck the poison out of Cody's bug bite, the bottom part of Cody's left pant leg is colored the same shade as the rest of his pants.

When Cody was getting ready to vote and when he was in the lavatory voting, his right hand was completely bandaged up, but when they find out that it was a fake elimination, the bandages are gone.

When Chris asked Cody if he would give seeing who would be eliminated a "big fat thumbs-up," and when Gwen was voting, Gwen was seen with strands of hair sticking out as if she was still under the effects of the EpiPen. However, earlier, when she and Courtney were convincing Sierra to vote for Heather, and later at the rest of the elimination ceremony, her hair is normal.

When all the members of Team Amazon are voting, there are seven passports instead of five.

During the voting confessionals, Heather's passport shows her with her original hair, even though it is shorter now this season.

In the confessional while Heather states she always knew that one day people would worship her, the window shows that it is morning outside despite being at night at the time.

Izzy's wristband is missing while she is giving two thumbs-up.

Gallery

See also