The High Priestess of Soul herself.

Nina Simone

The High Priestess of Soul herself. Though her specialty was jazz, Nina absorbed blues, soul, R&B and even pop into her eclectic and unique style. She was a gifted piano player and a distinct vocal talent. She was socially conscious and politically radical at a time when it really mattered. She recorded the definitive versions of other people’s songs, and debuted songs that other artists would take to great heights later. She’s certainly one of the most sampled artists in hip-hop, which is as good a piece of evidence as any that her influence is still massive. She’s incomparable.

Recommended Listen:

Nina Simone Sings the Blues

Crash Course:

1. Nina Simone Sings the Blues

2. High Priestess of Soul

3. I Put a Spell on You

Compilation Replacement:

Anthology

Signature Songs:

1. “I Loves You Porgy”

2. “Don’t You Pay Them No Mind”

3. “In the Dark”

4. “Sinnerman”

5. “Mississipi Goddamn”

Personal Note: Nina is such a complex and multifaceted artist that it was almost impossible to really encapsulate everything she could do, or rank her different eras. As such, this is definitely more weighted toward my personal opinions than usual, just because it was the only way to make head or tails. She has plenty of staple early live albums that could have been in the crash course, or her later records which are beloved and have a cult following now but weren’t her best-reviewed. I also left out plenty of staple songs of hers because I just couldn’t live without having “In the Dark” and “Don’t You Pay Them No Mind” on that list. So please, explore beyond what’s here. Do a little research (allmusic.com is always a good resource) and follow any thread that appeals to you. You really can’t go wrong.

I actually haven't yet. Nothing between Silk and Soul and A Single Woman used to be available on streaming services or affordable CD. For a long time, any record store I went into I would check for Nina albums and buy anything they had on the rare occasion there was one though.

I've heard At the Village Gate, Broadway-Blues-Ballads, I Put a Spell on You, Pastel Blues, Let It All Out, Wild Is the Wind, High Priestess of Soul, Sings the Blues, Silk and Soul, Nina Simone and Piano and A Single Woman. 11 has never felt like so few.

Honestly and Piano is my least favorite thing I've heard. Precision was never her strongest quality as a vocalist, but she gets downright messy on that one at times. I think I'll probably love her run of stuff in that period like Black Gold and To Love Somebody though.

Yeah my first two years I was too panic stricken trying to figure out how to fit all the things I'm "supposed" to teach. And then my seniors on the football team who come out to "Blood on the Leaves" had no idea where the sample comes from.

I figured at that point if I can't bring music and context into stuff like A Raisin in the Sun, then why the hell am I doing this?

So we covered "Blowin' in the Wind", "Strange Fruit", "People Get Ready" and, among others, pair of Nina "Mississippi Goddamn" and "To Be Young Gifted and Black"

Random pointless anecdote:

Before streaming services really fully caught on her stuff was frequently out of print, and what had been remastered wasn't in too many stores' limited jazz sections. So I had a standing rule that any time I went into a record store, I searched for her and any proper albums they had, I bought on the spot. I got High Priestess of Soul at Disney world. I got Nina Simone and Piano at some random little shop in New Hampshire.

I love that I got to have that because it's the closest I'll ever get to the old school music fandom of having to hunt and search to find a record and getting that thrill when there's something new to discover.

I get why Nina wasn't wild about Baltimore (it's a lot of production for her) but WOW do I love it. The strings are big, but they're beautiful. And Nina over some funk grooves is novel and, improbably works. Some awesome material choices (Randy Newman?!? Hall and Oates!?! )

And while there are a bunch of great songs, "Music for Lovers" is absolutely breathtaking. When she made up her mind to really dynamically deliver a song ("My Man's Gone Now" from Sings the Blues), there was nobody who could touch her.

Would like to give a shoutout to Pastel Blues, which is probably my favourite record of hers, and contains definitely my favourite song of hers - Sinnerman. The control and the power behind Sinnerman is absolutely remarkable. I couldn't imagine anybody else singing it. One of the best vocal cuts ever recorded. Other highlights include the hypnotic opening track, Be My Husband, and the tragic, brutal cover of Strange Fruit.

However, like Chris says, you can't go wrong with any of her records really, she's got half a dozen stone-cold classics. I'm only familiar with her 60s stuff really, the latest album of hers I've listened to is Black Gold from 1970, so I'm interested in digging a bit deeper.

@cshadows2887, do you have a recommendation for a deeper cut album?

I'm sure you've heard Wild Is the Wind, which was hard to leave out of the 3. I'm pretty fond of the pop pair of To Love Somebody and Here Comes the Sun as well. And if you want to go early, At the Village Gate is a good live album.