Is it just me, or is it hard to find any really great sounding Status Quo albums? I have several on CD. Right now I am listening to The Singles Collection: 1966-1973, a 1998 remaster, I think. Even back in the vinyl-dominated days of the 1970's, I think these were not great recordings. Mind you, great live band back in the day!

Piledriver and Hello! are good recordings, so is Blue For You. They aren't hi-fi serious, but looking for that with classic Quo is missing the point. It's loud, live and raw rock music. The recordings are good enough.

When Quo got an outside producer in and consciously tried to make a great sounding album that sounded good on top end hi-fi, it didn't work. We ended up with the wimpy sounding Rockin' All Over The World album. Whatever You Want has a very good sound and good songs, but loses some of the rawness and energy with it's clean sounding production. Great album though.

I never saw Quo in the 70s, too young, but I did see one of the 'Frantic Four' reunion shoes in 2014, and it was a blinder.

It sounds awesome, Rain, Mystery Song, Is There A Better Way and That's A Fact are some of the best sounding songs in Quo's discography. Big Fat Mama on Piledriver is up there too. Power and clarity.

The UK 80s UK PRT pressing sounds very good, even though it's fake stereo, it's one of the better sounding examples I've heard. I was happy with it for years until I got very lucky with a mono original. The Spare Parts from the same reissues is superb. Good enough that I'm not bothered about having an original.

Mono the way to go then?

Definitely, it was only mixed in mono at the time. The original Pye stereo pressing is fake stereo. Problem is, as far as I'm aware, the mono mix is only available on the original pressing, which of course, is rare and expensive in decent condition.

There might be a recent mono reissue from the 2000s, possibly on the Earmark label, but it's likely to just be the CD remaster on vinyl. There's nothing currently in print unfortunately.

Edit: This is the Earmark pressing from 2004 and it's mono.

Status Quo - Picturesque Matchstickable Messages From The Status Quo

Thank you, much appreciated.

The original CD of 12 Gold Bars is pretty well regarded on this forum. Given how old it is, it sounds quite decent.

In terms of remastering, I like the deluxe editions mastered by Andy Pearce but opinion on his work is divided.

Liked that band in the seventies.

After, let's say 1980, didn't listen to them anymore.

A few years ago bought, don't rememember where, a double "big hits" ore something like that.

I was surprised that I was captured by their full, simple, energic sound.

No... it's not Audophile, but who cares...

IT'S ONLY ROCK & ROLL

And I like it (a lot...)​

Totally agree, easily one of their very best songs. Maybe even their last really great one.

Did get a lot of radio airplay down here and I’m surprised it wasn’t released as a single. It probably helped boost sales of On The Level - that album sold by the truckload here.