WASHINGTON — If, like many citizens, you're having trouble keeping up with American movements in and around Iraq, let me try to help.

In Baghdad, Maj. Gen. Charles H. Swannack Jr., commanding general of the 82nd Airborne Division, said in an interview this week that the Baath Party government had probably planned the current insurgency before the American invasion. "I believe Saddam Hussein always intended to fight an insurgency should Iraq fall," he told The Washington Post.

But here in the nation's capital on Thursday, Douglas Feith, deputy to the secretary of defense and one of the most passionate neoconservative authors of the war, told the Council on Foreign Relations: "Saddam's demise has freed the Iraqi people . . . and created a new opportunity for free institutions to arise in the Arab world. In Iraq and Afghanistan, democracy has begun . . . . The Iraqis know they've been liberated from tyranny!"

Ahhh, but the Monday before Feith's speech, the CIA sent a bleak, urgent, top-secret report to Washington, which resulted in the precipitant return the next day by the American reconstruction czar in Baghdad, Ambassador L. Paul Bremer III. The report, by the CIA's Baghdad station chief, said the "insurgency" was gaining strength because Iraqis had no confidence in the Americans or their ability to restructure Iraq. Polls show that a majority of Iraqis regard American troops as occupiers rather than liberators, that the American-appointed Iraqi "leaders" are not capable of governing, and that the majority, but until-now complaisant, Shia population might soon join the obstreperous Sunnis.

But still Feith went on: "Iraq is on the rapid road to self-rule," he said. "The Iraqi Governing Council has won international recognition, and there are 250 governing councils on the municipal levels."

Ahh, but — wait! Wasn't it this same week that Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez said in a press conference that while there previously had been three to five attacks on coalition forces a day, for the past month there had been 30 to 35 a day? That we have reached a "turning point" and that it was clearly a "war"?

Feith was having none of this. Even as Japan, South Korea and Turkey opted out of the coalition, and after the Italians lost 18 men to a suicide bomber in Nasiriyah in the supposedly "safe" South, he insisted, "We have forged formidable partnerships!"

Bremer's duty upon his sudden return to Washington was to warn the administration that he could not achieve his political mission if the security situation continued to deteriorate. According to the Financial Times, Bremer recommended in a two-page memo that the processes of transferring sovereignty, writing a constitution and holding elections be dramatically accelerated. He also said he agreed with the grim CIA report.

Then he swiftly returned to Baghdad, by all accounts empowered to put into practice these life-saving suggestions.

Yet Feith continued with his indelible thought process. It was quite all right, he summed up, that Washington did not have the exact truth about Iraq's supposed weapons of mass destruction before it went to war. "The fact that we didn't have the absolute truth doesn't lead to anything," he said, reminding one of the old Soviet doublespeak. "You wouldn't have that intelligence even if it were true."

And while Democrats and even Republicans were questioning this, shall we say, "relative" outlook toward morality, Feith was praising President Bush in terms that might have embarrassed even those old compliment-prone Soviet leaders. "President Bush thought immediately after 9/11 that this was an act of war," he said at one point at the council meeting. "That was a seminal act of wisdom!"

Clearly delineated in this week's quotes and dramas are the stark differences between our people on the ground in Iraq — the men and women risking their lives every minute to actually do something — and the ideologues and civilian "thinkers" here.

Remember that virtually none of the neo-cons, such as Feith, has ever served in the military and, in fact, all avidly sought out deferments. Few of them have lived overseas or know Iraq from experience. Most will tell you, with more than a whiff of superiority, that they are "intellectuals." They think. In addition to being Cold Warriors and people who believe in the raw uses of power above diplomacy and negotiation — as has been outlined many times in papers from Israel's Haaretz to The Washington Post — many of the neo-cons are avid activists of the far-right Likud Party in Israel and thus support Ariel Sharon's expansion into a "Greater Israel" that could have been linked to a new Iraq.

Interestingly enough, Douglas Feith gave virtually this same speech at another Council on Foreign Relations meeting in July. Same obsessive and unproven ideas, almost the same words. Meanwhile, the unfortunate Americans who have to carry out the messianic visions of this group are out on the bitter deserts of Iraq, trying to figure out what to do next and, in their warnings and deeds, to wake America up to what is really happening.

Universal Press Syndicate