President Bush ended the week by restating his confidence in his embattled secretary of defense, Donald Rumsfeld, in unequivocal terms.

"Secretary Rumsfeld's energetic and steady leadership is exactly what is needed at this critical period. He has my full support and deepest appreciation," said Bush.

In some administrations, such language might not mean what it seems. It could even be read as an invitation for a cabinet member to resign, especially one as besieged as Rumsfeld. This week, the catalog of retired flag officers calling on him to resign reached half a dozen. Among them: John Batiste, a major general who commanded the First Infantry Division in Iraq, and Charles H. Swannack Jr., the major general for the 82nd Airborne as recently as 2004.

But when George W. Bush makes a foursquare pronouncement such as his latest on Rumsfeld, it resonates. And it is taken largely at face value. This president has stood by his friends, allies, appointees and supporters with uncommon steadfastness. In fact, loyalty may be his most salient virtue.

The question is whether that virtue, pursued beyond reason, becomes a kind of self-indulgence that neither the Bush administration nor the country can afford.

Something deep in the genetic code of the Bush family values loyalty highly. In fact, it seems to prize loyalty above practically all other virtues. It makes you wonder whether someone once did something very disloyal and very damaging to the House of Bush, back in the distant past or on a far bough of the family tree.

The first President Bush was sometimes criticized for being "loyal to a fault." He took personal relationships so seriously that he seemed incapable of turning on anyone he trusted. His first White House chief of staff, John Sununu, the gruff former governor of New Hampshire, threw his weight around in Washington with bruising effect. But Bush would not remove him until a scandal over his cavalier use of government airplanes made it imperative -- long after the political damage had been done.

Surely everyone regards loyalty as a virtue. And it has a special sheen when it appears in politics, where it tends to be rare. Looking back over history, a keen sense of when to desert your friends has been a useful survival skill -- almost as useful as a keen sense of when your friends are about to desert you.

But too much of anything, even a good thing, can be a bad thing. And there are times when a leader must weigh loyalty to an individual on the grander scales of national interest.

Rumsfeld surely presents a case in point. He has become the living symbol of the war in Iraq, not only because he is the Pentagon boss but because he pushed the specific decisions that turned a short-term victory into a long-term quagmire. He came close to the brink in April 2004, caught in the rage over prisoner abuses at Abu Ghraib that became a rallying cry for anti-U.S. elements throughout the Islamic world.

But when that moment of crisis came two years ago, President Bush went to the Pentagon to give Rumsfeld a high-profile endorsement. With the entire top echelon of his foreign policy advisors arrayed behind him, the president pledged to stand by his man. At the time it played as a gesture of supreme loyalty; in retrospect it seems more like a missed opportunity.

Personnel decisions are always complicated -- and no less so at the upper reaches of the federal power structure. Everyone knows how much Mr. Bush values the counsel of his vice president, Dick Cheney, whose Washington resume begins with service as a Rumsfeld staffer in the 1960s.

Cheney and Rumsfeld's careers have many points of intersection, culminating in the current one. So the president's loyalty investment here is twofold, and it reaches deep into the philosophical heart of his administration.

When does loyalty become a liability? Perhaps when it starts looking less like steadfastness and more like stubbornness. Or perhaps when it looks like a reluctance to admit the obvious.