November 7, 2021

Dear Blowing Rock Homeowners,

Veterans Day is a tribute to military veterans who have served in the U.S. Armed Forces. Not to be confused with Memorial Day, which honors those who died while in service, Veterans Day honors all military veterans, including those still with us.

At the request of Post Commander Albert Yount, George Wilcox invited Major General Charles Swannack, U.S. Army Retired) to be the featured speaker at the Blowing Rock American Legion’s Veteran’s Day Program on Saturday November 13, 2021, at 11:00 A.M. at the American Legion Building.

Albert is the Post Commander at Blowing Rock Legion Post 256. Albert has been the anchor to keep Post 256 alive and well. Post 256 provides assistance for young persons seeking admission to the Boys National Program and conducts services with patriotic songs and other ceremonies in Blowing Rock Memorial Park on Memorial Day and Veterans Day. Each year Post 256 places more than 600 American flags on the final resting places of deceased American veterans at 17 local cemeteries each Memorial Day.

General Swannack was our top General in Iraq shortly after the American invasion of that country. He also saw action in Bosnia and Panama among his many assignments. He is a decorated veteran who is very active in programs and organizations that assist our military veterans.

One of these organizations under his leadership provided a rescue dog to a veteran struggling with PTSD. This dog was funded by Blowing Rock residents Marty and Ted Couch, Pam and Leigh Dunston, Laurin and Bill Carter and Betsy and George Wilcox.

Albert has asked George to introduce the General at the ceremony. The tribute to our veterans should be a great community event next Saturday morning, so please mark your calendar.

The General’s biographical information is provided below. He is a native North Carolinian from Winston Salem.

Regards,

Tim Gupton

Major General Charles H. Swannack Jr., U.S. Army (Retired)

Major General Charles H. (Chuck) Swannack, Jr. was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant of Infantry from the United States Military Academy on 9 June 1971. He has proudly served his Nation for thirty plus years in command and staff positions at every level from platoon to Department of the Army.

Prior to retiring, MG Swannack commanded the 82nd Airborne Division from October 2002-May 2004. During this time, he provided forces to Combined Joint Task Force-180 for combat operations in Afghanistan, and he personally led the Division during combat operations from Kuwait to Baghdad and later civil-military operations in Al Anbar Province, western Iraq.

Prior general officer assignments include: Commanding General of Multinational Division (North) and Task Force Eagle during Operation JOINT FORGE (SFOR 11) in Bosnia-Herzegovina, where he oversaw implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords; Commanding General of the Joint Readiness Training Center and Fort Polk, where he was the senior trainer for all Light, Airborne, Air Assault, Ranger and Special Forces units in the Army; and Deputy Director for Strategy, Plans and Policy within the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans, Headquarters, Department of the Army. His initial assignment as a general officer was with the 82nd Airborne Division as the Assistant Division Commander (Operations).

As a Brigade Commander, MG Swannack deployed to Haiti for peacekeeping operations during Operation UPHOLD DEMOCRACY. He also served in the Strategic Plans and Policy Directorate, J5, the Joint Staff, where he was instrumental in developing and executing US strategy and policy for Central America and the Caribbean Basin. As a Battalion Commander, he deployed to Panama during Operation NIMROD DANCER and subsequently participated in combat operations during Operation JUST CAUSE.

MG Swannack is a graduate of Capstone and the National War College. He holds a Master of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology.

His decorations include the Legion of Merit (6OLC) and Bronze Star Medal (1OLC). He proudly wears the Combat Infantryman Badge, Master Parachutist Badge and the Ranger Tab.

Initially in retirement, MG Swannack provided consultation services to multiple defense corporations and primarily served in the capacity of a trainer, coach and mentor to Brigade Combat Teams preparing to deploy to Iraq and Afghanistan.

From 2010-2013, he served as CEO of the Logistics Services Division, Louis Berger Services (formerly US Logistics, Inc.) a $50MM veteran logistics services company where he managed the transformation of US Logistics from an entrepreneurship located in Fayetteville NC to a fully functioning corporation able to join the parent company in Greenville SC.

In early 2014, MG Swannack joined Speedway Motorsports as Executive Director for Speedway Children’s Charities, a 501c (3) nonprofit, with the mission of assisting underprivileged children to become productive adults.

In early 2019, MG Swannack was named Vice President, Armed Forces Affairs and now leads an initiative “Welcome Home Patriots” to improve the lives of post-servicemen and servicewomen.

He also serves as President of the Patriot Military Family Foundation in Mooresville NC, and actively supports many other military charities as a means of “giving back” to those who served him so well during his military career.

MG Swannack is married, has twin children and eight grandchildren.