Love Actually returns to our TV screens tonight in festive tradition, along with its star-studded cast of much-loved actors. Among the stars of the film is national treasure Emma Thompson, who famously plays the jilted wife of the late, great Alan Rickman. While Emma is undeniably an incredible actor, there is a sad truth behind how she played her part quite so well in Love Actually.

Emma, who has just starred as the formidable Miss Trunchbull in a new on-screen adaptation of Mathilda the musical, was once embroiled in a traumatic love triangle with two other Harry Potter stars - and has admitted to drawing on her own experiences when it came to playing the part of the double-crossed lover in Love Actually.

READ MORE: Keira Knightley's quiet life in North London, normal husband, and PTSD struggles

The 63-year-old paved the way for her incredibly successful acting career with a number of increasingly prominent acting parts from the early 80s, starting out on the West End before starring in two BBC series, Tutti Frutti and Fortunes of War. A clear on-screen star from the word go, she won the Best Actress BAFTA for both series.

It's not hard to see where Emma's talent came from, as she was born to actors Eric Thompson and Phyllida Law. However, Thompson has revealed that in 1982 tragedy struck her family when her dad died aged just 52. She said the experience 'tore [the family] to pieces', but has also reflected: "At the same time, it's possible that were he still alive I might never have had the space or courage to do what I've done... I have a definite feeling of inheriting space. And power."

In 1989, things seemed to be looking up for Emma when she married fellow actor Kenneth Branagh. While the couple tried to keep their relationship private, avoiding photoshoots or interviews together, they regularly collaborated on films including Henry V and Much Ado About Nothing, and were dubbed a "golden couple" by the British press at the time.

However, the illusion was shattered in 1995 when Emma and Kenneth announced they were splitting up over their clashing work schedules. But it soon emerged that Kenneth was reportedly having an affair with another actress, Harry Potter star Helena Bonham Carter, who famously played Bellatrix Lestrange in the wizarding franchise.

Emma has since revealed she based the heartbreak of her Love Actually character on her real-life experience following the affair. According to Glamour magazine, the actor said in a 2018 interview: “That scene where my character is standing by the bed crying is so well known because it’s something everyone’s been through.

"I had my heart very badly broken by Ken. So I knew what it was like to find the necklace that wasn’t meant for me. Well it wasn’t exactly that, but we’ve all been through it.”

Kenneth and Helena had a public relationship for a few years, but they too split in 1999, and Emma has since told the Sunday Times she 'made her peace' with Helena, describing her as a 'wonderful woman'.

Emma credits her husband, Greg Wise, who she met on the set of Sense & Sensibility, for coming to her rescue in her time of need, and has said he 'picked up the pieces and put them back together'. The couple, who have a home in West Hampstead, have a daughter, Gaia, 22, and a son, Tindy, who they adopted after meeting him aged 16.

Want to get personalised celeb, TV, and entertainment news straight to your inbox every day? You can tailor our news to your interests, here.

For more news in and around London, visit the MyLondon homepage.

READ NEXT: