Welcome to Susan W. Patton Photography! Thank you for your interest in my work. To share a little about my style of photography, I am a huge fan of real life. I love photography that tells a story and makes you feel something when you look at it. My number one focus when I pick up my camera is to capture something authentic. Real people. Real moments. That's it. If this strikes a chord with you, let's chat.

The bulk of my work is focused on high school seniors. I also shoot families, maternity sessions and engagements, all using a lifestyle approach.

In terms of lighting and location, I use natural light for my on-location sessions. The majority of my work is done outdoors, in Western PA and Eastern Ohio. I love farms, fields, barns, ponds, parks, woods, walking trails, creeks...anywhere we can think. I also love architecture and urban shoots too. The common thread is the open space and fresh air which seem to bring out the best in people and in my work. It's just relaxing. And fun. My gosh, you'll have fun!

You may wonder if I ever shoot indoors. Yes, of course, I can shoot inside but I try my hardest to use whatever natural light I can to capture interesting, artistic images.

If you want traditional, formal portraits...you know the ones in which everyone is sitting in front of a staged backdrop, shirts are tucked in, hair is perfect, and children (even adults) are being bribed or threatened to behave, I beg you to contact another photographer. This type of photography is as painful for me to shoot as it is for you to smile through. It's not my strength and I don't feel called in any way to this style of picture-taking. I do real life. I do silly, unruly, unstructured, wonderfully imperfect and artistic shoots. I expect that most people don't love having their pictures taken. I plan on kids not wanting to sit still for long. Trust me, I get it and I welcome it. It's real life and I love it all!

Investment

In terms of time and money, a shoot generally lasts 1.5 to 2 hours. There are three session choices based on location.

For sessions shot within 10 miles of my 16101 address, the session fee is $225. (Ex. Downtown New Castle, downtown New Wilmington, Westminster College, Shenango/Neshannock/Laurel/Union/New Castle/Wilmington High Schools, Pearson Park, and Cascade Park to name a few).

For sessions up to 20 miles away, the cost is $325. (Examples include but are not limited to Ellwood City, Harmony, Zelienople, Hermitage PA, Cranberry Twp., Sharon PA, Poland OH, Youngstown OH.)

For Pittsburgh locations (i.e. Wexford, Oakland, Shadyside, Downtown, Hartwood Acres, Station Square) the session fee is $425.

If there is another location you are considering, or if you are outside of my general area, please contact me for a quote.

Session fees are now due at the time you book your date. Once payment has been received, you will be notified with a confirmation. Until then, dates are available on a first come, first served basis. Acceptable forms of payment include: check made out to Susan W. Patton Photography, payment through Paypal, or cash.

For Senior Sessions:

See Investment section above for session fee options and payment requirements.

Plan for 2 hours including outfit changes and any driving between locations.

Sessions include up to three outfit changes. If you need more than three outfits we will schedule a 2nd session and a new session fee will be applied.

For more information on senior sessions, please call or email me at 412.523.0915 or [email protected].

What to expect after your session:

Images will be available for online viewing within 4-6 weeks from the date of your session. You will be emailed a link to a password protected album on my website that you can share with others. From this album, you will be able to purchase prints and various products. If you need to see samples of products or you need more help with ordering, you can set up an appointment at my office. Your online gallery will be available for one year from the date the gallery is made available on my site. After that, the gallery will be removed to create space for new sessions.

Print and product pricing*:

Although the following price list doesn't include all the items I offer, these are the most commonly asked about pieces and should give you a good idea of what to expect in terms of pricing if you order directly from my office via phone or in-person consultation. Please note, if you order directly from your online gallery, prices are 10-12% higher to account for website service fees.

Table top/gift-sized prints:

4 wallets (one image): $12

4x6: $12

5x7: $17

8x10: $32

Large Prints:

11x14: $90

16x20: $110

16x24: $135

20x24: $160

20x30: $185

30x40: $225

Gallery wraps:

8x10: $148

11x14: $175

16x20: $225

20x24: $275

(other sizes available upon request)

Framed images:

8x10: $148

11x14: $210

16x20: $295

10x10 layflat book: 20 pages (10 spreads), up to 20 images. $350

5x7 double-sided flat cards for holidays, graduation, Holy Communion, thank yous, etc.: $2 each (minimum order 50 cards).

Digital download of session images with permission to print: $600

Digital download with USB of session images with permission to print: $625

Digital download of single image with print rights: $50

Touch up fee per image: $5