Quentin Davies will be seen as an unlikely defector to the Labour party.

He served in what is seen as the most rightwing shadow cabinet of recent years, under Iain Duncan Smith, had a minor government job in Margaret Thatcher's final administration and is now MP for the ex-prime minister's home town of Grantham.

A former diplomat and City banker, his activities outside parliament, including consultancies and directorships, are thought to make him one of Westminster's highest-earning MPs.

He was a member of a shrinking band of Conservative pro-Europeans at Westminster and backed fellow-Europhile Kenneth Clarke against David Cameron in the 2005 Tory leadership election.

He warned that Mr Cameron risked making the Conservatives look like "dishonest double-glazing merchants" by pulling them out of the European People's party in the European parliament.

More recently, he voiced fury at Mr Cameron's decision to demand an immediate inquiry into the government's handling of the war on Iraq, branding the call "absolutely crazy".

Mr Davies, 63, began his career in the diplomatic service and was posted to cold war Moscow before leaving the Foreign Office to work in the City, where he became director of Morgan, Grenfell, the investment firm.

He entered parliament as Conservative MP for Stamford and Spalding in 1987. The seat was changed to Stamford and Grantham in 1997.

Soon after his arrival at Westminster, he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to the education minister, Angela Rumbold, serving in that role from 1988 to 1991 and staying with her when she moved to the Home Office.

But he rose no higher through the government ranks, and, after the 1992 general election, returned to the backbenches and served on the Treasury select committee.

Mr Davies joined William Hague's frontbench team in 1998 as spokesman for social security, then on Treasury matters, then defence.

His most senior job came when he served as shadow Northern Ireland secretary under Mr Duncan Smith from 2001 2003, but he returned to the backbenches once more when Michael Howard took over the party leadership.

He has most recently been a member of the cross-party House of Commons international development select committee.

Mr Davies' entry in the register of MPs' Interests lists directorships in construction firm Vinci SA and its subsidiary Vinci UK plc and work as parliamentary consultant to the Chartered Institute of Taxation.

He is an unpaid member of the board of the Association of Lloyd's Names and director of Sumac Underwriting Ltd.

The son of an Oxford doctor, he attended school in Reading before reading history at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and then taking up a fellowship at Harvard University.

His Who's Who entry notes that he is a member of the London clubs Brook's, Beefsteak and Travellers.