LOS ANGELES -- Universal Pictures is moving ahead with plans to bring bloodthirsty Hannibal Lecter back to the big screen in a "prequel" to the 1991 hit Silence of the Lambs and recent follow-up Hannibal, Daily Variety reported in its Wednesday edition.

Director Brett Ratner (Rush Hour, The Family Man) is in talks with Universal to receive about $4 million to direct Red Dragon, an adaptation of Thomas Harris' 1981 best-selling crime thriller that first introduced Hannibal "the Cannibal" to readers, Variety said.

Anthony Hopkins is in negotiations to reprise his Oscar-winning Lecter role for Dragon, depending on the script, according to the entertainment trade paper.

It said Universal, the studio arm of Vivendi Universal, will finance the picture and release it worldwide.

Dino De Laurentiis, who produced Hannibal, will return to produce the Red Dragon with Martha De Laurentiis.

Academy Award-winning screenwriter Ted Tally (The Silence of the Lambs) came aboard the project last November to adapt Red Dragon, a predecessor to both "The Silence of the Lambs" and Hannibal, Variety said.

The story opens with Lecter being arrested for the first time by ex-FBI agent Will Graham, a top investigator who quit the bureau after nearly becoming one of Lecter's victims.

"Red Dragon" was previously made into the 1986 picture "Manhunter," directed by Michael Mann and produced by the De Laurentiises. The new film will incorporate elements of the book not seen in "Manhunter."

Universal and De Laurentiis last collaborated on Ridley Scott's "Hannibal," starring Hopkins and Julianne Moore, which has grossed $180 million overseas and $165 million domestically to date. MGM handled domestic marketing and distribution while Universal is distributing that film internationally.

Besides winning Tally a screenplay Oscar, Silence of the Lambs won the Academy Award for best picture and earned Oscars for Hopkins, co-star Jodie Foster and director Jonathan Demme.

"Dragon" will reteam Ratner with Universal after his last success with the studio directing romantic fantasy "The Family Man," starring Nicolas Cage and Tea Leoni.

Ratner also recently directed the Jackie Chan hit "Rush Hour" and its upcoming sequel "Rush Hour 2."

Tally's credits include adaptations of the novels "All the Pretty Horses," "The Juror" and "White Palace."

The 30 Best Movies on Hulu This Week

Immaculate, Casino, and Get Out are just a few of the movies you need to watch on Hulu right now.

The Untold Story of How Ridley Scott Saw Star Wars—and Ended Up Making Alien

In 1977, Ridley Scott was considering making a medieval period piece. Then he saw Star Wars and set about making two sci-fi classics, Alien and Blade Runner.

The 30 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Love Lies Bleeding, Dune: Part Two, and Beetlejuice are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.

People Are Big Mad About the House of the Dragon Season 2 Finale

“Did I just watch a 70 minute trailer for Season 3?” is just one of the reactions fans have posted online about the season's "disappointing and poorly executed" closer.

The 21 Best Movies on Apple TV+ Right Now

Fancy Dance, The Velvet Underground, and Argylle are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Apple TV+ this month.

The 52 Best Shows on Disney+ Right Now

Arctic Ascent With Alex Honnold, X-Men ’97, and Star Wars: Young Jedi Adventures are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Disney+ this month.

The 36 Best Shows on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Boys, Batman: Caped Crusader, and Fallout are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The Week of Brat Summer Will Go Down in Internet History

After Charli XCX declared that Vice President Kamala Harris “IS brat,” nothing was the same.