With the debut of National Geographic’s new scripted mini-series The Right Stuff on Disney+, it’s possible that your attention has turned to the stars. Specifically, you may be curious about the original adaptation of the Tom Wolfe book. Released in 1983, the film from director Philip Kaufman scored 8 Oscar nominations (even if it didn’t make a big splash at the box office).

Clocking in at 3 hours and 13 minutes, this one feature film is itself almost half as long as the mini-series. This should keep you occupied while you wait for new episodes of The Right Stuff to land on Disney+. But how can you watch the original Right Stuff? Is it on Disney+? Is it even available to stream? Here’s what you need to know.

Is the original The Right Stuff on Disney+?

While you can stream National Geographic’s new adaptation of The Right Stuff on the platform, you cannot stream the original Right Stuff film on Disney+.

Is the original The Right Stuff film on Netflix? Where can you stream The Right Stuff movie?

Unfortunately, you cannot stream 1983’s The Right Stuff on any streaming service. If you want to watch the original film, you’re going to have to pay to either rent or buy it on VOD. You can rent or buy The Right Stuff via iTunes, Prime Video, Google Play, Vudu, or your preferred VOD store.

Who was in the cast of the original The Right Stuff film?

The film certainly differs from what’s on Disney+ in one major way: the film was told primarily through the eyes of test pilot and legend Chuck Yeager. His story isn’t told in the Disney+ series, as the new show focuses exclusively on the seven pilots who were chosen to be the first astronauts. The film’s cast included:

Sam Shepard as Chuck Yeager

Scott Glenn as Alan Shepard

Ed Harris as John Glenn

Dennis Quaid as Gordon Cooper

Lance Henriksen as Wally Schirra

Fred Ward as Gus Grissom

Charles Frank as Scott Carpenter

Scott Paulin as Deke Slayton

Additionally, Barbara Hershey, Kathy Baker, Mary Jo Deschanel, Pamela Reed, Mittie Smith, Veronica Cartwright, Susan Kase, and Mickey Crocker play the astronauts’ wives.

You can stream The Right Stuff TV series on Disney+.