About

Dr. Amrit S. Rai MD FRCSC completed his Bachelor of Health Sciences (BHSc) and Doctor of Medicine (MD) degrees at McMaster University. During his undergraduate studies, Dr. Rai remained at the top of his class. Upon graduating medical school, he completed a research fellowship in Glaucoma and Advanced Anterior Segment Surgery at the University of Toronto.

He then completed his Ophthalmology residency training at the University of Toronto where he was recognized for his academic mastery. Dr. Rai repeatedly received the top marks on departmental exams and upon graduation was recognized as having the highest academic standing after 5 years of residency training. He also excelled in the operating room and received the Kensington Eye Institute (KEI) award for top surgical resident. Dr. Rai constantly strives for excellence when caring for his patients.

Dr. Rai is a board-certified Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Canada (FRCSC). He is a medical and surgical Comprehensive Ophthalmologist with a focus in cataract surgery. He can provide medical, laser, and/or surgical treatment for a wide variety of ophthalmological conditions. He is interested in global health and completed a Global Health Education Initiative Program at the University of Toronto during his residency. He has authored numerous peer-reviewed publications and textbook chapters.

Dr. Rai enjoys staying active by playing tennis, soccer and snowboarding. He is able to serve patients in English and Punjabi.

Education

Undergraduate

2009, Bachelor of Health Sciences, McMaster University

Medical School

2012, Doctor of Medicine, McMaster University

Fellowship

2015, Research Fellowship in Glaucoma and Advanced Anterior Segment Surgery, University of Toronto

Residency

2016, Ophthalmology, University of Toronto

Global Health

2020, Global Health Education Initiative Certificate Program, University of Toronto

Memberships

Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada

Ontario Medical Association

Canadian Medical Association

Canadian Ophthalmological Society

Eye Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario

American Academy of Ophthalmology