After working as a publisher for Elle India for nearly half a decade, Rai will now take over as business head of Big CBS Prime and Big CBS Love.

Amrit Rai, who was until recently the publisher of fashion magazine Elle India, has put in her papers at the organisation. She has joined Big CBS as business head and will lead two channels of the network - Big CBS Prime and Big CBS Love. Her last day at Elle was August 31.

Rai has 23 years of experience in the media industry and has worked across print and television. She joined Elle in 2008 and worked for more than five years at the publication, reporting to Archana Pillai, CEO, Ogaan Publications. Her mandate at Elle India was to manage the business operations.

Speaking on her experience at Elle, Rai says, "Elle is the world's largest selling fashion magazine and I have had an amazing experience which has been exhilarating, fun, fulfilling and complete with massive learnings. I enjoyed myself immensely and ensured we achieved our objectives with credibility. All Elle India partners were not only satisfied but happy. I will miss working with Elle India terribly."

"I received a fabulous opportunity to join one of India's largest media conglomerates and represent USA's No. 1 television network, which has recently launched in India. Also, in my long media journey, I was returning to television after a hiatus of 11 years. Armed with new learnings from print, I am confident of adding value to both my new company's business as also my personal and professional growth curve," adds Rai.

She began her career as an advertising executive at Business India magazine in 1990 and worked there for three years. Thereafter, she moved to TV18 as marketing manager for a short duration. Later, in 1995, she moved to Nimbus Communications as group marketing head. After spending around two years at Nimbus, Rai joined STAR India as assistant vice-president, sales for the next half a decade before joining Elle. She also had a short stint with Vjive Networks as VP, business development and alliances.