Executive power rests with the 10-member State Congress (cabinet), which is accountable to the parliament and is headed by two captains regent. As the joint heads of state with largely ceremonial roles, the captains are elected every six months by the legislature from among its own members. Although there is no official prime minister, the secretary of state for foreign and political affairs is regarded as the head of government. Following the legislative elections in late 2019, Luca Beccari of the Sammarinese Christian Democratic Party (PDCS) was elected to the post in early 2020.

The 60 members of the unicameral Great and General Council are elected for five-year terms. The 2019 elections were considered credible and free, and the results were accepted by stakeholders and the public. The PDCS, then in opposition, won with 21 seats. The left-wing Tomorrow in Motion (DML) coalition placed second with 15 seats, followed by Libera San Marino (LSM) with 10 seats, We for the Republic (NplR) with 8 seats, and Future Republic (RF) with 6 seats. After the elections, the PDCS formed a governing coalition with DML and NplR.

There are no restrictions preventing the opposition from increasing support through elections, and the country has undergone transfers of power between rival party groupings in recent years. Multiple opposition groups are currently represented in the Great and General Council.

In May 2023, the RETE Civic Movement, which had won 11 seats in the 2019 elections as part of the DML coalition, withdrew its support for the government and joined the opposition, citing a lack of progress with social and economic reforms. RETE’s two cabinet ministers, the secretaries of state for health and internal affairs, were replaced in June by members of the PCDS and NplR, respectively.

While citizens generally enjoy full political rights, women are underrepresented in the Great and General Council, where they held 19 of 60 seats after the 2019 elections, and in politics generally. An assessment mission from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that was deployed ahead of the 2019 polls noted that gender quotas on candidate lists were undercut by the preferential voting system. Women are better represented in the country’s Electoral Council and in polling administration.

LGBT+ citizens have advanced their interests in the political sphere in recent years, and in 2022 Paolo Rondelli was elected as one of the two captains regent, becoming the world’s first openly gay head of state.

About 16 percent of the population consists of noncitizens who do not have political rights in the country; most are Italian nationals. Under San Marino’s strict naturalization criteria, individuals without a citizen spouse, parent, or grandparent generally must live in the country for over 30 years to be eligible for citizenship.

In response to scandals involving high-ranking officials, San Marino has launched a series of programs to combat corruption and money laundering. However, GRECO’s 2020 report called for structural changes to San Marino’s judicial sector in order to prevent unwarranted political influence and to strengthen the country’s anticorruption framework. The report also highlighted the need to adopt a code of conduct for members of parliament. In response, the parliament in 2022 adopted legislation that introduced a code of conduct for lawmakers, with provisions designed to better manage conflicts of interest and improve transparency through asset declarations. Also that year, the Judicial Council adopted a code of ethics for judges. While a 2022 GRECO report expressed approval of these reforms, it highlighted remaining deficiencies in the monitoring and enforcement of the newly adopted rules.

In 2017, several former officials were convicted of bribery, corruption, money laundering, and vote buying as part of their involvement in the so-called Conto Mazzini case. Multiple former captains regent and ministers received prison sentences ranging from two to eight years. In 2022, after years of hearings, an appellate court upheld most of the convictions but reduced nearly all of the penalties.

Freedom of the press is generally upheld. Local media are pluralistic, and journalists investigate important topics, including financial crimes. However, the risk of heavy fines or civil damages under San Marino’s strict defamation laws can prompt self-censorship among journalists. Moreover, limited revenues mean that media outlets are dependent on economic support from political or business actors, which may influence their reporting. News consumers also have access to Italian media, and internet access is not restricted.

Judicial affairs are managed by a Judicial Council made up of judges and lay members. In 2020, the government adopted legislation that altered the voting structure within the Judicial Council, giving greater influence to members of parliament sitting on the council. The body subsequently removed three judges who had been investigating the Conto Mazzini case.

In response, GRECO called for structural changes to limit political interference with the judiciary. The parliament adopted reforms in 2021 that were designed to strengthen judicial independence, including provisions that prohibited lawmakers from serving on the Judicial Council, required the council’s lay members to have specific legal education or experience, and called for those members to be elected by a two-thirds majority in the parliament; the judges on the council are elected by their peers. In 2022, GRECO expressed its satisfaction with these reforms as well as the judicial code of ethics that was adopted by the reorganized Judicial Council that March.

Due process rights surrounding charges and trials are generally upheld in practice. The authorities respect legal safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention. The 2020 GRECO report on San Marino’s judiciary expressed concerns about the lack of professionalism and transparency in the system, and called for a more consistent, objective, and transparent allocation of cases. In 2022, the parliament passed amendments to the code of criminal procedure and other legislation that provided for an objective and systematic allocation of cases, strengthened the protection of defendants’ rights, and set rules for the recusal of judges who have conflicts of interest. In its 2022 report, GRECO expressed satisfaction with these reforms.

San Marino law criminalizes the dissemination of ideas related to racial or ethnic superiority; acts of violence or discrimination on various grounds, including sexual orientation and gender identity; and incitement to such acts. However, discrimination based on skin color and language are not covered by these provisions, and the country lacks a strong and comprehensive legal framework for combating discrimination more broadly. A 2019 constitutional amendment banned all forms of discrimination based on sexual orientation, but it does not cover gender identity, and it is not supported by specific, enforceable laws addressing employment and other forms of discrimination affecting LGBT+ people. Women continue to face societal prejudices that limit their access to employment and economic opportunity.

Personal social freedoms are generally safeguarded in San Marino. A law adopted in 2018 allows civil unions for same-sex couples. However, same-sex marriage is not recognized, and same-sex couples do not have the right to adopt children together. Reports of domestic violence, which is prohibited by law, are rare.

In a 2021 referendum, more than 75 percent of participants voted in favor of legalizing abortion up to the 12th week of pregnancy or if a pregnancy poses a danger to the woman’s life or health. The parliament passed legislation implementing these results in 2022. Abortion had previously been a criminal offense unless it was necessary to save the pregnant woman’s life.