1999 Scores

Status: Free

Freedom Rating: 1.0

Civil Liberties: 1

Political Rights: 1

Overview

San Marino is the sole survivor of the numerous independent states that existed in Italy prior to unification in the nineteenth century. Its modern multiparty democratic system has been dominated by a long succession of coalition governments. The three main political parties are the Christian Democratic Party (PDCS), the Socialist Party (PSS), and the Progressive Democratic Party (PPDC).

Since 1993, San Marino has been governed by a centrist PDCS-PSS coalition, which returned to power after the May 1998 elections.

A tiny enclave within the Italian province of Emilia-Romagna, San Marino has close ties to Italy, from which it receives an annual budget subsidy provided under the terms of a special treaty.

In addition to agriculture, the country's vibrant, primarily private enterprise economy includes production of livestock, light manufacturing, and tourism, which constitutes more than 60 percent of government revenue.

Reputedly founded in BCE 301, San Marino is the world's oldest and second smallest republic. The Sanmarinese are ethnically and culturally Italian, but their long history has created a strong sense of identity and independence. San Marino's constitution, dating from the year 1600, vests legislative power in the Grand and General Council (parliament) of 60 members directly elected for five-year terms, subject to dissolution. A ten-member Congress of State, or cabinet, is elected by the parliament for the duration of the term. Two members of the council are designated for six-month terms as executive captains-regent, one representing the city of San Marino and the other the countryside. The secretary of state for foreign affairs has come to assume many of the prerogatives of a prime minister.

San Marino is a member of the United Nations, International Court of Justice, Council of Europe, World Trade Organization, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, International Monetary Fund, and International Labor Organization. Although San Marino has official relations with the European Union (EU), and participates in its security program, it is not a full member of the EU.

Political Rights and Civil Liberties

San Marino's citizens can change their government democratically. The citizens elect the 60 members of the parliament according to a proportional system. All citizens having reached the age of 18 have the right to vote. Women were permitted to stand as candidates for seats in the Grand and General Council for the first time in 1974.

San Marino enjoys a free press. Newspapers are published by the government, by some political parties, and by the trade unions. Italian newspapers and radio and television broadcasts are freely available. Radio Titano is the country's only privately owned radio station.

San Marino has no formal asylum policy. Instead, it has allowed a small number of refugees to reside and work in the country. Immigrants and refugees are eligible for citizenship only after 30 years' residence. Those born in San Marino remain citizens and can vote no matter where they live. Most Sanmarinese belong to the Roman Catholic Church. The law prohibits discrimination based on religion, race, disability, language, or social status.

Workers are free to form and join unions under a 1961 law. Collective bargaining agreements carry the force of law. Unions may freely form domestic federations or join international labor federations. Union members constitute approximately one-half of the country's workforce. Trade unions are independent of the government and political parties, but they have close informal ties with the parties, which exercise a strong influence on them. The right to strike is guaranteed, but no strikes have occurred in the past ten years. Freedom of association is respected.

The law provides for an independent judiciary, which is based on the Italian legal system. The judicial system delegates some of the authority to Italian magistrates, in both criminal and civil cases. A local conciliation judge handles cases of minor importance. Appeals go, in the first instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy. The final court of review is San Marino's Council of Twelve, a group of judges chosen for six-year terms (four are replaced every two years) from among the members of the Grand and General Council.

Several laws provide for the equality of women in the workplace and elsewhere. In practice there is no discrimination in pay or working conditions. All careers are open to women, including careers in the military and police as well as the highest public offices.