1 When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion: then were we like unto them that dream.

2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter: and our tongue with joy.

3 Then said they among the heathen: The Lord hath done great things for them.

4 Yea, the Lord hath done great things for us already: whereof we rejoice.

5 Turn our captivity, O Lord: as the rivers in the south.

6 They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.

7 He that now goeth on his way weeping, and beareth forth good seed:

shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

1 When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion,

we were like them that dream.

2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them.

3 The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.

4 Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south.

5 They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

1. When that the Lord again his Zion had forth brought

From bondage great, and also servitude extreme,

His work was such as did surmount man's heart and thought,

So that we were much like to them, that used to dream:

Our mouths were all with laughter filled then,

Also our tongues did show us joyful men.

2. The heathen folk were forced then this to confess,

How that the Lord for them also great things had done:

But much more we, and therefore can confess no less;

Wherefore to joy we have great cause, as we begun;

O Lord, go forth, thou canst our bondage end.

Who to deserts dost flowing rivers send.

3. Full true it is, that they that sow in tears indeed

A time will come when they shall reap in mirth and joy:

They went and wept in hearing of their precious seed,

For that their foes full oftentimes did them annoy:

But their return they joyfully shall see,

Their sheaves bring home, and not impaired be.

VERSION 1. (L. M.)

Surprising deliverance

When God restored our captive state,

Joy was our song, and grace our theme;

The grace beyond our hopes so great

That joy appeared a painted dream.

The scoffer owns Thy hand, and pays

Unwilling honors to Thy name;

While we with pleasure shout thy praise,

With cheerful notes thy love proclaim.

When we review our dismal fears,

'Twas hard to think they'd vanish so;

With God we left our flowing tears,

He makes our joys like rivers flow.

The man that in his furrowed field

His scattered seed with sadness leaves,

Will shout to see the harvest yield

A welcome load of joyful sheaves.