Normal weather for Yekaterinburg in May

It's pleasantly warm in May in Yekaterinburg with an average temperature of 20°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 15°C to a high of 23°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between 0°C and 10°C.

In May, there is an average of 28 mm of precipitation, spread over 7 days days. Of the total precipitation, about 1,1 cm falls as snow in May. The wind speed is around 4 Bft, mostly coming from the Southwest.

The UV index is a maximum of 8 this month. That's a very high value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn within 10-15 minutes.

The highest recorded temperature on May in recent years was 34°C in 2021. The lowest daytime temperature on this day was 6°C in 2022. The extreme night temperatures ranged from a low of -6°C to a high of 17°C.

Want nice weather? May is a great month to visit Yekaterinburg. You’ll get pleasant temperatures and not too much rain this month.

Check out the climate of Yekaterinburg for all months and discover the best travel time

Average daily weather in May

Click on a day for more details about the average weather on that day in May.

Daily Temperature in May in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in May in Yekaterinburg, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of May. Based on historical data, it shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Rainfall in May in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily rainfall in May for Yekaterinburg, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of May. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily Snowfall in May in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily snowfall in May in Yekaterinburg, measured in centimetres. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. The data is based on historical measurements and gives an idea of the average snowfall in May.

Daily UV Index in May in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily UV index in May in Yekaterinburg, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.

Temperature in May in Yekaterinburg Over the Years

This chart shows the average temperature in May in Yekaterinburg, measured in degrees Celsius, over the past years.

Total Rainfall in May in Yekaterinburg Over the Years

This chart shows the average rainfall in May in Yekaterinburg, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail.

Snowfall in May in Yekaterinburg per year

This chart shows the average snowfall in May in Yekaterinburg, measured in centimetres, over the past years.

Weather experiences in May in Yekaterinburg

Have you been to Yekaterinburg in May?

Share your weather experience in May in Yekaterinburg.

When were you here?

How was the weather?

Describe your weather experiences:

What's your name?

What's your email?

Your email will not be shown in the review and will not be shared with others.

Average Weather in Yekaterinburg by Month

Click on a month below to see detailed weather info for Yekaterinburg. Based on historical weather data, you can see the average temperature, rainfall, wind, and UV index for each day of the month.

Or check out the climate of Yekaterinburg for all months at once