Yekaterinburg Weather in January: With the air being damp (Humidity is 77%) and temperature being as low as -27℉, you can expect cold weather on your visit to Yekaterinburg in the month of January. The average temperature is 9℉. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 4.11 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in February-March: The temperature is cold throughout the months, the average temperature being 20℉. The air is slightly humid and expect to feel colder than usual. Unless you are very sure about the activities you want to do, this is not a very ideal time to visit Yekaterinburg. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 16.72 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in April: Are you one of those who waits for winters to get all those layers out? Then the best time to visit Yekaterinburg for you would be April. The relevantly high humidity during this month makes for pretty chilly afternoons too. 42℉ is what the day feels like except the nights when the temperature falls! Expect an average precipitation of 1.9 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in May: Warm and pleasant day time temperatures, coupled with right amount of dampness in the air makes May the best time to visit Yekaterinburg. The days are sunny, and the average temperature is 53℉ which is just perfect to put on those sneakers and go exploring Yekaterinburg. This time period sees an average precipitation of 8.13 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in June: With average humidity of 70%, temperatures sway between 41℉ to 82℉. Now this may cause a little discomfort, but we are sure not complaining! This weather is perfect to go sightseeing around the city of Yekaterinburg. This time period sees an average precipitation of 13.33 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in July-August: The highest temperature recorded is 88℉ which would make you want to run to the nearest café to down a glass of chilled drink, but the moderate humidity of 77% makes this an excellent time to visit Yekaterinburg. This time period sees an average precipitation of 32.01 mm.

Yekaterinburg Weather in September-October: The air is moderately humid with average humidity being 76%. The temperature ranges between 5℉ to 77℉ and it is still cold in Yekaterinburg. The high humidity in the air makes it feel colder, although the average temperature is 44℉. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 12.41 mm.