April 9th, 2010

Crytek is an interactive entertainment development company founded by the Yerli brothers in 1999. Crytek’s head office is located in Frankfurt, Germany, the company also has studios in Budapest (Hungary), Kiev (Ukraine), Sofia (Bulgaria) and Seoul (Korea). Crytek entered the UK market in 2009 with the acquisition of Nottingham based Free Radical Design which has been renamed to Crytek UK.

Crytek is dedicated to the creation of high-quality video games for Next Generation Consoles and PC and real-time 3D-Technologies such as the CryENGINE®, one of the world’s most advanced and award winning 3d engines. In addition to the in-house development of video games, Crytek also licenses the CryENGINE® technology to other developers to create games, movies and serious games.

Karl Hilton, Managing Director of Crytek UK explains the company’s reasons for joining TIGA:

“We are joining TIGA because we feel it is important to be part of the UK community and support TIGA in its mission to make the UK the best place in the world to do games business. Crytek UK fully supports TIGA's campaign to gain Games Tax Relief for the UK games development industry to enable us to remain competitive in the international marketplace.

“Crytek entered the UK market to access the exceptional talent that exists in the UK development community. At Crytek UK we offer a premier working environment in our brand new office spaces, great company culture and access to cutting edge technology, by doing so we hope to attract the very best people to join the company.

“Crytek is also keen to work with TIGA’s university members and other academic institutions to give them free access to the CryENGINE® in the classroom. This will give students the chance to cut their teeth using the latest technology and ensure that graduates are skilled and experienced in industry development tools when they enter the workforce. As part of our support for TIGA we will be offering a discount for existing TIGA members who wish to license CryENGINE® technology”.

Richard Wilson TIGA CEO welcomed Crytek to TIGA:

“Crytek UK is a significant and very welcome addition to the UK development community and to TIGA. We hope more international companies will follow Crytek’s example by investing in the UK and recognising the highly skilled and talented workforce we have here. TIGA also commends Crytek’s commitment to work with our university members to give them access to the latest industry technology and address the skill shortage that exists in our industry”

Ends

Notes to editors:

About TIGA:

TIGA is the trade association representing the UK’s games industry. The majority of our members are either independent games developers or in-house publisher owned developers. We also have outsourcing companies, technology businesses and universities amongst our membership.

TIGA's vision is to make the UK the best place in the world to do games business. We focus on three sets of activities: political representation, generating media coverage and developing services that enhance the competitiveness of our members. This means that TIGA members are effectively represented in the corridors of power, their voice is heard in the media and they receive benefits that make a material difference to their businesses, including a reduction in costs and improved commercial opportunities.

About Crytek GmbH: Crytek GmbH ("Crytek") is one of the world’s leading independent development studios for interactive entertainment. It is based in Frankfurt am Main (Germany) and has additional studios in Kiev (Ukraine), Budapest (Hungary), Sofia (Bulgaria), Seoul (South Korea) and Nottingham (UK).

Crytek is dedicated to creating exceptionally high-quality video games for Next-Generation Consoles and PC, powered by their proprietary cutting-edge 3D-Game-Technology, CryENGINE®. Since its foundation in 1999, Crytek has created the multi-award winning PC titles Far Cry®,

Crysis® (awarded best PC Game of E3 2007 and Best Technology at the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards) and Crysis Warhead® (awarded Best Graphics Technology at IGN Best of 2008 Awards).

Crytek and CryENGINE are registered trademarks or trademarks of Crytek GmbH in the USA, Germany and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

For further information, please contact Eva Field, TIGA PR Manager on: 07814 039 983, or email eva@tiga.org