Ah, le Tour. What does the Tour de France mean to me?

Bleary eyes and cups of tea.

Teams of sweaty, finely tuned athletes from all around the world, engaged in an epic battle against topography.

Gabriel Gate launching his annual charm offensive against the chefs of regional France.

That exhilarating, slightly nauseous feeling I get as my eyes follow the peloton around some steep curve in the Pyrenees.

Forcing myself to stay awake for all the boring bits, only to fall asleep just before they hit the final climb.

And heaps of chateaus. Hundreds of chateaus. Seriously, like, thousands of chateaus.

Listen to Tim Shiel's full, uncut Tour de France playlist on Spotify or Rdio.

Kraftwerk – 'Tour de France'

It also means I listen to Kraftwerk's 'Tour de France', on repeat for about three weeks. its the unofficial anthem for cyclists everywhere, or at least it should be. Founding Kraftwerk member Ralf Hutter is potentially the biggest cycling nut in modern music. The story goes that the Kraftwerk tour bus used to drop Ralf off hundreds of kilometres from the venue so he could cycle the last part of the journey.

Mark Ronson – 'The Bike Song'

This year the Tour started with three days in the UK, winding its way down from Leeds to London before crossing the channel to France. The clip for 'The Bike Song' begins with British producer and all round very British person Mark Ronson whispering to a magic bike in French. He then takes on the appearance of a mod Billy Idol and cycles around the streets of London with some pretty girls. Of course he does. Because he is Mark Ronson.

Unknown Mortal Orchestra – 'Bicycle'

Where Australia's landscape has the countenance of a smooth uninterrupted crepe, New Zealand's landscape has the jagged edges of a crumpled piece of paper. Let's say perhaps a discarded shopping list. Or a phone bill - a scenic, breath-taking, crumpled phone bill. I imagine it's a challenging place to ride a bike.

According to New Zealand's Unknown Mortal Orchestra, the key to a smooth ride in the land of the long white cloud is to "ride over the stars". If you're curious what that means, perhaps see if you can get Gandalf to hook you up with some of that special pipeweed.

Pink Floyd – 'Bike'

Yes, this is a song about a bike. But did you know it is also a song about a homeless mouse called Gerald? It makes me wonder: what kind of cyclist was Syd Barrett? Did he dance on the pedals like an Alberto Contador? Or did he have the fierce acceleration of a Mark Cavendish? This song, from Pink Floyd's 1967 record The Piper at the Gates of Dawn provides little insight into either of these questions.

Boards of Canada – 'Happy Cycling'

Michael and Marcus Sandison are to Scottish electronic music what Frank and Andy Schleck are to Luxembourgish professional road racing. And by that I mean they are brothers who engage in a similar activity together, on the same team, to some acclaim.

I wonder if the Sandison brothers - aka Boards of Canada - have ever tried their hand at a time trial? Or if the Schleck brothers ever tried to make woozy downtempo electronic music? We may never know. But here's a fun fact: according to a Boards of Canada fan site, this song is built off a Pink Floyd sample.

Señor Coconut – 'Tour de France'

German producer Señor Coconut obtained permission from Kraftwerk to release his series of "electro-latino" cover versions of their classic songs.

His pitch-perfect cha-cha-cha take on 'Tour de France' is shamelessly daggy. It re-imagines the minimal electro anthem with all the grace of a poorly qualified amateur salsa dance instructor, and all the subtlety of Barry Morgan.

The Triplets of Belleville – 'Belleville Rendez-Vous'

The Tour de France is the setting for much of Sylvian Chomet's charming animated film The Triplets of Belleville. An old French grandma enlists the help of three 1930s music hall singers to find her kidnapped grandson Champion, a gangly professional cyclist abducted by the French mafia in the middle of the race.

I saw this film about ten years ago - the fantastically grotesque image of Champion's muscular legs rippling during a mountain ascent has never left me.

Shonen Knife – 'Cycling Is Fun'

Imagine if The Shaggs were from Osaka and they wrote a song about cycling in 1984? Shonen Knife have released over 20 records – their most recent is this year's Overdrive – this track is from their third album, 1984's Yama no Att-chan.

The Smiths – 'This Charming Man'

"Punctured bicycle on a hillside desolate…". Here's a Tour de France drinking game for you. Every time a rider gets a puncture, have a drink, and then sing the opening line to The Smiths' 'This Charming Man'. What's that? Richie Porte's blown a tire? "Punctured bicycle..." Cue the charming man in the Team Sky tour car.

Let's be honest. If you saw Morrissey on a desolate hillside with a punctured bicycle tire, all sweaty and gross, fuming with a rage and frustration the depth of which is only possible if you are Morrissey, would you pull over and offer him a lift?

Sure, I'm charming, but am I "let sweaty Morrissey sit in my car and whine at me as we drive back down a hill" charming? I'm not so sure.