Charles Bukowski was an American poet, novelist, and short story writer, born in 1920. Bukowski, who was also called “Hank” or “Buk“ is often associated with the “Dirty Realism” literary movement and is considered as one of the most influential poets of the 20th century.

Bukowski’s works are characterized by a straightforward style, describing the harsh reality of existence, raising subjects such as alcoholism, addictions, authenticity, fulfillment, poverty, love, or sadness.

Charles shares a specific rebellious and unconventional spirit, questioning society’s norms and pushing boundaries of raw authenticity. Additionally, he wasn’t afraid of confronting the darker aspects of life, human conditions, and overstepping authorities.

Bukowski’s writing style, marked by a rejection of traditional poetic conventions, made him a pioneer of a more accessible and relatable form of poetry that touches upon the harsh realities of life. And that raw honesty and authenticity is something that resonates with many readers.

Even though Bukowski was far from a perfect example of moral life, his works reflect a deep understanding of human nature and a celebration of the human spirit in all its flaws. His ability to capture the essence of everyday life and present it unapologetically left a lasting impact on modern poetry.

And this resilient Bukowski's works offer various life lessons that we can take, such as embracing authenticity, and uniqueness, pursuing passions, not settling for a life devoid of meaning or fulfillment, and embracing the imperfections and power of self-belief.

1. Roll The Dice

One of Bukowski's most popular and inspiring poems is "Roll The Dice". In this poem, he encourages readers to take risks because the pursuit of freedom and dreams outweigh the consequences of it, such as suffering and humiliation. The title itself refers to gambling, a sport where many are likely to take a loss.

Bukowski advises against going the safe route and settling for a comfortable, stable, and predictable life. True fulfillment can only be achieved by taking bold actions.

“if you’re going to try, go all the

way.

otherwise, don’t even start.

if you’re going to try, go all the

way. this could mean losing girlfriends,

wives, relatives, jobs and

maybe your mind.

go all the way.

it could mean not eating for 3 or

4 days.

it could mean freezing on a

park bench.

it could mean jail,

it could mean derision,

mockery,

isolation.

isolation is the gift,

all the others are a test of your

endurance, of

how much you really want to

do it.

and you’ll do it

despite rejection and the

worst odds

and it will be better than

anything else

you can imagine.

if you’re going to try,

go all the way.

there is no other feeling like

that.

you will be alone with the

gods

and the nights will flame with

fire.

do it, do it, do it.

do it.

all the way

all the way.

you will ride life straight to

perfect laughter,

it’s the only good fight

there is.”

One of the most powerful and resonating with people lines is the first one: “If you’re going to try, go all the way. Otherwise, don’t even start.“ In my opinion, this is the essence of Bukowski’s poem, in which he stated that the consequences of going through paved paths and conventional routes are unfulfilling and limiting.

“Huk”, who himself lived as an outsider, encourages individuals to question society’s norms to find real freedom. Additionally, he acknowledges that the pursuit of dreams requires commitment and the acceptance of hardships, criticism, and isolation. But you must be willing to follow the uncertain path to experience the reward, just like in gambling. All the prices to pay are incomparable to the possibility of attaining personal happiness and fulfillment.

In the motivational "Roll the Dice", Bukowski inspires people to overcome their fears and embrace uncertainty with a high amount of determination. His powerful words encourage readers to live on their own terms and take advantage of every opportunity.

2. The Laughing Heart

Another inspirational and empowering poem by Bukowski is “The Laughing Heart“, in which he, as in “Roll The Dice“ encourages readers to embrace life on their own terms and resist conformity. He begins poems with powerful lines, urging us to avoid the influence of external pressures and social expectations.

This poem is about not ending up in uninspired existence and actively seeking opportunities to escape the rat race, but also pursuing growth and freedom. The motivational message encourages us to embrace opportunities even in dark times.

“your life is your life

don’t let it be clubbed into dank submission.

be on the watch.

there are ways out.

there is light somewhere.

it may not be much light but

it beats the darkness.

be on the watch.

the gods will offer you chances.

know them.

take them.

you can’t beat death but

you can beat death in life, sometimes.

and the more often you learn to do it,

the more light there will be.

your life is your life.

know it while you have it.

you are marvelous

the gods wait to delight

in you.”

“There is a light somewhere“ - Bukowski suggests that opportunities will always arise, and these chances presented by the universe or gods might occur in various forms. Our task is to actively seek and recognize opportunities. After recognition, we have to seize them without hesitation because it can beat the limitations of our lives and allow us to experience a feeling of victory over the inevitability of our mortality.

And this somehow reminds me of a famous quote by Steve Jobs:

“When you grow up, you tend to get told that the world is the way it is, and your life is just to live your life inside the world. Try not to bash into the walls too much. Try to have a nice family life. Have fun, save a little money. That's a very limited life. Life can be much broader, once you discover one simple fact, and that is everything around that you call life was made up by people who were no smarter than you. And you can change it. You can influence it. […] Once you learn that, you'll never be the same again.“

Additionally, “Hank“ emphasizes the importance of optimism because even in hard times, there may be a little spark of hope and light that can guide us toward a more fulfilling existence.

What’s inspiring about that poem is the message about hope and pushing the boundaries of what is possible. It’s a powerful reminder to live authentically and fully by taking risks and pursuing passions. The awareness of fleeting nature and death in this poem is not depressing. It's quite the opposite. Bukowski presents it as something encouraging to overcome obstacles and possessing qualities that allow us to live on our terms and strive for what is authentic.

The message this poem carries is full of hope and resilience. Even if there’s not much that we can do about existence and death, we can at least beat deaths in our lives.

3. The Genius of the Crowd

Bukowski, who lived outside of society, wrote a thought-provoking poem that touches upon darker aspects of human nature and the paradoxes of society. He exposes the hypocrisies of community and highlights the importance of critical thinking, questioning society’s norms, and avoiding following those who claim to have all the answers.

As in previous poems, Bukowski offers a critical perspective on society, conformity, and blindly following others. The poem encourages readers to be more aware and self-conscious, especially as individuals in society’s structure and hierarchy.

“there is enough treachery, hatred violence absurdity in the average

human being to supply any given army on any given day

and the best at murder are those who preach against it

and the best at hate are those who preach love

and the best at war finally are those who preach peace

those who preach god, need god

those who preach peace do not have peace

those who preach peace do not have love

beware the preachers

beware the knowers

beware those who are always reading books

beware those who either detest poverty

or are proud of it

beware those quick to praise

for they need praise in return

beware those who are quick to censor

they are afraid of what they do not know

beware those who seek constant crowds for

they are nothing alone

beware the average man the average woman

beware their love, their love is average

seeks average

but there is genius in their hatred

there is enough genius in their hatred to kill you

to kill anybody

not wanting solitude

not understanding solitude

they will attempt to destroy anything

that differs from their own

not being able to create art

they will not understand art

they will consider their failure as creators

only as a failure of the world

not being able to love fully

they will believe your love incomplete

and then they will hate you

and their hatred will be perfect

like a shining diamond

like a knife

like a mountain

like a tiger

like hemlock

their finest art”

Bukowski urges to disrupt the conventional understanding of society, authorities, and morality. He encourages and invites us to recognize hidden brilliance within our contradictions and find inspiration in unconventional and thought-provoking realms of our own minds.

His observations show that those who claim to advocate for peace often do not possess true peace within themselves. Similarly, those who preach about God or religion are often the ones who are most in need of a spiritual foundation.

Bukowski invites readers to reflect on the artificial qualities of society as well as dwell on our minds, flaws, and imperfections as a source of creativity. He suggests that true art and profound understanding arise within us, and the ones who are in power may often reject that vision.

What’s interesting in “The Genius of the Crowd” is that we can view it not only as a simple warning against conformity but embracing the complexity of the human condition, which should motivate us to avoid people or leaders who claim to have answers because our nature is way too much complex.

Bukowski challenges the conformity of the crowd and encourages a deeper exploration of our own uniqueness.

4. Style

“Style“, similarly to the above-mentioned poems reflects on the importance of individuality. In this poem, Bukowski encourages us to find our unique voice and way of expressing ourselves. He invites individuals to embrace their style and not be swayed by external expectations or judgments.

Bukowski explores the concept of style and its importance. He presents style as a means to approach and transform mundane activities into art. “Hank“ suggests that adopting a unique approach and a distinctive manner of doing things, can enhance even the most ordinary or dangerous tasks.

“Style is the answer to everything

A fresh way to approach a

Dull or dangerous thing

To do a dull thing with style is preferable

To doing a dangerous thing without it

To do a dangerous thing with style

Is what I call art

Bullfighting can be an art

Boxing can be an art, Loving can be an art

Opening a can of sardines can be an art

Not many have style not many can keep style

I have seen dogs with more style than men

Although not many dogs have style

Cats have it with abundance

When Hemingway put his brains to

The wall with a shotgun, That was style

Or sometimes people give you style

Joan of Arc had style, John the Baptist

Christ, Socrates

Caesar, García Lorca

I have met men in jail with style

I have met more men in jail with

Style than men out of jail

Style is the difference, a way of doing

A way of being done

Six herons standing quietly in

A pool of water

Or you walking out of the bathroom, naked

Without seeing me”

Bukowski implies that style is a rare quality possessed by few individuals. Humorously, he suggests that he saw dogs with more style than men, although not many dogs have style. “Buk“ provides examples of individuals throughout history who exhibited style in their actions, such as Hemingway, Joan of Arc, or Jesus.

Additionally, what’s common in Bukowski’s poem, he challenges conventions like he did in “Roll the Dice“ or “The Genius of the Crowd“, in this case, he questions the conventional notion of style. He states that he encountered more men with style in jail than outside of it. “Hank“ thinks that people who experienced hardships and struggles may develop a unique and authentic sense of style.

The end of this poem highlights the essence of naturalness and individuality by describing a final image of someone walking naked out of the bathroom without noticing the presence of another person. As we previously noticed in Bukowski’s works, he often emphasizes the importance of individuality and possessing unique qualities. In “Style“ Bukowski suggests that true style is not concerned with society’s norms.

Charles highlights the rarity of true style, the variety of its manifestations, and the ability to give life a sense of uniqueness and beauty.

Summary:

Bukowski shared a rebellious and unconventional nature, each of these poems explores distinct themes and perspectives, but together they offer a multifaceted exploration of life, individuality, and the challenges and joys of existence.

“If you’re going to try, go all the way. Otherwise, don’t even start.“ You must be willing to follow the uncertain path to experience the reward, just like in gambling.

“There is light somewhere“. Avoid the influence of external pressures and social expectations. Escape rat race and pursue growth by actively seeking opportunities.

“And the best at hate are those who preach love”. Be aware of society’s hypocrisy and contradictions. Those who speak out against negative traits are exempt from them.

“Style is answer to everything“. Find your own unique voice and way of expressing yourself. Don’t let your style be swayed by external expectations and social judgments.