Arnold Schwarzenegger opened up about his relationship with his ex-wife, Maria Shriver, in an interview with People that was released on Wednesday.

During his sit-down with the media outlet, the 76-year-old actor revealed that he still held his former spouse, to whom he was married to 1986 until 2021, in high regard, despite their split.

The star of the Terminator franchise, who was recently spotted with his current girlfriend, Heather Milligan, stated that his 'chapter with Maria will continue on forever' and that there was 'no reason for me to feel anything other than love for her.'

Schwarzenegger began by admitting that his past actions led to the end of his relationship with the 67-year-old journalist, with whom he shares sons Patrick, 30, and Christopher, 26, as well as daughters Katherine, 33, and Christina, 31.

He stated: 'We never left the [first] chapter, because remember, it's not like we had a feud. We didn't have a fight. It's just my f*** up, right?'

The former pair separated in 2011 after it was revealed that the Predator star had fathered a son named Joseph, 25, with his family's former housekeeper, Mildred Baena.

The actor also recalled that he, as well as his former wife, decided to focus on the well-being of their children following their separation.

'She said, "Okay, this is what it is," and then she decided to make a split, so it was her decision. But the fact is, we always made it very clear that the kids should not suffer because of that,' he recalled.

Schwarzenegger went on to speak about his current relationship with Shriver and stated: 'Everything is kind of just as if we're together but we have separate lives.'

He added that his former wife 'has her things, her relationship, I have mine, but we always communicate about the kids, about the holidays.'

The former Governor of California has since moved on with Milligan, whom he initially met in 2012.

The pair was introduced after Schwarzenegger underwent shoulder surgery and was referred to his girlfriend, who works as a physical therapist, by his surgeon.

The performer recalled: 'After my therapy was finished, after I was finished with the movie, I called her back and took her out for lunch to say thank you. And then one thing led to the next.'

The happy couple initially began seeing each other in 2013, although they did not make their red carpet debut for two more years.

Schwarzenegger made no secret of his affection for his girlfriend, with whom he recently attended Oktoberfest in Munich.

'We have so many things in common. Our relationship is fantastic. I think the world of her,' he stated.

The actor added: 'I love that she's into working. She's clearly independent. She just is driven as hell.'