Adam Smith

U.S. Representative for Washington

David Adam Smith was born in June 1965 in Washington, D.C. He grew up in SeaTac, Washington. He attended Western Washington University in Bellingham, transferring to Fordham University where he earned a B.A. in political science. He received a Juris Doctor from the University of Washington, working his way through college by loading trucks for United Parcel Service. He entered the private practice of law.

He served two years as a prosecutor for the City of Seattle and worked temporarily as a pro tem judge. He was a member of the Washington State Senate for six years before being elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. He assumed office in January 1997.

Smith is married to Sara Bickle-Eldridge and they have two children. He is Episcopalian.

In the News…

Representative Adam Smith of Washington, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said President Biden has allowed Russian President Vladimir Putin to intimidate him into withholding key military assistance from Ukraine.

“We need to be more aggressive about what we’re giving them,” he told attendees at a Center for New American Security event. “I don’t agree with the president on the notion that we shouldn’t give them long-range missiles, because I think he’s sort of buying into Putin’s heroic here.”

“Every single piece of artillery we send them is capable of striking Russia because Ukraine’s right on the border with Russia,” he said. “The longer-range stuff is not about going into Russia. It’s about giving you the ability to have a more standoff capability to hit the Russians who are in Ukraine, because if the Russians can see farther and shoot farther, then you’re at a disadvantage.”

Ukrainian officials have pledged to use the artillery they are provided for defensive purposes. President Biden agreed to give high-mobility artillery rocket systems, known as HMARS, armed reportedly with missiles that can fire about 40 miles, rather than the longest-range munitions that could hit targets 185 miles away.

Contact this Leader…

Did you pray for Representative Smith today? You can let him know at:

The Honorable Adam Smith

Representative for Washington

2264 Rayburn House Office Building

Washington, DC 20515

RECENT PRAYER UPDATES