Adam Smith

U.S. Representative for Washington

David Adam Smith was born in June 1965 in Washington, D.C., and grew up in SeaTac, Washington. Following his high school graduation, Smith worked as a ramp serviceman for United Airlines. He attended Washington University, later graduating from Fordham University with an undergraduate degree in political science. He completed his Juris Doctor degree at the University of Washington. He worked his way through college by loading trucks for United Parcel Service.

After law school, Smith spent two years in private practice and then served as a prosecutor for the city of Seattle. He entered politics serving in the Washington State Senate for six years. He was elected to the United States Congress and began his term in January 1997.

He is married to Sara Bickle-Eldridge, and they have two children. He is an Episcopalian.

In the News…

Representative Adam Smith of Washington said he wants to return $3.8 billion to the Department of Defense that has been redirected from defense modernization to the U.S.-Mexico border wall construction. He added that Congress’ inherent power of the purse can reverse the border wall project.

The funds were reappropriated from planned procurements in the fiscal 2020 budget, including a Navy amphibious assault ship, a fast transport ship, four Air Force cargo planes, and funds for the National Guard and reserve.

Smith told reporters that “it’s going to look like us trying to claw back that money”. He added that he believes the administration went too far and that Congress needs to step in.

He said, “I think you can absolutely pass a bill that says we appropriated this money for these [military] purposes in the FY20 bill. You’ve taken it out of all these purchases and put it there. Put it back!”

Contact this Leader…

Did you pray for Representative Smith today? You can let him know at:

The Honorable Adam Smith

Representative for Washington

2264 Rayburn House Office Building

Washington, DC 20515

RECENT PRAYER UPDATES