In this section

Integrated Degree

Music (including Foundation Year)

Apply

UK and international students need to apply through UCAS. Except those inside the Crimea Region/Sevastopol, the so-called Donetsk People's Republic (DNR) / Luhansk People's Republic (LNR), Cuba, Iran, North Korea or Syria who need to use our alternative application form.

Why choose the Integrated Degree in Music

This is a four-year degree including a one-year foundation programme. The foundation year allows you to develop key musical skills and experience to prepare you for university life and to continue with our BMus Music.

This programme gives you the chance to gain key practical and theoretical skills and experience across music theory, performance, technology, composition and musico-cultural theory.

You'll receive guidance in study skills topics such as critical thinking, researching and writing and inducts you into various musical and institutional facilities and services, from music studios to Wellbeing and Careers teams.

Upon successful completion of the Foundation year, you gain automatic entry into our BMus Music degree and/or an internal audition for our BMus Popular Music programme.

The foundation year programme gives you an opportunity to make music with students from across different degree programmes in a lively and vibrant departmental community. This community features everything from orchestral, jazz and pop ensembles to gamelan, mbira and improvising groups.

You'll also have the opportunity to perform at open mics, student-run showcase and PureGold, our annual music festival that celebrates music created and performed at Goldsmiths.

You'll be within easy reach of South East London's many venues during your time with us, as well as those across the capital, which provide a connection to music, art, dance, and theatre with an international focus, but also to local promoters, labels and the London-based music industry.

Goldsmiths has strong links with the music industry, employing professional musicians, producers, and artists as guest speakers and as lecturers.

We also present frequent, high-profile speakers from the music industry at our talks and events. Recently, these have included Dave Okumu, Nigel Godrich, Darkstar, Mica Levi, Matana Roberts, and Arts Council Music Relationship Managers.

Contact the department

If you have specific questions about the degree, contact Naomi Matsumoto.

UCAS code

W310

Length

1 year full-time (Foundation) followed by 3 years full-time (undergraduate degree)

Department

Music

Watch videos about this course

Great facilities

We offer excellent rehearsal and performance spaces, including our own music studios.

Enjoy London life

Have easy access to London's music scene in what's been voted the world's top student city (QS Best Student Cities 2023)

Showcase your talent

You'll have the opportunity to perform and take part in ensembles.

What you'll study

On this foundation year, you will study the following compulsory modules.

Module title Credits Introduction to Musicology 15 credits Foundation for Composition 15 credits Foundation for Performance 15 credits Foundation for Music Studies 15 credits Building Your Research World 30 credits Reading and Writing Your World 30 credits

Option modules will become available to you should you decide to proceed onto either the BMus Music or BMus Popular Music on successful completion of your foundation year.

Overview

You'll study four core music modules going across music performance, music theory, composition (including music technology) and basic musicology. You'll also study two broad-based modules embedded in our music studios, the library and London cultural life in general.

Practical and subject-related skills are developed through class-based tasks, either individually or in groups, (including analytic, listening-based, or discursive exercises), or by setting up and reviewing follow-up tasks undertaken outside of class through workshops where you are given the opportunity to offer peer feedback.

Teaching style

The programme is delivered through small-group lectures, seminars, group and individual tutorials, workshops, and individual lessons.

You will also have an assigned one-to-one instrumental or vocal tutor, and a personal tutor who will guide your study. This mix of practical and academic support is designed to help you make the leap into higher education with confidence.

We have a large staff team with a very wide range of research interests. We also regularly bring in external specialists to support our modules, or as instrumental/vocal tutors.

Entry requirements

We would normally expect applicants to have some level 3 study equivalent to grade C at A-level or PP in a BTEC Diploma. However, we will also consider experience of playing a musical instrument or other music-related experience. Offers will be made specific to your educational background and experience.

Admission is by interview and/or by submission of a portfolio. The portfolio should include videos of two or three musical performance pieces, and a written outline of current music theory knowledge, and where possible, a recording or written short piece of original music.

Alternative qualifications

See our full list of entry qualifications.

We welcome students with a range of educational experiences. If you believe you may not meet the standard qualification requirements we would still encourage you to apply because we consider all aspects of your application when making a decision.

We’ll pay particularly careful attention to your personal statement, which is your opportunity to demonstrate your interest in the subject you’ve applied for. Your referees are also welcome to include any relevant contextual comments around your academic achievements. We’ll look at all these things when making a decision on your application, as well as your qualifications and grades.

International qualifications

We also accept a wide range of international qualifications. Find out more about the qualifications we accept from around the world.

If English isn’t your first language, you will need an IELTS score (or equivalent English language qualification) of 6.0 with a 6.0 in writing and no element lower than 5.5 to study this programme. If you need assistance with your English language, we offer a range of courses that can help prepare you for degree-level study.

Fees and funding

Annual tuition fees

These are the UG fees for students starting their programme in the 2024/2025 academic year.

Home - full-time: £9250

International - full-time: £20160

If your fees are not listed here, please check our undergraduate fees guidance or contact the Fees Office, who can also advise you about how to pay your fees.

It’s not currently possible for international students to study part-time if you require a Student Visa, however this is currently being reviewed and will be confirmed in the new year. Please read our visa guidance in the interim for more information. If you think you might be eligible to study part-time while being on another visa type, please contact our Admissions Team for more information.

If you are looking to pay your fees please see our guide to making a payment.

Funding opportunities

We offer a wide range of scholarships and bursaries, and our careers service can also offer advice on finding work during your studies. Find out more about funding your studies with us.

Additional costs

In addition to your tuition fees, you'll be responsible for any additional costs associated with your course, such as buying stationery and paying for photocopying. You can find out more about what you need to budget for on our study costs page.

There may also be specific additional costs associated with your programme. This can include things like paying for field trips or specialist materials for your assignments. Please check the programme specification for more information.

Facilities

As a Foundation student, you will have full access to the Goldsmiths Music Studio (pictured) and Electronic Music Studios, receiving inductions and booking rights at both studios free of charge.

You will also be able to make use of our extensive rehearsal room and tech facilities in the main Goldsmiths building.

All modules make use of the College VLE as a repository for essential module information, and all students receive training in music technology, including knowledge of music software. There are dedicated computer rooms for self-directed learning.