By Amy McRary of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Ernest J. Gaines' story "A Lesson Before Dying" occurs in 1948. The book about it wasn't published until 1993. The play, now at the University of Tennessee's Carousel Theatre, wasn't written until 2000. Yet its themes of racism and systemic injustice - and, thankfully, its sense of community responsibility and individual compassion - resonate today.

The Carousel production that continues through March 13 tells the story flawlessly. From the simple set to the background music to a stellar cast, this story is for all of us. Be forewarned - more than one person could be seen wiping tears as a man is executed for a murder he didn't commit.

"A Lesson Before Dying" is a story of two young black men who find their very different lives have deep commonalties. The semiliterate Jefferson is condemned to die in the electric chair after being wrongly convicted of killing a white shopkeeper. Called a "hog" by his own lawyer in the trail, Jefferson's lost all dignity and pride.

College-educated teacher Grant Wiggins seems Jefferson's opposite. Sent to college by a supportive group of women who saved money for his tuition, Grant is back home teaching black children at the Louisiana community's poor plantation school. But he's as lost in his way as Jefferson is in his. Angry and without a focus, Grant hates teaching, hates the South and wants to leave his pain by leaving Louisiana. Then he's convinced to visit Jefferson in jail by the latter's godmother, Emma Glenn. Miss Emma knows she can't save Jefferson from dying. But she wants him to walk to his fate like a man and not feeling like an animal.

The men's interactions slowly transform each. Grant gives Jefferson back his dignity and pride. But Jefferson shows Grant his own purpose and a sense of peace.

For all its seriousness, "A Lesson Before Dying" isn't preachy. Visiting director Andrea J. Dymond's production never falls into melodrama. The only issue I had was with the first act's series of short scenes that risked becoming choppy as characters and themes are introduced.

Each of the seven actors is excellent. Visiting artists Trequon Tate as Grant and UT graduate student Jude Carl Vincent as Jefferson never miss. Tate realistically portrays Grant's complex emotions. His anger and frustration are never forced; his recognition that he and Jefferson are so alike is quietly, effectively moving.

Vincent is just as strong in the difficult role of condemned Jefferson, a man who goes from eating from a basket like a pig to walking strongly to a tragic fate. His expressions and words often brought tears to my eyes.

But the play doesn't rest on the two leads. In particular, Chicago-based actress Celeste Williams's Miss Emma will be familiar to anyone raised by a strong, sacrificing woman who will do whatever she can to protect those she cherishes. I'd also like to single out UT undergraduate Connor Hess, who handles well the role of white deputy Paul Bonin. Hess often is on stage reacting to other characters' words. But it's his words that give the play its stance against capital punishment as he sadly describes Jefferson's execution as "we killed him."

The scene in which Jefferson dies is indicative of how well "A Lesson Before Dying" is presented. The electric chair is described in detail beforehand but never seen. Instead Jefferson steadily walks across the stage through a steel-like door as electric pops and snaps are heard through the theater.

Fans of Gaines' book already know "A Lesson Before Dying" is a must-see. But you don't have to have read the book to learn this play's lessons.

'A Lesson Before Dying'

Where: Carousel Theatre, University of Tennessee

When: 7:30 p.m. March 4-5 & March 9-12; 2 p.m. March 6 & March 13

Tickets: $26 adults, $22 seniors Wednesday/Thursday shows. $32 adults, $28 seniors Friday/Saturday/Sunday show. $16 UT faculty/staff, $15 non-UT student, $5 UT student for any show. Tickets at 865-974-5161, http://.clarencebrowntheatre.com