The following essay was originally written during the week of March 5, 2021 for a Modern American Fiction course at my undergraduate university. A Lesson Before Dying was one of my top two favorite novels from the semester. The story takes places in the fictional town of Bayonne in 1940s Louisiana. The citations are based on the 1993 Random House printing, but you can read the full text online, formatted by Vintage books, here.

Grant, played by Don Cheadle, in the 1999 TV movie

In Ernest Gaines’s A Lesson Before Dying, manhood is associated with personal dignity and with selfless, self-sacrificial endurance.

The question of what makes a man is proposed early in the novel at the unjust trial of Jefferson, an uneducated black man whose sole crime is physical presence at the wrong place at the wrong time. On the basis of his lack of education and his race, Jefferson’s defense lawyer argues that Jefferson should not be condemned for the crime of which the court accuses him because he is not, at the core, a man; rather, he is “a boy and a fool”, whose “skull here holds no plans”, and the lawyer states that the execution of Jefferson would be as logical as the execution of a hog, for all the justice it would deliver, denying Jefferson the dignity of being called a man [1].

Through the trial, Miss Emma, the aunt of the narrator Grant, fixates on this imprecation of Jefferson as a hog, and after the sentencing asks Mr. Henri Pichot, a man whose family she has served for years, to allow her to “see him [Jefferson] die like a man” [2]. This degradation of black manhood in Bayonne is emphasized through the novel in the casually mentioned segregation – from the bathrooms to the churches [3] – the self-imposed deferential codes of conduct such as not entering a bank before a white couple [4], and the treatment dealt to Grant in the presence or homes of particular white individuals. For instance, when requesting weekly conferences with Jefferson per the wishes of his godmother and his aunt, Grant is forced to enter through the back door and wait standing in the kitchen for over two hours to speak with the Sheriff Sam Guidry at the home of Henri Pichot.

Shortly after, the superintendent of the area’s schools visits the one where Grant teaches first through sixth graders, and subjects random students to physical inspections far too reminiscent of the physical inspections of slaves at an auction not too long ago. A former teacher of Grant’s, Matthew Antoine, warned his class about the fate that most would likely meet, regardless of their academic attainments: those superior in status would make each of the students, when they had grown and lived a little life, into the “n***** you were born to be”, this slur bringing with it the full heft of the less-than-man sense that labeled Jefferson a hog at trial [5]. Grant recognizes this destruction of manhood being attempted against him through the humiliation of hours-long waiting periods in a kitchen entered through the back door and through food and body searches before every jail visit [6].

When a society steeped in white superiority and anti-black racism seems intent on breaking a man down, even one of Grant’s education level, the confidence of being called a man is shaky. How one owns this title must be independent of how one is treated by others, because the black man of Bayonne is not guaranteed honorable treatment. The importance of Jefferson appropriating the manhood that the white court has tried to deny him is most fully expressed in Grant’s explanation to his girlfriend Vivian: “We black men have failed to protect our women since the time of slavery…. What she [Miss Emma] wants is for him, Jefferson, and me to change everything that has been going on for three hundred years…. [W]hat she wants to hear first is that he did not crawl to that white man, that he stood at that last moment and walked” [7].

To be a man is to, despite all trials and tribulations, despite all humiliating circumstances, despite all deplorable injustices, stand and not flee, as Matthew Antoine had told Grant was the only avenue by which a black man could change his state and as black men had been doing, according to Grant, for hundreds of years. Manhood is “dignity…identity…loving and caring” [8]. It is also, Grant implies, a demonstration of heroism, defined as service “for people he loves, because he knows it would make their lives better” [9]. For the women in A Lesson Before Dying, Grant, a man raised on the plantation and educated in “reading, writing, and arithmetic”, is the fulfillment of a hope for men of that caliber to contrast “their fathers, their grandfathers, their uncles, their brothers – all broken” [10]. Jefferson, meanwhile, symbolizes resistance to dehumanization, and the fulfillment of manhood from a different angle.

By these standards, Jefferson proves himself a man. In the initial weeks in jail, he withdraws from the family and friends who visits – runs away, so to speak – but conversations with Grant and personal musings persuade him to return and to give what he can for as long as he can out of care for others and respect for himself. After the execution, the deputy Paul tells Grant, whose own realization of manhood is a work in progress, that Jefferson was “the strongest man in that crowded room” and that “straight he walked” [11].

Have you read A Lesson Before Dying? [12, 13] What do you think about its theme of manhood? How do you define manhood?