One of the most important figures of 19th century drama, Swedish August Strindberg’s 1888 play Miss Julie is a rich, complex work open to begetting different interpretations. The play is only one act and set mostly in a kitchen on a midsummer’s eve with three main characters who become Miss Julie, the daughter of the Count, footman Jean and cook Christene. An upper class, noble character Julie’s wish to get out of the class and sexual constraints of the society results in a flirtation followed by a sexual intimacy that brings about her tragic doom in a scene of hypnosis at the end of the play. As the night proceeds, the relationship between Julie and Jean turns into a power battle and presents a rich pattern that could be analyzed within stylistic features and devices. The play allows exploring how power relations between characters are indicated in speech acts, turn-taking, dramatic irony and other features of conversational structure especially uncovering who is in control or how one builds up power over one another. A stylistic analysis of their interactions acknowledges the exchange of power between them the degree to which Jean imposes a set of gradually growing attitudes of authority and the degree to which Julie endeavors to resist with her social status privilege. In that battle of power Julie’s descend or ‘fall’ from upstairs to the kitchen is replaced by Jean’s authoritarian rise which is in accordance with the rise of the sun. Therefore the aim of this study is to adopt a closer look on how the strength gained by social status or personal characteristics clash and change hands in the course of the play which could be revealed with reference to power in various forms as Miss Julie’s social power over Jean because she is from upper class clashes with Jean’s personal power over her as he is confident, proud and ambitious.

By the beginning of modernity, a new horizon was composed by the middle class who abrogated hierarchy and monarchy by viewing social identity through the lens of the economy, hence capitalism emerged and social identity became vitally dependent on economic power. Traumatic effects of social stratification and social conflicts leading to tremendous endeavor to bridge a gap between high and lower classes of society were of the most important purposes of Marxist writers. It should be mentioned that Carl Marx defined the scaffolds of the society in relation to struggle between high and lower strata of the society. Marxism is defined during the history as a plethora of conflicts between major classes of the society who are suppressing majority and suppressed minority to at conflict leads to a social change. Strindberg's play “Miss Julie” is a naturalistic tragedy but it also includes social stratification and social conflicts between two classes of the society with symbolic characters in a symbolic setting. Court's house, the setting of the play, symbolizes a capitalist society in which Miss Julie and John belong to different classes of the society. John is a waiter and Miss Julie is the mistress of the house and symbol of a high-class person. What is outstanding in this play is the hidden structure of the play, emerging through detail and tone, is based on the special relationship between class and sex. Strindberg juxtaposes these two characters who are the symbol of different classes by strings of Marxism in the play. Strindberg also put strings of the idea that if a person from aristocrat family makes a relationship with a lower class one, it would be taken as her fall down and if a person makes relation with a higher class of the society it works as a ladder to better his position in society. As in the play, John who is aware of his position always warned Julie about the dangers of their relation and always care about his position when he refused to call Julie ''Dear''. As John used this relation as a mean to improve his status in society he symbolically rebelled against the capitalist society which led to another capitalism at the end of the play. This paper respectively is going to delve into the Marxism, social stratification and shed light on the social conflicts in Strindberg's play “Miss Julie”.

It is worthy of note that every drama script is established on the basis of the characters involved. This article describes the synergy between the Stanislavski " s theory and August Strindberg " s plays under the three dimension of women character. In this discussion, the women characters in " The Father " and Miss Julie plays were succinctly analyzed using the three dimensions viz: natural, social and psychological. The three dimensions were therefore employed in order to understand and uncover the connection between the female characters. Strindberg's female characters have a complete natural dimension; they were often portrayed as perfect and physically beautiful. This is perhaps due to genetic factors and social traditions that Strindberg attributed to them. In particular, Strindberg focuses on the social and psychological dimensions of his female characters. His female characters often belong to the upper class and depicted as predominantly clever in dealing with others. In the end, the aim of this study was adequately achieved using Stanislavski " s system, thereby providing a better understanding of human relations, pleasure.

This dissertation examines the ways in which tragedy produces, and challenges, human subjectivity in three distinct periods of western theatrical production. It also tells a story of their ahistorical continuity based on tragic repetition. Readings of Aeschylus' Oresteia, Sophocles' Oedipus Tyrannos, and Euripides' Bacchae ground this argument in the Greek original. Specific constructions of fate, agency and justice provide sites for understanding the evolution of a tragic consciousness. Charting a meta-narrative of tragic inheritance through Greek tragedy, Renaissance tragic drama, and the modern drama, I establish an alternative view of western theatre's past—one that embodies its own consciously adopted tragic form. Renaissance artists repressed the knowledge structures contained in the artifacts of a past consciousness in service of Christian morality and bourgeois rationality. By creating a hybrid moral tragedy rooted in contemporary ways of knowing, they valorized the human perspective in contradiction to the world-centered one that Greek tragedy staged. As a result, the dramatic tradition increasingly excluded that which could not self-disclose from its catalogue of the real. It secured the illusion of autonomous human agency, creating the conditions for its own literary and historical tragic reversal. Marlowe's Doctor Faustus, Shakespeare's Macbeth, Hamlet and Winter's Tale model this contradiction. Finally, I retheorize Szondi's “crisis of the drama” reading Strindberg's Miss Julie, Ibsen's Hedda Gabler and Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard as a final cycle of tragedy that stages historical transformation as the suicide of dramatic realism.