Once again, Blue Bridge Theatre has treated Victoria to a production that’s both a work of beauty and current with the issues of today. Written in 1888 by Swedish playwright August Strindberg, Miss Julie is a play that made me question everything about the class system and the part that gender roles (no matter which class they reside in) play.

Strindberg’s work is considered some of most controversial and influential writing of its time, and Miss Julie certainly shows that. The play begins in the kitchen of a wealthy home, with a kitchen maid busy in her everyday duties. The set, designed by Rachel Macadam, is very impressive, with eye-catching detail and authenticity.

The kitchen maid, Kristin (Stephie Bright), is soon interrupted by the valet, Jean (Kholby Wardell), who is raving about the wild behaviour of the Earl’s daughter. The audience soon understands that Miss Julie (Melissa Taylor) is the subject of their conversation, and that her behaviour around town has both impressed and horrified Jean.

This play has a very interesting dynamic: a revolving exchange in power dynamics between Miss Julie and Jean. The two characters end up in a short-lived (one-night) steamy love affair. Power over Jean is displayed by Miss Julie in a somewhat entitled, even bratty, fashion in the beginning of the production, when she taunts and flirts with Jean in front of his girlfriend Kristin, even telling him to kneel and kiss her shoes. The power is stolen by Jean after their sexy tryst, when Miss Julie is suddenly vulnerable and frightened by what they’ve done, and what consequences will undoubtedly happen.

Miss Julie is a good play to see for those who like to practice critical thinking. It raises questions on topics such as class, capitalism, gender, feminism, and the possible results of impulsive sex. It’s also a great play to watch for visual stimulation, as both the costumes (by Mary Downes) and the set are absolutely beautiful.

Miss Julie is, however, a production that requires intense concentration, as the whole play is one long, very heated, conversation between three characters. It might get a bit uncomfortable at times, depending on the viewer’s ability to sit and watch people go through every known difficult emotion there is as they try to figure themselves out. It rises and plummets, then rises and plummets again.

Miss Julie is not necessarily what I’d recommend as a first-date play, because a person might question whether or not they’d want to attempt a relationship ever again. That aside, Blue Bridge, as usual, outdid itself with its performance, both visually and with very gifted acting.