August Strindberg was a Swedish writer, most famous for writing plays. Additionally, he wrote fiction and cultural criticism, and he also painted, working prolifically throughout his life. His work earned him a reputation as the most important figure in the development of modern Swedish literature. He is well-known for taking established forms and expanding on them in innovative and experimental ways.

Born in Stockholm to a maid and a shipping agent, Strindberg was raised in an impoverished and highly religious household, in which his intellectual precociousness was not valued or appreciated by his working parents. After studying chemistry at the Institute of Technology, Strindberg went to Uppsala University, where he began writing plays. His first major work was a historical play called Master Olof, about Olaus Petri, a major figure in the Protestant Reformation in Sweden. The New Theatre in Stockholm rejected the play, and Strindberg turned to other writing projects, publishing The Red Room, a novel, in 1879. The novel was a huge success, and Strindberg turned back to theater, writing The Secret of the Guild in 1880. At this time, Strindberg told people that his main interest in theater was writing material that his wife, the actress Siri von Essen, could act in.

In 1882, Strindberg published a collection of anti-establishment short stories called The New Kingdom. In 1884, he wrote a collection of short stories called Getting Married that got him in trouble with the Swedish government for its progressive depiction of gender equality. In 1888, he wrote Miss Julie, one of his most famous plays, basing the story of a capricious mistress and her psychosexual dynamic with a young irreverent servant on Darwin's theory of the survival of the fittest. In 1889, he wrote The Stronger, but became disillusioned with the theater when his theater company, the Scandinavian Experimental Theatre, failed. Throughout this time, known as his "Inferno crisis," Strindberg faced some struggles with his mental health.

Strindberg attributed much of his later work's inspiration to his deteriorating mental health, which he thought of as mystical visions called "the Powers," sent to him to force him to atone for the moral wrongs of society. His plays written around the turn of the century include The Vasa Trilogy, and A Dream Play.