The Austrian writer Robert Musil (1880-1942) studied philosophy and psy- chology at the Humboldt-University in Berlin (1903-1908) and was a student of Carl Stumpf. With him also studied future gestalt-psychologists. The intellectual impulses he received at this time had a determining influence on his thinking and on his way of understanding knowledge and literature. The present paper attempts a reconstruction of how Musil tried to transpose psychological theories on the Ego and on human feel- ings, which Stumpf discussed with his students, into a narrative structure. This will be achieved through an analysis of Musil’s novellas “The Temptation of Quiet Veronika” (Die Versuchung der stillen Veronika) and “The Perfecting of Love” (Die Vollendung der Liebe), which were published in 1911 in the collection “Unions” (Vereinigungen). The aim is to show how Musilʼs conception of literature as a particular dimension of “non-ratioïd” knowledge was developed during his studies in Berlin and is closely connected with the theories Stumpf presented to his students, above all, with his theo- ry of emotions.

Mary Poovey remarks that for the literary critic ‘numbers constitute something like the last frontier of representation’. Although in recent years there has been a growing critical interest in the intersection of literature and mathematics and in the cultural history of mathematisation, the work is just beginning. This thesis offers an account of what it means for literature to be woven with mathematics and for mathematics to be part of the history of style. I examine the work that mathematics does in a range of literary texts produced in the quantified world of the twentieth century: produced after Ian Hacking’s ‘avalanche of printed numbers’ – in the era, as Alain Badiou puts it, ‘of number’s despotism’. Through readings of Samuel Beckett, Robert Musil, Gertrude Stein, Wallace Stevens, Wyndham Lewis, Stéphane Mallarmé, Paul Valéry, Jacques Roubaud and others, I trace modern literature’s engagement with the symbolic and affective economy of quantification and with the cultural history of mathematics. I place literary treatments of mathematics in dialogue with the versions of mathematics constructed by mathematicians in their prose works (manifestos, historiography, apologias and memoirs). Jeremy Gray’s recent account of modernism in mathematics poses a challenge for the study of literary modernism. Is there really a stylistic homology between modernist mathematics and modernist art and literature? If so, can the history of modernist mathematics shed new light on the phenomenon of literary modernism? Though the history of modernist mathematics offers a useful resource for interpreting some of the invocations of mathematics in modernist literature, I argue that modern literature’s engagement with mathematics cannot wholly be explained by reference to modernist mathematics. To describe modern literary mathematics solely in terms of autonomous ontology, formalism and axiomatics – the contours of modernist mathematics’ self-conception – would be to elide the commonplace, everyday, demotic mathematics that is woven into the fabric of modern life and modern literature: arithmetic, statistics, accountancy, measurement, the normal curve, probability and half-forgotten schoolroom sums. Modern literature offers resources for a cultural phenomenology of what Jürgen Link calls the ‘curve landscapes’ (Kurvenlandschaften) of our mathematical habitus: of the graphs, algorithms, numbers and models that map social experience. Moreover, literature has its own mathematical idioms or vernaculars – its own styles of writing about and using mathematics – with their own histories. These vernaculars include geometrical classicism, the non-Euclidean avant-garde, arithmomania, the romantic mathesis universalis, chance procedures, pseudomathematical nonsense poetry, combinatorial literature and Oulipean constraint writing. Through the categories I elaborate in the chapters of the thesis – perimathematical writing, the symbolic economy of mathematics, mathematical vernaculars, demotic mathematics and the phenomenology of probability – I hope to contribute to the development of a conceptual vocabulary for the study of literature and mathematics, and to sketch a map of the domain of twentieth-century literary mathematics.