While it may seem so on the surface, horror is not a monolith. Endless subgenres fall under the horror moniker, including gothic horror, supernatural horror, and others. One of these subgenres is giallo—Italian murder mystery films based on crime novels with yellow covers (giallo is Italian for yellow). Though perhaps a lesser-known genre to a general audience, giallo films are the foundation for the very popular slasher genre, which boomed in the late 70s and throughout the 80s.

Giallo films are marked by the black-gloved killers and beautiful women who are one perfect scream away from death. Expect kills with charming practical effects and though the films themselves are old, they seem fresh and new. It’s easy to fall down a giallo-inspired cinematic rabbit hole.

The five films below act as a primer to giallo films, meant to introduce any viewer to a variety of directors and eras.

A Bay of Blood (1971), directed by Mario Bava

Giallo would not be the same without Mario Bava, who cemented the genre with Blood and Black Lace (1964). As an introduction to the genre, though, Bava’s A Bay of Blood is a perfect step into the world of giallo for fans of slashers and modern horror films. It marks a beginning, both defining giallo and setting the stage for later slasher films because of its gore and violence.

Read our review here

All the Colors of the Dark (1972), directed by Sergio Martino

Sergio Martino’s film stars Edwige Fenech as Jane, a woman haunted by terrifying dreams. The presence of these dreams—as well as a secretive religious sect—set this giallo apart from others. All the Colors of the Dark toys with conventional horror storylines, often playing with films like Rosemary’s Baby (1968). This film perfectly mixes the best of giallo, psychological drama, and satanic films to create something mesmerizing.

The Case of the Bloody Iris (1972), directed by Giuliano Carnimeo

This 1972 film remains a favorite because of how it perfectly crafts its mystery and the way it leans on Edwige Fenech’s performance as Jennifer, a woman who moves into an apartment complex only to be greeted with murder. By placing Jennifer at the center of this narrative, audiences are invited into the world of giallo through her eyes. Anyone can enjoy this dramatic, fun entry in the giallo genre.

Tenebrae (1982), directed by Dario Argento

Though perhaps most known for his 1977 classic Suspiria, Dario Argento made his name with giallo films in the early 70s. With Tenebrae, Argento revisits his giallo heyday, blending together classic giallo storylines and tropes with new references, influenced by his late 70s filmmaking. As always, Argento’s strength comes in his unparalleled use of color and ability to build paranoia and fear, both for the characters in the film and his audience.

Knife + Heart (2018), directed by Yann Gonzalez

Knife + Heart is both a love letter to giallo films of years past and a giallo film itself. It takes place in the 70s, a time when giallo was at its height and follows gay pornography director Anne (Vanessa Paradis) as she deals with a series of murders at her studio. Though a recent release, Knife + Heart expands on the giallo genre with its inclusion of queer characters and modernization of the typical giallo plotline—not to mention its gory kills.

Read our review here