PHILADELPHIA — Marvin Jones remembers the feeling of invincibility the Detroit Lions had as they rallied for fourth-quarter win after fourth-quarter win, the belief in the locker room that they could conquer anything.

In 2016, the Lions were the comeback darlings of the NFL, repeatedly digging themselves early holes, only to pull out improbable victories.

Three weeks into the 2019 season, those feelings are back.

The Lions staved off a late rally Sunday to beat the Philadelphia Eagles, 27-24, in a wild game at Lincoln Financial Field.

Jamal Agnew returned a kick 100 yards for a touchdown, the Lions turned two Eagles fumbles into first-half points, and though they didn’t technically come back for the third time in as many weeks, the Lions once again showed the requisite resolve to overcome a slew of potentially mortal mistakes.

[ Want more Lions analysis? Download our app for the latest. ]

“Obviously, we don’t want it to be close, but hey, this is the NFL,” Jones said. “We’ve had go-rounds like this where we made history in 2016 with stuff like this. But my thing is, what we’re doing, we’re working hard every week, we get put in tough situations every week and those situations, they show up and we capitalize on them.”

The Lions, off to their best start since 2011, came up with two key fourth-down stops in Sunday’s fourth quarter — the final one with 41 seconds left, after allowing a blocked field goal — to improve to 2-0-1 heading into next week’s showdown with the Kansas City Chiefs (3-0) at Ford Field.

The Eagles started their final possession at midfield after Malcolm Jenkins blocked a 46-yard Matt Prater field goal, though Rasul Douglas’ long return was negated by a block-in-the-back penalty.

Carson Wentz threw incomplete on first and second down, then short to Nelson Agholor on third down to give the Eagles a fourth-and-5 at the 45 with 55 seconds to play.

An offensive pass interference penalty on Darren Sproles wiped out a big gain, and left the Eagles in fourth-and-15. Wentz threw downfield against a three-man pass rush to rookie second-round pick J.J. Arcega-Whiteside.

Rashaan Melvin ran stride for stride with Arcega-Whiteside down the middle of the field, and contested the pass that Arcega-Whiteside dropped.

“It was a little graze (of my finger),” Melvin said. “Got enough in there so he couldn’t make adjustments and catch the ball, and I was in position so he couldn’t body catch it. It feels good to get the W for the team and get ready for next week.”

Melvin’s play was one of several big defensive plays the Lions made.

Jarrad Davis, playing for the first time since spraining his right ankle in the preseason, forced a second-quarter fumble that A’Shawn Robinson recovered near midfield to set up a 25-yard Prater field goal.

[ Lions grades: Stafford, WRs make plays, but both lines must improve ]

One series later, Agholor fumbled as he turned to run upfield, and Darius Slay recovered to set up another Prater field goal.

The Lions led 20-10 at halftime, then answered a third-quarter Eagles’ touchdown drive with a nine-play, 75-yard scoring march of their own. Matthew Stafford completed a 27-yard pass to Jones on third-and-4 on the drive, then Jones beat Sidney Jones for a 12-yard touchdown.

“We’re doing just enough,” Stafford said. “We’re making those critical plays in games. I think our defense is doing a great job getting off the field, third or fourth down, whatever it was today. A lot to clean up on offense. We were moving the ball good. We didn’t score enough touchdowns. I think we got down in the red zone and didn’t put sevens on the board enough. But guys are making enough plays and guys believe in each other, are sticking together and pulling it out.”

Wentz pulled the Eagles within three points on a 2-yard touchdown pass to Agholor with 6:59 to play, before the Lions defense made two final stops to seal the win.

On Philadelphia’s penultimate possession, the Lions forced a four-and-out that saw Wentz trying to scramble for a first down on fourth-and-8.

The Lions couldn’t move the ball on the ensuing possession, and sent Prater on for a 46-yard field-goal try that would have given the Lions a six-point lead.

Jenkins crashed almost untouched through the left side of the field-goal protection unit for the block, but Davis said the defense working a short field, in need of a stop, is a situation the Lions prepared for in practice.

“Just resilient,” Davis said. “That’s what goes through my mind. I think that’s the biggest thing that we have and we have built and we have worked for is to be able to finish in these situations, to be able to have resiliency.”

Stafford completed 18 of 32 passes for 201 yards, and Jones had six catches for a game-high 101 yards for the Lions, who needed a late touchdown to beat the Los Angeles Chargers last week, and blew an 18-point fourth-quarter lead only to rally for a tie in overtime against the Arizona Cardinals in Week 1.

Wentz was 19 of 36 passing for 259 yards for the Eagles, who played without their top two receivers because of injury. Agholor led the Eagles with eight catches for 50 yards as the Lions double-teamed top Eagles tight end Zach Ertz (four catches, 64 yards) most of the game.

Seidel: For once, the Lions got the breaks to win, so let's enjoy it

Analysis: Lions goal on defense: Don't let Zach Ertz beat us (and he didn't)