Who was Robert Krasker?

In 1951 Robert Krasker, BSC was the first Australian cinematographer to win an uncontested Academy Award for his enduring and inspirational work on The Third Man yet he’s almost completely forgotten in Australia.

BSC stands for British Society of Cinematographers, the professional organization of cinematographers in the British film industry, founded by Bert Easey, BSC in 1949.

Robert Krasker BSC was a founding member of the Society and his fellow members tell me they remain fond of him and his achievements as a cinematographer over the decades.

Professor Duncan Petrie, author of The British Cinematographer, told me that: “He was one of the giants in British postwar cinematography with films like Henry V, Brief Encounter, Odd Man Out, The Third Man, Trapeze, The Criminal, El Cid, The Fall of the Roman Empire.”

Director Martin Scorsese said, “You can’t talk about The Third Man without recognizing the incredible contribution of Robert Krasker”.

Dr Falk Schwarz, author of Farbige Schatten – Der Kameramann Robert Krasker (Colourful Shadows – The Cameraman Robert Krasker), writes that “Any commentary dealing with post-War British cinematographers invariably claims that the best of them all was Robert Krasker.”

Australian adventurer, screenwriter and director John Farrow, however, reportedly disputed Krasker’s right to be called an Australian at all despite being a citizen and spending his formative years in Western Australia and the eastern states.

Krasker maintained his Australian nationality all his life, proudly described himself in print and in person as an Australian and made a valiant attempt to create a feature film production studio here in Sydney in the early 1950s.

So much of Robert Krasker’s life remains a mystery and although he may have preferred it that way when he was alive, his story is essential and inspirational not only for those of us working in the film and television industries here but for all Australians with an interest in creativity and innovation.

As Professor Petrie shared with me during my research for this article, “…of course being Australian he really ought to be celebrated in his home country.”

Robert Krasker’s beginnings

On the 28th January 1914, Leon and Matilda Krasker registered the birth of their fifth child, Robert, in Perth, Western Australia.

Robert had actually been born during a stopover in Alexandria on the 21st of August 1913 while the family was on a business trip from WA to Europe and then back via Egypt.

Their visit to the city in the Nile River delta may have been prompted by Leon’s diamond-cutter brother Aaron’s prior sojourn in Alexandria but most likely was due to Matilda’s mother still living there amongst its thriving cosmopolitan community.

Leon, Matilda and Robert’s three oldest siblings, George, Georgette and Mitzi, had originally arrived in Western Australia on the 12th of April 1910 at the port of Fremantle having departed from Great Britain, while Stephanie was born in Australia the next year, in 1911.

The address recorded on Robert’s birth certificate was 99 Hay Street, Subiaco, now a low-rise shopfront and office building, but in the early years of the twentieth century the street was a mixture of low-density residences and shops with many merchants living above their premises.

Leon Krasker had trained as a goldsmith in Paris, adding the craft to his ongoing work as a merchant, then moved his young family to London as a hoped-for endpoint to years of travel west from his own birthplace of Tulcea, now in Romania.

Matilda Krasker née Mathilde Rübel was born in Czernowitz, now Czernivtsi, once affectionately known as “Little Vienna”, a border city that had changed hands over the centuries between Moldavia, the Ottoman Empire, Austria, Ukraine, Romania and then back to Ukraine where it remains today.

Life for Jews in eastern Europe and Russia had never been easy or well-settled given endless pogroms, persecutions and invasions.

Earning a decent living proved challenging for them in Great Britain as well with Jewish immigrants surviving on piecework in slum sweatshops.

Krasker’s father’s ancestors were originally from East Prussia where their surname had been an entirely different one but like many immigrants to other lands their name change had been forced upon them by an uncomprehending border official and so Krasker it became.

Leon Krasker’s move to Western Australia had been motivated by tales of the fortune made there as a pearl trader by Mark Rubin, a fellow Jewish Eastern European, so the family travelled far north of Perth to the little Shark Bay town of Denham to set up in the pearl business.

By the time they arrived in Shark Bay the pearling industry was almost exhausted there and had removed itself further north to Broome, but the family moved into 25 Knight Terrace on Denham’s seafront.

As soon as the required two year waiting period was over, Leon applied for naturalization and became an Australian citizen, certified worthy and reliable by a local Denham official.

On arrival in Denham, Leon had made connections with the few remaining pearl lugger captains who would beach up on the other side of the peninsula in Monkey Mia and Herald Bight and he travelled there on horseback through the scrub to buy pearls every week.

One day, Leon Krasker didn’t return home to Knight Terrace.

He’d fallen from his horse, Battler, on the beach, broke his leg and died from exposure and dehydration while crawling towards a watering hole that was later named Krasker’s Tank.

Leon Krasker, age 39, was buried three days later in Shark Bay Cemetery on the 29th of September 1916 and Matilda and the five children moved back south to Perth.

Without the pearl trade to anchor them in Western Australia they moved about hither and yon.

With Robert’s need for a creative and technical education that was unavailable in Perth or elsewhere in Australia the family moved back to Europe for the last time in January 1929.

Robert was sixteen years old.

He studied art in Paris and then moved to Dresden, often described as “the most beautiful Baroque city in Europe”, to learn optics and photography.

Dresden had become an economic and industrial hub under the German Empire after its founding in 1871 and by the time of Robert Krasker’s arrival was a major centre for camera and optical design, manufacturing and education.

The Russian-born chemist Robert Luther had taken up a full professorship in Dresden in 1908 then became director of the Wissenschaftlich-Photographischen Instituts (Scientific Photography Institute) of the Technische Hochschule Dresden, now Technische Universität Dresden (TU Dresden), leading the growth of the city’s photographic industry through his research in photochemistry.

Students including the American photographer Imogen Cunningham flocked to the Hochschule from all over the world as it provided an excellent scientific foundation for photography and cinematography, supplemented by the modern art for which Dresden had become a thriving centre during the Weimar Republic.

On completing his studies in Dresden, Robert made his way back to Paris where he was employed at Paramount Pictures’ European language film studios in Joinville-le-Pont in the city’s southeastern suburbs, working under American cinematographer Philip Tannura.

Tannura and his colleagues at Paramount Pictures’ “Babel-sur-Seine” introduced the French film industry to so-called “American lighting” comprising a single key spotlight from above and in front of an actor.

The studios were a hotbed of innovation in cinematography and sound recording with the talkies bringing the silent era to its close, and were host to a roll-call of world-class directors including Alexander Korda.

As Cameron Howard of The Blonde at the Film writes: “Not only were languages flying around, but so were assorted tricks, styles, and filmic conventions. Babel-sur-Seine most likely had a large impact on film style and production just because it brought together so many different traditions and personnel who could learn from each other.”

The looming collapse of the Weimar Republic and the rise of the Nazi Party saw expatriate and native filmmakers leave the Continent for the United Kingdom and the United States and Krasker was no exception, moving to London where his mother, brother and sisters had already settled.

He soon found a job in the camera department under French cinematographer Georges Périnal at Alexander Korda’s newly-founded London Films Productions in 1932, based at Denham Film Studios west of London from 1936.

Robert Krasker had moved from one Denham to another.

Robert Krasker’s achievements

During research for this article the Australian director Bruce Beresford sent a shorter one that he had written about Robert Krasker and the many remarkable films on which he worked his cinema magic, kindly arranged by cinematographer Ben Allan, ACS CSI.

“Robert Krasker is unquestionably one of the greatest lighting camerapersons of all time,” he wrote.

“Lighting cameraman” is an old term for what we now refer to as a cinematographer or a Director of Photography and Mr Beresford is using a less sexist form of that deprecated terminology.

This is at least the second time Mr Beresford has written about Robert Krasker: the first was Robert Krasker’s obituary for The Bulletin on the 1st of December 1981:

“From the beginning his style was distinctive and remains quite undated when his films are screened today…. He eschewed glamour in favour of realism and was noted for his extraordinary use of high-contrast images and bold wide-angle compositions.”

It’s been said that every film where Robert Krasker was credited as lighting cameraman or Director of Photography had something to teach us in his use of light, shade, tone, colour and movement.

Of his films that I’ve seen so far there is an unmistakably singular vision at work in them.

Krasker knew he needed to learn about art and photography to the highest standards at an early age and the education system in Western Australia could not satisfy that desire.

No art or technical institution in Australia at the time could, since we lack the world-class galleries, museum collections, researchers and teachers he readily found in Europe.

Krasker’s family background equipped him well for study and work in Europe, providing him with fluency in German and French and enough conversational skills in Italian and Spanish to direct his camera departments, talent and crew members of a range of nationalities in a number of filming locations.

Learning from Robert Krasker

Robert Krasker taught me about lighting, image design and motion through his films but at the time I didn’t know it.

My ethnic, uneducated, working-class father’s only chance of a decent job meant moving from an eastern states capital to a series of isolated spots in Western Australia and my education was severely curtailed as a result.

Dad died young from the stresses of the work and longterm separation from his family while off in far distant desert locations for months on end.

My sudden loss of access to the top-quality education I needed to get where I wanted meant I became a stranger in a strange land far from home, in exile from extended family, friends, acquaintances and familiar places none of which I ever saw again.

Traumatized, I sought refuge in art and photography, gleaning what I could from popular magazines while ordering books in from elsewhere via the local lending library.

Before, back east, my parents had been avid drive-in cinema-goers with a fondness for widescreen Technicolor epics and the odd romance, so at least I’d seen The Trap, The Heroes of Telemark, The Fall of the Roman Empire and El Cid.

Then as now, TV broadcasters served up a steady diet of classic black and white movies such as Brief Encounter, Odd Man Out, The Third Man, The Criminal and many more.

A keen visual memory helped me build a mental database of images from the movies I saw and those movies were my teachers.

In July 2022 The Third Man appeared on TV and released in me a flow of stored memories and scenes from it and other classic feature films.

I wondered who the genius was who created all those amazing and still contemporary images in The Third Man.

I went online, looked the movie up on IMDb, learned about its cinematographer and continued researching Robert Krasker’s life, his times and his achievements.

Robert Krasker’s demise

In his book’s chapter Kurze Begegnung (Brief Encounter), Falk Schwarz describes a chance meeting in a Chelsea pub after watching The Third Man at the National Film Theatre in August 1981.

Schwarz and his colleague had been discussing the film, wondering how an Australian cinematographer could understand and successfully depict the essence of post-war Vienna.

An elderly gentleman sitting next to them stands up then stumbles a little.

“Did you want to interrupt our conversation?”, Schwarz asks.

With a slightly English-tinged intonation, the gentleman replies: “Oh, no. Not at all. I just thought: Why shouldn’t an Australian have a feeling for Vienna? I’m Australian too. Not all Australians were born there either. Most of them came from Europe.”

It’s Robert Krasker.

The three arranged to meet the next week, same time, same day, same place, to talk more but Robert Krasker failed to show up.

The Times reported that Robert Krasker had died earlier that day, of aortic stenosis and a lifetime of severe diabetes from malaria caught in the Sudan on the set of The Four Feathers.

It was the 16th of August 1981 and he died at home in his flat at 1 Harrogate House, 29 Sloane Square, Chelsea, London SW1W 8AE.

Why remember Robert Krasker?

The Australian Cinematographers Society report A Wider Lens opened the curtains on the bigotry, sexism, discrimination, harassment, mental health issues, suicide and even rape in Australian film and television camera departments.

It revealed just the tip of the iceberg for the entire film and television industry here and elsewhere, with entrenched gatekeeping in terms of class, gender, ethnicity, age, religion, disability, health, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, and sex characteristics (SOGIESC).

My question is, would Robert Krasker have been allowed to study, work and succeed as a cinematographer here and now given all his differences, many of which are listed in the previous paragraph.

Such differences have been used as justification for discrimination against Australia-based filmmakers and for preventing them from entering the industry here and as A Wider Lens reports continue to dog their lives and careers if they’ve been lucky enough to gain first foothold on the moviemaking career ladder.

The fact that Robert Krasker became “one of the giants” attests to his determination and his family’s support in overcoming obstacles unique to his time and that remain in force today.

For those of us locked out of the Australian film and television industry for being different, celebrating Robert Krasker may kindle new hope and determination to fight the system and change it for the better for ourselves and for those to come.

For those like me, imagine what our lives and careers might have been if we had known about him when we were young and full of hopes and dreams that had yet to be shattered by the dead hand of a patriarchal and racist system.

If only they’d taught about the great Robert Krasker in university art school and the technical college I attended to learn cinematography followed by teaching it there.

Robert Krasker’s life and achievements would have inspired me to fight and fight and fight despite the barriers and blacklisting, knowing that he succeeded even if in another time and another place.

On gatekeepers, mentors, outsiders, sponsors & culture wars

Coming soon.

A gallery of Robert Krasker BTS photographs

Links