Early days (1982–1985)Edit

Cinderella was formed in 1982 in Philadelphiasuburb, Clifton Heights, Pennsylvania,[5] by singer-songwriter, keyboardist, and guitarist Tom Keifer and bassist Eric Brittingham.[6] The initial lineup also included guitarist Michael Schermick and drummer Tony Destra. In 1985, Shermick and Destra left to form Britny Fox, another Philadelphia-based glam metal band. Cinderella practiced in the attic of the American Legion building in Wayne, PA.[7] In a 2014 interview, Tom Keifer stated that Kissbass guitarist Gene Simmons first took interest in the band and tried to get them a deal with PolyGram, but they were not interested. Jon Bon Jovi saw them perform at the Empire Rock Club in Philadelphia and talked to his A&R man, Derek Shulman about seeing the group. Shulman was not convinced at first either, and wanted to sign the band to a six-month development deal. But after extensive negotiations, he finally signed the band.[8][9] In 1985, with a recording contract with Mercury/Polygram Records in the works, guitarist Jeff LaBar and drummer Jim Drnecjoined the band.

Night Songs is the debut studio album by American glam metal band Cinderella. It was released on June 9, 1986, by Mercury Records.Mercury issued the album worldwide, while Vertigo Records handled the album's release in the UK.

The album peaked at No. 3 on the US charts on February 7, 1987, and was certified double platinum for shipping 2 million copies there twelve days later. In May 1991, it was certified triple platinum, having shipped 3 million copies.

Leadoff single "Shake Me" failed to chart, but "Nobody's Fool" cracked the Top 20, reaching No. 13. Third single "Somebody Save Me" went to #66. On May 4, 1987, Cinderella filmed parts of their concert in Philadelphia. These live songs were, along with their three MTV videos, released on home video in August 1987 on Night Songs: The Videos.

Night Songs sold several million copies due to a combination of Cinderella's breakthrough single "Nobody's Fool", MTV airplay, and an opening slot on labelmates Bon Jovi's tour, in support of their album Slippery When Wet.

Night Songs

Cinderella

Released June 9, 1986

Label Mercury

Producer Andy Johns

1. "Night Songs"

2. "Shake Me"

3. "Nobody's Fool"

4. "Nothin' for Nothin'"

5. "Once Around the Ride"

6. "Hell on Wheels"

7. "Somebody Save Me"

8. "In from the Outside"

9. "Push, Push"

10. "Back Home Again"

Cinderella

Tom Keifer – lead vocals, guitar, piano

Jeff LaBar – guitar, vocals

Eric Brittingham – bass, vocals

Fred Coury – drums (does not play on the album, joined shortly after it was recorded)[15]

Additional musicians

Barry Bennedetta – lead guitar on "Back Home Again", "Nothin' for Nothin'" and "Push, Push"[16]

Jeff Paris – keyboards[16]

Jody Cortez – drums on all tracks[16]

Tony Mills – background vocals[17]

Jon Bon Jovi – background vocals on "Nothin' for Nothin'" and "In From the Outside"

Bill Mattson – background vocals on "Shake Me"

Great memories with the Cinderella debut. In fact, I recall recording the album to a Maxell tape which got a ton of play in the summer of 1986. I began going to concerts at this time, and Cinderella seemed to open for everyone, specifically David Lee Roth on his memorable first solo tour. What a night! Wish I remembered more.

1. Night Songs” “I need a shot of gasoline!” Epic opener and always a concert highlight, still one of my favorites by the band

2. "Shake Me"-catchy song and their first single: great chorus

3. "Nobody's Fool"- remember when it was seemingly ubiquitous on MTV, nice ballad but certainly not their finest

4. "Nothin' for Nothin'"- great album cut, forgot that Bon Jovi sang background on this one

5. "Once Around the Ride"- another solid tune

6. "Hell on Wheels"- first dud, never got into this song

7. "Somebody Save Me"- Everybody's got opinions

But nobody's got the answers

And the **** you ate for breakfast

Well it'll only give ya cancer- words of wisdom indeed. Stellar track that still sounds fresh.

8. "In from the Outside"-ehhh, ok but not essential

9. "Push, Push"- fun live track but not a fave

10. "Back Home Again" decent closer

All in all, a solid debut with several classics that I enjoy cranking up from time to time. Used to be my favorite, but I’d now rank it third out of their four studio releases.

Next up, Long Cold Winter.

Oh man I love this album. This seemed to come out of nowhere and was (is) fabulous. The music did not correspond with the hair metal look though. Never did.

Love this album but it probably is my least played album from the classic first 3 album run. Cool videos with the cameos and the two girls running around helped sell 12 year old me on this album big time! I always liked the fact that they incorporated the blues into their sound.

I remember being on the playground at school in 1986......we had an assembly on drugs later that day in the auditorium....a cool rocker chick from the next grade up saw me on the playground and informed me that she had just come from the assembly and that "Nobody's Fool" was featured in it lol! I was pretty pstched and remember my friends and I all yelling out when the song got played in it.

Long Cold Winter is the second studio album by American glam metal band Cinderella. It was released in July 1988 on Mercury Records.

Long Cold Winter

Studio album by

Cinderella

Released July 5, 1988

No. Title Length

1. "Bad Seamstress Blues/Fallin' Apart at the Seams" 5:19

2. "Gypsy Road" 3:55

3. "Don't Know What You Got (Till It's Gone)" 5:56

4. "The Last Mile" 3:51

5. "Second Wind" 3:59

6. "Long Cold Winter" 5:24

7. "If You Don't Like It" 4:10

8. "Coming Home" 4:56

9. "Fire and Ice" 3:22

10. "Take Me Back" 3:17

Total length: 43:51

Personnel

Tom Keifer – electric, acoustic and steelguitars, harmonica, vocals, producer

Jeff LaBar – guitar (lead guitar on "Falling Apart at the Seams" and "Coming Home")

Eric Brittingham – bass, backing vocals, producer

Fred Coury – drums (credited but does not play on the album)

Cinderella's second album, Long Cold Winter, was released in 1988. The new album signified a shift towards a blues rock sound, though it could still be described as glam metal. A 254-show tour to support the album lasted over 14 months, and in August 1989, the band performed at the Moscow Music Peace Festival alongside other metal acts, such as Ozzy Osbourne, the Scorpions, Mötley Crüe, Bon Jovi, and Skid Row. The tour's stage show included Tom Keifer being lowered to the stage while playing a white piano during their radio hit "Don't Know What You Got (Till It's Gone)".

Singles from Long Cold Winter

"Gypsy Road"

Released: June 1988

"Don't Know What You Got (Till It's Gone)"

Released: August 1988

"The Last Mile"

Released: January 1989

"Coming Home"

Released: March 1989

The record reached No. 10 in the US and became double-platinum for shipping two million copies in the US by the end of the year, just as their debut album Night Songs had done earlier. It was later certified triple platinum. The album features four singles, which all charted on the Billboard Hot 100. "Don't Know What You Got (Till It's Gone)", the band's highest-charting single, reached No. 12, "The Last Mile" reached No. 36, "Coming Home" reached No. 20, and "Gypsy Road" hit No. 51, more than a year after the release of the album.