Context - Your parents go out of town a lot, and Eric likes to come over when they do.

3:07AM

---- Girls Name - Sydney Stone

I WAS WOKEN UP BY a pain in my side, along with ringing from the phone.

Who the fuck calls at this time of night?

I look over, looking at the surroundings of my room, seeing what could possibly hurt me.

My dog.

My dog was lying on my bed, stretching, and accidentally scratched me.

Go figures.

I grabbed the phone that was on the wall by my bed, annoyed by the rude awakening during my sleep.

"Who the hell is this?"

I heard a chuckle on the other end, hinting who it was, "That's no way you talk to your boyfriend now, sweetheart."

Eric Brittingham.

"Eric, it's 3 goddamn aclock in the morning, go to sleep."

"But I'm bored! I wanna see you," he says, I hear the frown being made with it.

"Just come over. If my parents were here, you'd be dead." I rub my eyes, still in a state of sleepiness.

"But their nottt!" He sings, joyful now, "I'll be over in 5."

The line goes dead, and I put the phone back on the wall, lying back on my back and staring at the ceiling.

My parents were gone for another.. 5 days? So it didn't matter if Eric came tonight or not. They wouldn't be home.

I was still tired, I was trying to fight it before Eric got here, but I was too late; I fell asleep.

....

I blink open my eye, feeling a presence looking at me.

When I saw what it or who it was, it was clear as day.

"Eric, why the fuck are you watching me sleep?"

He laughs at my reaction, shaking his head, "I wasn't watching you, I was waiting for you to wake up."

I sat up in bed, rubbing my eyes to try and wake up more, blinking to fix my vision.

"Luna isn't very happy that you woke her up," I laugh, pointing to my dog, who was glaring at Eric.

"Sorry, luna," he mutters, petting her head.

"Why are you here again?" I ask, turning to him.

"You really were half asleep," he laughs, "I just wanted to see you."

"Tom kicked you out of his house?"

He sighs and nods, "I was over, but he invited a girl, and I wasn't gonna stay to watch."

I laugh at his statement, "I'm better anyways."

"Of course you are," he smiles, kissing my cheek.

"Here, get comfortable," I scoot over on my bed, the most I can aways with my dog.

He kicks off his shoes and gets under the covers with me- luckily, he didn't have jeans on, just sweats and a muscle shirt.

"Did you see Daisy when you got here?" I ask, "wait how did you get in here?"

"Daisy is by the end of your bed, and your back door was unlocked," he nonchalantly says.

Daisy was my other dog, by the way.

"Hold on.. did you at least lock it?" I ask, lying all the way back.

"I'm not stupid, absolutely," he rolls his eyes, lying back with me.

He places me on his chest when he lays down, playing with my hair when I get comfortable.

"You're gorgeous, ya know that?" He asks, looking down at me.

"You tell me everything, my love," I mutter, wrapping my arms around his mid section.

"That's because I mean it!"

I laugh at his words, closing my eyes, "You're here now, let's sleep."

He chuckles, a smile appearing on his face, "With you here? Gladly."

He kissed my head, wrapping his other arm around me, "I love you, syd."

"I love you too, Eric."