A glam metal band most known during the 1980s. They were formed in Philadelphia in 1982 by vocalist Tom Keifer and bassist Eric Brittingham.

During the Night Songs tour, Cinderella were exposed to a very large audience opening for Bon Jovi (on their tour for Slippery When Wet).

Cinderella’s second album, Long Cold Winter, was released in 1988. The 254-show tour to support it lasted over 14 months and included dates on the Moscow Music Peace Festival along side other glam metal heavyweights such as Ozzy Osbourne, The Scorpions, Mötley Crüe, Bon Jovi, and Skid Row. A highlight of the tour’s stage show featured Keifer being lowered to the stage while playing a white piano during their radio hit Don’t Know What You Got ‘Til It’s Gone.

Their third album, Heartbreak Station was released in 1990 and featured songs much more heavily influenced by Keifer’s love of the blues. Following the accompanying tour, Fred Coury left the band and joined former Ratt vocalist Stephen Pearcy in a band called Arcade.

Additionally, Keifer began experiencing problems with his voice after the tour and underwent several operations. This added to delays in recording of their fourth album. In 1994, they finally released Still Climbing, but with little support from their label and none from Mtv. The album quickly disappeared from the charts.

Cinderella reunited in 1997 and toured the United States in the following year. That same year, Mercury Records released a greatest hits compilation titled Once Upon a… In 1999, Live at the Key Club was releasd through Cleopatra records. Around this time they were signed by John Kalodner to Portrait/(Sony) Records. Unfortunately, they were dropped by the label before a new album could be released. They toured again in 2000 and 2002.

In the Summer 2006, Cinderella toured with fellow glam metal rockers Poison to celebrate the 20th anniversary of both bands’ first albums. “Night Songs” and “Look What The Cat Dragged In” were both released in 1986. The tour was a rousing success and swiftly became one of the most successful tours of 2006, averaging about 20 thousand people in attendance per night. Currently, Cinderella is actively touring and they have sold 20 million albums world wide.