Ornella Barra, co-chief operating officer of the Walgreens Boots Alliance, says, “I am delighted to celebrate with all of you, the launch of No7 Beauty Company, as a standalone consumer packaging and goods company within the WBA.”

By branching out into a consumer packaging and combining traditional competitors in the brand business, No7 positions itself a consumer-first business aiming to grow its offering to customers.

Participating companies include Liz Earle Beauty Company, Botanics, Soap and Glory, Sleek MakeUp and YourGoodSkin.

A launch video was shared on the brand’s social media channels and highlighted the intentions behind the brand expansion. It begins by stating ‘A global beauty transformation is here’ and ‘We believe in doing the right thing’.

The fast paced clips show people of all backgrounds, genders and ages celebrating beauty and skincare. It also shows the participating brands, social media insights and efforts in science and sustainability.

A fitting and upbeat song plays over the clips, repeating the line ‘here comes the brand new’ while showcasing different comms strategies and social campaigns, from influencer connections to charity partnerships.

No7 Beauty Company also held an online launch event this week. Ann introduction by co-chief operating officer of the WBA, Ornella Barra, showcased some of the brand’s recent successes and social efforts. Barra also made the company ambition clear, ‘to become a truly inclusive beauty business making fantastic beauty products that more accessible than ever before.’

Beauty journalist and diversity advocate, Ateh Jewel, then hosted the event from London. No7 beauty company team members, retail partners, followers and friends of the brand were able to watch the event live, creating a sense of community and strengthening the employer brand.

Guest speakers from the new portfolio of brands discussed the No7 Beauty Company launch, and its position in the beauty industry as a force for good. The launch video was uploaded for the public to watch on YouTube yesterday 20 April.

For a global brand currently sold in 20 countries, the use of video comms and a virtual launch of No7 Beauty Company strengthened the organisation’s identity as a global community of employees and consumers, while also generating excitement and consumer awareness on social channels.