MovieGuide, May 8, 2000

Airing on public television in May, Bonhoeffer: Agent of Grace tells the story of the German theologian executed by the Nazis after he plotted to assassinate Adolph Hitler. The movie opens with Bonhoeffer singing at a black Pentecostal church in Harlem during World War II. Bonhoeffer decides to go back to Germany where he is needed. There, he finds that Hitler’s National Socialists are destroying the country. A few Germans in the high command who oppose Hitler recruit Bonhoeffer to travel to Sweden and England, to try to get help from the Allies to ovethrow Hitler. Eventually, this connection draws Bonhoeffer into the conspiracy to kill the mad leader. Ulrich Tukur, who plays Bonhoeffer, is so real, so authentic, so profoundly aware of all the nuances, that we meet Bonhoeffer in him. The other actors are also superb. This excellent production harkens back to the “Golden Age” of Hollywood in that it is devoid of objectionable elements. Most importantly, it clearly highlights the great moral questions raised by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. By asking the right questions, Bonhoeffer helps us think through the answers that we would give based on God’s Word, the Bible.

St. Mary's Press - April 2002

Bonhoeffer: Agent of Grace tells the story of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a highly regarded Lutheran minister who courageously opposed Hitler and the Nazis. This 90-minute video shows how Bonhoeffer grows in his own resolve to be courageous and to speak the truth as he sees it in a time of savage immorality.

visualparables.com - January 2001

Millions of believers still read and cherish the words of the courageous martyr Dietrich Bonhoeffer. Perhaps only Karl Barth and Reinhold Niebuhr have had as much influence on theology and the church in the 20th century as this German pastor - and both of them were connected to him. Thanks to the PBS special many people will learn some of the details of his life and of the dangerous times out of which he forged his theology. Ulrich Tukur's portrayal shows both the seriousness of the pastor-theologian and the saving grace of his humor, the latter which was but one of the many attributes that drew all sorts of men and women to him.

Eclectic Homeschool Online 2005

Bonhoeffer: Agent of Grace is a compelling and oft-times disturbing 90-minute color movie about German clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer and his opposition to Hitler and the Nazis. "What is a moral person to do in a time of savage immorality?" That question tormented the Lutheran minister and his answer to it ultimately cost him his life. The Winner of the Best Film category at the Monte Carlo Television Festival in 2000, the movie can be difficult for your younger children to watch as it sheds light on the little-known resistance to Hitler inside of Germany and the price paid for such rebellion. The Nazis hanged Bonhoeffer less than a month before they surrendered; the scene would be disturbing for young viewers even though it is not graphic. The questions and motivations with which the minister grappled are for all times and all people, though the movie itself is a fine addition to your studies of World War II history, the history of the Church, and as your family plunges into discussions of how Christians should live in a fallen world.