This entertaining, star-studded comic adventure takes full advantage of its "ragtag misfits on a mission" theme. Writer-directors Jonathan Goldstein and John Francis Daley far exceed expectations -- which, admittedly, are pretty low for game-based genre movies. Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves' story manages to be engaging, funny, and occasionally moving, but also lighthearted and not overly violent. And it's significant that the main male and female characters are platonic best friends who aren't romantically interested in each other. The writers give Edgin and Holga a sibling-like bond: They tease and taunt each other but also unconditionally support and love each other, leaving the (refreshingly light!) romantic tension to their younger pals Simon and Doric. Pine is a pitch-perfect lead, and Rodriguez has played so many versions of a woman warrior that you just expect her to fell lots of foes. The supporting characters are equally well cast. Grant is hilarious as the greedy Forge; Page (of Bridgerton fame) is clearly adept at playing humorless, seemingly perfect characters; and Head does a fine job pivoting from her beautiful Shadow and Bone character to play a villainous wizard who's trying to take over the world.

Goldstein and Daley's script is full of zingers and ongoing jokes, but it's also earnest and sweet, reminding viewers that these are indeed deep-feeling characters with kind hearts. In one scene, Holga visits her ex-husband, whom she still loves. He's played by an A-list actor in a small but impactful cameo (no spoilers here!), and their conversation is surprisingly substantive for a relationship talk in an action movie. Speaking of which, the action sequences are slick without being overwhelming, with brawls making up most of the fights until the third act. There's a funny moment when Holga faces off with six or seven opponents on her own, and Edgin is so confident in her chances that he's on a completely different mission. The scenes between Edgin, Holga, and young Kira also pack a punch, as the thieves must reconcile their motives with what the girl actually needs from them. And the world-building, while not as thorough as Lord of the Rings, is enough to make audiences eager for a sequel to this fun, funny family movie pick.