Owen Wilson and his former girlfriend, Jade Duell, were spotted while watching their son Ford play soccer in Los Angeles on Sunday morning.

The 55-year-old performer and his ex appeared to be on great terms, as they flashed smiles while speaking to each other on the sidelines.

The Zoolander actor, who out on an affectionate display with his former partner after she arrived at LAX earlier this year, later celebrated his son's performance on the field by excitedly raising his arms.

Wilson kept it casual while wearing a light blue button-up shirt and a pair of beige pants during the game.

The Academy Award-nominated performer also wore light brown shoes and completed his look with light brown sunglasses and a black hat.

Duell opted for a white t-shirt and a pair of slim-fitting gray joggers as she watched her son play.

The actor's former partner also wore a pair of Ugg-style boots and accessorized with dark sunglasses.

Wilson and his former partner revealed that they were planning on starting a family in January of 2011, and she gave birth to Ford, 12, that same year.

The two eventually split up, and the performer began a short-lived romance with Caroline Lindqvist.

The pair went on to welcome a son named Finn, nine in October of 2013, and the actor currently co-parents his child with the personal trainer.

Wilson later started seeing Varunie Vongsvirates, and she gave birth to his daughter Lyla, five, in October of 2018.

The performer's relationship with his former partner has been rocky however, and she exclusively told DailyMail.com that he had 'never met' his daughter in 2021.

Vongsvirates went on to state that, while the Shanghai Noon star 'helps financially,' he had not made any attempts to spend time with his youngest child.

Wilson gave a rare insight into his home life during an interview with Esquire, where he spoke about trying to impress his sons with his bedtime stories.

'Sometimes telling the stories at night, you do take a little pride that these guys are into this story,' he said.

The actor then recalled that his boys had encouraged him to try and adapt one of his homespun narratives.

He recalled: 'One of them even said "Dad, you should do something with this. This is a really good story!"'