Jade Duell is a US government employee who previously worked for the Department of Homeland Security as a police officer. She became well-known as Owen Wilson’s lover and the mother of the couple’s child.

She has kept a low profile since her breakup with the celebrity. Please scroll down to learn more about Jade’s personal life, such as where she is now and whether or not she is married.

Jade Duell Biography and profile summary

Jade Duell was born in 1983. She is a local of Lengthy Island, New York, and holds American citizenship. Her age as of 2022 is 39 years, however, her zodiac signal is unknown because she fails to offer an actual and full beginning date. Moreover, she earned a Bachelor of Science in Criminology from the College of Maryland in 2004. Regrettably, no details about her childhood or youth is accessible.

Jade Duell: Relationship with Owen Wilson

Wilson was in Washington, D.C., in 2009 to shoot How Do You Know?, James L. Brooks’ directorial debut (2010). Reese Witherspoon, Jack Nicholson, and Paul Rudd star in the picture, which was a critical and commercial disappointment. Wilson may have stumbled onto Duell’s story for the first time. She did, after all, start dating Owen in 2009. She rose to stardom after her lovey-dovey became public, like Janet Elway, who married former American football player John Elway.

Duell became pregnant in 2010, and their son, Robert Ford Wilson, was born in January 2011. However, the relationship ended five months later, in June. While still being with Jade and their child, according to a source. Wilson desired the freedom to do anything he pleased with his male and female friends. On the other side, Jade was fiercely opposed.

In the end, Wilson betrayed her. Wilson stayed in Santa Monica, while Jade moved in with her parents on Long Island with Robert. Jade has made her Instagram account private, but she uses Twitter to keep her followers up to date on her whereabouts.

Even though they are no longer together, the female police officer and The Shanghai Noon actor look after their son and frequently go on vacations together. On a private plane, the three flew to Maui for a wonderful family vacation in December 2020.

Jade Duell: Career

After completing her schooling, Jade Duell was hired as a police officer at the United States Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., in 2006. She lived in the Dulles Airport suburbs for the next few years.

After all, Jade is a member of the US Department of Homeland Security. Duell went on to become the United States of America’s Federal Air Marshall.

Jade Duell: Net worth