ACTOR Owen Wilson’s love life has always been under the radar since his rise to fame.

The star is a father of three children from three different relationships.

Is Owen Wilson married?

Owen Wilson has never been married.

The 53-year-old has been in numerous relationships with several A-listers, including Gina Gershon and Demi Moore.

He has also dated singer Sheryl Crowe and actress Kate Hudson.

Owen and Kate met in 2006 while making the movie You, Me and Dupree.

At the time, Kate was still married to her then-husband, rocker Chris Robinson but grew closer to Owen during the Fall of that year.

However, in June of 2007, People magazine announced their breakup.

As reported by MTV, the actress wished Owen nothing but the best despite their split, saying: “Owen is such a lovely person, and I love him dearly and I wish him beautiful things — health and everything that he desires in life.”

After his split from Kate, Owen went on to date Jade Duell, Caroline Lindqvist, and Varunie Vongsvirates.

Does Owen Wilson have children?

Owen is a father to three children.

The actor shares Robert, 10, with his ex-girlfriend Jade Duell, with whom he reportedly split back in 2011.

He also shared a six-year-old son named Finn with fitness trainer Caroline Lindqvist.

Additionally, Owen is a father to two-year-old Lyla Aranya Wilson with his ex Varunie Vongsvirates.

Varunie claimed she begged the actor to get involved in Lyla's life.

She told Daily Mail that her former lover was "not involved at all" with their little girl and "has never" even met her.

Owen's ex added: "He helps financially but it’s never been about that.

"Lyla needs a father. It’s ironic how [Owen] keeps getting these father roles, he's playing a father in his new movie, and he's never met his own daughter."

There was speculation that Lyla was not Owen’s child, however, back in 2018, he took a paternity test which proved he was the father of Varunie's baby.

A source told Us Weekly: “He even checked the no visitation box in court in June.

“He does not want to visit [and does not] want any custody of her.”

Is Owen Wilson dating anyone now?

It is unclear if Owen currently has a girlfriend.

Yet, an insider told OK magazine that the actor is willing to open his heart to love, saying: “Owen would like another chance at romance — one that would go the distance — and he’s hopeful the right woman will come along.

“But until she does, he’s totally content being a single dad.”

However, he's turning heads on-screen as he stars opposite Jennifer Lopez in rom-com Marry Me.

Also starring singer Maluma and comedian Sarah Silverman, the movie is "an unlikely romance about two different people searching for something real in a world where value is based on likes and followers."

The movie was released on February 11 in theaters and on Peacock.