Splash Owen Wilson and his son in April

Actor Owen Wilson is said to have split from the mother of his only child.

The Wedding Crashers star and former air marshal Jade Duell have a five-month-old son together, Robert.

The relationship came to an end because the 42-year-old wasn't ready to commit, it has been claimed.

According to an 'insider' talking to the National Enquirer: "Owen wanted the freedom to do what he wanted with his friends, both male and female, while remaining a family unit with Jade and the baby.

"But Jade wasn't willing to go along with that, so Owen decided to end things with her instead of cheating behind her back."

Advertisement

Duell and Robert are said to have moved to New York to be with her family while Wilson remains based in Santa Monica, California.

The 42-year-old actor showed no signs of strain on June 18 when he walked the red carpet at the Cars 2 premier in Los Angeles.

In the Disney/Pixar sequel, Wilson voices the leading role of Lightning McQueen, the star racer of the 2006 animated film.

Sasha-Lins/X17online.com

Wilson shocked his family, friends and fans with his suicide attempt four years ago when he tried to overdose on prescription pills and slashed his wrists after splitting up with girlfriend Kate Hudson.

Advertisement

Since then the Little Fockers star seemed to have gotten his life back on track by embracing fatherhood when son Robert Ford Wilson was born n January 14 of this year.

He told told U.S. entertainment show Access Hollywood: 'I was never like somebody who was like, 'Oh gosh, it's a little baby! Let me hold it.

'They're so fragile, but then when it is your own, all of a sudden you feel a lot more confident. You really do have this bond, this real connection with this thing that a month ago wasn't even here It is strange... Their cries are like beautiful music!'

Fans were surprised when Jade's pregnancy was announced four days before the birth of her son in Hawaii, as it had not been public knowledge that the Midnight In Paris actor was even dating her.

It was then revealed that he and Jade met last year when the air marshall sat next to him on a flight.

Advertisement