Two particular features make this story interesting. Firstly, Abbott makes use of a fairly simple geometric analogy to convey the rather complex idea of higher dimensionality, which had begun to circulate amongst mathematicians of his time. To create this analogy, he introduces four fictional worlds: Pointland (only consisting of a single point which has no dimension at all), Lineland (an infinite line in which women are just points and men are shorter lines), Flatland, and Spaceland (the three-dimensional world we ourselves live in).

All inhabitants of Abbott’s lower-dimensional worlds struggle to grasp the concept of a higher dimension: The point in Pointland cannot comprehend the concept of a line; the inhabitants of Lineland do not understand what it would mean for a figure to live in two-dimensional Flatland, and the Flatlanders cannot come to terms with three-dimensional Spaceland.

The story ends with A Square trying to persuade all of Flatland about the existence of higher dimensions and ending up getting arrested for his radical views. He then writes Flatland during his imprisonment. (Abbott initially published his story under the pseudonym ‘A Square’, indicating that the story was supposedly written by its protagonist, but also hinting at the author’s last name, Abbott Abbott – ‘A’ squared.)

The appeal to this analogy is that the reader can identify with the struggle of imagining a higher dimension. Just like A Square not being able to comprehend the concept of a sphere or a cube, we do not know what a fourth dimension would look like, because we are locked into our three-dimensional world.

Abbott, Edwin Abbott (aka A Square), Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions (London, 1884).

Banchoff, Thomas F., ‘From Flatland to Hypergraphics: Interacting with Higher Dimensions’, Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 15:4 (1990), 364-72.

Funk, Wolfgang, ‘The Mathematics of Evolution: Dreaming about Four Dimensions with Edwin A. Abbott and May Kendall’, Critical Survey, Special Issue: Victorian Literature and Science, 27:2 (2015), 67-80.

Henderson, Andrea, ‘Math for Math’s Sake: Non-Euclidean Geometry, Aestheticism, and “Flatland”’, PMLA/Publications of the Modern Language Association of America, 124:2 (2009), 455-71.

Hinton, Charles H., ‘What is the Fourth Dimension?’, Scientific Romances, 1 (1884), 1-22.

O’Connor, John and Robertson, Edmund, ‘Edwin Abbott Abbott’, MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive, Website, <https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Abbott/> [accessed 10 February 2023].

O’Connor, John and Robertson, Edmund, ‘Flatland Preface Second Edition’, MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive, Website, <https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Extras/Abbott_Flatland/> [accessed 10 February 2023].

Reich, Karin, ‘Flatland: An Analogy between Mathematics and Physics’, Science & Education, 16 (2007), 625-36.

Rucker, Rudy, The Fourth Dimension: Toward a Geometry of Higher Reality (Mineola, NY, 2014).

Stewart, Ian, ‘Introduction and Notes’, in Abbott, Edwin A., The Annotated Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions (New York, 2008).

Tromp, Theresa, ‘The Fourth Dimension and Hyperspace’, The Mathematics Teacher, 19:3 (1926), 140-146.

show less