Flatland: A Romance of Many Directions is a novella written by Edwin A. Abbott. Released in 1884, it tells of a two-dimensional being visiting other dimensions.

Characters[]

A. Square - the narrator of the tale

The Sphere

Monarch of Lineland

A. Square's wife

A. Square's brother

A. Square's grandson

The Point

rest to be added

Publisher's summary[]

This masterpiece of science (and mathematical) fiction is a delightfully unique and highly entertaining satire that has charmed readers for more than 100 years. The work of English clergyman, educator and Shakespearean scholar Edwin A. Abbott (1838-1926), it describes the journeys of A. Square [sic – ed.], a mathematician and resident of the two-dimensional Flatland, where women-thin, straight lines-are the lowliest of shapes, and where men may have any number of sides, depending on their social status.

Through strange occurrences that bring him into contact with a host of geometric forms, Square has adventures in Spaceland (three dimensions), Lineland (one dimension) and Pointland (no dimensions) and ultimately entertains thoughts of visiting a land of four dimensions—a revolutionary idea for which he is returned to his two-dimensional world. Charmingly illustrated by the author, Flatland is not only fascinating reading, it is still a first-rate fictional introduction to the concept of the multiple dimensions of space. "Instructive, entertaining, and stimulating to the imagination." — Mathematics Teacher.

Plot[]

Note: Part One is largely worldbuilding for the society of Flatland. It also serves as a satire of Victorian society. The basic gist of Flatland society is that it is a two-dimensional world with a rigid caste system based on the shape of its inhabitants. The men of Flatland are geometric shapes able to assume numerous shapes (though kept in line through the caste system) and the women are line segments with very little rights.

Chapter 13: How I had a Vision of Lineland[]

In the penultimate day of Flatland's 1999th year, a square (with the name "A. Square") goes to bed and has a dream (possibly a vision) of a world populated by lines and points. He talks with what he first thinks is a Flatlandian woman, but soon discovers is the Monarch of Lineland.

Chapter 14: How I vainly tried to explain the nature of Flatland[]

A. Square and the Monarch try to discuss the nature of their worlds (with the Monarch assuming that A. Square is a "Feminine monstrosity" and is faking imbecility) but A. Square fails to get the Monarch to comprehend the nature of Flatland. He even tries to show himself moving through Lineland but the Monarch only sees this as a conjuring trick. As such, A. Square yells at the Monarch and is attacked by every citizen of Lineland before waking up in his bed.

Chapter 15: Concerning a Stranger from Spaceland[]

The next day, A. Square tries to teach his son principles of Flatland geometry but gets angered after his grandson suggests the existence of a third dimension. After A. Square shoes his grandson out of the room, a mysterious voice sounds seemingly from nothing.

Chapter 16: How the Stranger vainly endeavoured to reveal to me in words the mysteries of Spaceland[]

In a mirror of A. Square's conversation with the Monarch of Lineland, the figure from the third dimension (a Sphere) tries to demonstrate the existence of a third dimension. Due to A. Square's perspective, he is unable to understand the Sphere's arguments and grows angry - attacking the Sphere at the end of the conversation.

Chapter 17: How the Sphere, having in vain tried words, resorted to deeds[]

The Sphere then tries to show A. Square the existence of three dimensions through actions, but this also fails. Exasperated, the Sphere decides to drag A. Square into Spaceland.

Chapter 18: How I came to Spaceland, and what I saw there[]

From Spaceland, A. Square is able to see every corner of his own house. The Sphere and A. Square then fly through Flatland - seeing various people seeing other Spacelanders (who are trying to spread the "Gospel of Three Dimensions", something that happens every one thousand years) and the government of Flatland trying to suppress this. This leads to A. Square's brother (a clerk within the government) being imprisoned.

Chapter 19: How, though the Sphere shewed me other mysteries of Spaceland, I still desired more; and what came of it[]

Though disturbed by the sight of his brother being dragged to jail over essentially nothing, A. Square still thirsts for knowledge and tries to press the Sphere on the existence of other dimensions. The exasperated Sphere refuses to believe in them and throws A. Square back to Flatland.

Chapter 20: How the Sphere encouraged me in a Vision[]

Back in his house, A. Square decides against telling his wife about his experience. He instead goes to bed. During this slumber, he is visited in a dream by the Sphere. The duo travel to Pointland (a land of no dimensions) and encounter its only inhabitant. A. Square tries to inform the Point about the existence of other dimensions but fails.

Chapter 21: How I tried to teach the Theory of Three Dimensions to my Grandson, and with what success[]

After awaking, A. Square tries to tell his grandson about the existence of other dimensions but also fails as he is unable to put forth any understandable devices for their existence.

Chapter 22: How I then tried to diffuse the Theory of Three Dimensions by other means, and of the result[]

Though he is unable to actually prove any of his experiences, A. Square tries to write down a treatise on other dimensions. He also slowly begins to crack over time, before eventually erupting into a speech on the existence of other dimensions in public. For this, A. Square is thrown into jail. His only comfort in jail is seeing his brother occasionally (though his brother refuses to believe in other dimensions). After some time in jail (seven years, meaning that in-universe Flatland was written in 2007), A. Square writes the in-universe version of Flatland, the book.

See also[]

Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift

The Tempest by William Shakespeare

A History of Mathematics by Carl B. Boyer

An Episode of Flatland by C.H. Hinton

Sphereland by Dionijs Burger, Jr.

Flatterland by Ian Stewart

Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad

1963 series by Alan Moore

Sources[]