The Night of the Triffids is a new full cast audio drama based on Simon Clark’s 2001 novel, and adapted for audio by the author. The Night of the Triffids is the official sequel to John Wyndham’s The Day of the Triffids, first published in 1951, and is fully approved by the John Wyndham estate.

In the original The Day of the Triffids the Earth has been overwhelmed by killer plants and the majority of the world’s population have been struck blind. As the novel ends, Wyndham’s narrator scientist Bill Masen is escaping, with his wife and four-year-old son, to the Isle of Wight where a small colony of survivors is holding out. Simon Clark’s sequel picks up the story twenty-five years on... One morning Bill Masen’s son, David, now grown up, wakes to a world plunged into darkness. Now, the triffids have an advantage over humanity.

Sam Troughton (Robin Hood, Alien vs Predator) plays David Masen and is supported by a full cast with Nicola Bryant (Doctor Who) as Kerris Baedekker.

Author Simon Clark read John Wyndham’s The Day of the Triffids when he was twelve years old. He loved this brilliantly inventive Sci-Fi classic so much he searched in vain for a sequel. Many years later, he was delighted and honoured to be granted the opportunity to continue the story of those menacing walking plants in his best-selling book The Night of the Triffids, which has been translated into many different languages and won the British Fantasy Award for best novel 2002. “Writing The Night of Triffids was absolutely a labour of love,” says Simon. “Being asked to adapt my novel for the Big Finish production seemed daunting at first, but it turned out to be one of the most thrilling projects of my professional life, and gave me chance to revisit John Wyndham's Triffids, and find out just how frightening they can be.” Simon Clark’s novels include post-apocalyptic thrillers such as Blood Crazy, Stranger and On Deadly Ground (formerly King Blood), and the time travel epic The Fall.

A new paperback and ebook edition of the novel of The Night of the Triffids is due to be published by Constable & Robinson in August 2014 (www.constablerobinson.com). A new film version of the original The Day of the Triffids is currently in development with Mike Newell (Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Four Weddings and a Funeral) announced as director.

The Night of the Triffids is released in September, priced on CD for £14.99 and as an MP3 download for £12.99 - both can be pre-ordered from here.