Lacey Chabert may be best known for her role as Gretchen Wieners in Mean Girls. (You know, the one whose hair is full of secrets). But the actress has made quite the career for herself outside of the “Plastics.” Yep, we’re talking about all the Lacey Chabert Hallmark movies, and we’re breaking each one down for you.

From her first one almost ten years ago (!) to another that is being released in upcoming months—here are the 17 (yes, you read that correctly) Hallmark movies starring Lacey Chabert, from oldest to newest.

1. ‘Elevator Girl’

Original Airdate: February 13, 2010

What happens when two very different people—a successful lawyer whose career is moving fast and a free-spirited woman with a carefree approach to life—get stuck together in a broken elevator? You guessed it, instant sparks. But their separate worlds might just be too far apart for them to have a successful relationship.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

2. ‘Matchmaker Santa’

Original Airdate: November 17, 2012

Baker Melanie Hogan’s romantic holiday plans with her workaholic boyfriend don’t go according to plan when a chance meeting with a mysterious Santa strands her and her boyfriend’s best friend Dean together. As you can imagine, it’s not long before Melanie starts to see that the man of her dreams may not be her boyfriend after all. Plus she finds some Christmas spirit along the way.

Where to stream: Not currently available

3. ‘The Color of Rain’

Original Airdate: May 31, 2014

When Gina loses her husband on Christmas Day, she soon finds a kindred spirit in another parent at her kids’ school, Michael, who lost his wife at the same time. While trying to help their children work through their grief, they end up getting closer and falling in love. But some skepticism from family and friends have the new couple questioning their new relationship. Warning: This one pulls at some heart strings.

Where to stream it: Amazon Prime Video

4. ‘A Royal Christmas’

Original Airdate: November 21, 2014

Prince Leopold, heir to the throne of Cordinia, has no ambitions of marrying into royalty after falling in love with Emily Taylor, a humble seamstress from Philadelphia. Of course, marrying someone outside of royalty is a no-no according to the prince’s mother, Queen Isadora, who has other plans for her son.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

5. ‘All of My Heart’

Original Airdate: February 14, 2015

A young caterer’s life suddenly changes when she inherits a country home and learns she must share it with a career-obsessed Wall Street trader. While tensions start off high, feelings begin to change when they find themselves having to work side-by-side to restore their newly acquired home. Opposites attract, right?

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

6. ‘Family For Christmas’

Original Airdate: July 11, 2015

When a highly ambitious anchorwoman makes one wish to an office party Santa (we’re serious), she wakes up the next morning to find she is married to her college sweetheart (with two kids), and her world is turned upside down. Just a special reminder to be careful what you wish for.

Where to stream: Not currently available

7. ‘A Christmas Melody’

Original Airdate: December 18, 2015

A single mother moves back to her hometown to start a new life with her young daughter. When the young girl has a hard time adjusting, she seeks out the help of her music teacher to write a song that she will sing at the annual Christmas Variety Show. Soon enough, an unexpected relationship begins between mother and teacher. Oh, and did we mention Mariah Carey also stars?

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

8. ‘A Wish for Christmas’

Original Airdate: October 29, 2016

Sara Shaw is the type of woman who prefers to sit on the sidelines at work. But when her big idea for a Christmas initiative is stolen, she makes a wish to Santa that she’ll finally have the courage to stand up for herself. The only catch? She only has 48 hours to do so. Will Sara speak her mind before the clock runs out?

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

9. ‘Moonlight in Vermont’

Original Airdate: April 8, 2017

After fast-paced New York City real estate broker Fiona Rangely gets dumped by her boyfriend, she escapes to her family’s quaint Vermont inn for a few days to slow down and evaluate her life. But when her ex-boyfriend Nate shows up with his new girlfriend, Fiona devises a plan to win back his affection: Pretend the handsome head chef Derek is her new boyfriend. The fake relationship quickly turns into a real one. We saw that one coming.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

10. ‘All of My Heart: Inn Love’

Original Airdate: October 7, 2017

Yep, this is the sequel to the first, All of My Heart. Newly engaged Brian and Jenny's plans to open their new inn don’t go so smoothly when a surprise storm hits. With funds running low, Brian agrees to return to Wall Street, while Jenny scrambles to keep the inn opening on time. In the process, they find themselves leading separate lives and begin to feel a strain on their relationship.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

11. ‘The Sweetest Christmas’

Original Airdate: November 11, 2017

When struggling pastry chef Kylie Watson learns she’s made it to the finals of the American Gingerbread Competition, she thinks her competitive spirit has finally paid off and hopes the publicity will help her jumpstart her new café. But as these things movies go, the oven she’s supposed to use breaks down. Desperate, she reaches out to her ex-boyfriend Nick who runs his family’s pizzeria. Obviously feelings rekindle and things get complicated when Nick takes drastic steps to win her back.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

12. ‘My Secret Valentine’

Original Airdate: February 3, 2018

Chloe takes advice from the chalkboard notes that her mysterious house rental tenant leaves behind. Meanwhile when a slick sales rep arrives with plans to buy her family’s prized winery, Chloe starts to question if her secret admirer might be the same man that’s driving her crazy.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

13. ‘Love on Safari’

Original Airdate: July 28, 2018

After Kira inherits a wildlife reserve in South Africa, she travels there to meet the no-nonsense head ranger, Tom. She learns the reserve is in financial jeopardy and she might have to sell it to her uncle's competitor. But, Tom urges her to save it by taking her on a safari in hopes that she will fall in love (with the animals and him).

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

14. ‘All of My Heart: The Wedding’

Original Airdate: September 29, 2018

In the third installment, Jenny and Brian are planning their incredibly romantic wedding. Emily’s country inn is filled to capacity with family and friends when a distant relative of Emily’s arrives and she stakes a claim to the house. Of course, the couple’s relationship will be tested as the wedding day approaches and they struggle to keep the house that brought them together in the first place.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

15. ‘Pride, Prejudice, and Mistletoe’

Original Airdate: November 23, 2018

Based on the book of the same title by Melissa de la Cruz, the film follows Darcy, a woman who has always worked hard to prove herself and be successful on her own terms (aka start her own company, rather than joining the family business). When returning to her hometown for Christmas, Darcy reconnects with an old rival, restaurant owner Luke, and they are forced to plan a charity event together. We’re going to bet Darcy and Luke discover some romantic feelings for one-another.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

16. ‘Love, Romance & Chocolate’

Original Airdate: February 16, 2019

New York accountant Emma Colvin is heartbroken when her boyfriend leaves her before their planned romantic getaway to Belgium for Valentine’s Day. Convinced by a friend to go alone on the trip, Emma is introduced to renowned chocolatier Luc Simon, who is in the midst of a competition to create the most romantic chocolate in Belgium for the upcoming Belgian royal wedding. Once Emma gets involved, a budding romance develops and the trip turns out to be the adventure of a lifetime.

Where to stream: Amazon Prime Video

17. ‘Christmas in Rome’

Original Airdate: November 30, 2019

Airing this month, Chabert plays an independent-minded American tour guide named Angela, who is fired from her job in Rome just before Christmas. Ouch. She unexpectedly crosses paths with an American executive named Oliver, who wants to buy a high-end Italian ceramics company. He hires Angela to be his tour guide around the city, as the owner of the ceramics company won’t sell it to him until he learns “the heart and soul of Rome.” We’re going to take a guess and say he earns the heart and soul of Angela as well.

Where to stream: Coming soon