1. Lacey Chabert's Background

Lacey Chabert was born in Purvis, Mississippi on September 30, 1982. The well-known actress is of English, French, Italian, and Scottish ancestry.

2. Cotton Candy Voice

Lacey has been described as having a cotton candy voice. Her voice is distinctive and she was heard in many advertising jingles as well as parts in animated films and television shows such as Nickelodeon's The Wild Thornberrys. Lacey also did other commercials. Once she had an assignment advertising cough syrup.

3. Chabert's Acting Career

Lacey is a very popular actress on the Hallmark Channel, but she didn't start out there. Actually, her acting career started in 1990 when she was only eight years old.

She was a child actress with roles in well-known television shows and movies. For instance, she played Erica Kane's daughter on All My Children from 1992 to 1993. As a child actress, she gained prominence in her longest role as Claudia Salinger in the Fox television drama Party of Five where she appeared in 142 episodes from 1994 to 2000.

4. Hallmark Actress

When Lacey was coming of age, she appeared in a television movie every year. However, it was not until 2010 that she had a leading role in a Hallmark movie. Most of her fans still remember that she played the part of Liberty Taylor in Elevator Girl. In that movie that launched her Hallmark career, Lacey and a lawyer got stuck in an elevator. Sparks began to fly even though they were from different backgrounds. He was a young successful lawyer while she was a free-spirited working-class girl.

She has appeared in so many Hallmark Christmas movies that the New York Post and many other sources refer to her as the "Queen of Hallmark Christmas Movies."

5. Lacey's Hallmark Leading Men

Lacey has shown great chemistry with popular Hallmark actors in many romantic movies. Brennan Elliott has co-starred alongside Lacey in nine Crossword Mysteries. Lacey's other handsome leading men include the following:

Paul Greene

Tyler Hynes

Stephen Huszar

Sam Page

Brendan Penny

Andrew Walker

6. Lacey's Co-Stars in "The Wedding Veil Trilogy"

Lacey shared the screen with two other popular Hallmark actresses: Alison Sweeney and Autumn Reeser in The Wedding Veil Trilogy. The three friends discovered a wedding veil with a legend that the woman in possession of the veil would find love. Lacey's character was the first to get married. Autumn's character got married in the second installment, and Alison's character got married in the final installment.

7. What Lacey Loves About Hallmark

Lacey once said in an interview with E! that she loves working with Hallmark because viewers can always expect a happy ending. She explained that in the world we’re living in today it is good that the Hallmark movies add a little love and light and levity that she is very proud of.

8. Lacey's Family

Lacey married her longtime boyfriend, businessman David Nehdar, on December 22, 2013, in Los Angeles. Julia Mimi Bella Nehdar, their only child was born on September 1, 2016. Julia's name is similar to her maternal grandmother's name which is Julie. The family of three has a dog named Kitty.

9. Lacey's Other Interests

When Lacey was younger, she worked as a waiter in her sister's restaurant and thought it would be her career. However, that phase soon passed. Her fans are glad it did pass. Otherwise, they would not have gotten the chance to be entertained by her acting.

Lacey Chabert's voice is in the one you can hear in eleven video games, including at least Star Wars games: The Old Republic, The Old Republic- Rise of the Hutt Cartel, The Old Republic- Shadow of Revan, and The Old Republic- Knights of the Fallen Empire.

The actress is an avid photographer and an accomplished violist. She enjoys various activities, such as shoe shopping, cooking Cajun food, and working out.

10. Social Media Presence

Lacey and her young daughter have social media accounts, but the patriarch of the family does not.

Information About Other Hallmark Stars