EXCLUSIVE: Lacey Chabert (Mean Girls) has been tapped to star in Hot Frosty, a holiday rom-com that Jerry Ciccoritti (My Life with the Walter Boys) is directing for Netflix.

Others set to star include Dustin Milligan (Schitt’s Creek), Craig Robinson (Killing It), Joe Lo Truglio (Brooklyn 99), Katy Mixon (Mike & Molly), Lauren Holly (Dumb and Dumber) and Chrishell Stause (Selling Sunset).

Written by Russell Hainline (The Santa Summit), the film picks up with Cathy two years after losing her husband, as she magically brings a handsome snowman to life. Through his naïveté, the snowman helps Cathy to laugh, feel and love again, as the two fall for each other just in time for the holidays…and before he melts.

Joel S. Rice (Single All the Way, A Tourist’s Guide to Love) and Michael Barbuto (Never Too Late to Celebrate, Catch Me if You Claus) are producing for Muse Entertainment. Aren Prupas and Jonas Prupas are exec producers on the project, which is part of a 2024 holiday slate at the streamer also including the Lindsay Lohan starrer Our Little Secret and Meet Me Next Christmas starring Christina Milian.

Best known for her role as Gretchen Wieners in Mean Girls, Chabert has most recently been seen starring in numerous holiday films, most of them for Hallmark, including Haul Out the Holly: Lit Up and A Merry Scottish Christmas, along with the franchise The Wedding Veil. Securing her involvement in Hot Frosty was considered a coup for Netflix, sources tell us, given the actress’s cachet in the holiday space. This year, she’ll also be seen starring opposite Kristoffer Polaha in The Christmas Quest for Hallmark.

Perhaps best known for directing episodes of series like My Life with the Walter Boys and Schitt’s Creek, Ciccoritti has also helmed TV movies like Turkey Drop and Angel Falls Christmas, among many other projects.

Chabert is repped by Innovative Artists and Thruline Entertainmen; Milligan by Gersh, Red Management, and McKuin Frankel Whitehead; Robinson by UTA, 3 Arts Entertainment, and Ziffren Brittenham; Lo Truglio by 3 Arts, Andy Corren Management, and Hirsch Wallerstein Hayum; Mixon by Verve and Principal Entertainment LA; Holly by Mavrick Artists Agency, The Characters Talent Agency, and Gilbertson Entertainment; Stause by UTA; and Ciccoritti by OAZ.