Sofia

Stjepan Mesic

Age: 89 Year

Profation: Politician

Birth Place: Croatia

BirthDay Coundown:

days

hours

:

min.

:

sec.

Happy Birthday Stjepan Mesic!

Short Bio About Stjepan Mesic

There are many Politician s in the world, but there is one such name among them, whom people love a lot and his name is Stjepan Mesic, so today we are going to tell you about Stjepan Mesic, so read this post completely.

Second Commander of Croatia, fraction frum 2000 to 2010. He was particularly the last Commander of Yugoslavia ago Yugoslavia dissolved He studied law at the University off Zagreb before beast appointed a municipal judge and becoming the cardinal judge off Orahovica and a participant off the Legislature off SR Croatia

Stjepan Mesic Biography Full Biography, Wiki, Bio Real Name/Full Name Stjepan Mesic Profession Politician Famous Politician Age( in July 2024 ) 89 Years Date Of Birth/ Birthdate December 24,1934 Birthplace croatia Birth Sign Capricorn Nationality/From croatia Gender Male Height, Weight & More Height (approx.) Not Know Weight (approx.) Not Know Body Measurements (approx.) Not Know Eye Colour Not Know Hair Colour Not Know Family Info Father's Name Not Know Mother's Name Not Know Brother's Name Not Know Sister's Name Not Know Childern Not Know Spouse's Not Know Parents Not Know Income Networth & Salary Salary (approx.) Not Know Net Worth (approx.) Not Know Car Collection Update Soon Find Social Media Accounts Facebook stjepan-mesic Instagram @Stjepan Mesic Twitter #Stjepan Mesic Youtube Stjepan Mesic

Here Some Detail about Family

He wedded in 1961 & possessed 2 children

Where is the birthplace of Stjepan Mesic on Map ?

These facts which you might not know about Stjepan Mesic

Stjepan Mesic is Famous Politician From croatia.

He had formerly served as Speaker of da Croatian Parliament & Prime Minister of Croatia

Some FAQs About Stjepan Mesic

Stjepan Mesic is Populer Politician. He Was Born in croatia.

Stjepan Mesic is from croatia. He Was Born in croatia. He is Great Politician.

Capricorn is the 10th zodiac sign out of total 12 zodiac signs. According to our database Stjepan Mesic's zodiac sign is Capricorn.

Stjepan Mesic is 88 Years Old in December 2023 and Date of Birth is December 24 1934.

Stjepan Mesic's Date of Birth is December 24 1934 . Stjepan Mesic is 88 Years Old in December 2023.

See what Stjepan Mesic's trend graph is showing in Google.

Below Post Ad

Newer

Brent Stanton - Age, Height, Birthdate, Bio, Family, Networth

Older

12th Planet - Networth, Biography, Birthdate, Family