View waymark gallery

Carlisle Cathedral - Carlisle

in Cathedrals

Posted by: flipflopnick

N 54° 53.673 W 002° 56.317

30U E 503936 N 6083058

Carlisle Cathedral is in the centre of city, and is the second smallest cathedral in England, certainly in terms of length. However, there are other smaller cathedrals in Scotland.

Waymark Code: WM1JQM

Location: North West England, United Kingdom

Published By: saopaulo1

Views: 157

Situated between the city centre and the imposing castle, Carlisle Cathedral started life in 1092 as a church founded by William Rufus (builder of Carlisle Castle). In 1122 Henry I created it as an Augustinian Priory of St Mary before, 11 years later, elevating it to cathedral status, making Carlisle the only city in the modern county of Cumbria.

The building has a rather violent history, perhaps unique to any cathedral in Britain. Even before the Reformation it had been destroyed by fire (1292), with its rebuilding delayed by the Wars of Independence. In 1297 it was the location where Robert the Bruce swore allegiance to Edward I (although that wasn't the end of the wars).

After the Reformation Oliver Cromwell destroyed much of the west end, while four years later in 1645 the Scottish destroyed much of the original nave. After the Jacobite invasion of 1745, the Duke of Cumberland used it as a gaol and torture chamber for captured Jacobites.

Thankfully, since then, the cathedral has been allowed to resume its original, spiritual purpose and the latest addition, between 1999 and 2000, has been the hanging of a complete new set of 12 bells.

Look out for the beautifully restored 14th-century barrel-vaulted painted ceiling, its gold stars shining resplendently on a rich blue background, and a particularly fine east window, depicting Christ leading the saved into paradise above the damned being dragged to hell.

The cathedral has been battered by centuries of cross border warfare. Prior to being a cathedral there have been several disasters. In around 860 the church was devastated by the Danes and remained a ruin until 1090 when William Rufus arranged for its reconstruction. In 1292 a fire did a lot of damage and in the Civil War soldiers butchered the nave for fortification building material. Henry I made the church a Cathedral in 1133 and Adelulf became the first bishop. Out of the original seven bays of the Norman church's nave only two now survive. The eastern sections of the church were rebuilt in the early thirteenth century and then again starting in 1292 after a fire that started in a near-by house. The fire destroyed the wooden ceiling and the Early English columns. The columns were rebuilt in the Decorated style.

In the Cathedral grounds are the Deanery, with its 14th century Prior's Tower and fine painted 16th Century heraldic ceiling, and a gift shop, and the 'Prior's Kitchen' serving tea, coffee and hot and cold food.

The great East Window is one of the most distinctive features, and dominates the Choir and timber barrel vault. The intricate masonry was designed by Ivo de Raughton, the leading architect of decorative tracery in the North of England, who lived a few miles south of Carlisle. The upper windows are 14th Century. The lower nine lights which replace the medieval windows removed at the time of the Civil War, are by John Hardman of Birmingham. They date from 1861, and represent scenes from the life of Christ. Several other windows are also by Hardman, including the West window, and the North window in St Wilfred's Chapel.

Many other things in the Cathedral are well worth studying, all described in a colour guide booklet, particularly the Bishop's Throne by George Street (1880).

Opposite the main entrance to the Cathedral is the Fratry, a monastic building dating from the 13th century, reconstructed in the late 15th century by Prior Thomas Gondibour. It now houses the Cathedral library, situated in the undercroft is the Prior's Kitchen Restaurant. In the range of buildings beyond the Fratry, which includes the Deanery, can be found the Prior's Tower, dating from the 13th century.

It is free to enter, although a donation is encouraged. Services are held on Sundays at 7.40am for Mattins, 8.00am for Holy Communion, 10.30am for Sung Eucharist and 3.00pm with Evensong. Weekdays have Morning Prayer at 7.40am and Holy Communion at 8.00am on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Then Eucharist at 12.30pm on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, with Evensong at 5.30pm (sung each day except Saturdays and School holidays).

Interior scrolling view on BBC site (needs JAVA) (visit link)

Address:

Carlisle Cathedral Cathedral Office 7 The Abbey Carlisle Cumbria England CA3 8TZ Religious affiliation: AnglicanDate founded or constructed: 1133 elevated to cathedral statusWeb site: [Web Link]

Visit Instructions:

1.Describe your visit, including the date, with as much detail as possible

2.Provide at least one original photograph – no need to include your GPS in the picture

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Cathedrals

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point