Hershey and Carlisle midpoint

Find things to do halfway with

Map of halfway point

Click here to show map

View a map with driving directions using your preferred map provider: Google Maps, Bing Maps, or MapQuest.

More trip calculations

Hotels near Peace Church, Pennsylvania

Driving Distance

Driving Time

Cost Of Driving

Places To Stop

Distance

Flight Time

Time Difference

Halfway between Hershey, PA and Carlisle, PA

The best city between Hershey, PA and Carlisle, PA to meet is Peace Church, Pennsylvania.

The closest zip code to the midpoint is 17001.

The exact latitude and longitude coordinates are 40째 13' 56" N and 76째 56' 41" W.

The total driving distance from Hershey, PA to Carlisle, PA is 34 miles or 55 kilometers.

Each person would then have to drive about 17 miles to meet in the middle.

It will take about 19 minutes for each driver to arrive at the meeting point.

For a flight, the straight line geographic midpoint coordinates are 40째 14' 36" N and 76째 55' 32" W.

The city at the geographic halfway point from Hershey, PA to Carlisle, PA is Camp Hill, Pennsylvania.

Peace Church, Pennsylvania

City: Peace Church

State: Pennsylvania

Country: United States

Category: cities

Hershey, Pennsylvania

City: Hershey

State: Pennsylvania

Country: United States

Category: cities

Carlisle, Pennsylvania

City: Carlisle

State: Pennsylvania

Country: United States

Category: cities

Halfway point calculator

Travelmath helps you figure out the midpoint between two locations based on the driving directions from each starting point. You can find the closest town that is an equal distance from two cities. Use this tool to determine the best city to meet, or to look for interesting stops along the way if you're planning a long road trip and you need to take a break or stay overnight. Search for hotels at the midpoint city to split up your drive, or explore other nearby cities and discover local towns on your trip. If you're meeting a friend halfway in-between, you can figure out how far each person has to drive and how long it will take to arrive at the center. Even if you're separated by water, you can still calculate the straight line geographic midpoint to determine the closest flight distance.