“ Don't worry. Chump's got ya. „ ~ Chump's catchphrase.

“ You ducks make me sick, you know that? You’re fed all day by the humans in the park, but that’s not enough for you. No, no, no. You got to come to our territory. You got to steal our food. And then you insult us?! „ ~ Chump initially on bad terms with the Mallards when they first met.

“ Chump: I didn’t think I’d ever say this, but, uh, you are one heck of a bird.

Mack: Oh. Well, thanks, Chump. You’re not so bad yourself. [Chump becomes sensitive and tearful]

Chump: Yeah, you know, I’m getting a little waterworky up here. [Chuckles] Scram, you crazy ducks. Get out of here.

Mack: Bye, Chump.

Gwen: Byebye, Chump.

Pam: Bye, Chump.

Dax: Thank you!

Pam: Thanks for everything.

Uncle Dan: So long, Chump. Don’t forget where you got that sandwich.

Chump: Byebye, you country bumpkins. I love you. „ ~ Chump happily waving goodbye to the duck family after Delroy's rescue.

Chump is a supporting character in Illumination's fourteenth feature film, Migration, and the main protagonist of its short film, Fly Hard.

She is the leader of a New York pigeon gang who initially comes into conflict with a duck family but ultimately befriends them and becomes their guide around New York to help them complete their migration to Jamaica.

She was voiced by Awkwafina, who also played Ming Fleetfoot in Jumanji: The Next Level, Katy in Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings, Rebecca in Renfield, and voiced Courtney in The Angry Birds Movie 2, Otto in The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge on the Run, Sisu in Raya and the Last Dragon, Ms. Tarantula in The Bad Guys, and Scuttle in The Little Mermaid and Zhen in Kung Fu Panda 4.

Appearance[]

Chump is a small, stocky and pot-bellied grey pigeon with a large, oversized head, huge bulging brown eyes with tiny pupils, wide and thin eyebrows, wings proportionally large in relation to its body when spread, a tuft of feathers on its head and as her main feature a right leg deformed into the shape of a kumquat without toes. She's barely as big as Gwen, a duckling.

Personality[]

“ Sorry for busting your bills over here, but, uh… [Sniffles] sometimes I get sensitive, is all. Us pigeons, we got big hearts, too. Ain’t that right, guys? „ ~ Chump's true nature.

Pugnacious, cynical and surly, Chump is openly hostile to the first person who dares to denigrate her or her species just as she hates it when people invade her territory. Choleric by nature, she is easily touchy and will raise her voice at insults and wrong words, just as she sometimes ironically confuses the pronunciation of her name with an insult. Initially, she looks down on ducks for always being pampered by humans. She can also be a bit dishonest when it comes to sharing, having initially demanded eighty percent of a sandwich instead of half.

Beneath her nonchalant exterior, Chump turns out to be quite sensitive and not all that vile. She quickly took a liking to the Mallards after Pam stood up to her for sandwich shares, earning her respect and friendship while becoming incredibly good-natured towards the duck family. According to her, her anti-social behavior is just a mood swing due to the hypersensitivity of pigeons. She even comes to like Mack following his altercation with the chef, never imagining that one day she would think that from a duck.

Her other personality traits include an excessive confidence that leads her to be recklessly hit by vehicles, a relaxed and cool attitude when she is at her most social, and being genuinely sensitive to compliments from others.

In terms of interaction, Chump mainly expresses herself with colloquial nicknames whether unfriendly or friendly, such as when she warmly said goodbye to the Mallards by openly saying that she loves them.

Biography[]

Past[]

To be added...

Migration[]

Chump first appears in the shadows under a bridge, while Mack has just yelled "Trashy, trahy vermin". She demands to know who said that before she shows up in person. She challenges him to say the insult again before expressing her personal disgust for the ducks and her displeasure with the family invading their territory to insult them in addition to stealing their food, such as the sandwich that Uncle Dan tried to keep it to himself. While Mack only makes the situation worse by trying to reason with Chump since she mistakes his own name for an insult, Pam manages to defuse the tension by offering to share the sandwich, only for Chump to demand 80% as part. The two female birds subsequently argue over their individual parts until Chump gives in to Pam's final demand, appreciating her tenacity. Having become friendlier towards the ducks, Chump apologizes for her outburst due to her pigeon sensitivity and offers to help them with anything. When Pam tells him about Jamaica, Chump initially mistakes it for a place in Queens until she is corrected on it. She therefore thinks about talking about it to an old friend of hers even though it is an apparently painful subject.

At the exit of Central Park, Mack is unsure about flying over the road again but Chump says it's safe as long as they stay close to her, only for her to take three buses in a row and a scooter. Fortunately not too seriously injured, she takes the ducks through Time Square as evening falls. Stopping at the restaurant building, The Ciguapi, the ducks panic at the sight of a twin-rotor helicopter stylized as a tiger but Chump assures them that they don't have to worry about that before revealing that her friend Delroy's landlord is a chef, who she describes as a predator cooking prey for lazy predators, then brings the family into the building through a ventilation shaft.

Arriving in the office where Delroy is being held in a cage, Chump quickly greets the depressed parrot who doesn't even pay attention while making brief introductions to the Mallards. After Chump is told how the Chief captured Delroy in the middle of the night years ago before taking him away from Jamaica, Dax offers to free the exotic bird by retrieving the key but Delroy dissuades him because the Chef still keeps the key on him and this psychopathic human to cook the ducks in duck à l’orange. Gwen asks what duck à l'orange is, to which Chump gives a macabre answer. Eventually, Mack sets out in an attempt to retrieve the key, followed by Pam while the others remain in the office.

As soon as Mack and Pam emerge from the kitchen with the key, the customers suddenly start a dance party, leading a worried Chump to remember that today is salsa evening at The Ciguapi. Mack and Pam are fortunately able to adapt the salsa to make their way back to the office, only to have Mack accidentally swallow the key and Chump alert the gang that a really angry chief is showing up. She has time to lock the office door while Pam tries to spit out the key. The Chef breaks down the door but the six birds have time to hide behind a pillar until Mack accidentally swallows the helium contained in Gwen's balloon and crashes right into the Chief's face, spitting the key at the same time.

Delroy finally free, the gang celebrates their victory on the roof of Ciguapi. Chump ultimately recognizes Mack's worth, so Mack friendly returns the compliment, making her noticeably flattered and in tears although she tries to hide it. The Mallards then continue on their way after saying goodbye to Chump who also ends up wishing them an equally happy goodbye, with a smile on her face.

Fly Hard[]

Chump is offended that her gang stoops to pecking at the pieces of bread that the old woman Dolores throws at them in the park, earning her a remark from Greg about her consumption of trash to which she tells him to shut up. However, Chump becomes emotional when Dolores gives her a large piece of bread which she happily eats while trying to hide the face from his gang. As the first snowflakes fall, Dolores returns home by bus but drops her gold pendant, of which only Chump notices the loss. The pigeon, always moved by the kindness of the human, decides to brave the falling snow just to tuck in her collar. Following the bus with her wings, Chump ends up hitting the windshield of a truck before hitting a trash can and loses the necklace which she tirelessly tries to retrieve between the legs of the humans before fighting over it with a dog. She then hits a billboard and the medallion falls under the subway rail, quickly forcing her to flee the subway coming towards her apparently not for the first time. The misadventure ends with Chump buried and freezing in the snow but she still manages to bring the medallion back to Dolores who, as a sign of gratitude, welcomes Chump into her home for the winter, offering her a donut to her great pleasure and welcoming the rest of the gang.

Quotes[]

Migration[]

Fly Hard[]

Gallery[]

Renders[]

Other[]

Trivia[]

"Chump" is a derogatory word synonymous with idiocy. This is further referenced when Chump reacts badly to Mack addressing her by name twice in a row, with Chump believing he is deliberately insulting her.

Chump is the second bird character to be voiced by Awkwafina, after Scuttle. Ironically, the two characters both appeared in 2023.

Ironically, Awkwafina who voices Chump is also from New York, making Chump's New Yorker accent very natural.

Navigation[]