A source at The Times Magazine, on strict condition of anonymity, tipped me weeks ago that the theme of today's issue would be Money. One article, whispered Rob Hoerburger, copy-desk head (oops! burned another source), would be about Silicon Valley's brat pack: "those who, for example, made upward of $10 million in the dot-com era but who consider that chump change."

In the grand scheme of American economic linguistics, far more significant than the profits or predations of Web-site wizards is the emergence and staying power of the phrase chump change. The alliteration that drove its predecessor phrase, chicken feed, into innocuous desuetude is a stinging attack on the arrogance of those enviable richies who supposedly use the term.

Begin with chump. In the 1864 edition of J.C. Hotten's Slang Dictionary, it was defined as "the head or face. . . . A half-idiotic or daft person is said to be off his chump." The chump then became synonymous with "fool": Senator Marcus A. Hanna, who considered "politician" to be a high calling, in 1902 derided an opponent: "I used to think he was a politician, but I don't now. He's a chump."

That sense of being a jerk, easily defeated, was accentuated by its contrast with the similar-sounding champ. But by 1930, in his Dictionary of the Underworld, Eric Partridge detected a sinister connotation in the verb form of chump, meaning "to hoodwink": "Every once in a while I chump a guy for some real dough." That meaning was taken up in the world of prostitution, married to "trivial amount," and in 1967, Robert Beck wrote in "Pimp" that in the 1940's "Western whores were lazy and satisfied with making 'chump change."' The novelist George Cain wrote in the 1970 "Blueschild Baby," "The toughs stand at the entrances . . . jingling chump change in their pockets." James Ellroy had his fictional villain in 1988 "only making chump change gigging on Central Avenue."

Now the phrase is used 24/7 (a numeric locution that has temporarily replaced the nondigital round the clock as well as the slangily natural allatime). It is most frequently used to describe a huge number that pales in comparison with an even bigger number: "An extra $11 billion in the highway bill may seem like chump change to most of the Senate," grumbles The San Antonio Express. Or, as my source uses the phrase, it's what dot-com dukes think of as a measly $10 million.

Relatedly. . . .

NOMICSNOMICS

I had a hand, as a White House speechwriter back in 1969, in popularizing the word Nixonomics. It seemed like a nice encapsulation of a philosophy of a "full-employment budget" but soon became a handy phrase that liberals could use to castigate stagflation and conservatives to hoot at wage and price controls.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.