It’s been almost 40 years since the reggae legend Bob Marley died, but his music continues to live within us. In 1963, Bob Marley and his friends formed one of the most renowned and popular reggae groups known to this day, The Wailing Wailers. Most of the group members died after Bob Marley’s death in 1981, leaving only Bunny Wailer and Beverly Kelso. Bob Marley sang truth through his music, and he spoke about the political and social problems in society then--problems that we are still faced with today--which is why one still resonates with his music. He tells us that we are not alone, and we are all one.

The purpose of this article is to shine a light on the wonderful works of such soulful and deeply connected artists, and to breakdown what each song dignifies and why it is celebrated today in different parts of the world.

1. Burnin’ And Lootin’

This song is one of my all-time favorites. This was the opening song in the French movie La Haine, directed by Mathieu Kassovitz, which explores the hatred, racism, and discrimination in a lower-class Paris society. This song talks about how Bob Marley wakes up in a curfew and finds out he's been imprisoned with his fellow friends. He is surrounded with faces he could not recognize, “all dressed in uniforms of brutality.” Bob Marley’s choice of words here is no mistake or coincidence, but simply emphasizing the abuse of power used by the police.

He then goes on to sing, “How many rivers do we have to cross before we can talk to the boss?” which speaks to what African Americans had to endure during the shipments of slavery and how long it took for them before they could be free. The boss he is referring to is not a human being, but freedom. This is what he does--he takes our struggles, our past, his soul, and he delivers art. The chorus of this song goes on to talk about how we are going to be “Burnin’ and a-looting Tonight, burnin’ all pollution tonight, burnin’ all illusion tonight.” Bob Marley agreed with protesting, standing for what is right, and also looting, but it meant more to him than just “burnin and looting.” It meant the burning of racism, discrimination, and brutality--that pollution. He meant burnin’ the illusion that black people are a threat to society and mankind.

2. Jammin’

This is the kind of song you just never want to stop dancing to. I always envision myself on stage as one of Bob Marley’s female Singers in a bar--him playing his guitar while everyone starts to do a choreographed dance that wasn’t planned--like in the musicals. And we all start “jammin.”

It's amazing how the soft melodic tunes give you such energy and thrill. You feel the excitement of each lyric in your bones. This song takes you to a good time in your life, or even makes you imagine one. I love how this song gives us that sense of community and shows us how comforting and beautiful it is to rejoice together as one.

3. No woman, no cry

This was Marley’s first hit when he sang it live at the Lyceum Theatre in London. Really, how cool is that? The first time I heard this song, I was on my bed doing some homework. It came on, I took a moment to listen, and I almost started crying. I know, I cried when the song says, “No woman, no cry”--it’s ironic. I felt as if I was being consoled and comforted by Marley himself. The lyrics of this song were originally written by Vincent Ford who helped Marley when he was very poor and owned a soup kitchen in Kingston. This song looks like it reflects on a personal experience of Marley’s; according to Rolling Stone magazine, the “Government yard in Trench Town” refers to the Jamaican public-sector housing where Marley lived in the late ‘50s. In this song he is reassuring a woman that everything will be okay and trying to remind her of the good times, as he says, “o little darlin’, don’t shed no tears; no woman no cry.” I guess this is why I was so emotional towards this song. It reassured me that everything will be alright and still does.

4. Is This Love?

We can’t deny the fact Marley is a lady’s man and knows the way to a lady’s heart. I mean, this song is so romantic and charming. He questions if what he's feeling for this woman is love, then goes on to sing, “I want to love you and treat you right. I want to love you, every day and every night. We’ll be together, with a roof right over our heads. We’ll share the shelter of my single bed. We’ll share the same room.” I think that is the most beautiful lyricism, which has the purest intent. This is the song I would love to be played on my wedding day--dancing with my significant other, asking myself, is this love? One of Bob Marley’s inspiring quotes about love is, “Live the life you love. Love the life you live.” And “Don’t expect more than she can give. Smile when she makes you happy, let her know when she makes you mad, and miss her when she’s not there.” I mean, wow. Just wow.

5. Concrete Jungle

The concrete jungle has such a beautiful mix of instruments, voices, and melodies. With its beautiful, yet sad and harmonious tunes, this song tells us a lot about Bob Marley’s past and where he came from. According to the Rolling Stone magazine, the title is a colloquialism used to describe Trench Town’s Arnett Gardens housing project (which was built from cheap concrete rather than bricks). In this song, Bob Marley says “Darkness has covered my light and the stage my day into night. Now, where is this love to be found” The concrete jungle was not a very accessible place and had very small apartments; residents usually complained about basic resources like running water, and there was even horrific gang warfare that made the project so unsafe. This explains Marley’s choice of words in describing the concrete jungle. Marley does not shy away from his past but acknowledges it and embraces it. This song was perfectly composed by not only Bob Marley, but the fantastic group of artists and musicians who supported him--from the drums to the guitar, to the bass chords which align so well to make such exquisite and truthful music.

6. Redemption Song

In times like these, as the face of oppression and racism still lies in our world, we need something to hold onto. Faith for a better world--a better world for our children. This song is very heartfelt. It takes you through the past, the struggles, and the sufferings of our ancestors. Bob Marley talks about how we should emancipate ourselves from mental slavery, and how nobody but ourselves can free our minds. The message of that statement is much needed in today’s society concerning the Black Lives Matter movement. Now is when we should question the systems that have been ingrained in our culture and how they affect us in our daily lives. Marley does not only speak for his generation, but future generations as well. This song wasn’t Bob Marley’s usual style, like his funky beats and groovy tunes. Instead this has a more mellow and acoustic rhythm. This was Bob Marley’s last song before he died, and it summed up everything he stood for in his life and his beliefs.

7. Get Up, Stand Up

This is the most empowering song ever made in the history of human rights. Bob Marley tells us how we should stand for what is right, and what is our right in this very strong and vibrant song. There is always a political message in his music that tries to educate and inform us about the world that we live in. Jamaica then was known for its oppression and rebellion against colonizers. Marley grew up trying to fight the unfair system that was created for him and his people--this was one of the influences Bob had in his music. He sings his solution to an unjust system, which is to get up, and stand up. This song is a song that drives you in every way possible to speak out against injustice and partial treatment in a system of government or community. This is one of the Wailer's most remarkable works, still known to this day.

8.) I Shot the Sheriff

Apart from its catchy tunes and playful rhythm, “I Shot the Sheriff” is one of Bob Marley’s best songs that blew up, due to Eric Clapton’s cover. His version was a number one hit in the US. Clapton’s cover boosted Bob Marley’s career and introduced Marley to an entirely different audience. As political as this song sounded when I first heard it, it turns out there was no actual political intent. I did some research, and I found out the song is actually about Bob Marley’s ex-girlfriend, Esther Anderson. According to Rolling Stone magazine “Marley wrote the song after discovering she was on birth control--he considered the pills sinful, and the doctor who prescribed the pills was the ‘sheriff.’” She claimed she helped Bob Marley write the song. This song takes you on a journey about a man who shoots a sheriff who is abusing him, but he is accused of killing the deputy.

9.) Them Belly Full (But We Hungry)

I recently started listening to this song, and it is so captivating. It’s the beat of the drums, the female singers, and how raw Bob Marley’s voice is that draws my attention. According to Rolling Stone, Bob Marley gave Carlton Barret (the drummer) co-writing credit for the song. My favorite part of the song is when Bob Marley sings, “We're gonna dance to Jah music, dance… Forget your sorrows and dance… Forget your troubles and dance.” This song’s primal message is to dance in the face of hard times, which is also part of what Bob Marley represented. I love this song, not only because of its message, but the way it seems the instruments are also singing the song, and how much it blends with Bob Marley’s voice.

10. Roots, Rock, Reggae

The song's groovy tunes catch you off guard and just blow you away. I love how the voices of Bob Marley, Rita Marley, Judy Mowatt, and Marcia Griffiths come together and form such beautiful and mellow harmony at the start of the song. Bob Marley compliments his style of music, reggae, in this song, as he says, “hey there Mr. music you sure sound good to me.” He takes pride in this genre of music and requests that it should be played for “all his people to see.” This song is full of confidence and love for his roots. He also adds a few Rock elements to this song, like a roiling rock guitar and smooth pop saxophone. This song was on one of his most known albums, Rastaman Vibration, which also consists of his other known songs like Positive Vibration, Crazy Baldhead, and War.

Bob Marley is such a big influence in my life. He has shown me a whole new side to music--one I never thought existed. The same goes for the talented group of artists who contributed so much to his music, with the beautiful melodies and instruments that make it so mellifluous. His music has brought so much pleasure to my soul, especially during times like these when things aren’t exactly great with the world and even with ourselves. The ten songs that I’ve listed here may not all be his most streamed or talked about songs, but they are simply my favorites. There are somany more like Bad Card, Rat Race, Punky Reggae Party, Easy Skanking, etc. All are extremely lovely and quite meaningful. I am forever grateful to have the opportunity and privilege of hearing and connecting to such soulful, inspirational, truthful, and passionate music.