You would think that the high-profile Japanese-American actors Sessue Hayakawa and Tsuru Aoki would have been obvious casting choices in an American movie set in Japan... but then again, this came out of the U.S. in the same year as Birth of a Nation, and so we get Mary Pickford as “Cho-Cho San” in yellowface. Great. From the stilted English in the intertitles to the childish scrawl of Cho-Cho’s letters to her American lover, to Adelaide’s literal talking down to Cho-Cho like a petulant child, it’s just really hard to get through this without rolling your eyes over and over again. Not to mention the fact that Pinkerton is just an ass, like, we’re supposed to sympathize with him, but he’s…

Oh, 1915, the same year that The Birth of a Nation was released. It should come as no shock that the most well-known, respected and sought after actress of the '1910s silent era, Mary Pickford would have first dibs and be cast in the leading role of Madame Butterfly. Just for those who may not know, Mary Pickford is a Canadian-American actress. She's also very white. Here she plays a young Japanese woman named Cho-Cho San. So, with that information, you know what you're in for...

Mary Pickford donning yellowface. She is vying for the affections of an American naval officer. A bloke who wants to marry a young Japanese woman, but also goes and marries his American wife back…

Cho-Cho-San (Mary Pickford) goes against a fortune tellers warning and marries an American naval officer (Marshall Neilan) but soon disaster strikes

Director Sidney Olcott brings MADAME BUTTERFLY to the screen and he was given American's Sweetheart as well as a decent budget but sadly the end result is somewhat of a letdown. At just 61-minutes the film moves by quickly but there are just a few too many issues.

One such issue is that Neilan is rather forgettable in his role as the Naval officer. I can't help but think of several other actors who would have been much better in the part. Neilsan isn't awful, by any stretch of the imagination, but at the same time he just doesn't…