Alyson Rae Stoner (born August 11, 1993) is an American actor, dancer, singer and model. Stoner is best known for their roles in The Suite Life of Zack & Cody (as Max), Cheaper by the Dozen, Cheaper by the Dozen 2 (as Sarah Baker), Mike's Super Short Show (as Sally), Step Up (as Camille Gage), Alice Upside Down (as Alice) and Camp Rock (as Caitlyn Gellar).

They have been a background dancer for several stars, such as Missy Elliott, Eminem, Outkast and Will Smith. They are also known for their voice as Isabella in the Disney Channel series Phineas and Ferb, and The Alyson Stoner Project, which was released on DVD in February 2009.

Personal life[]

While growing up, attending Maumee Valley Country Day School, they studied Ballet, Tap Dance, Jazz Dance, at the O'Connell's Dance Studio in their hometown, Toledo, Ohio. They also modeled and trained at the Margaret O'Brien Modeling Studio there. They won best model of the year at the IMTA Convention in New York City with Ms. O'Brien's studio in 2000, and they won many awards in acting and dance. After this, Alyson decided to try hip-hop dancing, including appearing in the Missy Elliot music video for Gossip Folks.

In March 2018, Stoner came out in an article on Teen Vogue, stating they were "attracted to men, women, and people who identify in other ways." Later that year they stated in an interview "I don't feel comfortable labeling my sexual orientation or even faith at the moment." In June 2023, Stoner stated that they use they/them pronouns and they had been fired from a television show after coming out as queer.

Stoner has been open about their struggles with mental health and disordered eating. According to Stoner, they first developed anxiety at age six due to the high-stress environment of working in the entertainment industry with symptoms including heart palpitations, hair loss, and seizures. In 2011, at age 17, they were hospitalized and checked themselves into rehab facility for eating disorders, having struggled with anorexia, bulimia, and binge eating disorder for years. They credit therapy for assisting in their recovery.

Career[]

Dancing[]

After choreography training in Los Angeles, Stoner famously appeared as a background dancer in the music video for Missy Elliott's "Work It", "Gossip Folks", and "I'm Really Hot" and as well as Eminem's "Just Lose It" alongside a one male and "No Tengo Dinero" by the Kumbia Kings. They have also been a back-up dancer for Will Smith at the 2005 Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards, and for OutKast at the 2004 Kid's Choice Awards. Stoner danced with a dancing group called the JammXKids between 2003 and 2006. They quit the group in early 2006 due to scheduling conflicts, but continues to work with the individual kids in different jobs. They were also one of the dancers in the special features for the Shark Tale DVD. Stoner teaches hip hop currently at millennium dance complex, and is credited as the youngest person to teach a master class there.

Film[]

In 2002, Stoner became the co-host of the Disney Channel's Mike's Super Short Show along with Michael Alan Johnson, an infomercial segment regarding forthcoming Walt Disney Pictures releases.

In 2003 and 2005, they appeared as Sarah, one of the twelve Baker children, in the successful comedies Cheaper by the Dozen and Cheaper by the Dozen 2. They have also appeared in several television shows aimed at the preteen market, including The Suite Life of Zack and Cody, That's So Raven and Drake & Josh.

In 2006, they had a small film role in Step Up as Channing Tatum's younger sister. They currently provides the voice of Isabella in the Disney Channel animated series Phineas and Ferb, it was Stoner that came up with their character's catchphrase "Whatcha doin'?"

In 2007, they starred in the hit Nickelodeon movie "The Naked Brothers Band" as a huge fan of the band that hangs out with them everyday in the studio.

In 2008, they starred in the Disney Channel Original movie Camp Rock as Caitlyn Gellar, an aspiring music producer. Their reception in Camp Rock was particularly strong, with various media outlets suggesting it was about time they played a main character role, having backed up for other big names such as Will Smith and Hannah Montana.[1]

Recently, Stoner starred as Alice McKinley in the movie Alice Upside Down, based loosely on the Alice series, particularly The Agony of Alice, by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor. This was their second starring role, and, according to an interview that appears on the direct-to-DVD release, they states that this was the first time they have had to appear in every scene in a movie.

They also played the new voice of Malani from Star Wars: Ewoks in Walt Disney Pictures's traditional animated film version of Star Tours.

Stoner has recently finished filming the third Step Up flim; Step Up 3-D, the first dance movie to be shown in 3D. Alyson self confimed Adam Sevani will star. Stoner will reprise the role of Camille Gage, Tylers younger sister. Stoner has recently uploaded a video onto their official YouTube page of their final dance rehearsal, which introduces other/potential cast members. It will be released at the cinemas in 2010.[2]

Music[]

Music has been one of Stoner's long-time passions.

In 2004, Alyson appeared in rap singer; Eminem's Music Video for Just Lose It, one of his leading singles. In 2005, they recorded a cover version of the song. In 2005, they sang two songs from the soundtrack of the movie "Alice Upside Down" Lost and Found, and Free Spirit, in which they played the lead role.

They have also recorded a cover version of the song Dancing in the Moonlight for the 2009 Disney DVD/Blu-Ray movie, Space Buddies.[3]

Stoner is currently working with record producers, songwriters and a vocal coach in order to focus on transitioning their style of voice, from "kiddie-pop" into a more soulful pop vibe with a little alternative edge, so they can start working on their first studio album.[4]

They recently released their first EP called "Beat the System" which contained 4 songs and a bonus song.

Publishing[]

Stoner is the "dance editor" for KEWL Magazine. They also recently hosted a global fan summit on Amazon.com with Hannah Montana star Miley Cyrus. Stoner appeared in the Disney Channel Original Movie Camp Rock, along with the Jonas Brothers.

They starred in a webseries called Ghost Town shown on Dailymotion's newly launched DM Kids site.[5]

In February 2009, Stoner released the Alyson Stoner Project they described as "a dance video hybrid - melding many styles of entertainment into one package".[6]

It was directed by Kevin Schmidt, their co-star from Cheaper by the Dozen.[6] Behind the scenes videos and pics are available at their YouTube[7] and MySpace accounts.[8]

In the summer of 2008, they appeared in the Disney Channel Games as a member of the Blue Lightning Team along with the Kiely Williams, Demi Lovato, Roshon Fegan, their Camp Rock castmates, Shin Koyamada, Cole Sprouse and several overseas Disney Channel actors.

Stoner has also appeared in Wii Fit related videos on the Nintendo Channel on the Wii video game console demonstrating how to do balance exercises.

They voiced the character Kairi for the video game Kingdom Hearts Re:Chain of Memories, and Xion in Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days.

Filmography[]

Film[]

Year Title Role Notes 2003 Cheaper by the Dozen Sarah Baker Worldwide Gross: $190,212,113 2004 Garfield Kid Rat (Voice) Worldwide Gross: $198,964,901 2005 Cheaper by the Dozen 2 Sarah Baker Worldwide Gross: $82,570,000 2006 Step Up Camille Gage Wordwide Gross: $114,194,847 2008 Alice Upside Down Alice Straight-to-DVD Camp Rock Caitlyn Gellar Disney Channel Original Movie 2010 Step Up 3-D

[9]

Camille Gage Theatrical movie Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam Caitlyn Gellar Disney Channel Original Movie Kung Fu Magoo Lorelei Tan Gu in production 2014 Step Up: All In Camille Gage Theatrical movie 2020 Phineas and Ferb The Movie: Candace Against the Universe Isabella (voice) Disney+ original movie

Television[]

Year Title Role Notes 2002-06 Mike's Super Short Show Sally Main character (25 episodes) 2004 Drake & Josh Wendy Guest star I'm with Her Dylan Cassidy "The Kid Stays in the Picture" 2005 The Suite Life of Zack & Cody Max Recurring 2005-2007 (6 episodes) That's So Raven Ally Parker "Goin' Hollywood" Lilo & Stitch: The Series Victoria (voice) "Snooty: Experiment#277" 2006 W.I.T.C.H. Lilian Voice only (4 episodes) Joey Kaley "Joey and the Critic" 2007 The Naked Brothers Band Self Main role 2007-2015 Phineas and Ferb Isabella (voice) "Jenny" (voice) Main role 2008 Disney Channel Games Self Blue team 2012; 2019-present Young Justice Barbara Gordon Season 2 and Outsiders 2016-2019 Milo Murphy's Law Lydia, Kris Recurring role 2019-present The Loud House Sam Sharp (voice) Season 3-present 2019 2019 MTV Video Music Awards Self Dancer for Missy Elliot's performance 2022-present Hamster & Gretel Lauren / The Destructress Recurring role

Music[]

Year Title Notes 2005 "Baby It's You" covered of JoJo song 2008 "Lost & Found" Alice Upside Down OST "Free Spirit" "We Rock" Camp Rock "Our Time Is Here" S'Winter Phineas And Ferb "In The Mall" 2009 "Dancin' in the Moonlight" Space Buddies OST "How About Today" Phineas and Ferb "Fly Away Home" Tinker Bell and the Lost Treasure 2014 "Maps" dance cover of Maroon 5 song, with MAX

Video games[]

Year Title Role Notes 2008 Kingdom Hearts Re:Chain of Memories Kairi 2009 Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days Xion, Kairi

Television appearances[]

Stoner has appeared on such shows as The Ellen DeGeneres Show, The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Saturday Night Live, The Maury Povich Show, American Music Awards, Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, NAACP Image Awards, Dance Dance Revolution, The Bonnie Hunt Show and the Disney Channel Games.

Gallery[]

References[]

[]

Official Website

Official Alyson Stoner Project Site

Alyson Stoner at TV.com