Disney Star Alyson Stoner, of “Camp Rock,” “Cheaper By The Dozen,” “Phineas & Ferb,” and “The Suite Life of Zack & Cody,” has a new project to share with us – aptly entitled “The Alyson Stoner Project,” an original dance instructional musical fitness revolution available now on DVD. To share her talents and her new DVD release with her fans, Alyson will be teaching a special dance class on Saturday, December 5, 2009 from 4:30 – 5:30 at Dance Dimensions in Woodland Hills, CA.She will sign autographs after class for one hour. Cost of the class is $25 and all children ages 7-12 are welcome.

While you may know her best as a young actress, Alyson grew up in Ohio studying Ballet, Tap and Jazz. She won multiple awards in dance, acting and modeling and moved to Los Angeles where she studied Hip Hop with Wade Robson. Alyson has danced in videos and on TV, and has acted for Disney since she was 9 years old.

To reserve a space and pay for this class by phone call Dance Dimensions TODAY at: (818) 999-DANCE (3262)

More About Alyson:

Alyson Stoner was born in Toledo, OH on August 11, 1993. Besides starting pre-school at Maumee Valley Country Day School at age 3, her “career” in dance also started at age 3 at the O’Connell Dance Studios in Toledo where she was trained in tap, jazz and ballet. At age 6, she and older sister, Correy, decided to take modeling and began classes at the former Margaret O’Brien Modeling Studio in Toledo. It was there that the future opportunities of an acting career became apparent. Ms. O’Brien took Alyson to the International Modeling and Talent Association’s New York Convention where she competed in many talent competitions. She took home honors in seven categories including First Place for a Comedic role, Second Place in Dance (as a 6 year old in the 8 to 12 year old category!) and First Runner Up, Actress of the Year.

Off to Los Angeles her family went to interview agents and managers. Shortly after these meetings, it was obvious that she was very enthused about being a performer through acting and dance and during the initial short stay, Alyson auditioned for every type of TV, Commercial, Print, Dance and Movie role available for that age. She found success early on and now has many credits to her name.

For the first few years in L.A., Alyson trained for the more popular Hip Hop style of dance with well-known choreographers Wade Robson, Fatima, Hi Hat, Dave Scott, Shane Sparks and Dante to name a few. It then came as no surprise when she auditioned and was cast to dance in the Missy Elliott “Work It” video which won top honors for Missy Elliott at the Video Music Awards. She went on to perform in two other Missy videos: “Gossip Folks” and “I’m Really Hot”. Missy continued casting Alyson as a dancer in various performances both live and taped, including the Jay Leno Show, American Music Awards, MTV’s Fashionably Loud Spring Break Concert in Miami and at Seattle’s Radio Concert. Her video career didn’t end there as she was called out by Eminem to dance in one of his videos and she was booked to dance at the Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards with both OutKast and Will Smith.

Her acting career took off soon after her move to L.A. when she booked commercials for Mattel, Hallmark-Disney and McDonald’s and then two ABC TV pilots in the same year. She was cast as “Sally” at age 8 on the popular Disney Channel’s “Mike’s Super Short Show” which ran for five years. In addition, she had a recurring role as “Max” on The Suite Life of Zack & Cody and filmed her own pilot for Disney entitled “Better Days”. She has appeared as guest starring roles on Disney’s That’s So Raven as well as Drake & Josh (for Nickelodeon).

Voiceovers have also been a steady job for Alyson with such noted ones as Lilo & Stitch, W.I.T.C.H., Pompoko and Phineas & Ferb. She has performed voicework for many TV shows and movies as well.

Alyson has filmed many TV shows as a guest star but has also booked six ABC/NBC or Disney pilots as the lead or in a leading role in her short career. She has appeared on such talk shows as The Ellen DeGeneres Show, The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Maury Povich’s World’s Most Talent Kids segment, The Sharon Osbourne Talented Kids segment as well as performed live for TV at the American Music Awards, The Kids’ Choice Awards and the NAACP Image Awards.

Her “big screen” career includes roles as “Sarah Baker” in the popular Cheaper by the Dozen and Cheaper by the Dozen 2 movies starring Steve Martin and Bonnie Hunt; as “Camille” in Step Up starring Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan; as “Alice” in Alice UpSide Down (where she also sang the title song) and as “Caitlyn” in Disney’s Camp Rock starring among others, the Jonas Brothers.

She continues to enjoy dance as a teacher of hip hop for both children and young teens and has taught master classes in Hollywood, San Diego and nearby Simi Valley. She even performed 26 stage shows with “Fame” Choreographer and Dancer Debbie Allen in “Brothers of the Knight” at age 8. And recently, Bloch Dance Apparel Corporation contracted with Alyson to design her own dance/street shoe line which is scheduled out in the Spring of 2008.

She is now studying with a voice coach and working on a recording career writing some of the music she sings and continues to be active in sports being well trained in basketball (following in sister Jaimee’s footsteps!), softball, soccer, swimming, golf and makes it a practice to work out regularly. Alyson is a very focused home-schooled student and she “dabbles” around on a few musical instruments, loves to cook and attend sporting events when the time allows.