Alyson Stoner Checked Into Rehab After “Hunger Games” Audition

She was auditioning for the film's lead role.

Alyson Stoner Wrote a Book About LGBTQIA+ Health and Wellness

"Though I’d employed my body artistically since three years old, it took many years into adulthood to realize I had agency and a voice."

Alyson Stoner Details Early Acting Trauma: "My Childhood Is Officially Gone"

“In just over a decade, the tentacles of the industry have suffocated and destroyed my family."

Hilary Duff, Alyson Stoner, and the "Cheaper By The Dozen" Cast Reunited

For a TikTok challenge, of course.

Alyson Stoner Opened Up About Experiencing Depression and Anxiety

"The magic begins when you start accepting yourself in every phase."

Alyson Stoner's New Song Is All About Feeling Grounded in Your Own Skin

"Because that’s the journey I’m on, and I know how difficult and uncomfortable and foreign that can be.”

Alyson Stoner Shares the Soulful Playlist of Her Life

From newer bops to classics from Janet Jackson.

Cole Sprouse, Demi Lovato, Alyson Stoner, and More Disney Channel Stars Had an Epic Reunion

It was at a party for Hayley Kiyoko's recently released album.

Alyson Stoner: What It Was Like to Fall in Love With a Woman

"In its purest sense, I felt awakened, more compassionate, and like my truest self."

Alyson Stoner on her Beauty Secrets, Touring with the Jonas Brothers, and Struggling with Body Issues

Singer, dancer, actress, and philanthropist--there's not much Alyson Stoner doesn't do. So we were doubly happy when the busy starlet took time out of her day to chat with us about everything from embarrassing moments to body acceptance, and why she's so excited to share her own experiences on beinggirl.com.

We Want Your Questions for Alyson Stoner!

Have a burning question for Alyson Stoner? We're holding a Twitter Q&A with the Camp Rock cutie and new BeingGirl.com host on 12/13 from 5-6pm EST and we need your questions!

Alyson Stoner Tapped as the Face of Oral-B's For Me Line

You probably know Alyson Stoner from the Missy Elliot videos she danced in as a kid or maybe more likely from her roles in Camp Rock and Camp Rock 2. But the actress is stepping out...