Alyson Stoner got her first break in Hollywood as one of the 12 kids in “Cheaper By The Dozen,” and after that 2003 film, she worked steadily in supporting roles on kid shows on Disney Channel and Nickelodeon.

But this summer, the 14-year-old actress is poised to jump to a higher level of success.

A role in “Camp Rock,” the Disney Channel’s big hit of the summer, helped make her a favorite of millions of tween and teen viewers.

The feature film “Alice Upside Down” – which played at the Newport Beach Film Festival earlier this year – arrives on DVD on Tuesday, and represents Alyson’s first lead role in a movie.

All of which suggests that Alyson should draw a big crowd when she meets with fans and signs autographs at the Build-A-Bear Workshop at Downtown Disney at 1 p.m. Saturday, July 26.

“I’ve been very, very blessed with the opportunities that have come my way since ‘Alice,’ and I think with the exposure of this movie, people saw the opportunity for me to do both comedic and dramatic roles,” she says. “So it allowed me to work outside the Disney Channel.”

The movie is based on a series of young adult novels by Newbery Award-winning author Phyllis Reynolds Naylor, and tells the story of Alice’s struggles adapting to a move to a new town a year or two after the death of her mother. The cast includes Lucas Grabeel of “High School Musical” as her brother, Luke Perry as her dad and Penny Marshall as her new teacher.

“It’s a heart-warming family film,” Alyson says of the story. “She’s trying to find the path and direction she wants to lead her life. It’s all about finding your own uniqueness that’s going to make you shine in the end.”

The appearance at Build-A-Bear Workshop connects with “Alice Upside Down” in that her character attends a birthday party set there in the film. Though Alyson says she’s long been a fan of the place in real life.

“Oh, yes!” she says when asked whether she’s made bears there in the past. “I’ve probably built around 10, but I’ve only kept three or four of them.”

The debut of “Camp Rock,” which stars the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato, also put the spotlight on Alyson, who hopes fans of her character Caitlyn in that movie will want to check her out in “Alice,” too.

“The target audience is right where ‘Camp Rock’ is, so the people who enjoyed watching the Jonas Brothers will also be able to relate to the character of Alice,” she says.

In addition to promoting “Alice,” Alyson will also appear on a panel at Comic-Con in San Diego on Sunday to talk about “Phineas and Ferb,” the Disney Channel animated series in which she voices the character of Isabella.

Drawing on her background as a professional dancer, she’s also done a Web series called “Get Fit With Alyson”; she’s developing a musical fitness video called “The Alyson Stoner Project”; and – never a dull moment – designed her own dance shoe.

It was one or two dance credits on her resume that particularly caught our eye. Sounding so sweet and innocent on the phone, we just had to ask how she came to work as a dancer in videos for potty-mouthed rappers Missy Elliot and Eminem.

“Missy and Eminem, both their personas are very hard hip-hop,” she says. “But in reality, their personalities off camera are very personable and appropriate, and they allowed me to be in the clean portions of the music, so my mom wasn’t ashamed to have me part of the project.”

All of this work, and the increasing exposure it brings, has caused her to adjust to life in the public eye, which is both exciting and intimidating at the same time, Alyson says.

“I’m such a regular kid, I don’t expect to be glorified or magnified the way I am,” says the Los Angeles resident. “It’s overwhelming in the sense that I’ve lost a lot of privacy, but it’s very rewarding when I get to share my gift with people all over the world.

“If I can use my influence to help other people make healthier choices about lifestyles, then I’m doing my job.”