On August 14th, Drake uploaded his song, "Laugh Now Cry Later" which automatically became Number 1 trending on Youtube. Overall, the song has done exceptionally well across the world and on different platforms such as Spotify, Apple Music and many others.

At the start of the music video, Drake seems to be coming out of an immensely expensive Mercedes. After that, he seems to be casually rapping as he gets out of the car and strolls into Nike Headquarters. This continues until a quarter of the way through where Lil Durk starts to rap, where he seems to be rapping at a better quality than Drake.

In my opinion, I believe that Durk seems to have a more consistent verse unlike Drake's. If you listen closely to Durk you can hear the flow of the music as he does NOT stop. On the other hand, Drake does repeatedly stop after every few lines, whether it is or not for the audience to listen to the beat or not I can not tell. But it does not work. Due to this, he starts to lose the flow and has to repeatedly start it up again, in contrary to Lil Durk. However, at the end of his verse, Durk does start to pause at some points but to match Drake.

After the verse there is some swearing dialogue then Drake starts to rap again, until he starts crying? Don't really know how to feel about that. After that Drake raps again with some dancing and then the music video ends with a photo of Drake holding a basketball. And that is the music video.

In terms of the composition there are literally no flaws I can hear. Everything seems to be in tune and as always in check. For every piece of music, there are (on average 2 parts) sometimes more, sometimes less. In this song, there are three. The first part is at the beginning until halfway through. After that, halfway till three quarters where there is a bit of dialogue. Then, music starts again playing until the end. At the end I can say, feeling completely assured, that this song could not have been made better if tried.

For the lyrics, I am quite impressed by the word choice for the song. There are many simple words used but due to the fact that rhyming comes into play they lose their simplicity and become more complex therefore, adding depth into the song and actually show the emotion rather than just the statement. However, the repeated use of the racial slur is honestly just annoying. Since many other words could have been used in order for people who are not able to say the word can still song the song out loud. I do understand once or twice but 8 times is pushing the boundaries. But then again, this is word is used many times in many rap styled genres and music. So there isn't much anyone can do about it.

The name of the song itself "Laugh Now Cry Later" has actually been used a long time ago by a rapper called Ice Cube. The genre for this was Rap and Hip Hop, similar to Drake's genre of music. O'Shea Jackson (Ice Cube's legal name) had released this as the name of his Seventh Album all the way back in June 6th 2006. Collaborations were with Snoop Dogg himself, and Lil Jon who were upcoming artists who were already well-known. Similar to the story of how Drake has collaborated with Lil Durk a well-known but also upcoming star.