Just a few weeks after unloading their new joint album, The Voice of the Heroes, Lil Baby has announced plans to hit the road with Lil Durk.

On Monday (June 21), Lil Baby announced The Back Outside Tour, a 23-date tour that will see Durkio appear as the special guest. The trek is all set to begin on Sept. 1 before ending on Oct. 15. With sizable solo catalogs and the chance to perform tracks from their new joint album, the Lil Baby and Lil Durk tour should be exactly what their fans were looking for.

The Back Outside Tour seems like an extra-appropriate tour on a variety of fronts. On one level, Lil Baby has seen his stock shoot through the roof over the last year-and-a-half, with his guest verses being highly sought after and his solo drops being special events for fans everywhere. His most recent album, My Turn, debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 albums chart when it was released in February 2020.

Meanwhile, Durkio has seen a massive career resurgence. His most recent solo album, The Voice, has been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Meanwhile, his 2020 guest appearance on Drake’s “Laugh Now Cry Later” earned him the No. 5 spot on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, giving him his highest chart appearance to date.

On another level, of course, the tour feels welcomed because, after months of being held captive by the COVID-19 pandemic, fans can finally go outside and enjoy live events like plays, sports and…concerts like the ones Lil Baby and Durk will be putting up this coming fall. With all that in mind, it’s hard to think of a more spot-on title. See the tour dates for yourself below:

Lil Baby’s The Back Outside Tour With Lil Durk

Wed, Sept. 01 – Mansfield, Mass. – Xfinity Center

Fri Sept. 03 – Hartford, Conn. – XFINITY Theatre

Fri Sept. 10 – Raleigh, N.C. – Coastal Credit Union Music Park at Walnut Creek

Sat Sept. 11 – Charlotte, N.C. – PNC Music Pavilion

Tue Sept. 14 – New Orleans, La. – Smoothie King Center

Wed Sept. 15 – Dallas, Texas – Dos Equis Pavilion

Thu Sept. 16 – Houston, Texas – Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion

Fri Sept. 17 – Austin, Texas – Germania Insurance Amphitheater

Mon Sept. 20 – Albuquerque, N.M. – Isleta Amphitheater

Wed Sept. 22 – Phoenix, Ariz. – Ak-Chin Pavilion

Thu Sept. 23 – Anaheim, Calif. – Honda Center

Fri Sept. 24 – Los Angeles, Calif. – STAPLES Center

Sat Sept. 25 – Oakland, Calif. – Oakland Arena

Mon Sept. 27 – Salt Lake City, Utah – USANA Amphitheatre

Tue Sept. 28 – Denver, Colo. – Ball Arena

Thu Sept. 30 – Maryland Heights, Mo. – Hollywood Casino Amphitheatre

Mon Oct.. 04 – Cincinnati, Ohio – Heritage Bank Arena

Wed Oct.. 06 – Newark, N.J. – Prudential Center

Thu Oct.. 07 – Brooklyn, N.Y. – Barclays Center

Sat Oct. 09 – Burgettstown, Pa. – The Pavilion at Star Lake

Sun Oct. 10 – Louisville, Ky. – KFC Yum! Center

Thu Oct. 14 – Tampa, Fla. – MIDFLORIDA Credit Union Amphitheatre

Fri Oct. 15 – West Palm Beach, Fla. – iTHINK Financial Amphitheatre