We publish data collected through our vehicular traffic data monitoring program, in which we collect and maintain data on the state route system from a network of permanent and short-duration traffic counters. Data includes hourly or sub-hourly vehicle volume, classification, speed and weight data, which is used to produce annualized statistics and reports.

Data reporting applications

Directional and combined-direction summary statistics for our network of permanent and short-duration count locations are available through our Traffic Data Reporting System. This application also includes more granular (daily, hourly, 15-minute) count data collected at each permanent location, as well as recently collected granular data at many short count locations. For assistance with this application, including accessing and extracting data, please see our Help and User’s Guide (PDF 1.10MB).

Alternate reporting systems

Combined-direction summary statistics in tabular format for all count locations and years is available through ourHistorical AADT and Truck percentage dataset (XLSX 12MB).

Recent years’ combined-direction summary statistics, as well as extrapolations of that information to the full roadway network, are available in GIS format through our Geospatial Open Data Portal.

Short-duration count granular data for 2021 and prior years can be accessed using our Electronic Content Management system through the SecureAccess Washington portal. To set up access, contact our count processing team at TDGMOShortCountECMHelp@wsdot.wa.gov.

Annual Traffic Report

The Annual Traffic Report summarized traffic data maintained by the Washington State Department of Transportation for the state highway system, but as of 2017 is no longer published. Point-specific traffic volume data is now available through the data reporting application and datasets listed above. Vehicle Miles of Travel data is available on our Annual mileage and travel information page. Select publications of the Annual Traffic Report are available electronically through the State Library and State Archives websites. Reports for other years are available in hard copy through the Archives. Please contact the State Archives to access these reports.

Traffic data requests