Go West: Farhad Moshiri

Farhad Moshiri: Go West was produced to accompany the 2017 exhibition of the same name. Moshiri’s richly embellished paintings and sculptures explore the intersection of eastern and western popular culture, the tension between traditional craft and contemporary art practice, and the malleable nature of identity. The volume includes essays by contemporary art history scholars and is illustrated with full-color images of pieces in the exhibition as well as documentary photographs of the artist at work.

Mitra M. Abbaspour, Shiva Balaghi, and Jose Diaz

Limited edition hardcover (four versions), 132 pages, 68 illustrations

The Andy Warhol Museum, 2017

$39.95

Buy Now

Moshiri’s interest in Pop art and kitsch resonates throughout his work. Many of his visuals are pulled from cartoons, films, comic strips, children’s books, and advertisements, while phrases appropriated from classical poetry, soap operas, and pop songs blur the lines between art and cliché. By selecting ambiguous source images that reference both American and Iranian popular culture, Moshiri takes a complex look at how we define our own cultural identity.

In his work, Moshiri often transforms mundane materials such as plastic pearls, glass beads, acrylic paint, crystals, knives, and machine-made Persian rugs into intricate, laborious works of art. These materials function as a response to contemporary Iranian society—where name brands are highly valued and often imitated by local entrepreneurs—and are also familiar to most Western viewers.

Moshiri mines his own culture for inspiration and subject matter. He incorporates motifs, images, and stories drawn from Iranian culture, nodding to forms such as Persian rugs, ancient pottery, and classical poetry. The artist often adopts traditional artistic practices, at times even outsourcing the production of his work; for example, he has enlisted skilled female workers previously employed in Tehran’s wedding garment to assist in creating labor-intensive embroidered works.