Salma Hayek's 2014 movie "The Septembers Of Shiraz" recently cast Adrien Brody according to Deadline. "The Septembers of Shiraz" will start shooting June 9. The film will be directed by Wayne Blair (The Sapphires) and is based on the New York Times bestseller by Dalia Sofer.

Author Delia Sofer was 10 years old when her family fled Iran during its uprising. The movie is based on the true story of a secular Jewish family caught in the Islamic revolution in Iran, and their journey to escape from the dangerous tyranny that sweeps their country and threatened to destroy their lives at every turn.

Salma Hayek will play an imprisoned gem dealer's wife in "The Septembers Of Shiraz." The other major players in Shiraz are Hayek's jailed husband, daughter, and United States-situated son, and Hayek's attempt to flee the war-torn nation with her daughter and husband.

"The Septembers Of Shiraz" is produced by Gerard Butler, Alan Siegel, and Heidi Jo Markel.

Salma Hayek also recently joined the cast of "A Three Dog Life" with John Travolta according to Movieweb. A Three Dog Life will be based on the best-selling memoir by Abigail Thomas. The film is written and will be directed by Nick Guthe (Mini's First Time), who also produces.

Abigail Thomas' (Hayek) husband, Rich (Travolta), gets in a tragic car accident which leaves him with no memory of his past life. Rich finds himself subject to hallucinations, rage and terror and is forced to live in an isolated institution. To be close to her husband, Abigail reinvents her life and moves from New York City to the small country town.

Salma Hayek's movie "Khalil Gibran's The Prophet" has been set as an Official Selection work-in-progress screening at the Cannes Film Festival according to Variety.

The screening of the animated film will feature highlights from the film and be presented by producer Salma Hayek-Pinault and director Roger Allers ("The Lion King").

The story portrays the unlikely friendship between a young mischievous girl and an imprisoned poet.

"Khalil Gibran's The Prophet" the animated film also features the voices of Salma Hayek, Liam Neeson, John Krasinski, Frank Langella, Alfred Molina and Quvenzhane Wallis. Producers are Hayek-Pinault, Clark Peterson, Jose Tamez and Ron Senkowski.