You may watch below the first official trailer of Septembers of Shiraz, the upcoming drama thriller movie directed by Wayne Blair based on a script by Hanna Weg and Dalia Sofer and starring Adrien Brody, Salma Hayak-Pinault, Shohreh Aghdashloo, Alon Aboutboul, Ariana Molkara, Jamie Ward, and Wadih Dona:

SEPTEMBERS OF SHIRAZ

Tehran, Iran, 1979.

From the international best selling book.

Based on true events.

Plot synopsis:

“The harrowing story of a secular Jewish family in Iran as they fight for their lives immediately following the 1979 revolution. Directed by Wayne Blair and featuring powerful performances by Academy Award® winner Adrien Brody, and Academy Award® nominees Salma Hayek-Pinault and Shohreh Aghdashloo, Septembers of Shiraz illustrates the impact of political upheaval on ordinary people and gives us an incisive examination of a troubled moment in history.”

There’s also a new poster, take a look below:

(Click on the poster to enlarge.)

SEPTEMBERS OF SHIRAZ

Based on true events.

Salma Hayek is a hell of a great actress, love her! But Adrien Brody kind of looks like a wimpy kid next to her… lol! Anyway, great film ahead!

The release date of the movie Septembers of Shiraz is set to June 24, 2016.

Update – A new poster:

(Click on the poster to enlarge.)

:)

Thanks to TIFF here’s a first preview clip of Septembers of Shiraz, the upcoming drama thriller movie directed by Wayne Blair based on the novel of the same name by Dalia Sofer:

Septembers of Shiraz – I’m here looking for my husband.Plot synopsis:

“A thriller based on the New York Times notable book . . . this is the story, based on true events, of a secular Jewish family caught in the Islamic revolution in Iran–and their heroic journey to overcome and ultimately escape from the deadly tyranny that swept their country and threatened to extinguish their lives at every turn.”

Actress Salma Hayek manages to look beautiful even with an ugly headscarf.

Anyway, here’s an interview with the film crew thanks to The Hollywood Reporter, it features some new footage from the film:

TIFF: ‘Septembers of Shiraz’ Star Salma Hayek Says “Humanity Is Not Not Black and White”

We also have a new batch of pictures:

(Click on a picture to enlarge.)

And a new poster:

(Click on the poster to enlarge.)

SEPTEMBERS OF SHIRAZ

Escape at any cost.

Still no official release date.

:)

A new picture of Septembers of Shiraz, the upcoming drama thriller movie starring Salma Hayek and Adrien Brody, has shown up online, take a look:

(Click on the picture to enlarge.) Plot:

“Prior to the Iranian revolution it was a place where people of all religions were allowed to flourish. This is the story of a prosperous Jewish family who abandon everything before they are consumed by the passions of revolutionaries.”

Salma Hayek still manages to look gorgeous even with a damn scarf on her beautiful head!

There’s still no official release date.

:)