Updated:

Plymouth Whalers President, General Manager and Head Coach Mike Vellucci announced the acquisition of 20-year-old forward Andy Bathgate from the Belleville Bulls. In return, the Whalers send third round picks in the 2013 and 2014 Ontario Hockey League Priority Selection back to Belleville.

Bathgate is the grandson of NHL Hall of Famer Andy Bathgate. See this story from Hooks Orpik of Pittsbugh Penguins Prospects.

"Bathgate adds to the depth of our team," said Vellucci. "He was Belleville's leading scorer last year. He can play in all situations and will help in all areas."

Bathgate was selected by Belleville in the third round (54th overall) in the 2007 OHL Priority Selection and was taken by the Pittsburgh Penguins in the fifth round (151st overall) in the 2009 National Hockey League Entry Draft.

Bathgate was not signed by the Penguins and comes into this season as a free-agent.

He's excited about joining the Whalers.

"I've heard tons of good things about Plymouth from guys I know," Bathgate said in a telephone interview. "I've got a bunch of friends who have played there - Tyler Seguin, Scott Wedgewood had nothing but good things to say. I'm incredibly excited to come to Plymouth."

Bathgate enjoyed his best offensive season in the OHL last year for the Bulls, scoring 25 goals and 35 assists for 60 points in 64 games. In all, Bathgate has scored 42 goals and 75 assist for 97 points in 172 career games in the OHL.

Bathgate comes to Plymouth in search of a pro contract for 2012-13.

"I've heard that Plymouth runs a pro-style (training) camp and I've heard great things about Mike Vellucci," Bathgate said. "I'm a play-making centerman and am a pass-first, shoot-second kind of guy. But I'm not afraid to score the odd goal here and there."

The acquisition of Bathgate gives Plymouth five overage players (1991 birthdays) on the roster - forwards RJ Mahalak, Jamie Devane and Peter Neal, along with Bathgate - and defenseman Beau Schmitz.

More content: See Paul Svoboda's story from the Belleville Intelligencer.