Hockey - Men 9/10/2012 1:48:00 PM

Gryphons welcome new recruits for 2012-13 season

The Guelph Gryphons men's hockey team is excited to bring in nine new recruits who will be joining the team this season. Among the newcomers are:

Brett Appio is a 6-foot-1 Bolton, Ont. native who played 192 games and amassed 41 points and 447 penalty minutes in the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) with the Sarnia Sting, Erie Otters, and Owen Sound Attack before finishing his Junior eligibility with the Brantford Golden Eagles during the 2011-2012 season.

Coaches' Comments: "Brett is a hard working winger who has a nice edge to his game."

Andy Bathgate comes to the Gryphons following a five-year career in the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) with the Belleville Bulls and the Plymouth Whalers. The 6-foot-1 Georgetown, Ont. native had 188 points in 262 games in the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) as a center and was selected 151st overall by the Pittsburgh Penguins in the fifth round of the 2009 National Hockey League entry draft.

Coaches' Comments: "Andy is a very skilled player who sees the ice very well and is very creative with the puck."

Daniel Broussard is a 6-foot-1 defenseman from Fayatteville, North Carolina. Broussard comes to Guelph from the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) via the Sarnia Sting and the Ottawa 67's. In four years Broussard played 226 games and had 36 points as a dependable player at both ends of the ice.

Coaches' Comments: "Daniel is a very smart defenseman who will add leadership to our team."

Mike Hasson played 154 OHL games and had 25 points with the Brampton Battalion, the Niagara Ice Dogs, and the Kitchener Rangers. Coming out of Ariss, Ont. the 6-foot-1 right winger completed his final Junior season with the Elmira Sugar Kings during the 2011-2012 season.

Coaches' Comments: "Mike has a great shot and adds some size to our forward group."

Nick Huard is a North Bay native who comes to the Gryphons via the Maritime Hockey League (MHL) where he accumulated 223 points over 139 regular season games and won a couple of league championships with the Woodstock Slammers. Nick also played 59 games in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL) for the Victoriaville Tigres and the Lewiston Maineiacs.

Coaches' Comments: "Nick is a very dynamic player who will add some jump to our team."

Jordan Mock is a 6-foot right winger from Dartmouth, NS who comes to Guelph from the Maritime Hockey League (MHL) where he played with new Gryphon Nick Trecapelli on the Truro Bearcats (see below). In the MHL Mock accumulated 145 points over 150 regular season games and also saw some time with the Saint John Sea Dogs of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL).

Coaches' Comments: "Jordan has a nice touch around the net and will help balance our scoring."

Nick Quinn spent two years in the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) with the Oshawa Generals. With the Generals he played 113 games and put up 36 points. Prior to the OHL, this 6-foot Markham, Ont. native played for the Orangeville Crushers with current Gryphons Scott Collins and Phil Teri.

Coaches' Comments: "Offensively, Nick moves the puck very well and he makes good reads on defence too."

Mike Schwindt is a 6-foot-4 mobile defenseman from Mount Forest, Ont. who played 281 Ontario Hockey League (OHL) games with Niagara and Sault Ste. Marie. While in the OHL Mike accumulated 49 career points.

Coaches' Comments: "Big, strong, and he makes good first passes out of his zone. Mike adds size to our defense corps."

Nick Trecapelli is a local Guelph, Ont. 6-foot defenseman who comes to the Gryphons from the Maritime Hockey League (MHL) Truor Bearcats where he finished his Junior eligibility following a three-year Ontario Hockey League (OHL) career with the Saginaw Spirit, the Sudbury Wolves, and the Peterborough Petes. In 156 OHL games Nick had 21 points while he put up 39 points in 47 regular season games with Truro.

Coaches' Comments: "A great character player with good hands and heads up play. He will be a local favourite."