About Westminster School

Westminster School is a leading historic private school in London for boys aged 13 to 18 and girls aged 16 to 18. It's known for its iconic location next to Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament.

Students at Westminster School develop a love of learning and learn to embrace new ideas. The curriculum incorporates traditional subjects alongside more contemporary options. Such subjects include theology and philosophy, electronics, product design, Mandarin, and Russian.

Westminster School is one of the most successful schools in the world. Students achieve excellent exam results and take up places at top global universities. Each year, around 40 students leave for leading US colleges. Others move on to universities such as LSE, Imperial College, the Sorbonne and the Royal College of Music.

Westminster School 13+ entrance exam

Stage 1

All boys applying for 13+ entry to Westminster School sit the ISEB Common Pre-Test. This is an exam created by the Independent Schools Examination Board which is usually taken in the autumn term of Year 6.

The ISEB Common Pre-Test is taken online and consists of multiple choice questions. It is entirely adaptive, which means the questions become more difficult depending on how your child is performing. The questions span four subjects:

Maths: questions are based on the Year 5 national curriculum – although children in Year 6 may find this section challenging. The questions range from arithmetic to multi-step problem solving.

English: questions are split into two sections: reading comprehension, and spelling, punctuation and grammar.

Verbal reasoning: your child will be tested on their ability to reason and solve problems with written information, such as letters, words, symbols and numbers.

Non-verbal reasoning: these questions assess your child’s logic, critical thinking and problem-solving skills using figures and diagrams. They will need to show that they can analyse and manipulate 2D and 3D figures.

The ISEB Common Pre-Test takes around 2 and a half hours to complete. Your child can sit the four subjects together or at separate times. If they are taking all four subjects on the same day, they will be allowed a short break between each section.

Westminster School will also request a copy of your child’s latest school report. The admissions team will review this report and your child’s ISEB results before deciding which children to take forward to Stage 2. Around 250 children are invited back for the second stage.

Stage 2

In mid-December of Year 6, you will find out if your child is invited back for the second stage of the admissions process. Stage 2 consists of written tests and an interview.

The written tests are taken in early January. There are two tests in total:

English: 40 minutes

Maths: 40 minutes

Your child will also be invited for an interview, which is scheduled separately for January or February. Learn more and get top tips in Atom’s guide to private school interviews.

After the interviews and written tests, Westminster School decides whether to offer an unconditional place. Unconditional offers are made on the expectation that your child will make good academic progress at his current school and will have an unreserved reference of support from his school in March in Year 8.

Atom’s top tips for applying to Westminster School

Westminster School is a selective school. With around 500 children applying for 13+ entry each year, competition for places can be high. Here are our top tips to help your child prepare for the selection process.

Bitesize learning

It’s important to build a good knowledge base before school entrance exams. Your child should have a good understanding of the content they’ve been taught at school before testing their knowledge with practice tests.

Using a ‘little and often’ approach when learning is key – our brains encode new information more effectively when dealing with smaller ‘chunks’ of information. For children aged 10–11, child psychologists recommend regular study sessions of 20–30 minutes.

With Atom Home, you don’t need to worry about creating a study schedule. When you enter your target schools, you’ll get a bespoke learning plan tailored to your schools’ entrance exams. Know exactly what your child needs to do each week to confidently pass.

Read widely

Entrance exams test children’s ability to analyse and interpret written information. Regular reading is a great way to help your child build these skills.

Encourage them to read books from different genres and by a diverse range of authors. Increasing the variety of your child’s reading will help them understand different styles, tones and purposes. Meanwhile, reading a little every day will help widen their vocabulary, sharpen their analytical thinking, and enhance their imagination.

Looking for reading inspiration? Check out our Key Stage 2 reading list.

Hone curiosity

Selective schools are often looking for children who are interested in learning. You can help by supporting your child’s broader learning, their intellectual curiosity, and their passion for developing an understanding of the world.

Talk to your child about the world we live in and inspire an interest in current affairs with age-appropriate journalism. It’s also a good idea to make sure they’re benefitting from a rich variety of experiences, such as visiting libraries, museums and galleries.

Refine exam technique

When your child feels confident with their knowledge of the exam topics, they’ll be ready to put their knowledge to the test.

Mock tests can help your child develop problem-solving skills and refine exam technique. They’re also a great way to consolidate learning, while highlighting any knowledge gaps they might want to tackle before exam day.

When you set Westminster School as a target school on Atom Home, your child will get ISEB mock tests as part of their learning plan. Atom’s mock tests mirror the real ISEB – the curriculum, the timings, the controls and even the colours. Know what to expect on exam day.

Celebrate progress

Setting regular, achievable goals and celebrating your child’s progress – no matter how big or small – will help keep their motivation high.

Make sure to encourage a growth mindset. This means celebrating effort, as well as achievement! When your child makes mistakes or struggles to understand a particular topic, help them understand that they’ll improve through practice. Regular praise will help your child improve their resilience when tackling new and challenging topics.