The Enemy will play two hometown headline shows at Coventry Cathedral Ruins on 21st and 22nd May to coincide with the release of their third album ‘Streets in the Sky’ on 21st May. The band will also be performing an exclusive warm-up show at London’s Borderline on 18th April before their headline gig at Shepherd’s Bush Empire on 24th May.

The shows at Coventry Cathedral Ruins will follow the bands homecoming show at S7VEN nightclub in February which sold out in seconds and was packed with fans who featured on the video for the free download song ‘Gimme The Sign’. The Enemy will celebrate the release of their third album in their hometown of Coventry on the Monday and Tuesday of the week of release and the gig promises a host of new songs along with lots of the bands hit tracks and a few special guests.

The Enemy will also be performing a warm-up gig on 18th April at London’s Borderline and with a capacity of only 300, the show will be a sell-out. The tiny gig will precede their headline show at London’s Shepherd’s Bush Empire on 24th April where they will perform to 2000 people.

‘Streets in the Sky’ is the bands third album and according to the band, their best yet. “Streets In The Sky is the result of more than a years hard work from lots and lots of people. I’m more proud of it than any album we’ve ever made. It sounds massive and the songs are some of the best we’ve written. I can’t wait to see what the public make of it.” says The Enemy’s Tom Clarke.

Recorded in London and LA with Joby J. Ford from seminal US punk band The Bronx, the 12-track album has the signature Enemy anthemic guitar sound yet it is much heavier than the last two albums. It is packed with huge songs from the catchy and forceful free download single ‘Gimme The Sign’ to the instantly catchy anthemic song ‘Bigger Cages (Longer Chains)’ to the melodic and punchy track ‘This Is Real’. New single ‘Saturday’ is a summer anthem in the making with a singalong chorus that is just made to be chanted from the football stadium to the festival fields to the pub on a night out. The Enemy are set to make their mark again in 2012 and ‘Streets in the Sky’ is just the start. The video for the new single ‘Saturday’ can be seen exclusively on VEVO at http://bit.ly/theenemysaturday from Thursday 5th April .

Album Track listing:

Gimme The Sign

Bigger Cages (Longer Chains)

Saturday

1-2-3-4

Like A Dancer

Come Into My World

This Is Real

2 Kids

Turn It On

It’s A Race

Get Up And Dance

Make A Man

The band will be performing four UK tour dates this May alongside the Coventry and London Borderline shows and will also be appearing at summer festivals including T in the Park and V Festival.

The Enemy Tour Dates:

April 2012

Thur 18 London Borderline

May 2012

Sat 05 Leeds Live at Leeds

Mon 21 Coventry Cathedral Ruins

Tue 22 Coventry Cathedral Ruins

Wed 23 Manchester Academy

Thu 24 London Shepherds Bush Empire

Fri 25 Glasgow Barrowlands

Tickets go on sale for the Coventry Cathedral Ruins and London Borderline shows to fans at http://bit.ly/TheEnemy-official at 9am on Wednesday 4th April and on general sale at www.gigsandtours.com at 9am on Thursday 5th