An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown is co-presented by Theater of War Productions, Public Library of Mount Vernon and Knox County, Mount Vernon Arts Consortium and Kenyon College and is made possible with generous support from Kenyon College Office for Community Partnerships, Ohio Arts Council, Mount Vernon Arts Consortium, the National Endowment for the Arts, an LSTA Competitive Grant and the Kenyon College Bicentennial fund.

An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown

The event presents scenes from Henrik Ibsen's original 1892 work, in a new version by Bryan Doerries, followed by an interactive, town-hall style conversation that includes the cast, panelists, and audience members.

The play tells the story of a doctor who discovers the water supply in his small country town has been poisoned by a tannery. Despite his efforts to convey the truth to the public, the doctor fails to save his community from disaster and is ultimately scapegoated for his whistleblowing. Featuring an array of local talent- including Mount Vernon Mayor Matt Starr, Gambier Mayor Leeman Kessler, Kenyon College Department of Drama faculty Jon Tazewell, and many others-Artistic Director Bryan Doerries invites that cast and audience to join in a post-show discussion about how the play resonates in "America's Hometown" today.

Interested in tickets?

An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown premieres at Knox Memorial Theater in Mount Vernon at 6:00 p.m. on April 6, and at Oden Hall in Gambier on April 7 at 4:00 p.m. Advance registration is required, but as with all Library events, this program is free and open to the public. Tickets are available for in person attendees at https://www.mvac.org/theater-of-war and 740-462-4ART. Zoom attendees may register at eotp-knoxcounty.eventbrite.com.

Need 504 Accommodation?

Persons requesting 504 accommodations can contact Public Library Assistant Director Cassandra Peters at (740) 392-BOOK or [email protected]. Please note that requests for ADA/504 accommodation must be submitted by March 15th, 2024. For more information about this project email [email protected], or call (740) 392-BOOK ext. 259.

Need a ride to the show?

The Library has contracted with local transportation companies to offer a limited number of door-to-door shuttles for person interested in attending performances of An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown. Transportation vouchers will be provided on a first-come, first served basis until capacity is reached. To arrange a ride, please contact [email protected], or call (740) 392-BOOK ext. 259 by March 25th at 5:00pm.

Coffee Hour with the Artist: An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown

Public Library of Mount Vernon and Knox County

201 North Mulberry Street

Mount Vernon, Ohio 43050

Monday, March 25, 2024 from 9:30am-10:30am.

Stop by the Main Library from 9:30 am-10:30 am on Monday, March 25 for a conversation with Theater of War Productions Artistic Director Bryan Doerries and The Honorable Matt Starr, Mayor, City of Mount Vernon about the upcoming production of An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America’s Hometown. The artists will talk informally with attendees about their past and present collaborations, what it’s like for the mayor to play The Mayor, and what An Enemy of the People is all about. Attendees will have the opportunity to ask questions about the project and sign up to get involved. Complimentary coffee and donuts will be served. As with all Library programs, this event is free and open to the public.

Meet and Greet at Happy Bean

Happy Bean Coffee Shop

221 South Main Street

Mount Vernon, Ohio 43050

Monday, March 25, 2024 from 5:30-6:30pm.

On Monday, March 25 all are welcome to stop by Happy Bean Coffee Shop from 5:30-6:30pm for coffee and conversation with Theater of War Productions Artistic Director Bryan Doerries. Learn more about the Library’s upcoming production of An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America’s Hometown, our collaboration with Kenyon College and Mount Vernon Arts Consortium. Attendees will have the opportunity to ask questions about the project and find out how to get involved. Complimentary coffee, tea, light refreshments will be served. This event is free and open to the public.

Meet the Artist: Bryan Doerries Discusses An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America's Hometown

Kenyon College Bookstore

106 Gaskin Avenue

Gambier, Ohio 43022

Tuesday, March 26, 2024 from 11:00am-12:00pm.

Kenyon College Bookstore welcomes Bryan Doerries (K’98) Artistic Director of Theater of War Productions for a conversation about his upcoming production of An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America’s Hometown on April 6 at Knox Memorial Theater and April 7 in Oden Auditorium. Bryan will talk about his work founding the acclaimed theater company, its groundbreaking work in using ancient texts to launch conversations about contemporary issues, and how the Kenyon community can get involved in this exciting project. This event is a collaboration between the Kenyon College Bookstore and the Public Library of Mount Vernon and Knox County. As with all Library events, it is free and open to the public.

Meet the Artist: Coffee Hour at the Annex with Bryan Doerries, Theater of War Productions

Join us at The Annex, Gund Gallery’s new downtown space for art! We’re hosting Theater of War Productions Artistic Director Bryan Doerries in an informal meet and greet. Bryan will discuss the upcoming production of An Enemy of the People: A Theater Project from America’s Hometown, answer questions about his theater company, and invite community members to get involved. Complimentary coffee and snacks will be served. This program is free and open to the public.