LogiSense was established by a team of dedicated professionals in early 2010 with the goal of delivering a wide array of comprehensive logistics solutions from a single corporate platform.

The Company has quickly entrenched itself in key areas of domestic logistics, freight management, port & marine services and corporate advisory business. LogiSense was able to achieve this in a brief operating history by assembling a best-in-class management team and forging strategic alliances with renowned operators both domestically and overseas.

Our holistic services array enables us to provide our discerning clientele with one-window solutions throughout the logistics value chain.

View our services roster or send us an email for further information.

An associated company of LogiSense, Marine Dynamics is purposed for the development and operations of one of the largest private sector off-dock container terminals in the Country. The off-dock container handling facility is located in Port Qasim. The Company will also be developing a state-of-the-art oil & gas storage facility, also located in Port Qasim.

MS Shipping, a subsidiary of LogiSense, is the project company for operations pertaining to Karachi Port. The Company operates a leading off-dock container terminal located at West Wharf, Karachi and also undertakes Stevedoring and Shipping Agent related assignments. MS Shipping also owns and operates a range of heavy equipments.

Both companies are managed by LogiSense's core management team.

We are growing and always looking for high caliber professionals to join our ranks. So whether you have already built a career in logistics or are looking for an exciting new challenge, we may have a position open that suits your qualifications and experience.

Think you have what it takes to be a part of our team? Drop us an email and find out more info@logisense.net

We are an equal opportunity employer.

In compliance with international standards of corporate governance LogiSense follows a formal code of Business Ethics & Conduct – an important part of our comprehensive compliance program. In addition to dictating LogiSense’s commitment to its customers, business partners, employees and local communities; the Code also addresses areas such as antitrust, unfair selling practices, conflicts of interest, transparency in reporting & governance, employee rights & working conditions as well as health, safety & environment protection.

Our team members are actively trained to uphold the Company’s Standards of Business Conduct – since LogiSense is an approved contractor for the Government of Pakistan and Defense Forces, there is special focus on laws and regulations that apply to public sector contractors.

LogiSense is in the process of developing a dedicated Oil & Gas Storage Terminal located at Port Qasim, adjacent to the Oil Pier, with a cumulative planned storage capacity of approx 50,000 tons.

The Terminal is spread over a vast 10 acres and will provide a centralized storage facility for all major hydrocarbon products regularly imported into Pakistan.

The Facility will have a direct pipeline link with the Port Qasim Oil Pier and a large number of independent tanker filling stations to ensure maximum throughput year round.

In addition, state of the art fire fighting equipment and a dedicated safety team will be stationed at the facility 24/7 to ensure secure operations and compliance with international safety standards.

Project company: Marine Dynamics (Private) Limited