LogiSense Alternatives

Alternatives to LogiSense

Compare LogiSense alternatives for your business or organization using the curated list below. SourceForge ranks the best alternatives to LogiSense in 2024. Compare features, ratings, user reviews, pricing, and more from LogiSense competitors and alternatives in order to make an informed decision for your business.

1

Recurly

Recurly

Thousands of innovative companies across media and entertainment, consumer goods, software, education, health and wellness, and travel and hostpiatlity industries rely on Recurly for faster, more profitable growth. The partnership and platform of Recurly removes the complexities of automating subscription management and recurring billing at scale, enabling teams to manage and optimize their subscriber lifecycles with ease. Category-defining companies including Sling, Twitch, Bark, FabFitFun, Paramount, Lucid, and Sprout Social have chosen Recurly to manage billions of dollars in recurring revenues, future-proof their recurring billing and revenue management, and recover billions of dollars in lost revenue due to churn. Founded in 2009, Recurly is based in San Francisco, with offices in Boulder and London. Recurly | Keep a good thing growingⓇ

Starting Price: $0.00/month

2

Stax

Stax Payments

Stax empowers software platforms, small businesses, and large businesses, through simplified, industry-leading integrated payment and recurring billing solutions. Stax Connect is an unmatched payment ecosystem that enables unparalleled portfolio growth through technology and payment monetization. Radically simplify the ability for ISVs to power their payments with Stax’s developer-friendly API, offering a single integration that provides access to best-in-breed tools needed to provide payment acceptance capabilities, eliminating the time and costs associated with other “PayFac in a box” offerings. Secure in-person and online credit card payment processing with Stax Pay. An all-in-one business management platform built to help you run and grow your business.

3

Chargebee

Chargebee

Chargebee is a recurring billing and subscription management tool that helps SaaS and SaaS-like businesses streamline Revenue Operations. Chargebee integrates with the leading payment gateways like Stripe, Braintree, PayPal etc. around the world to let you automate recurring payment collection along with invoicing, taxes, accounting, email notifications, SaaS Metrics and customer management. Chargebee handles all your crucial workflows from lead to ledger with power-packed integrations that include Salesforce, Xero, Quickbooks, Avalara, Slack, among others. Deflect cancellations at scale straight from Chargebee with a best-of-breed solution, Chargebee Retention, that provides personalized experiences that get results. Run experiments based on customer and subscription attributes taken straight from Chargebee to ensure you provide a personalized and relevant cancel experience.

4

Octane

Octane

Our usage-based billing platform enables businesses to accurately and efficiently monetize their products and services based on actual usage. With our platform, companies can seamlessly track and measure usage metrics, such as usage duration, volume, or specific actions, and generate accurate invoices or pricing plans accordingly. By shifting from traditional fixed pricing models to a dynamic and flexible usage-based approach, businesses can optimize revenue streams, increase customer satisfaction, and align pricing with actual value delivered. Our platform provides comprehensive analytics and reporting capabilities, empowering organizations to gain valuable insights into customer behavior, identify growth opportunities, and make data-driven decisions.

5

Cloudmore

Cloudmore

Whether you're a business looking to solve a recurring services procurement challenge, a vendor transitioning to recurring revenue, or a service provider moving to the cloud, Cloudmore has a solution for you. One place to sell, manage and bill your subscription channel partners and customers. Solve the procurement challenge for recurring and metered services. Reduce your billing processing time and remove costly billing errors. Users can self serve to discover and acquire the services they need. Showcase and sell your services in an internal or external marketplace. Select services from Cloudmore's service catalog and sell these to your users in their curated e-store. Manage pricing on a global or per customer basis. Create offers and quotes from your service catalog. Your admin users can discover, provision and manage services and view monthly billing details.

Starting Price: 499

6

OneBill

OneBill

OneBill is an end-to-end subscription management, billing, and revenue management platform that powers the entire customer lead-to-revenue generation experience. OneBill supports all types of billing models such as one-time billing, subscription billing, recurring billing, and usage-based billing. OneBill’s seamless integration with other enterprise systems such as carriers & service providers, payment gateways, accounting & admin, taxation, and CRM & ERP platforms is made possible with open APIs. The platform covers all aspects of a business from CPQ, automated order provisioning & activation, billing & invoicing, all the way to revenue reporting, customer subscription management, and channel partner commission management. OneBill has been helping SMBs, SMEs, and large enterprises to reduce billing errors, compliance risk and drive greater efficiency with an end-to-end billing and revenue management solution fully integrated with some of the world’s leading solutions.

7

BlueSnap

BlueSnap

BlueSnap's All-in-One Accounts Receivable Automation solution, formerly Armatic, is the highest rated software solution for Payment Processing, Billing/Invoicing, Recurring Billing and Subscription Management. Billing and Invoicing: Create beautiful invoices with our powerful invoice editor synced into your accounting system. Provide a customer portal, automatic charging, payment collection, and apply late fees. Recurring Billing & Subscription Management: BlueSnap provides enterprise-class subscription billing management for fast-growing businesses worldwide. Enable trial periods, manage plans, or prorate subscriptions. Payment Processing: BlueSnap is processor agnostic and provides integrations to all types of payment solutions from credit card payments, ACH, SEPA to wires. We handle partial payments, automatic failed payment retry, and automatic payment recovery.

8

BluLogix

BluLogix

BluLogix is a leading provider of extensible cloud-based monetization solutions, empowering B2B businesses to optimize their subscription, recurring revenue and usage-based billing processes. The BluLogix platform delivers flexible, scalable, and feature-rich solutions across industries, helping increase revenue, profitability, innovation and customer satisfaction. BluLogix provides end-to-end automation and seamless integration across the revenue process, tailored for businesses with complex billing needs. It is built to adapt rapidly to evolving business requirements, ensuring customers can capitalize on the subscription economy with efficiency, accuracy, and speed. Recognized by industry analysts as a leader in recurring revenue, BluLogix specializes in complex and consumption-based billing solutions, and is a trusted partner for businesses seeking to optimize their quote to cash processes, drive revenue growth, increase profitability and enhance customer satisfaction.

Starting Price: $500.00/month

9

TimelyBill

Bill Perfect Inc.

TimelyBill is a telecom billing and revenue management solution which facilitates service providers to introduce products, generate invoices, collect payments, offer bundles, share profit with partners, detect fraud and many other revenue related functions. We understand that no two organizations are alike. TimelyBill OSS / BSS was designed to provide maximum flexibility and reliability. TimelyBill puts you in control of your billing. Add or modify fields, labels, validation rules, permissions, store customer data in multiple languages, and more. TimelyBill includes full-featured components which target the needs of telecom and communications service providers.

10

Gotransverse

Gotransverse

The Intelligent Billing Platform - Gotransverse is a full-stack subscription and usage-based billing platform built for companies who need high volume, sophisticated pricing and real-time rating. Gotransverse enables adoption and revenue growth in companies through our SaaS subscription billing platform designed for sophisticated pricing, high volumes, and rating. Integrate any data source and automate limitless subscription billing software models at high volumes. Take full advantage of one-time, recurring, and usage-based pricing, regardless of volumes or complexity. Extensible native cloud architecture for sophisticated and enterprise billing platform needs with elastic scale, resulting in lower cost-to-serve. Its configuration-based design brings business time-to-value and agility. Our billing software experts are involved in every step of the way. Helping you find the right solution through our delivery assurance, implementation, and customer success programs.

11

Cheddar

CheddarGetter

Subscription Billing Software. Save Time. Scale Revenue. Cut the time it takes to build monetization into your product. Our usage-based approach gets you up and billing in as little as one day. Our platform tracks customer activity first and applies your billing rules second. That means you can spend more time iterating your pricing models without changing billing code. Cheddar was created by software engineers tired of sitting in pricing meetings. We designed our platform so your software only needs to know what activity to track, isolating pricing from the codebase once and for all. In just a few API calls, Cheddar manages all the complexity of billing and collections - including activity tracking, pricing, subscription management, overage, invoicing, external payments, processing, underwriting, SaaS metric reporting, customer communications, and revenue optimization.

Starting Price: $99 per month

12

Aria

Aria Systems

Aria helps enterprises make the shift from ownership to access, from one time purchases to ongoing relationships. Aria’s cloud-native billing and monetization platform is purpose-built to allow enterprises to bring sophisticated usage-based and subscription products and bundles to market. Offer products in new ways and expand your market to people and places you were unable to reach before. Aria orchestrates what you need to provide your customers with simple and effortless buying experiences. Web storefronts access Aria to present the right offers and pricing to drive customer acquisition by making it simple for users to sign up for services and take advantage of special offers and trial periods. With Aria, it’s easy to provide a consistent, positive buying and branding experience regardless of where your products are sold or by whom. Offers can reflect current customer relationships, such as transitioning from freemium offerings to paid subscriptions or service plan upgrades.

13

ZoneBilling

Zone & Co.

The only all-in-one agile monetization platform for simple to complex billing & revenue, built for NetSuite – the #1 cloud financial management system for growing businesses. Wave goodbye to managing subscription billing in spreadsheets. Bill your customers and build invoices to match your exact needs directly in NetSuite, no matter how complex the use case, billing model, or revenue requirements. Introducing subscriptions? ZoneBilling can do it. Moving toward usage-based billing? ZoneBilling's got you covered. Looking to automate renewal management? Yup, ZoneBilling can do that, too. So...what else are you waiting for? Toss the complex spreadsheets aside and discover the ease and simplicity of the first all-in-one billing solution. Configure & bill for subscriptions from single or multiple streams. Use complex usage-based formulas to calculate pricing. Bill customers for products or services in advance.

14

Suger

Suger

One platform to manage product listing, offer, contracts, metering & billing crossing the top 5 cloud marketplaces, so you can grow your cloud revenue without limits. List your products in cloud marketplaces as quickly as 3 days, without any engineering effort. We can also customize the landing page so that you can get your products in front of customers ASAP. Providing you with flexibility in how you choose to monetize your products, either a flat rate, annual commitment, monthly subscription, usage-based, seat-based, or a combination of commitment and usage-based pricing. Suger works together with your current metering/billing service, no need for migration. It can be your build-in-house solution or a third-party metering platform. Bi-directional sync opportunities between your CRM with cloud providers, leverage their expertise and resources to help drive sales, and reach new markets and customers that you may not have been able to reach on your own.

Starting Price: $10,000 per year

15

Good Sign

Good Sign

You can monetize any recurring business model, from single subscriptions to large contracts. Automate your pricing, billing and sales accounting. Use any source data for usage-based revenue models. Manage the contract lifecycle, and scale up to provisioning and automated fulfillment. Automate your monetization intelligently with the Good Sign SaaS solution. Our smart solution is especially suited to the continuous and recurring services business, regardless of industry. It removes pricing and billing problems and enables fast to market with new services. You are free to use different pricing models. No more revenue leakage due to errors and unbilled services. Manual work is reduced. Cash flow is faster. Accounting entries are automatically correct. Monetize any recurring business model from single subscriptions to large contracts. Automate all pricing schemes. Fixed fees, overage charges, and pay-per-use.

Starting Price: €495 per month

16

Stripe Billing

Stripe

Stripe Billing is the fastest way for your business to bill customers with subscriptions or invoices. Capture more revenue, support new products or business models, and accept recurring payments globally. Start collecting one-time or recurring payments via card, ACH, and other popular payment methods instantly. Test and roll out changes via our API or right in the Dashboard. Flexible billing logic for everything from per-seat pricing to metered billing out of the box. Support for coupons, free trials, prorations, add-ons, and overages is built-in. Reduce churn with smart retries, automated failed payment emails, and an automatic card updater. In 2021, Stripe Billing helped businesses recover 38% of failed payments on average. Understand your growth, churn, and financial health with automated reporting and revenue recognition. Easily sync billing and payments data with the rest of your workflows.

17

Paddle

Paddle Payments

Paddle is a subscription commerce and billing platform for Software and SaaS companies. It’s more difficult than ever to keep up with customer demands, to find new international growth opportunities, and to manage your internal resources effectively. With Paddle, you spend less time on fixing internal roadblocks and can focus on scaling your business. Paddle provides a full suite of tools from optimized checkout to sell your software, to recurring billing, fraud detection, manual invoicing, sales taxes, global currencies, customer support, analytics and much more, all in one platform. Choose how you want to sell, Paddle supports every type of sales motion. Optimize your checkout for conversions, scale your sales-assisted invoicing to more business accounts, and add subscription billing

18

Zenskar

Zenskar

Zenskar is a New York based Quote-to-cash platform that can automate complex subscription & usage-based billing, manage receivables, provide analytics, set up flexible revenue recognition workflows, and automate usage data metering. Zenskar helps creative sales teams stay creative with pricing/contracts while not making it difficult for finance teams!

19

NetSuite SuiteBilling

NetSuite

NetSuite’s billing solution, SuiteBilling, automates invoicing operations. Combine flat, tiered and consumption-based options with promotions, volume discounts and customer-specific rates for maximum flexibility. Support for multiple pricing models and complex rating scenarios make it easy to generate accurate invoices. And, SuiteBilling lets you manage the entire subscription lifecycle: Modify subscriptions and prorate billing, consolidate multiple charges on a single invoice and auto-generate renewal invoices to improve retention. Inefficient manual billing leads to invoice errors that frustrate customers and delay payments. Automating the billing process means more accurate invoicing, which accelerates payments and improves cash flow. Consolidated billing creates trust by displaying every charge on a single invoice, while customer-specific discounts drive repeat business and automated renewals reduce subscriber churn.

20

Zoho Billing

Zoho

Handle recurring billing and payments effortlessly with Zoho Billing (formerly Zoho Subscriptions), a powerful subscription management software. With Zoho Billing, small businesses up to large enterprises can manage the entire customer life cycle--from accepting recurring payments to handling customer subscriptions--with ease. Top features include recurring billing, subscription management, subscription metrics, subscription finance, payment gateways, and a number of integrations. Effortlessly manage your products or services and pricing with a comprehensive product catalog. Make sales a breeze by optimizing sales strategies with flexible pricing models and the pricing table widget. Unleash seamless quotation, invoicing, and expense tracking. Handle projects and timesheets effortlessly, and generate e-invoices for swift and smooth transactions that comply with regional regulations.

Starting Price: $39 per month

21

Zuora

Zuora

Industry leading solution to monetize and manage your subscription service. Your systems today are holding you back. Finance teams are drowning in spreadsheets. Developers are backlogged. Zuora makes it easy to manage subscriptions and keep up with fast changing go-to-market strategies on a single platform. Speed up billing operations for large volumes of invoices at scale without losing attention to detail. Group customers together and set up automated billing schedules and rules for each group. Every time a customer upgrades, downgrades, or changes a subscription, billing is impacted. By using the Rating Engine from the Zuora Central Platform, Zuora automatically handles these prorations and calculations so you don’t become a bottleneck. Use Zuora’s tax engine or integrate with a 3rd party tax solution to pull real-time tax calculations for every invoice.

22

BillingPlatform

BillingPlatform

BillingPlatform empowers businesses with innovative software solutions to optimize revenue generation through every stage of the customer lifecycle, powering growth through operational agility along with a frictionless customer experience. Our industry-leading, cloud-based platform is leveraged by global enterprises to optimize the customer journey from idea to revenue. With global customers across multiple industries, including software, finance, media, transportation and communications, BillingPlatform processes billions of transactions and dollars every year, enabling enterprises to grow revenue, reduce costs and improve the customer experience.

23

billwerk

billwerk

Subscription Management, Recurring Billing and Payments radically automated for your European subscription business. The platform complies with European Standards EU-DSGVO and GOBD, has a strong REST API and offers a variety of ready-to-use integrations to European third-party vendors. With billwerk your subscription revenues grow faster, your costs are minimized and You steadily benefit from the high product innovation rate of othe platform.

Starting Price: euro 139/month

24

m3ter

m3ter

Our data infrastructure solution helps software companies deploy and manage usage-based pricing. Instrument your business to eliminate billing operations pain, and price and sell better. Data infrastructure to ingest, transform and store usage and cost data at scale. Configure pricing of any complexity, aggregate data, and calculate bill amounts in real-time. Deliver usage, cost, and spend data wherever it is needed throughout the stack. m3ter is a ‘drop in’ platform with smart integrations to existing tooling that make them work as needed for usage-based pricing. An API-first service with scripting and ‘pricing as code’ that enables the developer to deliver high levels of automation. m3ter is a managed cloud service that meets the standards for security and operational excellence required by major enterprises. All these capabilities depend on usage, cost, and spend data. You need infrastructure to ingest, store, and deliver it where needed, in real-time.

25

Fusebill

Fusebill

Automate subscription billing and management like hundreds of our clients in SaaS, avionics, publishing, telematics, etc. Eliminate manual billing. Reduce revenue leaks, churn. Fusebill simplifies all aspects of subscription billing and management, automating recurring invoicing, payments, and revenue recognition while streamlining customer lifecycle management to maximize revenue. Fusebill's flexible ledger-based platform allows you to scale your business with absolute confidence.

Starting Price: $295.00/month

26

SOFTRAX Revenue Management System

SOFTRAX

The SOFTRAX Revenue Management System (RMS) is a powerful approach to revenue management. It is the world’s only system that combines best-in-class automation for one-time, milestone, subscription, consumption, and renewal billing and complex revenue recognition in a single solution to streamline the revenue management process. SOFTRAX delivers the only comprehensive solution that supports all forms of complex billing and revenue recognition in accordance with the new ASC 606 and IFRS 15 standards. This unique system drives a high level of automation to advance your back-office functionality toward continuous accounting. SOFTRAX seamlessly integrates with existing ERP, CRM, CPQ, or home-grown systems.

Starting Price: $420.00/month

27

2Checkout

Verifone

The 2Checkout Monetization Platform is comprehensive and flexible, so you can quickly pursue new market opportunities and deliver exceptional user experiences. The all-in-one monetization platform that maximizes your revenues and makes global digital sales easier. We enable merchants to accept mobile and online payments from buyers worldwide. Our payment processing is seamless, safe, reliable, no matter where you are on the map. This is the all-in-one monetization package that helps global businesses grow digital commerce revenue streams. Get in front of new customers worldwide via our niche affiliates from across the globe, and use our channel manager solution to multiply your global distribution network online. Reach out through the channels where your customers are buying.

Starting Price: 4.5% + $0.45 per sale

28

Amberflo

Amberflo

Meter any infrastructure, platform, application or custom resource or feature. We provide an end-to-end usage data and consumption data infrastructure that serves as the system of record and a single source of truth. Our metering data infrastructure is a fully managed, full-featured platform for usage instrumentation. It comes with a rich set of APIs and language-specific SDKs that manage idempotency, deduplication, batching, and flushing. Chose from popular pre-build usage-based models such as per-unit, overage, volume, tiered, multi-attribute. Pricing plans come with full lifecycle management from creation, change management, deprecation and automatic transitioning of customer accounts. Just like the leading cloud service providers, Amberflo provides rich set of real-time usage and revenue explorer capabilities. Operate your business as the major cloud providers do with real-time usage and revenue data at your fingertips.

Starting Price: $0.01 per month

29

Conga Billing

Conga

Conga Billing empowers evolving organizations to automate billing and invoicing management. Bill for blended business models, including subscription services, physical goods, professional services, and usage-based or consumption-based services. Invoice customers in the ways they prefer to pay. Conga Billing offers the flexibility to invoice per your customers’ requests with customizable billing for full orders, partial orders, or split orders. Enjoy more accurate and efficient billing management with automated invoices driven from assets quoted, contracted, or ordered. Automatically adjust your customers’ invoice schedules based on upgrades, downgrades, and swaps.

30

Dynamics Billing

Omniware Solutions

Dynamics Billing gives you better control over your Billing, Invoicing and Customer Management. Billing & Invoicing: Save time and eliminate errors through automation. Customer Management: Seamlessly manage ALL customer data (interactions, invoices, products, payments, etc.) from one screen. Insights: Grow your business fast with the best analytical tools, including visual models of all Billing and Customer Management Data. Enable Optimized Pricing to guarantee end-customers the best value pricing for your products and services. This revenue approach allows you to increase market share in highly competitive industries. Improve your product or service value by reflecting customers’ situations. Connect operational and IoT data with situational pricing to gain advantage against less capable competitors.

31

SpryBill

Kilmist Corporation

Cloud based end-to-end subscription and metered billing, customer care, business intelligence and analytics solution for communication service providers and IoT companies. SpryBill manages your Product Catalog, Customer Info, Subscriptions, Discounts/Promotions, Taxation, Invoicing, Payment processing, Sales Commissions, Documents and Customer Communications. It also includes flexible usage Procurement, Mediation, Rating, Surcharging and Auditing modules to streamline wire-line, mobile, VOIP, prepaid, retail and wholesale billing. SpryBill Analytics mines your billing data and provides crucial reports and dynamic executive dashboards that highlight hidden insights and Key Performance Indicators. SpryBill is highly configurable, ultra-scalable and affordable for small and large businesses alike.

32

Maxio

Maxio

Maxio empowers growing B2B SaaS leaders to monetize their business and uncover critical financial insights in an unpredictable market. Natural growth isn’t a straight shot; it ebbs and flows along with the market. Wherever you are on your growth journey, Maxio gives you the tools to navigate your business through every inflection point. You need a system that can support your monetization model (no matter how simple or complex) without sacrificing the agility required to meet changing market demands. With Maxio, you’re always striking the right balance. Don’t let your systems hinder your ability to go to market. Maxio sits at the heart of your tech stack, automating the manual tasks that exist between your CRM, GL, and reporting tools. To navigate through an ever-changing market, you need insights today—not two weeks from now. Maxio gives you the ability to answer your toughest business questions quickly and accurately.

33

Tridens Monetization

Tridens

Tridens Monetization, a Future-Ready Charging & Revenue Management for the Modern Business. Gain disruptive innovation, brand differentiation, and business transformation with service, industry, and business-model agnostic billing platform designed for the connected digital world. Key Product Features. Innovate with the Future-Ready Monetization Platform, Built for High Volume Consumption-Based Events for any Service, Industry, & Partner-Enabled Business Model. Innovative Offer Design: Product Catalog, Discounts (percentage, value), Pricing & Rating, Plans & Bundles, Contracts & Terms. Customer Management: Customer Overview, Customer Hierarchies, Contract Management, Customer/Partner web and mobile app. Convergent Charging: Any type of service, real-time online, offline, sharing, Flexible consumption rules & real-time notifications, Advance Discounting, Resource and Discount sharing. Billing & Invoicing: Flexible billing cycles, daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, semi annually.

34

Billsby

Billsby

Whatever your subscription business, rely on Billsby for easy and accurate recurring billing. The most powerful, customizable and easy to integrate subscription billing software used by hundreds of companies worldwide to simplify revenue operations. Every Billsby account supports unlimited products, plans and cycles - making it really easy to support even the most complex plans. Once customers sign-up and as their subscription changes, use Zapier to complete follow up tasks across all of the other tools and services you use to run your business. Our drop-in checkout helps customers to sign up for your product quickly and easily, with low development effort. Customers can manage their own account with our drop-in account management tools - reducing service costs.

Starting Price: $35 per month

35

jBilling

Enterprise jBilling Software

The world’s leading open source billing solution gives you all the flexibility and customizable options you need for highly complex billing. No matter what you have in mind we can do it. jBilling overcomes complex billing scenarios simply and rapidly, so you’ll always be able to take advantage of that next great business opportunity! jBilling lets you get to market fast with your innovative products and services by allowing you to isolate your custom code and change it whenever you need to. Only jBilling’s open source technology gives you complete visibility into source code so you’ll always be able to trust your billing. Sign up with jBilling for a high performance, expertly managed service that scales with your business. Deploy jBilling yourself for a powerful, flexible and scalable billing engine right in your own data center. Deploy jBilling in a way that’s right for your business. Work with one of jBilling’s Approved System Integrator Partners.

36

Subscription DNA

Subscription DNA, LLC.

Automate Your Recurring Billing Business with Subscription DNA® Subscription Billing, Membership & Paywall Software. Subscription DNA's powerful SaaS platform creatively integrates subscription billing, robust subscription management, paywalls and authentication. With our customized front-end options, customers can login and manage their own accounts right from your site. With our branded administrative console you can quickly manage accounts, automate recurring invoicing, analyze reports, communicate with targeted user groups, process transactions, generate payment requests, track member login statistics and much much more. With our hands-on team approach and flexibility, you can leverage ongoing support and custom development services on your terms.

Starting Price: $199 per month

37

Togai

Togai

Go live with pricing changes without engineering effort. Analyze what’s not working in your pricing, simulate different models, and launch new pricing, all in a matter of days, not months. Be ready for a 6-8 month cross-functional scramble. Between juggling invoicing and billing with finance to ensure nothing breaks, pleading for engineers’ time to make even the smallest code changes, and working with the sales team to ensure the new pricing fits into their CPQ and workflows, it can be a nightmare. Togai is the monetization suite you need to implement and optimize pricing without any dependencies. Simulate new pricing, track and meter usage, set up or schedule customized pricing models, automate your internal revenue workflows, and get actionable insights on your pricing, all with just a few clicks. Simulate different pricing models, and plans on your actual data using our pricing simulator.

Starting Price: $15 per month

38

MaxBill

MaxBill

MaxBill drives the operational transformation forward, supporting businesses on their journey to hyperautomation to help create, market and monetize new and existing services. Our smart BSS solution, built for both enterprises and SMBs, serves as a solid foundation for the company’s intelligent, partner- and customer-centric, data-driven and compliant digital ecosystem. We have been successfully implementing our solution to support telecommunication, utilities, gaming and energy service providers’ growth in highly competitive, rapidly-changing markets. Gain total control of your commercial operations with seamless integration of service connection life cycle with a complete meter-to-cash functionality, including billing, metering, payments, debt collection and revenue management. Grow your business, offer a new range of connected services and take advantage of the fast-moving market trends with our MaxBill technology-powered, automated billing and revenue management platform.

39

Ordway

Ordway

Ordway is a smart billing and revenue automation platform for scaling businesses that simplifies how companies price products, send invoices, collect payments, and recognize revenue. Designed for the SMB market, the cloud-based platform removes manual workarounds in the accounts receivable and revenue recognition functions and sits between an application/CRM and accounting system. The platform is built around flexible templates to handle a diverse customer base - multiple charges per contract, unique contact terms, etc. The platform generates accurate revenue schedules and finance teams can define custom revenue recognition templates. Monthly invoices are sent via automated billing runs that include all current and newly activated customers without manual reconciliation. A REST API-first methodology means integration with existing systems can be accomplished with minimal impact to engineering teams.

40

Solvimon

Solvimon

Unlock growth opportunities, streamline operations, and scale across borders with our next-generation pricing and billing platform. Effortlessly introduce usage-based or hybrid pricing models, and create superior customer experiences. Empower your sales team to tailor pricing and create winning quotes for enterprise clients, while billing automatically. Centrally manage localized pricing and billing entities without getting overloaded with manual work. Adopt best practices from fast-growing businesses while avoiding their pitfalls. Engineers no longer need to spend precious time on pricing and billing - they can focus on your core product instead. You can integrate with our REST APIs within a matter of days, not months.

41

Archetype

Archetype

Archetype is the pricing, billing, and metering stack you won't have to build. Create any pricing model and charge on usage, seats, and more with infinitely flexible pricing and automated invoicing. Automate operations, financial invoicing, and collection workflows. Save your engineering teams thousands of hours by building an in-house billing, metering, and invoicing stack. Archetype powers SaaS pricing, freeing your team to focus on product and saving your engineering and teams thousands of hours. Charge for total or peak usage. Offer free trials. Flexible pricing models scale with your needs. Seats, minutes, API calls, define your unit, log events, and start collecting. Monitor revenue, usage, and churn to address spikes and identify trends. Run real-time pricing experiments. Track conversion, usage, and churn to optimize your pricing. Let your users set usage thresholds. Alert your sales and support to resolve issues or upsell.

42

Invoice Options

Invoice Options

Invoice Options is an affordable billing software for small and medium telecommunications service providers. Specifically designed for local exchange carriers (LECs), competitive local exchange carriers (CLEC), Internet service providers (ISPs), Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), Inter-Exchange Carriers (IXCs), and wireless providers, this web-based solution offers end-user billing, customer care, CDR collection and mediation, order management and workflow, custom rating plans, flexible reporting, invoice printing, and more.

43

IntegriBill

Sandy Beaches Software

IntegriBill, our 5th generation telecom billing and customer service application, was built to increase voice providers' profitability by meeting regulatory compliance requirements, improving productivity, minimizing fees and taxes, reducing churn and providing best in class management tools. All this has been accomplished by listening to our clients for more than 30 years. A few of the many features the application offers include: • Invoice Creation • Taxation • Tax Mapping assistance • Jurisdiction determination and rating of call detail records • RESTful API • Traffic Studies for Federal Universal Service Fund minimization • Proper taxation of bundled sales items • White Label billing • ACH / Credit Card integration • Tax Exemption tracking If your telecom company isn't more profitable utilizing IntegriBill, we've failed.

44

Butter

Butter Payments

Butter is ending involuntary churn for direct-to-consumer and SaaS subscription brands by recovering failed payments and subscribers faster, and more efficiently, delivering 5%+ ARR growth. How do we do it? We build and deploy custom machine learning algorithms that analyze each individual failed payment, enabling us to determine the optimal approach and timing for retrying the transaction. Unlike traditional retry solutions that employ a generic "one-size-fits-all" approach, our tailored approach ensures that no potential recovered revenue is left on the table. Intelligently tackling failed payments and payment health leads to: Reduced Churn Rates - Reducing customers lost to failed payments decreases churn and the impacts compound over time Increased LTV:CAC Ratio - With fewer customers churning due to failed payments, your overall LTV improves Increased Top-line ARR - 5%-10% more revenue recovered from failed payments

45

Transaction Cloud

Transaction Cloud

Transaction Cloud is the most efficient platform for Payments, SalesTax/VAT/GST compliance (collection, filing), Subscription Management, Recurring Billing, Invoicing and Fraud Detection. It is used by companies around the world to simplify their payment, tax, accounting and risk management process. Transaction Cloud uses its innovative Singularity Integration architecture which saves 50% of resources and time required for integration. Moreover, the points of failure and maintenance cost over the long run are significantly reduced resulting in a reliable, resilient, and efficient system. Their pay as you go pricing is the most competitive in the industry. Their support for multiple currencies, major credit cards, wallet payments (ApplePay, GooglePay, PayPal) and fast interface results in high conversion rates. In conclusion, Transaction Cloud is a strong, customer focused, transparent, reliable and secure platform made exclusively for selling SaaS and digital products.

46

Invoice Cloud

Invoice Cloud

Invoice Cloud provides a complete, simple, and secure electronic bill presentment and payment solution. Our SaaS platform provides flexible and always-up-to-date online payment solutions that can be configured to meet the unique needs of your organization. And our simple-to-use interface engages customers throughout the payment process to deliver your highest ever e-payment adoption rates. With Invoice Cloud, your customers can move seamlessly from paper to paperless. Our platform drives the industry’s highest adoption rates, enabling significant benefits for our clients.

47

SaaSBox

SaaSBox

Launch your SaaS in hours instead of weeks. SaaSBox is a turnkey package of hosted software handling authentication, subscription, and dashboards for your SaaS. SaaSBox makes it super easy to launch a small business SaaS with no-code tools or standalone web applications. It is a bundle of essentials with login, payments, and backend integrations so that you don't have to build all of that from scratch. SaaSBox turnkey package enables you to go from an application to a fully functional SaaS business in a very short time. What is more, SaaSBox continues to save you precious time as you run your SaaS. SaaSBox maintains and upgrades its hosted features, so you can focus on making your core service better. SaaSBox's comprehensive billing system built on Stripe is designed to remove manual updates and support requests related to billing. See your active users on a daily basis through an admin dashboard.

Starting Price: $30 per month

48

RevCent

RevCent

RevCent is a cloud-based suite of business tools that empowers online sales, subscriptions, usage based billing, and trial offers. Manage the flow of credit cards with complex Payment Profiles, and recover declined charges with Decline Salvage Profiles. Dive deep into reporting with RevCent's tracking that lets you get insights on customers throughout their entire lifetime. Schedule a demo today for a Full overview of all the features.

Starting Price: % of sales volume

49

NEON

Code Desk

Neon has unique components like Billing, Rate Management, CRM, Reporting & Monitoring, Various integrations, Account Management etc to make your management tasks more efficient. NEON has all Billing, Invoicing, Settlement, Netting and other functionalities to meet all financial aspects of a business. Handle the end-to-end billing cycle for an ever-increasing number of interconnect partners, while reducing costs through increased efficiency and through reductions of errors in a traditionally error-prone process. Rate Management involves classified Customer & Vendor Rates, LCR, A-Z generation, Unlimited rate tables, Centralized rate management, Rate export in different switch formats, Rates scheduling, Import Vendor rate sheets etc. Increase productivity with all your sales communication in one place. CRM includes Opportunity/Task Management, Account Activity Monitoring, Lead and Account Management, workflow, and Online Contact Management.

50

iBill.io

iBill.io

Save thousands on building and managing Radius Authentication and Accounting software and servers. Automate your customer billing and spend less time on invoicing and more time building your ISP. Work on any device from anywhere where you have an internet connection. Easy to use software saves you time and makes managing your network easier. We have designed our pricing to be accessible to any internet service provider and free package allows new service providers to worry about rolling out their network and not on the cost of deploying software services.

Starting Price: $49 per month