IBM researchers have built and operated the world's smallest working computer circuits using an innovative new approach in which individual molecules move across an atomic surface like toppling dominoes.

The new "molecule cascade" technique enabled IBM (IBM) to make working digital-logic elements about 260,000 times smaller than those used in today's most advanced semiconductor chips.

The most complex circuit they built -- a 12-by-17-nanometer three-input sorter -- is so small that 190 billion could fit atop a standard pencil-top eraser. A nanometer is a billionth of a meter -- the length of five to 10 atoms in a line.

- - -

Mickey Mouse Microsoft: Walt Disney (DIS) and Microsoft are offering a co-branded Internet service that combines the MSN 8 software with Disney's content, called Disney on MSN.

The new service was announced Thursday by Michael Eisner, chairman and CEO of Disney, and Bill Gates, chairman and chief software architect of Microsoft, at the launch of the MSN 8 service in Central Park.

The service provides dial-up Internet access along with parental controls and other features of the MSN 8 service with age-appropriate start pages for children and a separate startup page for adults.

- - -

EarthLink crony admits guilt: A business associate of EarthLink co-founder Reed Slatkin has agreed to plead guilty to an elaborate scheme to obstruct the SEC's investigation of Slatkin.

Daniel Jacobs will plead guilty to conspiracy to obstruct justice when he is arraigned next month, the SEC and U.S. Attorney's Office said.

Slatkin, who also served as a financial adviser to celebrities, business executives and socialites, pleaded guilty in April to five counts of mail fraud, three counts of wire fraud, six counts of money laundering and one count of conspiracy to obstruct justice. Slatkin left EarthLink's (ELNK) board last year. His sentencing is pending.

In his plea agreement, Jacobs acknowledged that when the SEC began its investigation of Slatkin in 1999, he and others provided the agency with false documents concerning NAA Financial, a bogus Swiss brokerage firm that Slatkin claimed he was using to hold investors' funds.

Instead, Slatkin was using money collected from new investors to pay older investors while claiming he was delivering above-average returns.

- - -

Intel expands: Despite the technology slump, Intel opened a $2 billion expansion of its chip-making plant in New Mexico to meet demand when the economy rebounds.

The expansion, called Fab 11X, will build microprocessors on 12-inch silicon wafers using the most advanced process technology, said Paul Otellini, Intel's president.

Intel (INTC), which is best known for its Pentium processors, also makes communications processors, flash memory and other silicon-based chips. The expanded plant will build Pentium 4, Pentium 3 Mobile and other processors, Intel spokesman Chuck Mulloy said.

- - -

New X-mas chips: ATI launched a trio of graphics chips aimed at the mainstream market, hoping to cash in on Christmas sales and turn up the competitive heat on arch-rival Nvidia (NVDA).

ATI (ATYT) said cheaper versions of its Radeon 9500 and 9700 chips, designed to deliver sharper graphics for video games, are available now or within one month.

Derived from ATI's high-end Radeon 9700 Pro, launched in July, they are the first mainstream chips to support Microsoft's (MSFT) DirectX 9.0, the company said. Many game developers use that platform to create titles because it has a high degree of visual detail.

- - -

Myanmar traffic outlook: Internet usage in military-ruled Myanmar is expected to jump ten-fold in the next two years, although certain political Web sites and pornographic channels will continue to be blocked, an official from a state-run agency said.

Myanmar's ruling junta, in power for four decades, has promised to move toward democracy and gradually liberalize an economy tottering close to collapse.

The junta allowed the country to dial into the worldwide Web in January, but not many people in this impoverished nation of 51 million people can afford to go online.

Pyone Maung Maung, joint secretary of Myanmar's e-National Task Force, told Reuters 20,000 Myanmar people now surf the Internet and the number could rise to 200,000 in the next two years as connectivity improves.

- - -

Terra Lycos layoffs: Internet portal Terra Lycos has laid off 174 U.S. employees, or 21 percent of its American staff, in moves that reflect continuing challenges for Web companies.

Of the 174 job cuts, 112 hit the company's U.S. headquarters in Waltham.

Jennifer Risi, a spokeswoman for the company, said the reductions are the result of efficiencies created by the October 2000 merger of Lycos with Spain's Terra Networks.

Terra Lycos ranks as the sixth most popular U.S. Internet destination according to Neilsen/Net Ratings.

Terra Lycos is the parent company of Wired News.

AP and Reuters contributed to this report.