Houston Rockets star Shane Battier says he does not wanted to be traded because he wants to carry on playing with Yao Ming.

"Definitely I am not going anywhere next season because Yao is there," said Battier. "We had a pretty good regular season last year, we are a stronger team with him around. It's a lot of fun playing with him."

The 29-year-old swingman is on a China Tour organized by his Chinese shoe sponsor PEAK. He is scheduled to visit Xi'an and Guangdong after promotional work in Beijing.

The Rockets fired coach Jeff Van Gundy after the team lost to Utah Jazz 4-3 in the first round of the NBA Playoffs in May and appointed Rick Adelman as new head coach.

Battier has repeatedly been linked with a trade as Houston look to fill a hole at power forward.

"I think it's because we have a new coach, rumors are rumors," said Battier. "I had a long talk with Rick, everybody knows Rick is an expert on offense, but he also focuses on defense, so it is sure I am in his plans."

Joining Rockets from the Memphis Grizzlies in 2005, Battier contributed 10.3 points per game in 38.9 minutes. His 44.2 three-point percentage is seen an efficient weapon and offensive weapon, but it is his all-round defensive play that earns the most plaudits.

Under former coach Van Gundy, Rockets finished last season with a 52-30 record, their best in 10 years. At the heart of the success was a stingy defense, but too often the offense failed to fire.

They finished 17th in the league in scoring with 97 points per game and finished 27th in field goal percentage with a 44.5 percentage. The team struggled to find consistent offense in the postseason, shooting a miserable 41 percent in a first round exit to the Utah Jazz.

During the coach's previous coaching stint in Sacramento, the Kings led the NBA in scoring three times in eight seasons.

Battier said he is confident about the team's future next season.

"I know there are a lot of Rockets fans and also a lot of my fans in China, I won't let them down next season," he said. "With a new coach, Yao and (Tracy) McGrady, I believe we are able to move further than we did this year."

(China Daily 07/11/2007 page22)