In the Haut-Rhin, Alsace, Altkirch is the capital of the Sundgau region. It is at the crossroads of several countries, such as Switzerland or Germany, not far from the Franche-Comté and Burgundy. This small medieval city founded in the twelfth century and glorious past is installed on a rocky outcrop and an impressive architectural heritage recalls this interesting story.

Crossed by the Ill, the city of Altkirch is surrounded by forests and hills that have made it successful. Visitors enjoy the greenery and ideal for hiking and other horse riding or cycling. The Alsatian Jura, not far, adds charm to the landscape of the Alsatian city.

Ancient medieval city, full of Altkirch a significant built heritage and full of interest that blends harmoniously with the Alsatian Jura landscapes.

Located next to the City Hall Altkirch the Sundgauvien museum traces the history of the region but also its capital. In a beautiful Renaissance building, city models through time are presented, as suits or works of art. The building is located on the beautiful Republic Square that also hosts the Fountain of the Virgin, a vestige of the old church destroyed around 1845.

Neo-Romanesque church built in the late nineteenth century, Notre Dame has ancient treasures of beauty. Do not miss a Christ on the Mount of Olives dating from the fourteenth century, a baptistery in Vosges sandstone, a Pieta from the fourteenth century, the backbone, or the paintings of Jean-Jacques Henner, Sundgauvien illustrious painter. The church was built on the site of the old castle.

The ancient center of Altkirch is surrounded by ramparts and watchtowers which there remain several relics, like the old door, Bloch round or a square house, the last witness of the old castle.

Try by Saint Morand hospital, upstairs the oratory chapel is located in the old cell of the saint. The ceiling is covered with Baroque frescoes, like this beautiful climb of Saint-Morand.

The CARC, Rhenish Contemporary Art Centre offers year-round exhibitions of contemporary art. It is located in a Wilhelminian style building built in 1889.

Animated since the Middle Ages, the city still offers Altkirch of various events during the year.

Every Thursday morning, a traditional market takes place in the streets of downtown Altkirch. He was replaced on Saturday morning by a farmer's market.

In April, the International Film Festival of Altkirch, projection of short films and evenings with directors.

In May, find the flower market on the Place de la Halle au Blé.

In June, the Friendship Festival and its concerts and in September, the GB Sound Festival organized by the MJC. The program for this event, various concerts of contemporary music and urban art benefits.

All summer, the Tourist Office organizes its summer entertainment for the whole family: heritage tours, breakfasts on the farm, nature outings, crafts, etc.

In November, St. Catherine Fair, one of the oldest agricultural fairs in Alsace.

From December to early January, the city of Alkirch morphs with the Enchanted Forest. Throughout the city center, skits present the stories and legends of Sundgau and elsewhere. Many activities are organized during this period, Cave Fireflies Christmas exhibition at the museum Sundgauvien, narrated tours, chalets craftsmen, ice skating, etc.

All year round, exhibitions, concerts, theater, etc. the Corn Exchange.