The castle of Ferrette, one of the oldest castles in Alsace (beginning of the 12th century), offers a beautiful panoramic view of the Vosges, the Black Forest and the Jura. Just a stone’s throw from the Swiss border, a short walk leads to this castle which once belonged to the great Austrian Habsburg family…

Altkirch is the small capital of the Sundgau. This small, peaceful town can be visited both by a tour of its medieval remains and by the street art that covers the walls of some houses. This oscillation between history and modernity can also be discovered in its museums, as the town is home to both the Rhine Center for Contemporary Art and the Sundgauvien Museum, which traces the history and traditions of southern Alsace.

Only the south of Alsace has the secret of a culinary speciality that cannot be ignored… The delicious fried carp, accompanied by chips of course, and often served as much as you like: the fried carp is a very rich dish that is a must try! The restaurant owners of the Sundgau have formed an association to offer this culinary experience, “Sundgau, Routes de la Carpe Frite” and signs allow you to follow the gourmet itinerary and find all the restaurants on the Routes de la Carpe Frite!

In the unusual setting of a former Italian distillery, the Fernet-Branca Foundation is a surprising contemporary art space: Since the production of Fernet-Branca, the bitter herbal digestif, ceased, the building designed by a Milanese architect has been transformed into a museum space. It is now an essential art centre for this cross-border area at the gateway to Germany and Switzerland!

As its name suggests, the Three Countries Bridge is a bridge on the border between France, Germany and Switzerland, linking the town of Huningue in Alsace to the town of Weil-am-Rhein in Germany. Its length of 238m makes it the largest pedestrian and cyclist bridge in the world! Inaugurated in 2007, this bridge is a tangible symbol of peace in Europe and allows people to cross the Rhine on foot or by bike in complete peace of mind!

The Upper Alsace Memorial retraces the history of Alsace during the First World War and more precisely, that of Southern Alsace. Did you know that it was in the Sundgau that the first two French and German soldiers died on the Western Front? The Memorial recalls the meeting of these soldiers who killed each other about thirty hours before the official start of the First World War. But the museum also has a large collection of objects as well as an immersive trench, a must-see!

The South of Alsace is crossed by three EuroVelo’s, EuroVelo 5, 6 and 15, which makes it a great cycling destination! Indeed, its quiet, sometimes hilly landscapes or punctuated by locks lend themselves perfectly to cycling or slow-mode excursions…

The Little Alsatian Camargue is the oldest and largest nature reserve in Alsace! This preserved area was created in 1982 and is home to many varieties of trees and flowers and a multitude of animal species. Formed by the flooding of the Rhine, this wetland reserve allows the observation of migratory birds, batrachians, dragonflies and wild horses. The Camargue is working on the reintroduction of salmon into the Rhine, setting up observatories and raising awareness of nature. The nature reserve is freely accessible and offers guided tours for school groups and adults.

The Landskron Castle is one of the many castles in Alsace and is located a short distance from the Swiss border. Built in the 13th century, the castle belonged to the famous House of Habsburg, was fortified by Vauban and turned into a garrison before being destroyed by the Austrians and Bavarians in 1814. Today, its ruins still dominate the Sundgau and offer panoramic views towards Basel and the Black Forest. It is maintained by a Franco-Swiss association and a short hike connects the castle with the abbey of Mariastein in Switzerland, a true place of pilgrimage.

Standing on a small hill 1 km from the Swiss border, the Château du Morimont was built in the 12th century and then destroyed during the Thirty Years’ War by French troops. Its ramparts, guard towers and exceptional vaulted cellar can be visited all year round.