Altkirch, a town of nearly 6,000 inhabitants located in the Haut-Rhin department in Alsace, has chosen Trela, the alert system dedicated to local authorities for risk management, prevention, mobilization and protection of the population against risks.

The city's issues

On the border with Switzerland and Germany and at the gateway to Burgundy, the capital of the Sundgau is a complex territory exposed to a multitude of risks:

natural risks: flooding, rising water levels on the Ill, land movement, seismic risks

industrial risks: 25 Seveso sites and 2 nuclear power plants nearby

risks linked to the transport of dangerous goods via the Mulhouse North sorting station and the Maurice-Lemaire tunnel, one of the longest in France, which allows the Vosges massif to be crossed in its middle

A technological breakthrough

Nicolas Jander, mayor of Altkirch, wanted to equip himself with a reliable and innovative alert system to effectively warn his citizens in case of an incident. "Trela is built around a central mapping system linked to the Geohazard databases developed by the State and allows us to precisely target the areas where these alerts are broadcast." Mr. Jander continued: "If we chose Trela, it's also because it's the complementary solution to the FR-Alert device deployed at the level of the prefectures, it's a 100% Made in France solution that scrupulously respects the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and that the data hosting is done on a French cloud."

Charlotte Thomas, Director of Trela's offer, adds: "The health crisis and climate change have largely demonstrated, over the last few months, the importance of developing a culture of risk in France and the urgency of providing cities with advanced technological tools to enable elected officials to exercise their power to alert the population in case of emergency situations. Mr. Jander and his team have been aware of this reality for years and we are very proud to accompany the municipality of Alkirch in the modernization of its warning system. Available since November 2022, Trela has already contracted with about ten cities in France."

-----

About Intersec

Intersec offers solutions for using mobile and location data to help institutions meet public safety and citizen protection requirements. In addition to FR-Alert, Intersec provides mayors and presidents of local authorities with an innovative alert solution called Trela. Internationally, Intersec's solutions are deployed in 50 countries to reach, locate and map nearly one billion mobile devices 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and the public alert solutions cover 30% of the European Union's population. At Intersec, "Privacy by Design" goes beyond accepted standards to ensure regulatory compliance, regardless of where our customers operate. For more information: intersec.com and trela.fr.

Press