Vanessa Anne Hudgens ( HUJ-ənz; born December 14, 1988) is an American actress and singer. After making her feature film debut in Thirteen (2003), Hudgens rose to fame portraying Gabriella Montez in the High School Musical film series (2006–2008), which brought her significant mainstream media success. The success of the first film led Hudgens to acquire a recording contract with Hollywood Records, with whom she released two studio albums, V (2006) and Identified (2008).

Since the release of her studio albums and the High School Musical franchise, Hudgens has focused on her acting career. She appeared in the films Bandslam (2009), Beastly, Sucker Punch (both 2011), Journey 2: The Mysterious Island, Spring Breakers (both 2012), Second Act (2018), Bad Boys for Life (2020), and Tick, Tick...Boom! (2021). She starred in the Netflix Christmas movies The Princess Switch (2018) and its sequels (2020 and 2021) and The Knight Before Christmas (2019), and co-produced the latter three.

Hudgens played the role of Emily Locke in the NBC series Powerless (2017). She made her Broadway debut playing the title role in the musical revival of Gigi (2015) and had roles in two of Fox's live musical productions: Rizzo in Grease Live! (2016) and Maureen Johnson in Rent: Live (2019). In 2022, Hudgens co-hosted the Met Gala in Manhattan.

Early life

Hudgens was born in Salinas, California, and was raised along the West Coast, from Oregon to Southern California. Her mother, Gina (née Guangco), held a succession of office jobs, and her father, Gregory Hudgens, was a firefighter. She has a younger sister, Stella, who is also an actress. She was raised as a Catholic. Her father, who died of cancer in February 2016, was of Irish, French and Native American descent, and her mother is Filipina, a native of Manila. All of her grandparents were musicians.

Career

1998–2004: Early roles

Starting in 1998, Hudgens performed in musical theater as a singer, and appeared in local productions of Carousel, The Wizard of Oz, The King and I, The Music Man, and Cinderella, among others. Two years after her career in stage plays and musicals, she began auditioning for commercials and television shows, and her family moved to Los Angeles after she won a role in a television commercial. She began her acting career at age 15, and she briefly attended Orange County High School of the Arts, followed by homeschooling with tutors.

Hudgens had her first acting role in an episode of the sitcom Still Standing, airing on CBS in 2002, in which she portrayed Tiffany. Later that year, she guest starred in an episode of the series Robbery Homicide Division, airing on CBS. Hudgens made her theatrical debut in the 2003 drama film Thirteen, in the supporting role of Noel. The film, which revolved around teenager Tracy trying to fit in and getting caught up in the wrong crowd, was somewhat of a commercial success, grossing $10 million worldwide. Despite its minor commercial success, the film received positive critical reviews. USA Today called Thirteen the most "powerful of all recent wayward-youth sagas". Hudgens subsequently landed a role in the 2004 science fiction-adventure film Thunderbirds, based on the 1960s television series. Hudgens portrayed the character of Tin-tin. The film was a commercial failure and was strongly criticized for "abandoning the original concepts".

2005–2008: High School Musical and music

In January 2006, Hudgens played Gabriella Montez, one of the lead roles in the Disney Channel Original Movie High School Musical. The film saw Hudgens portraying the new girl at high school who falls for the captain of the basketball team. The two later reveal a passion for singing, and audition for the school play together. Hudgens starred alongside Zac Efron and Ashley Tisdale, the former of which she was partnered up with during the auditioning process due to their "chemistry". It was Disney Channel's most-watched film that year with 7.7 million viewers in its premiere broadcast in the US, until August's premiere of The Cheetah Girls 2, which achieved 8.1 million viewers. For the film, Hudgens recorded numerous songs which had commercial success. The song "Breaking Free", a duet with Zac Efron, became Hudgens' highest peak on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 4, and number 9 in the UK. Following the success of the film, Hudgens released her debut studio album, V, on September 26, 2006. It sold 34,000 copies in its first week, and debuted at number 24 on the US Billboard 200 chart. In February 2007, the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America. As of August 2009, the album has sold 570,000 copies in the US. It was preceded by two singles, "Come Back to Me" and "Say OK", both of which were moderately successful in several countries. Both singles received promotion on Disney Channel, with the music videos for both premiering on the channel.

In 2007, Hudgens reprised her role as Gabriella in High School Musical 2, released on August 17. The premiere was watched by over 17.2 million viewers in the US, almost 10 million more than its predecessor, making it the most-watched Disney Channel Original Movie of all time. Disney Channel aired a weekly program called Road to High School Musical 2, beginning on June 8, and leading up to the premiere of High School Musical 2 in August. The show offered viewers a behind-the-scenes look into the production of the movie. The world premiere of the opening number "What Time Is It" was on Radio Disney May 25, 2007, and similarly "You Are the Music in Me" premiered on July 13, 2007. The film was generally well received by critics. USA Today's Robert Bianco awarded the film three stars out of four, stating that High School Musical 2 was "sweet, smart, bursting with talent and energy, and awash in innocence". While critics enjoyed the film, they noted that the timing of its premiere seemed odd, premiering just when school was about to resume again whereas the film's plot involved the gang going on summer vacation.

Her second studio album, Identified, was released on July 1, 2008. It sold 22,000 copies in its first week, 12,000 less than V. Despite the drop in sales, the album debuted at number 23 on the Billboard 200, one spot higher than V. The album was preceded by one single, "Sneakernight", which peaked at number 88 on the Billboard Hot 100. Following the commercial failure of the album, Hudgens parted ways with Hollywood Records. Hudgens again reprised her role in High School Musical 3: Senior Year, the first film from the franchise to be released theatrically. It opened at number one at the North American box office in October 2008, earning $42 million in its first weekend, which broke the record previously held by Mamma Mia! for the biggest opening by a musical. The film finished with $252 million worldwide, which exceeded Disney's expectations.

2009–2017: Mainstream film and television

Following the completion of the High School Musical series, Hudgens confirmed that she was taking a break from her music career to focus more on acting. She played a supporting role in a musical comedy Bandslam, which was released theatrically on August 14, 2009. Hudgens plays "Sa5m", a 15-year-old awkward freshman with untapped talents. Although Bandslam was commercially unsuccessful, Hudgens' performance received praise from critics. David Waddington of the North Wales Pioneer noted that Hudgens "outshines the rest of the cast, failing to fit in with the outcast narrative and making the inevitable climactic ending all the more expected", and Philip French of The Guardian compared her acting to Thandie Newton and Dorothy Parker.

In 2010, Hudgens made a return to theater productions and starred in the musical Rent as Mimi. The stage production ran from August 6–8, 2010, at the Hollywood Bowl. Her involvement in the production drew negative comments, but director Neil Patrick Harris defended his decision with casting Hudgens by saying, "Vanessa [Hudgens] is awesome. She's a friend. I asked her to come in and sing to make sure she had the chops for it. And she was very committed and seemed great."

In 2011, Hudgens starred with Alex Pettyfer in the film Beastly, based on Alex Flinn's 2007 novel. She played one of the main characters, Linda Taylor, and described her as "the 'beauty' of the story but not the stereotypical beauty everyone thinks of." Hudgens and Pettyfer were recognized as ShoWest Stars of Tomorrow. Beastly was released on March 4, 2011, to mostly negative reviews. It was ranked No. 45 in The Times' predicted "50 Biggest Movies of 2010". The film was screened at ShoWest and drew enthusiastic reactions from the luncheon crowd of exhibition officials. The film went on to make $28 million worldwide as of 2012. Hudgens also starred as one of the five female leads in the action film Sucker Punch, directed by Zack Snyder. She played Blondie, an institutionalized girl in an asylum. The film was released in March 2011, and grossed $19 million in its first weekend at the North American box office, opening at number two. By the end of its run, Sucker Punch totaled $89 million worldwide. Though the film's content was derided, it received some recognition for the visual effects of the fantasy sequences. Sucker Punch received a nomination at the 2011 Scream Awards for Best F/X, and its stunt work was nominated for a Taurus Award.

In 2012, Hudgens starred alongside Dwayne Johnson and Josh Hutcherson in the science fantasy action-adventure film Journey 2: The Mysterious Island (2012), the sequel to the 2008 film Journey to the Center of the Earth, playing Hutcherson's love interest. The film earned $325 million worldwide during its theatrical run, which outperformed its predecessor. It received generally mixed to negative reviews from critics. The consensus from Rotten Tomatoes is: "Aggressively unambitious, Journey 2 might thrill teen viewers, but most others will find it too intense for young audiences and too cartoonishly dull for adults".

In 2013, Hudgens starred alongside Selena Gomez, Ashley Benson, Rachel Korine and James Franco in the film Spring Breakers. The story followed four college-aged girls who decide to rob a fast food restaurant in order to pay for their spring break. It was released theatrically in March 2013, receiving generally positive reviews. ..... To coincide with the film, Hudgens released the dubstep-influenced song "$$$ex", with a music video featuring clips from the film. The song features guest vocals from YLA, and was produced by Rock Mafia. ..... I told my agent that I never want to do it ever again." Later that year, Hudgens played Cindy Paulson in The Frozen Ground, a film based on the Robert Hansen case wherein she plays his only victim who escaped. She co-starred with John Cusack and Nicolas Cage. She also starred in the action film Machete Kills, based on the eponymous character of the same name from the Spy Kids franchise. The film was directed by Robert Rodriguez. By the end of the year, Hudgens starred alongside Michael Shannon, Joel Marsh Garland, Dree Hemingway, and Nick Lashaway in Spike Jonze's short comedy-drama film Choose You. The cast performed the film live as a skit at the first YouTube Music Awards, to the music of Avicii.

In 2014, Hudgens starred as a pregnant teenage runaway girl in the drama film Gimme Shelter with Brendan Fraser, written and directed by Ron Krauss.

In 2015, Hudgens starred in the Columbia Pictures' comedy horror film Freaks of Nature. That same year, she took on the title role in a production of Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe's Gigi, which opened at the Kennedy Center from January 16 to February 12, before transferring to Broadway on April 8. The production closed on June 21.

On January 31, 2016, Hudgens starred in the role of Rizzo in Grease Live!, Fox's live broadcast based on the original Broadway musical. Hudgens dedicated her performance to her father, who died from cancer one day before the special aired.

In 2017, Hudgens played Emily Locke on NBC's comedy series Powerless, which was based on DC Comics characters. It was cancelled after one season. That same year, Hudgens was featured on Shawn Hook's single "Reminding Me" and starred in the music video. She hosted the 2017 Billboard Music Awards with rapper Ludacris, which premiered on May 21. Hudgens also served as a permanent judge alongside Nigel Lythgoe and Mary Murphy on the 14th season of the American reality dance show So You Think You Can Dance.

2018–present: Career expansion

In 2018, Hudgens starred in the romantic comedy film Dog Days, alongside Finn Wolfhard and Nina Dobrev. She collaborated with electronic dance music duo Phantoms on the single "Lay With Me", released in September 2018. She starred in the Netflix film The Princess Switch in November 2018, in which she portrayed both a European duchess and a pastry chef from Chicago, who temporarily switch roles. In December 2018, she co-starred opposite Jennifer Lopez in the comedy film Second Act, directed by Peter Segal. Hudgens returned for the 15th season of So You Think You Can Dance, as part of the panel of permanent judges. The same year, she essayed the role of Vanessa Morales in a production by Kennedy Center of Lin-Manuel Miranda's original musical In the Heights.

In January 2019, Hudgens starred in another Fox live musical presentation, Rent: Live, as Maureen Johnson. Hudgens also co-starred with Mads Mikkelsen in the Netflix film adaption of Víctor Santos's 2013 graphic novel Polar: Came From the Cold. In November 2019, she starred in and served as a producer on the Netflix film The Knight Before Christmas.

In 2020, Hudgens appeared in the third entry in the Bad Boys franchise, Bad Boys for Life, which grossed over $426 million worldwide. In November that year, she starred in and produced the Netflix film The Princess Switch's sequel, The Princess Switch: Switched Again, portraying an additional third role. By the end of the year, Hudgens hosted the MTV Movie & TV Awards: Greatest of All Time television special, which highlighted the greatest moments of film and television since the 1980s, as well as moments from past editions of the award ceremony.

In 2021, she voiced the lead character, Sunny Starscout, in the animated Netflix film My Little Pony: A New Generation. In November 2021, Hudgens appeared in Netflix's biographical film adaption of the musical Tick, Tick... Boom!, as playwright Jonathan Larson's friend Karessa Johnson, directed by Lin-Manuel Miranda. Hudgens lent her voice to songs on the film's soundtrack. Later that month, she appeared in the third installment of Netflix's The Princess Switch film series, The Princess Switch 3: Romancing the Star, directed by Mike Rohl. Hudgens reprised her three roles from the second installment, and also served as a producer.

In 2022, Hudgens starred alongside Alexandra Shipp, Kiersey Clemons, and Ezra Miller in the Paramount Pictures' action thriller film, Asking for It. The film released in theaters, digitally, and on Blu-ray on March 4. Later that month, she co-hosted the 94th Academy Awards' red carpet pre-show with Terrence J, Sofia Carson, and Brandon Maxwell. In May 2022, Hudgens co-hosted the Met Gala red carpet livestream for Vogue with actress and television personality La La Anthony, and the magazine's editor-at-large Hamish Bowles. In June 2022, she co-hosted the 30th MTV Movie & TV Awards with Tayshia Adams, with Hudgens hosting the first half of the ceremony for film and scripted television.

Upcoming projects

Hudgens will be voicing the character of Willow in the Netflix 3D anime-style series Army of the Dead: Lost Vegas, which will serve as a prequel to the 2021 zombie heist film Army of the Dead. She is re-teaming with director and executive producer Zack Snyder for the series, after they previously worked together on Sucker Punch. The series is reported to release sometime in 2022.

Hudgens will star in Hamish Linklater and Lily Rabe's film Downtown Owl, alongside Rabe, Ed Harris, Finn Wittrock, Jack Dylan Grazer, and August Blanco Rosenstein. It is an adaption of Chuck Klosterman's 2008 novel of the same name, and is being produced by Sony Pictures' production label Stage 6 Films. Principal photography began in Saint Paul, Minnesota in April 2022.

Hudgens has also signed to lead and executive produce the trucker adventure-drama film Big Rig. Principal photography is slated to begin later in 2022.

Personal life

In 2005, Hudgens began dating her High School Musical co-star, Zac Efron. Their relationship was highly publicized until their breakup in 2010. From 2011 to 2020, Hudgens was in a relationship with actor Austin Butler. By 2021, Hudgens was in a relationship with Major League Baseball shortstop Cole Tucker. Hudgens and Tucker got engaged in February 2023, and were married on December 2, 2023, in Tulum, Mexico.

Hudgens was raised Catholic but now identifies as a non-denominational Christian. She attends the Los Angeles affiliate church of Hillsong Church.

In May 2016, Hudgens paid $1,000 in restitution for damage of U.S. Forest Service property by carving initials within a heart on a rock in the Coconino National Forest and displaying it on her personal Instagram feed.

In March 2020, Hudgens posted an Instagram video where she stated that it is "inevitable" that people will die from the COVID-19 pandemic. The video caused controversy as critics accused her of minimizing the impact of the disease and the need for preventive measures. She subsequently apologized for her "insensitive" remarks.

As of October 2021, Hudgens is living in the "Little DeMille" house, which director Cecil B. DeMille built for his mistress. Before Hudgens, actor Gary Oldman owned the property.

Leaked photos

..... A statement from her publicist said that the photo was taken privately and it was unfortunate that they were released on the Internet. Hudgens later apologized, saying that she was "embarrassed over the situation" and regretted having "taken [those] photos". In January 2008, Hudgens released a statement indicating that she declined to comment further on the subject. In October 2007, OK! magazine speculated that Hudgens would be dropped from High School Musical 3 as a result of the explicit images, but The Walt Disney Company denied this, stating, "Vanessa has apologized for what was obviously a lapse in judgment. We hope she's learned a valuable lesson."

..... Hudgens' representatives did not comment, though her lawyers requested the removal of the pictures. In late 2009, Hudgens sued www.moejackson.com for posting ... "self-portrait photographs" of her taken on a mobile phone in a private home. .....

Filmography

Film

Year Title Role Notes 2003 Thirteen Noel 2004 Thunderbirds Tin-Tin Kyrano 2008 High School Musical 3: Senior Year Gabriella Montez 2009 Bandslam Sam The Ultimate Idol Herself Documentary 2011 Beastly Lindy Taylor Sucker Punch Blondie 2012 Journey 2: The Mysterious Island Kailani Laguatan Spring Breakers Candy 2013 Choose You Ex-girlfriend Short film The Frozen Ground Cindy Paulson Machete Kills Cereza Desdemona Gimme Shelter Agnes "Apple" Bailey 2015 Freaks of Nature Lorelei 2018 Dog Days Tara The Princess Switch Stacy De Novo / Lady Margaret Second Act Zoe 2019 Polar Camille The Knight Before Christmas Brooke Winters Also producer 2020 Bad Boys for Life Kelly The Princess Switch: Switched Again Stacy De Novo / Lady Margaret / Fiona Also producer 2021 My Little Pony: A New Generation Sunny Starscout Voice role Tick, Tick... Boom! Karessa Johnson The Princess Switch 3: Romancing the Star Stacy De Novo / Lady Margaret / Fiona Also producer 2022 Asking for It Beatrice 2023 Dead Hot: Season of the Witch Herself Documentary; also co-executive producer Downtown Owl Naomi 2024 Untitled fourth Bad Boys film Kelly Filming TBD French Girl Ruby Collins Filming Untitled Paul Soriano-directed travel documentary Herself Filming

Key Denotes films that have not yet been released

Television

Year Title Role Notes 2002 Still Standing Tiffany Episode: "Still Rocking" Robbery Homicide Division Nicole Episode: "Had" 2003 The Brothers García Lindsay Episode: "New Tunes" 2005 Quintuplets Carmen Episode: "The Coconut Kapow" 2006 Drake & Josh Rebecca Episode: "Little Sibling" High School Musical Gabriella Montez Television film; Disney Channel Original Movie The Suite Life of Zack & Cody Corrie 4 episodes (season 2) 2007 High School Musical 2 Gabriella Montez Television film; Disney Channel Original Movie 2009 Robot Chicken Lara Lor-Van / Butterbear / Erin Esurance Voice role; episode: "Especially the Animal Keith Crofford" 2012 Punk'd Herself Episode: "Lucy Hale" 2016 High School Musical: 10th Anniversary Herself Television special Grease Live! Betty Rizzo Television special Project Runway All Stars Herself Episode: "Let it Flow"; guest judge (season 5) 2017 Powerless Emily Locke Lead role 2017 Billboard Music Awards Herself Television special; host Running Wild with Bear Grylls Herself Episode: "Vanessa Hudgens" Drop the Mic Herself Winner; episode: "Vanessa Hudgens vs. Michael Bennett / James Corden vs. Nicole Richie" 2017–2018 So You Think You Can Dance Herself Seasons 14–15; judge 2018 RuPaul's Drag Race All Stars Herself Guest judge; episode: "All-Star Variety Show" (season 3) 2018–2019 ... History Joan of Arc / Marge Callaghan / Mata Hari Guest star; episodes: "The Middle Ages", "Baseball", "Femme Fatales" (seasons 5, 6) 2019 Rent: Live Maureen Johnson Television special 2020 MTV Movie & TV Awards: Greatest of All Time Herself Television special; host The Disney Family Singalong Herself Television special 2021 The Boulet Brothers' Dragula Herself Guest judge; episode: "Nosferatu Beach Party" (season 4) Savage x Fenty Show Vol. 3 Herself Television special; runway model 2022 94th Academy Awards Herself Television special; pre-show host 2022 Met Gala Live Herself Livestream special; host 30th MTV Movie & TV Awards Herself Television special; host Entergalactic Karina Television special; voice role Eli Roth’s Haunted House: Trick-VR-Treat Fairy/dollmaker VR web special 2023 95th Academy Awards Herself Television special; pre-show host Rennervations Herself Episode: "Chicago: Building a Mobile Music Bus (ft. Vanessa Hudgens)" TBA Army of the Dead: Lost Vegas Willow Voice role

Key Denotes series that have not yet been released

Stage

Year Title Role Venue(s) 1998 Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas! The Musical Cindy-Lou Who Old Globe Theatre The King and I Unknown Various locations 1999 ... Yankees The Wizard of Oz Dorothy Gale 2000 Cinderella Cinderella The Little Mermaid Sebastian (9:52–9:55) 2001 Charlotte's Web Fern Arable The Hunchback of Notre Dame Quasimodo 2002 A Christmas Carol Unknown Carousel 2003 Evita The Music Man 2010 Rent Mimi Marquez Hollywood Bowl 2012 The 24 Hour Plays Vanessa Broadway 2015 Gigi Gigi Kennedy Center / Broadway 2018 In the Heights Vanessa Kennedy Center

Discography

Main article: Vanessa Hudgens discography

See also: High School Musical discography

V (2006)

Identified (2008)

Concert tours

Headlining

Identified Summer Tour (2008)

Co-headlining

High School Musical: The Concert (2006–07)

Opening act

The Cheetah Girls – The Party's Just Begun Tour (2006)

Awards and nominations

Year Association Category Nominated work Result Ref. 2006 Imagen Foundation Awards Best Actress – Television High School Musical Nominated Radio Disney Music Awards Best Female Artist N/A Nominated Favorite TV Star Who Sings N/A Nominated Best Song (shared with Zac Efron) "Breaking Free" Nominated Best New Artist N/A Nominated Best Team Anthem (shared with High School Musical cast) "We're All in This Together" Won Best Dance Style (shared with High School Musical cast) High School Musical Nominated Best Song To Listen To While Getting Ready For School (shared with Zac Efron) "Start of Something New" Nominated Favorite Karaoke Song (shared with Zac Efron) "Breaking Free" Nominated Best True Ringer Ring Tone (shared with Zac Efron) "Breaking Free" Won Best Video That Rocks "Come Back to Me" Won Best Song to Play While Doing Homework (shared with Zac Efron) "Start of Something New" Nominated Best Song to Wake Up To (shared with Zac Efron) "Start of Something New" Nominated Best Song From A Movie (shared with Zac Efron) "Breaking Free" Nominated Best Song You've Heard a Million Times and Still Love "Come Back to Me" Nominated Best Song To Put On Repeat (shared with High School Musical cast) "We're All in This Together" Nominated Best Song To Put On Repeat "Come Back To Me" Nominated Most Stylish Singer N/A Nominated Teen Choice Awards Choice TV Chemistry (shared with Zac Efron) High School Musical Won Choice TV Breakout Star High School Musical Nominated 2007 Choice Music: Breakout Artist – Female N/A Won Young Artist Awards Best Young Actress - TV Movie, Miniseries or Special High School Musical Nominated Radio Disney Music Awards Best Top 40 Artist N/A Nominated Best Team Anthem (shared with Zac Efron) "You Are the Music in Me" Nominated Most Stylish Singer N/A Nominated Best Soundtrack Song (shared with Zac Efron) "Gotta Go My Own Way" Won Best Soundtrack Song (shared with High School Musical 2 cast) "What Time Is It?" Nominated Best Video That Rocks "Say OK" Nominated 2008 Teen Choice Awards Choice Hottie N/A Won 2009 Kids' Choice Awards Favorite Movie Actress High School Musical 3: Senior Year Won MTV Movie Awards Breakthrough Female Performance High School Musical 3: Senior Year Nominated Best Kiss (shared with Zac Efron) High School Musical 3: Senior Year Nominated Teen Choice Awards Choice Movie Actress: Music/Dance High School Musical 3: Senior Year Nominated Choice Movie: Liplock (shared with Zac Efron) High School Musical 3: Senior Year Nominated Choice Hottie N/A Nominated 2010 ShoWest Female Star of Tomorrow N/A Won Australian Kids' Choice Awards Cutest Couple (shared with Zac Efron) High School Musical 3: Senior Year Won 2011 People's Choice Awards Favorite Movie Star Under 25 N/A Nominated Teen Choice Awards Red Carpet Fashion Icon – Female N/A Nominated Choice Movie: Liplock (shared with Alex Pettyfer) Beastly Nominated 2012 Choice Movie Actress: Sci-Fi/Fantasy Journey 2: The Mysterious Island Nominated 2013 Kids' Choice Awards Favorite Movie Actress Journey 2: The Mysterious Island Nominated Alliance of Women Film Journalists Awards Actress Most in Need of a New Agent

(shared with Ashley Benson, Rachel Korine & Selena Gomez) Spring Breakers Nominated 2014 MTV Movie Awards Best Kiss (shared with Ashley Benson & James Franco) Spring Breakers Nominated Young Hollywood Awards Trendsetter Award N/A Won 2015 Broadway.com Audience Awards Breakthrough Performance (Female) Gigi Won 2017 Teen Choice Awards "See Her" Award N/A Won MTV Movie & TV Awards Best Musical Moment (shared with the cast of Grease: Live) "You're the One That I Want" Won 2018 Broadway World Washington DC Awards Best Actress in a Musical – Large Professional Theatre In The Heights Won 2019 Napa Valley Film Festival Blackbird Vineyards Visionary Award N/A Won 2020 People's Choice Awards Female Movie Star of 2020 Bad Boys for Life Nominated Action Movie Star of 2020 Nominated 2021 Kids' Choice Awards Favorite Movie Actress The Princess Switch: Switched Again Nominated

See also

In Spanish: Vanessa Hudgens para niños