Little Red Riding Hood’s Zombie Hunt - game

Download link, version 4 (first uploaded version)

Platforms: Windows XP to 10 (Windows 8-compatible)

While this isn’t the best game I’ve made (so I’m not expecting much in terms of feedback), I’d like to let more people than just a few friends of mine know about this game, so here you go.

I had an urge to make a game based off of Little Red Riding Hood’s Zombie BBQ since that game was so neat and also a game that has characters from fairy tales. While this isn’t what I had in mind for the latter, I decided to merge them into this small project.

I took some general feedback from Ellis, such as not dragging out the boss battles for too long when there’s nothing new to offer and such. This is also another attempt at creating an easier game that wasn’t nightmarishly hard as my Touhou fangames. Also, I introduced some features that weren’t present in my Touhou fangames, like breaks and regular enemies.

Anyway, gameplay.

There are 3 stages (decided not to bore you guys for too long), with attacks from the later stages (except for the final stage) incorporated into the 3 bosses (which are characters from popular stories) and you control Little Red Riding Hood and shoot zombies. In the second, harder mode, you aim with the cursor whereas in the first, you shoot straight up. You’ll come across 3 bosses, the first of which is Alice (dedicated to Alice fans and fairy tale lovers). You’ll even see a reference to the zombie “BBQing” from the original title.

There are two game modes, plus a bonus boss. In addition, there is a demo of a concept thing for an Atari 2600 version of the game. The music in this game is meant to give the feeling of the music used in the original game.

My first version of the game lacked a lot of things in this current version (version 4). The first two battles were more alike and generic. For instance, Alice had only a stream of bullets aimed at you plus the bullet shower, while Gretel had only 3 streams of bullets and the red candy shower. As such, Pinocchio was really the hardest of the 3 bosses and had something to offer. However, I incorporated some attacks from Santa Claus and Zombzilla into the bosses too to spice them up so that they are more fun than just the generic attacks I originally had. I even added the Chesire Cat, which should be recognizable to those who haven’t read the original books much.

Also, this is perhaps a relatively larger game since I had 4 pieces of mp3′s in it. And this game was somewhat of an experiment to create a full game that could be run on Windows 8 even so I’m proud it worked out.

Anyway while this game certainly is not as fun as the original, I hope you’ll have some enjoyable time seeing the renditions of the characters.