DOHA: Syria effectively reached the Asian Cup last 16 for the first time in their history on Tuesday with a 1-0 win over India, sending their opponents home.

Hector Cuper’s side finished Group B with four points and are set to go through to the knockouts as one of the best four third-placed teams.

Omar Khribin was Syria’s hero, his 76th-minute goal the winner.

Igor Stimac’s India head home with three defeats and no goals.

Syria did most of the attacking in the opening exchanges in Doha but were restricted to speculative shots, as they sought their first goal and win at this Asian Cup.

They were lucky not to be reduced to 10 men after 25 minutes, when Mahmood Al-Aswad violently chest-barged Mahesh Singh Naorem to the ground, having been dragged back in possession.

Referee Sivakorn Pu-udom booked both players, in a generally lenient performance.

Moments later, the Thai official declined fierce penalty appeals from the Syrians for a trip in the box on Ammar Ramadan.

By half-time, with Uzbekistan trailing Australia 1-0 in the other match, a win would have seen Syria tie the Uzbeks on four points.

But they trailed their rivals on goal difference, and would need to score a few to take second place and an automatic place in the knockouts.

Minutes after the break, India’s defense was weakened as center-back Sandesh Jhingan limped off with an injury, replaced by the less experienced Nikhil Poojary.

Syria continued to hog possession, but could not conjure a real chance.

India, who were also yet to register a goal in Qatar, could not connect with striker Sunil Chhetri, despite the 39-year-old’s spirited running.

With 20 minutes left and many goals required, Syria coach Cuper sent on forward Alaa Al-Dali, replacing Ramadan.

As Indian legs tired, Syria finally mustered a moment of slick football 14 minutes from time, Ibrahim Hesar delivering a cutback from the left for Khribin to drill into the net.

LONDON: This time, Manuel Akanji made no mistake from the penalty spot.

After a 1-1 draw, Manchester City beat Manchester United 7-6 in a penalty shootout to win the Community Shield at Wembley Stadium on Saturday, with Akanji scoring the clinching penalty.

The Switzerland defender had different emotions after his last shootout — at the European Championship last month when he was the only player to not convert a penalty kick in a loss to England in the quarterfinals. On that occasion, Akanji took Switzerland’s first attempt.

“I let the others shoot first,” Akanji said, “because obviously when you miss a penalty, you don’t go into the next one with that much confidence.”

City ended a run of three straight losses in the traditional curtain-raiser to the English soccer season, between the winners of last season’s Premier League (City) and FA Cup (United). Pep Guardiola’s team had been beaten by Leicester, Liverpool and Arsenal over the past three years.

And it goes some way to avenging the loss to United in the FA Cup final 77 days ago, when City were beaten 2-1 to miss out on another league-and-cup double.

It looked like United would be claiming another Wembley win over their neighbor when second-half substitute Alejandro Garnacho cut inside and drove a low shot inside the near post in the 82nd minute.

City equalized in the 89th when Bernardo Silva, also a substitute, headed in from Oscar Bobb’s cross.

The game went straight to penalties — there is no extra time in the Community Shield — and Silva saw his shot saved by Andre Onana off City’s first attempt.

Jadon Sancho failed off United’s fourth kick as Ederson tipped the shot onto the post. It was more penalty heartache for Sancho, who was one of three England players to miss in the shootout loss to Italy in the Euro 2020 final at Wembley.

United defender Jonny Evans, the team’s eighth penalty-taker, chipped his effort over the crossbar to give Akanji the chance to win it for City.

Against England in Dusseldorf, the center back placed his kick to his right and had it saved by Jordan Pickford, but this time he lifted it down the middle and under the bar.

While United fielded a close-to-full-strength team, City were still without a raft of key players following the Euro 2024 final between Spain and England. Rodri, Phil Foden, Kyle Walker and John Stones were all missing, while Kevin De Bruyne started on the bench and was a late substitute.

“We’re happy to start the season in the way we have and obviously there’s a lot to come,” said Ruben Dias, who was City’s captain for the match. “It’s another trophy and we’re always happy to collect trophies. We’ve just had a long season and we still don’t have a full squad back but it is very good for us to start this way.”

Guardiola has now won 18 trophies — including the Community Shield three times — since joining City in 2016.

PARIS: It’s been a golden summer for Spanish soccer.

Less than a month after winning the European Championship, Spain followed up with a thrilling 5-3 extra-time victory in the Olympic men’s final against France on Friday.

Sergio Camello’s two goals eventually settled an epic match in Spain’s favor after France fought back from 3-1 down to force extra time at Parc des Princes.

“We are the happiest children in the world,” said Camello, who had come on as an 83rd-minute substitute and likely made himself a national icon.

Spain’s coach Santi Denia said his players deserved to cry “tears of joy” after “such a long-suffering match.”

Long-suffering for the players, maybe. But for anyone watching, it will live in the memory as a classic.

France took an early lead through Enzo Millot but Spain replied with three goals in 10 minutes as Barcelona star Fermin Lopez Lopez struck twice and Alex Baena made it 3-1 in the 28th minute.

Roared on by passionate home crowd, France mounted a late fightback in the second half after Maghnes Akliouche scored in the 79th. France pushed the game to extra time when Jean-Phillipe Mateta equalized from the penalty spot in the 93rd minute.

But the momentum swung once again when Camello lifted over France goalkeeper Guillaume Restes in the 100th and he got his second when racing away from his own half in the first minute of time added on.

The forward tore off his shirt and was quickly swamped by teammates and substitutes, who piled onto the field from the touchline in frenzied celebrations.

Spain, which lost the final to Brazil at the Tokyo Olympics three years ago, became the first European gold medalist in men’s soccer since it last won the tournament at the Barcelona Games in 1992.

Not even during Spain’s dominant run of winning back-to-back Euros and the World Cup from 2008-2012, could it add to that sole Olympic gold.

That wait ended in Paris and underlined the power of Spanish soccer once again. Spain also won the under 19s European Championship last month — beating France in the final.

The Olympic victory marked a personal double for Lopez and Baena who were both part of the Euro 2024-winning squad.

“What a summer. And I hope this summer never ends so we can continue winning,” Baena said. “I am very happy to have made history with Spain.”

It was another painful defeat in a final for a France team after losing on penalties to Argentina at the World Cup in 2022. Like then, the French players showed their resilience to battle back from a losing position and force extra time — only to fall short again.

While Camello’s goals ultimately ended French hopes of a first Olympic gold since Los Angeles 1984, the crowd continued to cheer loudly as coach Thierry Henry and his players showed their appreciation with a lap of honor after the final whistle.

“We tried to respond as best we could,” Henry said. “France is beautiful when we are all together, when we unite. It was a wonderful sight to see those flags, red, white and blue.

“People from the get-go wanted to support us. We lost tonight, but they kept singing.”

Spain’s victory ended the dominance of Latin American nations for the last five editions of the Olympics. Brazil and Argentina won twice in that time, with Mexico also taking gold.

Nigeria won at Atlanta 1996 and Cameroon at Sydney 2000.

Women’s soccer is also thriving in Spain after the national team won the World Cup last year. But it could not add to that success at the Olympics, with Spain’s women’s team losing 1-0 to Germany in the bronze medal match earlier on Friday.

PARIS: Sergio Camello struck twice in extra time as Spain took gold in the Olympic men’s soccer final after a 5-3 win against France on Friday.

The thrilling win at Parc des Princes completed a golden summer for Spanish soccer — following the senior team’s European Championship triumph last month.

Spain, which lost the final to Brazil at the Tokyo Olympics three years ago, became the first European gold medalist in men’s soccer since it last won the tournament at the Barcelona Games in 1992.

France came back from 3-1 down to send the game to extra time when Jean-Phillipe Mateta equalized from the penalty spot in the third minute of time added on.

But substitute Camello coolly lifted over France goalkeeper Guillaume Restes in the 100th and got his second in the first minute of time added on.

Spain’s victory marked a personal double for Fermin Lopez and Alex Baena, who were both part of the Euro 2024-winning squad.

Barcelona star Lopez scored twice and Baena got Spain’s other goal in a blistering 10-minute spell in the first half which gave them a 3-1 lead at the break after Enzo Millot had opened the scoring for France.

But the game was turned on its head when France mounted a late fightback through Maghnes Akliouche and Jean-Philippe Mateta, who converted a penalty in the third minute of stoppage time to send the game to extra time.

The dramatic climax sent the home fans wild as they chanted “Alez Les Bleus” and roared their team on.

And while Camello’s goals ultimately ended French hopes of a first gold since Los Angeles 1984 the crowd continued to cheer loudly as coach Thierry Henry and his players showed their appreciation with a lap of honor after the final whistle.

“It was a crazy final, at the end we got a medal,” Henry said. “Unfortunately, we are not Olympic champions, but you can’t take anything away from this team.”

Camello’s second goal, racing away from his own half before firing past Restes, sparked frenzied celebrations from the Spanish.

The forward tore off his shirt and was swamped by teammates and substitutes, who piled onto the field from the touchline.

He had only come as substitute in the 83rd as Spain tried to protect their lead in regulation — but ended up a national hero.

Spain’s victory ended the dominance of Latin American nations for the last five editions of the Olympics. Brazil and Argentina won twice in that time, with Mexico also taking gold.

Nigeria won at Atlanta 1996 and Cameroon at Sydney 2000.

RIYADH: The Saudi Arabian football season of 2024-2025 kicks off next week when last year’s top four finishers in the Roshn Saudi League compete for the Saudi Super Cup.

The traditional curtain-raiser of domestic football in the Kingdom, the Saudi Super Cup will see Al-Nassr, Al-Ahli, Al-Taawoun and domestic treble winners Al-Hilal competing for the prestigious trophy in Abha between Aug. 13 and 17.

The four clubs will compete for the honor at the Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz Stadium in the picturesque city of Abha for the first time.

This year’s tournament continues with the expanded four-team format introduced in 2023.

The semifinals will see Al-Hilal face Al-Ahli on Aug. 13, with Al-Nassr taking on Al-Taawoun the following day. The final is to be held at 7:15 p.m. Saudi time on Aug. 17.

Al-Hilal, as treble winners last season, will be aiming to maintain their impressive form from the 2023-24 campaign which saw the Riyadh side, under Portuguese manager Jorge Jesus, secure their record 19th league title.

Portugal’s Ruben Neves, Serbian duo Aleksandar Mitrovic and Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, and the returning Neymar are all set to feature in the season-opening competition.

Al-Ahli, who are returning for their second top-flight season, will provide a tough test for last year’s champions as the Jeddah club aim to secure their first Super Cup victory since 2016.

With a strong pre-season behind them and featuring the return of international stars in Edouard Mendy, Riyad Mahrez and Roberto Firmino, Al-Ahli will be difficult to beat.

Al-Nassr, led by Portuguese superstar Cristiano Ronaldo, will have their sights set on redemption going into the new season, after a dramatic penalty shoot-out defeat in the King Cup final ended a difficult campaign.

With new signing Brazilian goalkeeper Bento set to feature, the Riyadh side will be aiming to add to their two previous successes in the Saudi Super Cup.

Al-Taawoun will look to replicate the fine form that saw the Buraydah outfit achieve an impressive fourth-place finish in the top flight. Led for the first time by new manager Rodolfo Arruabarrena, the side will aim to provide an early shock in the new season.

The Saudi Super Cup represents the start of a historic new season of domestic football in Saudi Arabia and is the first football tournament to take place in the Kingdom since the historic announcement of the country’s official bid to host the 2034 FIFA World Cup.

For more information on how to purchase tickets for the Saudi Super Cup, visit: https://webook.com/en/saudi-super-cup-2024

PARIS: Ann-Katrin Berger saved a last-minute penalty and Germany won the bronze medal at the Paris Olympics with a 1-0 victory on Friday over Women’s World Cup winner Spain.

Berger dove to stop Alexia Putellas’ penalty attempt in the ninth minute of stoppage time, then raised her hands in victory.

Putellas — a two-time Ballon d’Or winner — was in tears as the match ended.

Giulia Gwinn had converted a second-half penalty for Germany that proved to be the game winner.

It was Germany’s fourth bronze medal in women’s soccer at the Olympics. The Germans won the gold medal at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Games but didn’t qualify for Tokyo three years ago.

Spain, ranked No. 1 in the world after the World Cup win, were making their Olympics debut.

Gwinn, was fouled by Spain goalkeeper Cata Coll, confidently struck her penalty in the 64th minute after a scoreless first half.

Spain’s Aitana Bonmati, the reigning women’s world player of the year, had the best chance in the opening half but her shot hit the crossbar. Jennie Hermoso’s attempted rebound was blocked by a German defender.

Alexandra Popp started for Germany after missing the semifinal with an illness. Popp was the only current German player who was also on the squad that won the gold medal in 2016.

Lea Schuller, who returned from injury as a second-half substitute, nearly scored in the 71st minute but Coll made a kick save for Spain.

Putellas was the FIFA Best women’s player of the year and the Ballon d’Or winner in both 2021 and 2022. She tore her ACL and required surgery ahead of the 2022 European championships, but returned in time for Spain’s World Cup run.

Spain struggled in the knockout round in France, needing penalties to get past Colombia before losing to Brazil 4-2 in the semifinals. Spain were vying to become the first team to win an Olympic title after lifting a World Cup.

Spain had a wild ride at the World Cup last summer. Before the tournament started, more than a dozen players quit the team because of what they said was an unprofessional atmosphere that impacted their mental health.

Coach Jorge Vilda was peppered with questions about the mutiny during the World Cup. But the players were unbothered, losing just one match during the tournament before lifting the trophy.

Chaos erupted afterward when Spanish Federation President Luis Rubiales forcibly kissed Jenni Hermoso during the winner’s ceremony. Rubiales resigned in the wake of the scandal, and Vilda was dismissed.

In France, Spain were led by coach Montse Tome, a former national team player.

Germany fell in extra time to the United States. Sophia Smith scored the lone goal in a 1-0 victory that sent the Americans into Saturday’s gold medal match in Paris.

Germany were playing the Olympics under interim coach Horst Hrubesch, who took over after Martina Voss-Tecklenburg was dismissed after the team’s poor showing at the World Cup.

Christian Wuck will take over as the coach of Germany ahead of the 2027 World Cup.