Since the inauguration of the monument, on the Day of the Romanian Language, in 2014, it is here that the evocation of the three great spirits united by the same ideal takes place: Mihai Eminescu, Grigore Vieru and Adrian Păunescu.

"We come every year, at the end of autumn to pay homage to our greatest writer Adrian Păunescu. Someone said that his Flame became a torch for his descendants, those who carry that flame forever lit, because he was the one who militated for values, for the integration of the Romanian people," said Nina Apostu, teacher at the High School from Truşeni.

The idea of installing the monument of the Union Poets in Truşeni, of the open-air meetings in memory of the three great writers belongs to Vasile Grozavu, the president of the Cultural League for the unity of Romanians everywhere, Chisinau branch. This time, the personality of Adrian Păunescu, born in Copăceni, Sângerei, was brought back to the circuit.

"11 years ago, the great poet, politician, Romanian left us for all Romanians around the world, Adrian Păunescu. His poetry awakened the sense of dignity, of Romanianism in these holy places as well. As the great poet said "And yet love ...". The love of the country, the love of the people, of the culture and of everything that God has given us," said Vasile Grozavu.

Each commemorative stop represents an opportunity to get to know the work, the cultural facts of the Union Poets. Thus, the academician Mihai Cimpoi spoke to the students about the lyrical, social, patriotic poetry of Adrian Păunescu.

"He had the courage to talk about Bessarabia back in the 70's, this theme was permanent in his creation, in the parliamentary speeches, in the speeches at the congresses of Romanian spirituality. He was also a member of our Academy. He was ill and when he heard that we had elected him an Honorary Member of our Academy, for three minutes he was very happy and he left here in high spirits," said Mihai Cimpoi.

The ceremony for awarding Adrian Păunescu the title of honorary member of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova took place on August 30, 2010. Two months later, on November 6, Adrian Păunescu passed away at a hospital in Bucharest.