Ana Maria Păunescu, the daughter of the poet Adrian Păunescu, was invited to the podcast “Altceva cu Adrian Artene” on July 13. She additionally talked in regards to the unhealthy mouths that claimed, no extra, no much less, that her father was the “courtroom poet” of the dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu. However what’s the fact?

“He was kicked out in all places…

In fact and I practiced… My husband seemed up the courtroom poet poems and it is superb that individuals do not see what he says in these poems. He cherished Nicolae Ceaușescu, he declared publicly, within the 2000s.

The wheels are turning once more…she stated, “I cherished him”. He was trustworthy, he did not even go to the process, not simply that, little or noble curiosity. He cherished Ceaușescu and believed up to a degree that he would preserve the nation on the suitable path.

Who else wrote in 1980 that “we’ve no water within the pipes, no warmth within the rooms, the years are nice, however they’re getting worse”?

Who had the energy to jot down these poems, to learn them on the stage of Cenaculul Flacăra? He was protected by his personal energy, he was a baby who left Bîrca, went to Craiova to highschool, then got here to Bucharest to Zoia highschool, which was for ladies, he was the one boy in his class of ladies, he by a poem the place he says “I give my class the blended character”. A peasant baby from Bîrca, with an illiterate grandmother, who taught him a lot, nonetheless, about life, not about writing and studying, however about life in its complexity.

He got here to Bucharest and got down to grow to be the best Romanian author, which some say he would have succeeded”stated Ana Maria Păunescu.

On July 20, 1943, in Copăceni, Sîngerei district, Republic of Moldova, the nice Adrian Păunescu was born, a persona troublesome to cowl in phrases, image, historical past, and, above all, literary critic, essayist, journal director, poet, writer, Romanian lyricist, author, translator and politician.

“When every thing occurred naturally / We have been towards one another just like the solar and the moon, / And solely now I am beginning to love you / Once I really feel like I’ve misplaced you without end “, the poet wrote in one of many verses. the poem “Solely now”. “Altceva cu Adrian Artene” proposes to not anticipate “Simply now” in relation to the values ​​of Romanian tradition, however all the time to understand them, to hearken to them, to honor them as a result of solely tradition gives a basis sound and wholesome civilization when it comes to ethical and emotional judgement. I subsequently invite you, expensive member of the “Altceva cu Adrian Artene” group, to affix me beginning at 19:00, on the official YouTube channel, the place I intend to have a dialogue filled with substance, historical past and tradition with Ana Maria, daughter of the venerable Adrian Păunescu,” stated Adrian Artene.

Adrian Păunescu made his debut as a poet in 1960, and 13 years later he managed the journal “Flacăra”. He wrote dozens of volumes of poems, being recognized and appreciated for the convenience with which he composed verses.

A lot of his creations have been set to music by vital Romanian artists, comparable to Vasile Șeicaru, Ștefan Hruscă or Nicu Alifantis. “Repeatable Burden”, “Prayer for Dad and mom”, “Make Like to the Canons”, “Throw to the Waves” or “Nonetheless Love” are simply a few of his well-known poems.

Subscribe to the YouTube channel “One thing else with Adrian Artene”activate the notifications, as a result of each Saturday from 19:00, you’ve got the possibility to find in PREMIERE, ALTCEVA, a podcast that trains your thoughts and feeds your soul.

The content material of “Altceva cu Adrian Artene” can be considered on accounts Fb, Instagram, Tik Tokbut in addition on the group of WhatsApp.