Last Updated on July 10, 2021

FreeJ is a vision mixer: an instrument for realtime video manipulation used in the fields of dance teather, veejaying, medical visualisation and TV.

It features realtime rendering of multilayered video and chained effect filtering directly on the screen (through dynamically loadable plugins).

FreeJ treats every video source as a layer, making it possible to dynamically apply a chain of filters, loadable as effect plugins and easily customizable. Layers are planned for rendering of analog video input, digital movie files (avi/mpeg), image bitmaps, sound scopes, texts and eventually more.

FreeJ can be controlled locally or remotely, and from multiple places at the same time, using its ascii console interface; operations can be scripted in Javascript and triggered live via keyboard, mouse, MIDI controllers, Joysticks, OSC clients, Wiimotes and more devices.

FreeJ is written with efficiency in mind, benefits of a realtime object oriented architecture that makes efficient use of multithreading (in which the layers run in parallel), also taking advantage of multiple CPUs and cluster systems.

Features include:

Mix multiple video layers – each layer can be video taken from different sources: movie files, webcams, tv cards, images, rendered text, flash animations and more.

Stream online video – produces an Ogg/Theora/Vorbis stream for broadcast on Icecast servers, mixing all the video and grabbing the audio from soundcard.

VeeJay over Ethernet.

Live compositing of multiple webcams, TV signals, movie files, images, TXT files, particle generators and more..

Can be remotely controlled (VJoE).

Can be scripted in procedural object oriented language.

Can playback flash vectorial animations.

No frame drop when looping movie clips.

Emacs/Vi style console with hotkeys (S-Lang).

Accepts asynchronous controllers at the same time (Midi, joystick and more coming..).

Very efficient video engine with multithreaded layers.

Website: github.com/jaromil/FreeJ

Support:

Developer: Denis Rojo, Silvano Galliani, Christoph Rudorff, and many contributors

License: GNU GPL v3

FreeJ is written in C and C++. Learn C with our recommended free books and free tutorials. Learn C++ with our recommended free books and free tutorials.

Return to Video Home Page