IT'S FAIR to say that Tom Jones is a national treasure thanks to his incredible career as a singer.

The superstar has continued to shine in the spotlight with his huge back catalogue of much-loved songs.

How old is Tom Jones?

Sir Tom Jones was born in Treforest, Pontypridd, Glamorgan, Wales, on June 7, 1940 - which makes him 84-years-old.

His showbiz career spans over six decades, from his emergence as a vocalist in the mid-1960s with a string of top hits and regular appearances in Las Vegas.

He became a coach on The Voice back in 2012, while it was still on the BBC.

Tom mentored Leanne Mitchell, who went on to win the first series.

Tom Received a Grammy Award for Best New Artist in 1966.

He also has numerous Brit Awards which includes Best British Male in 2000 and the Outstanding Contribution to Music award in 2003.

Oher music gongs include a MTV Video Music Award in 1989.

Tom was awarded an OBE in 1999 and in 2006 he was knighted by the late Queen Elizabeth II for services to music.

What is his net worth?

As of 2024, Tom is estimated to boast a staggering net worth of £252M.

The majority of this would have stemmed from the 100 million records he has sold in his lengthy career.

However, Sir Tom would've also pocketed a huge amount from ITV for his role as head judge on The Voice.

Tom also has an impressive property portfolio which includes homes in his native Wales, London and an LA mansion.

Who was his wife Linda Trenchard?

Tom was married to his childhood sweetheart Lady Melinda Rose Woodward for 59 years and was by her side when she died from a “fierce” battle with cancer in April 2016.

The couple had one son, Mark Woodward, who was born in 1957.

Linda stood by Tom throughout their marriage despite the lothario enjoying a string of affairs and admitting to sleeping with 250 women at the height of his fame.

Sir Tom once described his marriage as “rock solid” despite his affairs, saying “all the rest was fun and games”.

I feel alive when [Tom] comes through the door, whatever the time of day or night is.

Tom Jones' late wife Linda

Linda and Tom enjoyed a private marriage and were rarely pictured together out in public.

Sadly, the singer's late wife was crippled with agoraphobia, a fear of going outside, in later life and friends say the private woman feared being gossiped about.

In a rare interview, Linda once said: “I feel alive when [Tom] comes through the door, whatever the time of day or night is.”

Close friends said she enjoyed housework, watching TV and drinking champagne.

How to watch Tom Jones: Later with Jools Holland

Tom fans are getting a treat, as he will feature on a Later with Jools Holland.

You can catch it on BBC Two at 8.30pm on June 8, 2024.

The pair of them will perform a number of Tom's biggest hits.