Two decades after he was a highly sought after recruit for the University of Michigan basketball team, former NBA player and Birmingham native Shane Battier will be in Ann Arbor as part of a charity event Thursday night benefiting the SafeHouse Center.

Battier will be working the grill at bd's Mongolian Grill - located at

200 S. Main Street

in Ann Arbor - as well as taking pictures and signing autographs as part of the event that is being organized by the Ms. Molly Foundation, a non-profit organization run by Molly Maid.

"We do all kinds of different things across our communities from coast-to-coast," said Meg Roberts, president of Molly Maid. "We just think it's really important to promote the benefits of SafeHouse and what they do."

The SafeHouse Center is a domestic violence and sexual assault shelter in Washtenaw County.

Roberts said events like the one Thursday night are a great way to raise awareness for domestic violence and gives people a chance to meet some of their favorite superstar athletes.

"It's another way to get people out and get more people in the city of Ann Arbor in supporting a cause that unfortunately happens everywhere," Roberts said.

Along with supporting the efforts of SafeHouse, proceeds will also go to The Battier Take Charge Foundation which benefits kids who don't qualify for traditional student aid for college, but don't make enough to pay for it on their own.

Thursday's event marks the second time Molly Maid has partnered with bd's to host a charity event benefitting SafeHouse. In November, Detroit Lions safety Glover Quin manned the grill and signed autographs as well.

While Battier elected did not play collegiate or professional basketball in his home state, he was named "Mr. Basketball" for the state after the 1996-97 season and led Detroit Country Day to three state championships during his high school career.

Battier elected not to stay in the state to continue his college career, choosing instead to attend Duke University.

He went on to win an NCAA championship with Duke and is a two-time NBA champion having played for the championship Miami Heat teams in 2012 and 2013.

There will be two dinner services over the course of the night starting at 6 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. respectively. Tickets can be purchased in advance and start at $10 for children under 10 and $25 for adults. Each ticket includes a full soup and salad bar, one Mongolian bowl, tax and gratuity.

Roberts said the goal is to sell 250 tickets and as of Monday afternoon, about half the tickets were remaining.

"We want to see that swell because most importantly we want to donate the most money possible," Roberts said.