Lena Dunham’s husband Luis Felber has admitted he “had to Google” the Girls creator before they met last year.

The musician, who is known professionally as Attawalpa, met Dunham on a blind date in London last January after they were set up by mutual friends and were engaged seven months later.

Reflecting on their love story in an article published by The Sunday Times, Felber, 36, said he didn’t know who Dunham was and “had to Google her” before their first date.

He wrote: “Then I went on her Instagram and I saw her dancing to a song called ‘Red Hot P***y’ in her garden in LA.

“Lena puts herself out there in a really special way. That was all I had to go on at the time.”

Elsewhere, Dunham admitted that getting married after seven months of dating “is not something I recommend to everybody but it worked for us”.

The Catherine Called Birdy director also added that her marriage to Felber has taught her about “teamwork and compromise”.

The couple tied the knot at an intimate ceremony at London’s Union Club on 25 September 2021. Taylor Swift and 13 Reasons Why star Tommy Dorfman were two of her eight bridesmaids on the day.

Elsewhere, Dunham revealed how her movie, Sharp Stick, which sees her portray a pregnant woman, prompted her to reflect on the meaning of motherhood.

The Girls creator underwent a total hysterectomy in 2018 after enduring years of endometriosis-related pain.

Speaking to WSJ Magazine in August, the actress shared: “I think the movie was a lot about motherhood and the different shapes motherhood could take and the questions I was asking myself about that.

“What is motherhood going to look like for me? What are my feelings about what motherhood’s supposed to look like versus what motherhood actually looks like?

“I’m firmly in that moment in my life where there are babies, babies everywhere. So it was an exciting chance to ask myself some of those questions, while also having the kind of distance that comes from asking them through characters.”