LOVE COMES FULL CIRCLE

OUR HISTORY IN 12 YEARS

Since its inception in 2012, the Main Stage of the Annual Brazilian Festival in Florida has become a beacon of Brazilian heritage and culture. Every year, the festival pays tribute to iconic performers, bands, composers, music genres, and styles that have revolutionized and marked Brazilian Popular Music. It has hosted some of Brazil’s most renowned artists, including Netinho, Banda Mel and Carla Visi, founders of the “Axe Music” style, Ellen Oleria, the first winner of TV show “The Voice,” and the legendaries Paralamas do Sucesso, a multi Latin Grammy award-winning rock/ska band, and Cidade Negra.

In 2018, the festival celebrated Brazil’s diverse regions with performances by the Queen of Forro, Elba Ramalho, the King of Rap and Hip Hop, Marcelo D2, the reggae band Chimarruts, and the country duo Don & Juan. The following year, the festival featured one of Brazil’s most iconic pop/rock bands, Biquini Cavadao, and Brazil’s pop phenomenon and judge for “The Voice,” IZA.

In 2020, the Annual Brazilian Festival faced a significant setback when the City of Pompano Beach shut down the event and refused to host it, even as a virtual or limited attendance event following CDC guidelines. Despite this disappointment, the Festival persevered and was able to find a new home in the compassionate City of Fort Lauderdale. The event attracted a diverse crowd, all in search of hope, faith, and a belief in happier days to come. The Festival went above and beyond to prioritize the health and safety of all attendees by meticulously implementing all necessary precautions and guidelines imposed by Broward County and the CDC, including temperature checks, mandatory mask-wearing, and social distancing. The festival became a model for the industry, and set new industry standards for safety and compliance during times of distress. The 2020’s Brazilian Festival also showcased 45 local artists affected by the Pandemic. Despite the challenges faced in 2020, the Annual Brazilian Festival’s resilience and commitment to its mission to promote multicultural diversity, unite the community, and assist minority-owned small businesses, never wavered.

In 2021, the festival invested heavily in rebranding itself at a new location in Fort Lauderdale to continue promoting multicultural diversity and assisting minority-owned small businesses. The festival launched a massive promotional campaign and showcased a multicultural star-studded lineup, including classic rock band Smash Mouth, the Samba Beat of Paula Lima, from the Brazilian Version of the Play “The Cats”, Brazilian pop, rock, and reggae band Onze:20, and James McWhinney, from Big Mountain, among others.

In 2022, the festival took a bold step by focusing on environmental protection, clean energy, and recycling. The 11th Annual Brazilian Festival was held at Snyder Park in Fort Lauderdale to reinforce the message of climate change with performances by Latin Grammy winners and nominees, including Vitor Kley and Maneva, the founding Fathers of Samba, Fundo de Quintal, and Karinah, the next diva of pagode.

Over the past decade, the Main Stage of the Annual Brazilian Festival in Florida has become a symbol of Brazil’s rich musical heritage and cultural diversity, showcasing some of Brazil’s most iconic artists and promoting multicultural unity. With each passing year, the festival continues to grow and evolve, leaving an unforgettable and inspiring mark on local music and culture.

CHANGING SOUTH FLORIDA LANDSCAPING

For over a decade, the Annual Brazilian Festival Florida has been a vibrant celebration of culture, business, and community. From the moment you step foot into the festival, you’ll be immersed in a wonderland of new brands, local small businesses, and trendsetting companies, all showcasing their services and products. And let’s not forget the genuine food vendors, offering delectable dishes that will tantalize your taste buds!

But the festival is more than just a showcase for exhibitors and vendors. It’s a place for networking, growth, and new business development. Thanks to Florida’s Largest Brazilian Festival, many exhibitors and food vendors have experienced increased brand awareness, new partnerships, and even franchising opportunities.

But the impact of the festival goes beyond business. It has transformed Florida’s landscape, making it a prime destination for tourism and entrepreneurial investors. Before the Brazilian Festival, South Florida hosted fewer than two Brazilian concerts and events per year. But now, thanks to the festival’s massive marketing campaign overseas, there are more than three Brazilian events, concerts, and performances per month. This has generated new jobs and helped local small businesses succeed financially.

And it’s not just about business and entertainment. The Annual Brazilian Festival in Florida also gives back to the community, teaming up with a myriad of non-profits and donating over $45,000 since its inception. Overall, the Annual Brazilian Festival Florida is more than just an event. It’s a celebration of culture, community, and commerce that has transformed Florida into a must-visit destination for tourists and investors alike.

NUMBERS DON’T LIE

200 Multicultural Exhibitors & Small Businesses per year.

45 Gastronomic Options per year.

180K Social Media Fans, 1.2 Million video views per year, reaching an Annual audience of 2.6 Million people.

101K Organic Website Hits per Quarter, 40K Hits and 2.6 Million Impressions via Google.

An Average of U$ 225K invested Annually on Brazilian Suppliers.

An Average of U$ 55K invested Annually on Brazilian Labor.

More than 4100 direct and indirect Part Time jobs have been generated since 2012.

More than U$1,5 Million generated in gross revenues for Food vendors since 2012.

More than 41 International Acts and Headliners performed.

All the Numbers show this is the LARGEST “Community” BRAZILIAN FESTIVAL ON IN FLORIDA.

Brazilian Festival Info:

2024 Schedule Annual Brazilian Festival.

TAMPA – TBD, 2025

SAN DIEGO /CA: TBD, 2025

FORT LAUDERDALE/FL: Oct 26th, 2024