Last month at Stubb’s hosted Press Junkie PR‘s 10-year Anniversary party. Frederico7, the mesmerizing Austin Pan-American, soul musical group, performing in Portuguese, English, and Spanish graced the stage with a gleaming set featuring Guitarist Sergio Yazbek, formerly of the popular Brazilian reggae-fusion act, Cidade Negra. That group is enjoyed a large audience in South America selling over 10 million records. If that doesn’t tell you the level of musicianship represented by F7, we don’t know what will. We know we booked the group to headline our Latin bill at SXSW last March and it was best thing that happened prior to the festival.

Opening with “La Mirada del Halcon,” Frederico’s smooth vocals accompanied with the band’s synchronized, sonic carriage. The band lured the crowd through entrancing melody, establishing an Abraxas-like atmosphere for the evening. The festive tone the band employed was appropriate for a night of celebration.

The show continued with “Perola Negra,” heavily empowered by the masterful strumming of Yazbek. The song shifted the tone towards psychedelic entrancement. Heavy percussion paved the way for intricate guitar work and a maraca-laden chorus with “Nature of Love.” This number included particularly inventive and impressive guitar and drum solos by Bruno Vinezof and Yazbek.

The festive-yet-smooth tone dripped from the stage as Frederico7’s R&B-tinged delivery of world beat, universally-embraced tunes captivated and energized the crowd. To experience a Frederico7 in concert, is to appreciate worldly art, music, performance, and talent. It’s an uplifting experience as is chatting with Geib as we did last week at Hard Luck Lounge. Take a peak at the short interview to learn more about this up and coming act.

Catch Frederico7 next at a special performance at the Austin Public Library Little Walnut Creek Branch on October 5. RSVP and more details can be found here.

Frederico7:

Frederico Geib: vox: guitar

Sergio Yazbek: Lead Guitar

Alán Uribe: Bass

Pete Powers: Drums

Bruno Vinezof: Percussion

Featured photo by Luis Orozco