ATHENS — The Greek finance minister, Evangelos Venizelos, said on Saturday that talks between the government and its foreign creditors on a second rescue deal were “on a razor’s edge,” adding that though progress had been made on some levels, crucial issues were unresolved.

Agreement was reached on issues like recapitalizing Greek banks and the privatization of state assets, Mr. Venizelos said.

“Two major, interrelated issues remain unresolved — labor relations and wages in the private sector, and the fiscal measures that must be taken to ensure we are within the target for 2012,” Mr. Venizelos said after a two-hour conference call with euro zone officials. Despite the barriers, a deal must be reached in bailout talks by Sunday night, he said.

Earlier in the day, state television announced that a meeting scheduled for Saturday between the Prime Minister Lucas Papademos and the leaders of the three parties in his coalition had been put off until Sunday afternoon as talks between the government and creditors dragged on. Mr. Papademos is expected to seek political support for a new round of austerity measures.

“Everything must be completed by tomorrow night, all the issues must be resolved, commitments made and procedures set in motion to ensure we are on deadline in view of the bond expiry in March,” Mr. Venizelos said. He was referring to a 14.5 billion euro payment that Greece must make on March 20 or face a potentially disastrous default.

Mr. Venizelos said that the teleconference call with his euro zone peers on Saturday had been “difficult,” that there had been “great concern and great pressure” from the creditor states, and that the situation was critical.

Outside pressure on Greece was mounting to reach an agreement on concessions. “If we should determine that everything is going wrong in Greece, then there would not be a new program, then that would mean that in March a declaration of bankruptcy would occur,” the head of the 17 euro-zone finance ministers, Jean-Claude Juncker, told Der Spiegel of Germany.

Mr. Venizelos added: “The gap between the successful completion of procedures and a deadlock, which could be accidental or due to a misunderstanding, is very small. It’s a very fine line.”