Enzio Boldewijn was heading into the unknown this summer when he came to Notts County.

Clubs in the lower leagues, and further up the ladder in some cases, can have a reputation for a laddish culture that might put some off.

Unsure what he would be met with a Meadow Lane, the Dutch winger admits Nottingham has been to his liking, especially his teammates, who immediately made him feel a part of the squad.

"It's a good city. We've been into town a few times for dinner. I really like it here," he said.

"My teammates, when I first came, they really got me in the group. I wasn't shut out. I wasn't used to that before I came.

"It was great to be welcomed like that."

The 25-year-old lives in the city with his girlfriend. He admits he did not know entirely what he was getting into either when he left his homeland in 2016 after stints with FC Utrecht, Den Bosch (loan) and Almere.

But after two seasons at Crawley and a fledgling few months with the Magpies, he is happy he took the risk.

"I didn't know what to expect when I came to England," he said.

"I'd not had a good time in Holland for a few years. I needed something else.

"I'd always played with pace and a bit of power. I knew English football might suit me and I'm happy I made this step."

Boldewijn has been one of the only plus points for Notts this season as they sit bottom of League Two.

He has already scored excellent three goals in Magpies' colours, but results have been miserable with just two points on the board in eight games.

Nonetheless, Boldewijn is enjoying his football as he looks to get better, admitting he is unsure how much more there is to come from him.

"Obviously we aren't getting the results we wanted, but I still love it here. I've certainly not had second thoughts about coming here," he said.

"I'm at a bigger club and I've got good teammates. My football is getting better every week.

"I can't say if I'm playing to my very best. I just try to keep trying to getting better.

"Last season I had a spell where I wasn't at my best, but then it went very well. I hope this season I can have a longer period of playing well."