Michael Howard, the former Tory home secretary, is one of those half-ghosts from Tory cabinets who materialise on the backbenches to indicate that they are not quite dead to do a spot of Labour-bashing.

In his case one can almost see the dagger in his back, inscribed "something of the night". Piquantly, Ann Widdecombe, his former junior who thus maligned him, has surged into popularity as the more rightwing alternative to Michael Portillo and potential successor to William Hague.

Mr Howard was the last of the Tory "Cambridge Mafia" of the 60s - which included Kenneth Clarke, John Gummer, Norman Fowler and Leon Brittan - to retire to the back benches.

He came up via Llanelli grammar school in Gorseinon, near Swansea, where his Romanian Jewish shopkeeper father had settled. At school he was one of only two Jewish pupils. The family name of Hecht was anglicised to Howard.

In 1966 and 1970 he contested two parliamentary elections for the Conservative party at Edge Hill, Liverpool, before finding a safe seat 13 years later in Folkestone and Hythe. The delay was partly because of his desire to make his way as a successful barrister in planning and employment law, but also provided a chance to cement his marriage to ex-model Saundra Paul - her fourth, his first.

Once in the Commons, Mr Howard established his rightwing views. In his maiden speech he urged legal protection for strike breakers, and endorsed the restoration of the death penalty and US intervention in Grenada. Within two years he had begun his climb up the greasy pole of politics.

A populist home secretary, from 1993 to John Major's 1997 election defeat, he fought crime by locking people up - to the dismay of top judges and his more centrist predecessors like Douglas Hurd. His tough line saw crime drop by 15% and made him the darling of the tabloids but he was seriously undermined by his handling of the resignation of the Derek Lewis, the director of prisons, in 1996.

Mr Lewis fell on his sword when a report into the escape of prisoners from Whitemoor prison highlighted serious deficiencies in the system. Mr Howard almost suffered the same fate when he was asked about whether he had made Mr Lewis a scapegoat 14 times by Jeremy Paxman on Newsnight.

Despite this public relations disaster, Mr Howard managed to maintain widespread support in the press due to his Europhobia. As the senior Eurosceptic in John Major's cabinet he pursued many battles with Europhile Ken Clarke and seemed well placed to succeed Mr Major.

This hope was destroyed in the first round of the Tory leadership battle following their May 1997 defeat. After William Hague reneged on a deal to run as Mr Howard's deputy, Mr Howard came fifth with 23 votes. He then backed the much younger man and was rewarded with the post of shadow foreign secretary. He spent the next two years doing little else other than demanding Robin Cook's resignation.

Although still very pro-American and against a federal Europe, Mr Howard no longer fitted in with Hague's "Little England" Europhobes, who criticised him for supporting Nato's attack on Serbia as a "just war". After Mr Hague announced plans for "kitchen table Conservatism" in March 1999, Mr Howard retired from frontbench politics to the relative comfort of his well-cushioned boardrooms.

There he can exhibit his QC's mind, expressed with a slight Welsh accent in his smoothly courteous personal manner.

The departure of Derek Lewis made an enemy of Ann Widdecombe and probably ended Mr Howard's chances of becoming leader. He must often think what might have been if those convicts had not gone over the wall in Whitemoor.