FOUR Limerick senior rugby clubs are to face into Energia All-Ireland League play-offs after today's final round of fixtures.

Shannon and Garryowen will play in the Division 1A/AB promotion/relegation series - Shannon playing Old Belvedere and Garryowen facing Old Wesley.

Shannon RFC boosted their survival hopes in Division 1A with a win over Young Munster on Easter Sunday, but this Saturday afternoon The Parish fell to a 33-17 defeat to UCD at Belfield.

The Limerick side were 28-3 in arrears by half time - the Dublin students with four tries by the break.

In the second half, Jade Kriel and Josh Costello went over for ties but there was to be no dramatic fightback.

City of Armagh also suffered defeat on the final day, to Cork Con, but the Limerick side face into the relegation play-offs as they fell one point short of the Ulster side.

Also in Division 1A, Young Munster finished with a 29-24 loss to Lansdowne.

Fionn Gibbons and James Horrigan had first half Young Munster tries with one conversion from Tony Butler but it was the Dublin side that led 19-12 at the interval.

Gibbons had a second try early in the second half but Lansdowne maintained their lead and the final try for the Limerick side didn't arrive until the final whistle with Harry Fleming touching down.

In Division 1B, promotion-chasing Garryowen concluded their campaign with a 31-10 win over Highfield in Dooradoyle. The Light Blues were 12-10 ahead at half time.

The win was sealed in the final 10-minutes with a Cian Hurley try for the home side.

In Division 2A, UL Bohemian fell to a 25-16 home defeat to Nenagh. The Tipperary men laid the foundation for victory with a 12-6 lead at the interval.

The loss sees UL Bohs drop into the relegation places. In the Division 2A/2B promotion-relegation play-offs they will face Sligo.

Elsewhere in Division 2A, Old Crescent finished their campaign with a 26-17 loss to Barnhall. It was 7-3 to the winners at the break with Ronan McKenna kicking the points for the Limerick side.

A Jake Considine try left it 12-10 just before the hour mark. The lead was out to nine points before John Lyons went over for the second Crescent try. That left it 19-17 and Old Crescent weren't to score again with Barnhall sealing the win with an injury time try.

In Division 2C, promotion-chasing Bruff scored a 19-14 win over Clonmel.

Shane Duggan was among the scores as Bruff built a 14-0 lead by half time.

Clonmel battled back to level but Kieran O'Dwyer popped up with the winning try for the Co Limerick side.

Bruff now play Galwegians in the Division 2B/2C promotion-relegation play-off.