THERE are promotion and relegation issues to be decided for Limerick clubs in the final day of the Energia All-Ireland League this Saturday.

Shannon RFC boosted their survival hopes in Division 1A of the All-Ireland League after recording a precious 37-22 bonus point victory over local rivals Young Munster at Thomond Park on Easter Sunday evening.

The result has seen ninth-placed Shannon draw level on points with eighth-placed City of Armagh in the top flight table.

However, the Parish side remain in the relegation play-off position as the Ulster side boast a superior points difference.

The battle to avoid the relegation play-off will come down to next Saturday's final series of regular season games in Division 1A.

While Shannon make the trip to Belfield to face seventh-placed UCD, City of Armagh host second-placed Cork Constitution at the Palace Grounds.

Shannon outscored their visitors by five tries to three at Thomond Park to complete and home-and-away double over their Limerick rivals in the League this season.

READ MORE: Limerick club and school rugby fixtures for the period April 3-10

In Division 1B, promotion-chasing Garryowen are all but guaranteed a promotion play-off place after securing a precious 28-3 victory over Old Belvedere at Ollie Campbell Park.

Third-placed Garryowen are five points clear of fifth-placed Belvo' with now just one round of games to go in the regular season.

The Light Blues host fourth-placed Highfield in their final regular season game next Saturday.

In Division 2A, Old Crescent dropped to fifth place in the table in the battle for promotion play-off places after succumbing 19-24 at home to Navan RFC at Takumi Park on Saturday.

Crescent trail fourth-placed Banbridge by two points ahead of their final game of the regular season, a crucial away date against third-placed Barnhall next Saturday.

Also in Division 2A on Saturday, UL-Bohemian suffered a 19-32 defeat against Banbridge at Rifle Park.

The result has seen the Red, Red Robins drop to eighth-place in the table ahead of next weekend's final series of games when UL-Bohs will be at home to local rivals Nenagh Ormond.

In Division 2C, promotion-chasing Bruff recorded a hard fought 26-21 bonus victory over Enniscorthy at Alcast Park.

The result has guaranteed fourth-placed Bruff's place in the promotion play-off.

The south Limerick side are level on points with third-placed Enniscorthy ahead of their final round home date with Clonmel next Saturday.