About Sanaya Irani:

Sanya Irani is an popular Indian tv actress, mainy known for her role as Khushi Kumari Gupta in Iss pyar ko Kya naam doon. She was born and brought up in Mumbai, Maharashtra. She did her schooling in Ooty. Apart from tv serials Sanaya Irani has also appeared in Many Advertisements. Sanaya Irani's role in Iss pyar ko Kya naam is very different from Radha ki Betiyaan kuch kar dikhaingi on NDTV Imagine. Sanaya irani has hosted the Zara Nachke Dikha season 2. Sanaya Irani has won the award for ITA Face of the year 2008 and nominated for New Talent Awards Best Actress in 2009. Other television actors with whom she is close to are Barun Sobti from Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon, Deepali Pansare, Ragini Khanna, Gautami Kapoor and Arjun Bijlani(co-star from Left Right Left and Miley Jab Hum Tum).

Sanaya Irani Biography:

Sanaya Irani was born on 17th September in Mumbai. She is an Indian actress known for her roles in television series such as Miley Jab Hum Tum and Radhaa Ki Betiyaan Kuch Kar Dikhayengi. . After her skimp with modeling Sanaya entered acting, where a famous role was as Kajol's friend in the movie Fanaa (2006). presently, she is playing the main role in Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon which is very well-known in India. Sanaya Irani has played a simple, girl next door in Miley Jam Hum Tum, a show based on college romance, very different from the glamorous role she played in Radha ki Betiyaan kuch kar dikhaingi on NDTV Imagine.

Sanaya Irani's boyfriend:

Rumors is that sanaya Irani is dating her Co-star Mohit Sehgal from the serial Miley Jab Hum Tum. Its all began when Miley Jab Hum Tum started and Mohit Sehgal and Sanaya Irani soon became close friends. Their friendship turned to love but the couple just didn't admit to it. They are always together and Mohit Sehgal could'nt stop talking about Sanaya Irani even to the media.

Sanaya irani in Fanna:

Sanaya irani also played the character of one of Kajol's many friends in the blockbuster movie Fanaa.

Sanaya irani in iss pyaar ko kya naam doon:

Sanaya Irani, is playing the lead role in Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon - opposite Barun Sobti. they are most amazing couple on tv right now and have rocking on-screen chemistry. In this serial we can see her in an Indian bahu avtaar. Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doona is STAR Plus show. This serial premiered in India on June 6, 2011, and presently airs on weekdays at 8:00 pm. Is Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon is a love story of Khushi and Arnav, showing different shades of personalities in realtionship of love and hate. Khushi and Arnav both have opposite beliefs, thus they contrast each other. In this serial, character of khushi and Arnav is based on love-hate relationship.

Television:

Sanaya Irani made her debut in television with SAB TV's popular show Left Right Left as SameeraShroff, where she shared screen space with present co-star Arjun Bijlani as Mayank. Sanaya also played a character in Radhaa Ki Betiyaan before Gunjan's role finally came in her way. Sanaya's first portfolio was done by veteran actor Boman Irani, who was a photographer then. She was also one of the contestants in Meethi Chhori no. 1.