When does 'F1,' the Apple Original film with Brad Pitt produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, open in theaters? June 27, 2025.

Oscar winners Brad Pitt and Javier Bardem, stars of "F1," filmed in Volusia County, Florida, and at the Rolex 24 at Daytona International Speedway.

"F1" is directed by Joseph Kosinski (“Top Gun: Maverick”) and includes seven-time F1 world champion Lewis Hamilton as a producer.

Film and longtime TV producer Jerry Bruckheimer served as the Grand Marshal for the 62nd running of the Rolex 24 in Daytona Beach.

Wave the checkered flags for "F1!" The Brad Pitt racing movie is already a winner for Florida, given scenes were filmed here.

Previously referred to as "Apex," the action film "F1" stars the Academy Award-winning Hollywood superstar Brad Pitt as Sonny Hayes, an ex-Formula 1 driver who returns to the sport to mentor a rookie teammate. British actor Damson Idris plays Pitt's rookie teammate on their fictional team APXGP, and Academy Award-winning actor Javier Bardem plays the leader of APXGP. Other co-stars include Kerry Condon, Tobias Menzies, Sarah Niles, Kim Bodnia and Samson Kayo.

The Apple Original film about the world of Formula One racing, directed by Joseph Kosinski (“Top Gun: Maverick”), was produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and seven-time F1 world champion Lewis Hamilton, who has a cameo in the film. "F1," which gives viewers a peek of Daytona International Speedway, opens in theaters June 27, 2025.

Here's what we know about the Formula One-based project starring Brad Pitt and Florida's role in the racing movie.

Where was filming for 'F1,' Formula One racing movie starring Brad Pitt?

As of July 16, 2024, just over a week after the trailer for "F1" was released, the Formula One film shot various scenes at multiple F1 race weekends (F1 competes worldwide), including:

F1 practice ahead of the U.S. Grand Prix in Austin, Texas, in October 2022

Las Vegas Grand Prix in November 2023

62nd edition of the Rolex 24 endurance race at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach in January 2024

British Grand Prix, in which "F1" star Brad Pitt attended with his real-life girlfriend Ines de Ramon. According to USA TODAY, the couple were spotted July 5, 2024, walking in the paddock during the F1 event at Silverstone Circuit in Northampton, England.

Filming began at Silverstone, Central England, in 2023 and will continue through the season, finishing at Abu Dhabi in December 2024. Production on "F1" took place during actual Grand Prix weekends as professional racers hit the track, Apple TV+ shared in a press release.

Did Brad Pitt shoot scenes for 'F1' movie at Daytona International Speedway in Florida?

In January 2024, Brad Pitt, the two-time Sexiest Man Alive for People magazine, caused quite a stir when he arrived with film crews to work at Daytona International Speedway during the run-up to the venue's famed Rolex 24 endurance race. Pitt filmed scenes around the track, in Daytona Beach and New Smyrna Beach, alongside actor Javier Bardem ("No Country for Old Men," "Skyfall").

Interestingly, film and TV producer Jerry Bruckheimer was named the Grand Marshal for the Rolex 24.

Bruckheimer, also filmed parts of the movie “Days of Thunder,” starring Tom Cruise and then-wife Academy Award winner Nicole Kidman ("The Hours," "A Family Affair"), at the World Center of Racing.

“Daytona International Speedway is an iconic venue and it’s going to be an honor to give the command for the Rolex 24 at Daytona,” Bruckheimer said via a press release. “I’ve been here for the biggest NASCAR race and now I can’t wait to experience one of the most prestigious sports car races in the world.”

How accurate is 'F1,' the Formula One racing movie starring Brad Pitt?

"F1" stars Brad Pitt as a retired Formula One racer itching for his comeback. He suits up as a racecar driver, and real-life Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton serves as an executive producer on the film.

As of July 16, 2024, "F1" was still in production ahead of its 2025 release date. The film, previously called "Apex," has been in the works since at least 2022 when Pitt was spotted in Austin, Texas, at an F1 practice event. The Hollywood superstar took fan photos while there, according to the Austin American-Statesman.

While it's too soon to tell how accurate "F1" will be to the actual world of Formula One, Daytona International Speedway officials complimented Bruckheimer in a Daytona Beach News-Journal story in January 2024: “Jerry Bruckheimer has produced some of the most entertaining and action-packed movies and shows of the past several decades,” Daytona International Speedway President Frank Kelleher said. “Whether he featured fast cars, high-flying jets, or frantic foot races, his work reflects the energy we’ll see in the Rolex 24 at Daytona, making him the perfect grand marshal for this year’s race.”

For example, "F1" was filmed during the "Roar Before the Rolex 24" endurance race event there with the No. 120 Wright Motorsports Porsche 911 GT3, an entry in the GTD Class, serving as the center of the shooting as the movie car. Drivers Adam Adelson, Elliott Skeer, Jan Heylen and Fred Makowiecki piloted the car.

"When we were contacted by the movie team about the possibility of filming here, we were very thrilled that our property, Daytona International Speedway, the World Center of Racing and IMSA could be part of that," IMSA President John Doonan said. "It's a testament to the folks making the film that they want it to be 100% authentic. They ran until 2 in the morning" during filming in January 2024.

Said Doonan: "The branding, it's all authentic and I think that's really great. To have the first segment of the movie here at Daytona, here in Volusia County and around the area, it can only be good, to be honest. We've all seen racing movies. We can all name our favorite racing movies. But for me, it's about making sure the movie is authentic. And although I didn't approve the paint scheme, it looks pretty slick."

Above are photos of the Rolex 24 at Daytona International Speedway in January 2024, courtesy of the Daytona Beach News-Journal.

What was the name of Florida restaurant destroyed by fire after Brad Pitt, Javier Bardem filmed scenes for 'F1'?

In addition to the Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, the "F1" movie crew also was spotted filming scenes at the landmark Pappas Drive-In & Family Restaurant in New Smyrna Beach, as well as Christina’s Coin Laundry next door.

From the first look at the "F1" trailer, there’s plenty of racing action, but no obvious signs yet of the scenes filmed at the popular New Smyrna Beach restaurant, which was gutted by an overnight fire in March 2024, the Daytona Beach News-Journal reported.

Watch the trailer for 'F1' racing movie starring Brad Pitt

The trailer for the Apple Original film "F1," based on the world of Formula One, was released July 7, 2024. F1 (the actual racing organization) released the trailer on its social platforms, with the Instagram Reel getting more than 1.1 million likes.

“We need to build a car for combat,” Brad Pitt’s character gravely states in a scene featured in the "F1" preview clip. Asked about safety, he responds, “Who said anything about safe?”

When does 'F1' racing movie with Brad Pitt come out?

"F1" will open abroad on June 25, 2025, then in U.S. theaters on June 27, 2025.

Contributing: Scott Horner, Indianapolis Star; Edward Segarra, USA TODAY