6-11 December 2016 in the auditorium of the Library of arts. A. P. Bogolyubov held a retrospective of scenic and theatrical works of Konstantin Korovin and his students — Sergey Gerasimov, Fedor Fedorovsky, George Lapshin

the Library of arts. A.P.Bogolyubov

6-11 Dec 2016

Moscow, Suschevskaya street, 14

On December 5, 2016 notes 155-летие since the birth of Konstantin Alexeevich Korovin (1861-1939) — painter, one of founders of impressionism in Russian art, theatrical decorator, and writer.

For this anniversary retrospective is dedicated scenic and theatrical works of Konstantin Korovin and his students, the exhibition which includes works from the collections of the Moscow Gallery VELLUM, Fund them. Korovin "let's save together" and a major private collections.

Exhibition "Korovin and students" pass 6 to 11 December 2016 in the theatrical hall of the Library of arts. A. P. Bogolyubov.

Charity event and Vernissage on 5 December. In the beginning 18:30.

Lecture "Konstantin Korovin. Gave the sun" on December 10. In the beginning 14:00.

Konstantin Korovin left a great legacy. He was not only a great artist but a wonderful teacher who raised a galaxy of outstanding figures of Russian and Soviet art of the first half of the last century. Among them: Sergey Vasilyevich Gerasimov (1885-1964), who became an academician and people's artist of the USSR, Fedor Fedorovich Fedorovsky (1883-1955), who for more than a quarter of a century was the chief artist of the Bolshoi theatre artists continue his career in exile, such as George A. (George) Lapshin (1885-1950), a brilliant representative of the Paris school. It is very important that all the best pupils and followers Korovin — and Gerasimov, and Fedorovsky, and Lapshin — to the end of his career like he fulfilled the precepts of the teacher. And they, in turn, have become famous and recognized teachers. Gerasimov was the Director MGHI them. V. I. Surikov. Fedorov already in 1920-х taught students of VKhUTEMAS — "forge of cadres of the new revolutionary art." And Georges Lapshin led the Art Studio at the House of Russian youth in Paris.

With the works of these talented artists the audience will meet at the exhibition "Korovin and students".

Vladimir Semenov, Director of the Moscow Library of arts named after A. Bogolyubov: "Today, libraries are beginning to play the role of not just a meeting place with books, but a full-fledged cultural centers,which are formed around the current art-сообщества. They become a magnet for new artistic projects, including the Museum, and these high-status exhibition clearly demonstrates the relevance of this approach".

***

Charity evening for the birthday of the artist, which will be held on December 5, aims to attract the public to the preservation of cultural memory and heritage of Konstantin Korovin.

In September 2015 the staff of the Foundation named after K. A. Korovin "let's save together" and hundreds of enthusiasts have helped to open the first memorial Museum Korovin in his ancestral house in the village of Okhotino (Pereslavl district of the Yaroslavl region). Now the Foundation plans to perpetuate the memory of a great artist in Moscow and is preparing a joint project with mgahi. V. I. Surikov, a building which stands on the site of the house where he was born and spent his childhood Konstantin Korovin.

Exhibit "Korovin and students" is supported by: Foundation named after K. A. Korovin "save together", Galleries, VELLUM, Interregional Chaliapin center and the Russian Fund of Culture

operation Mode of the exhibition "Korovin and students": 06-11 December 2016, from 10 to 19 hours.

the price of the ticket: 100 roubles.

the program of the evening 5-го Dec (entrance by invitations and paid tickets):

18:30 — opening of the exhibition "Korovin and students"

19:00 — Charity evening "To the Cape of Good Hope". Literary readings of short stories by K. A. Korovin, the execution of works from the repertoire of Fyodor Chaliapin. host of the evening — poet Marina Vernalis.

In the framework of the project "Korovin and students" 10 Dec 14:00 on lecture "Konstantin Korovin. Gave the sun." Lecture by art historian Armen Apresyan (entrance ticket to the exhibition).

the organizers of the project:

GBUK g. Moskvy "Library of arts. A. P. Bogolyubov": Moscow, Suschevskaya str., 14, bogolublib.ru;

the Gallery VELLUM: call + 7 (985) 776-33-31, www.vellum.ru;

Fund them. Korovin "let's save together", the President of the Foundation Elena Peshkova: call + 7 (967) 079-79-70, kkorovin.com.