Sergei Gerasimov with his wife in 1910

Entrance to the Grand Canal, Venice was painted by Gerasimov whilst in Venice in 1959. He travelled to Venice with a group of younger Russian artists including Vladimir Stozharov and Victor Ivanov. Ivanov has said they had so little money they had to pay for their guest house in paintings and that one day a fine group of paintings will turn up in Venice as they were collected by the hotel owner.

The view point of the painting is looking down the entrance to the Grand Canal. The Doges Palace is on the right and the Dogana or customs house on the left. The fashions of the people standing in the foreground are distinctive 1950's and were quite intriguing to the Russian artists according to Victor Ivanov. The warm Venetian sun combines with the sea water in the Canal to bath the city in a haze that Gerasimov has skillfully managed to capture. This beautiful painting is an important and rare survival of one of Gerasimov's paintings from this trip to Italy.

Sergei Gerasimov was secretary of the USSR Union of Artists at this date(1958 - 1964) and taught the generation of post war artists such as Geli Korzhev, the Tkachev brothers and Vladimir Stozharov. The Russian artists' response to Italy on these visits in such paintings as this is an important part of the Soviet painting tradition that has been little studied.

Sergey Vasilyevich Gerasimov (Russian: Серге́й Васи́льевич Гера́симов; 26 September [O.S. 14 September] 1885 in Mozhaysk, current Moscow Oblast - 20 April 1964 in Moscow) was a Soviet Russian painter.

Gerasimov was one of the most important of all Soviet artists. A student of Konstantin Korovin as a young artist he later went on to join the Makovets group. His early watercolors are considered masterpieces and show a tendency toward modernism that is less pronounced in his later work. In the 1920s and 1930s, he taught at the state art school Vkhutemas, and designed posters and painted works sympathetic to the new Communist government in a style later known as Socialist realism.

Despite this he was known throughout the Russian art world to be a liberal thinker whose paintings showed the influences of Impressionism and other modern movements. Under Joseph Stalin these tendencies placed him in aesthetic opposition to his arch-nemesis (and ironic namesake) Alexander Gerasimov.

During the Stalin era, Sergey Gerasimov was demoted from his position of director of the Russian Artists' Union and replaced by Alexander Gerasimov. During the period of World War II, Sergey Gerasimov, along with most of the faculty and student body of the Surikov Art Institute were moved from Moscow to the ancient caravan city of Samarkand.

Some of Gerasmov's most famous works were painted during this period and show scenes of the old oriental city of Samarkand. Many of these paintings are on display to this day at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow. With the death of Stalin and the rise of Nikita Khrushchev, Sergey Gerasmimov was re-instated as the head of the Russian Artists' Union, a position he held until his death in 1964.

Some of Gerasimov's most famous students that he came in contact with and taught at the Surikov Art Institute include; Fedor Z. Zakharov, Vladimir Stozharov, Alexey and Sergey Tkachyov, Yury P. Kugach, Aleksei Gritsai, Gely Korzhev, and many other important Soviet artists.

Selected works

The Partisan's Mother(1943)

The Peasant Uprising of 1860 (1951)

Outside Link(below).