1. Snapfish What? You still store all your photos in albums and frames only?

2. -- Hewlett-Packard Company (Snapfish Terms and Conditions, 2009) -- Leading online photo service Including share, print, store, and use photos What Is Snapfish?

3. History 2000: first launched 2004: expanded to 22 countries worldwide 2005: grown significantly since bought by HP 2009: more than 70 million members, and 1 billion unique photos stored online

4. Basic photo editing Free online photo sharing Unlimited online photo storage Digital camera prints Personalised photo products, such as calendars, mugs, mousepads and more What does Snapfish offer? Services and products for Your photos!!

5. Users must be 13 years of age or older Users must submit requested information including Name, and Correct email address Users must agree to, and abide by all the terms and conditions (TaC) Eligibility to become a member

6. After becoming a member... Personal use only – not for commercial purpose Users must provide with accurate information about yourself when requested Users must use the services at least once every 365 days, to maintain &quot;Active Participation&quot;.

7. Copyright Right to copy, display, modify, transmit, make derivative works of and distribute your content Either own your content or have written permission from the copyright owner to make such content available to the Service.

8. Copyright (continue) Snapfish may delete, move, and edit prohibited contents: Is deceptive, pornographic, and offensive Comprises copyrighted material used Violates F orms of corruptive code Harms anyone Advocates illegal activity Provides a link to any of the above

9. Collection of personal Information Contact information Financial information Automatic data collection browser type language access time etc Optional friends emails for the tell-a-friend program

10. Share Personal Information For services and marketing purpose only to: Credit card processors Providers of customer services Email service providers Automated data processors Shipping agents HP-owned business entities

11. Privacy Only invited friends that have access to your photos C hoice of receiving period offer of products and services Credit Card information is used only for payment processing and fraud prevention

12. Issues to Concern Invitees could forward the email invitation to others who will then be able to see your photos Users will not be notified of changed terms No ID verify – actually any one can sign up for services Privacy settings are not user friendly

13. Things to remember Do not sign up for member if you don ’ t agree to th e TaC Check TaC periodically Check privacy settings Do not save Credit Card details Explore and enjoy!

14. More information http://www.itchy-feet.com.au/201/review-of-snapfish-photo-printing-and-storage http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snapfish http://www3.snapfish.com/aboutUs http://www.cnet.com.au/snapfish-online-photo-service-takes-the-plunge-in-australia-339272590.htm http://reviews.cnet.com/4520-6451_7-6245115-1.html