Snapfish is a division of HP (Hewlett Packard) and is a well known online photo service started in 2004. Snapfish's products not only include photo books, but also other personalized items including invitations, mugs, address labels, posters, prints, puzzles, canvas prints.

Both hardcover and softcover photo books in both landscape and square orientation are available and Snapfish's software is online. You upload your photos to the site and you can share and store your photos for free.

Snapfish’s book making software is easy to use and is geared towards making a more simple photo book as the layouts are not customizable.

For more information and for actual photos of my Snapfish photo book, check out my Snapfish comparison to MyPublisher or my comparison review of Snapfish, MyPublisher, Mpix, and Blurb.

Click HERE to go to Snapfish's site!

Don't forget to check the main Photobook Deals page for all of today's deals! Bookmark that page or fan me on Facebook and you won't miss out on the latest coupon codes!

Photo Book Girl Tries Before You Buy!

What sets my site apart from other sites that just post a mindless list of coupon codes, is that I try as many photo book companies as I can, like Snapfish and provide you a firsthand and honest review of each company. For more info on Snapfish and actual photos of my Snapfish books, check out my Snapfish Review.

The blog posts below will take you to the latest Snapfish coupons and promos. The expiration date of each deal is provided in parentheses, so you'll know if the deal is still available.

Snapfish Deals from the Blog

Dec 2, 2018: Deck the Halls with Your Own Photos - Best Custom Photo Ornaments for the Holidays

The perfect way to add some personal touches to your Christmas tree and holiday decor. Great as gifts too. Find out my best tips for DIY and favorite company for photo ornaments!

May 1, 2018: Photo Book Girl's Mother's Day and Father's Day Gift Guide 2018

Mother's Day is May 13th and Father's Day is not too far behind on June 17th! One very special Father's Day for us occurred back in 2015. We ...

Nov 12, 2017: Photo Book Girl's Annual Holiday Photo Card Guide - Best Deals & Tips 2017

Who has the best prices on custom photo cards? Check out my holiday card guide for 2017!

Snapfish Review

If you're trying to find the right photo book publisher for your next project, check out our company review pages. See the Snapfish Review page for tips, quick specs and a link to every type of Snapfish photo book available!