Business Strategy

When conducting business transactions Snapfish primarily uses the “business to consumer” type of e-commerce. The company, primarily based on the Internet, resembles a “click and mortar” type of online business. Snapfish’s collaboration with Walgreen’s allows customers to upload pictures and order their prints, gifts, etc. on the website and then physically pick the products up at a Walgreen’s store.

Snapfish employs a low cost strategy. With 13 million current members and growth rate of 6 million new members per year, Snapfish targets a very large market resulting in economies of scale. Snapfish benefits from combining their leadership in online photography with the expertise and leadership of parent company Hewlett-Packard in digital imaging and home printing. Given the resources of these 2 companies, I’m sure they will continue to strive to keep costs to a minimum while providing great service, which to customers equals a good value.

Marketing Mixes

Snapfish takes advantage of several effective marketing mixes. They are registered with all the major market search engine contenders, with their website being the first to appear when searching for the company, as well as being the most prominent when searching for digital photo services. Snapfish has strategic affiliate programs with major companies such as; Nokia, Cingular, Netscape, Comcast, Travelocity, and Sprint. Other successful marketing strategies adopted by Snapfish include online ads, e-mailing lists, and viral marketing.

The film developing industry is certainly not a new one, but Snapfish is capitalizing on the opportunity to excel by offering a service which allows for not only development of actual photo prints but also storage and sharing of photos on the internet. Compared to it’s competition, Snapfish is aggressively priced and offers the customer flexible options.

Snapfish is continually offering special promotions to existing as well as new customers to promote the use of their service. The company continues to make uploading pictures more and more convenient to customers, now even offering customers the ability to upload photos taken on their cellular camera phone. Snapfish also offers to develop standard film by having customers mail the film to them. Not only does the company develop the film and send the prints to the customer, they also create a new album on the customer’s online account. This allows people without access to a digital camera to have their pictures available online. This service has expanded Snapfish’s spectrum of potential customers.

Porter's 5 Forces

Supplier power seems to be the dominant force for Snapfish. Buyers don’t have much power because there aren’t many competitors from which to choose. It would be difficult for new entrants to cause a stir in the market because Snapfish already has a very large amount of customers and offers excellent quality for a low price. The vast resources and know-how of Snapfish/HP create a considerable entry barrier. The closest competitor to Snapfish is Shutterfly, which offers a similar service. However, Shutterfly only deals with digital photos, and prints are only made available via delivery, whereas Snapfish can develop, print, and upload both digital photos and conventional film and customers can pick up their prints at the nearest Walgreen’s store if they wish.

Business Initiatives

Snapfish utilizes such business initiatives as CRM (customer relationship management) and SCM (supply chain management) to achieve customer satisfaction and efficiency. Since orders are placed over the Internet, Snapfish is primarily an e-business. All information about orders processed and inventory are tracked within a database, so the status of an order or the availability of a product can easily be confirmed. Customer information and history are retained in order to expedite the customer’s next order and also to give the company insight about which customers to target when advertising certain products. The CRM is an initiative that helps increase revenues (top line), while SCM helps keep costs down (bottom line). Snapfish uses software by Oracle as IT support for both SCM and CRM.

Payment

When ordering from Snapfish customers are given a few different payment options. Snapfish offers the convenience of using all major credit cards, as well as debit and check cards. Snapfish also accepts check and money orders, but customers may only use this method of payment when using the standard film developing service as described above.