incarcerated

1983:

Amir Mirzaei Hekmati is born in Flagstaff, Ariz., to Ali and Benhaz Hekmati.

1984-2001:

Hekmati is raised in Nebraska for a few years before his father takes a position as a professor at Mott Community College. Hekmati graduates from high school in Flint in 2001.

2001-2005:

Hekmati serves in the United States Marine Corps. He was trained at Camp Pendleton, Calif., as a rifleman. Because he spoke some Farsi, he was sent to the Defense Language Institute to learn Arabic. He was deployed to Iraq from April to September 2004 doing translation work. His enlistment ended August 2005.

2006:

Hekmati

, Lucid Linguistics LLC, to do translation work, which specialized in Arabic, Persian and military-related issues.

2008:

Hekmati is listed as a contributor to a five-year study of two-way translation systems in tactical military situations. The study is published by the Mitre Corp. and financed by Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Later that year, he is listed as a subcontractor for a company developing a video-game-based foreign language training tool funded by an Army contract.

2010-2011:

Hekmati participates in a six-month training program Fort Leavenworth run by United Kingdom defense firm BAE Systems. The program is for people looking to the Army’s Human Terrain Teams to provide language and cultural expertise to military units in Iraq and Afghanistan. Hekmati served on an Iraq team from September 2010 to May 2011 and resigned in June 2011.

August 2011:

Hekmati is

on allegations that he is a spy. Family members say he was making the trip to visit his grandmother in Tehran after getting permission from the Iranian Interests Section of the Pakistani Embassy in Washington, D.C.

December 2011:

Iranian state television airs a statement by Hekmati in which he confesses to entering Iran as a CIA mole. Hekmati's family believes the alleged confession to be false and coerced.

January 2012:

Iran's Revolutionary Court

. "Amir Mirza Hekmati was sentenced to death ... for cooperating with the hostile country (the United States) and spying for the CIA," the country's semi-official Fars news agency reported. "The court found him Corrupt on Earth and Mohareb (waging war on God)," it added.

March 2012:

Hekmati's death sentence is annulled and a re-trail is ordered, with a high court saying there were problems with his original trial.

February-April 2013:

Family members are

from Hekmati and word emerges that prison conditions are improving, with the incarcerated Hekmati moving to a less-restrictive area of the prison. Family member hold onto hope that it's a sign of an eventual release.