Dart wears every frustration on her face and in her muscles, slamming balls into the ground when the feeling takes. She sobbed into a towel at a change of ends. Boulter acts more serenely, often applauding high skill from her ­opponent.

What they shared, other than nationality, was fluctuating output, making for a compelling grudge match of several mini-epic games. “You see everything how I’m thinking, unfortunately, but I’m so happy to be able to get through,” Dart said. “My head-to-head is absolutely woeful against her so I wasn’t expecting too much.”

Boulter had triumphed in all bar one of their previous matches. They tend to throw something up, serving up back-to-back Nottingham beef over the past two seasons. Last year Dart accused Boulter of being unprofessional because of a gesture towards her head, to which Boulter replied that it was nothing ­personal, and something she did every match. Their 3hr 13min rematch last month left Dart furious with the officiating. She jokingly wagered £50,000 with an ­umpire that she was right and they wrong. Thanks to her third-round payout, she could lose that hypothetical bet and have £93,000 left over.

This was a rare occasion. For long stretches of the Nineties and Noughties, it was headline news if one British woman made it into the second round, let alone two together. We were back in Virginia Wade territory. Had there been such internecine interest since Anne Hobbs beat Wade in the second round in 1981, on this very court?

The fourth game was the first ­Homeric miniature, six deuces that ended in a Boulter hold. A ballgirl threw a ball to Dart after a double fault, and she hit it away in annoyance. When going well, she swung her arms to gee up the crowd. Her serve was malfunctioning and a ­glacial change-up went wide, a seventh double fault of the match handing back one of her breaks, only for a frazzled Boulter to dish it back, giving Dart the second set.

Boulter could not capitalise on two break points in the fourth game of the decider, sending two attacking forehands awry, and more followed. Each game was seismic, and Dart was coming out on top, holding serve in a five-deuce affair and realising a sixth break point of the game in a six-deucer. Boulter levelled at 4-4 and a brilliant backhand took her within one game of the match.

There was an angry slap of the thigh and successive walks to the back of the court for Dart, a moment to herself, at 6-2 down in the tie-break. Boulter said her combination of opponents in the first two rounds made it hard to find rhythm. Would this kind of interruption help? “I don’t know,” she said. “I actually didn’t notice. I try not to look too much.”

Dart won the next four points, and it was level again at 8-8 when Boulter won a 25-shot rally, the longest of the match. Then two unforced errors — she finished with 75 of them — sealed her goodbye. Dart had cursed, cried and conquered. “I just had a tough day at the office,” Boulter said. “Not my best tennis. But it’s what happens sometimes.”

The win takes Dart up to a ­provisional world No 77, a career best, joining Sonay Kartal and Emma ­Raducanu in the third round. Unlike them, she does not have a seed to face after Wang Xinyu beat Jessica Pegula, the world No 5 whose family owns the Buffalo Bills in NFL. Now that’s ­someone to make a bet with.

Yuriko Lily Miyazaki, the wild-card, lost 6-0, 6-0 in 50 minutes against ­Daria Kasatkina.

He will be back for some mixed doubles with Emma Raducanu but Andy Murray is still receiving a heartwarming ovation wherever he steps foot.

It’s time for Murray to get on the mic: “Two of my kids are up there and it’s way past their bedtime,” he says, his humour never far from view.

“It was obviously very special to play with Jamie, we’ve not the chance to do it before,” Murray said. “It was a race against time to get out here and physically it wasn’t easy but I’m glad we were able to do it one time together.”

He follows it up with chatting about after he lost to Roger Federer in his first Wimbledon final.

“It’s always really difficult to speak after a loss, particularly after a Grand Slam final and being at Wimbledon.

“That’s the closest I had been and it was obviously difficult. It was quite an important moment in my career.

“I’m not saying I’m the most outgoing or bubbly personality, but I think people probably saw how much I cared about the sport for the first time maybe.

“Obviously it was an important match and important moment in my career.”

Speaking about winning Olympics gold in 2012, he says: “Definitely to that point it was the biggest week of my life.

“To turn that around after losing in the final of Wimbledon and then to come here and play, it was one of my favourite days I’ve ever had, certainly as an athlete.

“To play in a home Olympic Games at Wimbledon, to beat Roger for once in a big match was nice and then I had a great run in the mixed doubles with Laura Robson as well so yeah, it was an amazing week for me.”

On winning his first Wimbledon title in 2013: “I did find it pretty stressful to be honest with you. It wasn’t easy but I obviously had an amazing team of people around me, supporting me through all of that.

“The crowd support obviously made a huge difference. Playing at a home is obviously a huge advantage in all sports and I used it that day.

“Novak [Djokovic] had an off day obviously. I just managed to get over the line. I didn’t really actually enjoy it as much as I should’ve done. I just found the whole thing very, very stressful.”

The match may be over but the show is not over yet. Wimbledon are determined to bring the curtain down on day four with some tears – sad or happy, depends on your angle – as the tributes to Andy Murray begin.

Novak Djokovic, Martina Navratilova, John McEnroe, Dan Evans, Cameron Norrie and Jack Draper are all on court to praise Murray. A huge smile comes across his face as he sees Sue Barker walking out onto the court to begin the warm words and well wishes. The man himself has already teared up, and we could be preparing ourselves for a few more.

The tribute montages are beginning on the big screen.

Stuart Fraser writes: Andy and Jamie Murray’s first and final Wimbledon together lasted only one match as British tennis’s most successful siblings suffered a first-round defeat in the men’s doubles.

With retirement beckoning for Andy later this summer, the chance to play with his brother on Centre Court could not be passed up. There was to be no fairytale, though, as their Australian opponents Rinky Hijikata and John Peers prevailed 7-6 (8-6), 6-4 in a tense encounter.

● Read Stuart Fraser’s report here

Stuart Fraser writes: A tense first set in this doubles match on Centre Court. All 12 games of the first set went with serve before the Murrays let slip a set point in the tie-break at 6-5. Hijikata and Peers took their first set point at 7-6 to kill the atmosphere. If this goes to a third set, the roof will definitely be required as it is getting dark out here.

Alyson Rudd writes: “Is Norrie winning Wimbledon?” Nick Kyrgios asked in his BBC commentary and he was not entirely joking. This was a display of sheer class from a competitor who might very well have been out to prove that his demotion to British No2 came too soon. Jack Draper who was seeded and came into the championships as British No1 simply had no answer to the fierce returns and crisp exchanges.

“I was pretty relaxed coming into it,” Norrie, 28, said but he certainly had a point to prove. “I really enjoyed it,” he added.

No1 Court was practically empty for the arrival of Draper and Norrie. Those who had been on court for Part 1 of the Battle of the Brits between Katie Boulter and Harriet Dart simply needed a comfort break both practically and emotionally before putting themselves through the wringer once again. And this was a contest that played havoc with the heartstrings.

Norrie, who was born in South Africa and grew up in New Zealand, has been trying to be more adventurous but tweaking his game has come at the cost of falling down the world rankings while Draper had been in the ascendency. When Norrie was passed at the net with his serve under pressure in the first set he might just have had doubts about any tweaks requiring him to advance mid- point but both players held serve and the first set was decided by a dramatic tie break with Draper left legs akimbo at the net after a gruelling rally. Norrie took the breaker with a crisp volley at the net thereby allaying any concerns about mixing up his play.

Draper looked highly frustrated and his opponent exploited the fact to win a point in the first game of next set by lofting the ball high after two weak smashes as if knowing Draper would put the third in the net. Norrie broke serve in that game with a passing shot that was drenched in confidence. Norrie then broke again with flashes of genius as Draper became ever more moody, looking towards his box in annoyance. The fact there were some vociferous Norrie fans in the stands did not improve his outlook.

“I don’t know those guys,” Norrie said in his post -match interview. Draper clawed back a break courtesy of a Norrie double fault, then held serve with difficulty leaving Norrie to serve with ease to take the second set.

Draper looked more positive at the start of the third set, held serve and then put Norrie’s under pressure but failed to capitalise and it was to his credit that he did not crumple but took an opportunity on Norrie’s next service game to break with a vicious, deep return. But, serving for the set, Draper found Norrie to be in the sort of form that marked his progress to the Wimbledon semi-final two years ago and he broke the British No1 to love and then served to love. Draper looked suitably miffed having perhaps assumed he had turned a corner. Instead the third set went to a tie break that was jam packed with brilliance and marginal errors. Draper saved match point with a cross court volley at the net but he soon succumbed to the sheer brilliance, and yes, indignation of his opponent.

The US Stars and Stripes fluttered feebly for Jessica Pegula today as the fifth seed was ousted in the second round by China’s Wang Xinyu 6-4, 6-7(7-9), 6-1 on American Independence Day.

The Chinese player blasted 38 winners which, combined with 33 unforced errors from Pegula, secured victory and a third round match-up against Harriet Dart who beat fellow Briton Katie Boulter in a tense three-set thriller. For Wang, world No42, the victory was her first over a top 10 player.

“Couple of days ago I was asking my coach when will this happen,” Wang said. “Jessica was really tough to play on grass. Her ball was super low and I’m just really happy I won in the end.”

For Pegula the loss was an ignominious crash back to earth on the back of some great form heading into the grass-court grand-slam.

In the Berlin lead-up event she saved five match points in the final to win her first career grass title with victory over Anna Kalinskaya and had high hopes of improving on last year’s quarter-final finish here.

While Pegula’s challenge ended in feeble fashion there was better news elsewhere for her compatriots.

Following her on to No3 Court was 11th seed Danielle Collins who avoided any slip-up in what is likely to be her final Wimbledon with retirement looming.

She beat Hungarian qualifier Dalma Galfi 6-3, 6-4 to set up a third-round clash against Brazil’s Beatriz Haddad Maia.

Men’s 14th seed Ben Shelton also made the third round as he outlasted South African qualifier Lloyd Harris in a match lasting close to four hours.

Shelton won a last-set tie-break 10-7 and will face Canada’s Denis Shapovalov on Saturday.

Rick Broadbent writes “I’ve no idea,” had been Jacob Fearnley’s honest answer when asked how he could beat Novak Djokovic. Outside of the world’s top 500 a month ago, the duel had all the makings of one of those polite Centre Court mismatches. Instead, ignorance was bliss and the Scottish wildcard, 22, rattled the seven-times champion, tested his wounded knee to the limit and even fuelled fleeting partisan hopes of one of the great Wimbledon upsets.

It took three hours for Djokovic to win 6-3 6-4 5-7 7-5. “Huge congrats to Jacob, he played a great match today,” said the magnanimous and relieved victor. “I saw him play for the first time two days ago. Obviously, there is an element of surprise. Idon’t know if I had a champion’s mentality today. I was not really comfortable in my own skin.”

Given he had knee surgery less than a month ago, was that a factor? “I was feeling okay,” he said. “I don’t want to be looking for any excuses for my performance today. Physically I felt well. Can I be playing and moving better? Absolutely.”

Djokovic’s fitness will become clearer in the days ahead, but Fearnley deserves enormous credit for his refusal to play the accepted role.The world No 277 from Edinburgh needed at least two things to happen to pull off a dream triumph. Firstly, he had to play the game of his life. Then he needed Djokovic to be below par. Both came true and he duly threw everything at his chance. He got himself into rallies and was bereft of awe. After losing two hard-fought sets, the traditional thing would have been to fade away to plucky loser status. Instead, he broke Djokovic for a second time in a single set to take it into a fourth.

Djokovic looked mystified, unsettled. He pointed out an annoying spectator and an official scurried away to despatch justice. He complained about the same person later. “Why is he not out?” Fearnley hit a ball between his own legs. Djokovic chuntered. The tenets of a shock were slowly coalescing. At 3-2 up in the third, Fearnley had a breakpoint. Djokovic, with 93 Wimbledon wins to Fearnley’s 1, had to scamper around the court, find an acute volley and then play a confident overhead to save it. This was far more uncomfortable than both he and common sense felt it should have been.

Buoyed by a dominant serve that Djokovic struggled to dent, it was remarkable that Fearnley maintained his level until the last two games. This fabled strip of grass had become the bridge across a class chasm. And whatever the issues with Djokovic’s fitness, it was the pain in the neck over the net that was more of an issue.

The Serb had to serve to stay in the fourth set as Fearnley’s big-hitting continued to scrape away the veneer of invincibility. He came up with two big ones, but the mere fact he was having to find escape routes was unexpected.

Champions, though, do not panic and Djokovic trusted that eventually Fearnley would feel the occasion. You have to go back to 2017 for a Wimbledon final without Djokovic. Now 37, this sometimes divisive figure is a man of metronomic rhythm. A new book about him by the writer Mark Hodgkinson explains how a formative session with his old coach included returning shots while listening to a band called Electro Orgasm sing “Everyone in Yugoslavia is playing rock ‘n’ roll’. Through this, he learnt the rhythm of reading, reacting and returning. The Beatles also helped but it was Electro Orgasm that put him on the way. Briefly, it had seemed there was a possibility of a premature ejection, before normal service was resumed.

Rick Broadbent writes If Wimbledon was Glastonbury then this would have been the legends’ slot. No need for all that hand-wringing over whether Coldplay or Andy Murray are fit for purpose, just drink in the nostalgic treat served up by a veteran beat combo who can transport you back to summers of love. This stuff is meant to make you smile, you know. Easy to forget when conflating a poor xG with an existential crisis, but step forward Stan Warwinka and Gael Monfils, the men to put the fun in the dysfunctional world of sport.

Warwinka is now 39. Monfils is 37. Youth won out with a 7-6 6-4 7-6 triumph straddling two days. The combined age of the friends was the highest in a men’s match at Wimbledon since Rod Laver and Bob Howe back in 1971. Both are much-loved, unorthodox and play with the air of people who know there are more important things out there. Warwinka’s contempt for the short ball, in particular, is an enduring thing of wonder. Their popularity and feats are such that it seemed a distinctly grumpy decision by scheduling killjoys to put them out late on Court Two on Wednesday. French flair v Swiss swash was made for show courts and TV dinners. Instead it got a 7.30pm start and a smattering of people wondering what time they stopped serving at the Dog & Fox.

They finished with Monfils potentially two games from victory and so came back for more today.

Monfils made short work of it, won the tiebreak and described it as a “cool match”. Indeed it was. During their careers, these two have attracted plenty of praise and no little criticism for their perceived slacker cool. If Novak Djokovic treats his body like a temple, Warwinka has perceived his as a pool-side cabana. He famously confessed to having a couple of beers the night before he saw off Djokovic in the French Open Final in 2015. “I’ve never needed ten hours sleep,” he explained. Monfils also had a memorable meeting with Djokovic in the US Open semi-final back in 2015, when he shook the ingrained beliefs of John McEnroe with what the gilded brat deemed the ‘Don’t Try’ strategy. On that occasion, Monfils hit short, looping balls, barely bothered to return some serves and took wild swipes at random moments. McEnroe said his peers would have nothing but contempt for this. Monfils said he was trying to throw his opponent off guard to bridge the gap in class. There were other tanking allegations.

Ah, but they can play too. Ten years ago Wawrinka won the Australian Open against Rafa Nadal before adding the French and US Opens with victories over Djokovic. Twenty years ago Monfils won the boys’ titles at the Australian Open, French Open and Wimbledon. He has made grown-up semi-finals too, but it was the way he did things rather than the things he did. Wawrinka made scores of errors in this match but painted a rainbow with that flamboyant follow through on each of his eight backhand winners.

Monfils could play Grigor Dmitrov next. Even Baby Federer is 33 now. The next gen have the toughest acts to follow. They may match them for talent but can they match them for the rest of it?

The previous night it had seemed appropriate that they were playing in the dying of the light. Close by, a church bell rang. We have no idea how many more treats we will get from this duo, but it was tennis with bells on. Old guys rule.

A shock double bagel is welcome on Brick Lane, not so much against a brick wall on No18 Court at Wimbledon. Yuriko Lily Miyazaki’s second-round match with Daria Kasatkina was delayed a day because of rain, albeit it finished so quickly on Thursday morning it felt like Kasatkina was still trying to finish it on a Wednesday. Done by noon; 6-0, 6-0 in 50 minutes.

Miyazaki overcame the odds in the first round, smashing Tamara Korpatsch 6-2, 6-1. It came as a surprise for more than one reason: many British wild cards have shown rare form in the build-up on grass, whereas Miyazaki had lost nine of 11 matches before these championships. The chasm this time between 12 and 148 in the rankings was too great. The wild card will have been absolutely livid.

Kasatkina is at home on this surface, and has an excellent chance in an open draw. The only match she has lost on grass this summer was against Aryna Sabalenka in Berlin. After that, she won the title in Eastbourne, beating Emma Raducanu, Jasmine Paolini and Leylah Fernandez in the last three rounds.

Miyazaki won six points in the first set, losing in 19 minutes. Three double faults, zero points won on second serve, 15 unforced errors to Kasatkina’s one. The second set offered an opportunity to restart, but it began with a fourth double fault. The Briton found favour with a selection of drop shots, playing the wily Kasatkina at her own game. She could not hold and another double fault made it 3-0. Kasatkina had two match points and wasted them both. Could this be the start of the most unlikely comeback in Wimbledon history? No. She took the third.

For those who are interested in this sort of thing, Susan Tutt defeated Marion Boundy in 20 minutes at the 1969 Wimbledon, and that wasn’t even 6-0, 6-0 (the defeated won two games). Last month, Iga Swiatek whitewashed Anastasia Potapova in 40 minutes at the French Open, and that was in the fourth round.

In case you missed it yesterday, Emma Raducanu produced her best Wimbledon performance to reach the third round, overwhelming her Belgian opponent Elise Mertens in a 6-1, 6-2 win. Stuart Fraser, in his match report, praised “a stunning display of crisp ball-striking” but warned that the “nation should not get too carried away at this early stage in the tournament”.

• Read here

As her son nears the end of a glittering career, Judy Murray took a trip through the Times archives with Stuart Fraser to recall a tipple with Sir Alex Ferguson, paparazzi stakeouts and the emotional toll of 20 vintage years of Andy Murray.

• Watch the video here

11am start unless stated

Seeds in brackets

Centre Court (1.30pm): J Fearnley (GB) v (2) N Djokovic (Ser); (1) I Swiatek (Pol) v P Martic (Cro); R Hijikata (Aus) and J Peers (Aus) v A Murray (GB) and J Murray (GB).

No 1 Court (1pm): (32) K Boulter (GB) v H Dart (GB); (28) J Draper (Britain) v C Norrie (GB); M Giron (US) v (4) A Zverev (Ger).

No 2 Court (7) H Hurkacz (Pol) v A Fils (Fr); (10) Jabeur (Tun) v R Montgomery (US); (4) E Rybakina (Kaz) v L Siegemund (Ger).

No 3 Court J Munar (Sp) v (9) A de Minaur (AUS); Wang Xinyu (China) v (5) J Pegula (US); (11) D Collins (US) v D Galfi (Hun); E Ruusuvuori (Fin) v (11) S Tsitsipas (Gr).

No 4 Court C Bucsa (Sp) v J Bouzas Maneiro (Sp); L Darderi (It) v (25) L Musetti (It); D Shnaider (Russ) and E Vesnina (Russ) v Y Putintseva (Kaz) and C Tauson (Den); H Dart (GB) and M Lumsden (GB) v (5) S Errani (It) and J Paolini (It).

No 5 Court M Frech (Pol) and K Kawa (Pol) v A Danilina (Kaz); Xu Yifan (China); M Demoliner (Br) and D Medvedev (Russ) v G Escobar (Ec) and A Nedovyesov (Kaz); E Navarro (US) and D Parry (Fr) v L Bronzetti (It) and V Gracheva (Fr); A Erler (Austria) and L Miedler (Austria) v (9) N Skupski (GB) and M Venus (NZ); A Blinkova (Russ) and M Sherif (Egy) v E Hozumi (Japan) and M Uchijima (Japan).

No 6 Court V Cornea (Rom) and F Marozsan (Hun) v A Mies (Ger) and J Smith (Aus); N Balaji (India) and L Johnson (GB) v (4) M Arevalo (El Salvador) and M Pavic (Cro); (13) G Olmos (Mex) and A Panova v M Kostyuk (Ukr) and E Ruse (Rom); I Gamarra Martins (Br) and B Haddad Maia (Br) v I Khromacheva (Russ) and K Rakhimova (Russ); (6) S Gonzalez (Mex) and E Roger-Vasselin (Fr) v D Evans (GB) and H Searle (GB).

No 7 Court T Mihalikova (Slova) and O Nicholls (GB) v (6) D Schuurs (Neth) and L Stefani (Br); (7) C Dolehide (US) and D Krawczyk (US) v S Aoyama (Japan) and A Krunic (Ser); Wang Xiyu (China) and Lin Zhu (China) v E Appleton (GB) and Y Miyazaki (GB); C Bucsa (Sp) and N Hibino (Japan) v T Maria (Ger) and A Rus (Neth); H Baptiste (US) and A Parks (US) v M Ninomiya (Japan) and F Wu (Taiwan).

No 8 Court (31) B Krejcikova (Cz) v K Volynets (US); T Machac (Cz) v R Safiullin; T Kokkinakis (Aus) v L Pouille (Fr); G Minnen (Bel) and H Watson (GB) v (14) S Kenin (US) and B Mattek-Sands (US).

No 9 Court A Bublik (KAZ) and A Shevchenko (Kaz) v Y Bhambri (India) and A Olivetti (Fr); F Martin (Fr) and M Middelkoop (Neth) v T Griekspoor (Neth) and B Stevens (Neth); (1) M Granollers (Sp) and H Zeballos (Arg) v A Fils (Fr) and U Humbert (Fr); M Linette (Pol) and P Stearns (US) v A Bogdan (Rom) and J Cristian (Rom).

No 10 Court (15) A Muhammad (US) and A Sutjiadi (Indo) v I Begu (Rom) and M Trevisan (It); J Clarke (GB) and M Willis (GB) v (15) M Purcell (Aus) and J Thompson (Aus); (4) K Siniakova (Cz) and T Townsend (US) v R Masarova (Sp) and L Noskova (Cz); N Bains (GB) and A Rajecki (GB) v T Babos (Hun) and N Kichenok (Ukr); M Kolodziejova (Cz) and A Siskova (Cz) v L Davis (US) and K Zimmermann (Bel).

No 11 Court (3) R Ram (US) and J Salisbury (GB) v W Blumberg (US) and C Ruud (Nor); (30) T Etcheverry (Arg) v A Popyrin (Aus); (16) S Doumbia (Fr) and F Reboul (Fr) v O Crawford (GB) and K Edmund (GB); K Piter (Pol) and V Tomova (Bul) v C Burel (Fr) and C Osorio (Col); C Eubanks (US) and E King (US) v L Broady (GB) and B Harris (GB).

No 12 Court Wang Yafan (China) v (12) M Keys (US); (10) G Dimitrov (Bul) v Shang Juncheng (China); (13) T Fritz (US) v A Rinderknech (Fr); C Wozniacki (Den) v (30) L Fernandez (Can).

No 14 Court (18) M Kostyuk (Ukr) v D Saville (Aus); F Cobolli (It) v (24) A Tabilo (Chile); G Mpetshi Perricard (Fr) v Y Nishioka (Japan); (1) Hsieh Su-wei (Taiwan) and E Mertens (Bel) v A Barnett (GB) and F Christie (GB).

No 15 Court Y Putintseva (Kaz) v (27) K Siniakova (Cz); M Osorio Serrano (Col) v (20) B Haddad Maia (Br); (17) A Kalinskaya (Russ) v M Bouzkova (Cz); Q Halys (Fr) v (21) K Khachanov (Russ); T Machac (Cz) and Zhizhen Zhang (China) v A Behar (Uru) and A Pavlasek (Cz).

No 16 Court F Comesana (Arg) v A Walton (Aus); D Snigur (Ukr) v (13) J Ostapenko (Lat); (23) C Garcia (Fr) v B Pera (US); (9) L Kichenok (Ukr) and J Ostapenko (Lat) v D Saville (Aus) and Yue Yuan (China); F Coria (Arg) and M Navone (Arg) v (7) W Koolhof (Neth) and N Mektic (Cro).

No 17 Court P Badosa Gibert (Sp) v B Fruhvirtova (Cz); D Shapovalov (Can) v D Altmaier (Ger); J Niemeier (Ger) v (21) E Svitolina (Ukr); (11) C Gauff (US) and J Pegula (US) v (11) A Kalinina (Ukr) and D Yastremska (Ukr).