Boulter was contesting her first match of the week in Miami after receiving a bye directly into the second round as the No. 24 seed. But she struggled early on against world No. 105 Brenda Fruhvirtova - the younger sister of fellow tennis star Linda Fruhvirtova. They traded breaks in the first two games but it was the Brit who found herself in trouble as the 16-year-old raced into a 4-2 lead.

Fruhvirtova suddenly started to struggle towards the end of the set, saving three break points in the eighth game before calling the physio right before she had the chance to serve for it. The Czech star resumed play but appeared to be dizzy and physically hampered as Boulter managed to break back, eventually taking the set in a tiebreak.

Fruhvirtova briefly left the court but she didn't benefit from her comfort break and was broken to start the second set. It appeared as though the players could be stopping when rain started to fall with Boulter leading 1-0. The world No. 105 took the opportunity to call the physio again but this time she decided that she couldn't continue, retiring from the match.

After advancing to the third round for the first time, Boulter admitted that she struggled with receiving a bye as she tried to find her feet on the court while dealing with what was happening on the other side of the net.

"I think it’s a tough situation. Obviously I felt like it was a match that I was going to get into a bit more and more she’s played a match on these courts so I was always going to find it difficult to come out and play," the British No. 1 told Sky Sports. "It's not a situation I've been in before, it's quite new for me. And obviously to win a match like that, I’ll take it but of course I wanted to get better. And she’s a young talent and she’s going to do very, very well in the future."

Explaining how she tried to deal with her opponent's setback, Boulter continued: "I actually think it’s one of the toughest things to do. Obviously like halfway through the match I’m seeing her coaches telling her to pull and then she’s not. So there’s a lot going on. One minute she’s struggling to put the ball in the court, the next minute she’s running 10 shots side to side. So it’s a tough mental game and for me it was challenging today and I probably wasn't the kindest to myself so we live and learn."