Lately, I’ve become obsessed with planning the ultimate cross Canada road trip. And if my 10+ years as a travel blogger can tell you anything, it’s that I absolutely love organizing, planning and researching for big trips, even if I don’t have a definite date for when I will take them.

For most of my travel life, I’ve prioritized new, international locations over exploring my own backyard here in Canada. But during covid when international travel was restricted, I learned to appreciate travel in my home country. So much so that my husband, Colin, and I took an Atlantic Canada honeymoon!

It turns out: Canada is amazing! Or at least the 32 million people who visit my country each year certainly think so.

And so as a Canadian myself, I would love to spend more time discovering this country outside of the cities I’ve lived in and know well, Vancouver and Toronto. I love the idea of going from coast to coast, exploring cities and wildlife, visiting all 10 provinces on a cross Canada road trip!

Which is why I’ve put together an epic 34-stop cross Canada road trip itinerary from Vancouver to St. John’s!

When I was looking up an itinerary for a road trip across Canada, I noticed that many other posts only covered a fraction of the country. I get it, Canada is a big place. But I want to plan a route that drives across all of Canada (even if I can only drive it in small stretches at a time)!

Below I’m sharing my ultimate cross Canada road trip itinerary – from Victoria to St. Johns, from the Pacific to the Atlantic – and all of the stops in between. I’ll dive into the things you must see, what to do if you don’t have enough time to drive across Canada, how to get around and where to go in each destination.

Disclosure: Some of the links below are affiliate links, meaning if you click through and make a purchase, I will earn a small commission at no additional cost to you. Thanks for your support!

Canada road trip FAQs

Is Canada good for road trips?

Absolutely! Canada is one of the best countries for road trips. Many people have taken on a Canadian road trip so you’ll find lots of infrastructure like free and paid campsites, rest stops, paved roads, gas stations, restaurants and grocery stores throughout the country. If you’re an English speaker, you’ll have no problem getting around most of Canada.

Canada is also great for road trips because it offers something for everyone. Whether you’re into big cities, natural wilderness, water sports, hiking, biking, shopping, art, food or something else, you can design your Canada road trip around your interests.

How long would a road trip across Canada take?

Canada is a BIG country; it’s the second largest country after Russia. So driving across Canada will take a while! The main route of the Trans Canada Highway, which starts in Victoria, BC and ends in St. John’s, NF, is 7,821 km, making it the fourth longest highway in the world.

It would take 100 hours (4.2 days) of straight driving to complete this route across Canada, which doesn’t account for overnight stops, waiting for ferries, stopping for meals or any sightseeing.

Assuming you don’t want to drive 24 hours a day without stopping, you should give yourself at least three weeks to road trip across Canada – though I’d recommend a couple of months if you have the time. My itinerary below has 34 stops and would probably take 2-3 months to really enjoy.

Because the country is so large, driving across Canada can be daunting. But even if you don’t have time to drive across all of Canada, you can still plan an epic east coast Canada road trip, a shortened Canadian road trip (such as driving from Toronto to Vancouver), a road trip around Atlantic Canada or one on the west coast.

Short on time? Check out my suggestions at the end of this post for mini Canada road trips!

When is the best time for a Canada road trip?

Despite our reputation, it’s not ALWAYS cold in Canada. In fact, our country gets really stinking hot in the summers! And of course, being such a huge country, the weather varies a lot from coast to coast.

That being said, I wouldn’t attempt a cross Canada road trip in the winter. While places like Vancouver and Victoria might be mild, other places will be freezing, blanketed in snow and no fun to explore – if the roads are even open to let you through!

Summer is a much better time for a Canadian road trip. While the weather will be hot in places, driving across Canada in the summer means you don’t have to worry about snow chains or snow tires. Parks will be open and camping outdoors will be comfortable (if you can find some shade).

Of course, summer is also Canada’s busiest tourism season, so prepare for crowds. Many popular areas, like Banff, will be teeming with people and campgrounds will book up in advance.

I would plan a cross Canada road trip for late spring or early fall. That way, you still get the best weather but hopefully with fewer crowds.

Car vs RV: How should you drive across Canada?

So you want to road trip Canada but now you have to think: how am I actually getting across this huge country?

Unfortunately, public transportation isn’t a great option. We have very limited passenger train routes in Canada and while you can basically cross the country by train with ViaRail, it will be slow, expensive and skip a lot of great stops.

Your choice will probably come down to driving a car with plans to overnight in hotels, motels, tents, Airbnbs, and the like or driving an RV across Canada (or other motorhome/converted van/trailer) that allows you to sleep and live in your vehicle.

Ultimately, I think this comes down to personal preference as there are pros and cons to both.

A car will be cheaper to buy/rent (if you don’t already have one) and fuel up, easier to drive and likely have fewer parts to maintain. But it can be costly to stay in hotels every night and annoying to constantly be packing and unpacking.

An RV will be more expensive to buy/rent (if you don’t already have one) and fuel, plus more cumbersome to drive, but can be convenient for road trippers who want to have their home with them.

When trying to decide, consider your comfort level with driving, how many people are road tripping with you, what kind of accommodation you prefer and, of course, your budget for your cross Canada road trip. If you’ve never RV-ed before, I’d recommend renting one for a shorter trip before trying to drive across Canada.

Need to rent a car for your Canada road trip? Check out Discover Cars!

My top 5: What to see on a road trip across Canada?

A quick scroll down to my itinerary will show you that there is so much to see on a road trip across Canada. But here my top five picks for stops you can’t miss:

Stanley Park in Vancouver, BC

The stunning Banff National Park in Alberta

Niagara Falls and the surrounding wine country in Ontario

Old Montreal and Old Quebec City in Quebec

The Cabot Trail in Nova Scotia

And for everything else you’ll want to see, let’s dive into my full cross Canada road trip itinerary below!

Cross Canada road trip map

The ultimate cross Canada road trip itinerary

Through my extensive research, I found lots of posts that helped to plan a road trip in Canada, but on a smaller scale. Maybe it was just an east coast Canada road trip or a Toronto to Vancouver driving trip.

And while those adventures sound great, I wanted to put together an entire cross country road trip driving the entirety of Canada from east to west. While my road trip itinerary doesn’t cover every inch of Canada, it’s the most comprehensive one I’ve come across!

Below I’ll list every stop on my ultimate cross Canada road trip itinerary, including how long the drive is from the previous stop and what you’ll want to do there. I’ve broken the itinerary up into sections (west coast, prairies, eastern, Atlantic), but they all connect to each other so you can simply continue heading east.

Ready? Let’s drive across Canada!

West coast and Rocky Mountains: BC & Alberta road trip

This portion of the itinerary covers British Columbia and the first part of Alberta along the Rocky Mountains. Stops on this portion of the road trip are:

Vancouver Island

Vancouver

Kelowna

Jasper

Banff

Calgary

Vancouver Island, BC

As you’ll see from the Canadian road trip planner map above, I actually start my cross Canada road trip in Vancouver. I live in Vancouver, so it would be a lot easier for me to pack up my car from home and start heading east, rather than back track to the Island.

Plus, I’d love to do a separate BC road trip around Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands, like Galiano and Salt Spring Island (perhaps as a practice road trip before we try to drive across Canada!).

But if you’re not from Vancouver, have never been to the Island and want to complete the entire Trans Canada Highway main route, I highly recommend starting your cross Canada road trip in Victoria, BC.

I’ve visited Victoria a number of times and really love it. This charming provincial capital has a beautiful harbour, world-renowned gardens and great food. From there, you can keep exploring more of Vancouver Island.

Must do on Vancouver Island:

Stroll through Butchart Gardens

Try surfing in Tofino or check out more things to do in Ucluelet

Go whale watching

Canadian fun fact: Vancouver Island is an island off the mainland of BC where the provincial capital, Victoria, is found. Vancouver is a city on the mainland on BC. There is no such thing as Victoria Island in BC or a capital city of Vancouver.

However, a reader let me know that there is in fact a Victoria Island located in the Arctic Ocean (thank you, Marlene!), but don’t go there if you’re trying to find Victoria, BC. I know, it’s confusing!

Vancouver, BC (3 hrs from Victoria)

If you skipped Vancouver Island, your cross Canada road trip will officially start in my home city, Vancouver! Otherwise, you can take a short and scenic ferry ride from Victoria to the mainland.

Vancouver is one of the most beautiful cities in the world and a highlight of any trip to Canada. Even as a local since 2010, I’m constantly amazed that I get to live in a place with beaches, mountains, city life and incredible food!

Must do in Vancouver:

Walk or bike along the Seawall to enjoy Stanley Park and city beaches

Shop and dine on Granville Island

Take a day trip to Whistler or another local ski mountain

Eat delicious sushi!

Another incredible thing to do in Vancouver (and all of Canada) is discover our indigenous history and culture. My friend Melanie put together this awesome post with lots of ideas for enjoying Indigenous culture in Vancouver!

The Okanagan, BC (4.5 hrs from Vancouver)

From Vancouver we’re heading into BC’s interior to visit the Okanagan Valley. The Okanagan is BC’s wine country and lake country, known for beautiful wineries, water sports and, unfortunately, summer wildfires.

If you’re visiting this area in the summer, make sure you’re aware of any fire bans, water restrictions or other alerts. Other than that, kick back with a glass of vino and a beautiful lakefront view!

Lucky for us, we have family in Kelowna and have visited the Okanagan many times (we even got engaged in Penticton!). But even if you don’t have family to stay with, BC’s Okanagan is well worth a visit.

Must do in Kelowna & the Okanagan:

Visit a local winery or join a wine tour

Hang out on Lake Okanagan

Take a day trip south to Penticton, Osoyoos or another South Okanagan town

Jasper, AB (7 hrs from Kelowna)

Many people skip Jasper, preferring to drive straight from Vancouver to Banff or Vancouver to Calgary, but I think a detour north to Jasper would be a highlight of any Canada road trip.

Jasper National Park is the biggest national park in Canada, home to glaciers, waterfalls, lakes, islands, forests and so much more. As soon as I saw a picture of Maligne Lake (above), I knew I needed to add Jasper to this itinerary.

Plus, because it’s a detour off the main Trans Canada Highway, Jasper is never as busy as our next stop, Banff. Fewer crowds? Yes, please!

Must do in Japser:

Admire Maligne Lake and Maligne Canyon

Witness the powerful Athabasca Falls

Ride the Jasper SkyTram or walk the Columbia Icefield Skywalk

Short on time? If you don’t have time to stop in the Okanagan or Jasper, you can do a Vancouver to Banff road trip in about nine hours, passing through Kamloops, Revelstoke and Glacier National Park.

Banff, AB (3 hrs from Jasper)

Another reason to visit Jasper? Because the drive from Banff to Jasper is through Icefields Parkway, one of the most scenic drives in the entire world.

Once you tear your eyes away from the road, you’re in for even more beauty in Banff National Park, Canada’s first national park and visited by more than four million people every year.

Spend your days hiking, camping and admiring all of the beautiful scenery around you. Because Banff is so popular, make sure you book your accommodation ahead of time and wake up early to avoid the largest crowds.

Must do in Banff:

Check out the views from the Banff Gondola

Be wowed by some of the prettiest lakes like Emerald Lake, Morraine Lake and Lake Louise

Soak in a hot spring or set out on any number of scenic hikes in the area

Or check out this complete 4 day Banff itinerary!

Calgary, AB (1.5 hrs from Banff)

In case you didn’t get enough hiking in Banff, you can make a stop in Canmore on your way to Calgary for more beautiful mountain views. Then it’s time to enter Cowtown, aka Calgary.

As a Vancouverite, it’s almost mandatory for us to make fun of Calgary (apologies to my Calgarian friends and family!), but there’s actually quite a bit to enjoy in the city. If you time your road trip right, you could be in town for the annual Calgary Stampede, which happens every July. There are also parks, museums, sports arenas and more to visit in Calgary.

Many people choose to visit Banff on a day trip from Calgary, since it’s only 1.5 hours away. But because there’s so much to do in Banff, I think it’d be better to spend a few days there before moving onto Calgary. However, if you’re short on time, you could do a day trip to Banff while basing in Calgary.

Must do in Calgary:

Don a cowboy hat at Calgary Stampede

Stroll (or raft) along Bow River and check out the Peace Bridge

Visit the Heritage Park Historical Village to learn some Western Canada history

Try your hand at some winter sports at WinSport, home of the 1998 Winter Olympics

Canadian fun “fact”: Just to prove how great the Vancouver-Calgary rivalry is, when I asked my husband what someone should do in Calgary he suggested “complain that you’re not in Vancouver.” But we’re just kidding, Calgary is great!

Prairies: Alberta, Saskatchewan & Manitoba road trip

We’re now moving into Canada’s prairie provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Stops visited on this portion of your road trip are:

Drumheller

Saskatoon

Riding Mountain National Park

Winnipeg

Whiteshell Provincial Park

Drumheller, AB (1.5 hrs from Calgary)

From Calgary we are leaving the Rockies and officially entering prairie land. This part of Canada is known for being quite flat (and dull) but as you’ll see below, there are some great places to stop on your cross Canada road trip.

First up: Drumheller! Known as the Town of the Dinosaurs, if you have any dino lovers in your car, this is going to be a mandatory stop!

Must do in Drumheller:

Check out fossils found in the area at The Royal Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology

Spot hoodoos in the nearby badlands

Take a day trip to Dinosaur Provincial Park (2 hrs from Drumheller)

Saskatoon, SK (5 hrs from Drumheller)

I was debating which of Saskatchewan’s major cities to include in this itinerary: Saskatoon, Regina or Moose Jaw. Ultimately I decided on Saskatoon as it’s the largest city, doesn’t have as much of a government feel as the capital (Regina), and is closest to Drumheller.

If you prefer to visit Regina, check out Stone Hall Castle, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and the world’s largest moose statue.

Or if you prefer to check out Moose Jaw, don’t miss the Tunnels of Moose Jaw tours. These are interactive tours that take place in the tunnels below the city and look really fun!

Must do in Saskatoon:

Visit Wanuskewin Heritage Park to learn about people’s sacred relationship with the land

Stand up paddle board on the South Saskatchewan River

Grab lunch at the oldest and largest farmer’s market in the province, the Saskatoon Farmer’s Market

Not into cities? If cities don’t do it for you, skip Saskatoon and head south to visit Saskatchewan’s Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park or Grasslands National Park for forests, lakes, wide open spaces, wildlife spotting and stargazing.

Riding Mountain National Park, MB (6 hrs from Saskatoon)

A great stop to break up the long drive across the Canadian Prairies is Riding Mountain National Park in Manitoba.

This park is home to forests, grasslands and great wildlife viewing. It’s a top place to visit in the province and a nice change from city life if you’re driving from Saskatoon to (spoiler alert on the next stop) Winnipeg.

Must do in Riding Mountain National Park:

Try out water sports in the summer or cross-country skiing in the winter

Take in the view from the top of Bald Hill

Go on a day trip to nearby university town, Brandon

Winnipeg, MB (3 hrs from Riding Mountain)

Welcome to The Peg! Affectionally called “Winterpeg” in the winter, you may want to steer clear of Winnipeg in the colder months. But in the summer, you’ll find lots to enjoy in this city. With a number of museums, markets, festivals and parks, you’ll have lots to fill your days.

And when you need a break from city life, head up to Lake Winnipeg. Enjoy the white sand dunes at Grand Beach or indulge in Icelandic heritage and Viking statues in Gimli.

Must do in Winnipeg:

Visit the Canadian Museum for Human Rights (I’ve heard it’s incredible!)

Get to know the city by riding the Central Winnipeg Bike Loop

Escape to the water on Lake Winnipeg

Whiteshell Provincial Park, MB (1.5 hrs from Winnipeg)

Our last stop in the prairies is Whiteshell Provincial Park, a park located on the border between Manitoba and Ontario. It’s a great introduction to the natural scenery that awaits you in western Ontario.

If you prefer to drive farther (since Whiteshell isn’t that far from Winnipeg), you could cross the border into Ontario and base in Kenora, a waterfront town with lots of beach activities.

Must do in Whiteshell Provincial Park:

Hit the beach at Falcon Lake

Discover the Bannock Point Petroforms

Visit West Hawk Lake, a crater lake formed by a meteor

Eastern Canada: Ontario & Quebec road trip

We’re now moving into the middle section of Canada and our two biggest provinces, Ontario and Quebec. Here we’ll be visiting:

Thunder Bay

Sault Ste Marie

Manitoulin Island

Tobermory

Toronto

Prince Edward County

Ottawa

Montreal

Eastern Townships

Quebec City

Tadoussac

Thunder Bay, ON (6.5 hrs from Whiteshell)

From Manitoba it’s a long drive to Thunder Bay to begin the Ontario road trip portion of this Canada itinerary.

The city of Thunder Bay isn’t the most exciting place to be but all of the nature nearby is really worth visiting. They say it’s home to some of the best beaches, waterfalls and viewpoints in the province!

Must do in Thunder Bay:

Explore Ouimet Canyon Provincial Park (Canada’s version of the Grand Canyon)

Admire Kakabeka Falls, the second highest waterfall in the province

Check out the amethyst mines and find your own to take home, as suggested by my friend Lyn!

Visit the Terry Fox Monument, commemorating the spot where Terry’s Marathon of Hope across Canada ended

Sault Ste Marie, ON (7.5 hrs from Thunder Bay)

It’s another long drive from Thunder Bay to Sault Ste Marie (pronounced Soo Saint Marie). What can I say? Ontario is a big province and you have a lot of ground to cover!

Luckily you’ll be driving along Lake Superior the whole time, affording you lots of places to stop and admire the view or go on a little hike to stretch the legs. Right on the US/Canada border, The Soo is a big port city with a splash of outdoor adventure for you to enjoy.

Must do in Sault Ste Marie:

Kayak down or go fly fishing on St. Marys River

Unleash your inner aviation geek at the Canadian BiPlane Heritage Museum

Ski or mountain bike at Hiawatha Highlands

Manitoulin Island, ON (4 hrs from Sault Ste Marie)

You didn’t think a cross Canada road trip itinerary would include islands did you? Or at least not in Ontario! But it’s true, Ontario is home to a number of islands, such as Manitoulin Island in the middle of Lake Huron.

Manitoulin Island is actually the largest freshwater island in the world and an amazing place to explore Indigenous culture, scenic trails and even see the Northern Lights (if you’re lucky!).

Must do on Manitoulin Island:

Hike the Cup and Saucer Trail for epic views

Explore some of Manitoulin’s 100+ lakes by canoe

Visit Wiikwemkoong, Canada’s only official Unceded Indian Reserve

Tobermory, ON (2.5 hrs from Manitoulin Island)

To get from Manitoulin Island to Tobermory, you and your vehicle will load onto a scenic ferry. Now look at us; we’re island-hopping in Canada!

While technically not an island, Tobermory does feel like a world of its own. It’s absolutely one of the most beautiful, natural places in Ontario with hidden gems (shipwrecks, anyone?) and Caribbean-like waters waiting to be discovered.

Must do in Tobermory:

Explore beaches, caves and grottos at Bruce Peninsula National Park

Take a boat tour around Flowerpot Island

Dive around 20 historical shipwrecks at Fathom Five National Marine Park

Short on time? Prefer cities? You can drive from Winnipeg to Toronto through the US (21 hours) rather than through the Canadian stops above (25 hours) and visit Minneapolis, Chicago and Detroit on the way.

Toronto, ON (3.5 hrs from Tobermory)

Welcome to The Six, my hometown of Toronto (us locals drop the second “t” so it’s more like “Torono”). Arguably the best known city in Canada and the biggest, no cross Canada road trip could exclude TO.

Having grown up in Toronto, it’s hard for me to see it as a tourist locale. But besides visiting my friends and family, there really is so much to do in this bustling, diverse city. From museums, parks and islands to sports arenas, shopping streets and galleries, there’s something in Toronto for everyone.

But my favourite part of the city is all of the different neighbourhoods that each have a distinct culture and feel. My favourites are Chinatown, The Annex and Kensington Market. It’s also some of the best eating in Canada, no matter what cuisine you’re in the mood for!

Must do in Toronto:

Head up the iconic CN Tower for a view over the city

Cruise across to the Toronto Islands and check out the skyline view

Watch a major league baseball, basketball or hockey game

See dinosaurs at the Royal Ontario Museum or admire art at the Art Gallery of Ontario

Get your fill of delicious Portuguese, Chinese, Italian, Indian, Korean food and any other cuisine!

Day trip to Niagara Falls!

Having grown up in Toronto, I’ve been to Niagara Falls a handful of times and often stayed overnight. At just over an hour from Toronto, Niagara Falls is an easy day trip.

But if you have the time and budget, I do recommend spending a few days in the Niagara region. Or if you’d prefer to base in Toronto and just see the falls on a day trip, that works too.

Besides seeing the incredible Niagara Falls (and yes, the Canadian side is much better than the American side) you’ll also want to check out Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario’s charming wine country.

There are lots of wine tours through Niagara if you’d rather not drive or find wineries yourself. You can also visit Albion Falls just outside of Hamilton on your way to Niagara, kind of like a warm up for the bigger Niagara Falls.

Prince Edward County, ON (3 hrs from Toronto)

Despite having lived the first 18 years of my life in Toronto, I’m sad to say I haven’t been to Prince Edward County. Which is too bad because it seems like the cutest collection of small towns, beaches, wineries, galleries, shops and parks.

The County is an island in Lake Ontario (not to be confused with Prince Edward Island, which is also an island called Prince Edward, but a province in the Atlantic Ocean) home to farmers and makers, perfect for slowing down and enjoying local life.

Must do in Prince Edward County:

Hit the beach at Sandbanks Provincial Park or North Beach Provincial Park

Wine taste through local wineries (there are also cideries and breweries, if you prefer)

Bike or hike the Millennium Trail or shop local in Picton or Wellington

For more suggestions of what to do, check out my friend Renee’s post with 16 things to do in Prince Edward County!

Ottawa, ON (3 hrs from Prince Edward County)

From Prince Edward County we’re heading north to Canada’s capital, Ottawa (no, Canada’s capital is not Toronto!). Ottawa is an incredible place to learn about Canada’s history and hear a mix of our national languages, English and French.

In the winter, don’t miss skating down the Rideau Canal, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and the world’s largest skate rink at 7.8km.

But there’s lots of fun to be had in the summer in Ottawa too! I’ve visited in both seasons and enjoyed skating in the cold and wandering Parliament Hill in warmer months.

Must do in Ottawa:

Visit a museum such as The Canadian Museum of History, The Canadian War Museum or The Canadian Museum of Nature

Take a tour of Parliament Hill

Stroll, skate or cruise along the Rideau Canal with a Beaver Tail!

Canadian fun fact: A Beaver Tail is a Canadian dessert that is essentially deep fried dough with toppings on it in the vague shape of a beaver’s tail. No actual beavers are harmed in the making of these treats!

Montreal, QC (2.5 hrs from Ottawa)

Bienvenue à Québec! Ready to road trip Quebec? We’re crossing over from Ontario to French-speaking Quebec and stopping first in one of my favourite cities, Montreal.

I always say that if I spoke French fluently, I would move to Montreal. But don’t worry! You don’t need to be fluent or even rudimentary at French to visit Montreal (but it would be good to parlez français if you want to move there).

Montreal has incredible food, is diverse and bustling, and has a wonderful European charm to it. There are beautiful viewpoints, stunning churches, funky street art, world-class restaurants, and lots of festivals and events.

Montreal feels like a place unlike any other in Canada and is a city where you could never get bored. I’ve visited a handful of times over the years and always enjoy the city.

Must do in Montreal:

Wander Old Montreal and the Port of Montreal

Go on a food tour of Montreal enjoying bagels, poutine, crepes and much more!

Admire Montreal’s famous Notre Dame and St. Joseph’s churches

Eastern Townships, QC (1.5 hrs from Montreal)

Despite a few visits to Montreal over the years, I haven’t explored more of Quebec yet. One area I’d love to spend a few days in is the Eastern Townships, just an hour or two southeast of Montreal.

This area is Quebec’s natural wonderland, where many Quebec and Ontario locals have cottages to spend their summers. It’s the perfect place to golf, hike, bike, take to the water and stargaze. There are also wineries, local shops and festivals to enjoy.

Must do in the Eastern Townships:

Get back to nature at Parc National du Mont-Orford

Visit the world’s first Dark Sky Preserve at ASTROLab in Parc National du Mont-Mégantic

Climb one of the world’s longest suspension bridges at Gorge Park

My friend Renee is once again coming in clutch with her list of 13 villages to visit in the Eastern Townships!

Quebec City, QC (2.5 hrs from the Eastern Townships)

On your way to Quebec’s capital, it may be worth a detour to Beauce for a sweet treat, since this town is responsible for 20% of the world’s maple syrup production!

All sugared up, you’re off to Quebec City for a few days of culture, architecture and history. There are world-renown art galleries and museums, stunning churches, and North America’s only ice hotel!

Quebec City has always struck me as a very romantic place – in fact, Colin and I thought about including it in our honeymoon itinerary. I’d love to splurge on a stay at the Château Frontenac one day (the most photographed hotel in the world). You can tell how badly I want to visit Quebec City by all of the must dos I listed below!

Must do in Quebec City:

Stroll along the fortified walls of Old Quebec, a UNESCO World Heritage Site

Explore the Citadelle de Québec, a military heritage site built between 1820 and 1850

Admire Montmorency Falls (they’re actually taller than Niagara Falls!)

Get your nature on at Jacques-Cartier National Park

Shop from local artisans at Île d’Orléans

Enjoy a day at Eastern Canada’s largest theme park, Village Vacances Valcartier, and stay the night at an ice hotel

Tadoussac, QC (3 hrs from Quebec City)

From Quebec City, you’ll drive along the St. Lawrence River to your last stop in Quebec, the historic, small town of Tadoussac. Tadoussac was founded in 1600 as the first French settlement in North America.

Despite being a small place, Tadoussac draws a good number of visitors thanks to its beautiful landscape and wildlife spotting opportunities (whales, bears and beavers!). Plus, it’s the perfect stop before you head to the Maritimes and Atlantic Canada.

Must do in Tadoussac:

Go whale watching and learn all about these mammals of the sea at Marine Mammal Interpretation Centre

Hike around Saguenay Fjord National Park

Sea kayak on Tadoussac Bay

Atlantic Canada: New Brunswick, PEI, Nova Scotia & Newfoundland road trip

Last but not least is the east coast of Canada! We’ll be visiting all of the Maritime provinces (New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia), as well as Newfoundland. In this section, you’ll stop at:

Fredericton

Fundy National Park

Charlottetown

Annapolis Valley

Halifax

Cape Breton Island

North Sydney

Port aux Basques

Gros Morne National Park

Gander

Elliston

St. John’s

Fredericton, NB (6 hrs from Tadoussac)

Ready to road trip the east coast of Canada? A big drive from Quebec has you in Fredericton, the provincial capital of New Brunswick.

While certainly not the most popular city in Canada, Fredericton is known for its colonial charm, military history, and arts and music scene. Since it’s such a long drive from Quebec into the Maritimes, why not spend a day or two in Fredericton?

Must do in Fredericton:

Shop the Fredericton Boyce Farmers Market during the day and the Garrison Night Market in the evening

Stop by the old British garrison where you can watch the changing of the guard, visit restored barracks and cell blocks, and take part in a soldier’s daily activities

Visit Kings Landing (no, not that one!) to see what life was like in New Brunswick 200 years ago

Fundy National Park, NB (2 hrs from Fredericton)

I remember visiting the Bay of Fundy with my family when I was about 12 years old and being wowed by the changing tides. When the tides were out, we were able to walk all the way out onto the ocean floor. This really is a unique area of Canada!

The Bay of Fundy runs along the south coast of New Brunswick and you can visit a number of sites along it. St. Andrews, to the west, is a National Historic Site and when the tide is out, you can actually drive along the ocean floor from St. Andrews to Ministers Island.

Heading northeast you’ll hit Saint John where you can watch the Reversing Falls Rapids. Next you can visit St. Martins Sea Caves, which you can visit on foot or via kayak depending on the tides. From there, you’ll be into Fundy National Park where even more natural wonders await!

Must do at Fundy National Park:

Hike and visit beaches along the Fundy Trail Parkway

Visit waterfalls from Alma such as Dickson Falls, Laverty Falls and Third Vault Falls

Explore Hopewell Rocks at both high tide and low tide

Charlottetown, PE (2.5 hrs from Fundy)

The next stop on your east coast of Canada road trip is Charlottetown in Prince Edward Island (PEI). PEI is Canada’s smallest province and while there’s lots to see, Charlottetown is a great base to explore from since everything on the island is within two hours of the capital city.

The birthplace of Canadian Confederation, Charlottetown is a historic city full of charm, waterfront features and really delicious food (I could not get enough of their ice cream and fresh seafood!). PEI also has sand dunes, museums, Indigenous history, beaches and lots more to discover.

Plus, it’s the real home of Anne of Green Gables! You might know Anne from the novels written by LM Montgomery. Just outside Charlottetown, you can visit the home that inspired Montgomery’s writing. This was one of my highlights in PEI!

Must do in Charlottetown and PEI:

Eat home grown Cavendish potatoes, Cows ice cream and fresh PEI oysters

Visit the Anne of Green Gables Museum and walk through her home from the books

Go beach hopping in PEI: sand dunes, red sand beaches and more!

PS: On your way from New Brunswick to PEI, don’t miss a stop in Shediac, the lobster capital of the world!

Annapolis Valley, NS (5 hrs from Charlottetown)

From Charlottetown you’ll head back across the Confederation Bridge, down through New Brunswick and into Nova Scotia. Your first stop in Nova Scotia is the Annapolis Valley, the province’s wine region!

Historically an apple-growing region, the Annapolis Valley is now known for its acidic white wine and Méthode Classique sparkling wine, as well as ciders and spirits. Of course, there’s lots to discover in this area for non-drinkers too! The views are beautiful and there’s lots of nature, history and delicious food to enjoy.

Must do in the Annapolis Valley:

Go on a wine tour to try the Valley’s best

Visit a recreation of one of North America’s first settlements at Port-Royal National Historic Site

Learn about the history and culture of the Mi’kmaw people at Kejimkujik National Park

Halifax, NS (2 hrs from the Annapolis Valley)

Next up is one of my favourite cities in Canada (and another one I’d consider moving to), Halifax. It was one of the highlights of our Atlantic Canada honeymoon.

Halifax is a really cool city with lots to do, great local seafood, an awesome waterfront and just a great vibe all around. I loved that the city had some awesome history to discover in really engaging ways, as well as lots of modern and multi-cultural offerings.

Plus, there are so many awesome day trips from Halifax along the coast of Nova Scoatia, like the famous Peggys Cove lighthouse and adorable town of Lunenberg.

Must do in Halifax:

Get dinner at The Bicycle Thief, try Nova Scotian donair and other great eats in Halifax

Have a moving experience at the Pier 21 Immigration Museum (probably the best museum I’ve ever visited!)

Visit the Halifax Citadel and learn about Canada’s military history

Walk along the Halifax Waterfront Boardwalk and take the ferry over to Dartmouth

Go on a day trip to Peggys Cove, Lunenberg and Mahone Bay

Need more suggestions? Check out 22 things to do in Halifax!

Cape Breton Island, NS (5 hrs from Halifax)

From Halifax you’ll head to the jewel of Nova Scotia: Cape Breton Island!

Depending on how much time you have, you can choose to drive the entirety of the Cabot Trail around Cape Breton Island, or just visit one or two towns. The entire trail is only 298 km (185 mi) long, so could be driven in a day. But I highly recommend spending a few days in this picturesque region!

Cape Breton was the most beautiful part of our 2021 Atlantic Canada honeymoon. We loved checking out beautiful coastal vistas, going on short hikes amongst the fall foliage, and discovering small town bakeries and restaurants. I’d definitely suggest prioritizing this stop on your cross Canada road trip!

Must do on Cape Breton Island:

Visit the Alexander Graham Bell Museum in Baddeck

Check out the stunning views at Lakies Head near Ingonish

Hike the Skyline Trail near Cheticamp

Eat breakfast at Salty Rose’s Periwinkle Cafe, have dinner at L’Abri and get fresh baked goods at Aucoin Bakery

For more details on where to stay and what to do on Cape Breton, check out my 5 Day Cabot Trail Itinerary on Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia!

North Sydney, NS (2 hrs from Cape Breton Island)

After your adventure around Cape Breton, it’s time to start making your way to Newfoundland, the most eastern province in Canada and the last one to tick off your Canadian bucket list.

The easiest way to road trip to Newfoundland from Nova Scotia is by taking a Marine Atlantic ferry from North Sydney to Port aux Basques. There is year-round ferry service, typically with two departures a day, and you can drive your car onto the ferry. A sailing takes about seven hours.

While waiting for your ferry to depart, you can enjoy Sydney’s waterfront, explore the nearby Fortress of Louisbourg and check out the world’s largest fiddle!

Port aux Basques, NL (7 hrs from North Sydney)

Welcome to Newfoundland, your final province on this massive cross Canada road trip! Depending on what sailing you took from Nova Scotia, you may arrive at Port aux Basques in the evening or early the next morning.

In case you get seasick like I do, or just need a break from being on the move, you may want to book a night in Port aux Basques before continuing on with your east coast Canadian road trip. While in Port aux Basques you can check out the Cape Ray Lighthouse, go for a stroll along the Grand Bay West Beach Trailway, or head out on a marine excursion.

Canadian fun fact: Despite its spelling, most people pronounce Newfoundland as NEW-fin-LAND and not new-FOUND-land.

Gros Morne National Park, NL (3.5 hrs from Port aux Basques)

A UNESCO World Heritage Site, Gros Morne National Park is probably one of the most beautiful places in Canada. But because it’s hard to get to and lesser known, it doesn’t see the same huge crowds as Banff or Whistler.

All that means is you’ll have a lot of this beauty to yourself! Explore the rugged coast line and see where tectonic plates once crashed to form epic mountains, rocky tablelands, gorges, ponds, forests and more!

Must do in Gros Morne National Park:

Be wowed by the view at Western Brook Pond Fjord

Hike up Lookout Hills Trail or summit Gros Morne Mountain

Depending on the time of year, you can go for a pond cruise, kayak on Trout River, bike through fall foliage, or ski and snowboard in Burridges Gulch

Gander, NL (4 hrs from Gros Morne)

Come from away to Gander, Newfoundland, the town made famous for hosting the “plane people” when air space was closed during 9/11.

On Sep 11, 2001, 38 planes with 6,500 passengers and crew members were grounded in Gander, which had a population of just 10,000. But Gander stepped up and showed the world what it means to be a good neighbour by welcoming and caring for everyone. This is all beautifully depicted in the musical, Come From Away, which I’ve been very fortunate to see in Toronto and Vancouver.

It’s because I’m such a fan of this musical that Gander is on my Newfoundland bucket list. But even if you don’t know the show, this is a pretty remarkable town to visit and an important place in history.

Must do in Gander:

Visit the Gander International Airport, once the largest airport in North America

Learn about Gander’s aviation history at the North Atlantic Aviation Museum

Take a trip to the Appleton 9/11 Memorial where a piece of steel from the Twin Towers is located (passengers from the grounded planes donated money to help build the park where the memorial is located)

Elliston, NL (2.5 hrs from Gander)

We’re coming to the end of your east coast Canada road trip. On your way to Elliston, stop at Terra Nova National Park, Canada’s most easterly national park, and the Discovery Trail, home to sweeping views and coastal history.

Just before Elliston you can stretch your legs along the Skerwink Trail, once named one of the best walks in the world by Conde Nast, and the perfect place to spot birds and humpback whales.

Speaking of wildlife spotting, that’s why I added Elliston to this Canada road trip itinerary. Nicknamed Bird Island Cove, Elliston is one of the best places in North America to see puffins from land! If you’re visiting between May and September, a visit to Puffin Island in Elliston would be well worth it.

Short on time? Not into puffins? If you’d rather not stop in Elliston, you can carry on straight from Gander to St. John’s (3.5 hrs drive).

St. John’s, NFL (3.5 hrs from Elliston)

Congratulations, you have officially made it to the end of the ultimate cross Canada road trip! From Victoria to St. John’s, from east to west, from the Pacific to the Atlantic, you have officially driven through every province and the entire length of Canada.

Give yourself a few days in Newfoundland’s artsy, historic and colourful capital to celebrate! Here you can dine out, enjoy Maritime music and discover what makes Newfoundland so unique.

Prefer to celebrate the end of your road trip out in nature? St. John’s has lots of options for that too. Hike the East Coast Trail, go puffin or whale watching, ferry to Bell Island, check out the gardens at Pippy Park or spot wildlife at Salmonier Nature Park.

Must do in St. John’s:

Take in the views and learn some history at Signal Hill National Historic Site

Push a little farther east to Cape Spear Lighthouse National Historic Site, the most easterly point in North America

Learn about the history, art and culture of Newfoundland at The Rooms

Check out the colourful homes on Jellybean Row

Canadian fun fact: Don’t confuse St. John’s, the capital of Newfoundland, with Saint John, a city (but not the capital) of New Brunswick.

Where to go after you finish driving across Canada

You did it – you drove all across Canada on the most epic cross Canada road trip! Now what?

From St. John’s, you can fly direct to a few places in Canada (like Halifax, Montreal, Toronto or Calgary) or internationally, to places like Orlando, Florida and London, UK. Of course, that would mean either returning your rental vehicle in St. John’s, which may incur an expensive one-way fee, or selling it there, which could take time.

If you’re keeping your vehicle, the easiest way to leave St. John’s is to drive to Argentia (1.5 hr drive) and ferry back to North Sydney. This overnight ferry boards at 5:00pm and arrives in North Sydney the next morning at 9:00am.

If a 16 hour ferry crossing doesn’t sound like your cup of tea, you could drive back to Port aux Basques (9 hrs from St. John’s) and get on the 7 hour ferry to North Sydney from there.

Or, you can put your most seaworthy road trip companion on the long ferry from Argentia while you hop a flight out of St. John’s (this is definitely what I will be doing – apologies to my husband who will get stuck with the car!).

Once back in Nova Scotia, you’re on Canada’s mainland and can continue driving to your final destination from there. Rather than reverse the Canada road trip you just did, why not check out our neighbour to the south and start a US road trip?

From North Sydney it’s only a 7.5 hr drive into Maine, where you can begin exploring the US. That may or may not be the next big road trip I’m planning!

What’s missing from this Canadian road trip planner?

Frankly, quite a lot! Canada is a huge country and while this road trip covers 34 places across all 10 provinces, that barely scratches the surface of what Canada has to offer.

I created this itinerary by researching places of interest in each province. Next, I plotted them on a map, which you can see above with all of the purple dots.

I then figured out a driving route that would link as many of the dots as possible without detouring too far from the most efficient east-west route. Sadly, some of the purple dots didn’t make it into the final road trip itinerary as they were just too far away.

The majority of Canadians live along the Canada/US border, so you’ll notice that my road trip route also stays quite far south. That means I missed a lot of central/northern Canada, including incredible places like:

Haida Gwaii in BC

The home of polar bears in Churchill, Manitoba

All of the territories (Yukon, Northwest Territories, Nunavut)

The capital of Alberta (Edmonton)

Algonquin and Muskoka in Ontario

Quebec’s Gaspe Peninsula

Labrador, which makes up the province of Newfoundland and Labrador

All of these places are well worth visiting, but difficult to do on an east-west Canada road trip that’s primarily based in the south of the country. I hope to visit them all some day on separate trips!

How to plan a road trip in Canada if you’re short on time

The road trip itinerary I listed above covers 34 stops across Canada and would likely take 2-3 months to enjoy properly. But what if you don’t have 2-3 months to road trip Canada? No worries! There are lots of cross Canada road trips you can take if you’re short on time.

Obviously you can complete just a part of my road trip itinerary above if you don’t have time for the whole thing. But here are a few more suggestions for Canadian road trips depending on how much time you have:

1 week Canada road trip: Drive from Toronto to Quebec City

Toronto (3 nights) > Montreal (2 nights) > Quebec (2 nights)

With one week, you could do a mini Ontario and Quebec road trip when you drive from Toronto to Quebec City, stopping in Montreal along the way.

You could also take a half or full day trip to Niagara Falls from Toronto. The entire drive is only 8 hours, making this an easy road trip to complete in a week.

2 week Canada road trip: Vancouver to Banff road trip

Victoria (2 nights) > Vancouver (3 nights) > Kelowna (2 nights) > Jasper (2 nights) > Banff (3 nights) > Calgary (2 nights)

Two weeks would be a great amount of time for a Vancouver to Banff road trip, seeing the best of the Rocky Mountains and Canada’s west coast. You can stop for wine in Kelowna and even push north to Jasper to really make the most of the area’s beauty!

With two weeks, you would even have time to add on Victoria on the west and Calgary on the east if you’re happy to move fast. Of course, if you wanted to slow down and spend more time at the national parks, you could cut these extra stops and add days in Jasper and Banff.

You can also drive from Calgary to Vancouver if you want to do this road trip in reverse.

3 week Canada road trip: East coast Canada road trip

Halifax (3 nights) > Annapolis Valley (2 nights) > Bay of Fundy (3 nights) > Charlottetown and PEI (4 nights) > Cape Breton Island (3 nights) > ferry to Newfoundland (1 night) > Gros Morne National Park (2 nights) > St. John’s (2 nights) > ferry to Nova Scotia (1 night) > return to Halifax

When we went on our Atlantic Canada honeymoon, we had about 3 weeks to explore the Maritimes and it was a great amount of time.

I would highly recommend dedicating a three week Canadian road trip to one region of the country, whether that’s an east coast Canada road trip or west coast Canada road trip, rather than trying to drive across a few regions.

I’ve started this itinerary in Halifax, as it’s probably the easiest airport to fly into. After a few days exploring the city of Halifax, you can pick up a car and explore Atlantic Canada! You’ll start with wine tasting in the Annapolis Valley and then drive over to New Brunswick to check out the Bay of Fundy.

From there, you’re driving over to PEI for fresh seafood and then back to Nova Scotia to loop Cape Breton Island. Next, you’re on the ferry to Newfoundland where you’ll see the views of Gros Morne National Park and colourful homes of St. John’s.

Finally, you’ll board the overnight ferry and make your way back to Halifax where you can return your rental car and fly home.

1 month Canada road trip: Toronto to Vancouver driving trip

With a whole month, you can make a pretty serious dent in driving across Canada! Rather than stretching yourself to drive from coast to coast, save the Atlantic provinces for a future trip and just drive from Toronto (my old hometown) to Vancouver (my current hometown).

Week 1: Toronto, Tobermory & Manitoulin Island

Week 2: Driving across the prairies (see my recommended spots in the full itinerary above)

Week 3: Banff & Jasper

Week 4: The Okanagan & Vancouver

Alternatively, you could head east from Toronto and spend a month exploring Ontario, Quebec and the Maritimes. You probably wouldn’t have time to make it to Newfoundland, but you could tick off quite a few east coast provinces.

Week 1: Toronto, Prince Edward County & Ottawa

Week 2: Montreal, Eastern Townships & Quebec

Week 3: Bay of Fundy and PEI

Week 4: Halifax and Cape Breton Island

Wrapping up: 10 cross Canada road trips tips

Before you hit the road, keep these road trip tips in mind!

1. Safety first (car edition): Make sure you’re comfortable driving the vehicle you’ll use for this Canadian road trip and that any necessary maintenance is taken care of. Follow the rules of the road, regularly service your car and have jumper cables available.

2. Safety first (human edition): Stay safe and healthy on the road by staying in accommodation that you’re comfortable with, and keeping in touch with friends and family (particularly if you’re travelling alone). Make sure your car is stocked with water, a first aid kit and any other emergency supplies.

3. Book ahead in the busy season: Campgrounds, tours and parking lots fill up fast in busy Canadian tourist hot spots in the middle of summer! Make sure you do your research and book ahead when needed. While this might impact your ability to be spontaneous, it could save you a lot of stress and money.

4. Download all the apps: These days there are apps to help you find cheap gas, roadside attractions, free places to park, scenic campsites and so much more! Download the apps you need and be sure you have offline maps downloaded to help you navigate when you don’t have cell service. You may also want to join a roadside assistance or hotel loyalty program.

5. Consider a parks pass: Depending on how many national parks you’re visiting, you may want to buy the Parks Canada Discovery Pass for cheaper entrance to all of the national parks of Canada. Each province also has a pass for their provincial parks, which may be worth looking into.

6. Take it slow: If this is your first time to Canada or first big road trip, slow down. Give yourself time to get used to life on the road and schedule off-days so you can rest, do laundry, etc. Remember, Canada is a big place! You’ll enjoy your Canadian road trip a lot more if you aren’t driving 8 hours a day, rushing from one stop to the next.

7. Have a plan to stay connected: Depending on where you’re going on your road trip, you may not always have cell or internet service. And depending on where you’re coming from, you may not be able to use your home service in Canada. Look into options ahead of time, like buying a portable wifi unit, getting an e-Sim or stopping at wifi-friendly cafes, so you can stay connected.

8. Start preparing early: If you’re planning to be on the road for a couple of weeks or a couple of months, you’ll want to prep ahead of time. How far do you want to drive each day? Are you staying at campgrounds or hotels? Are you eating out or hitting the grocery store?

If you’re travelling with anyone else, make sure you’re having these conversations with them so everyone is on the same page.

9. Be respectful: Your Canada road trip will likely take you through lots of natural areas, so remember to Leave No Trace and be respectful of the outdoor environment. It’s also important to do your homework about whose land you’re travelling on, paying respect to Canada’s Indigenous peoples whose unceded land we live on.

10. Plan your next trip back to Canada! Whether you drive from Victoria to St. John’s or just a small section in between, make sure this trip to Canada isn’t your last. Hopefully you’ll be amazed by the natural wonders, history, culture, food and people here in Canada, and eagre to plan your next trip back!

Need to rent a car for your road trip? Get the best deal with Discover Cars!

And there you have it, my ultimate cross Canada road trip itinerary. I hope this itinerary has gotten you excited for your own road trip across Canada. I’d love to know: Where in Canada do you most want to visit?

Check out more adventures across Canada:

10 Things You Must Eat in Montreal

How to Spend a Weekend in Penticton, BC

Camping at Porteau Cove, BC

5 Day Cabot Trail Itinerary on Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia

22 Things to Do in Halifax, Nova Scotia

Save my cross Canada road trip itinerary for your future trip planning. Pin it!