BCE Inc. subsidiary Bell Globemedia said yesterday that it has bought out Terra Lycos's minority position in the Sympatico-Lycos Inc. joint Internet venture.

The transaction ends a partnership to which BCE and Bell Globemedia felt Terra Lycos contributed little, according to a source close to the situation. The allegation was strongly disputed by Terra Lycos.

BGM and Terra Lycos announced in a joint news release that BGM will buy out the 29-per-cent minority interest in Sympatico-Lycos indirectly held by Terra Lycos subsidiary Lycos Inc.

Terms of the transaction announced yesterday were not disclosed.

The two companies said they will continue to provide one another with "certain commercial services," but on a non-exclusive basis.

"BGM has been unhappy with Lycos as a partner for a while," one source said.

"The value of the business has all come from BGM's side. There was nothing coming the other way.

"There was the expectation they would deliver international advertising sales to Sympatico-Lycos. [Those sales]haven't materialized."

But a spokeswoman for Terra Lycos took strong exception to the comments.

"We felt that we overdelivered to the relationship and delivered really high-quality products to consumers in the Canadian market," said Michele Perry, vice-president of communications for the company, based in Waltham, Mass., outside Boston.

She said it was Lycos that brought European media giant Bertelsmann AG as an advertiser to Sympatico-Lycos.

The source said BCE and BGM were involved in "lengthy" negotiations aimed at reaching an amicable split.

Lib Gibson, president and chief executive officer of Bell Globemedia Interactive, said: "The big driver was we wanted to have 100 per cent of the company. We have decided to buy them out."

BCE also owns domestic telephone company Bell Canada. BGM's other assets include the CTV television network and The Globe and Mail newspaper.

Terra Lycos's parent is Terra Networks SA of Spain.

The deal ends a disappointing chapter in BCE's media convergence strategy, which has been less than stellar, said Eamon Hoey, senior partner at Toronto-based Hoey Associates Telecommunications Consulting Services Inc.

"Lycos brought nothing to the party that [BCE's]Sympatico couldn't develop itself," he said.

Linking with Lycos was a mistake from the get-go because it was just too small a fish to contribute much of any value, he said.

As it turns out, it's not necessary to negotiate exclusive agreements with just one portal or content provider, as Montreal-based BCE did with Terra Lycos and continues to do through majority ownership of CTV and The Globe, Mr. Hoey said.

Stephen Killeen, president of Terra Lycos U.S., said Lycos.com has four million Canadian users and the new structure will allow it to continue serving them.

Lycos Inc., which struck the joint-venture deal with BCE in February, 2000, was subsequently acquired in October, 2000, by Terra Networks. Under the terms of the joint venture, BCE was to contribute $125-million over three years. Lycos contributed no cash but made all of its on-line brands and tools available to Sympatico-Lycos.

Those brands included Wired.com, an on-line news service, and Tripod, a personalized Web-site builder.