Plymouth Township Police Detective Jeff McGee was credited with helping solve the case of two shoplifters who went on a spree hitting stores in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York.

In June of this year, Patrolman Michael Terranova of the Manchester Police Department in New Jersey responded to a Rite Aid Pharmacy that reported two men shoplifting over $500.00 worth of over-the-counter cough and cold medications. Patrolman Terranova was able to obtain surveillance footage of the two suspects, which was later published on our various social media pages. During his initial investigation, Patrolman Terranova learned that the same suspects were also involved in pharmacy shoplifting incidents in Toms River, New Jersey, and Springfield, New Jersey.

Detective Joseph Fastige of the Manchester Township Police Department’s Investigations Bureau continued the investigation and tied the two suspects to reported cases of shoplifting in several communities in Pennsylvania and New York.

With the assistance of Detective Jeff McGee of the Plymouth Township Police Department, Detective Fastige was able to identify the suspects as Lasha Dekanoidze, 35, and Giorgi Adeishvili, 38, both of Brooklyn, New York.

As a result of Detective Fastige’s investigation, Dekanoidze and Adeishvili were subsequently charged with third-degree Shoplifting. The duo turned themselves in at the Manchester Township Police Department on July 26th after Detective Fastige made contact with them on the phone. In accordance with New Jersey Bail Reform, Dekanoidze was subsequently released on a summons and Adeishvili was transported to the Ocean County Jail pending a detention hearing.

Based on this investigation, Dekanoidze and Adeishvilli have been linked to additional unsolved shoplifting incidents throughout New Jersey. The information obtained by Detective Fastige was shared with other law enforcement agencies and will likely result in future criminal charges.

The Manchester Township Police Department thanked the Plymouth Township Police Department (PA), the Lower Merion Township Police Department (PA), the Wright Township Police Department (PA), the Toms River Police Department, the Springfield Township Police Department, and the Rite Aid Organized Retail Crime Investigation section for their collective and cooperative assistance in this investigation.

Photo: Manchester Police Department