I recently visited Fenghua (奉化区), China. What I observed there in terms of digital disruption was striking. It can represent a wake-up call for anyone that believes they are in an industry, sector or geographic area where they are protected.

Fenghua is known for being the birthplace of Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石) and the gateway to the fabulous nature reserve of Xikou (溪口镇). What interested me even more was the juxtaposition of old and new.

On one side of the street we observed people washing their clothes as they have done for millennia (see short video clip).

On the other side of the street, literally, access to all public buildings was managed using facial recognition, which is becoming pervasive in China (see photo). More generally, our trip to Fenghua was digitally enabled from start to finish. We booked a car using Didi, of course. We signed up to enter the place by scanning a QR code and paying with AliPay. Then our access was controlled using facial recognition.

I was awed by the level of integration and how smooth it all was. Some small teething problems might be expected, and indeed, we encountered a small glitch. The facial recognition system clearly worked better on Chinese faces than on my Western face. The guards explained, somewhat apologetically, that the system struggled to deal with beards. As shown in the photo, I was sometimes rejected, and needed assistance to gain access. More than anything else this minor niggle served to highlight how impressive the system was, overall. And the contrast between what was taking place on the two sides of the street emphasized how this disruption was occurring at lightning speed: the millennia-old traditions juxtaposed with leading use of technology.

The experience brought home to me how critical it is for leaders to maintain an open mind, stay curious, access information from diverse sources, remain humble and be ever alert. Disruption is coming.

I am observing this truth, from another angle, in the startup communities that I support. Both in the Antler ecosystem and in the UNLEASH ecosystem, thousands of hungry, creative people are pursuing this ideal of disruption. Access to funding is easy for anyone with an strong team and a bright idea.

One of the few sustainable competitive advantage I am aware of is a talented and well-aligned top team that enjoys deep trust, maintains a high standard of commitment and accountability, fosters a well-developed ability to navigate conflict and emphasizes a razor-sharp focus on results. It is a noble pursuit to build such a team and we are thrilled to have the chance to support our clients in this quest.