London, 1969

Bryan "Chas" Chandler was born in Heaton, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, England on the 18th December 1938. His first job after leaving school was in the Tyneside shipyards as a turner. He went on to make major contributions to British rock as a musician in the 1960's, and as a producer, and manager throughout the 1970's.

A big-built man who liked to drink and smoke and had, said Keith Altham:

"enormous drive and self-belief. It was that enthusiasm that helped both Jimi Hendrix and Slade become stars. He'd just tell everyone: 'They are the best in the world!'"

He learnt to play guitar and was playing bass for the Alan Price Trio in 1962 when vocalist Eric Burdon joined the band. They renamed the group The Animals. Their first hit song was House Of The Rising Sun in 1964. Other hits include Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood, Bring It On Home to Me and It's My Life. Chandler was the most prominent of the group's backing vocalists and did some occasional song writing with Burdon.

The Animals: 1964 Alan Price, John Steel, Chas Chandler, Hilton Valentine and Eric Burdon in the middle.

"We toured non-stop for three years, 300 gigs a year and we hardly got a penny..."

Chas Chandler, The Independent 1994

The group split up in September 1966, by this time their business affairs "were in a total shambles" according to Chandler, and the group disbanded . Chandler reinvented himself, becoming a talent scout, artist manager and record producer.

The Animals had other line ups but none that could compare. Chandler's talents as bass player are rarely discussed, but his energetic and imaginative style were an important part of the band's sound; that's his famous riff opening We've Gotta Get Out of This Place, and more obscure tracks like I'm In Love Again and Bury My Body testify to his skill on the instrument.

During his final tour with the band in the US, he saw a then-unknown guitarist named Jimi James play at a New York club. James was doing an imaginative arrangement of a song, Hey Joe. In September 1966, Chandler convinced James to come with him to England, where he would make him a star.

Chandler's belief in Hendrix was such that he sold all his guitars to finance the project. After changing his name to Jimi Hendrix, Chandler recruited Mitch Mitchell and Noel Redding to form The Jimi Hendrix Experience. He was instrumental in introducing Hendrix to Eric Clapton and it was through this introduction that Hendrix got a chance to play with Clapton and Cream on stage.

Chandler formed a partnership with Mike Jeffery, who was manager of The Animals, and together they co-managed the Experience but he produced the first two Hendrix albums, 'Are You Experienced?' and 'Axis: Bold as Love' along with studio engineers, Eddie Kramer, George Chkiantz, and Gary Kellgren.

He wasn't just a studio presence either, he was involved in the selection and refinement of the material and invaluable because he understood both sides of the glass. He quit halfway through the 'Electric Ladyland' sessions in 1968 when he became frustrated with the abundance of hangers-on in the studio. It was shortly after Chandler quit that Hendrix died in London in 1970.