Singer-songwriter & multi-instrumentalist Mark Adams aka Duke was born in Newcastle-upon-Tyne (North East of England). In his teens Mark fell in love with soul music and artists Marvin Gaye, Isaac Hayes & Sly & the Family Stone, he also let rip with a passion for the golden age of rock n’ roll - Buddy Holly, Little Richard, Gene Vincent & Eddie Cochran! Barely in his teens Mark put together his first band – a thrashing thing like Iggy and the Stooges. It was called Catch 22 after the film. For three years the band treated the Newcastle club scene to a repertoire of 50’s classics rendered in a high-octane style mixed with their own three-chord rockers.

After Catch 22 ran out of juice, it was a rethink time for Mark. “When I saw the band One Hand One Heart on local TV they blew my mind, they were tight and shiny something was going to happen for them." Hearing that the band needed a singer, Mark approached them and landed the gig.

Picked up by manager Chas Chandler (bassist from The Animals) “Chas was fascinating to work with, a true music man who managed Jimi Hendrix & brought him to the UK." Years of gigging followed, and then a deal with Epic records. Two singles and an album were released before One Hand One Heart fell apart.

Nor, has anyone who's witnessed this amazing singer live will tell you, does it stop there. Mark went solo and wrote his first hit ‘So In Love With You’, this record opened many doors, it led him into the dance world with a new stage name ‘Duke’ and to producers Norman Cook (Fatboy Slim) and Full Intention (Jon Pearn/Michael Gray) responsible for the classic remixes of 'So In Love With You'. It hit the mainstream and dance charts in the Netherlands (top 5) "DJ Marcello was the very first to play the track at the Escape club in Amsterdam" then travelled from territory to territory. It has received continued mainstream major radio support to-date in the Netherlands “I will always have a love for the Netherlands where it all began!”

One of his most memorable experiences was writing and producing with soul legend Bobby Womack “an experience I will never forget."

Mark signed to various labels including Gary Kurfirst’s label for the U.S. Radioactive/Universal Records (Garbage, Live, Blondie & Talking Heads) “Gary was an amazing guy to work with, a true innovator.”