North Light, the Vodafone Derby winner, will seek to enhance his reputation later this month in the Budweiser Irish Derby at The Curragh, with trainer Sir Michael Stoute confident the colt has both the toughness of mind and temperament to establish himself as the leader of his generation.

"He is a very worthy Derby winner," Stoute declared. "He has more speed than his brothers Researched and Cover Up (both trained by Stoute) and he is a very progressive colt, who is lovely and relaxed. He has great scope," the trainer added.

Those comments are particularly relevant when attempting to put the race into historical perspective. Was the Weinstock's North Light in the class of Mill Reef, Sir Ivor and Nijinsky? Or is he to be dispatched to the 'C list' of Derby winners, alongside Henbit, High Rise, Oath and company?

My own view is that, based solely on Saturday's performance at Epsom, North Light was a long way short of the first-mentioned 'greats', who, in their respective years, won this race with their dazzling superiority. But nor is he in the C list category, not by a long chalk.

Assessments are usually coloured by bias of some description, and in this case, it is likely to be a suspicion the winner lacks a modern Classic pedigree, being by Danehill out of Sought Out, a mare whose ability to run marathon distances enabled her to win the 1992 Prix du Cadran, the French equivalent of the Gold Cup.

But Stoute would take issue with that line of argument, speaking purely from first-hand experience. He pointed out: "The mare (Sought Out) was not a slow horse. Although she won the Prix de Lutece (1m7f) for us, she was placed in the Ribblesdale over 1m4f) at Ascot and we were sorry to lose her when she went to France.

"As for this colt, we had originally planned to run him in the Lingfield Derby Trial, just to give him some experience of that type of track, but the ground was worse than it was at York, so we went to the Dante instead. He had been suffering from cracked heels in the spring."

North Light had clearly improved since York, but the same horses - Rule of Law and Let The Lion Roar - chased him home, in the same order, although this time the winning margin had increased marginally, to a length and a half. The winner's liking for fast ground, and his adaptability, were both positive factors.

Contrary to the views of those who thought North Light might ultimately advance to the Doncaster St Leger, Stoute said he would not hestitate to drop him back in distance, to a mile and a quarter. "We still have to sit down quietly and discuss where we want to go with him next, but The Curragh at the end of the month is a distinct possibility," he said.

The Derby was a triumph for Stoute and his staff, who had been painstaking in eliminating as many risks as possible beforehand, despite several horses in the yard being below-par. Stoute had placed North Light in isolation. "The team have done a magnificent job, particularly my assistant Stuart Messenger," the trainer said.

Stoute equalled Henry Cecil's achievement of saddling four Derby winners, but both modern-day trainers are still three short of the record seven, held jointly by Robert Robson, John Porter and Fred Darling.

Kerrin McEvoy, the Australian jockey, finished second on his first Derby ride, but it is doubtful whether he will ever deliberately want to get that far back on any future Classic mount at Epsom. Let The Lion Roar was 'flying' late in the home straight, giving the impression he would be a St Leger type, as, too, did fourth-placed Percussionist.