North Light was always in a good position to land the 225th Derby, giving trainer Sir Michael Stoute his fourth win in the race and jockey Kieren Fallon his third to go with his Oaks win on Ouija Board on Friday.

Frankie Dettori, seeking his first Derby win at the twelfth attempt, was struggling a long way out on the other 7-2 joint favourite Snow Ridge.

It was Snow Ridge's Godolphin stablemate Rule Of Law, who stuggled to stay in touch early in the race, who came through late to finish second. But he was never able to get in a position to challenge the winner, on whom Fallon had always been travelling easily behind the pace set by Meath.

Shortly after turning into the home straight, Fallon asked North Light to take the lead and win his race, seemingly confident that his mount would see out the distance. American Post briefly looked dangerous, but his stamina gave out as the out-and-out stayers, Rule Of Law and Let The Lion Roar, came from behind to fill the places. Fourth home was Percussionist, who was in trouble down the hill but kept on well in the straight. The result was a near carbon copy of the Dante Stakes at York, in which North Light beat Rule Of Law half a length with Let The Lion Roar two-and-a-half lengths away in third. This time the distances were a length-and-a-half and a head.

Stoute, greeting a back-to-back winner of the race after Kris Kin last year, was understandably delighted, saying: 'This is a lovely horse to train. We thought there was a possibility of a muddling race, but we knew he stays and knew he loves the firm, so we were going to be positive.'

The trainer's attention to detail was exemplified by his inspection of the fresh strip of ground against the far rail as the runners were at the start for the hilarious Sport Relief Mascot Derby, run before the first race. Fallon, drawn next to the rail in the opening Vodafone Live Handicap on Lord Mayor, looked as though he was following the trainer's instructions by sticking to the fence until pulling his mount out to begin a winning challenge with two furlongs to run. It was a ride that bore strong similarities to the one the champion jockey gave Kris Kin last year. That was to be the blueprint for North Light's success, too. Stoute and Fallon, it would appear, feel that an early rails pitch close to the pace is the key to winning the Derby. Watching reruns of Lester Piggott's nine Derby wins shown at Epsom yesterday, it was not hard to see where the idea came from.

But Fallon did not have to be as hard as early on North Light as he had a year ago on Kris Kin, who had to be cajoled to hold his place on the rails throughout the first half of the race. Fallon claimed that he always had his eyes on this prize with North Light. The Irishman said: 'This was always one of my favourite horses. When I first rode him at Sandown on his debut, I thought: "This could be my Derby horse." He keeps on improving.'

Stoute trains North Light for the family of the late Lord Weinstock, who died in 2002, a few days before Fallon forced Golan home in front in the King George and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes at Ascot. The Weinstock family were out in force to celebrate this success, 25 years after Troy, owned in partnership with Sir Michael Sobell, had carried the Weinstock colours to win the 200th Derby.

With Piggott introduced to the jockeys in the parade ring 50 years after his first Derby win, it must have been a particularly daunting occasion for Kerrin McEvoy, the young Australian jockey riding Rule Of Law in his first Derby, especially as he'd had an unhappy run on Sundrop in Friday's Oaks. However, McEvoy, who reported that Rule Of Law 'had trouble coming up the hill', was rewarded with second place. Let The Lion Roar's trainer, John Dunlop, will not be afraid to take on the winner in the Irish Derby in three weeks.

'I think he was unlucky as he got boxed in behind Percussionist coming down the hill when that horse was going nowhere,' he said.

Percussionist's trainer, John Gosden, said: 'We had a great run and just got going too late on ground faster than he really wants.' But he did not sound as though he was ready to have another go at North Light, adding: 'I thought the winner had the tactical speed and was the best horse by far.' That was how it looked from the stands.

Dettori's and Fallon's fortunes were neatly encapsulated in the race after the Derby, when Fallon on Starry Lodge just held the not-so-Italian, on Swift Tango, by a head. Fallon, as the expression goes, got first run, just as he had on the rest of the field aboard North Light.