Aaron Ramsey is a Welsh international midfielder who has played for some of Europe's top clubs including Arsenal, Juventus and Rangers.

The Cardiff schoolboy started close to his roots at Cardiff City before making a historic move to Arsenal where he would go onto win three FA Cups. After a impressive term in north London, in 2019 he moved to Italy to play for Juventus.

After a decent spell in Juventus which included winning a Scudetto, Ramsey slowly drifted from the first team picture before signing a loan deal with Rangers on 31 January 2022.

Juventus released him from his contract in July 2022, and he joined Ligue 1 club Nice on a free transfer at the start of August.

After a one-year stint in France, Ramsey completed a return to his boyhood club Cardiff on a two-year contract in July 2023.

Cardiff dreams

From the age of eight, Ramsey was a part of Cardiff's youth development programme, working his way all the way through to the first team.

The talented, home-grown midfielder made his professional debut for Cardiff in the final game of the 2006/07 Championship season. Appearing in a 1-0 defeat to Hull City aged 16 years and 124 days, he became the youngest player to play for Cardiff.

Ramsey would go onto make 21 appearances in the 2007/08 season, scoring twice, his first in an FA Cup third round win over Chasetown.

His efforts in the cup would earn Cardiff a place in the final, as well as earning Ramsey a start at Wembley. Despite losing to Portsmouth, the Welshman's second season as a professional caught the eye of many clubs, including those in the Premier League.

Arsenal had a £5million bid for the youngster accepted and in June 2008 Ramsey was announced as an Gunner.

Promising but devastating start at Arsenal

Arsene Wenger persuaded Ramsey to transfer to Arsenal instead of Manchester United or Everton and it would turn out to be a historic move.

Ramsey began his career in north London during a Champions League qualifying match against FC Twente, marking his debut with an assist.

The Welshman scored his first goal for the Gunners on the biggest stage, the Champions League. A long-range effort against Fenerbahce made put him fifth on the list of youngest Champions League goalscorers.

Ramsey was awarded a long-term contract with the Gunners and scored his first Premier League goal in a 4-1 dismantling of Portsmouth in the second game of the 2009/10 season.

Ramsey continued his impressive form as the season progressed, scoring against Stoke and Portsmouth again, as well as playing five times in the Champions League.

However, his career ground to a shuddering halt in February 2010. Ramsey was on the receiving end of a horrific challenge from Stoke city's Ryan Shawcross which caused a double fracture to Ramsey's lower right leg, breaking both his tibia and fibula.

He didn't return to training until October 2010 before making his return to pitch in a reserve game against Wolverhampton Wanderers.

Return and glory in north London

Ramsey would enjoy two loan spells during 2010 and 2011 as he prepared to resume his Arsenal career.

From November 2010 to January 2011, Ramsey was loaned to Nottingham Forest. He returned to north London before making a second move, returning home to Cardiff.

Ramsey finished the 2010/11 season with seven appearances for the Gunners, which included a stunning strike against Manchester United.

He would continue to develop at Arsenal before elevating himself to legend status at the end of the 2013/14 campaign.

Ramsey end Arsenal's 10-year trophy drought to cap an amazing season on an individual level. Ramsey ended the season with 16 goals in 34 appearances, as well as racking up 10 assists and playing a major role in Arsenal's FA Cup success.

He missed four of the Gunners' FA Cup fixtures up to the semi-final. However, in the final against Hull City, Ramsey scored the winning goal in extra time after Arsenal had fought back from a 2-0 deficit. It secured the Gunners' 11th FA Cup and helped earn Ramsey Arsenal's Player of the Season award.

The win over Hull was the catalyst for a run of FA Cup successes. The following season Arsenal retained the trophy, beating Aston Villa 4-0 in the final.

Despite a lacklustre 2015/16 season, Arsenal and Ramsey bounced back to secure a record-breaking 13th FA Cup in 2017. Ramsey again scored the winning goal as they defeated Premier League champions Chelsea 2-1.

Ramsey would go and have another two seasons in north London, being named Arsenal Player of the Year for a second time in 2017/18, before leaving the club for a new challenge in 2019.

A change of scenery

Ramsey joined Italian giants Juventus in July 2019. He opened his account for the Old Lady in style, scoring in 2-1 win over Verona on his Serie A debut.

In his first season at the club he would score four times, assisting his side to Serie A glory, winning the 2019/20 title.

In the following season, the Welshman won the Supercoppa Italiana as well as the Coppa Italia, Juve beating Atalanta 2-1 in the final.

Return to British football

Ramsey started finding his opportunities at Juventus grow more limited, and he seeked an escape route midway through the 2021/22 season.

During the January transfer window he was strongly linked with Crystal Palace and Newcastle United, but nothing materialised.

On deadline day, he secured a surprise loan move to Scottish champions Rangers.

However, the midfielder failed to make a succesful impact in Glasgow playing just 13 games in four months, and scoring two goals.

He missed the decisive penalty in Rangers' Europa League final defeat by Eintracht Frankfurt, and was an unused sub in the Gers' Scottish Cup final win against Hearts.

On his return to Juventus the club terminated his contract a year early and he joined Ligue 1 club Nice on a free transfer in August 2022.

Back at Cardiff

After making 34 appearances for Nice during the 2022/23 campaign, scoring once and assisting three goals, Ramsey made a surprise return to his boyhood club after agreeing to terminate his contract with the French side.

Ramsey told Cardiff's website: "It feels unbelievable to finally be back here. I always thought one day I'd come back, and now it's the perfect time to do that.

"To be back with my family and around familiar faces is just brilliant, so I'm delighted to be back here now. I've missed that a lot in the last year or so, so it was important for me to be back around them.

"Obviously I'm a Cardiff City fan and watching them over the years since I've been away, we've had some low points but some big highs as well, being in the Premier League and representing Cardiff on the big stage. That's a target of mine - to try and help my team-mates and this club to get back to the top.

"I owe so much to Cardiff, to the fans, to everybody who has been at the club when I was here as a young boy coming through. For me now to come full circle, to be part of this team now, and hopefully achieve the goals we want, there's no better feeling than that."

Ramsey's seven-year-old son Sonny also joined Cardiff's academy, signing his contract alongside his father.

International career

Ramsey emerged as a part of Wales' new wave of talent. He earned his first Under-21 cap aged 16 in 2007, featuring in a 4-3 defeat of Sweden.

A year after his debut for the Under-21s, Ramsey earned himself a call-up to the senior squad. Still aged 17, he played in a 1-0 victory over Denmark.

The Welshman also became the youngest player to ever captain Wales, leading his side out aged 20 years 90 days in a friendly against England.

Ramsey was also a member of Great Britain's 2012 Olympic Squad. He featured in all three group games and the quarter-final which saw GB knocked out on penalties by South Korea.

Ramsey was part of the Wales team that reached the round of 16 at the delayed Euro 2020 tournament, scoring in 2-0 group game win over Turkey. He also helped his nation qualify for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.

In March 2023, Ramsey was named Wales captain after Gareth Bale retired.

Personal life

Ramsey is married to Colleen Rowlands, who he has known since his childhood, both growing up on the same street.

The couple have three children, with the second and third being twins.

Ramsey is also a supporter of the World Wildlife Fund. The athlete is also sponsored by Adidas.

Net worth