Lake And Palmer Biography

The English progressive music band Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP) was founded in London in April 1970. Carl Palmer (drums and percussion), Greg Lake (vocals, bass, guitar, and producer), and Keith Emerson (keyboard) made up the band. They were one of the most well-known and financially successful progressive rock bands in the 1970s, with nine RIAA-certified gold record albums in the US and an estimated 48 million records sold worldwide. Their music featured jazz and symphonic rock elements as well as adaptations of classical music and was dominated by Emerson’s flamboyant use of the Hammond organ, Moog synthesizer, and piano (although Lake wrote several acoustic songs for the group).

The Nice keyboardist Keith Emerson and bassist and vocalist Greg Lake of King Crimson first crossed paths in late 1969 while both bands were on tour. After preliminary discussions about the possibility of forming a group in New York City, Emerson and Lake eventually met in December 1969 when The Nice and King Crimson were scheduled to perform together at the Fillmore West in San Francisco. At the time, Emerson was looking to start a new band and Lake wanted to leave King Crimson.

Following their appearance at the Isle of Wight Festival in August 1970, the band gained popularity. The band released Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (1970) and Tarkus (1971), both of which peaked in the UK’s top five, in their first year after signing with E.G. Records, which distributed the band’s music through Island Records in the UK and Atlantic Records in North America. Pictures at an Exhibition (1971), Trilogy (1972), and Brain Salad Surgery (1973), all of which were released on the ELP-owned Manticore Records label, all contributed to the band’s sustained popularity. Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer released Works Volume 1 (1977) and Works Volume 2 (1978) following a three-year hiatus (1977). After 1978’s Love Beach, the trio split up in 1979.

Palmer, who was by this point a member of Asia, was replaced by Cozy Powell when the band temporarily reassembled in the 1980s as Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell. Lake was then replaced by Robert Berry while Palmer came back, creating 3. The original trio reunited in 1991 and went on to record two additional albums, Black Moon (1992) and In the Hot Seat (1994), as well as embark on several tours between 1992 and 1998. At the High Voltage Festival in London in 2010, they gave their final performance to mark the group’s 40th anniversary. Palmer is the sole remaining band member as Emerson and Lake both passed away in 2016.

Rolling Stone’s 2016 retrospective review named “10 Essential Songs by EL&amp;P” stated, “After forming in 1970, EL&amp;P became one of rock’s first supergroups…

The end effect was a run of albums…that elevated progressive rock from a cellar listening experience under a black light to a phenomenon that fills stadiums. With With With Emerson at its center, ELP became one of the most accomplished and captivating bands rock has ever produced. Emerson’s never-ending search for a bigger, grander sound (made possible by a bank of organs and synthesizers that grew to resemble a fortress onstage) was a major factor in this. “Truly classically knowledgeable, and they openly displayed their respect for classical music,” is how the trio is defined. They were praised for their “virtuosity and their unrestrained fury” and are claimed to have “created a genuine blend between rock and jazz.”

Lake And Palmer Discography

Top Videos

Frequently Asked Questions

Lake And Palmer Genre?

Lake & Palmer were an English progressive rock band formed in 1970. The group’s classic lineup consisted of co-founders Keith Emerson (keyboards) and Greg Lake (bass, guitar, vocals), who were joined by drummer Carl Palmer. With this lineup, they became one of the most popular and commercially successful progressive rock bands of the 1970s.

What Was Lake And Palmer’S Biggest Hit?

Lake and Palmer’s biggest hit was “Lucky Man”, which reached number four on the UK Singles Chart in 1971. The band also had success with other singles such as “Karn Evil 9” and “Brain Salad Surgery”.

Most Searched For Lake And Palmer Songs