Acharya Ramlochan Saran Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Acharya Ramlochan Saran: a Hindi literateur, grammarian and publisher. He founded the Pustak Bhandar in Laheriasarai and Patna in 1915, which made the little known place like Laheriasarai prominent in Indian publishing. He shifted his publishing activities to Patna in 1929.He also founded a number of magazines like Balak magazine (1926–1986), Himalaya (1946–1948) and Honhar (Hindi and Urdu) (1939). Through his publishing efforts he encouraged many other Hindi literateurs like Ramavriksha Benipuri, Ramdhari Singh 'Dinkar', Acharya Shivapujan Sahay, and Pt. Harimohan Jha.He guided Upendra Maharthi the artist to develop his talents through work under him for over a decade. He was a pioneer in encouraging young authors of Bihar and through his editing standardised the Hindi language. His Hindi primer Manohar Pothi is still the finest effort ever made to teach Hindi alphabets to beginners

Acharya Debaprasad Ghosh Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Acharya Debaprasad Ghosh: was an Indian mathematician, linguist, lawyer, journalist, educationist and statesman. He started his career at the age of 21 as a professor of mathematics at the Ripon College. He was actively involved in politics as the President of Bharatiya Jana Sangh

Acharya Kuber Nath Rai Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Acharya Kuber Nath Rai: was a writer and scholar of Hindi Literature and Sanskrit. He was born in Matsa village, Ghazipur, Uttar Pradesh in a Bhumihar Brahmin family. He got his education from Banaras Hindu University and Calcutta University. From 1958 to 1986 he was in Nalbari college, Assam as a Lecturer in English Department. From 1986 to 1995 he was in Swami Sahajanand PG College, Ghazipur, UP as a Principal. He got the Moorti Devi award from Bharatiya Jnanpith and many awards from UP,WB and Assam Government.

'Acharya' Hazari Prasad Dwivedi Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

'Acharya' Hazari Prasad Dwivedi: was a Hindi novelist, literary historian, essayist, critic and scholar. He penned numerous novels, collections of essays and a historical outline of Hindi literature.He was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1957 for his contribution to Hindi literature, and the 1973 Sahitya Akademi Award in Hindi, for his collection of essays, 'Alok Parva'[He passed the "Shastri" examination at Sanskrit University and was later appointed as a Hindi teacher at Santiniketan. He later became professor and head of Hindi Departments at Banaras Hindu University and Panjab University, Chandigarh.

Mukta Ram Acharya Origin/Culture/Country: Hindu

Mukta Ram Acharya: a Nepalese actor. This artist achieved inspiration to be an actor by a local drama show when he was taken by the school in his childhood. His affiliation with the school of art dates back to his teenage when he began his line of profession in 1988 from Pancha Kumari Art Group, Sinamangal, Kathmandu.Because of his continuous devotion and commitment in the sector of art, he was invited to play in a National Radio Drama Festival of Nepal and was awarded the first prize for a drama, Samanantar. Likewise, he was also awarded as the best actor in 1989 in the Competitive Theatre Drama Festival organized by the Royal Nepal Academy. Theater has always been an inseparable part of his life. He played in many dramas including Ram Banbas, Simako Antim Prahar, Trass, Bibastako Bhumari Bhitra, to count a few.