Sitamarhi is the transcendental birthplace of Sita Devi, the eternal consort of Lord Ramachandra on the banks of the Lakhandai (Lakshmana) river. Specifically, the location of Her appearance is the Punaura village of Sitamarhi district in Bihar, India. Hence, this place is also called Punaura dham. It lies five kilometres west of Sitamarhi town, which is located on the Indo-Nepal border.

Punaura dham is spread over 10 acres of land and includes a Janaki temple and a pond called Sita Kunda/Janaki Kunda. Janakpur in Nepal, where Sita Devi grew up is less than two hours only from Sitamarhi.

Sitamarhi was almost destroyed by the earthquake of 1934 but rebuilt slowly over years. The town doesn’t have great facilities to accommodate pilgrims currently but plans are afoot to give it a facelift.

Birth of Mother Sita

Being the Supreme Goddess, Sita Devi’s birth is uncommon. She does not appear just like us mortal beings. The Ramayana speaks of Her glorious appearance.

Janaka Maharaja was a very pious King, who showered love and affection on his citizens. He is known as an authority on the science of devotional service. This is one reason he was called Videha i.e. one who could transcend the bodily consciousness.

Janaka Maharaja ruled over the Kingdom of Mithila from the modern-day Janakpur city in Nepal. Once, Janaka Maharaja was ploughing the land with two oxen in current day Punaura dham to prepare it for a Vedic sacrificial homa. While doing so, the plough hit something in the ground.

When Janaka Maharaja looked, he saw a golden box strutting out from the ground. Being curious, he pulled out the golden box from the earth and opened it. To his surprise, he found a beautiful baby girl lying in the box.

His joy knew no bounds as he didn’t have children. Queen Sunaina, his wife and the queen of Mithila was behind Janaka Maharaja. She too could not contain her joy at the sight of this beautiful baby girl.

Janaka Maharaja and Queen Sunaina decided to bring up the baby as their own daughter. Janaka Maharaja named the baby girl as ‘Sita’ owing to the fact that he struck the golden box carrying the baby girl while ploughing the field. Baby Sita was carried away by her parents Janaka Maharaja and Queen Sunaina to their palace in present day Janakpur city.

Places to visit in Sitamarhi

The Janaki Mandir marks the spot where Sita Devi was found in the golden box. This big temple with huge gateways and courtyard houses the deities of Lord Rama, Sita Devi and Bhakta Hanuman. The temple is crowded with devotees usually.

Three major festivals are celebrated here i.e. Rama Navami, Janaki Navami and Vivaha Panchami. There are strong demands from many leaders to enhance the glory of Sitamarhi on the lines of the Rama Janmabhumi. This is due to the growing consciousness that Sita Devi has not been given the respect she deserves even though She is the eternal consort of Lord Rama.

Nearby is the Janaki Kunda, which was originally built by Janaka Maharaja. The pond is said to have been used to bathe Baby Sita initially. You can take a holy dip in the Kunda or sprinkle some water on yourself.

Another important holy spot in Sitamarhi is the Haleshwar Sthan temple housing Lord Shiva as Haleshwarnath. This temple is said to have been established by Janaka Maharaja.

How to Reach Sitamarhi

If Sitamarhi is your goal, the Muktinath Yatra conducted by Tirtha Yatra is highly recommended.

Sitamarhi town is located 136 kms away from the state capital Patna. There are numerous points from where you can travel to Sitamarhi. This could be Patna, Darbhanga or Muzaffarpur. The below options will make things clear for you –

By Road: Sitamarhi is well-connected to the other cities of Bihar and even cities outside Bihar via state and national highways. State or private buses are available, to and from Sitamarhi. At the Sitamarhi bus stand, you will even find buses to New Delhi.

Apart from buses, Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur, 75.5 kms and 60 kms away respectively are the nearest urban centers from where taxis could be hired.

By Rail: The Sitamarhi Railway Station is well-connected to other cities in Bihar via 17 trains on an average. If you’re travelling from cities and towns outside Bihar, you could catch a train to Muzaffarpur Railway Station 60 kms away. Further on, you can board a local train to Sitamarhi or reach via bus/taxi.

By Air: The nearest airport is Muzaffarpur Airport 68.4 kms away. The two other nearest airports are Darbhanga and Patna at a distance of 75 kms and 144 kms respectively. You can fly into these airports and reach Sitamarhi via the rail or road route.

Sitamarhi is as special as Sita Devi Herself

The lilas of Sita Devi have been unique always. Right from Her transcendental birth to Her disappearance, Sita Devi has been an inspiration for both men and women alike.

Her appearance in a golden box, lifting Lord Parashurama’s bow as a child, swayamwara, voluntary exile into the forest along with Lord Rama, the abduction of Her mayic form by Ravana, agni-pareeksha, exile by Lord Rama later, etc. are all uncommon activities tinged completely with the transcendental touch.

Hence, Her birthplace is unique and non-different from Her. The best thing you can do is to pray for Her causeless mercy to understand Her lilas and even that of Lord Rama. Jaya Siya-Ram!