Three Kings Series – Albert King Playing Card, hand-drawn of him playing his 1967 Gibson Flying V, circa 1967. Part of the Three Kings Series portraits of Albert King, BB King and Freddie King Playing Cards.

The famous guitar went up for auction in November 2020.

The first guitar of King’s to ever come up for auction, the Flying V was the blues guitar legend’s go-to instrument both onstage and in the studio from 1967-1972.

Consequently, the guitar powered some of King’s best-known recordings, such as “Born Under a Bad Sign” and “I’ll Play the Blues for You.”

Inscribed with the words “Love you, Albert King,” the guitar was gifted to King by Gibson after his first Flying V, “Lucy,” was lost.

Albert King was an American guitarist and singer who is often regarded as one of the greatest and most influential blues guitarists of all time.

He is perhaps best known for his popular and influential album Born Under a Bad Sign (1967) and its title track.

He, B.B. King, and Freddie King, all unrelated, were known as the “Kings of the Blues”.

The left-handed Albert King was known for his “deep, dramatic sound that was widely imitated by both blues and rock guitarists”.

He was once nicknamed “The Velvet Bulldozer” because of his smooth singing and large size – he stood taller than average, with sources reporting 6 ft 7 inches, and weighed 250 lbs; and also nicknamed because he drove a bulldozer in one of his day jobs early in his career.

King was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 1983. He was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2013.

In 2023, he was ranked number 22 on Rolling Stone’s 250 Greatest Guitarists of All Time.

King died of a heart attack on December 21, 1992, in his Memphis home, age 69. His final concert had been in Los Angeles two days earlier.

#AlbertKing, #ThreeKings, #MusicArt, #PaulKing, #PaulKingArt, PaulKingArt.com

Description

All prints are produced using Giclee printing process which is used for archival art reproduction. This process uses fade-resistant archival pigment-based ink which lasts over 100 years. All prints are printed on 310GSM, Luxurious mould-made, 100% cotton rag Archival Certified watercolor paper.

Archival Conservation Mat is included with your purchase. Mat is a high quality, 4 ply (1/16″) surround mat. These frame mats are acid-free & Lignin-free made with 100% virgin alpha-cellulose surface, core and backing papers. So your caricature with mat will fit into a standard comparable frame either “20” x 24″ or “16” x 20″ depending on the print size, (frame not included). Price also includes a Backer Board.

32″ x 40″ stretch canvas print is produced by Giclee printing process and are hand stretched over heavy duty American made white pine. The canvas print is varnished twice after printing. The canvas prints are ready to hang (complete with hanging wire).