Sergio Osmeña III

Independent Candidate

Born December 13, 1943

Sergio de la Rama Osmeña III, more popularly known as Serge, is no stranger when it comes to the world of Philippine politics. Aside from the fact that he himself served as a Senator for three terms, he also came from a family that produced a Philippine president, two senators, and a number of local officials in the province of Cebu.

Serge, a Cebuano-Negrense-Ilonggo descend, was born on the 13th of December, the year 1943 to Lourdes de la Rama and former Senator Sergio Osmeña Jr. He has seven children with his wife, Isabel Lopez.As for his educational background, he studied at De La Salle College for his primary education, while he finished his secondary education at Beaumont College in England. Although Serge never got to attain any college degree, he went to different universities such as Harvard University, Georgetown University, University of San Carlos, and University of the Philippines – Los Baños.

Osmeña was first elected as Senator in 1995. He ran for the second time in 2001 and another in 2010. He is currently the chairman of Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies and the Committee on Energy of the 16th Congress. He has authored a total of 209 bills throughout his Senatorial term, and 65 of these were passed into law. Some of these laws are, Absentee Voting Law (RA 9189), Retail Trade Liberalization Act (RA 8762), Government Procurement Act (RA 9184), Securities Regulations Code (RA 8799), and Regional Headquarters for Multi-National Companies Act (RA 8756). He also co-authored the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act, Clean Air Act, Anti-Money Laundering Act and Safeguards Measures Act.

During the Martial Law Period, Serge was imprisoned and was put into the same cell with Eugenio Lopez Jr. The two of them then organized a hunger strike as a sign of protest against the illicit detainment of thousands of innocent political prisoners. In 1977, he was in exile in United States, and he did not return until Ferdinand Marcos was no longer in position. Even though he was exiled, he still “served as the Director for Movement for a Free Philippines” and “the Founding Director of the Justice for Aquino Justice For all (JAJA) Movement”.

Stands on some of the prominent political issues today

On the Bangsamoro Basic Law (BBL)

Among the many interviews and press releases of Serge, there is no clear transcript of what his stand is regarding the issue on the Bangsamoro Basic Law or the BBL. He did say however that is impossible to finish the draft of the law by June last year, instead it would probably accomplished in August or September, still of the previous year. He also said in an interview that he would make his own judgment as to what his decision on the said bill would be, and would not need to have a talk with the President about it. This is in response to the supposed meeting Aquino would be holding with the Senators in regards with the BBL.

On the Reproductive Health Bill (RH Bill)

“I’m a coward when it comes to that. I don’t want to fight with my elders, my mothers, cousins, friends and all that,” This were Osmeña’s words when he was asked about the controversial Reproductive Health bill. According to sources, Osmeña is for the bill, but he refuses to talk about it, because he did not want to have a dispute with his family and friends regarding his stand on the issue. He also said in an interview that despite the oppositions from some people in the society, he strongly believes that the bill would pass the Senate.

On the dispute over the West Philippine Sea

Again, no source could outwardly give out Osmeña’s stand on the West Philippine Sea dispute, he did however, together with Senator Ralph Recto, said that the executive could not just make an agreement that could compromise the country’s territorial claims with other countries without having to consult the Congress about it. This is in response to the negotiation that took place between the Department of Foreign Affairs and Malaysia in regards with the territorial claims over the West Philippine Sea. “Any treaty must undergo Senate oversight and approval. It might even require an amendment to our Constitution,” Osmeña said in the interview.

On corruption

According to Osmeña, the corruption going on inside our country requires a lifetime of effort to be eliminated and is not something that would just go away overnight. He also said that eliminating corruption is not just a one man’s job, but it requires the help of everybody and not just from our generation, but our children and our children’s children’s generation. He also said that the continuous corruption is because of the fact that nobody is penalized for the crime, so instead of stopping, people at fault tend to just do it over and over again.

On poverty reduction

From an article, Osmeña acknowledged the fact that poverty has been a serious problem over the years. Quoting the article, according to Osmeña, “...the country is experiencing “jobless growth” in which automation increases profits for corporations but hardly expands the worker base”.

References

https://www.senate.gov.ph/senators/sen_bio/osmena_bio.asp

http://moneypolitics.pcij.org/profiles/osmena-sergio-iii-dela-rama/#career-amp-wealth

http://www.people.nfo.ph/politician/sergio-osmea-iii/

http://rp3.abs-cbnnews.com/research/2010-candidate-profiles/05/05/10/Sergio-SERGE-dela-Rama-Osme%C3%B1a-III

http://www.rappler.com/move-ph/issues/mindanao/94651-senators-bbl-statements-stand

http://www.interaksyon.com/article/111191/osmea-smells-pnoy-offer-of-pork-for-bbl-passage

http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/322391/osmena-says-he-is-a-coward-to-face-rh-critics#ixzz41iNkNqL9

http://globalnation.inquirer.net/120213/ph-cant-make-deals-on-territorial-claims-without-clearance-from-congress-senators#ixzz41iSOkfkL

http://www.mb.com.ph/osmena-we-cant-eliminate-corruption-overnight/