Presidents come and go but the executive orders they issue, unless amended or repealed, have far-ranging impact in the way the government advances its political agenda. Even Sergio S. Osmeña, Sr., the second Philippine Commonwealth president and third chief executive who served only two years (1944-46), has his own share of legacy in form of edicts.

A Filipino of Chinese descent, Cebu-born Osmeña (1878-1961) was an alumnus of San Juan de Letran College before taking up Law at the University of Santo Tomas and later passed the Bar. During the Philippine Revolution, he was a war staff of Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. As a journalist, he founded in 1900 the El Nuevo Dia (The New Day) in Cebu.

His first public office was as councilor of Cebu (1903-04) and later was appointed acting governor of Cebu when Gov. Juan Climaco attended the 1904 St. Louis World’s Fair in Missouri, USA. With Climaco’s return, he became provincial fiscal until he contested the governorship in 1906 and won. He became a member and first Speaker of the House of Representatives (1907-22) and was senator for thirteen years (1923-35) representing the 10th Senatorial District; he also served as Senate President pro tempore.

During the Commonwealth, he was secretary of information (1935-37) before he ran as vice president of President Manuel L. Quezon, whom he succeeded in 1944 when he died of tuberculosis in New York. He also founded the enduring Nacionalista Party, a political group.

His fruitful political career also spawned the rise of his descendants. Son and namesake Sergio Jr. became senator and almost made it to the presidency if he was not defeated by Ferdinand E. Marcos in the 1971 elections. Two of his grandsons made it to the Senate (Sergio III and John Henry); two others made it to the Cebu governorship (Lito) and the city mayoralty (Tomas).

Former Sen. Sotero H. Laurel, son of wartime president Jose P. Laurel, described Osmeña as a ‘perfect gentleman’ in a speech made before the Cebu Newspaper Workers Foundation, Inc.