Museum Natural History Paris is dedicated to preserving the evolutionary science of human life through its unexpected riches. It has a huge collection of objects from the world of research, zoology, science, botany, geomorphology, mineralogy, evolution, ecology, society, and other fields. Here, three museums have been combined into one, including a building of skeletons, a four-story taxonomy wing, and a separate structure devoted to geology.

Paris Natural History Museum is known to be one of the three largest natural history museums in the world. The museum comprises a cluster of attractions scattered throughout the city, and the central building is the main hub. The museum was established in 1793, and the actual origins of the museum are in King Louis XIII's medicinal gardens.

The museum's collection is estimated to exceed more than sixty million specimens from various disciplines, including botany, paleontology, geology, zoology, and anthropology. The biggest attraction at the museum is the Great Gallery of Evolution, an enormous space that houses a wide range of specimens and species. These range from fossils to extinct animal species, dinosaur skeletons, and a detailed look at how the different species, including human beings, have evolved over the years. The museum combines the modern with the old, mixing exhibits like a rhinoceros skeleton that belonged to Louis XV with virtual reality headsets and modern touchscreen panels. Explore the vast collection of the museum with our Europe tour packages.

In the Children's Gallery, you can enjoy interactive games, surprise creepy crawlies, and watch videos about the life of kids in the Kayapo tribe of the Amazon. The museum also owns zoological reserves, marine research facilities, and arboretums, making it an important research facility.

Explore More - Paris Nightlife

Also Checkout - Things to Do in Paris at Night

Highlights

• If you're looking for the best natural history museum in Paris for your next urban adventure, the Museum of Natural History Paris can be your ideal choice.

• With spaces dedicated to animals, minerals, plants, and human beings alike, this museum is a group of gardens, galleries, museums, and even zoos dedicated to natural treasures.

• The Muséum has four main spaces: the Ménagerie, the Jardin des Plantes, the Grandes Serres and the Grande Galerie de l’Évolution.

• The Jardin des Plantes is the greenery cradling the museum's main building and the only botanical garden in the city. You can wander through the wide range of tropical plants from all corners of France here.

• Deep within the gardens, you'll find a greenhouse structure called the Grandes Serres, which is the museum's permanent exhibition.

• The Ménagerie is the zoo section of the museum where you can find over one hundred and fifty different animal species.You May Also Like: Thoiry ZooSafari TicketParis Museums

How To Reach

By Subway: Censier-Daubenton, on line 7, or Paris Austerlitz, on lines 5 and 10, are the closest subway stations to Museum Natural History Paris. Buses 24, 61, 63, 67, 89, 57, and 91 also stop near the museum.

By Metro: You'll have to exit Metro M10 or M7 at Jussieu Station. Go to your left and walk straight south to the entrance via the corner gate at the southeast, or exit Metro M5 and take a right turn through the plaza. Move across Pont d'Austerlitz to the traffic circle entrance gate, and make your way to the entrance through the gardens.

While in Paris Also Checkout: Airport Transfer Paris

Must Checkout - Paris Monuments

Other Essential Information

Buy tickets to any of the branches of the museum online to skip the long queues at the ticket office.

Don't forget to check out the Museum of Mankind, which traces the path of human evolution with reconstructed archaeological digs, bronze busts, and audio exhibits of various languages.

If you feel hungry during the tour, you can head to the cafe area situated in the Grande Galerie de l'Evolution to delve into delicious food.

The different branches of the museum are accessible to everyone. They are equipped with guided tours for partially-sighted, adapted workshops for those with learning disabilities, and adaptations for disabled visitors.

Also Checkout And Book: Lucerne And Paris Honeymoon Package