Since its foundation, the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle(MNHN) has been one of the most revered institutions in natural history. It is not only a museum, but also an epicenter for research, conservation, teaching and the dissemination of knowledge. Its influence extends beyond Paris, with sites in the Île-de-France region and beyond.

If you're looking for a place that combines natural science, paleontology, botany, geology, ecology and zoology, this is the place to go. Its collection, one of the richest in the world, is packed with meteorites, insects, minerals, human skulls, reptiles and prehistoric objects.

Discover the Museum:

Jardin des Plantes: A magnificent botanical collection, including a rose garden, an ecological garden and a vegetable garden. Open free every day from 8 a.m. to 6.30 p.m.

Grande Galerie de l'Évolution: Discover an incredible variety of species, from the imposing skeleton of a southern right whale to coral reefs, and immerse yourself in the studies of Darwin or Lamarck. The gallery is open daily from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. except Tuesdays.

Menagerie: Home to more than 1,000 species of animals, some of them on the brink of extinction. Monday to Saturday: 10am to 6pm. Sundays and public holidays: 10 a.m. to 6.30 p.m.

Grandes Serres: Four majestic greenhouses reflecting various ecosystems: tropical forests, deserts, New Caledonia and plant evolution. Open daily except Tuesdays.

The Gallery of Mineralogy and Geology : recognized as one of the world's oldest and most prestigious collections, this gallery features meteorites from Mars, imposing crystals and magnificent rocks and minerals. These priceless specimens tell the story of the Earth and the entire solar system. Open daily except Tuesdays.

The Paleontology and Comparative Anatomy Gallery : Examining similarities and distinctions is the very essence of comparative anatomy, enabling a better understanding of the living world. As for paleontology, it plunges us into the past by analyzing fossils. Explore the gallery devoted to these two fields, an emblematic space of science, heritage and history at the heart of the Museum. Open every day except Tuesdays.

The Botanical Gallery, home to the world's oldest herbarium.

Formerly the Royal Garden of Medicinal Plants, the museum has evolved over the centuries. After becoming financially independent in 1907, it expanded by creating laboratories throughout France. Today, not only is the essence of nature to be found here, but also the heritage of research and discovery going back centuries.

A visit to the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris is an immersion not only in the natural world, but also in the history and discoveries that have shaped our knowledge. We can assure you that this is a must-see for anyone wishing to marvel at the treasures our planet has to offer.

How to get to the Museum :

Gare d'Austerlitz (line 10, RER C)

Jussieu (lines 7 and 10)

Place Monge (line 7)

Censier-Daubenton (line 7)

Heritage Days 2024 at the Jardin des Plantes and the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle

For the Journées du Patrimoine 2024, on September 21 and 22, the libraries of the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle and the Jardin des Plantes will be hosting special tours of the Museum's treasures. [Read more]

Tropical Autumn: the plant and design exhibition at the Grandes Serres du Jardin des Plantes

A lively exhibition and a journey into the heart of nature: this is the exotic experience offered by the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, in the Grandes Serres of the Jardin des Plantes. From October 17 to November 25, 2024, discover "Tropical Autumn: Drawing Botany", a stroll that plunges us into the discovery of species with astonishing aesthetics. [Read more]

Missing Worlds: get up close to dinosaurs in virtual reality at Bercy Village - our test

Ready to cross paths with dinosaurs at Bercy Village? From July 6, 2024, we're taking a leap into the past, thanks to an extraordinary immersive virtual reality experience that will take us through the history of the Earth. [Read more]

The Versailles-Chèvreloup Arboretum and its Remarkable Garden

The Arboretum de Versailles-Chèvreloup awaits you all year round in its remarkable 200-hectare park! Come and stroll, picnic or play sport in complete freedom amidst 10,000 trees of over 2,500 different varieties. [Read more]

The Galerie de Paléontologie et d'Anatomie Comparée, the Museum's nugget in the Jardin des Plantes

You've heard of the Muséum and the Galerie de l'évolution, but what about the Galerie de Paléontologie et d'Anatomie comparée, nestling at the entrance to the Jardin des Plantes on the Gare d'Austerlitz side? From living creatures to extinct dinosaurs, discover the world of bones in this sublime museum, well worth a visit. [Read more]

Discover the treasures of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris

Paris's Jardin des Plantes is home to a number of historical and unusual sights that are well worth a visit. We reveal 8 treasures to discover in this 24-hectare haven of peace, one of the most beautiful parks in Paris. [Read more]

La Menagerie du Jardin des Plantes, the oldest zoo in Paris

The Menagerie, or rather the zoo of the Jardin des Plantes, belongs to the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle. Located next to the famous Jardin des Plantes, it's not only the oldest zoo in Paris, opened in 1794, it's also an area well worth a visit. Every day, hundreds of animals live in 5.5 hectares of greenery. Come and discover them! [Read more]

The Grande Galerie de l'Evolution, the immense museum dedicated to animals from all over the world, in Paris

If you've ever taken a stroll through the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, you'll no doubt have spotted the grand old buildings that stand along the way: this is the Museum of Natural History, of which the Grande Galerie de l'Evolution is a part. [Read more]

To be read

Tips for the week of August 12-18, 2024 in Paris: free or inexpensive outings

What to do in Paris and the Ile-de-France region in August 2024? Tips and ideas for outings

Free museums and monuments: places to visit this Sunday, September 1, 2024 in Paris

The Jardin des Plantes' hidden Alpine garden, a nugget worth discovering

The Jardin des Plantes conceals a magnificent alpine garden. Located between the Grandes Serres and the Menagerie, this garden, which has no entrance doors, is accessible via a hidden underground passage. Here you can discover the rock gardens and wild mountain plants. It's a haven of peace to be (re)discovered all year round. [Read more]

Unusual: witness the feeding of the felines at the Jardin des Plantes Menagerie

On certain days of the week, the Jardin des Plantes Menagerie invites you to take part in an exceptional experience in the fauverie, in the heart of the Jardin des Plantes Menagerie, by attending a feline meal. [Read more]

Discover the unusual Lion Fountain in the Jardin des Plantes : History and curiosities

Do you know the Lion Fountain in the Jardin des Plantes? Located near the entrance on rue Geoffroy Saint Hilaire, this work of art dating from 1863 awaits you at the foot of Buffon's labyrinth. We tell you all about it. [Read more]

Did you know? Discover France's oldest cedar of Lebanon in Paris and its unusual history.

In the heart of Paris, the Jardin des Plantes is home to a historical curiosity: the oldest cedar of Lebanon in France. Planted in 1734, its history is a mixture of botany, legend and an incredible journey. Let's take a green walk through Buffon's labyrinth to discover this remarkable 300-year-old tree. [Read more]

Did you know? The Gloriette de Buffon is the oldest metal structure in Paris.

In the heart of Paris's 5th arrondissement, the Jardin des Plantes is home to the mysterious and historic Gloriette de Buffon, dating from 1786. Discover a hidden treasure. [Read more]

The Durfort Mammoth at the Paris Natural History Museum, restored!

(Re)discover at the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, Paris, the newly restored "Mammouth de Durfort", an icon of paleontology on display since 1898. [Read more]

Meteorites from a French asteroid on display at the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle

In February 2023, an asteroid fell in Normandy. And many people collected these little meteorites to enable science to analyze them! Today, they can be seen at the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle in Paris! [Read more]

Visiting Paris with your family: six free game trails for fun walks with children

Visiting Paris is good, but with animations or devices to entertain the children, it is even better! The Paris Mômes team is now offering six new game trails to discover the capital's emblematic neighborhoods with your family! [Read more]