James L. Janik - Chairman, CEO and President

Thank you. Welcome, everyone, and thank you for joining us on the call today. Before we begin, I want to take a moment to highlight the recent changes to our management team. As our company continues to expand in size and scope, we expanded our leadership team accordingly during the third quarter.

First, I'd like to welcome Sarah Lauber to her first earnings call as our Chief Financial Officer. Sarah joined Douglas near the end of August and has been a wonderful addition to our team. Sarah brings more than 20 years of finance experience, most recently as a public company CFO, and prior to that, extensive experience in financial planning, management, and strategy. In her first 10 weeks at the company, Sarah has hit the ground running, visiting major facilities and immersing herself in our operations and learning what makes Douglas unique.

In addition, after successfully leading our finance team for 13 years, Bob McCormick was promoted to Chief Operating Officer. In his new role, Bob has assumed day-to-day responsibility for both our reporting segments. He has been instrumental in orchestrating our growth and acquisition strategies in recent years and has been effectively operating as a part-time COO for some time. I look forward to continuing our partnership as we execute our strategy in the years ahead. Bob is here on the call today and available to answer questions.

With that said, I'll hand over to Sarah to start the call.

Sarah C. Lauber - CFO

Thanks, Jim, for that introduction. I'm very pleased to be at Douglas. My first few months have been excellent as I've met employees, visited larger facilities and, as Jim said, seen firsthand what makes Douglas unique. I look forward to tackling the challenges ahead and helping the company meet its significant potential.

A few quick reminders before we begin. First, please note that some of the information you will hear during this call will consist of forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as amended. Such statements express our expectations, anticipations, beliefs, estimates, intentions, plans and forecasts. Because these forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, our actual results could differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements.

For more information regarding such risks and uncertainties, please see the sections titled Risk Factors, Forward-Looking Statements and Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the impending updates to these sections in our quarterly report on Form 10-Q.

Second, this call will involve a discussion of adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure which, under SEC Regulation G, we are required to reconcile with GAAP. Reconciliation of this measure to the closest GAAP financial measure is included in today's earnings press release which is available at douglasdynamics.com.