William Brangham:

That's right, Judy.

A warming atmosphere is creating serious problems in the Arctic Circle and on the continent of Antarctica. The Arctic Report Card is out. High temperatures, shrinking sea ice and extreme melting events are transforming the region. And at the opposite pole, in Antarctica, a key ice shelf that sits in front of the Thwaites Glacier could break up much sooner than expected, within five years.

Joining me now is David Holland. He studies atmospheric and ocean sciences at New York University, and is a leading researcher on the global initiative that's studying the Thwaites Glacier.

David Holland, great to have you back on the "NewsHour."

I should explain why you look so dapper tonight. You are being elected a fellow in the American Geophysical Union at their conference in New Orleans.

Congratulations.

Viewers might remember that the last time we saw you on the "NewsHour," you were on the Thwaites Glacier itself doing research there.

Can you help us understand what this most recent research showed?

David Holland, New York University:

Yes.

We have been seeing for the last couple of decades a large change in Antarctica and, in particular, on this one glacier called Thwaites in West Antarctica. And it's a very special place here because it's marine-based. It's actually largely in the ocean.

And the ocean can, in theory, easily melt it. And so that is what actually now looks it's coming to pass. Warm ocean waters have arrived at this glacier, and they're melting it like crazy.

David Holland:

It would be absolutely massive, on the time scale of the last century, what we'd seen.

We would see a dramatic rise of several feet of sea level. And it could be Thwaites itself perhaps two to three feet, but Thwaites is holding back its neighbors. And they, too, could fall apart, raising sea level by an additional maybe six feet, so, altogether, something of scale 10 feet. And if you try to wrap your head around that, we're talking around the entire Earth, the entire ocean.

It's a massive amount of water. It's a rewriting of the global coastline in that sense.

David Holland:

I started my Ph.D. Actually working in the north on the Arctic.

When I started in the early '90s not a human being on Earth would have said the Arctic will ever change in our lifetime. And then, within a decade, it began to fall apart. And it's been the largest change on the planet, perhaps, with half of the Arctic sea ice now gone.

But what really struck me in the report were the ramifications of that change, for example, more shipping, and thus more noise in the ocean, disturbing marine mammals, a change in the vegetation, a change in species. Now, apparently, animals like beavers have moved into Alaska. So it's all a change and it's a disruption to what was there.

It's very significant. And it goes beyond just the melting of the ice.