Who is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi? Biography, gossip, facts?

Valeriy Ivanovych Khoroshkovsky (Ukrainian: born January 1 1969 in Kiev) is a Ukrainian businessman former head of the Security Service of Ukraine former Minister of Finance and former First Vice Prime Minister. According to Ukrainian and East European media Khoroshkovsky is one of Ukraine's richest people. While being in public office Khoroshkovsky had large stakes in various Ukrainian media and metallurgy industries.

When is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's birthday?

Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi was born on the 1st of January 1969, which was a Wednesday. Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi will be turning 56 in only 143 days from today.

How old is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi?

Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is 55 years old. To be more precise (and nerdy), the current age as of right now is 20084 days or (even more geeky) 482016 hours. That's a lot of hours!

What is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's zodiac sign and horoscope?

Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's zodiac sign is Capricorn.

♑

The ruling planet of Capricorn is Saturn. Therefore, lucky days are Saturdays and lucky numbers are: 1, 4, 8, 10, 13, 17, 19, 22 and 26. Brown, Steel, Grey and Black are Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's lucky colors. Typical positive character traits of Capricorn include: Aspiring, Restrained, Firm, Dogged and Determined. Negative character traits could be: Shy, Pessimistic, Negative in thought and Awkward.

Is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

100% of all voters think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi still alive? Are there any death rumors?

Yes, according to our best knowledge, Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is still alive. And no, we are not aware of any death rumors. However, we don't know much about Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's health situation.

Is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

When did Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi retire? When did Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi end the active career?

Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi retired on the 31st of March 2002, which is more than 22 years ago. The date of Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's retirement fell on a Sunday.

When did Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's career start? How long ago was that?

Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's career started on the 29th of March 1998, which is more than 26 years ago. The first day of Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's career was a Sunday.

Does Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi do drugs? Does Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi does smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or does Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi does do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi does take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi has never tried drugs before.

What is Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi doing now?

Supposedly, 2024 has been a busy year for Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi. However, we do not have any detailed information on what Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi is doing these days. Maybe you know more. Feel free to add the latest news, gossip, official contact information such as mangement phone number, cell phone number or email address, and your questions below.

Are there any photos of Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!