On your big day you want to feel not only beautiful, but fully supported as well. That's where we come in.

We have a team of stylists and makeup artists ready to make your bridal vision come to life. We're available to travel to you, no matter the location! And you can trust that you will walk down the isle feeling beautiful.

We always prefer to do a trial run for just the bride at least 3 months before wedding day. Head to our salon in Glendale and we'll nail down your perfect style.

We can do 2 eyeshadow looks (lighter > darker) and 2 hair styles (all down curled > half or full updo). Bring inspiration photos, ideas and more!

Make sure your face is freshly washed that morning and apply any moisturizing products at least 30 minutes prior.

We will apply specific primers for your skin type. It's also good to exfoliate a few days prior if you have dry skin.

** Dermaplaning by a professional esthetician a week prior allows for amazing smooth skin for

an ideal foundation application.

We always have a variety of false lashes to fit different eye shapes.

We have also worked on many brides who have eyelash extensions. We do use all waterproof makeup which is something to keep in mind as that is not always recommended by lash artist, but often necessary for long lasting wedding day makeup.

We stay for the allotted time. We apply lipstick at the very end.

We always do a final once over to make sure everyone is looking and feeling their best!

We will also leave you with a small touch up kit for anything you may need throughout the night.

We recommend having your hair thoroughly washed (twice if needed) with conditioner only on the ends and part it the opposite way in which you want it styled to help maximize volume.

We also recommend letting it air dry and having it washed at least an hour before getting it styled. We will apply products for texture, volume, shine, etc.

If you have naturally curly hair, you can blow dry it smoothly or flat iron it before. If you want a very smooth / sleek style flat ironing before will be best. This makes it easier to get a sleek curl with the curling iron.

If you are doing an updo this isn't necessary, and we can smooth out the top as needed for the style.

Bangs should be combed into place and in the direction, you want them styled. We can apply products and round brush as needed.

We always arrive at least 15 minutes early to set up all of our stuff.

All we need is an area to set up hot tools (with outlets) and a regular height chair for our hairstylists. A barstool height chair is super helpful for our makeup artist. A mirror is always a great bonus. (We have ring lights for lighting so no need to worry about that).