925 Orizaba Ave.

Long Beach, CA. 90804

Phone: 626-614-4719

Email: [email protected]

________________________________________

Objective

Establish and develop an Interior and Architectural position with a firm with a clear vision of its future that can provide the challenge of exciting work, opportunity for advancement and long-term career growth. Utilize my creative and professional skills to enhance the design elements for a variety of corporate, commercial hospitality and residential projects. Pursue new design experiences and challenges.

Professional Skill Summary

Multi-disciplined designer, ranging from Commercial Interiors, Show Set & Lighting Design for upscale architectural and thematic projects throughout the globe.

Skilled in client presentations, shop drawings, vendor coordination, budgets and time lines.

Proficient in the following: AutoCAD Architectural 2012, Revit, SketchUp Pro, Adobe Photoshop, CAP 20-20, AGi32-v1.96, Visual and OS X.

Education: Private College — Design Guild, West Los Angeles, CA.

Public College — UCLA Extension Architecture and Interior Design Program (Arc ID) Los Angeles, CA.

Professional Experience

Interior Architecture (Freelance)

2006 – Present

Sr. Designer

Long Beach, CA & Duluth, MN.

Responsibilities: Established new design standards for fabrication drawing packages and ongoing department training. Increased productivity and decreased production lead times, with clear & concise client presentation and production document packages. Also increased company exposure and visibility in the Hospitality design community by actively being involved in related trade events throughout the U.S.

Sr. Show Set Designer

Rethink Attractions

N. Hollywood, CA

Responsibilities: I had the opportunity to be part of a team create this firms first design package. As their Sr. Show Set Designer I was involved in the creation of the initial foundation metric CAD drawing set, for the newly formed production group. The initial package proved to be a challenge in style and layout, but with my CAD Management background & Themed Design experience and patient, the package went out on time and within project budget.

Lighting Representative

Lightgroup

Los Angeles, CA

Responsibilities: Represented to the Lighting Design community in the Los Angeles & Orange Counties, energy efficient architectural and high-end contemporary lighting fixtures. Leveraged industry connections to rebuild representative firm’s client base of professional lighting designers and improved their standings and visibility.

Sr. Lighting Designer

Applied-Minds

Glendale, CA

Responsibilities: Northrop Grumman (Details Confidential)

Sr. Interior Designer

Applied-Minds

Glendale, CA

Project: Schiver Air Force Base (Details Confidential)

Sr. Lighting Designer

HFS Concepts4

Long Beach, CA

Responsibilities: Architectural lighting designer of custom light fixture design, photometric calculations and design documentation packages for Embassy and Marriot Suites. Projects were enhanced with the addition of visually dramatic large-scale sculptural pieces.

CAD Manager

Wolcott Architecture & Interiors

Culver City, CA

Responsibilities: Creating the presentation style, standards & procedures, manuals and conducted training. Reviewed and redlined all to be released documents for accuracy prior to final signature by the principal Architect.

Project Manager

Thomas-Gregor Associates

Long Beach, CA

Responsibilities: Princess Cruise Lines (Details Confidential)

Sr. Show Set Designer

Ralph M. Parsons

Pasadena, CA

Responsibilities: Busch Gardens, Tampa Bay, Florida. Project designer assigned to lead a team to review, correct and a create new design package that a previous created by an outside Architectural firm provided that was inadequate due to incomplete construction documentation. The construction was in progress leading to tight timeline.

Professional Experience Interiors and Thematic Design

Sr. Designer

Interior Systems Design

Sun Valley, CA

Nov. 2000 to May 2006

Responsibilities: High-end residential systems lighting & audio/video system integration designer and program designer for multi-million dollar private residences in Southern California such as the Michel Eisner Compound Malibu, to projects for Ben Stiller in Hawaii and various high-end retreats throughout Colorado.

Thematic Lead Designer

Walt Disney Imagineering

Glendale, CA

Jan 1995 to Nov 2000

Responsibilities: Tokyo Disney Seas in Japan Animal Kingdom, Specialized Lighting Fixture Design for a world recognized international themed entertainment group for three major theme parks abroad and in the US. Managed a creative team of designers to create shop drawings for hundreds of one of a kind thematic and historically correct lighting for interior and exterior area use. Contract designer supervision, fabricators coordination, warehousing, quality control and video conferencing with the field installation team in Japan.

Sr. Designer

Herman Miller

West Hollywood, CA

Mar 1992 to Jan 1995

Responsibilities: Team Disney building Anaheim, CA. Architainment specialty entertainment designer for a legendary furniture manufacturer developing specialized products to enhance an already recognizable line of office furniture systems. Working closely with Frank Gehry’s team, to custom design Herman Miller products that captured the exterior unique styling.

Professional Affiliations: