Powering The National Museum

As we continue building theÂ National Museum of the Surface NavyÂ aboard the Battleship IOWAÂ we find ourselves encountering challenges most museum spaces don’t have. Here’s a good one.

Â Advantage: We’ve eliminated the need for a “brick and mortar” structure.

Â Challenge: Shipboard systems are ill-suited to modern computer and technology loads associated with interactive displays.

Â Solution: Replace the largest, most problematic transformers at the forward end of the ship (where the museum will be located) and run new wiring to distribute power from shore.

Â Added Benefits: Accomplishing the mighty task alongside long-time collaboratorÂ Geveden Industrial, and receiving a grant award from our wonderful sponsorÂ The Ahmanson Foundation.

The work was done last week, and we’re ready for all the crazy-cool immersive exhibits the geniuses at Applied Minds will create for us!

A Job Opportunity In Our Veterans Department

Have a passion for working with veterans? Love connecting people and bringing them together? Enjoy planning events that facilitate those connections? Want to be part of a fun, talented, hard-working team? You might be our nextÂ Military and Veterans Affairs Manager!

This role offers candidates a real chance to make a difference in the lives of active-duty military, veterans, and their families. Help create a “home” for members of our military who need to reconnect to a community that fulfills their desire to be a part of something greater than themselves.

Click the buttons below for the full job description and for the application (scroll down on the page to which the link takes you).

Veterans will always be high on our priority list and our appreciation of their service is difficult to put into words.Â By donating to our veterans department, you are able to directly impact the quality, quantity, and reach of the resources to which we provide access.

To make a contribution, you can click the button below (or visitÂ our website) and designate your gift to Veterans in the donation window. Your consideration and support is greatly appreciated.

End-Of-Summer Fun Aboard Battleship IOWA

School Field Trips

Summer’s almost over, but more fun’s just around the corner!

Celebrate back to school with one of our field trip options. From our History TourÂ with an in depth tour through six decks to our STEM at Sea option that offers hands-on activities for K- 8th grade, we have something for everyone.

Not able to come down for in person tours? No problem! We have virtualÂ guided tours available as well. Book your field trip today with special education-discounted admission to the Battleship IOWA Museum!

Please contact our Sales Manager, Catherine Moreno atÂ groupsales@labattleship.comÂ for more information.

Scuttlebutt Podcast | Episode 118

This week’s episode is the third and final part of the panel we held at our ten year anniversary celebration.

The panel – CEO Jonathan Williams, COO Mike Getscher, CIO David Canfield, and Volunteer Manager Sue Schmidt talked about the state of Iowa coming through with some critical funding just in time, what sparked our transition to become the National Museum of the Surface Navy, and took questions from the audience.

Find Scuttlebutt where you get your podcasts or here:

Spotify:Â https://spoti.fi/3PfuFr3

Apple:Â https://apple.co/3Lkr47D

Google:Â https://bit.ly/uss-iowa-google-podcast

Amazon:Â https://amzn.to/3GYgR0g

Buzzsprout:https://www.buzzsprout.com/1971056/11091402

Or click the photo below for the YouTube version.