CAPE TOWN

Lisa Brice at Goodman Gallery Cape

Kevin Brand, Sanell Aggenbach and Julius Mfethe at AVA

Willem Boshoff at Michael Stevenson Gallery

Abrie Fourie at blank projects

Peter Eastman at whatiftheworld / Gallery

Nadja Daehnke at João Ferreira

Johan Louw at Erdmann Contemporary

Natasha Norman and Clare Sarembock at Bell-Roberts

Frauke Stegmann at CUBE

'The idiotic and inchoate descent into nihilism' at Michaelis Gallery

'Rising' at 34Long

Philip Glazer at Irma Stern Gallery

Penny Siopis at Michael Stevenson

Jeremy Wafer at Goodman Gallery Cape

Bridget Baker at João Ferreira

Johann Louw at Sanlam Art Gallery

Ernest Cole at Iziko SANG

'Making waves' at Iziko Good Hope Gallery

Ilené Jacobs at Rust en Vrede

Cara van der Westhuizen at Bell-Roberts

Strijdom van der Merwe at Focus Contemporary

'Contusion' at Irma Stern

Jennifer Lovemore-Reed, Karen Cronje and Rudolph Tshie at AVA

Paul du Toit at 34Long

'Finding UCT' at Centre for African Studies Gallery

'The Sneeze 80 x 80' at Iziko SANG

'Art from Rorke's Drift' at Iziko SANG

'Fabrications' at Iziko SANG

SOMERSET WEST

'Greenhouse - From Painting To Plastic' at Bell-Roberts Lourensford

STELLENBOSCH & PAARL

Leora Farber at US Art Gallery

Jürgen Schadeberg at Sasol Art Musuem

Trasi Henen at SMAC

RIEBEEK KASTEEL

Leon Vermeulen at Cape Francolin Art Hotel

Lisa Brice at Goodman Gallery Cape

Known for the fearlessness of her wide-ranging subject matter that has included violence, crime and sexuality, as much as for the extraordinary diversity of materials and media she employs, Lisa Brice has recently returned to painting. In her first solo exhibition in Cape Town since 1999, Brice focuses on the first flush of love by drawing on photographic and film images that conjure memories of adolescent desire, love and teenage kicks. By formally including the universal teenage 'language' of bleached denim she adds a caustic lo-fi edge to these works that explore oppositional tensions and drives. The ambiguities of intense emotion, introspection and uncertainty are suggested through the urgent handling of gesso, emulsion, wash, ink and bleach.

Brice graduated from the Michaelis School of Fine Art at the UCT in 1990 and quickly established a stellar career with numerous local and international exhibitions before relocating to London in 1999.

On Thursday November 1 at 11am Brice will conduct a walkabout for the Friends of the South African National Gallery. Contact Lizzie O'Hanlon on (021) 467 4662.

Opens: October 20

Closes: November 10

Goodman Gallery Cape

3rd Floor Fairweather House, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock

Tel: (021) 462 7573

Fax: (021) 462 7579

Email: info@goodmangallerycape.com

Hours: Tue - Fri 9.30am - 5.30pm, Sat 10am - 4pm

Kevin Brand, Sanell Aggenbach and Julius Mfethe at AVA

In 'Arcadia' Kevin Brand and Sanell Aggenbach explore the implied pursuit of perfect happiness on two very different yet complementary levels. While Brand blurs the boundaries of the banal and the majestic through monumental suburban delights, Aggenbach addresses the friction between two opposing ideals, referencing Coleridge's mesmerising 'Kubla Khan'.

Brand locates his Arcadian vision within the confines of a suburban framework. His new works, in some instances, revisit ideas and extend concepts central to his lexicon of beauty within the banal. 'The pursuit of a perceived ideal has always intrigued me, be it a concept, place or object. The reduction of the imagery to a linear representation could be an indication that this quest for an Arcadian ideal is one that will sadly always be yearned for.'

In contrast to this vision, Aggenbach presents Crossfire (Two Wrongs don't make a Right) as an elegy addressing the cycle of violence and the perception that retribution deters wrongful actions. The focus of her installation falls on two opposing ideologies caught in an aftermath of hostility, which reduces two fantastical Utopian landscapes to a scene of havoc. Says Aggenbach: 'I use the parable of conflict in paradise to present a state of turmoil which comments on conflict, consequence and irrationality.'

In contrast to this vision of Arcadia, Julius Mfethe concentrates on an idealised vision of rural life, depicting the interactions between animals and people. Mfethe is a self-taught sculptor who began working as a full time artist in 1976. His wooden sculptures are characterised by an astute observation and meticulous attention to detail. The scenes and subjects, observed often with humour or reverence, translate the artist's sense of rural tradition life into wood. He is a master of his materials - indigenous woods Mbaba, Msimbiti and Mhlakothi are finely carved, capturing movement and muscle tone in his subjects in works that don't usually exceed 25cm in height.

In 1977 and 1997 Mfethe won first prize on the FNB Vita Crafts award and has had solo exhibitions at the Tatham Art Gallery, Pietermaritzburg, and at the African Art Centre in Durban.

Opens: October 22

Closes: November 9

AVA

35 Church Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 424 7436

Fax: (021) 423 2637

Email: avaart@iafrica.com

www.ava.co.za

Hours: Mon - Fri 10am - 5pm, Sat 10am - 1pm

Willem Boshoff at Michael Stevenson Gallery

A conceptual artist of great stature, Willem Boshoff's work since the late 1970s has explored the interplay of art and language in the forms of concrete poetry, dictionaries, sculptures and installations. His previous show at the Michael Stevenson Gallery, 'Licked', took place in 2003. This exhibition, entitled 'Épat', sees Boshoff extending two seminal bodies of work, Blind Alphabet and KykAfrikaans, reflecting on the vital role that trees and wood play in his oeuvre, and commenting on world politics in characteristically playful yet pointed manner.

The artist writes: 'I am awestruck by trees and, to a large extent, dependent on them, not only for their great wooden material, but also for ideas.' Boshoff has spent the last few months working from the Nirox Art Residency, part of the Cradle of Humankind world heritage site near Krugersdorp. Here he found himself surrounded by spectacular trees in an area rich with myth.

Boshoff has exhibited extensively locally and internationally, and has represented South Africa at biennales in Johannesburg (1995), São Paulo (1996), Havana (2000) and Venice (2001). A retrospective exhibition of his work will be held at the Standard Bank Gallery in Johannesburg from September 25 to December 1, 2007.

Opens: October 25

Closes: November 24

Michael Stevenson Gallery

Hill House, De Smidt Street, Green Point

Tel: (021) 421 2575

Fax: (021) 421 2578

www.michaelstevenson.com

Hours: Mon - Fri 9am - 5pm, Sat 10am - 1pm

Peter Eastman at Whatiftheworld / Gallery

Peter Eastman is best known for his emphasis on surface textures using high-gloss, reflective enamel paint. His range of cityscapes and figures formed the basis for his successful solo exhibition entitled 'Reflective' at Michael Stevenson Contemporary in 2004.

Eastman came to South Africa soon after he was born in 1976 in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. After a year at Michaelis School of Fine Art, he decided to make art on his own. He subsequently worked restoring antiquities in London before returning to Cape Town in 1998. He has had two small solo exhibitions and his work has also been included in numerous group shows. Eastman's work is included in numerous collections including the Hollard Collection, and he was selected as a finalist for both the Sasol New Signatures (2005) as well as the ABSA L'Atelier Award (2003).

Opens: November 2

Closes: December 1

whatiftheworld / Gallery

1st Floor Albert Hall, 208 Albert Road, Woodstock

Tel: (021) 448 1438

Email: info@whatiftheworld.com

www.whatiftheworld.com

Hours: Tue - Fri 10am - 4pm, Sat 10am - 3pm

Natasha Norman and Clare Sarembock at Bell-Roberts

Natasha Norman's practise is concerned with symbolism: how society creates symols, how symbols communicate ideas to us and why some symbols have become heirlooms that are passed down through generations. Having previously worked exclusively with found photographs, Norman decided to engage with the medium of fashion photography for these two bodies of work entitled 'The Allure Series'. Comparing contemporary societal behaviour with its Renaissance predecessor, Norman has staged re-enactments of Renaissance paintings, shifting the medium and their content. Natasha Norman graduated from Michaelis School of Art, UCT with a BAFA in 2005. This is Norman's first exhibition with Bell-Roberts.

Claire Sarembock's work is photography-based, but she does not refer to herself as a photographer. Taking old found photographs of her family; the artist rephotographs and appropriates these. By doing so Sarembock recontextualizes the memories of childhood and portrays them as current fact. The images are printed on canvas and then sentences are embossed in white areas on the canvas in braille. The braille becomes a metaphor for fading memories - blind people don't see imagery - they hold imagery in their mind. Just as a memory becomes translucent, Sarembock has deliberately rephotographed these images so that they are not quite in focus (imperfect, as it were), as a reference to that faded memory which is her childhood.

Opens: October 17

Closes: November 10

Bell-Roberts Contemporary

89 Bree Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 422 1100

Fax: (021) 423 3135

Email: suzette@bell-roberts.com

www.bell-roberts.com

Hours: Mon - Fri 8.30am - 5.30pm, Sat 10am - 2pm

Frauke Stegmann at CUBE

Graphic designer Frauke Stegmann's 'Domestic Desire' project is about making an inventory of everything she has acquired and kept as she moved around the world and after putting down roots in Cape Town a few years ago. The project focuses on her collection of domestic/homemaking objects sourced from various markets abroad and more from the Milnerton Market in Cape Town.

These objects, sourced initially as a way to try and recapture\re-live old memories have been adopted and have become the basis of a new collection of work, with the objects in the collection recreated to make 'new' things. The shape of each re-creation is predetermined by the autobiographical nature of the way the original pieces were acquired, but their origin is one of chance. Through the casting process required to make each object, the history of each is erased while the inherent memories each object carries are retained through the shape.

Peter Saville says of her work: 'She appreciates how the values and codes inherent in materials can be used to communicate effectively and with great economy. Her choice of "found" resources - transposed from original context and creatively repositioned - displays innovation with a remarkable and contemporary lightness of touch.' Stegmann will be included in 100@360 published by Laurence King/London as one of the world's top 100 up-and-coming graphic designers. The book is coming out at the end of 2007.

Opens: October 17

Closes: November 10

CUBE Gallery

89 Bree Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 422 1100

Fax: (021) 423 3135

Email: suzette@bell-roberts.com

www.bell-roberts.com

Hours: Mon - Fri 8.30am - 5.30pm, Sat 10am - 2pm

'The idiotic and inchoate descent into nihilism' at Michaelis Gallery

Carrie Timlin and Lily Luz present the final show in this series of one-nighters. This will however take a new form in order to run for a week and be shown at the Michaelis Gallery. The show will bring together new work by all the artists who have participated thus far with work by artists exhibiting for the first time.

The emerging criterion in this art scene is that art is fun and without the unnecessary deeper insights. However contrary to the artist's best intentions, meaning is often imputed to the most superficial expressions, as it is human nature to search for this supposed meaning. The show will therefore attempt to deal with the concept of art detached from meaning and reason.

Opens: 8 October

Closes: 15 October

Michaelis Gallery

Hiddingh Campus, Orange Street

Tel: 072 448 5065

Email: tmlcar002@yahoo.ie

'Rising' at 34Long

34 Long is showing an exhibition of Chinese art, featuring prominent contemporary Chinese artists. Many of these, although not well known in South Africa, command international respect and healthy prices at auctions. At a recent Sotheby's New York auction, five of Zhang Xiaogang's works were among the top ten sales; one fetched in excess of $2 million.

Xiaogang, widely described as 'the Van Gogh of contemporary Chinese art', uses the visual language of official photography to create haunting, subtly disturbing images in his bloodline works. A 2006 limited edition print, Family portrait from this series, will be the highlight of the exhibition. Wang Guangyi works in a style known as 'political pop'. In his Great criticism series, Cultural Revolution propaganda poster images in flat, colourful American pop style are combined with Western brand logos like Chanel, Coca-Cola, HP, Swatch and Canon.

The Luo brothers (Luo Wei Guo, Luo Wei Dong and Luo Wei Bing), all trained in fine art, come from the south of China and have been producing mixed media artworks in Beijing for many years. They lived through the Cultural Revolution, and their work speaks of the disorientation of rapid modernisation. Yue Minjun, also a hot favourite in London and New York, uses self-portait and self-parody to make apparently hilarious works with deep, dark undertones. On show will be Revolutionary Romanticism from a serigraph edition of only 60, which displays his many-toothed grin of self-mockery. Sheng Qi has gained wide recognition for his paintings of stamp-sized images of people and places lost after the Tianamen Square uprising, held in his mutilated left hand.

Opens: October 9

Closes: November 3

34Long

34 Long Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 426 4594

Email: fineart@34long.com

www.34long.com

Hours: Tue - Fri 9am - 5pm, Sat 10am - 2pm

Penny Siopis at Michael Stevenson

Penny Siopis, one of South Africa's most highly regarded and influential artists, will hold only her second solo exhibition in Cape Town. 'Lasso' will continue exploring some of the concerns developed in her 'Feral Fables' series, giving even more powerful expression to the world of the emotions and the realm of the imagination.

Using painting, drawing and film, Siopis articulates this world through a strongly associative combination of imagery, sound and narrative. As in the 'Feral Fables' paintings, which combined liquid ink washes with viscous glue, Siopis also stresses the associative qualities of her chosen medium, which is as important for conveying feeling as imagery or narrative. In this new body of work, what the artist calls 'the poetics of vulnerability' - a feature characterising her oeuvre to date - is particularly strongly manifested.

Siopis was born in Vryburg in 1953 and is based in Johannesburg, where she is Associate Professor in Fine Arts at the University of the Witwatersrand. She has exhibited widely both in South Africa and internationally, but has not held a solo exhibition in Cape Town since 1984 when she showed alongside Peter Schütz at Gallery International.

Siopis' work has been selected for 'Bound', an exhibition exploring slavery at Tate Liverpool, UK, and for 'Local Racism, Global Apartheid. South Africa as a Paradigm', curated by Pep Suboris.

Opens: September 20

Closes: October 20

Michael Stevenson Gallery

Hill House, De Smidt Street, Green Point

Tel: (021) 421 2575

Fax: (021) 421 2578

www.michaelstevenson.combr> Hours: Mon - Fri 9am - 5pm, Sat 10am - 1pm

Jeremy Wafer at Goodman Gallery Cape

In Jeremy Wafer's first solo exhibition in Cape Town, he works with the performative aspects of minimalism, and the extent to which non-representational art is produced or experienced as a close relationship between viewer and object, with all the formal elements of size and scale, orientation, shape, colour and surface related to the artist's or viewers' own physical and psychological presence.

The exhibition includes a 6 metre floor sculpture, matt and polished discs, a photographic installation of paths crossing a burnt veld, a video projection and various sets of drawings, some exploring architectural themes, while others utilise bitumen and glass respectively. Wafer explores some of the ways in which he has worked in the past. The large curved floor sculpture echoes steel and wax works made in the 1980s in a similar reference to walls and barriers, alluding to internal and external space and to notions of inclusion and exclusion that were both literal and metaphorical representations of personal states of mind which at the same time could be read in more public or political ways.

Formerly from Durban where he was a leading figure in the visual arts community, Wafer is currently head of the Wits School of the Arts, Department of Fine Arts. In 2006 he won the inaugural Sasol Wax Art Award for his mixed media installation entitled Geography. Over the years, he has been awarded numerous residencies and is represented in many public collections.

Opens: September 22

Closes: October 13

Goodman Gallery Cape

3rd Floor Fairweather House, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock

Tel: (021) 462 7573

Fax: (021) 462 7579

Email: info@goodmangallerycape.com

Hours: Tue - Fri 9.30am - 5.30pm, Sat 10am - 4pm

Johann Louw at Sanlam Art Gallery

As an artist and painter Johann Louw stands out, comments Stefan Hundt, curator of the Sanlam Art Collection and gallery. 'His ability to manipulate and model paint and engage the inner psyche of the viewer through this medium place Louw as one of the few painters that have transcended the parochial self-indulgence that has characterised contemporary art in South Africa. Although his imagery remains enigmatic and may not be clearly explicable, it has become part of the iconography reflecting South Africa's evolving society.'

Over the past 20 years Louw has stood out as one of the foremost painters in South Africa. Although he has exhibited regularly in Cape Town and Johannesburg it has been hard to form a broad overview of his oeuvre. The exhibition in the Sanlam Art Gallery will show works from when Louw completed his studies at the University of Stellenbosch in the 1980s to the present. It is supplemented by an extensively illustrated catalogue of 60 pages with contributions by Professor David Bunn (head of the department History of Art at the Wits School of the Arts) and Andries Gouws, philosopher and acclaimed painter in his own right.

Opens: September 19

Closes: November 2

Sanlam Art Gallery

2 Strand Road, Bellville

Tel: (021) 947 3359

Email: stefan.hundt@sanlam.co.za

Hours: Mon - Fri 9am - 4.30pm

Ernest Cole at Iziko SANG

Ernest Cole was a courageous young photographer who spent five years documenting everyday experiences of black South Africans under apartheid in the 1960s. Simply titled 'Ernest Cole', the exhibition is a commentary on many manifestations of apartheid, as seen through Cole's lens: the lives of migrant labourers recruited to the mines and the indignities that they were forced to endure, pass raids and arrests, the plight of domestic workers, 'Bantu' education, inadequate health care and poverty. The project culminated in the publication of House of Bondage in New York in 1967, negotiated by Magnum Photos, after Cole fled South Africa with a suitcase of his photographic prints.

The immediate banning of the book in South Africa imposed permanent exile on the photographer, who was then only 27. In the United States he undertook a project funded by the Ford Foundation, but this never reached completion and Cole finally gave up taking photographs. He died in New York in 1990, shortly before his 50th birthday and a few days after the release of Nelson Mandela.

Although the negatives for his South African images were smuggled out by fellow photographer Struan Robertson, with whom Ernest Cole had shared a darkroom in Johannesburg, their current whereabouts is unknown. In 2005, the Iziko South African National Gallery was granted funding by the National Lotteries Board to acquire a small collection of his photographic prints, possibly made in preparation for the re-publication of House of Bondage.

Opens: September 4

Closes: December 31

Iziko South African National Gallery

Government Avenue, Company Gardens, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 467 4660

Email: cquerido@iziko.org.za

www.museums.org.za/iziko

Hours: Tue - Sun 10am - 5pm

'Making waves' at Iziko Good Hope Gallery

A version of this exhibition, previously shown at the Johannesburg Art Gallery in 2004 - 5 and at the National Arts Festival in Grahamstown comes to Cape Town's Good Hope Gallery. The exhibition, which will feature approximately 100 works, attempts to provide both an interpretation of the development of South African art through the 20th century and a selection of the best contemporary work.

The historical coverage traces the emergence of a local tradition distinguishable from the earlier indigenous and Europe-derived traditions. The latter is illustrated in the work of Kay, Maggie Laubser, Alexis Preller and Irma Stern among others. The local tradition is seen as originating in the township painters from Gerard Sekoto among others in the 30s to Motjuoadi, Ngatane and Durant Sihlali in the 60s and 70s and also in the very different hybrid products of the Rorke's Drift and Polly Street art schools in the third quarter of the century.

Of pivotal importance in this process is the unique work produced in the context of political struggle after Sharpeville 1960 and Soweto 1976, seminally in the drawings of Dumile Feni and Motau in the 60s, followed in the 70s and the 80s by the work of Kumalo, Legae, Alexander, Ractliffe and others in a range of media.

In addition, distributed throughout the exhibition are examples of contemporary South African work in a range of media, including the sculptures of Jackson Hlungwane, Noria Mabasa and Peter Schütz, drawings by William Kentridge and Diane Victor, photographs by Santu Mofokeng and Guy Tillim, prints by Dan Rakgoethe and Cyprian Shilakoe, mixed media works by Sam Nhlengethwa and Tracey Rose as well as paintings by Robert Hodgins and Penny Siopis. The work of several younger artists including Gush, Nicholas Hlobo, Pieter Hugo and Churchill Madikida is also featured.

The exhibition has been curated by Koulla Xinisteris, Collection curator, and Graham Neame, Collection art advisor.

Opens: September 6

Closes: October 28

Iziko Good Hope Gallery

The Castle, Cape Town

Hours: Mon - Sun 10am - 4pm

Cara van der Westhuizen at Bell-Roberts Contemporary

Titled 'Venus Revisited', this show explores facets of feminine beauty while addressing issues of vanity and narcissism. Lithographic prints on multiple layers of glass rework and reconsider traditional representations of idealised women drawn from the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Mounted on handmade cabinets referencing the furniture of the boudoir, these subtle and enigmatic images of women as objects of desire are broken apart to show their biological interior, echoing the transparent surface upon which they are printed. This strategy of layering as a form of visual dissection draws on historically conflicting associations between external appearance and internal value associated with womanly beauty.

In these representations of the body's interior, fauna and flora merge with anatomical details. Thus, reference is made to the ambiguous historical relationship between women and nature. 'Woman' is presented as both nurturing mother and dangerously sexual other.

Having completed a diploma in graphic design (cum laude) at the Ruth Prowse School of Art in 1999, van der Westhuizen received a scholarship to study at UCT's Michaelis School of Fine Art where she completed her degree with double distinction. This is van der Westhuizen's first solo exhibition and is based in part on her Master's research at UCT.

Opens: September 19

Closes: October 10

Bell-Roberts Contemporary

89 Bree Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 422 1100

Fax: (021) 423 3135

Email: suzette@bell-roberts.com

www.bell-roberts.com

Hours: Mon - Fri 8.30am - 5.30pm, Sat 10am - 2pm

'Contusion' at Irma Stern Museum

This exhibition by three recent Michaelis graduates navigates violence in our society, reflecting on the many ways that social disturbances in our environment are experienced as dark shadows of a deeper unrest. The works try to expose the coping mechanisms that hide the collective distress or unease. A common theme in the work of all three young artists is the recognition of this shadow on the social consciousness of our society.

Suzanne Duncan uses objects usually intended to protect the body in the anticipation of injury. The absent body is projected onto these objects. These objects' inability to defend the body reveals an underlying vulnerability.

Natasha Norman explores paradoxes of violence and its representation. Her work investigates how the ever-diminishing emotional impact of viewing violent acts distorts judgement and perception. Norman was a finalist for this years' Sasol New Signatures Competition.

Dale Washkansky uses his own body as a means to access historic trauma, specifically located in a South African context. Juxtaposing quasi-naïve imagery with state iconography, Washkansky attempts to peel away the façades disguising societal violence. The resultant imagery is meant to be frustrating and confusing, acting as a symbol for the implosion of language when it faces pain. Washkansky is currently facilitating a workshop and exhibition with Siona O' Connell at !Khwa ttu.

Opens: September 26

Closes: October 16

Irma Stern Museum

Cecil Road, Rondebosch, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 685 5686

www.irmastern.co.za

Hours: Tue - Sat 10 am - 5pm

Jennifer Lovemore-Reed, Karen Cronje and Rudolph Tshie at AVA

In a follow-up to her February 2006 performance piece at Erdmann Contemporary, 'Bag-lady, clown, sycophant', Jennifer Lovemore-Reed will show 'Remnants, Relics and Reasons' at the AVA Gallery. The process of the previous performance piece will be laid open, like a collection of multi-dimensional puzzle pieces, for the public to reassemble and form a personal picture of the experience. The initial performance was done in complete silence. Unknown to the viewers, the official performance started before the artist left home for the gallery and only ended after she returned. Lovemore-Reed had set up a video camera in her work space, to tape herself talking to the camera just before departing for the performance and to tape herself upon her return. The result is two very telling pieces of footage which contain an immediate and accurate depiction of the experience of the artist before and after the performance. These pieces of footage will be central to the exhibition at the AVA. Other physical 'remnants' of the performance will also be included.

Karen Cronje will show 'Just a Little more' which aims to create elusive and intimate moments, reflecting her art-making process. The oil on canvas paintings and large drawings are not about finite definitions of closed statement but personal interrogations of process. Cronje studied at the University of Stellenbosch where she completed a Master's Degree in 2001.

Rudolph Tshie is renowned for his skill with oils, pastels and watercolour. His work aims to capture the spirit of a place and more specifically his experience of African life. He obtained a certificate in Fine Arts from the federated Union of Black Arts in JHB where he studied from 1991 - 93 and has gone on to exhibit extensively nationally in many group exhibitions and has just returned from a residence in Mauritius.

Opens: October 1

Closes: October 19

AVA

35 Church Street, Cape Town

Tel: (021) 424 7436

Fax: (021) 423 2637

Email: avaart@iafrica.com

www.ava.co.za

Hours: Mon - Fri 10am - 5pm, Sat 10am - 1pm

Leora Farber at the US Art Gallery

'Belonging' and 'displacement' are often contested terms in the language of post-colonial South Africa, where the severance of European ties is still being negotiated. In 'Dis-Location/Re-Location' Leora Farber explores these ambivalences through a dialogical relationship between South African colonial histories and lived present experience. Farber uses her image as metonym for herself and Bertha Guttmann - a Jewess brought to South Africa from Sheffield in 1885, in order to enter into an arranged marriage with the Lithuanian immigrant to South Africa, entrepreneur Sammy Marks. Residues of British and Jewish ancestry are visually and audibly grafted together with current influences from the Pan-African, post-colonial environment of Johannesburg. Ambivalences around belonging and displacement within this post-colonial environment are negotiated in relation to the artist's second-generation immigrant status.

In the work on exhibition, the amalgam of Bertha Marks and Farber is represented as engaged in needlework activities, considered as 'women's work' in the Victorian era and as a signifier of 'femininity' through docility and labour. The craft of needlework is used as a metaphor for the protagonist's attempts to negotiate a sense of being 'African' within a post-colonial environment by attempting to 'graft' a new identity physically and psychologically into herself.

This exhibition is travelling to seven art museums around the country and has been produced in collaboration with the South African design team Strangelove (Carlo Gibson and Ziemek Pater).

Opens: October 16

Closes: November 17

US Art Gallery

cnr. Dorp and Bird Streets, Stellenbosch

Tel: (021) 808 3524

Email: suz@sun.ac.za

Hours: Mon - Fri 9am - 5pm, Sat 9am - 1pm

Jürgen Schadeberg at Sasol Art Musuem

The book Voices from the Land and the photographic exhibition, which is about the lives of farmworkers, their plight, their problems, their hopes and fears, has been on Jurgen Schadeberg's mind for many years. He travelled through South Africa for two years documenting farm life and farm labour conditions, where he found some promising and positive situations where farmers are providing for their workers by giving them dignified and comfortable lives. However, many farmworkers are still living in unacceptable conditions and many are being evicted from their birth places.

'We allowed these men and women to talk about their lives and their problems, their grief and their anger. Many of the evictees we met were elderly and in bad health, a vulnerable and powerless group for which a farmer has little use, even though they might have sacrificed most of their lives in service', he notes in his introduction to the book which accompanies the exhibition.

'It is not an investigative report where judgements are made, but rather an attempt to open the eyes of society, particularly of those people in the urban areas who never come into contact with rural life and people. City dwellers buy their food in supermarkets and are presented with a tourist version of rural life while our politicians often visit the country on pre-arranged garden routes and are welcomed by cheering crowds, but they rarely stop to make surprise visits to hear the real stories of people's lives, the harrowing tales of destitution, poverty and despair', says Schadeberg.

Opens: September 5

Closes: October 13

Sasol Art Museum

52 Ryneveld Street, Stellenbosch

Tel: (021) 808 3660

Hours: Tue - Fri 9am - 4.30pm, Sat 9am - 4pm