by Don Franks

David Rovics is an established leftist political singer-songwriter, based in Portland, Oregan. He sings about workers’ struggles and anti-imperialist causes such as Irish and Palestinian freedom.

Rovics has spent over twenty years touring the world, including several visits to New Zealand. His latest album Into A PRISM is described by him as being a collection of “very topical songs about recent events such as the revelations about the NSA’s global ‘Prism’ spying program” (http://davidrovics.bandcamp.com/album/into-a-prism).

He was due to perform in Wellington next Monday night, now this will not happen. In his own words: ”When I got paged over the intercom to the All Nippon Airways desk I was nervous, but figured it was something about a seat assignment on the flight from Narita to Auckland that I was about to board. The woman from ANA handed me a cell phone and said that someone from New Zealand Immigration in Auckland wanted to talk to me.”

“Mr Rovics, why are you coming to New Zealand?”

“I’m playing six small gigs.”

“Do you have a work permit?”

“No,” I replied, “I was hoping I could get one when I arrived. I was under the impression it was a formality that could easily be taken care of when I got there.” Which is true. Although I sure was wishing I had taken care of this formality a long time before. Which is what I had done before my three previous tours of Aotearoa, aka New Zealand. The problem is, unless you live near a city with a New Zealand consulate in it, which I don’t, you have to mail your passport in to their embassy in Washington, DC, and be without a passport for several weeks, which is a logistical challenge for someone who tours as much as me.”

The immigration official then questioned Rovics about immigration hold-ups he’d encountered in Norway and Canada, asked how much money he would be bringing to New Zealand, and said he could not enter the country without a work permit.

David then asked, “ Can I cancel all my gigs and come in on a tourist visa?”

The immigration official replied to that: “You can’t board that flight. You’re not welcome in New Zealand.” Then with the comment “I’ve read your blog,” she terminated the conversation.

Clearly David Rovics is being barred for his politics, he has toured here a number of times before and was going about his entry into New Zealand in a similar manner as he has previously.

Last time in this country he played at the union-organised rally in Dunedin against the 90-day law. David Rovics may be offside with the capitalist state’s immigration department, but he is welcomed in New Zealand by the organised working class.

Immigration controls are nothing more or less than an arm of capitalist control. Human freedom demands absolute rejection of these controls.

David Rovics’ Wellington gig at Puppies will still go ahead next Monday night; in his absence various local performers will be playing his songs.

$20 is an act of solidarity with an artist who has been banned from performing his art, from earning his living.

Here is a link to the tickets: http://www.undertheradar.co.nz/ticket/2886/David-Rovics.utr

You can also donate to David directly: http://davidrovics.bandcamp.com/

His albums are pay what you want. So if you want to give him $50, buy an album for $50.