The mid-90s saw U2 engaging a great deal with film, including in Adam Clayton and Larry Mullen, Jr. recording the theme for Mission: Impossible, Bono and the Edge writing ‘Goldeneye’ for Tina Turner, and the band turning out one of its best singles, ‘Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me’ for Batman Forever. More subtle, but in keeping with the band’s love affair with post-Cold War Berlin, was the video for ‘Stay (Faraway, So Close!)’, written for Wim Wenders’ Faraway, So Close!, the sequel to/continuation of Wings of Desire. Directed by Wenders, the film acts as a continuation of those films’ aesthetic and conceit, with a distinctly musical twist.

The two Berlin films are deeply embedded in rock music already, with Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds appearing in Wings of Desire and Lou Reed (also a recorded guest on U2’s Zoo TV tour) turning up in Faraway, So Close! The video for the U2 track also picks up on the cue in Wings of Desire that the angels who descend to Earth might go on to be famous people (like Peter Falk!). In the video, U2 themselves are the angels, moving around a Berlin bus and taking an interest in people, before Edge picks up a music box (seen in Wings of Desire) and kickstarts the track. While the angels of Wenders’s world are not able to directly intervene, for the purposes of music, U2 become muses, inspirations, projecting their silence and yearning onto humans.

The central conceit of the video is of a band, led by a female singer, who are singing ‘Stay’. In colour, they pull out a show-stopping version of the song in a garage; in black and white, U2 surround them. Larry picks up some drumsticks and taps out the beat, helping the drummer keep time; Edge tweaks the tuning of the guitarist’s instrument; Adam watches beneficently. At the centre, Bono leans in to the lead singer’s microphone and mouths the words just before the woman sings them; Bono’s voice is heard as she sings. The projection is thus complete; Bono is present but also displaced from the words; the female singer takes his voice literally, but never has her own.

The angels are infused with negative capability: the state of constant yearning and expectation without realization. The song itself takes up a similar theme: ‘And if you look, you look through me / And when you talk, you talk at me / And when I touch you, you don’t feel a thing’. For one of U2’s most lovely songs, it’s also a brutal one, whose verses conjure an image of a survivor of domestic abuse (‘You say when he hits you, you don’t mind / Because when he hurts you, you feel alive’) and an inability to intervene. As such, the angels become a potent visual symbol of impotence; a desire to make difference without the ability to follow through. The Angel of Victory statue used in the film is reused here, Bono standing aloft it in the moments where we see him singing for himself, but separate from the humanity that he is screaming out to.

As such, Bono’s trajectory in the video mirrors that of the angels in Wenders’s films, as he finally descends himself for the final verse (‘just the bang and the clatter / As an angel runs to ground’). In colour, Wenders’s camera captures Bono suddenly appearing in the middle of a freeway with the bronze breastplate of an angel, tumbling over as if thrown from above; he then picks up the breastplate and begins running down the road. As opposed to the more existential musings that prompt Wenders’s film angels to Earth, here the choice seems to emerge from Bono’s desire to connect, to intervene – to protect the addressee of the song or the dying man he encounters held in the arms of a female angel.

The music video (and of course the song) is a beautiful accompaniment to Wenders’s vision. If Wings of Desire is about cinema’s (in)ability to create connection, then ‘Stay’ becomes the musical counterpart to that, in which music offers the desire to connect but a desire which is so often one-way, the efforts of a rock star to create mass intimacy equated with the angel who moves silently through a population that doesn’t notice. Faraway, yet so close; music creates the impression of intimacy without the actual human connection, especially when that music is carried on radio-waves. And so, as with Bruno Ganz’s angel before him, Bono’s angel crashes to Earth.