Never be ashamed of having a crush on Pollyanna Mcintosh I'm a crusher

British, Actress (Famous from Exam)

Votes Ranking Boost Ranking

Pollyanna Mcintosh ranks , and ranks among all celebrities on .

Pollyanna Mcintosh is straight and has been downright flaming -- she is breaking our gaydar! Don't get me wrong but the manliest men often have man-crushes on effeminate men. It makes them feel even more manly. She has dark brown hair. Scroll down and check out her slim body, short and/or medium dark brown hairstyles & haircuts.

2 Ways to Vote her Up!

1. Hit the "Tweet" button at the top ↑

2. Tell us "why you have a crush on her"

Refresh this page to see the "Crushers" increase after you "Like" or vote.

Why People Have A Crush On Pollyanna Mcintosh

Rated by 50+ girl-crushers

'INTENSE'. British horror film. I expected more, but their stress puts you on edge. Perfect role of Pollyanna McIntosh -- Mario Gonzalez M ..

May 23, 2015 at 04:55AM DreadCentral "Review: Let Us Prey (Blu-ray / DVD): Starring Pollyanna McIntosh, Liam Cunningham, Douglas Russell Di -- HoRRoR

Pollyanna Mcintosh Nude Female Celebrity Scenes Pictures and Videos: -- Nude Scenes

LA ÚLTIMA MUJER Protagonistas: Angela Bettis, Pollyanna McIntosh, Sean Bridgers. 3:00 AM -- Pánico

Steve Oram, Edward Hogg and Pollyanna McIntosh are among cast attached to UK portmanteau horror Its Walls Were Blood -- vision vision

New release info | "The Blood Lands" - Horror, Mystery, Thriller - Staring: Pollyanna McIntosh, Lee Williams, Joanne Mitchell, James ++ -- Cinema Usher - Qatar

The Woman (2011) has to be one of the most original horror films I've seen in a long time. Becoming quite the fan of Pollyanna Mcintosh. -- Christopher

Watched a movie called The Woman with Pollyanna McIntosh. She was by far the best thing in it. Amazing perfomance... But gruesome! -- Dean Harkness

Let Us Preyremote police station takes over the minds and souls of everyone. Liam Cunningham, Pollyanna McIntosh, 4:10 - 5:45 AM Showcase -- GymBunsenBurner

4. Pollyanna McIntosh -- raspoutine

IMDb. Most popular Females/Males. Chris Geere, You're the Worst. Pollyanna McIntosh, The Woman. Nicole Sullivan, MADTv. -- GSmith

Pollyanna McIntosh, Neil Sandilands, what kinds of fake names are these -- Hell Baby

Pollyanna McIntosh and Jimmi Simpson in Hap and Leonard: Power Couple -- Matt Lavendurrr

Christina Hendricks and Pollyanna Mcintosh helped -- əˈraɪli

Pollyanna McIntosh ( ) -- Bavariya

Adoro antologia de Terror mas esse TALES OF HALLOWEEN não rolou. Mesmo tendo a Pollyanna McIntosh de bruxa e homenagdem à Adrianne Barbeau -- Hector Lima

Watchin this film on Netflix called WHITE SETTLERS j think it's gonna be like Eden lake but with pollyanna mcintosh in, I fucking love her -- pink volcano slug

254 Let Us Prey, decent, cool psychological elements, slasher parts were same-old, Liam Cunningham and Pollyanna McIntosh rock -- Rick Regan

Pollyanna McIntosh is one of my favorite horror ladies. She's so stellar!!! -- choc chip charlie 🎃

Pollyanna McIntosh is in it, though. She was fantastic in THE WOMAN. -- Natalie

Pollyanna McIntosh is in it, though. She was fantastic in THE WOMAN. -- Natalie ⚰️ 💊

Today's underrated is 2014's Let Us Prey, making it Pollyanna McIntosh's second appearance on this list. -- Spines Podcast

Pollyanna McIntosh would be perfect for The Witches remake!!! -- TiffyCatSGH

Jadis (Pollyanna McIntosh) kinda looks like Milla Jovovich. She's so pretty. -- // マリエル //

Pollyanna McIntosh is the female Tim Curry -- steinein ツ

Jadis is played by McIntosh. Not exactly a bad ass name -- Peter Baumgartner

Pollyanna McIntosh she's so purdy irl with a British accent. here for her. -- ✊ Katniss 👊

Pollyanna McIntosh--of The Woman and White Settlers--is in Pretty awesome. -- Horror Homeroom

She is about to get real famous. -- 🦈

I love pollyanna mcintosh tho she is a babe and i would be jadis' slave tbh -- akeldama

Pollyanna McIntosh ("The Woman," "Let Us Prey") is on . I think she's pretty awesome. -- Michelle

OMG POLLYANNA MCINTOSH IS GOING TO BE ON THE WALKING DEAD!!!! IM SO F EXCITED! -- 🖤💋☠️Cortney☠️💋🖤

pollyanna mcintosh is so beautiful, if we get married can we get the entire junkyard with the Gladiator Pit? -- BEAST FROM THE EAST

This Pollyanna McIntosh is just the latest in a lot of Brits on The Walking Dead. -- CEM

The lack of Negan recently is making this stretch so much more bearable. More Pollyanna McIntosh and Trevor Phillips plz -- Joel Elvis Harley

Another Walking Dead shocker Pollyanna McIntosh who portrays Jadus is: a) British b) Actually delightful in person -- Jason / 제이슨 / ジェイソン

Pollyanna Mcintosh ( Jadis on ) looks so much like Milla Jovovich -- Kimmy

It is THAT Pollyanna McIntosh! -- Lisa Carol Fremont✂

Is it too early to stan Jadis and Pollyanna McIntosh -- ♢Quinnie♢

So cool seeing Pollyanna McIntosh (Jadis) on The Walking Dead. She's hot, talented, and a total badass in every horror movie she's in. -- Mateo Samora

Pollyanna McIntosh hat so eine grenzdebile Frisur. -- Shrimpsmann

Good morning, I loved New Best Friends. Everybody is growing, characters are developing, Rosita is an idiot, Pollyanna McIntosh is hot, bye. -- Fe5e;the 5 is silent

Sweet. Pollyanna mcintosh from the woman is on this week's walking dead. The woman is a great film. -- Anthony Smith

She is about to get real famous. -- Me🦈

Pollyanna McIntosh (Jadis from twd) is so beautiful I like the haircut tbh (something I can't do on mine) -- Ana

If you were wondering what my type is (and, c'mon, of course you were), Pollyanna McIntosh in HAP AND LEONARD is 100% it. -- Stephen Bowie

I love pollyanna mcintosh but jadis needs to fucking go -- Maylin 💕

I wouldn't touch Jadis on the show, but the woman that plays her, Pollyanna McIntosh, can get the cock -- T'Challa🇬🇲

Anything with Pollyanna McIntosh in it will be a delight. watching Let Us Prey Movie -- Cort Psyops

Wow, Pollyanna McIntosh's wardrobe at the end of S1E1 of Hap and Leonard is... well... EVERYTHING -- Stuart Barr