Pollyanna McIntosh was born on 15th March 1979 in Edinburgh, she is a director and actress known for her roles in films and TV shows.

McIntosh grew up in Portugal and Colombia before returning to her birthplace of Scotland, where she first began performing, on stage, at The Edinburgh Festival. At 16, she left for London and soon became involved in indie filmmaking, her first paid gig was unaccredited as a stoner in the Irvine Welsh triptych The Acid House. She moved moved to LA in 2004 where she appeared mainly on stage her biggest role of note was in the stage production The Woolgatherer before she earned her first big screen role, Stacy in 2005’s fantasy horror film, Headspace in 2005.

Although there is not much about her channel hopping Pollyanna must have been in demand in both the US and over this side of the Atlantic, she turned up in an episode of Taggart in 2009, and some low key US TV movies and a small part in Burke & Hare alongside David Hayman and Simon Pegg. Her first lead role was in a movie called The Woman which won a few awards around the European film festivals.

Back on the TV front Pollyanna was back over here in Waterloo Road and appeared in five of the six episodes of Bob Servant Independent, with the brilliant Brian Cox, the same year she turned up in her second Irvine Welsh film, Filth, with James McAvoy. McIntosh also played a regular in the Children's BBC show M I High as Crime Minster.

Pollyanna's first major role over in America was in Hap and Leonard a television drama series where she starred as Angel in Season one, she went on to star in two Seasons of the popular series Walking Dead as Anne 'Jadis' and has a recurring role in comedy-drama Lodge 49.

We're going to see more of Pollyanna in the tha coming year or so, first up is horror thriller Revenge Ride about a young woman who joins an all-female gang and seeks revenge on a group of college American football players. She is reprising her role as Anne "Jadis" in The Walking Dead Movie and sticking with the horror theme that she has found her niche, she has a starring role in a Western-Horror called The Moonshine Gang of Cheyenne.

McIntosh does her bit for charity, campaigning for the Joshua Nolan Foundation, raising funds for counselling sessions for grief-stricken relatives and those at risk of suicide, she is married to Grant Show who plays Blake Carrington in the reboot of Dynasty. She was back home in Edinburgh last year to talk about her career at Edinburgh International Film Festival.