Noboru Iguchi's Sukeban Boy (Oira sukeban) is scheduled to be screened at the 2006 Fantasia Festival in Montréal on Sunday July 16th at 2:10 p.m.. King Record Co. Ltd. (Kingu Rekôdo K.K.) released the movie theatrically in Japan on February 4th, and on sale DVD (KIBF-361; NTSC, region 2, no subtitles) there on March 8th.

As was reported here on ScreenAnarchy back on January 6th, the screenplay for Sukeban Boy was written by Iguchi, based on the eponymous manga serial by Gô Nagai. The movie's principal cast is as follows (listed order corresponds to Japanese DVD covers): Asami, Emiru Momose, Saori Matsunaka, Shizuka Itô, Demo Tanaka, Chisa Imai, Shô Sawamura, Kaori, Miwa, Kentarô Kishi, Hiroaki Murakami, and Beat Arima (Bîto Arima). The rest of its cast apparently includes Atsuko Miura, Kôichi Ôhori (on top), Risa Mizuki (Miduki Risa), and Junna Ayukawa.

Here's a description of Sukeban Boy that was written by ScreenAnarchy's own Todd Brown, a Fantasia Festival programmer: "Sukeban has a problem. The foulmouthed, hard-fighting son of a biker, the teenaged boy has been cursed with the looks of a pop princess. The looks lead to teasing, the teasing leads to fighting, the fighting leads to expulsions - expulsions from every boys' high school in the region. What's a biker who's nurturing conflicted feelings for his gender-confused child to do in such a situation? Simple! Dress the boy up as a girl and enroll him in an all-girls high school. But girls' schools are strange, disturbing places and, within a day of arriving, Sukeban has been signed up for humiliation classes and forced to do battle with the various school gangs: the Pantyhose League, the No-Bra League, and - of course - the Full Strip League. Wasting no opportunities to spread jiggling flesh across the screen, is SUKEBAN BOY a blazingly funny parody of the schoolgirl fetish film, or simply one of the most memorable fetish films ever made? By the time the nipple clamps and breast guns make an appearance, you simply won't care. Bizarre, hysterical and horribly wrong in absolutely all the right ways, SUKEBAN BOY is an unmissable guilty pleasure."

Iguchi's other directing credits include Nekome kozô, Manji, Snake Girl (Madara no shôjo) - one of the movies in the Kazuo Umezu's Horror Theater (Umezu Kazuo: kyôfu gekijô) hexalogy - Saishû seiki! Natsume Nana - kyûkyoku no erosu, Impolite Education (18-kin - abunai kankei: the kinshinsôkan), the short "Evil Guy" ("Yôchû no harawata") - a.k.a. "Entrails of a Larva" - and A Larva to Love (Koi suru yôchû).