The Hall of Famer basketball player, Kevin Garnett moved to the Boston Celtics in 2007. He made an instant impact on the team and the city and won the NBA championship the very next year for the team with a clutch performance in the finals.

‘The Big Ticket’ has shown his love and admiration for the city of Boston in every way possible. Going down memory lane, he shared a video of his ceremonial pitch for the Boston Red Sox back in 2007.

Nerves and cheers: Garnett’s memorable first pitch

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

Kevin Garnett’s unforgettable night at Fenway Park solidified his status as a passionate Red Sox fan and a beloved addition to the Boston sports scene. Despite the nerves before his ceremonial first pitch, Garnett delivered a lob to his old friend David Ortiz.

His pitch earned cheers from the crowd. In his new Red Sox jersey, donning #5, he immersed himself in the game while meeting Boston legends Larry Lucchino and Carlton Fisk.

Amusingly, Garnett after throwing his pitch, said, “Man, I need to get some ice. I wasn’t nervous, or afraid, just anxious.”

Also read: “Family” Duty Might Stop LeBron James From His “Last” Team USA Return Before 2024 Paris Olympics

Throughout the game, Garnett exhibited his animated and enthusiastic fandom, cheering Ortiz on. As the night drew to a close, he made sure to experience the iconic eighth-inning Sweet Caroline sing-along before departing.

Garnett’s connection with Boston was sealed, as he received a standing ovation from the fans. He left the fans eagerly anticipating his future appearances at Fenway Park and his future in the TD Garden.

A touching throwback: Kevin Garnett’s Instagram video brings back memories

It has been 16 years since Kevin Garnett threw the ceremonial pitch at the home of the Boston Red Sox, Fenway Park. In 2007, the NBA Hall of Famer moved from the Minnesota Timberwolves to the Boston Celtics in a significant deal.

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

The trade sent shockwaves to the NBA world. From the beginning, Garnett engaged himself in the city’s sports culture, appreciating its long past and loyal fans.

He shared a touching video of his special pitch on his Instagram story. This brought back good memories for both him and his many fans. Along with the film, he wrote: “Damn Time Be Flying”.

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

This simple thought shows how much Garnett loves Boston and its famous sports history. Fans will always remember the special connection between a renowned player and a city that holds a special place in his heart.