Watch: Kevin Garnett admits he barked at Jeff Teague during playoff game

Everyone has a podcast nowadays and Kevin Garnett is always a great interview. He was the latest guest on Jeff Teague's Club 520 podcast where KG confirms that yes he did get on his hands and knees and growl at Teague during a playoff game while the big ticket was a member of the Boston Celtics.

Kevin Garnett headlines 4 with MN ties on list of best athletes of the 21st century

How great is Kevin Garnett? He's the best player in Timberwolves franchise history, among the long list of elites in Boston Celtics lore, and clearly one of the great professional athletes of the 21st century.

Kevin Garnett Defends Knicks Star Julius Randle

The New York Knicks have been zeroed in on Jalen Brunson and Mikal Bridges as the team's top two stars for the past few weeks. Brunson recently signed a four-year contract extension just weeks after the team traded for Bridges, but someone who shouldn't be forgotten about is power forward Julius Randle.

Introducing Your New Canis Hoopus Site Manager

Hey fellow Wolves fans! I’m thrilled to take a moment to introduce myself to you. My name is Derek Hanson, and I’ve recently been appointed as the site manager for Canis Hoopus.

Kevin Garnett: Lakers’ LeBron James Could Play 10 More Years In Warriors’ Draymond Green Role

Even at 39 years old, Los Angeles Lakers star LeBron James continues to amaze and impress his peers and basketball fans across the world. While he might not be at the peak of his powers anymore, James remains one of the best players in the NBA and he proved his status after he was chosen to play for Team USA in the upcoming 2024 Olympics in Paris.

Boston Celtics Legend Kevin Garnett Sends Out Viral Post About LeBron James

LeBron James is still among the best players in the NBA at 39. The future Hall of Famer is currently playing for Team USA, and they had their first exhibition game on Wednesday evening (against Canada).

Kevin Garnett Throws Shade At Draymond Green While Describing LeBron James' Role In Team USA

Kevin Garnett recently took to Twitter to throw some shade at Draymond Green while praising LeBron James. His tweet subtly critiques Green by suggesting that LeBron, even at 39, could easily fill Green's shoes.

Kevin Garnett Says He Is Better Than Tim Duncan

Kevin Garnett's bold statement on a segment of Complex's 'I Got Time Today' where he claimed to be a better player than Tim Duncan stirs up an age-old debate between two of the NBA's greatest power forwards. "I would say so.

Dwyane Wade Says 2008 Boston Celtics Featuring Kevin Garnett, Paul Pierce Exaggerated Success

The 2008 Boston Celtics were largely the first of their kind when they paired Paul Pierce with Kevin Garnett and Ray Allen. The Celtics won a championship in their first season together but were unable to accomplish much the remainder of their time together.

Kevin Garnett Reacts To Boston Celtics NBA Championship

On Monday evening, the Boston Celtics beat the Dallas Mavericks in Game 5 of the NBA Finals by a score of 106-88. They have now won their first NBA Championship since the 2008 season when Rajon Rondo, Kevin Garnett, Ray Allen and Paul Pierce were on the roster.

Watch: Jayson Tatum recreates iconic Kevin Garnett moment after winning NBA Finals with Boston Celtics

Jayson Tatum took the Boston fans back in time as the Celtics claimed the championship at the TD Garden after 16 years. The arena was buzzing with cheers in 2008 as the fans celebrated their 17th title on the same day.

Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett go crazy after Celtics’ 18th NBA title

It took exactly 16 years for the Boston Celtics and their faithful to get back to this moment. Despite this, the formula for winning the NBA Finals has stayed the same.

Kevin Garnett Comes to Celtics' Defense Ahead of NBA Finals

The Boston Celtics steamrolled through the regular season, registering a 64-18 record. Finishing atop the NBA standings earned them home-court advantage throughout a playoff run that's now four wins from Banner 18.

Why Kevin Garnett Believes It’s the Boston Celtics’ ‘Time’ Amid Championship Run

Thanks to an impressive run this season, various personalities are already claiming that the Boston Celtics’ time to win a ring is now. Among those who share this sentiment is former NBA champion and franchise legend Kevin Garnett.

'I’m part wolf, part Celtic!' Kevin Garnett’s loyalty gets tested if former teams Celtics play Wolves in finals

Kevin Garnett, a Hall of Famer, has found himself in a unique position as both the Boston Celtics and Minnesota Timberwolves make their way to the Conference Finals.

Kevin Garnett Reveals Plans to Attend Timberwolves vs Mavericks

The Minnesota Timberwolves are going to the Western Conference Finals. That’s right, it is happening. For the first time in 20 years, too. In fact, the last time the Wolves made it this far, a prime Kevin Garnett was the centerpiece of the squad that did it, back in 2003-04.

OTD (2004): Kevin Garnett Gets Ready for War

The Minnesota Timberwolves dominated the Denver Nuggets last night in game 6 of the NBA Western Conference semifinals, forcing only the second game 7 in franchise history and the first in 20 years.

Kevin Garnett Prophesized Timberwolves Gm 3 Loss, Soft Refs Included

After taking the first two games of the series by an average margin of victory of 16.5 points, the Minnesota Timberwolves and their fanbase (including Kevin Garnett) were feeling very confident as the NBA Playoffs went back to Target Center for a home matchup with the Denver Nuggets.