BOSTON – Following his introductory press conference with the Boston Celtics in 2007, Kevin Garnett took in the renowned history of the organization that resides in the TD Garden rafters.

Now Garnett, who spent six seasons with the Celtics and was a centerpiece to the team’s 2008 NBA title, won’t be able to look skyward in the arena again without seeing his No. 5 hanging next to the other all-time Celtics’ greats.

On Sunday, the Celtics honored Garnett by forever retiring his jersey number as he became the 24th member of the organization to have the honor bestowed upon him.

“I came in here and I looked up at the banners and I just manifested not only a championship, but seeing myself immortal in the ceiling,” Garnett told the crowd in attendance following Boston’s 95-92 loss to the Dallas Mavericks.

Garnett made an immediate impact in Boston when the Celtics traded five players and two first-round picks to the Minnesota Timberwolves for the 6-foot-11 power forward.

More: Tom Brady changes mind on retirement, will return to Buccaneers to play 23rd NFL season

More: Who, what, when + where: MIAA high school hockey and basketball Final Four schedule is set

In his first season donning the green and white, Garnett’s unselfish nature permeated throughout the rest of the team, especially on the defensive end of the court as Garnett earned NBA Defensive Player of the Year honors that season, becoming the only player in Celtics history to accomplish the feat.

Garnett, a 15-time All-Star who was inducted in the Naismith Hall of Fame in 2020 after retiring in 2016, was a key catalyst alongside Paul Pierce and Ray Allen to end a 22-year title drought for the Celtics when Boston defeated the Los Angeles Lakers in six games to capture the organization’s 17th championship.

Garnett, who is one of three NBA players to ever compile at least 20,000 points and 10,000 rebounds for his career, cemented his status in Celtics lore by obtaining that championship ring. Garnett called that playoff run a “magical ride” as he averaged 20.4 points and 10.5 rebounds during that postseason.

“KG embodies the heart and soul of what it means to be a Celtic,” said Celtics Co-Owner and Alternate Governor Steve Pagliuca in a statement. “His selflessness and team leadership were critical to bringing a 17th banner back to Boston. He proved that nothing is impossible when you play as a team and trust each other. He is simply the best.”

More: BC High boys basketball takes down Central Catholic to soar into Div. 1 state semifinals

Many of Garnett’s former teammates, including Pierce, Allen, Eddie House, Leon Powe, James Posey, Kendrick Perkins and Glen Davis, were on hand for the festivities.

Pierce thanked Garnett for what he did for him and his teammates as by coming to Boston, Garnett awoke a then-slumbering franchise that endured an 18-game losing streak in the season prior to the Big Ticket’s arrival.

“What better to revive a franchise than with the energy Kevin brought,” Pierce said. “He brought Celtics pride back.”

Garnett’s patented, full-throttle intensity that also became his calling card during his stint with the Celtics was on display numerous times throughout his ceremony as he soaked in the moment from mid-court, receiving deafening cheers of adulation from the crowd.

Once handed the microphone, Garnett’s emotions poured out of him and in typical Garnett fashion, he couldn’t keep what he was feeling profanity-free.

“I knew you all (expletive) with me, but I didn’t know you all (expletive) with me like this,” said Garnett for the unwavering appreciation he received from the crowd.

Garnett also took time to shout out Allen as it has been rumored for years that there has been animosity between Allen and the rest of his former Celtics teammates, including Garnett. Allen wasn’t in attendance when Pierce had his number retired in 2018.

But Garnett’s big day seemed to heal some of the wounds and Garnett insinuated that the Celtics should retire Allen’s No. 20 next to have him complete his era’s Big Three in the rafters.

“I want to say something, it’s good to see Ray Allen here,” said Garnett as he, Allen and Pierce embraced with a hug at center court. “It’s good to see you here, Ray. You next.”

Before Garnett reminisced about his days with the Celtics, he took in the game from a courtside seat and even had a moment with Jaylen Brown late in the second quarter.

After Brown split a pair of Mavericks defenders, he accelerated and climbed the ladder to throw down a vicious slam dunk over 6-foot-10 forward Maxi Kleber. The posterization of Kleber brought Garnett out of his seat as Brown let out a primal scream in celebration and gave Garnett a high-five before getting back on defense.

While Garnett’s competitive nature shone through on the day that he was honored, there were times he held back tears.

But when Garnett finally raised his number to the rafters with the help of his two daughters, he couldn’t keep the tears from streaming down his face.

Garnett had achieved what he set out to do when he first came to Boston, and with it, he left an indelible mark on the Celtics that will never be wiped away and Garnett is now firmly situated where all the greats that play for the organization end up.

“I want to thank all y’all, man. It’s been real, man,” said Garnett in his final words to the crowd. “I would have never thought y’all loved me like this. I love you, Boston.”