Kevin Garnett resuscitated the Boston Celtics franchise. From Paul Pierce to Rajon Rondo, Kendrick Perkins, Doc Rivers, and Danny Ainge, he had a profound impact, elevating the careers of many in the organization, not just his teammates.

The Basketball Hall of Famer who helped lead the Celtics to Banner 17, besting the Los Angeles Lakers in 2008, may have raised even more championship flags to the TD Garden rafters had it not been for injuries.

The former league MVP suffered a season-ending knee injury during a 2009 campaign that Boston was noticeably better than its title team the year before.

They then got within one of defeating the purple and gold again in the Finals before Kendrick Perkins sustained a knee injury early in Game 6 that knocked him out of the series. They gave up 23 offensive rebounds in the deciding tilt.

Because Garnett "only" lifted the Larry O'Brien Trophy once during his six years with the Celtics, he expressed on KG Certified that he didn't believe he had a good enough resume to have his No. 5 retired alongside the franchise's other legends.

Paul Pierce, who's No. 34 also rests in the rafters at TD Garden, let him know that's not the case.

"Your impact in Boston, changing the culture. Bringing that presence. It was a different glow in that building."

The 2008 NBA Finals MVP nailed it. Garnett's immediate and immeasurable impact extends far beyond what he did on the court or the championship he brought to Boston.

Not only is the impact of his leadership and the franchise rejuvenation he's responsible for still felt today, but he and Pierce even provided a parting gift on their way out of the organization, with the Celtics acquiring the picks that eventually became current cornerstones, Jayson Tatum and Jaylen Brown.

It's the cherry on top of a tenure that undeniably earned Garnett a place alongside the other greats that propelled the team into one of the most storied franchises in sports.

Further Reading

Jayson Tatum Opens Up About Sacrificing in Celtics' Title Pursuit: 'It's a Process'

Jaylen Brown Praises All-Star Snub: 'Excelling His Game at a Rapid Pace'

Jayson Tatum Addresses Discourse Around His MVP Candidacy

Jaylen Brown Doesn't Win Dunk Contest but Delivers Most Poignant Moment

Kristaps Porzingis Shares How First Season with Celtics Compares to His Expectations: 'Haven't Stopped Smiling'

Jayson Tatum's Approach vs. Nets Tale of Two Halves and Steadfast Commitment

Brad Stevens Discusses Celtics' Plan for Final Roster Spot

Brad Stevens Sheds Light on Celtics' Motivations for Xavier Tillman Trade

Marcus Smart Shares How Boston Shaped Him, His Message to Celtics Fans

Celtics Maturation Molded by Experience: 'It Builds, Like, an Armor'

Jaylen Brown Quieting Doubters, Validating What He Always Believed: 'Earn Everybody's Trust'