WPKN is a 10,000-watt listener-supported community radio station broadcasting at 89.5 FM and streaming online at WPKN.org. WPKN’s terrestrial signal now serves a potential listenership of 1.5 million people in Connecticut, Long Island, and parts of New York and Massachusetts. Programs on WPKN include live and recorded music, news, public affairs, and spoken word. WPKN’s volunteer programmers present a wide variety of music and alternative information, in an eclectic mix of free-form programming that seeks to serve those whose needs are not met by mainstream media in a unique and vibrant way. WPKN’s programming mix is a cornucopia of genres and styles. From the obscure to the recognizable, it is presented by informed programmers who help listeners discover and rediscover the best in live and recorded performance. Some of our self-produced talk/news oriented shows, such as Between the Lines, are nationally recognized. WPKN is proud of its bold independence and its fearlessness to program without any strings attached. Generations of our dedicated and loyal audience have defined us as the real alternative to an increasingly homogeneous and limited choice in broadcast radio.

Read more

WPKN is a 10,000-watt listener-supported community radio station broadcasting at 89.5 FM and streaming online at WPKN.org. WPKN’s terrestrial signal now serves a potential listenership of 1.5 million people in Connecticut, Long Island, and parts of New York and Massachusetts. Programs on WPKN include live and recorded music, news, public affairs, and spoken word. WPKN’s volunteer programmers present a wide variety of music and alternative information, in an eclectic mix of free-form programming that seeks to serve those whose needs are not met by mainstream media in a unique and vibrant way. WPKN’s programming mix is a cornucopia of genres and styles. From the obscure to the recognizable, it is presented by informed programmers who help listeners discover and rediscover the best in live and recorded performance. Some of our self-produced talk/news oriented shows, such as Between the Lines, are nationally recognized. WPKN is proud of its bold independence and its fearlessness to program without any strings attached. Generations of our dedicated and loyal audience have defined us as the real alternative to an increasingly homogeneous and limited choice in broadcast radio.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes