The WPKN Music Mash RETURNS! It’s a grand celebration of listener-supported WPKN-FM, Bridgeport. JOIN THE BIG VINYL DIG at Read’s Artspace, 1042 Broad Street in downtown Bridgeport. PLENTY OF FREE PARKING! Over 40 tables of LPs, CDs, 45s, and who knows what else. $5.00 admission (9:30 AM) Early admission at 8AM ($15) or come in with the dealers (EXTRA EARLY $25) at 7 AM. Dealers from all over the Connecticut area and beyond. All types of music, from classic rock to punk, funk & hip hop. Great live DJs, beer and Record Store Day surprises too. Hope to meet you in the bargain bins!

What is MUSIC MASH ’23:

MUSIC MASH ’23 is a Record Fair produced by nonprofit, community radio station WPKN 89.5-FM. It has a bit more sizzle than the traditional record fairs–MUSIC MASH ’23 presents 50+ tables from dealers all over New England selling vinyl LPs, 45s, CDs and music collectibles. There will be LIVE music WPKN DJs and celebs spinning discs as well as food and drink options. Family friendly!

When is it and where is it?

Saturday, April 22, 2023 at the Read’s Artspace, located in downtown Bridgeport, at 1042 Broad Street. This former department store, features a well-lit massive gallery site on the entire ground floor. Exit 27 North and South off I-95. The location is a 5-minute walk from Metro North (convenient for New York City, and New Haven), and a 3-minute cab ride from the Port Jefferson Ferry terminal in Bridgeport.

Free Parking:

FREE outdoor parking across from Read’s Artspace with access to the lot from Cannon Street. FREE-on-street. Meters are NOT enforced in Bridgeport on Saturdays. Please–no parking at Reads. It is private and subject to towing.

Music Mash Hours:

7 AM to 5 PM on Saturday

Admission:

SUPER early admission starts at 7 AM (“Come in with the dealers!” for $25—Eventbrite only). Regular early Bird hours are from 8 AM to 9:30 AM. These tickets are $15 and allow first viewing of what is for sale. For many that’s a BIG deal. From 9:30 AM to 5:30 PM admission is $5 for adults, $3 for students. Children under 12 years old are FREE.

Who is Selling:

We are working with Record Riots, America’s leading chain of record shows (19 shows in 8 states!). We have many of the top dealers in New England specializing is all types and formats (vinyl LPs, 45s, CDs) of music from Jazz, Rock, Blues, World, Motown, New Wave, Reggae, Punk, Ephemera, Soul, Disco, Surf, Country, Rockabilly, R&B and more. Also, there are vendors selling books, posters, artwork and other collectibles. Prices will range from $1 to $1,000. WPKN-FM has several thousand donated LPs it will offer.

Restaurants: Food truck, local specials, beer from Two Roads Brewing Company and Berlinetta. Special discounts to Music Mash-goers.

Sponsors: Park City Music Hall is our marketing partner. Two Roads Brewing Company; Berlinetta Brewing Community Radio WPKN 89.5-FM and the Bridgeport DSSD.