Soumitra Ranade’s ‘Albert Pinto Ko Gussa Kyun Aata Hai’, a version 2.0 of its earlier avatar by Saeed Akhta Mirza will be the Opening Film of the 8th Jagran Film Festival in Mumbai on 18 September 2017.

The Festival running between 18-24 September 2017 at Mumbai’s Fun Republic, Andheri West, shall screen the film in the evening at 6.30 attended by the film’s cast and crew Nandita Das, Manav Kaul and Saurabh Shukla among others. The film, a tribute to its earlier version traces the story of Albert Pinto.

The story unfolds as one early morning Albert Pinto leaves his house without telling anyone where he is going. His girlfriend Stella, his mother and his brother Dominic are concerned about his safety. They file a missing complaint with the Police. When Albert doesn’t return even after a few weeks, they begin to fear. What they don’t know is that Albert is traversing a road journey from Mumbai to Goa. Nayar who drives the vehicle accompanies him on his mission. While Albert is an educated youth from a middle-class family, Nayar is a man from the streets. Through their sometimes cynical, sometimes witty and sometimes devastating conversations, we see the plot unfold. Albert’s anger stems from the experiences that life has presented to him – the personal injustice done to his father and the injustice done to a large section of humanity. It is this anger that is taking him to Goa, to settle a score that he believes will relieve him of his helplessness and enable him to lead a life of dignity and hope.

An alumnus of Sir J.J. School of Arts Mumbai and FTII Pune, Film’s Director Soumitra Ranade has been involved for the last 25 years in writing, directing and producing a wide range of animation and live-action projects in feature films, TV serials, documentaries and short experimental genres. His work has been showcased at various prestigious international film festivals including Toronto, Busan, Dubai, Oberhausen, IFFLA, River-to-River, Annecy, Hiroshima, Mumbai, Rotterdam and many others.

His most famous works include the children’s feature films Jajantaram Mamantaram and Goopi Gawaiyaa Bagha Bajaiyaa and animated TV Serials Karadi Tales and Bandbudh Aur Budbak. His documentary on Afghanistan ‘Khoob Asti Afghanistan’ was screened at many international film festivals.