PAUL LAWRIE took loads of tips from fellow pros to rise to the highest levels of world golf.

But it’s the generous tip his taxi driver dad received in the 1980s that Lawrie still looks back on as the making of his career.

His old man Jim was a cabbie in Aberdeen and you have to wonder if it was luck or destiny he should one day pick up businessman Stuart Spence.

During their journey the usual cabbie small talk turned to golf and, seizing on their shared interest, Lawrie senior mentioned his teenage son’s desire to become a professional.

What followed was an incredible offer that gave young Lawrie the financial backing to chase his dream all the way to an Open Championship victory and two Ryder Cups.

And to this day Spence’s generosity inspires the world No.31 to give kids the same chance he was afforded.

Lawrie said: “I was helped when I was young. Stuart Spence and Martin Gilbert of Aberdeen Asset Management helped me beyond belief.

“Especially Stuart. He didn’t have to help me, he didn’t know me. My dad was a taxi driver and he gave Stuart a couple of lifts home and they got chatting about golf and he said, ‘My boy is a golfer, he wants to be a pro’.

“So he said, ‘Ask him to come out and see me’ and then Martin gave me a car and a credit card. Mad stuff like that.

“Having met Stuart and spent time with him I realised he helps lots of people. So I thought, I’d quite like to be what he is – I’d like to give back as much as I can.”

He has certainly proved true to his word. Since setting up the Paul Lawrie Foundation in 2001, more than 8000 youngsters in the north east have been given the chance to take up the sport.

His network has already borne fruit with twice Scottish Amateur champion David Law leading a list of star pupils who have progressed to the pro ranks and been inspired by his support.

But inspiration can be a two-way street and Lawrie recalls a recent moment when he was the one re-energised by a meeting with a golfer whose dedication to the sport simply blew him away.

When Lawrie agreed to take part in Sky Sports News’ series ‘My Special Day’ he met Thomas Brock, a young fan who plays golf despite having a prosthetic limb.

The 18-year-old Aberdonian was already a keen golfer when he was diagnosed with cancer in his left foot, forcing surgeons to amputate below the knee.

Incredibly, just a week after the operation he went to his local course and shot 73 on one leg.

These days he plays with the aid of a prosthetic leg and Lawrie admits the day he spent with Thomas at his golf centre in Aberdeen was awe-inspiring. He said: “Whenever you meet people who go through stuff that Thomas has, to see his attitude towards the whole thing is amazing.

“I said to him before I went in, ‘Are you okay changing your shoe and stuff in front of me?’ He said, ‘Oh yeah, no bother’. Then he just got on the seat, whipped his leg off and changed his shoe.

“When you meet people like that it is inspiring.”

Lawrie has delivered plenty of inspiration himself for Scottish golf after a stellar 2012 season saw him not just recapture his top form, but actually take his game to a new level.

Two victories – the Qatar Masters and Johnnie Walker Championship at Gleneagles – plus a place in Europe’s

triumphant Ryder Cup side that staged the Miracle of Medinah capped a dream year.

This year might have started a little slower with the defence of his Qatar title ending yesterday as he missed the cut by a single stroke. Nevertheless, the 44-year-old feels good about his game and is determined to build on last year’s success by targeting a home appearance when the Ryder Cup comes to Gleneagles next year.

He added: “2012 was my best-ever year in money earned and top-10 finishes.

“I still have the desire. So long as I’m getting up in the morning and I’m willing to hit those balls, I’m going to keep improving.

“Nothing would be better than playing the Ryder Cup in Scotland. I’m not a big goal setter but that would be the one I’d want to achieve before I kind of stop.”

?You can see Lawrie’s interview in full on Sky Sports this weekend.