On the first night of the new year, the Utah Jazz came out in this New Year’s Day game against the Dallas Mavericks handling business. Despite both teams being unable to shoot the three-ball above 30%, Utah came on top in a dominating 127-90 victory. It takes the Jazz to their 15th win of the season, winning eight of their last 11 games.

The story of the night goes to none other than the former Sixth Man of the Year, Jordan Clarkson. After recently reclaiming his role as the leader of this team’s second unit, he stamped his name in the Jazz history books Monday night by earning the first regular-season triple-double the team has seen in 16 years.

The streak lasted a lengthy 5,801 days, which eclipsed any other franchise in the NBA. Clarkson posted a stat line of 20 points, 10 rebounds, and 11 assists off the bench, effectively breaking the team’s extensive drought.

Clarkson spoke after the game on opening up the year and breaking the long-winded record:

“Just happy to break that record, finally. I know it’s been some time. My bad to my OG, Carlos Boozer, but you know we had to do it. But yeah, that’s love."

Carlos Boozer was the last Jazzman to total a triple-double for Utah in the regular season, putting up a 22-11-10 stat line on February 12th, 2008 against the Seattle Supersonics. Yes, the Seattle SuperSonics were still a franchise the last time the Jazz saw a regular-season triple-double.

Clarkson continued to speak on what’s been going right for the Jazz through their recent stretch of success, crediting some solid team chemistry and seeing contributions down the board:

“I think we all just figuring it out. [During] the two weeks that I was out, Collin [Sexton], Kris Dunn, everybody did a great job stepping up and making plays. I think they set the tone, and then me coming back out, and coming back here, trying to play and just trying to recreate what they’ve been doing the whole time I was out...It’s just great seeing everybody step up and contribute."

With a fully healthy roster playing on all cylinders, this Jazz team has been a difficult one to stop on both ends of the floor. If we see these types of performance continue moving forward, Utah may be a sneaky Play-In threat come springtime.

The Jazz will look to continue their win streak on Wednesday when the Detroit Pistons travel to the Delta Center at 7 PM MT.

Follow Inside The Jazz on Facebook and X.