Points ans assists: Utah Jazz's Carlos Boozer

Carlos Boozer scored 27 points and finished with 14 rebounds as the Utah Jazz made the most of a strong start to beat the San Antonio Spurs 113-99.

Deron Williams also scored 27 points for Utah who were 10 points clear at 32-22 after the first quarter and were rarely troubled thereafter.

Tony Parker led the scoring for San Antonio with 21 points.

The Chicago Bulls secured an 86-85 win over the Cleveland Cavaliers, who could

not make it four wins in a row. Luol Deng scored 15 points for the Bulls, and LeBron James had 25 points for the Cavaliers but wasted a late match-winning chance.

In the National Hockey League, the Pittsburgh Penguins failed to make it eight road wins in a row at the start

of the NHL season as they slumped 5-2 to the Los Angeles Kings.

After posting seven straight victories away from their Mellon Arena home, they could not handle the Kings in the third period, as four goals saw the host side rally to win from 2-1 behind.

The in-form Anze Kopitar struck twice, while Jarrett Stoll, Michal Handzus and Dustin Brown also netted, with the Penguins scoring through Jordan Staal and Chris Kunitz.

The New York Rangers halted their run of four straight road defeats by winning 4-2 at the Edmonton Oilers.

A key contribution came from Ales Kotalik, who had a spell with the Oilers last season but is now a Ranger and scored once as well as claiming two assists.

Kotalik grabbed the third Rangers goal, with the rest coming from Ryan Callahan, Christopher Higgins and Marian Gaborik, and the Oilers' replies came from Mike Comrie and Lubomir Visnovsky.

While the Oilers slumped to a third defeat in a row, there was better news for four other Canadian teams.

The Montreal Canadiens beat the Boston Bruins 2-1, needing a shoot-out after Patrice Bergeron's late strike in regulation time cancelled out Glen Metropolit's first-period goal. Michael Cammalleri grabbed the shoot-out winner.

The Vancouver Canucks crushed the out-of-sorts Minnesota Wild 5-2, with goals from Darcy Hordichuk, Mason Raymond, Henrik Sedin, new recruit Matt Pettinger and Alex Burrows doing the damage.

The Ottawa Senators needed overtime to defeat the Tampa Bay Lightning 3-2, with

Jason Spezza drilling the winner.

Overtime was also required by the Calgary Flames, who defeated the St Louis Blues 2-1, with Dion Phaneuf grabbing the winner.

The Columbus Blue Jackets edged the Atlanta Thrashers 4-3, with two goals from Raffi Torres, while the San Jose Sharks failed to make it seven wins in a row, losing in a shoot-out to the Detroit Red Wings. Henrik Zetterberg followed up his goal in the third period, which took the match into overtime, by netting again in the shoot-out as the Red Wings won 2-1. Pavel Datsyuk also scored in the shoot-out for the Red Wings.

The Anaheim Ducks shut out the Nashville Predators, with Teemu Selanne (2), Todd Marchant and Bobby Ryan scoring in a 4-0 victory, while the Phoenix Coyotes were too strong for the Chicago Blackhawks, winning 3-1.