The Associate in Applied Science degree in Diagnostic Medical Sonography (AAS) program is designed to prepare individuals to enter the diagnostic medical sonography profession upon graduation. This degree is a seven-semester full-time day program that provides both theoretical and clinical instruction in sonography at JJC's Main Campus, and at hospitals and other health care organizations in the surrounding area. Up to 20 students are accepted into the program every fall. Most classes are offered face-to-face with the exception of two online courses (DMS 113 and DMS 120).

Diagnostic medical sonographers are highly skilled professionals who provide patient services using diagnostic techniques under the supervision of a licensed doctor of medicine. Diagnostic medical sonographers use specialized equipment to create images of structures inside the human body and perform a variety of diagnostic sonographic examinations of the abdomen, pelvis, small parts, pregnancy, superficial structures, vascular studies and other procedures. Diagnostic medical sonographers assist physicians in collecting patient diagnosis data necessary to reach diagnostic decisions. This profession requires the sonographer to use critical judgment and the ability to provide appropriate health care services.

The Diagnostic Medical Imaging Sonography Program at Joliet Junior College is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs upon recommendation of the Joint Review Committee on Education in Diagnostic Medical Sonography (JRC-DMS).

For information about the eligibility to sit for the ARDMS examinations please visit: ARDMS and ARDMS Prerequisites.

NOTE: Diagnostic Medical Sonography students of the AAS program must achieve a minimum grade of "C" in each of the Diagnostic Medical Sonography courses and all of the general education courses before they are eligible for graduation.

Loading...

The online Diagnostic Medical Sonography application for the AAS degree program is available each February for the opportunity to begin the program the following fall semester. If a student is not admitted to the program or chooses to defer acceptance, the student will need to re-apply the following year. No application will be kept on file after the start of classes.

The Diagnostic Medical Sonography AAS degree program has special admission criteria and limited enrollment. Applications for the Diagnostic Medical Sonography degree program will be accepted by the Admissions Office in February for the following fall semester. Applicants are responsible for ensuring the requirements are met and all necessary documentation is on file. Only complete files will be considered.

Students must be able to complete the following:

Students who have met the above admissions criteria are free to apply to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography Program in the month of February to enter the point ranking system. The application can be found only online in the month of February in MyJJC under “Campus Events”.

Students must meet the following prerequisites prior to application. Please read carefully to ensure all steps have been completed.

Current application (under Health & Occupational Science Students) on file.

Must meet residency requirements as defined by Joliet Junior College. In-district students have first right of admission. Out of district students will be admitted if spaces are available.

High School transcript or high school equivalency (GED, HiSET, TASC) on file with the Admissions Office verifying completion.

All college transcripts (other than JJC) must be evaluated and placed on record prior to submission of your application for the program. This process can take up to four weeks. Transcripts must be submitted by January 15. Official college transcripts should be mailed to Joliet Junior College, Academic Credentials Office, 1215 Houbolt Road Joliet, IL 60431-8938. Students must complete a Transcript Evaluation Form in order to have their transcripts evaluated.

Completion of PHYS 100 (or PHYS 110), BIO 250 and MATH 131 (or MATH 128) with a grade of “C” or better by the end of the spring semester.

Minimum CUM GPA of 2.0 or above.

Completed Test of Essential Academic Skills (TEAS – current version)

All students are required to watch a mandatory sonography information session prior to applying to the program. A recorded information session is posted on the DMS webpage.

Compliance with the technical standards for Diagnostic Medical Sonographers as outlined below:

Lift more than 50 pounds, push, pull, bend and stoop routinely

Have full use of both hands, wrists and shoulders

Distinguish audible sounds

Adequately view sonograms, including color distinctions

Work standing on their feet 80% of the time

Interact compassionately and effectively with the sick or injured

Assist patients on and off examining tables

Communicate effectively with patients and other health care professionals

Organize and accurately perform the individual steps in a sonographic procedure in the proper sequence.

Students who score 86 or above on the TEAS composite will be guaranteed admittance into the Diagnostic Medical Sonography Program, contingent on background check and drug screening results, verified attendance/viewing of the current application year’s informational session, the above requirements (see #1), and other factors (see the admissions page for more information). If there are more guaranteed admission than available seats, a ranking system will be used to determine who gets admitted first (see #3). Students who score below 86 will also be ranked.

Admissions to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography AAS Program will be determined by a point ranking system. Each eligible application will be given a number for anonymity. All demographic data will be removed. Applications are sent to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography Admissions Committee to be scored and ranked by the following criteria:

TEAS composite score - weighted 42%

TEAS Math sub-test score - weighted 8%

GPA (calculated based on courses required to enter the sonography program) - weighted 25%

Number of required general education classes completed - weighted up to 20%

Additional allied health held licensures- up to 5%

Upon admission to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography AAS program, all students are required to have on file in the Department of Health and Public Services:

A current physical examination which includes specified immunization and required laboratory work.

A current American Heart Association Basic Life Support (BLS) Healthcare Provider CPR card.

Current criminal background check and drug screen.

If granted admission, the applicant will be informed as to when these requirements must be completed. The applicant does not need to complete these requirements until notified.

Additional Class Requirements

These additional general education courses are not required to be considered for admission, but they are required for completion of the AAS Degree. Taking these courses will add points to the applicant’s overall score used in the ranking system above. Higher grades in these classes will earn more points. All courses must be passed with a C grade or higher.

BIO 251: Human Anatomy and Physiology II

ENG 101 (or ENG 102): Rhetoric

PSYC 101: General Psychology

If these courses are not completed at the time of application, they must be completed prior to starting sonography courses in the fall.

Important note: Mandatory information sessions are held throughout the semester. Please call the Student Advising Center at 815-280-2673 to make an appointment to assist you with your individual educational planning. For questions about the admissions process please call Kathleen Cartwright at 815-280-2429 or email kcartwri@jjc.edu. If you’ve completed the required pre-requisites and TEAS exam and want to schedule a 30-minute advising session with the Sonography Coordinator/Advisor, please email ultrasound@jjc.edu.

This criteria is subject to change. It is the applicant's responsibility to review the criteria on a regular basis.

Go to the Recommended Course Guide to see semester by semester schedule.

Please Note: TEAS Testing is offered on-campus only.

Who Needs to Take the TEAS Exam?

Students applying for admission into the Diagnostic Medical Sonography Program need to complete their TEAS 7 exam by the last day of February of each calendar year to be considered qualified for the admission process for the following Fall semester.

TEAS Testing Locations

ATI TEAS exams will take place only at the following locations:

Main Campus

Romeoville Campus

City Center Campus

*Any outside TEAS scores will not be eligible and accepted for program admission.

About the TEAS Exam

The TEAS exam is a timed, computer-based exam conducted by the Assessment Technologies Institute (ATI). "TEAS" stands for the Test of Essential Academic Skills. This three-and-a-half-hour exam includes 170 questions.

Cost & Fees

The cost of the TEAS test is $97 plus tax.

TEAS Exam fees are subject to change.

How to Register for the TEAS Exam at JJC

If you need testing accommodations, contact JJC's Disability Services department ahead of time at disabilityservices@jjc.edu or call 815.280.2613.

Purchase and schedule the TEAS test through ATI to test at JJC Testing Services. Choose the TEAS test for Nursing Students "In-Person, Proctored at an Institution" when registering.

Follow on-campus appointment rules and safety guidelines (listed above).

Watch our On-Campus Safety video to prepare for your testing appointment.

Arrive at your scheduled location 10 minutes before your exam with your photo ID.

Photo IDs Required: Please bring a current, government-issued photo ID, such as a driver's license or passport to your testing appointment.

Can I Take the TEAS More Than Once?

You are only allowed three attempts at taking the TEAS exam within a five-year period.

Program Specific Information: Review the TEAS Interpretation Guide for information about your TEAS scores, program advisor, retesting, and next steps.

Students should only take the TEAS exam once per semester. A semester begins on the first day of classes for a given semester (Fall, Spring, and Summer) and ends on the day before the first day of classes for the next semester. Visit our Academic Calendar for reference and view our chart below.

Please Note: With the new version of the TEAS (7) in June of 2022, the counter will be reset. Students who had taken TEAS (6) 3-times will now be able to take TEAS (7) 3-times in 5 years. Only the highest score of any semester is valid for ranking in our programs. All other attempts in a semester are counted against your total allowed attempts in 5 years.

JJC SemestersThe Semester Begins on...The Semester Ends on...FallThe first day of Fall semester classesThe day before first day of Spring semester classesSpringThe first day of Spring semester classesThe day before first day of Summer I semester classesSummerThe first day of Summer I semester classesThe day before first day of Fall Semester classes

Your TEAS Score

ATI (Assessment Technologies Institute) will provide you with your TEAS score. After the test is completed, results are available within a few hours. Scores may be accessed on the “My Results” page found in your personal ATI online student account.

Ranking System

Admissions to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography program will be determined by a point ranking system. Each eligible applicant will be given a number for anonymity by the admissions office.

Contact Information

Questions? Email testingservices@jjc.edu or call 815.280.2261.