Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield

4/5

At Anthem, we understand the importance of finding the right plan to protect both your health and your budget. Our goal is to help make healthcare simpler and more affordable, while giving you access to local doctors and hospitals you can trust.

With financial help, many Anthem plans offered through Connect for Health Colorado start as low as $0 a month* and include:

• $0 preventive care**

• $0 commonly prescribed medications**

• $0 virtual care visits**

• Online wellness tools and mental health resources

Experience matters in healthcare. With over 84 years serving individuals like you, you can feel confident we can connect you to the best Individual and Family health plan for your needs. To learn more, visit anthem.com or call 888-811-2101.

Anthem Customer Service Number: 855-453-7031

Blue View Vision

We all want to connect more with what matters most in our lives — and our health is at the heart of it all. When you choose Anthem for your vision coverage, you can feel confident your eye health is supported by a name you know and trust. With Blue View Vision, you can choose from more than 42,000 eye doctors and other eye care providers at over 32,000 locations.1 Our network is one of the largest in the country, so you will be able to receive your eye care and eyewear just about anywhere.

Let Anthem connect you to the right vision plan for your needs and budget, moving you closer to your healthiest life, and closer to what matters most. Shop now.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the trade name of Rocky Mountain Hospital and Medical Service, Inc. HMO products underwritten by HMO Colorado, Inc. Independent licensees of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. Anthem is a registered trademark of Anthem Insurance Companies, Inc.

*Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield is a Qualified Health Plan issuer that in certain geographic areas offers some health plans with a $0 premium option (after subsidy applied) through Connect for Health Colorado. Health plans with a $0 premium option are not available in all areas and eligibility for these plans is based on federal annual income guidelines.

**Subject to plan-specific benefit design, not available on all Individual and Family plans or in all areas.

1 Zeils Network 360® data, January 2023

Cigna Healthcare

4/5

Cigna HealthcareSM is a global health service company dedicated to improving the health and vitality of the people we serve. With quality health insurance plans, a broad network of providers, personalized support, and predictable costs, you’ll feel good knowing you have an experienced team advocating for your health every step of the way – all while keeping your budget in mind.

Don’t just get insured, get reassured with individual and family health insurance plans that offer:

$0 deductibles or $0 copays1

$0 preventive care2

Virtual care from $03

$0 – $3 preferred generic prescription drugs on most plans4

Maximum of $25 for a 30-day supply or $75 for a 90-day supply of insulin and some non-insulin medications5

24/7/365 access to a doctor, nurse or customer service online or over the phone

Up to $325 in rewards for taking simple actions like reading articles on how to get and stay healthy6

Plus, discounts on gym memberships, vision care, alternative medicine, hearing aids and much more through our Healthy Rewards® Discount Program 7

Cigna Healthcare offers medical, dental and pharmacy benefits to individuals and families in Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield, Denver, Douglas, El Paso, Jefferson, Larimer, Teller and Weld counties.

Customer service phone number: (800) CIGNA24 or (800) 244-6224

Interpreter services are available at no cost to you (TRS or TTY services just dial 711).

——————————————————————————————

Insured by Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company

$0 deductible and $0 copay are available on select Cigna Healthcare individual and family health care plans. Reference plan documents for more information.

Availability of $0 preventive care (no cost share) by plan may vary. Includes eligible in-network preventive care services. Some preventive care services may not be covered, including most immunizations for travel. Reference plan documents for a list of covered and non-covered preventive care services.

$0 virtual care (no cost share) for eligible preventive care and Dedicated Virtual Urgent Care for minor acute medical conditions. Not available for all plans. HSA plans and non-minor acute medical care may apply a copay, coinsurance or deductible. Cigna Healthcare provides access to Dedicated Virtual Care through a national telehealth provider, MDLive located on myCigna, as part of your health plan. Providers are solely responsible for any treatment provided to their patients.

Health benefit plans may be different, but in general to be eligible for coverage a drug must be approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), prescribed by a health care professional, purchased from a licensed pharmacy and be medically necessary. If your plan provides coverage for certain prescription drugs with no cost-share, you have to use an in-network pharmacy to fill the prescription. If you use a pharmacy that does not participate in your plan’s network, your prescription may not be covered or reimbursement may be limited by your plan’s copayment, coinsurance or deductible requirements. Look at your plan documents for more information about your plan’s prescription drug coverage.

Discounts available with the Cigna Healthcare Patient Assurance Program. $25 is the maximum out-of-pocket cost for a 30-day supply of covered, eligible insulin.

The Cigna Take Control Rewards® Program is available in all states to all primary subscribers that are active Cigna Healthcare Individual and Family Plan policy holders and who are 18 years of age or older. All rewards may be considered taxable income. Contact your personal tax advisor for details. Program participation along with redeeming rewards is dependent on qualifying premiums being current and fully paid.

Healthy Rewards is a discount program, separate from your medical benefits. This program is in addition to, not instead of, your plan benefits. A discount program is NOT insurance, and you must pay the entire discounted charge. Some Healthy Rewards programs are not available in all states and programs may be discontinued at any time. Participating providers are independent contractors solely responsible for any care or services provided.

The Access Plan is designed to disclose all the plan information required under Colorado law and can be obtained by calling Customer Service or visiting Cigna.com®.

Product availability may vary by location and plan type and is subject to change. All health insurance policies and health benefit plans contain exclusions and limitations. For costs and details of coverage, review your plan documents or contact a Cigna Healthcare representative. Cigna Healthcare products and services are provided exclusively by or through operating subsidiaries of The Cigna Group, including Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company. The Cigna Healthcare name, logo, and other Cigna marks are owned by Cigna Intellectual Property, Inc.

9/23 © 2023 Cigna Healthcare.

Denver Health Medical Plan

Elevate Health Plans by Denver Health Medical Plan (DHMP) is local, nonprofit, health insurance for the community where we live. Since 1997, we’ve dedicated ourselves to serving the Denver metro community. Elevate Health Plans are individual products offered by DHMP to help you protect the health of you and your family. As a health insurance carrier, we take your health personally. Our mission is to partner with our members to promote wellness while at the same time preventing disease.

Elevate Health Plans offers Individual and Family plans through Connect for Health Colorado that include the following benefits:

$0 preventive care

Reduced prescription costs at Denver Health Pharmacies

Virtual health care, including mental health care, resources

Expanded network

Online wellness tools

In partnership with Peak Health Alliance, Elevate Health Plans by Denver Health Medical Plan, a respected insurance carrier, will serve Colorado’s rural and mountain communities to bring the community, businesses and healthcare providers together to build a viable local network.

Kaiser Permanente

5/5

As Colorado’s highest-rated health plan,* Kaiser Permanente delivers care that is nationally recognized for its medical excellence. And because we’re a nonprofit, we’re able to focus our resources on what matters most — keeping you and your family healthy.

This dedication is why Kaiser Permanente was ranked highest in customer loyalty in the health plan category for the 11th year in a row by the NICE Satmetrix 2021 U.S. Consumer Net Promoter Score benchmarks. But what we’re most proud of is helping our members live their healthiest lives. In 2021, Kaiser Permanente led the nation in 42 \ effectiveness-of-care measures.* And for 30 years, the Kaiser Permanente Colorado Institute for Health Research has conducted medical and health research to improve clinical practices and policies for all individuals and populations, not just our members.

Kaiser Permanente offers both Individual and Family plans as well as Small Business plans through Connect for Health Colorado.

Customer service phone number: 1-800-632-9700

*The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a third-party organization that receives both clinical quality information (HEDIS) and member survey (CAHPS) feedback to rate health plans nationwide.

Note: Plan quality ratings and enrollee survey results are calculated by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) using data provided by health plans in 2022. The ratings are being displayed for health plans for the 2023 plan year. Learn more about these ratings at: www.healthcare.gov/quality-ratings

Rocky Mountain Health Plans / UnitedHealthcare

4/5

Rocky Mountain Health Plans, a UnitedHealthcare Company, is committed to providing Coloradans with the personalized attention, quality care and comprehensive coverage they deserve. We believe the idea of service goes far beyond what happens when you pick up the phone to call us. Our culture of service means uplifting others, contributing in meaningful ways, and improving the lives and health of people all around our state.

To speak with a plan expert call 800-308-3520

Note: Plan quality ratings and enrollee survey results are calculated by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) using data provided by health plans in 2022. The ratings are being displayed for health plans for the 2023 plan year. Learn more about these ratings at: www.healthcare.gov/quality-ratings

Select Health

Rating in progress

Healthcare is complicated. We make it simple.

For more than 40 years, Select Health® has operated as a nonprofit health plan dedicated to simplifying healthcare for its more than 1 million members across the Mountain West. Through a shared mission with Intermountain Health of Helping People Live the Healthiest Lives Possible®, Select Health is committed to making this possible through simple, sincere, and seamless experiences and products. Deeply rooted in value-based care, Select Health offers commercial and government medical plans, as well as dental, vision, and pharmacy benefit management in Utah, Idaho, Nevada, and Colorado.

In Colorado, Select Health offers Individual and Family medical plans through Connect for Health Colorado available in the following counties: Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield, Clear Creek, Delta, Denver, Douglas, El Paso, Elbert, Gilpin, Jefferson, Larimer, Mesa, Park, Pueblo, Routt, Teller, and Weld.

Accessible.

Access to UCHealth, Monument Health, and Intermountain Health providers and facilities.

Best-in-class providers to ensure access to quality care when and where you need it.

All plans include access to our highly trained Member Advocates team. They provide support, help members schedule appointments and find providers that speak their language, and more.

Affordable.

We know that life can be unpredictable. That’s why we’re committed to providing the best possible coverage at the lowest possible price.

Individual and Family plans include:

Virtual urgent care visits

$0 virtual office visits for primary care and mental health

Wellness rewards programs

HSA-qualified health plan options

Our promise is to make the complicated easy through better service, better providers, and better health insurance. Visit selecthealth.org or call our Individual Sales team at 855-442-0220 to learn how we can simplify healthcare for you.

Contact.

Member Services 800-538-5038

Website: selecthealth.org

Select Health obeys federal civil rights laws. We do not treat you differently because of your race, color, ethnic background or where you come from, age, disability, sex, religion, creed, language, social class, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, and/or veteran status.

This information is available for free in other languages and alternate formats by contacting Select Health: 800-538-5038.

Plan quality ratings and enrollee survey results are calculated by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) using data provided by health plans in 2023. The ratings are being displayed for health plans for the 2024 plan year. Learn more about these ratings »

Insurance Companies’ Customer Service Phone Numbers