Back to GetFilings.com

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549

------------------------

FORM 10-K

/X/ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE

SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED

DECEMBER 31, 1998

Commission file number: 1-10864

------------------------

UNITED HEALTHCARE CORPORATION

(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)

MINNESOTA 41-1321939

(State or other jurisdiction of (I.R.S. Employer Identification

incorporation or organization) No.)

300 OPUS CENTER 55343

9900 BREN ROAD EAST (Zip Code)

MINNETONKA, MINNESOTA

(Address of principal executive offices)

Registrant's telephone number, including area code: (612)936-1300

------------------------

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:

COMMON STOCK, $.01 PAR VALUE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, INC.

(Title of each class) (Name of each exchange on which registered)

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: NONE

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports

required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of

1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the

registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such

filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes /X/ No / /

Indicate by checkmark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item

405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the

best of Registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements

incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this

Form 10-K. / /

The aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the

registrant as of March 8, 1999, was approximately $8,512,536,866 (based on the

last reported sale price of $51.75 per share on March 8, 1999, on the New York

Stock Exchange).

As of March 8, 1999, 180,782,384 shares of the registrant's Common Stock,

$.01 par value per share, were issued and outstanding.

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders of Registrant to be

held on May 12, 1999. Certain information therein is incorporated by reference

into Part III hereof.

- ------------------------

*Only shares of common stock held beneficially by directors and executive

officers of the Company and persons or entities holding more than 10% of the

common stock filing Schedules 13G received by the Company have been excluded in

determining this number.

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS

UnitedHealth Group is a national leader offering health care coverage and

related services to help people achieve improved health and well-being through

all stages of life. The Company operates in all 50 states, the District of

Columbia, Puerto Rico and internationally. UnitedHealth Group's products and

services reflect a number of core capabilities, including medical information

management, health benefit administration, care coordination, risk assessment

and pricing, health benefit design and provider contracting. With these

capabilities, United is able to provide comprehensive health care management

services through organized health systems and insurance products, including

health maintenance organizations ("HMOs"), point-of-service plans ("POS"),

preferred provider organizations ("PPO") and managed indemnity programs. The

Company also offers specialized health care management services and products

such as behavioral health services, workers compensation and disability

services, utilization review services, specialized provider networks, employee

assistance programs, and knowledge and information services.

UnitedHealth Group is a Minnesota corporation, incorporated in January 1977.

Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms "United," "UnitedHealth Group"

or the "Company" refer to United HealthCare Corporation and its subsidiaries,

which operate under the name of, and is sometimes referred to in this Form 10-K

as, UnitedHealth Group. United's executive offices are located at 300 Opus

Center, 9900 Bren Road East, Minnetonka, Minnesota 55343; telephone (612)

936-1300.

BUSINESS OPERATIONS

The Company operates in the health and well-being marketplace. In late 1997,

the Company announced an internal realignment that established strategic

business units for each of the Company's six key business lines. These

businesses include UnitedHealthcare, Unimerica, Uniprise, Ovations, Specialized

Care Services and Ingenix. While the Company's general management and various

operational aspects, including information systems and certain administrative

functions, remain interrelated, the realignment allows each business to focus

fully on its specific set of customers and markets. The Unimerica business line

provides insurance services to the other businesses of UnitedHealth Group, and

its results are reported in the segment that originates the business. The

results of UnitedHealthcare and Ovations are combined in one segment.

UNITEDHEALTHCARE

UnitedHealthcare operates organized health systems. As of December 31, 1998,

UnitedHealthcare held a majority ownership interest in health plans operating in

approximately 40 markets nationwide and in Puerto Rico. UnitedHealthcare also is

engaged in a joint venture that operates a health plan in the Republic of South

Africa and provides consulting services in Germany, Hong Kong and the

Philippines through this business unit.

For organized health systems it owns, UnitedHealthcare assumes the risk for

health care and administrative costs in return for premium revenue.

UnitedHealthcare's owned health systems usually are licensed as health

maintenance organizations ("HMOs") or insurers. These plans provide

comprehensive health care coverage for a fixed fee or premium that usually does

not vary with the extent of medical services received by the member. Most of

UnitedHealthcare's owned health plans contract with independent providers of

health care services for medical and hospital services. UnitedHealthcare's

health plans that employ health care providers strive for cost-effective

delivery of health care services by emphasizing appropriate use of these

services, promoting preventive health services, and encouraging the use of

clinically proven treatments and best medical practices. UnitedHealthcare also

provides administrative and other management services to a limited number of

health plans in which UnitedHealthcare has no ownership interest.

UnitedHealthcare receives an administrative fee for providing its services to

these plans and generally assumes no responsibility for health care costs.

POINT-OF-SERVICE PRODUCTS. UnitedHealthcare's point-of-service products are

one of its most popular coverage options. Unlike some traditional HMO products,

which only cover non-emergency services

2

received from contracted providers, point-of-service products also provide

coverage, usually at a lower level, for services received from non-contracted

providers. Sometimes, this out-of-network coverage is offered directly by the

health plan, but more often it is provided by an insurance policy "wrapped

around" the health plan benefit contract. The insurance policy usually is

provided through one of Unimerica's insurance subsidiaries.

SELF-FUNDED PRODUCTS. UnitedHealthcare has developed self-funded products

for employers who want the cost containment aspects of an organized health

system while self-insuring the health care cost risk. UnitedHealthcare uses the

provider networks it has developed for its health plan or insurance products for

its self-funded products, many of which include a point-of-service feature. The

provider contracts for these products are with individual physicians, groups of

physicians and health care facilities and are generally on a standard

fee-for-service basis. With self-funded products, employers and other sponsoring

groups have access to a provider network and the administrative and care

coordination services associated with an organized health system product, but

the sponsoring company or group generally bears the financial costs associated

with the health care.

MEDICARE+CHOICE PLANS. Several of UnitedHealthcare's owned health plans

contract with the federal Health Care Financing Administration ("HCFA") to

provide coverage for Medicare-eligible individuals. Under these contracts, plans

receive a fixed monthly payment from HCFA for each enrolled individual and must

provide at least the benefits that would be covered under traditional Medicare.

The plans provide a significantly higher level of coverage and may, but often do

not, charge an additional monthly premium to the members for the greater

benefits. The health plans generally use a subset of their commercial product

provider network as the provider network for the Medicare products. Any

Medicare-eligible person in a plan's service area may enroll in the Medicare

product without underwriting or health screening. Features such as United Health

Passport allow members to travel to other UnitedHealthcare Medicare sites and

receive their same benefits.

Some of UnitedHealthcare's health plans also offer these Medicare products

to or through employer groups as a way of providing retiree health care

coverage.

MEDICAID PRODUCTS. Several of UnitedHealthcare's health plans offer

coverage to Medicaid-eligible individuals. These plans typically contract with a

state agency to provide such coverage and receive a fixed monthly payment for

each enrolled individual. The level of benefits generally is set by contract,

and few additional benefits are offered. Enrollment usually must be offered to

all eligible individuals without underwriting or health screening. Generally,

the provider network for commercial products is used, but some providers may

refuse to participate in the Medicaid product and the network may have a

different number or set of providers for other reasons.

OVATIONS

Ovations includes the Company's operations that target the market segment

comprised of people age 50 and older. These operations include Medigap and

Medicare supplement products, the EverCare-Registered Trademark- program and the

Company's relationship with AARP.

AARP. In early 1997, the Company finalized a 10-year agreement with the

American Association of Retired Persons ("AARP") to underwrite Medicare and

hospital supplement insurance products effective January 1, 1998. During 1997,

the Company coordinated the transfer of the operations from AARP's existing

vendor and prepared to implement this contract. As of January 1, 1998, the

Company's insurance subsidiaries assumed the underwriting risk, and Ovations

assumed the claim administration associated with the business.

EVERCARE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-. The EverCare-Registered Trademark- program

coordinates the provision of a broad spectrum of health care services primarily

to permanent nursing home residents through employed and contracted physicians

and nurse practitioners. EverCare is participating in a demonstration project

with HCFA to offer health care services to the elderly nursing home residents in

several separate locations throughout the country.

3

UNIMERICA

Unimerica is UnitedHealth Group's insurance arm, which serves as the legal

insurer for insurance products offered through UnitedHealth Group businesses.

Unimerica's insurance subsidiaries are licensed in all 50 states, the District

of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam and the Virgin Islands.

UnitedHealth Group reports the revenues from insurance products in the

segments that originate the business, not in Unimerica. Through these insurance

subsidiaries, Unimerica offers Options PPO, a national preferred provider

organization product. Options PPO combines access to UnitedHealthcare's

commercial health plan networks and certain specialty services with managed

indemnity coverage. Individuals covered under the Options PPO product have lower

out-of-pocket costs when they obtain covered services from contracted providers,

but also have the option to go outside of the network for covered services.

For customers with less than 50 employees, Unimerica typically sells its

products on an insured basis for a fixed premium, with no experience adjustments

made to the premium. This type of business often has been subject to sudden and

unpredictable changes in health care costs and generally has high administrative

and marketing expenses. In addition, these products are subject to extensive

state regulations. For larger customers, Unimerica sells these products on both

an insured and self-funded basis. The insured products often are sold on an

experience-rated basis, and the self-funded products usually are sold on an

administrative fee basis. In some cases, the agreement with the customer

includes penalties or rewards related to administrative service standards and/or

health care costs.

Unimerica's insurance subsidiaries also offer several health insurance

products in conjunction with health plan products. These products help employers

replace multiple health care policies and vendors with a single health care

plan. These subsidiaries also offer reinsurance and other insured products on a

selective basis to most of UnitedHealthcare's health plans and to employers and

other sponsoring groups offering self-funded health care benefit plans. Under an

agreement with Metropolitan Life Insurance Company ("MetLife"), UnitedHealth

Group businesses offers MetLife's life, dental, accidental death and

dismemberment and short-term disability products to customers, and MetLife

offers UnitedHealth Group's health care coverage products to MetLife customers.

This agreement with MetLife also contains certain exclusivity and

non-competition provisions.

UNIPRISE

Uniprise focuses on UnitedHealth Group's business with large employers. Its

core competencies include sales and account management, benefits administration

and customer services, including government-related operations, and care

management.

Uniprise provides sales and account management services to more than 200

customers, approximately 50 percent of which are Fortune 500 companies.

UnitedHealth Group's network-based medical and insurance products and

specialized care services are available to these customers, with various types

of funding arrangements. Uniprise specializes in serving the needs of large

multi-site employers, and offers long-term strategic health care coverage

planning to its customers.

The operations unit of Uniprise provides benefits administration services

and customer services to UnitedHealth Group customers in its other business

lines. Benefits administration services include enrollment, eligibility, claims

processing, and billing. Customer services include telephonic information,

provider directories and identification card production, and oversight of the

government operations and care management centers divisions.

The government operations division provides Medicare Part A services for

hospitals and nursing homes in Connecticut, New York and Michigan and Medicare

Part B services for beneficiaries and providers in Connecticut, Minnesota,

Mississippi and Virginia. This division also provides specialized claims

processing services for durable medical equipment in 10 northeastern states.

This unit serves as the national Medicare Part B carrier for the Railroad

Retirement Board. In addition, at the request of the Office of Personnel

Management and HCFA, the government operations division contracts with all

4

insurance carriers involved in the administration of the Federal Employee Health

Benefit Plan ("FEHBP").

The care management centers division offers customers medical management

programs designed to improve patients' clinical outcomes, reduce medical

expenses, and increase consumer satisfaction. These services include utilization

review, review of hospital-based services, and the administration of high-impact

medical programs based upon customer-specific demographic and claims data.

SPECIALIZED CARE SERVICES

Specialized Care Services is a portfolio of businesses that focus on

specific aspects of health and well-being. These businesses sell its products

and services to and through other UnitedHealth Group businesses as well as to

independent entities such as HMOs, PPOs, insurers, Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans,

third-party administrators, employers, labor unions and/or government agencies.

These businesses generally receive fees for the services they provide, which are

primarily administrative in nature. Specialized Care Services assumes no

responsibility for health care costs except for certain behavioral health

products. These businesses assume some responsibility for health care costs

related to providing mental health/substance abuse services.

BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES. Specialized Care Services provides behavioral

health services through United Behavioral Health ("UBH"), which offers

behavioral health care management services, employer assistance programs, and

psychiatric disability management services through specialized provider networks

and behavioral health care managers. UBH customers include most of

UnitedHealthcare's health plans, private and public sector employers and

government agencies. These services are provided by a national network of

contracted providers. United assumes the responsibility for health care costs

related to some of these services. UBH serves approximately 14 million

individuals.

HEALTH INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES. Specialized Care

Services provides health information, education and related services through

Optum-Registered Trademark-. Optum offers a full spectrum of counseling, access

and consumer information services for helping individuals manage their health

and well-being. Its services are available via 24-hour telephone information

lines, publications, audiotapes, face-to-face meetings and the Internet. Optum

services are available to approximately 15 million individuals.

TRANSPLANT SERVICES. Specialized Care Services offers transplant services

through United Resource Networks. United Resource Networks offers clients access

to a network of health care facilities for transplant-related services and

transplant care management services. United Resource Networks negotiates fixed,

competitive rates for high-cost, low-frequency health care services such as

organ and tissue transplants. United Resource Networks serves 450 clients,

representing approximately 37 million individuals.

INGENIX

Ingenix builds upon UnitedHealth Group's heritage of using its large

database and expertise to provide knowledge and information services to

providers, drug and device manufacturers, the government, payers, employers and

other interested organizations. It was formed by combining UnitedHealth Group's

information-related businesses and capabilities and expanded through several

acquisitions, as well as internal growth.

Ingenix provides four broad types of products and services:

CONSULTING. Ingenix provides consulting services to providers, payers,

employers and other health system participants focusing on actuarial and

financial matters, product development, provider contracting, and medical policy

and management.

PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICES. Ingenix performs clinical trials services and

outcomes and pharmacoeconomic research for pharmaceutical and medical device

manufacturers globally. Services

5

include helping find and train investigators and recruit patients, developing

research protocols, providing regulatory assistance, data collection and

management, biostatistics, and general project management.

PUBLISHING. Ingenix's publications unit sells print and electronic media

products that provide information regarding coding, reimbursement, billing,

compliance and other general health care issues.

SOFTWARE, DATA AND SERVICES. Ingenix's software, data and services include

databases for benchmarking, software to analyze and report cost and utilization

of services, data management services, HEDIS reporting, fraud and abuse

services, claims editing software, and reimbursement systems audits.

EXPANSION AND DIVESTITURE OF OPERATIONS

United continually evaluates expansion opportunities and often considers

whether to divest or stop offering certain of its businesses or products.

Expansion opportunities may include acquiring specialized care services programs

or insurance and health plan operations. United also devotes significant

attention to developing new products and techniques for managing health care

costs, measuring the outcomes and efficiency of health care delivered, and

coordinating and managing health care delivery systems. As part of its expansion

efforts, in 1998 the Company earmarked $35 million from the Company's corporate

usable cash reserves to invest in and help develop small but promising ventures.

During 1998, the Company completed several acquisitions and also sold or

terminated certain lines of business and ceased offering some products, all as

part of its ongoing emphasis on its strategic focus. If the Company were to make

numerous acquisitions, it may affect its ability to integrate and manage its

overall business effectively. Integration activities relating to acquisitions

may increase costs, affect membership, affect revenue and earnings growth and

adversely affect United's financial results.

GOVERNMENT REGULATION

United's primary business, offering health care coverage and health care

management services, is heavily regulated at both the federal and state level.

United believes it complies in all material respects with the various federal

and state regulations that apply to its current operations. To maintain

compliance, United or a subsidiary may make occasional changes in its services,

products, organizational or capital structure, or marketing methods.

Government regulation of health care coverage products and services is a

changing area of law that varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Regulatory

agencies generally have broad discretion to issue regulations and interpret and

enforce laws and rules. Changes in applicable laws and regulations are

continually being considered, and the interpretation of existing laws and rules

also may change periodically. These regulatory revisions could affect United's

operations and financial results. Certain proposed changes in Medicare and

Medicaid programs may improve opportunities to enroll people under products

developed for the senior populations. Other proposed changes may limit available

reimbursement and increase competition in those programs, with adverse effects

on United's financial results. Also, it may be more difficult for United to

control medical costs if federal and state bodies continue to consider and enact

significant and sometimes onerous managed care laws and regulations. Examples of

such laws are medical malpractice liability laws for health plans; mandates

requiring health plans to offer point-of-service plans and other benefits such

as direct access and formulary restrictions; limits on contractual terms with

providers, including termination provisions; implementation of a mandatory third

party review process for certain coverage denials and other laws and limits on

utilization management.

HIPPAA. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996

("HIPAA") may represent the most significant federal reform of employee benefits

law since the enactment of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ("ERISA")

in 1974. HIPAA's federal standards apply to both the group and individual health

insurance markets, including self-insured employee benefit plans. Some of

HIPAA's significant provisions include guarantees of the availability of health

insurance for certain employees and individuals; limits on the use of

preexisting condition exclusions; prohibitions against discriminating on the

basis of health status; and requirements which make it easier to continue

coverage in cases where an

6

employee is terminated or changes employers. While United currently believes

that it is in material compliance with the requirements of HIPAA, the law is far

reaching and complex, and the federal agencies involved in the enforcement of

HIPAA's provisions have been slow to provide guidance regarding HIPAA's

requirements in the form of final rules and regulations. Consequently, United's

efforts to measure, monitor, and adjust its business practices to comply with

HIPAA are ongoing. Further, significant enforcement responsibilities for HIPAA's

provisions have been given to the states. It is likely that United will

encounter different interpretations of HIPAA's provisions in the different

states as well as varying enforcement philosophies which may inhibit United's

ability to standardize its products and services across state lines. Ultimately,

under HIPAA and other state laws, cost control through provider contracting and

coordinating care may become more important, and United believes its experience

in these areas will allow it to compete effectively.

FRAUD AND ABUSE. Health care fraud and abuse have become a top priority for

the nation's law enforcement entities. The funding of such law enforcement

efforts has increased dramatically in the past few years and is expected to

continue. The focus of these efforts has been directed at participants in

federal government health care programs such as Medicare, Medicaid and FEHBP.

United participates extensively in these programs. The regulations and

contractual requirements applicable to participants in these programs are

extremely complex and ever changing. In light of this environment, United has

re-emphasized its regulatory compliance efforts for these programs; however, the

programs are subject to highly technical rules. When combined with law

enforcement intolerance for any level of noncompliance, these rules mean that

compliance efforts in this arena continue to be challenging.

AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS. United also is subject to governmental audits,

investigations and enforcement actions. These include possible government

actions relating to ERISA, which regulates insured and self-insured health

coverage plans offered by employers and United's services to such plans and

employers; FEHBP; federal and state fraud and abuse laws; state insurance or

licensing laws; laws relating to utilization management and the delivery of

health care; and laws relating to Medicare, including ACR development, special

payment status, payments for emergency room visits, and various other areas. Any

such government actions could result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal

fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including exclusion from participation

in government programs. United is currently involved in various government

investigations, audits and reviews, some of which are under FEHBP, ERISA, and

the authority of state departments of insurance. United does not believe the

results of current audits, individually or in the aggregate, will have a

material adverse effect on its financial position or results.

HMOS. All of the states in which United's health plans offer HMO products

regulate the activities of those health plans. Most states require periodic

financial reports from entities licensed to operate as HMOs in their states and

impose minimum capital or reserve requirements. Some of United's health plan and

insurance subsidiaries must maintain specified capital levels to support their

operations. In addition, state regulatory agencies require some United health

plans and insurance subsidiaries to maintain restricted cash reserves

represented by interest-bearing instruments, which are held by trustees or state

regulatory agencies to ensure that each subsidiary maintains adequate financial

reserves. Some state regulations allow agencies to review all contracts entered

into by HMOs, including management contracts and agreements between affiliates,

for reasonableness of fees charged and other provisions.

United's health plans that have Medicare risk contracts are regulated by

HCFA. HCFA has the right to audit health plans operating under Medicare risk

contracts to determine each health plan's compliance with HCFA's contracts and

regulations and the quality of care being given to the health plan's members. To

enter into Medicare risk contracts, a health plan must be either federally

qualified or considered a Competitive Medical Plan under HCFA's requirements.

Health plans that offer a Medicare risk product also must comply with

requirements established by peer review organizations ("PROs"), which are

organizations under contract with HCFA to monitor the quality of health care

Medicare beneficiaries receive. PRO requirements relate to quality assurance and

utilization review procedures. United's health plans that have Medicare cost

contracts are subject to similar regulatory requirements. In addition, these

7

health plans must file certain cost reimbursement reports with HCFA, which are

subject to audit and revision.

United's health plans that have Medicaid contracts are subject to federal

and state regulation regarding services to be provided to Medicaid enrollees,

payment for those services, and other aspects of the Medicaid program. Both

Medicare and Medicaid have, or have proposed, regulations relating to fraud and

abuse, physician incentive plans, and provider referrals that could affect

United's operations.

Many of United's health plans have contracts with FEHBP. These contracts are

subject to extensive regulation, including complex rules regarding premiums

charged. FEHBP is authorized to audit the rates charged retroactively and seek

premium refunds or institute other sanctions against health plans that

participate in the program, depending on the outcome of such audits.

INSURANCE REGULATION. United's insurance subsidiaries and most of the

Company's health plans are regulated by the department of insurance or

equivalent agency in each state or other jurisdiction in which the entity is

licensed. Regulatory authorities have extensive supervisory power regarding:

licensing; the amount of reserves that must be maintained; the approval of

insurance policy forms; the nature of, and limits on, insurance company

investments; periodic examination of insurance company operations; the form and

content of annual statements and other required reports on the financial

condition of insurance companies; and the capital requirements for insurance

companies. United's insurance company subsidiaries must file periodic statutory

financial statements in each jurisdiction in which they are licensed.

Additionally, these companies are periodically examined by the insurance

departments or equivalent agencies of the jurisdictions in which they are

licensed to do business.

INSURANCE HOLDING COMPANY REGULATIONS. Many of United's health plans and

each of United's insurance subsidiaries are regulated under state insurance

holding company regulations. Insurance holding company laws and regulations

generally require registration with the state department of insurance and the

filing of certain reports that describe capital structure, ownership, financial

condition, certain intercompany transactions and general business operations.

Various notice, reporting and pre-approval requirements generally apply to

transactions between companies within an insurance holding company system,

depending on the size and nature of the transactions. Some state insurance

holding company laws and regulations require prior regulatory approval or, in

certain circumstances, prior notice of acquisitions, and certain material

intercompany transfers of assets, as well as certain transactions between the

regulated companies and their parent holding companies or affiliates.

TPAS. Certain subsidiaries of United also are licensed as third-party

administrators ("TPAs") where required. TPA regulations differ greatly from

state to state, but generally contain certain required administrative

procedures, periodic reporting obligations and minimum financial requirements.

PPOS. Some United subsidiaries or products may be subject to PPO regulation

in a particular state. PPO regulations generally contain network, contracting,

financial and reporting requirements, which vary from state to state.

UTILIZATION REVIEW REGULATIONS. Many states have enacted laws and/or

adopted regulations governing utilization review activities, and these laws may

apply to some United operations. Generally, these laws and regulations set

specific standards for delivery of services, confidentiality, staffing and

policies and procedures of private review entities, including the credentials

required of personnel.

MCOS. Many states have enacted laws that allow self-insured employers

and/or insurance carriers to use a state-certified managed care organization

("MCO") to apply medical management and other managed care techniques to the

medical benefit portion of workers' compensation. United's subsidiaries

generally have sought MCO certification in states where it is available and

where they market managed care workers compensation products. MCO laws differ

significantly from state to state, but generally address network and utilization

review activities.

ERISA. ERISA regulates how goods and services are provided to or through

certain types of employee health benefit plans. ERISA is a complex set of laws

and regulations that is subject to periodic

8

interpretation by the United States Department of Labor. ERISA places controls

on how United's business units may do business with employers covered by ERISA,

particularly employers that maintain self-funded plans. The Department of Labor

has an ongoing ERISA enforcement program, which may result in additional

constraints on how ERISA-governed benefit plans conduct their activities. There

recently have been legislative attempts to limit ERISA's preemptive effect on

state laws. Such limitations could increase United's liability exposure under

state law-based suits relating to employee health benefits offered by United's

health plans and specialty businesses and permit greater state regulation of

other aspects of those businesses' operations.

YEAR 2000 ACTIVITIES

Our business depends significantly on effective information systems, and we

have many different information systems for our various businesses. Our

information systems require ongoing enhancements to keep pace with the

continuing changes in information technology, evolving industry standards, and

customer preferences. We have been modifying our computer systems to accommodate

the Year 2000. The Year 2000 problem exists throughout the global marketplace,

as many computer systems and applications were developed to recognize the year

as a two-digit number, with the digits "00" being recognized as the year 1900.

Starting in 1995, our formal Year 2000 Project Office began implementing a

remediation plan to ensure that critical information systems applications,

end-user developed application tools, and critical business interfaces remain

intact, and can function properly through the century change. We are on schedule

to complete, test, and certify our Year 2000 remediation efforts by September

30, 1999. A more detailed description and current status of our Year 2000

activities follows.

TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

MAINFRAME TECHNOLOGY. In conjunction with our two vendors that provide

support for our data center operations, we have completed, tested and certified

99% of our remediation efforts for the hardware, operating system and supporting

software remediation efforts on our two primary mainframe computer systems. In

addition, we are in the process of reviewing some of our smaller mainframe

systems and making modifications as necessary. We expect to be 100% complete

with all mainframe hardware and software technology Year 2000 modifications by

March 31, 1999. We also have installed separate test environments (both

mainframe and distributed) to test our business applications in a simulated Year

2000 environment.

DESKTOP HARDWARE & SOFTWARE. We have inventoried all of our desktop

hardware and software--over 40,000 computing devices of multiple makes and

models. All non-compliant desktop hardware and software have been identified and

are being modified or replaced with compliant systems by September 30, 1999.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS. We have inventoried all of our telecommunication

systems--more than 28,000 telecommunication devices, including traffic routers

and phone switches. We are using two outside vendors to assist us in modifying

or replacing non-compliant telecommunication systems. As of December 31, 1998,

we were approximately 75% Year 2000 compliant with our data and voice networks.

We expect all our telecommunication networks and devices will be Year 2000

compliant by September 30, 1999.

BUSINESS APPLICATIONS

SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS. We use 500 different software applications that

include over 80 million lines of computer code. We have surveyed our software

applications and have identified systems that will not be used after December

31, 1999, and systems that will be modified for Year 2000 compliance. We have

determined that 36% of our software applications will not be used after December

31, 1999 due to conversions, consolidations and software replacements. Of the

remaining applications, over 90% have been made Year 2000 compliant, tested and

certified or are scheduled to be certified for compliance. The

9

balance of the applications are yet to be tested. We expect all critical Year

2000 software modifications to be completed by March 31, 1999, with further

testing and certification during the remainder of 1999.

END-USER DEVELOPED APPLICATIONS. End-user developed applications are

analysis tools that have been internally developed by individual employees or

operating segments primarily running on personal computers or client servers.

The Year 2000 Project Office has continuously communicated with all employees

explaining the risks of non-compliant applications and provided tools and

techniques to make them compliant. We have identified and are tracking and

assessing Year 2000 compliance issues with respect to all potentially critical

end-user applications.

OTHER YEAR 2000 MATTERS

NON-INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS. We have approximately 300 owned or

leased facilities throughout the world. We have contacted all of our facility

managers regarding Year 2000 compliance issues. In addition, we have contracted

with a real estate management company to assist in our Year 2000 compliance

efforts. All facilities are scheduled to be Year 2000 compliant by September 1,

1999.

DEPENDENCE ON THIRD PARTIES. We have a contractual relationship with

approximately 300,000 different medical providers and more than 92,000 vendors.

Approximately 2,000 vendors have been identified as critical business partners

and suppliers. We are currently in communication with these critical business

partners to analyze their Year 2000 compliance efforts. We expect to complete

our analysis of critical vendor readiness and identify alternative vendors,

where necessary, by July 31, 1999. We will not be individually contacting all of

the 300,000 medical providers we conduct business with regarding Year 2000

compliance issues. However, we will be testing and verifying the electronic

collection of data with these providers through our EDI (electronic data

interface) clearinghouse vendors.

COSTS OF YEAR 2000 COMPLIANCE. The projected costs of our Year 2000

compliance efforts and the date on which we plan to complete the necessary Year

2000 remediation efforts are based on management's best estimates, which were

derived utilizing various assumptions of future events. However, there can be no

guarantee that these estimates will be achieved and actual results could differ

significantly from our current plans. Specific factors that might cause

significant differences include, but are not limited to, the availability and

cost of personnel trained in this area, the ability to locate and correct the

relevant computer codes, and the ability of our significant vendors, providers,

customers and others with whom we conduct business to identify and resolve their

own Year 2000 issues.

Costs associated with modifying internal use software for Year 2000

compliance are charged to expense as incurred. Purchases of hardware or software

that replace existing hardware or software that is not Year 2000 compliant are

capitalized and amortized over their useful lives. As of December 31, 1998, our

historical and projected costs to complete our Year 2000 remediation plan are as

follows (in millions):

COST INCURRED TO DATE PROJECTED COSTS

---------------------------- ----------------------------

YEAR RESOURCES AMORTIZATION RESOURCES AMORTIZATION TOTAL

- ---------------------------------- ----------- --------------- ----------- --------------- ---------

1996.............................. $ 1 $ -- $ -- $ -- $ 1

1997.............................. 12 -- -- -- 12

1998.............................. 18 -- 18

1999.............................. -- -- 18 7 25

2000.............................. -- -- 3 9 12

2001.............................. -- -- -- 9 9

2002.............................. -- -- -- 2 2

----- ----- ----- ----- ---------

$ 31 $ -- $ 21 $ 27 $ 79

----- ----- ----- ----- ---------

----- ----- ----- ----- ---------

BUSINESS RISKS OF NON-COMPLIANT SYSTEMS. Although we are committed to

completing and testing our remediation plan well in advance of the Year 2000,

there are risks if we do not meet our objectives by December 31, 1999.

Operationally, the most severe risk is business interruption. Specific examples

of

10

situations that could cause business interruption include, but are not limited

to: 1) computer hardware or application software processing errors or failures,

2) facilities or infrastructure failures, or 3) critical outside providers,

suppliers, or customers who may not be Year 2000 compliant. Depending on the

extent and duration of business interruption resulting from non-compliant Year

2000 systems, such interruption may have a material adverse effect on our

results of operations, liquidity, and financial condition.

CONTINGENCY PLANS. Each area of our Year 2000 compliance effort is

currently developing contingency plans to mitigate the risk of failure, and to

provide for a speedy recovery from possible failures associated with the century

change. The contingency plans detail strategies to implement in 1999 to prepare

for the century rollover, and actions to execute if problems arise. The target

date for completion of the initial contingency plans is April 1, 1999.

Contingency plans will be final by July 31, 1999.

MARKETING

The Company's marketing strategy is defined and coordinated by each

functional business unit's dedicated marketing staff. Within these business

units, primary marketing responsibility generally resides with a marketing

director and a direct sales force. In addition, several of the business units

rely upon independent insurance agents and brokers to sell some of the Company's

health plan, insurance, self-funded and specialized care products. Marketing

efforts also include public relations efforts and advertising programs that may

use television, radio, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail and

telemarketing.

COMPETITION

The managed health care industry evolved primarily because of health care

buyers' concerns about rising health care costs. The industry has brought

greater cost effectiveness and accountability into the health care system

through managed care products, including health plans, PPOs, and specialized

services such as mental health or pharmacy benefit programs. The industry also

has helped increase the accessibility and quality of health care services.

United operates in a highly competitive environment. Significant

consolidation has occurred within the managed care industry, creating stronger

and more diverse competitors. At the same time, new competitors have entered the

marketplace, which also may increase competitive pressures. In certain areas,

current competition may limit United's ability to price its products at levels

United believes appropriate. These competitive factors could adversely affect

United's financial results.

As managed health care penetration of the health care market and the effects

of health care reforms continue to increase nationwide, the Company expects it

may become increasingly difficult to obtain new contracts for its health plans

with large employer and government groups. The Company also expects competition

for smaller employer groups to intensify. In addition, employers increasingly

may choose to self-insure the health care risk, while seeking benefit

administration and utilization review services from third parties to help them

control and report health care costs.

The Company's business lines compete for group and individual membership

with other health insurance plans, Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans, health plans,

HMOs, PPOs, third party administrators, health care management companies, and

employers or groups that elect to self-insure. The Company also faces

competition from hospitals, health care facilities, and other health care

providers who have formed their own networks to contract directly with employer

groups and other prospective customers for the delivery of health care services.

The number and strength of the Company's competitors varies for each particular

business unit and geographic area. The Company believes that the principal

competitive factors affecting the Company and its products include price, the

level and quality of products and service, provider network capabilities, market

share, the offering of innovative products, product distribution systems,

efficient administration operations, financial strength and marketplace

reputation.

The Company currently believes that its competitive strengths include the

breadth of its product line, its geographic scope and diversity, the strength of

its underwriting and pricing practices and staff, its significant market

position in certain geographic areas, the strength of its distribution network,

its financial

11

strength, its generally large provider networks that provide more member choice,

its point-of-service products and experience, and its generally favorable

marketplace reputation. In some markets, however, the Company may be at a

disadvantage because of competitors with larger market shares, broader networks,

narrower networks (which may allow greater cost control and lower prices) or a

more-established marketplace name and reputation. The Company believes its

recent operational realignment will allow the individual business units to more

effectively compete in their respective markets.

EMPLOYEES

As of December 31, 1998, the Company employed approximately 29,226

individuals. As of December 31, 1998, approximately 239 of the Company's

employees were represented by a union. The Company believes its employee

relations are good.

CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS

The statements contained in this Form 10-K, and the Management's Discussion

and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation and other sections

of the Company's annual report to shareholders incorporated by reference in this

document, include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private

Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the "PSLRA"). When used in this Form

10-K and in future filings by the Company with the Securities and Exchange

Commission, in the Company's press releases, presentations to securities

analysts or investors, and in oral statements made by or with the approval of an

executive officer of the Company, the words or phrases "believes,"

"anticipates," "intends," "will likely result," "estimates," "projects" or

similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements.

Any of these forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may

cause the Company's actual results to differ materially from the results

discussed in the forward-looking statements.

The following discussion contains certain cautionary statements regarding

our business that investors and others should consider. This discussion is

intended to take advantage of the "safe harbor" provisions of the PSLRA. In

making these cautionary statements, we are not undertaking to address or update

each factor in future filings or communications regarding our business or

results, and are not undertaking to address how any of these factors may have

caused results to differ from discussions or information contained in previous

filings or communications. In addition, any of the matters discussed below may

have affected the Company's past, as well as current, forward-looking statements

about future results. The Company's actual results in the future may differ

materially from those expressed in prior communications.

HEALTH CARE COSTS. We use a large portion of our revenue to pay the costs

of health care services or supplies delivered to our members. Total health care

costs we incur are affected by the number of individual services rendered and

the cost of each service. Much of our premium revenue is priced before services

are delivered and the related costs are incurred, usually on a prospective

annual basis. Although we try to base the premiums we charge in part on our

estimate of future health care costs over the fixed premium period, competition,

and regulations and other circumstances may limit our ability to fully base

premiums on estimated costs. In addition, many factors may and often do cause

actual health care costs to exceed what was estimated and reflected in premiums.

These factors may include increased use of services, increased cost of

individual services, catastrophes, epidemics, the introduction of new or costly

treatments, general inflation, new mandated benefits or other regulatory

changes, and insured population characteristics. In addition, the earnings we

report for any particular quarter include estimates of covered services incurred

by our enrollees during that period for claims that have not been received or

processed. Because these are estimates, our earnings may be adjusted later to

reflect the actual costs. Relatively insignificant changes in the medical care

ratio, because of the narrow margins of our health plan business, can create

significant changes in our earnings.

Our medical care ratio has generally increased over the past several fiscal

periods. We are addressing the medical care ratio by altering benefit designs,

recontracting with providers, and aggressively increasing

12

both our contemporaneous and retrospective claim management activities. Our

inability to implement these changes successfully could lead to further

increases in our medical care ratio.

In addition, our operating results may be affected by the seasonal changes

in the level of health care use during the calendar year. Although there are no

assurances, per member medical costs generally have been higher in the first

half than in the second half of each year.

INDUSTRY FACTORS. The managed care industry receives significant negative

publicity. This publicity has been accompanied by increased legislative

activity, regulation and review of industry practices. These factors may

adversely affect our ability to market our products or services, may require us

to change our products and services, and may increase the regulatory burdens

under which we operate, further increasing the costs of doing business and

adversely affecting profitability.

COMPETITION. In many of our geographic or product markets, we compete with

a number of other entities, some of which may have certain characteristics or

capabilities that give them a competitive advantage. We believe the barriers to

entry in these markets are not substantial, so the addition of new competitors

can occur relatively easily, and consumers enjoy significant flexibility in

moving to new managed care providers. Certain Company customers may decide to

perform functions or services we provide for themselves, which would decrease

our revenues. Certain Company providers may decide to market products and

services to our customers in competition with us. In addition, significant

merger and acquisition activity has occurred in the industry in which we operate

as well as in industries that act as suppliers to us, such as the hospital,

physician, pharmaceutical and medical device industries. To the extent that

there is strong competition or that competition intensifies in any market, our

ability to retain or increase customers or providers, or maintain or increase

our revenue growth, pricing flexibility, control over medical cost trends and

our marketing expenses may be adversely affected.

AARP CONTRACT. Under our long-term contract with the American Association

of Retired Persons ("AARP"), we provide Medicare supplemental, hospital

indemnity health insurance and other products to AARP members. As a result of

the agreement, the number of members we serve, products we offer, and services

we provide has grown significantly. Our portion of the AARP's insurance program

represents approximately $3.5 billion in annual net premium revenue from

approximately 4 million AARP members. The success of the AARP arrangement will

depend, in part, on our ability to service these new members, develop additional

products and services, price the products and services competitively, and

respond effectively to federal and state regulatory changes. Additionally,

events that adversely affect the AARP could have an adverse effect on the

success of our arrangement with the AARP.

MEDICARE OPERATIONS. In the second quarter of 1998, we experienced a

significant rise in the medical care ratio for our Medicare operations. The

increase in medical costs was primarily due to the business growth in new

markets with higher and more volatile medical cost trends, coupled with lower

reimbursement rates. In response, we announced in October 1998 our decision to

withdraw Medicare product offerings from 86 of the 206 counties we currently

serve. The decision, effective January 1, 1999, will affect approximately

60,000, or 13%, of current Medicare members. As a consequence of this

withdrawal, we are precluded from re-entering these counties with Medicare

product offerings until 5 years after the effective date.

We will continue to offer Medicare products in strong and economically

viable markets. However, our ability to improve the financial results of all of

our Medicare operations will depend on a number of factors, including future

premium increases, growth in markets where we have achieved sufficient size to

operate efficiently, benefit design, provider contracting, and other factors.

There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully prevent future

losses on our Medicare operations.

REALIGNMENT OF OPERATIONS. We recognized a charge to earnings in the second

quarter of 1998 for our realignment. In January 1998, we initiated a significant

realignment of our operations into six business lines. As part of the

realignment, we began shifting resources and activities to more directly support

the operations of our businesses. Although we do not expect our realignment

efforts to negatively affect our product offerings, provider relations, billing

and collection disciplines, claims processing and payment

13

activities, or other business functions, there can be no assurance that such

negative effects may not occur. Our second quarter charge to earnings for costs

associated with the realignment was $725 million. Although we believe such

charges are adequate, there can be no assurance that the costs associated with

our realignment efforts will not exceed the charges we have taken for such

costs.

GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS AND REGULATION. Our business is heavily regulated on a

federal, state and local level. The laws and rules governing our business and

interpretations of those laws and rules are subject to frequent change. Broad

latitude is given to the agencies administering those regulations. Existing or

future laws and rules could force us to change how we do business, restrict

revenue and enrollment growth, increase its health care and administrative costs

and capital requirements, and increase our liability for medical malpractice or

other actions. We must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to market many

of our products. Delays in obtaining or failure to obtain or maintain these

approvals could adversely affect our revenue or the number of our members, or

could increase our costs. A significant portion of our revenues relate to

federal, state and local government health care coverage programs. These types

of programs, such as the federal Medicare program and the federal and state

Medicaid programs, generally are subject to frequent change, including changes

that may reduce the number of persons enrolled or eligible, reduce the amount of

reimbursement or payment levels, or may reduce or increase our administrative or

health care costs under such programs. Such changes have adversely affected our

results and willingness to participate in such programs in the past and may also

do so in the future.

The Company also is subject to various governmental reviews, audits and

investigations. Such oversight could result in the loss of licensure or the

right to participate in certain programs, or the imposition of fines, penalties

and other sanctions. In addition, disclosure of any adverse investigation or

audit results or sanctions could damage our reputation in various markets and

make it more difficult for us to sell our products and services. The National

Association of Insurance Commissioners (the "NAIC") is expected to adopt rules

which, if implemented by the states, will require certain capitalization levels

for health care coverage provided by insurance companies, HMOs and other risk

bearing health care entities. The requirements would take the form of risk-based

capital rules. Currently, similar risk-based capital rules apply generally to

insurance companies. Depending on the nature and extent of the new minimum

capitalization requirements ultimately implemented, there could be an increase

in the capital required for certain of our subsidiaries and there may be some

potential for disparate treatment of competing products. Federal solvency

regulation of companies providing Medicare-related benefit programs may also be

applied.

PROVIDER RELATIONS. One of the significant techniques we use to manage

health care costs and utilization and monitor the quality of care being

delivered is contracting with physicians, hospitals and other providers. Because

our health plans are geographically diverse and most of those health plans

contract with a large number of providers, we currently believe our exposure to

provider relations issues is limited. In any particular market, however,

providers could refuse to contract, demand higher payments, or take other

actions that could result in higher health care costs, less desirable products

for customer and members, or difficulty meeting regulatory or accreditation

requirements. In some markets, certain providers, particularly hospitals,

physician/hospital organizations or multi-specialty physician groups, may have

significant market positions or near monopolies. If these providers refuse to

contract with us, use their market position to negotiate favorable contracts, or

place us at a competitive disadvantage those activities could adversely affect

our ability to market products or to be profitable in those areas.

LITIGATION AND INSURANCE. We may be a party to a variety of legal actions

that affect any business, such as employment and employment

discrimination-related suits, employee benefit claims, breach of contract

actions, tort claims, shareholder suits, including securities fraud, and

intellectual property related litigation. In addition, because of the nature of

our business, we are subject to a variety of legal actions relating to our

business operations. These could include: claims relating to the denial of

health care benefits; medical malpractice actions; provider disputes over

compensation and termination of provider contracts; disputes related to

self-funded business, including actions alleging claim administration errors and

the failure to disclose network rate discounts and other fee and rebate

arrangements; disputes over copayment

14

calculations; and claims relating to customer audits and contract performance.

Recent court decisions and legislative activity may increase our exposure for

any of these types of claims. In some cases, substantial non-economic or

punitive damages may be sought. We currently have insurance coverage for some of

these potential liabilities. Other potential liabilities may not be covered by

insurance, insurers may dispute coverage, or the amount of insurance may not be

enough to cover the damages awarded. In addition, certain types of damages, such

as punitive damages, may not be covered by insurance and insurance coverage for

all or certain forms of liability may become unavailable or prohibitively

expensive in the future.

INFORMATION SYSTEMS. Our business depends significantly on effective

information systems, and we have many different information systems for its

various businesses. Our information systems require an ongoing commitment of

resources to maintain and enhance existing systems and develop new systems in

order to keep pace with continuing changes in information processing technology,

evolving industry standards, and changing customer preferences. In addition, we

may from time to time obtain significant portions of our systems-related or

other services or facilities from independent third parties, which may make our

operations vulnerable to such third parties' failure to perform adequately. As a

result of our acquisition activities, we have acquired additional systems and

have been taking steps to reduce the number of systems and have upgraded and

expanded our information systems capabilities. Failure to maintain effective and

efficient information systems could cause loss of existing customers, difficulty

in attracting new customers, customer and provider disputes, regulatory

problems, increases in administrative expenses or other adverse consequences.

THE YEAR 2000. We are in the process of modifying our computer systems to

accommodate the Year 2000. We currently expect to complete this modification

enough in advance of the Year 2000 to avoid adverse impacts on our operations.

We are expensing the costs incurred to make these modifications. Our operations

could be adversely affected if we were unable to complete our Year 2000

modifications in a timely manner or if other companies with which we do business

fail to complete their Year 2000 modifications in a timely manner.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND MANAGEMENT. Efficient and cost-effective administration

of our operations is essential to our profitability and competitive positioning.

While we attempt to effectively manage such expenses, staff-related and other

administrative expenses may rise from time to time due to business or product

start-ups or expansions, growth or changes in business, acquisitions, regulatory

requirements or other reasons. These expense increases are not clearly

predictable and may adversely affect results. We believe we currently have an

experienced, capable management and technical staff. The market for management

and technical personnel, including information systems professionals, in the

health care industry is very competitive. Loss of certain managers or a number

of such managers or technical staff could adversely affect our ability to

administer and manage our business.

MARKETING. We market our products and services through both employed sales

people and independent sales agents. Although we have many sales employees and

agents, the departure of certain key sales employees or agents or a large subset

of such individuals could impair our ability to retain existing customers and

members. In addition, certain of our customers or potential customers consider

rating, accreditation or certification of the Company by various private or

governmental bodies or rating agencies necessary or important. Certain of our

health plans or other business units may not have obtained or maintained, or may

not desire or be able to obtain or maintain, such rating accreditation or

certification, which could adversely affect our ability to obtain or retain

business with these customers.

ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS. The Company has made several large

acquisitions in recent years and has an active ongoing acquisition and

disposition program under which it may engage in transactions involving the

acquisition or disposition of assets, products or businesses, some or all of

which may be material. These acquisitions may entail certain risks and

uncertainties and may affect ongoing business operations because of unknown

liabilities, unforeseen administrative needs or increased efforts to integrate

the acquired operations. Failure to identify liabilities, anticipate additional

administrative needs or

15

effectively integrate acquired operations could result in reduced revenues,

increased administrative and other costs, or customer confusion or

dissatisfaction.

DATA AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. Many of the products that are part of our

knowledge and information services business depend significantly on the

integrity of the data on which they are based. If the information contained in

our databases were found or perceived to be inaccurate, or if such information

were generally perceived to be unreliable, commercial acceptance of our

database-related products would be adversely and materially affected.

Furthermore, the use by our knowledge and information-related business of

patient data is regulated at federal, state, and local levels. These laws and

rules are changed frequently by legislation or administrative interpretation.

These restrictions could adversely affect revenues from these products and, more

generally, affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.

The success of our knowledge and information services business also depends

significantly on our ability to maintain proprietary rights to our products. We

rely on our agreements with customers, confidentiality agreements with

employees, and our trade secrets, copyrights and patents to protect our

proprietary rights. We cannot assure that these legal protections and

precautions will prevent misappropriation of our proprietary information. In

addition, substantial litigation regarding intellectual property rights exists

in the software industry, and we expect software products to be increasingly

subject to third-party infringement claims as the number of products and

competitors in this industry segment grows. Such litigation could have an

adverse affect on the ability of our knowledge and information-related business

to market and sell its products and on our business, financial condition and

results of operations.

STOCK MARKET. The market prices of the securities of the Company and

certain of the publicly-held companies in the industry in which we operate have

shown volatility and sensitivity in response to many factors, including general

market trends, public communications regarding managed care, legislative or

regulatory actions health care cost trends, pricing trends, competition,

earnings or membership reports of particular industry participants, and

acquisition activity. We cannot assure the level or stability of our share price

at any time, or the impact of the foregoing or any other factors may have on our

share price.

16

EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT

FIRST ELECTED AS

NAME AGE POSITION AT 12/31/98 EXECUTIVE OFFICER

- -------------------------------- --- -------------------------------------------------------- -----------------

President, Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and

William W. McGuire, M.D......... 50 Director 1988

Stephen J. Hemsley.............. 46 Chief Operating Officer 1997

Arnold H. Kaplan................ 59 Chief Financial Officer 1998

David J. Lubben................. 47 General Counsel and Secretary 1996

Lois E. Quam.................... 37 CEO, Ovations 1998

Jeannine R. Rivet............... 50 CEO, UnitedHealthcare 1998

R. Channing Wheeler............. 47 CEO, Uniprise 1998

The Company's Board of Directors elects executive officers annually. The

Company's executive officers serve until their successors are duly elected and

qualified.

Dr. McGuire became a director of UnitedHealth Group in February 1989 and the

Chairman of the Board in May 1991. Dr. McGuire became an Executive Vice

President of the Company in November 1988, was appointed the Company's Chief

Operating Officer in May 1989, the Company's President in November 1989, and the

Company's Chief Executive Officer in February 1991.

Mr. Hemsley joined UnitedHealth Group in May 1997 and became Chief Operating

Officer in September 1998. Prior to that time, he served as Senior Executive

Vice President of the Company. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Hemsley was

with Arthur Andersen LLP where he served since 1974 in various capacities,

including Chief Financial Officer and Managing Partner, Strategy and Planning.

Mr. Kaplan joined UnitedHealth Group in July 1998 as Chief Financial

Officer. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Kaplan was associated with Air

Products & Chemical where he served since 1976 in various capacities, including

Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, Vice President Purchasing and

Controller.

Mr. Lubben became UnitedHealth Group's General Counsel and Secretary in

October 1996. Prior to joining the Company, he was a partner in the law firm of

Dorsey & Whitney LLP. Mr. Lubben first became associated with Dorsey & Whitney

in 1977.

Ms. Quam joined UnitedHealth Group in 1989 and became the CEO, Ovations in

April 1998. Prior to April 1998, Ms. Quam served in various capacities including

CEO, AARP Division, Vice President, Public Sector Services and Director,

Research. Prior to joining the Company, Ms. Quam served as Research Director

from 1987-1989 for Partners National Health Plan.

Ms. Rivet joined UnitedHealth Group in June 1990. Ms. Rivet was named CEO,

UnitedHealthcare in April 1998 and has served as Executive Vice President of

UnitedHealthcare since October 1994. She served as the Company's Senior Vice

President, Health Plan Operations from September 1993 to September 1994 and the

Company's Vice President of Health Service Operations from June 1990 to

September 1993.

Mr. Wheeler joined UnitedHealth Group in March 1995 and became CEO, Uniprise

in May 1998. Prior to May 1998, he served in various capacities of the Company,

including CEO, Northeast HealthPlans.

ITEM 2. PROPERTIES

As of December 31, 1998, the Company leased approximately 1.72 million

aggregate square feet of space for its principal administrative offices in the

greater Minneapolis/St. Paul, Minnesota area and in Hartford, Connecticut.

Excluding these areas, as of December 31, 1998, the Company leased approximately

6.38 million aggregate square feet in the United States, and approximately

97,100 aggregate square

17

feet outside of the United States (including Puerto Rico). Such space

accommodates health plans, managed care services, specialty programs or

satellite administrative offices. The Company's leases expire at various dates

through May 31, 2026. As of December 31, 1998, the Company owned approximately

310,700 aggregate square feet of space for administrative offices in various

states and its staff model clinic operations in Florida.

ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

Because of the nature of its business, United is subject to suits relating

to the failure to provide or pay for health care or other benefits, poor

outcomes for care delivered or arranged under United's programs, nonacceptance

or termination of providers, failure to return withheld amounts from provider

compensation, failure of a self-funded plan serviced by United to pay benefits,

improper copayment calculations and other forms of legal actions. Some of these

suits may include claims for substantial non-economic or punitive damages.

United does not believe that any such actions, or any other types of actions,

currently threatened or pending will, individually or in the aggregate, have a

material adverse effect on United's financial position or results of operations.

However, the likelihood or outcome of current or future suits cannot be

accurately predicted, and they could adversely affect United's financial

results.

Six suits assert claims under the United States securities laws against

United and certain of its current and former officers and directors. The

plaintiffs are stockholders of United who purport to sue on behalf of a class of

purchasers of common shares of United during the period February 12, 1998

through August 5, 1998 (the "Class Period"). Each complaint was filed in the

United States District Court for the District of Minnesota. Each of the six

actions claims violations of Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Securities Exchange

Act and SEC Rule 10b-5. In substance, the complaints allege that United made

materially false or misleading statements about the profitability and

performance of the Company's Medicare business during the Class Period. Two of

the complaints also allege that the Company made materially false statements

about its medical costs and the expenses related to the Company's realignment.

The complaints also allege that the statements were made with the intention of

deceiving members of the investing public and with the intention that the price

of United shares would rise, making it possible for insiders at the Company to

profit by selling shares at a time when they knew the Company's true financial

condition, but the investing public did not. The complaints allege that once the

Company's true financial condition was revealed on August 6, 1998, the price of

United common shares fell from a closing price of $52 7/8 on August 5, 1998, to

a closing price of $37 7/8 on August 6, 1998. The complaints seek compensatory

damages in unspecified amounts.

On January 19, 1999, we received a consolidated amended complaint (IN RE

UNITED HEALTHCARE CORPORATION SECURITIES LITIGATION, No. 98-1888 in the United

States District Court for the District of Minnesota) for the six suits which

essentially restates the allegations made in the earlier complaints.

On March 22, 1999, two actions were filed in the United States District

Court for the District of Minnesota by two pension funds against United, certain

current and former officers and directors, and other individuals yet to be

identified. The pension funds wish to "opt-out" of the aforementioned purported

class action suits. These individual actions essentially restate the allegations

made in the purported class actions and claim violations of Sections 10(b),

18(a) and 20 of the Securities Exchange Act. In addition, both actions assert a

claim of negligent misrepresentation and securities claims under state law. In

the aggregate, the plaintiff pension funds seek compensatory damages totaling

approximately $12.1 million.

The defendants intend to defend these actions vigorously.

ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS

None.

18

PART II

ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS

STOCK LISTING

The Company's common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the

symbol UNH.

The following table shows the range of high and low sales prices for the

Company stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange Composite Tape for

the calendar periods indicated through February 26, 1999. These prices do not

include commissions or fees associated with the purchase or sale of this

security:

HIGH LOW

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1999

First Quarter 1999

Through February 26, 1999 $ 49.50 $39.4375

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1988

First Quarter $66.8125 $46.5625

Second Quarter $73.9375 $ 61.25

Third Quarter $ 66.50 $29.5625

Fourth Quarter $ 50.625 $ 33.375

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1997

First Quarter $ 55.25 $ 42.625

Second Quarter $ 56.75 $ 43.75

Third Quarter $ 60.125 $ 47.875

Fourth Quarter $ 54.75 $42.4375

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

AS OF FEBRUARY 26, 1999, THE COMPANY HAD 13,111 SHAREHOLDERS OF RECORD.

DIVIDEND POLICY

The Company's dividend policy, established by its board of directors in

August 1990, requires the board to review the Company's audited consolidated

financial statements following the end of each fiscal year and decide

whether it is advisable to declare a dividend on the outstanding shares of

common stock.

Shareholders of record on April 3, 1997, received an annual dividend for 1997

of $0.03 per share, and shareholders of record on April 1, 1998, received an

annual dividend for 1998 of $0.03 per share. On February 16, 1999, the

Company's board of directors approved an annual dividend for 1999 of $0.03

per share to holders of the Company's common stock. The dividend will be paid

on April 15, 1999, to shareholders of record at the close of business on

April 1, 1999.

II-1

ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA

FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS UNITEDHEALTH GROUP

For the Year Ended December 31,

(in millions, except per share data) 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONSOLIDATED OPERATING RESULTS

Revenues $17,355 $11,794 $10,074 $5,671 $3,769

Earnings (Loss) From Operations $ (42)(1) $ 742 $ 581(2) $ 461(3) $ 506

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Net Earnings (Loss) Before

Extraordinary Gain $ (166) $ 460 $ 356 $ 286 $ 288(4)

Extraordinary Gain on Sale of

Subsidiary, net of income tax effects -- -- -- -- 1,377(5)

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Net Earnings (Loss) $ (166)(1) $ 460 $ 356(2) $ 286(3) $1,665

Convertible Preferred Stock Dividends (28) (29) (29) (7) --

Preferred Stock Redemption Premium (20) -- -- -- --

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Net Earnings (Loss) Applicable to

Common Shareholders $ (214)(1) $ 431 $ 327 $ 279 $1,665

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Basic Net Earnings (Loss) per

Common Share

Basic Net Earnings (Loss) per Common

Share Before Extraordinary Gain $ (1.12) $ 2.30 $ 1.80 $ 1.61 $ 1.69

Extraordinary Gain -- -- -- -- 8.06

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Basic Net Earnings (Loss) per

Common Share $ (1.12) $ 2.30 $ 1.80 $ 1.61 $ 9.75

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Diluted Net Earnings (Loss) per

Common Share

Diluted Net Earnings (Loss) per Common

Share Before Extraordinary Gain $ (1.12)(1) $ 2.26 $ 1.76(2) $ 1.57(3) $ 1.64(4)

Extraordinary Gain -- -- -- -- 7.86(5)

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Diluted Net Earnings (Loss) per

Common Share $ (1.12)(1) $ 2.26 $ 1.76(2) $ 1.57(3) $ 9.50

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Basic Weighted-Average Number of

Common Shares Outstanding 191 187 182 174 171

Weighted-Average Number of Common

Shares Outstanding, Assuming Dilution 191 191 186 177 175

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dividends Per Share

Common Stock $ 0.03 $ 0.03 $ 0.03 $ 0.03 $ 0.03

Convertible Preferred Stock $ 56.03 $ 57.50 $ 57.50 $14.38 $ --

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL CONDITION

(As of December 31)

Cash and Investments $ 4,424 $ 4,041 $ 3,453 $3,078 $2,769

Total Assets $ 9,701 $ 7,623 $ 6,997 $6,161 $3,489

Debt $ 708(6) $ -- $ -- $ -- $ --

Convertible Preferred Stock $ -- $ 500 $ 500 $ 500 $ --

Shareholders' Equity $ 4,038 $ 4,534 $ 3,823 $3,188 $2,795

- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Financial Highlights should be read together with the accompanying Financial

Review and Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes.

(1) Excluding the operational realignment and other charges of $725 million,

$175 million of charges related to contract losses associated with certain

Medicare markets and other increases to commercial and Medicare medical costs

payable estimates and the $20 million convertible preferred stock redemption

premium from 1998 results, earnings from operations and net earnings applicable

to common shareholders would have been $858 million and $509 million, or $2.62

diluted net earnings per common share.

(2) Excluding the merger costs associated with the acquisition of HealthWise of

America, Inc. of $15 million ($9 million after tax, or $0.05 diluted net

earnings per common share) and the provision for future losses on two large 28

contracts of $45 million ($27 million after tax, or $0.15 diluted net earnings

per common share), 1996 earnings from operations and net earnings would have

been $641 million and $392 million, or $1.96 diluted net earnings per common

share.

(3) Excluding restructuring charges associated with the acquisition of The

MetraHealth Companies, Inc., of $154 million ($97 million after tax, or $0.55

diluted net earnings per common share), 1995 earnings from operations and net

earnings would have been $615 million and $383 million, or $2.12 diluted net

earnings per common share.

(4) Excluding the nonoperating merger costs associated with the acquisitions of

Complete Health Services, Inc. and Ramsay-HMO, Inc., of $36 million ($22

million after tax, or $0.13 diluted net earnings per common share), 1994

earnings before extraordinary gain would have been $310 million or $1.77

diluted net earnings per common share.

(5) In May 1994, the Company sold Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, Inc. for

$2.3 billion in cash and recognized an extraordinary gain after transaction

costs and income tax effects of $1.4 billion, or $7.86 diluted net earnings per

common share.

(6) During 1998, we issued notes and commercial paper aggregating $708 million,

which remained outstanding at December 31, 1998.

II-2

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS

OF OPERATION

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

1998 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS

1998 was an important year of both challenges and successes for UnitedHealth

Group.

- - Excluding the effects of the unusual or nonrecurring events and transactions

described below, we achieved record profits. Underlying earnings from

operations, net earnings applicable to common shareholders, and diluted net

earnings per common share were $858 million, $509 million and $2.62 per share,

respectively, representing increases over 1997 of 16%, 18%, and 16%,

respectively.

- - We achieved record revenues of $17.4 billion, a 47% increase over 1997. This

growth was driven primarily by same-store enrollment growth in our

UnitedHealthcare business and from successful implementation of our $3.5

billion Medicare supplement insurance program with the AARP.

- - Record cash flows of more than $1.0 billion were generated from operating

activities, a 57% increase over 1997.

- - We completed several financing initiatives to achieve a more efficient

capital structure, including the redemption of our $500 million convertible

preferred stock and the repurchase of 11.3 million shares of our common stock.

- - We embarked on a major realignment of our operations into independent but

strategically linked businesses, each focused on performance, growth and

shareholder value. As a result of our evaluation of each business's strategic

fit and contributions, analysis of our profitability in certain markets, and

the adequacy of our medical costs payable estimates, we took actions that

resulted in special operating charges of $900 million.

1998 OPERATING RESULTS OVERVIEW

The following table summarizes our results for each of the last three years

ended December 31 (in millions, except per share amounts).

1998(1) 1997 1996(2)

- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Earnings (Loss) From Operations $ (42) $ 742 $ 581

Net Earnings (Loss) Applicable to

Common Shareholders $ (214) $ 431 $ 327

Diluted Net Earnings (Loss) per

Common Share $(1.12) $2.26 $1.76

Medical Costs to Premium Revenues 87.2%(3) 84.3% 84.6%

SG&A Expenses to Total Revenues 17.1% 20.0% 21.5%

- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Excluding the effects of $725 million of operational realignment and other

charges, $175 million of charges related to contract losses associated with

certain Medicare markets and other increases to commercial and Medicare medical

costs payable estimates, and the $20 million convertible preferred stock

redemption premium, earnings from operations, net earnings applicable to common

shareholders, and diluted net earnings per common share would have been $858

million, $509 million, and $2.62 per share, respectively.

(2) Excluding the effects of a $45 million provision for future losses on two

large multi-year contracts and $15 million of merger costs associated with the

acquisition of HealthWise of America, Inc., earnings from operations, net

earnings applicable to common shareholders, and diluted net earnings per common

share would have been $641 million, $392 million, and $1.96 per share,

respectively.

(3)Includes $175 million of contract losses associated with certain Medicare

markets and other increases to commercial and Medicare medical costs payable

estimates. The company's ratio of medical costs to premium revenues for the

year ended December 31, 1998, would have been 86.0% without these charges.

In 1998, we reported a net loss applicable to common shareholders of $214

million, or $1.12 diluted net loss per common share. However, these results

include certain large or unusual events and transactions as described below:

- - In conjunction with our realignment and other initiatives, we recorded $725

million of charges to operations during the second quarter of 1998. The charges

included $451 million of asset impairments and $274 million of estimated future

costs associated with our initiatives, such as employee terminations; disposing

of or discontinuing business units, product lines and contracts; and

consolidating certain processing operations and associated real estate

obligations. Although our realignment initiatives and the associated

nonrecurring charges caused us to report a net loss for 1998, these actions

position us to make long-term fundamental process and performance improvements.

- - Our second quarter 1998 medical costs include $120 million related to

contract losses and other increases to medical costs payable estimates in

UnitedHealthcare's Medicare markets and $55 million related to increases to

medical costs payable estimates associated with increased commercial medical

costs in certain health plans.

- - In conjunction with the redemption of our $500 million convertible preferred

stock, we paid a $20 million redemption premium. This premium is added to

1998's net loss to arrive at net loss applicable to common shareholders.

Excluding the effects of the events and transactions described above,

1998 underlying earnings from operations and diluted net earnings per common

share were $858 million and $2.62 per share, respectively, representing

increases of 16% over earnings from operations of $742 million and diluted net

earnings per common share of $2.26 in 1997. These increases were primarily

driven by improved margins in the commercial product offerings of our

UnitedHealthcare business and successful integration and management of our

services provided to the AARP, which began on January 1, 1998.

The discussion that follows provides a more detailed analysis of our

1998, 1997 and 1996 operating results.

II-3

1998 RESULTS COMPARED TO 1997 RESULTS

REVENUES AND ENROLLMENT

1998 was a record year for UnitedHealth Group, with consolidated revenues of

$17.4 billion, an increase of $5.6 billion, or 47%, over 1997. Our revenue

growth was primarily derived from successful implementation of our $3.5

billion Medicare supplement insurance program with the AARP and same-store

enrollment growth in our UnitedHealthcare business. On a year-over-year

same-store basis, UnitedHealthcare's total revenues increased by $1.7

billion, or 16%, over 1997.

The following table summarizes enrollment in all of our product

offerings as of December 31:

ENROLLMENT SUMMARY(1)

1998 1997 1996

----------------------------- ----------------------------- -------

Amount Increase (Decrease) Amount Increase (Decrease) Amount

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Enrollment, excluding Ovations

(as of December 31, in thousands)

UnitedHealthcare

Risk-Based:

Health Plans 5,231 17% 4,475 13% 3,945

Other Network-Based and Indemnity 530 (14%) 613 (29%) 858

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total Commercial 5,761 13% 5,088 6% 4,803

Medicare 483 40% 345 54% 224

Medicaid 638 21% 526 0% 525

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total Risk-Based 6,882 15% 5,959 7% 5,552

Fee-Based:

Commercial 1,725 7% 1,609 (29%) 2,279

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total UnitedHealthcare 8,607 14% 7,568 (3%) 7,831

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Uniprise

Risk-Based 261 (1%) 263 (9%) 288

Fee-Based 5,139 (2%) 5,226 (8%) 5,653

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total Uniprise 5,400 (2%) 5,489 (8%) 5,941

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total Enrollment, excluding

Ovations 14,007 7% 13,057 (5%) 13,772

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Enrollment information includes growth resulting from our 1998

acquisition of HealthPartners of Arizona, Inc. (509,000 members).

Additionally, the fee-based lives served by United HealthCare Administrators,

Inc. are included in 1996 (666,000 members). We sold United HealthCare

Administrators, Inc. on June 30, 1997.

Our revenues are comprised of: 1) premium revenues associated with our

risk-based products (those where we assume financial responsibility for

health care costs); 2) management services and fees associated with

administrative services only customers, managed health plans, and our

Specialized Care Services and Ingenix businesses; and 3) investment and other

income.

The discussion that follows provides an analysis of our 1998 revenue

trends for each of our three revenue components.

PREMIUM REVENUES

The following table summarizes premium revenues by business unit for the

years ended December 31 (in millions):

Percent

Increase

1998 1997 (Decrease)

- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

UnitedHealthcare $11,397 $ 9,507 20%

Ovations 3,584 87 NM

Uniprise 447 418 7%

Specialized Care Services 337 291 16%

Elimination of Inter-Unit

Transactions (249) (168) NM

- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

$15,516 $10,135 53%

- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

NM - Not Meaningful

Consolidated premium revenues in 1998 totaled $15.5 billion, an increase

of $5.4 billion, or 53%, compared to 1997. On January 1, 1998, our Ovations

business began delivering Medicare supplement insurance and other medical

insurance coverage to approximately 4 million AARP members. Premium revenues

from our portion of the AARP insurance offerings during 1998 were $3.5

billion.

Excluding the AARP business, 1998 consolidated premium revenues totaled

$12.0 billion, an increase of 19% over 1997. This increase is primarily the

result of growth in our UnitedHealthcare business. On a year-over-year

same-store basis, UnitedHealthcare's premium revenues increased $1.7 billion,

or 18%, during 1998. The increase reflects same-store commercial health plan

enrollment growth of 10% and average year-over-year premium yield increases

on renewing commercial health plan groups of approximately 5% to 6%.

Growth in UnitedHealthcare's Medicare programs also contributed to the

increase in premium revenues, with same-store growth of 33% in Medicare

enrollment. Significant growth in Medicare enrollment affects year-over-year

comparability. The Medicare product generally has per member premium rates

three times to four times higher than average commercial premium rates

because Medicare members typically use proportionately more medical care

services. On a year-over-year same-

II-4

store basis, UnitedHealthcare's commercial health plan and Medicare products

accounted for $1.8 billion of premium revenue growth during 1998.

The increase in UnitedHealthcare's commercial health plan and Medicare

product premium revenues was partially offset by a $240 million decrease from

other network-based and indemnity products. We expect enrollment in

UnitedHealthcare's other network-based and indemnity products will continue

to decline through 1999. To the extent possible, we will convert these

enrollees to UnitedHealthcare's commercial health plan products.

MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND FEE REVENUES

Management services and fee revenues during 1998 totaled $1.6 billion,

representing an increase of approximately $160 million over 1997. The

increase is primarily the result of acquisitions by Ingenix during 1997 and

1998. Additionally, our Specialized Care Services business -- most notably

United Behavioral Health and Optum,-Registered Trademark- our telephone- and

Internet-based health information and services business -- continues to

increase the number of individuals it serves.

INVESTMENT AND OTHER INCOME

Investment and other income increased to $249 million in 1998 from $231 million

in 1997. The increase of $18 million is primarily attributable to an increase in

average cash and investments from $3.6 billion in 1997 to $4.1 billion in 1998.

Net capital gains were $26 million in both 1998 and 1997.

MEDICAL COSTS

The combination of our pricing strategy and medical management efforts is

reflected in the medical care ratio (medical costs as a percentage of premium

revenues). The following table summarizes our medical care ratio by product line

for the years ended December 31:

1998 1997

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

UnitedHealthcare:

Commercial(1) 85.3% 85.7%

Medicare 92.0% 83.3%

Medicaid 85.2% 82.8%

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total UnitedHealthcare 86.7% 85.1%

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Consolidated UnitedHealth Group 87.2% 84.3%

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Consolidated (excluding AARP) 85.8% 84.3%

- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Includes commercial health plan, other network-based and indemnity products.

Our consolidated medical care ratio increased to 87.2% in 1998 from

84.3% in 1997. The year-over-year increase includes the effects of the AARP

business on our medical care ratio. We experience a medical care ratio of

approximately 92% related to our portion of the AARP insurance offerings,

which we began delivering on January 1, 1998. Excluding the AARP business, on

a year-over-year basis, the medical care ratio increased to 85.8%.

The increase in the 1998 medical care ratio is primarily attributable to

average Medicare premium rate increases of 2.5% that were more than offset by

increased medical utilization, reflected mostly in hospital costs. In 13 of

our 24 Medicare markets, representing half of our annual Medicare premiums of

$2.4 billion, we incurred contract losses of $111 million. Six of these 13

markets are generally newer markets where we have been unable to achieve the

scale of operations necessary to achieve profitability. In numerous counties

in the other seven markets, we experienced high medical costs which exceeded

the fixed Medicare premiums that increased only 2.5% on average.

We are addressing our Medicare medical care ratio by altering benefit

designs, recontracting with providers, and aggressively increasing both

contemporaneous and retrospective claim management activities. We also are

continuing to evaluate the markets we serve and products we offer. In

addition, we will curtail activities or exit markets where we believe near

term prospects are unacceptable.

To that end, in October 1998, we announced our decision to withdraw

Medicare product offerings from 86 of the 206 counties we then served. The

decision, effective January 1, 1999, affected approximately 60,000, or 13%,

of our Medicare members. We will continue to offer Medicare products in

strong and economically viable markets. Annual revenues for 1998 from

Medicare counties we exited were approximately $225 million.

Despite increasing commercial medical cost trends 