CPC Exam Preparation

Excellent opportunity to enhance your career by getting CPC Certification from AAPC

Comprehensive Medical coding Training with CPC preparation

Includes 5 sample CPC Papers + 5 Mock exams+ Slot booking

Excellent opportunity for Hyderabad coders and billers

Take the CPC exam at a low cost.

NO EXTRA FEES for slot booking

Training Highlights:

Highly Experienced Faculty

Training Material provided

Study whenever and wherever you want

Continue to work while gaining knowledge to climb the ladder of success in your career

Achieve your goals without sacrificing your job

Become fully trained in 2 months.

24 modules and hundreds of practice questions with answers

For more info. Please contact Joshi Medicode Technologies

Phone: 040 4201 5292

Address: Joshi Medicode Technologies

#217, Annapurna Block, Aditya Enclave, Ameerpet, Hyderabad – 500016

Email: info@joshimedicode.com

AAPC’s Certified Professional Coder CPC credential is the golden standard for medical coding in any Physician’s office setting and this certification is held by more than 80,000 coding professionals.

CPCs are critical for a compliant and profitable medical practice and typically earn 20% more than non-certified coders on average.

The CPC certification increases your chances of being hired and retained in this world filled with competitive jobs in the US Healthcare market.

Certified Professional Coders have proven themselves by undertaking rigorous examinations and gaining experience by understanding and knowing how to read a medical chart and assign the correct diagnosis codes (ICD-9), procedure CPT codes, and applying (HCPCS Level II) codes for a wide variety of clinical cases and services.

The CPC‘s abilities include:

Expert in reviewing and assigning accurate medical codes for diagnosis, procedures, and services performed by physicians and other qualified health care providers.

Proficiency across a wide range of services, including evaluation and management, anesthesia, surgical services, radiology, pathology, and medicine.

A sound knowledge of medical coding rules and regulations including compliance and reimbursement – allows a CPC to handle issues such as identifying medical necessity, claim denials, bundling issues and charge capture in a more proficient and better way.

Knowing how to integrate medical coding and reimbursement rule changes into a practice’s reimbursement process.

Knowledge of anatomy, physiology, and medical terminology necessary to correctly code provider diagnosis and services.

The CPC Exam (physician practice)

150 multiple choice questions (proctored)

5 hours and 40 minutes to finish the exam

1 free retake

Open code book (manuals)

$500.00+ AAPC Membership ($125)

The CPC examination consists of questions regarding the correct application of CPT, HCPCS Level II procedure, applying codes and ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes used for billing professional medical services to insurance companies. It is designed to evaluate a physician practice coder’s knowledge of the following:

Anesthesia

Radiology

Medicine

Nervous

Endocrine

Digestive

Urinary

Musculoskeletal

Evaluation and Management

Anatomy and PathoPhysiology

Mediastinum & Diaphragm

Practice Management

Male/Female Genital

Hemic & Lymphatic

Maternity & Delivery

Eye & Ocular Adnexa

ICD-9-CM

HCPCS Level II

Coding Guidelines

Medical Terminology

Pathology

Integumentary

Respiratory

Laboratory

Medical Coding Certification Requirements

We recommend individuals to have an associate Science degree.

Pay the examination fee at the time of application submission.

Maintain current membership with the AAPC.

New members must submit membership payments with the examination application.

Renewing members must have a current membership at the time of submission and when exam results are released.

All exams will be reported with exact scores and areas of study (scores less than or equal to 65%).