Gus Johnson Biography

Gus Johnson is beloved by a generation of sports fans who have come to associate some of the most dramatic moments in sports with his calls. Johnson is currently Fox Sports' lead play-by-play announcer for college basketball and college football. He has held each role since 2013 and 2011, respectively. From 1996-2011, national audiences came to know Johnson through his work with CBS Sports. He was perhaps best known for his highlight-inducing calls of NCAA Tournament games, but he also broadcast NFL, college football, track and field and boxing while at CBS. Also from 1994-2010, Johnson also worked for Madison Square Garden Network as the voice of the New York Knicks and a host for other programs. His first national broadcasting opportunities came at ESPN, where he called college hockey, college basketball and CFL football. Johnson worked his way up through local television, moving through the markets of Waco, Texas, Huntsville, Alabama, Winston-Salem, North Carolina and Washington D.C.

Book Gus Johnson for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Gus Johnson for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Gus Johnson. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Gus Johnson, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Gus Johnson's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Gus Johnson, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Gus Johnson for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Gus Johnson for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Gus Johnson for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Gus Johnson’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Gus Johnson for your Virtual Meeting