Within the Days of Azerbaijani Culture in Israel, activists of the “AzIz” Israel-Azerbaijan International Association met with general public at the Art House of the city of Rehovot. The Days of Azerbaijani Culture in Israel have been organized by “AzIz” Israel-Azerbaijan International Association, following the Heydar Aliyev Foundation’s initiative. The meeting was attended by Mayor of the city of Kiryat Ekron Khovev Tsabari, deputy of the Rehobot City Council Yefim Zaika, Director General of Israel’s Absorption Ministry Oded Forer and Director of the Culture Centre under the Azerbaijan University of Languages Emilia Rzayeva, who had come from Baku at AzIz’s invitation.

Continuing to inform Israelis of bloody massacre committed by Armenians in the Azerbaijani city of Khojaly, “AzIz” International Association opened a mobile photo exhibition called “Justice for Khojaly”.

Arye Gut, an expert in international relations, a member of the Board of Israel-Azerbaijan International Association, delivered a speech about the Khojaly tragedy, and called the Khojaly Genocide one of the most horrendous tragedies of the 20th century: “Merciless and horrifying scenes of this tragedy that we are demonstrating today are grave and incurable wound in Azerbaijani people’s heart. Armenian fascists have mercilessly killed 613 people at that cold winter night, showing no mercy for the old, children and women, and this is a crime committed against the mankind. Most of these people were subjected to unbearable tortures and humiliation.”

Underlining that residents of Khojaly were killed only for the reason that they were Azerbaijanis, A.Gut continued: “The Khojaly tragedy is one of the stages of the ethnic cleansing plan of Armenia on the occupied territories. Special cruelty committed against innocent children, women and elderly can not be justified by any means. This horrible tragedy should never be forgotten.”

Then Arye Gut talked of Azerbaijan’s history starting from the time of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan, the first parliamentary democracy in the Muslim Orient, the role of the Jewish in Azerbaijan’s history and culture, as well as the development being observed today in Azerbaijan in economy, industry and culture.

At the end of the event, a concert by string quartet under the direction of Leonid Barshtak took place. Works by classics of professional music of Azerbaijan Uzeir Hajibeyli, Gara Garayev and Tofig Gouliyev were performed. Young opera singer Maryam Hajiyeva performed arias in Azerbaijani.