"Rehovot" was built on the ruins of the Palestinian village Zarnuqa which was depopulated by the Givati Brigade in 1948 after its native residents were brutally expelled, and those who resisted were massacred.

Coincidentally, Fathi Shaqaqi one of the founders of the PIJ is originally from Zarnuqa; today the PIJ shelled the "Rehovot" settlement resulting in severe damage. The occupation assesses the shelling to be carried out with point-precise missiles rather than rockets such that they bypassed David's Sling and Iron Dome missile defense systems.

"The missile that was fired in the direction of Rehovot was equipped with high-precision technology, and the Israeli air defenses could not shoot it down bypassing the David's Sling and Iron Dome systems," Israeli media reported.

The Settlement of 'Rehovot' on the Ruins of Zarnuqa

During the 1948 Palestinian Nakba, the Israeli Givati Brigade depopulated Zarnuqa on May 27 and 28. According to one version in the Al HaMishmar Zionist newspaper, a soldier shot three persons (an elderly man, an elderly lady, and a child) with a Sten gun.

The villagers were then led outside and forced to endure the heat and thirst until they turned over their weapons.

Then the villagers were expelled to Yibna. Six people perished overall, while 22 were imprisoned. The residents of Zarnuqa witnessed Zionist soldiers and adjacent settlers pillaging their community. The dwellings were destroyed a month later after their second expulsion.

Read more: PIJ: the assassinated leaders will surely be avenged

One Israeli settler was killed and 10 others were injured due to the Palestinian resistance's rockets that hit the Israeli settlement of "Rehovot".

Israeli media said a rocket landed near a building in Rehovot, dealing heavy damages to the structure and its vicinity due to its massive warhead.

On Tuesday morning, the IOF launched a heinous aggression against the Gaza Strip, targeting civilian homes and several locations, and murdering 15 Palestinians, including five women and four children.

The Israeli occupation had launched an aggression against Gaza. It targeted several areas in the Strip, including the homes of PIJ leaders, which resulted in the deaths of 13 Palestinians, including three Al-Quds Brigades leaders.

On Wednesday, Al Mayadeen correspondent in the Gaza Strip reported that a Palestinian was martyred and another was seriously injured in an Israeli occupation shelling that targeted east of Khan Yunis, in the southern Strip.

Early Thursday morning, Three Palestinians were martyred in an Israeli airstrike that targeted a residential building in Hamad City, northwest of Khan Yunis, the Gaza Strip, an Al Mayadeen correspondent reported.

It is noteworthy that on Wednesday, sources in the Palestinian Resistance factions' joint operations room told Al Mayadeen that "the occupation pressed through various mediators to push for a ceasefire," noting that "the Resistance remained steadfast in its demand for a clear [Israeli] commitment to stopping the assassinations policy."

The sources also expressed the Resistance's "readiness to fight for the longest time period yet and to expand the ring of fire if necessary."