Two defensive blunders allowed Alexis Sanchez to net a brace as Arsenal inflicted Sunderland's first home defeat of the season.

In fact, scoreline at the Stadium of Light was something of a red herring; the visitors missed a host of chances to inflict further damage on side fresh from an 8-0 humiliation at the hands of Southampton.

After the Gunners' midweek smash-and-grab away to Anderlecht in the Champions League, Arsene Wenger was willing to give his players the benefit of the doubt, as he named an unchanged starting XI. Sunderland made two changes to their shambles at St Mary's, bringing in Adam Johnson and Jack Rodwell for Connor Wickham and Jordi Gomez.

Unfortunately for them, the was no change in their defensive paucity, as they orchestrated their own demise, gifting Arsenal their opener after 30 minutes.

It was Alexis Sanchez who profited from the lapse to score his four Premier League goal on the season when he pounced on a horrendous error from Sunderland centre-back Wes Brown. A poor back-pass from the former Manchester United defender saw Sanchez run clear into space, before calmly dinking the ball over Vito Mannone.

The second half brought further angst for Sunderland, as Steven Fletcher succumbed to injury and was replaced by Connor Wickham, just five minutes after the interval.

Sanchez continued to offer the greatest threat for the visitors, as he combined well with Danny Welbeck, enjoyed a loan-spell at the Stadium of Light in the 2010-11 season. However, Sunderland also began to fashion chances of their own.

Former Gunner Sebastian Larsson worked well to cross for Jack Rodwell, who could only find the arms of Wojciech Szczesny, before Larsson himself tested the Arsenal stopper from range. The introduction of Jozy Altidore for Adam Johnson in the 73rd minute gave Sunderland an extra body up top, and the American came close to drawing his side level with a header from a cross from Patrick van Aanholt.

And it was van Aanholt who was nearly gifted the equaliser, when the ball bounced his way after Szczesny had rushed out of his goal and fluffed a headed clearance. Sadly for the home fans, the full-back's speculative effort flew harmlessly wide.

Perhaps fitting, then, that Arsenal wrapped up the points by virtue of the second defensive blunder of the game, as Mannone lost his footing on the edge of his own six-yard box, allowing Sanchez to leave him scrabbling for the second time in the match.

Simon Bird's analysis

Deserved Arsenal win, but frustration that they didn't rack up four or five in the second half. Arsenal were good in possession, but didn't have to be that good confronted with terrible Sunderland.

Gus Poyet has got a job on his hands lifting this rabble. They have little confidence and not enough abilit and are prone to awful errors.

Keeper Vito Mannnone will be dropped after gifting the second Sanchez goal to Arsenal in injury time.

Teams

Sunderland: Mannone, Vergini, van Aanholt, O’Shea (c), Brown, Cattermole, Larsson, Rodwell, Buckley, Johnson, Fletcher.

Arsenal: Szczesny, Chambers, Mertesacker, Monreal, Gibbs, Arteta, Flamini, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Cazorla, Alexis, Welbeck

Best pictures

Next games

Sunderland: Crystal Palace, Everton, Leicester City