C and C++ are different programming languages, although they have much in common, for example, similar syntax, code structures, compilation, and concepts.

Developed almost half a century ago, the general-purpose programming language C has proven itself and found use in computer architectures of various sizes and complexity. The scope of C covers operating systems, drivers, and protocol stacks.

C development focuses mainly on low-level programming. C does not support objects or classes, while C++ is a high-level object-oriented programming language that provides modern and versatile features for developing systems and applications. C and C++ are very robust and suitable for coding on all levels.

Due to their flexibility, high speed, and scalability, C and C++ are used to create programs used at various programming levels and designed to perform diverse tasks.

Linux Distributions for Development

If you are going to start C/C++ development on Linux, you need a running instance of the distribution, for example, Ubuntu, Debian, Linux Mint, RedHat, and many others. Most of them are free.

Linux distros for programming differ in package managers, software suites, and default settings. Many distributions come with everything you need to get started with development.

Software developers use common toolkits, such as Qt, to ensure maximum compatibility between Linux distributions at the source code level when writing C++ programs.

However, if you don’t have enough experience, time, or opportunities to develop in C/C++, entrust it to professionals. For example, companies like Integra Sources are engaged in C/C++ software development, Qt cross-platform development, and embedded systems creation.

How IDEs can help

When you start programming in C/C++ on Linux, you need an integrated development environment (IDE). IDEs provide sets of tools and features. The main tools are code editors, debugging instruments, and automated tools.

Most IDEs support development in multiple languages. IDEs simplify and speed up the development process by automatically adjusting settings and offering only the tools needed.

Qt Creator

As a complete development framework, Qt comes with a cross-platform IDE called Qt Creator.

Qt Creator runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS operating systems and offers GUI-based cross-platform software app development for desktop, mobile, and embedded platforms. Qt Creator has an improved code editor that allows you to write programs in numerous languages in addition to C++.

With Qt Creator, you can create a Qt device emulator for testing and debugging your application. Qt Creator speeds up user interface startup with a fast compiler.

Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code is another open-source IDE available for Windows, Linux, and macOS. Visual Studio Code provides high-quality APIs, code refactoring, code completion, and many other essential features. It offers the necessary tools to create a Windows, Android, and iOS application.

Netbeans

The free, cross-platform Netbeans IDE provides users with C/C++ project types and templates, file navigation, multi-compiler support, Qt tool support, and remote development assistance.

Code::Blocks

Code::Blocks is a free and cross-platform C++ IDE whose functionality can be significantly extended with various plugins.

It supports multiple compilers, including GCC, Clang, and Visual C++. Code::Blocks is developed in C++ using the wxWidgets toolkit.

Eclipse

Don’t forget the well-known cross-platform and open-source Eclipse IDE, which offers developers a user-friendly graphical interface.

Vim

The highly customizable text editor Vim is also suitable for writing and editing C/C++ code, offering editor features for Unix/Linux users.

IDEs offer more programming convenience tools than plain text editors. Thus, the choice of IDEs for C/C++ development on Linux is excellent, and programmers can always select the one that suits them best.

Conclusion

Linux development is a fascinating process, the outcome of which depends in no small measure on the tools you use.

IDEs allow developers to write, edit, modify, run, debug, and deploy code efficiently and productively by providing all the functionality they need in one package.