George V (born June 3, 1865, London, England—died January 20, 1936, Sandringham, Norfolk) was the king of the United Kingdom from 1910 to 1936, the second son of Prince Albert Edward, later King Edward VII.

He served in the navy until the death (1892) of his elder brother, Prince Albert Victor, brought the need for more specialized training as eventual heir to the throne. Created duke of York (May 1892), he married (July 1893) Princess Mary of Teck, who had been his brother’s fiancée. Created duke of Cornwall and prince of Wales after his father’s accession (1901), he succeeded his father on May 6, 1910, and was crowned on June 22, 1911.

Britannica Quiz

Fit for a King (or Queen): the British Royalty Quiz

Formidable difficulties faced the new king early in his reign. The constitutional struggle to curb the power of the House of Lords was unresolved, and the Liberal government secured an undertaking from the king that, should the lords not yield, he would create sufficient new peers to overcome the opposition. After the Liberal success in the election of December 1910, the House of Lords relented and passed the Parliament Act (1911), and the king did not have to fulfill his pledge. Respect for King George greatly increased during World War I, and he visited the front in France several times.

After World War I the king was confronted by an outbreak of serious industrial unrest. He was also faced with a difficult decision on the resignation of Andrew Bonar Law in 1923, when he had to find a new prime minister. Both Lord Curzon and Stanley Baldwin had supporters among the elder statesmen whom George consulted, but, believing Baldwin had more support in the Conservative Party and that the prime minister should be in the House of Commons, the king selected him.

King George was seriously ill at the end of 1928, and for the rest of his reign he had to be extremely careful of his health. In 1931 the collapse of the pound and the consequent financial crisis split the Labour administration. To secure strong government, he persuaded Ramsay MacDonald and a part of his cabinet to remain in office and join with Conservative and Liberal ministers in the formation of a national coalition government. The celebration of George’s silver jubilee (May 1935) enabled the public to express its affection and admiration for him.