Jay Turser Guitars, distributed by Music Industries Corp., donated a JT-Warlord electric guitar to the ninth annual Skylar Neil Memorial charity golf tournament and auction, held May 5, 2005, at the Malibu Country Club, in Malibu, California. The final bid on the Jay Turser Warlord instrument, which was autographed by Vince Neil of MÖTLEY CRÜE, was $1,400.00, which contributed to the more than $51,000.00 that was raised during the event for cancer, leukemia and AIDS research.

In 1995, Vince Neil lost his daughter Skylar to stomach cancer. Since that time Vince has endeavored to help raise awareness and much needed funding for children's illnesses. The Skylar Neil Memorial Foundation has donated nearly a million dollars to various charity organizations for cancer, leukemia and AIDS research, and neurogenetic disorders such as autism, Down Syndrome and Williams Syndrome. All of the proceeds from the Skylar Neil Memorial charity golf tournament and auction are given to these charities so that they can continue their good work.

Commented Tommy Rizzi, Jay Turser Product Manager, “It was an honor and a pleasure to provide the Skylar Neil Memorial Foundation with a Jay Turser instrument for their charity auction. We're pleased that the autographed instrument brought in such a substantial sum of money that will go to such a worthy cause."

The Jay Turser JT-Warlord electric guitar offers the highest-quality materials, attention-to-detail craftsmanship, and a stunningly radical body design. Jay Turser's reputation for incredible playability and sound quality, combined with meticulous craftsmanship and ornate abalone and mother-of-pearl block inlays, offers an extraordinary value that far exceeds the instrument's U.S. suggested list price of $599.95.

The Warlord is a Jay Turser exclusive body design. The spectacular and radical solid body is dramatically enhanced with a beautiful high gloss finish available in solid and transparent colors. The body and headstock is wrapped in abalone and mother-of-pearl cream binding, while the neck features cream binding and black side-neck fret markers. The Warlord is designed for the player who wants the fat, full sound from two covered, high-gain, dual-coil, hum-canceling pickups. All Jay Turser instruments are covered by limited lifetime warranty.