ROBBIE Williams is preparing a shock bid to buy his beloved Port Vale football club.

The former Take That star, 49, has been backed by a consortium to take over the League One side — with a potential lucrative TV spin-off.

Robbie — who co-created the Soccer Aid charity football matches — was named as club president at the weekend and hinted at the behind-closed-doors talks as he posed in a team shirt, with the caption: “Up The Vale.”

If it goes through, Robbie could land a lucrative streaming deal, similar to the Wrexham takeover by Hollywood stars Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney.

A source said: “It’s really early days, but Robbie’s been formally approached to see if he’s interested in fronting a bid.

"Port Vale remains one of his greatest loves, and it’s always been a dream to be more involved.

"He’s had a couple of meetings, and his backers are incredibly excited.

“They feel Robbie would add the star quality, and make Port Vale a major player.

“Seeing what Ryan and Rob have done with Wrexham — the increased footfall, merchandise sales and general profile build — is inspiring.

"Port Vale fans love Robbie and, on paper, it’s a match made in heaven.”

Local lad Robbie played for his side at Vale Park in Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, in a 2001 testimonial, and later helped design their shirts.

He also founded his own US-based team in 2005 — Los Angeles Vale.

Port Vale have never been in the top flight of English football.

After being named president, Robbie posed in a club shirt and name-checked one of its stands.

He said: “My life is bizarre and wonderful and has taken many turns and twists and to find myself from the Railway Paddock to be ‘El Presidente’ is pretty special.

"It feels as though I need to be doing more in and around this place.”

Since actors Ryan and Rob completed their purchase of Wrexham in 2021, the Welsh club’s value has increased by more than 300 per cent.

Their docu-series Welcome To Wrexham, charting the takeover, became a hit on Disney+.