British singer-songwriter Robbie Williams is ready to experience L.A. life through another lens, listing his home in the Westside of Los Angeles County for sale at $11 million. Williams bought the French Normandy-style house in the Mulholland Estates — a star-studded gated community found in between Beverly Glen and Benedict Canyon — more than a decade ago for $5.45 million. The multistory home, built in 1992 and updated by the pop star, has a classic yet contemporary feel. Subtle hues, sparkling chandeliers and a sweeping staircase wrapped in artful ironwork are among the eye-catching details. In other parts of the home, dark patterned wallpaper creates visual interest against detailed molding.

The 10,681 square feet of interiors include a two-story entry that opens to a living room and a dining room with a mirrored wall. A study, a gym/media room, a center-island kitchen, a circular breakfast nook, seven bedrooms and nine bathrooms are also within the home. The third-floor master suite, with a separate sitting room and lavish modern bath, has pocket doors that open to a balcony overlooking the grounds. An office with a recording studio sits off the master bedroom. An outdoor living room with a fireplace, a built-in barbecue/kitchen and a swimming pool with a waterfall and rock spa fill grounds of about three-quarters of an acre. Views take in the city, mountains and surrounding canyons.

Williams, 42, gained fame in the 1990s as a member of the pop group Take That. As a solo artist, he has released 10 studio albums and is among the best-selling artists ever in Britain. He owns other real estate in Los Angeles.

Kylie Jenner makes a style change

Kylie Jenner loves to switch up her look, constantly cycling through various hair colors and other trends. Turns out that quick-change mentality applies to real estate, too. A year after buying a home in Calabasas, the 18-year-old and youngest daughter of Kardashian-Jenner matriarch Kris Jenner has bought a Cape Cod-inspired home in Hidden Hills for $6.025 million. The reality-television star is preparing to put the Calabasas home up for sale. As for the new house, it’s a traditional-style two-story with white siding and a slate-colored roof that butts up against the hillside on a 4.5-acre lot. It takes in views of the surrounding valley and a nearby creek bed. Inside, polished living spaces feature vaulted ceilings, distressed wood floors and a glass-enclosed wine cellar beneath the stairs. Open living and dining rooms, a chef’s kitchen with two center islands, a media room, six bedrooms and seven bathrooms lie within more than 7,000 square feet of interiors. And in true Kardashian-Jenner fashion, a master suite boasts custom boutique-inspired closets, a fireplace and a covered patio that opens to the grounds.

Outdoors, a large covered patio spans the length of the house and has a built-in barbecue. A swimming pool, rose gardens, fountains and lawns fill the setting. There’s also a four-car garage. The house came up for sale last year for $6.435 million and was taken off the market in January. Jenner appears on the series “Keeping Up With the Kardashians,” which centers on the lives of her parents, Kris and Caitlyn Jenner, and her siblings. Earlier this year, she launched the makeup line Kylie Cosmetics.

A ‘perfect’ rebel goes traditional

Australian actress Rebel Wilson of “Pitch Perfect” fame has bought a home in West Hollywood for $2.95 million. The two-story traditional, built last year by ROMM Remodeling, has classic curb appeal with a white picket fence, eggshell-colored siding and a decorative oval window above the front door. A covered porch sits off the entrance. Inside, the roughly 4,400-square-foot house features vaulted and coffered ceilings, wide-plank wood floors, delicate wainscoting and a range of white and gray hues. A glass-enclosed wine cellar sits below the stairs. Among common areas is an open living and dining room with a fireplace, a center-island chef’s kitchen, a family room and an office/library. Bi-folding doors off the family room open to a covered patio for indoor-outdoor entertaining. The master suite has two walk-in closets, a chandelier-topped soaking tub and a wet bar, for a total of five bedrooms and 4.5 bathrooms. French doors off the master bedroom open to a balcony overlooking the grounds. Outdoors, there’s a saltwater swimming pool, a tiled spa and a built-in fire pit. Lawns, landscaping and privacy hedges complete the setting. The house came to market in January for $3.299 million and was more recently priced at $3.195 million, records show.

Wilson, 36, has film credits that include “Bachelorette” (2012), “What to Expect When You’re Expecting” (2012) and “Pain & Gain” (2013). This year, she appeared in the comedies “How to Be Single” and “The Brothers Grimsby” and starred as Ursula in a three-night run of “The Little Mermaid” at the Hollywood Bowl. She will return for the third installment in the “Pitch Perfect” franchise, due out next year.

$2-million listing has ‘wonderful’ pedigree

A Hollywood Hills home that once belonged to Oscar-winning director Frank Capra and his first wife, actress Helen Howell, has listed for sale at $2 million. Built for Capra in 1925, the Spanish Revival-style house has vintage appeal, with arched doors and windows, brick accents and wrought iron work. Colorful tile risers decorate the steps leading up to the entrance. Inside, the 4,000 square feet of interiors continue the Old World ambiance with beamed ceilings, built-ins and stucco walls. A grand room topped with a cathedral-style ceiling has French doors that open to an inner courtyard. Other living areas include an updated kitchen with a center island, a formal dining area, a den and a wet bar. The interior space includes four bedrooms, 4.5 bathrooms and a maid’s quarters with a separate entrance. A raised deck, various sitting areas, garden beds and lawns make up the grounds. There’s also a two-car garage and a finished basement area. The house last changed hands more than four decades ago for $42,000, property records show.

Capra, who died in 1991 at 94, won a trio of Academy Awards for best director for the films “It Happened One Night” (1934), “Mr. Deeds Goes to Town” (1936) and “You Can’t Take It With You” (1938). “Mr. Smith Goes to Washington” (1939) and “It’s a Wonderful Life” (1946) are among the filmmaker’s other credits.