Pop star Robbie Williams compared his personality to that of Chester FC ’s legendary vice captain Gary Roberts in a no holds barred football podcast.

Robbie, originally from Stoke-on-Trent and a well known Port Vale fan, made the comments when he appeared as a live guest on the popular Undr The Cosh online show.

Joining in from his Beverly Hills home in Los Angeles, the former Take That member was asked by ex-Sunderland forward Chris Brown which footballer he most related to.

Robbie responded: “What’s his name? The guy that’s incredibly talented that played for Crewe and Port Vale...”

The team of hosts, which also includes former Stoke City and Macclesfield Town striker Jon Parkin and a comedy writer, also by the name of Chris Brown, shouted back in unison ‘Gaz Roberts’.

Blacon ’s Gary Roberts is known not only for his extraordinary talent but also for his well documented battle with drinking and gambling just as Robbie has fought his own demons.

At one point Robbie said: “Gary Roberts – I was like, yeah, that’s me that is.”

Drawing parallels with his own personal challenges, Robbie said: “Because you are gifted this opportunity at such an early age. In my career you were expected to do cocaine in the 90s, you were expected to be drunk. You were applauded and so I did! And I could get away with a lot of stuff because the stage is very small and I don’t have to run the channels on the stage!”

Robbie, who said he had now reached a place of contentment, has been sober 20 years and explained that it had taken him 10 years to sort out his head following his drug problems.

Echoing Robbie’s words about midfielder Roberts, Jon Parkin said: “He was absolutely incredible. He could have been anything in the football world. He was that good.”

Fellow ex-player Chris Brown agreed: “He could have been one of the best of all time.”

Unaware of Roberts’ current circumstances, Robbie asked: “Is he still playing?” to which the panel – swigging from cans and dressed in drag for the occasion – responded: ‘At Chester!’.

Gary, who as a youth played for England up to under 19s level, enjoyed being spotlighted even if there was a hint that he may not have delivered on his full potential on the field.

He tweeted: “Not everyday someone like @robbiewilliams name drops you, if you ever wanna come and watch just let me know, mate.”