Liverpool media, music and performing arts institution LMA, which is co-owned by singer Robbie Williams, is set to expand with a new state-of-the art campus at the city’s Metquarter, creating more than 100 jobs.

LMA is set to invest more than £15m in the new site, which will take up 50,000 sq ft of space at the building on Whitechapel in the city centre, which was formerly the site of a main post office before being transformed into a shopping centre.

The move has been driven by a surge in applications from prospective students across the country wanting to study at LMA.

Currently based across two campuses in Liverpool – Hope Street and Duke Street – LMA offers post-16 btec qualifications and post-18 degree courses, spanning music, musical theatre, dance, acting, film and TV production, and games art and animation.

As part of the expansion plans, LMA is also creating more than 100 jobs for industry-experienced individuals to join the dynamic teaching team.

It is currently recruiting for roles across all subject areas.

Robbie Williams, who became a co-owner of the business in 2019 after being wowed by its choir on The X Factor, said: “Since meeting the LMA Choir two years ago and later joining the LMA family, I’ve been constantly inspired by their sheer drive, dedication and passion.

“Liverpool is known for being home to some amazing talent and LMA is testament to that. I’m so proud to be part of its incredible journey, especially as the staff and students take their next steps in expanding across the city.”

The new campus is part of LMA’s wider expansion plans, which also includes its arrival in London later this year. Located at creative hub Here East on Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, the site is set to launch in September and will be LMA’s first to open outside of Liverpool.

Richard Wallace, who created LMA with brother Simon in 2008, said: “We’ve been working for some time to find the perfect location in the city centre that would house our world-class facilities for students and staff, and Metquarter is absolutely ideal for us.

“There is a lot of potential for what we can do at the site to help inspire students and give them unique opportunities to explore their passion and creativity, whether that’s on stage or screen, behind the camera, in the recording studio or creating the next big gaming sensation.

“It also gives us the capacity to welcome even more talented students from across the city – and beyond – to the LMA family, so it’s an extremely exciting time as we look forward to our next chapter.”

Plans for the new campus include state-of-the-art film studios, dance studios, music rehearsal rooms, classrooms and recording studios.

The Metquarter has had new life injected into it over the past 18 months with a major refurbishment and new occupiers including Everyman Cinema alongside fashion stalwarts Cricket and Kids Cavern.

There are also exciting plans to introduce new food and beverage offers to the scheme over the coming months.