As far as music careers go, there really isn’t much that Robbie Williams hasn’t done. He’s had generation-defining tunes, won bags of awards, earned loads of money and become a national icon. The next step? Owning a football club, obviously.

Devoted Robbie-heads likely know that he’s a lifelong fan of his hometown club, Stoke-on-Trent’s Port Vale. And now he might become the club’s owner, with local paper the Sentinel reporting that Williams could be lining up to front a takeover bid.

Port Vale, for any readers who don’t keep up to date with English football’s lower leagues, are a club in Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent. Currently in League One, their traditional rivals are Stoke City (matches between the two are called the ‘Potteries derby’), though the Vale and the Potters haven’t been in the same division for a rather long time (since 2002, in fact).

This isn’t the start of Robbie dabbling behind the scenes at Port Vale. Back in the 2000s he bought shares in the Vale, though the club then fell into administration and he lost those shares. From gigs at Vale Park and getting the team into video game FIFA 2000 to setting up Los Angeles Vale FC over in the US, Williams has long been a champion of the club.

Last weekend Williams was made Port Vale club president, with the singer describing the move as ‘fully mental’ and saying that from now on he’d like to be addressed as ‘El Presidente’.

If Robbie does take over Port Vale, comparisons will likely be made to Wrexham, which is now owned by Hollywood stars Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney. Indeed, sources at Port Vale told the Sun that Robbie’s ownership appeals partly due to his star power – and the potential for a TV show.

The source said: ‘It’s really early days, but Robbie’s been formally approached to see if he’s interested in fronting a bid. Port Vale remains one of his greatest loves, and it’s always been a dream to be more involved. He’s had a couple of meetings, and his backers are incredibly excited.

‘They feel Robbie would add the star quality, and make Port Vale a major player.

‘Seeing what Ryan and Rob have done with Wrexham — the increased footfall, merchandise sales and general profile build — is inspiring. Port Vale fans love Robbie and, on paper, it’s a match made in heaven.’

Exciting, eh? Especially if you’re a Vale fan. Now read about how Reynolds and McElhenney have transformed Wrexham into a buzzy tourist spot.

Did you see that a brand-new rail route could soon launch between London and the Midlands?

Plus: the location of Radio 1’s Big Weekend 2024 has been revealed.