Robbie Williams has sold his enormous Los Angeles mansion to DJ Khaled for $9.9million.

And with 11 bathrooms to choose from, the 40-year-old rapper won't be caught short.

According to TMZ, the 42-year-old British pop singer sold the 10,681 square-foot mansion to Khaled for exactly $9.9 million after listing it in June 2016 for originally $11million.

Scroll down for video

Located in the gated Mulholland Estates community, the house comes equipped with seven bedrooms and 11 bathrooms.

Although the house carries the 90210 zip code, Williams' mansion is nestled in the celebrity-heavy Sherman Oaks neighborhood between Beverly Glen and Benedict Canyon.

The French Normandy-style house, which was custom built in 1992, was originally purchased by the singer for $5.45 million in 2002.

Since then, Williams has renovated his home during his decade-plus of ownership.

The house features a two-story entry with an eye-catching, sweeping staircase, a formal dining room with a mirrored wall, a study, a gym/media room and a chef's kitchen with a broad center island.

The all-white interior and bathrooms - including a Moroccan-themed master - give the house a European feel.

The master suite also comes equipped with a spa-like bath, separate sitting room, doors that open to a balcony and an adjoining office with a recording studio - which would come in handy for DJ Khaled.

Outdoors features a swimming pool with a waterfall, garden kitchen, spa and covered dining area - perfect for the warm California climate.

The views from the three-quarter acre take in mountains and cityscape.

The star told the Wall Street Journal he was selling because 'after over a decade in the same location, we felt it was time to explore a new part of town'.

Williams and his wife Ayda Field - who raise two children together - have moved after buying a new - even more extravagant - $32 million property in Beverly Hills last year.

Meanwhile, the Party Like A Russian singer - who gained fame in the 1990s as a member of the pop group Take That - is among the bestselling musicians in Britain.