It has been reported that Robbie Williams has put his Beverly Hills mansion up for sale.

With an asking price of $3.6 million, Robbie is bidding farewell to the 4,659 square feet home which has a private football pitch.

The exclusive two-parcel Mulholland estate is the same house which the 38-year-old Angels singers used for the location of his wedding to wife Ayda Field in 2010.

Robbie's abode comes complete with five bedrooms and five bathrooms, and has seen various renovations.

Originally built in 1947, the main home measures at 3,525 square feet with three bedrooms and four bathrooms and a swimming pool.

Decorated with British memorabilia, the home has wood flooring and large living and dining rooms.

An extension was then built in four years later with an additional two bedrooms and one bathroom as well as a terrace and another pool.

The third remodeling to the house added a four car garage, living and lounge areas.

The separate guest house has its own entrance and is adjacent to the football pitch.

When Robbie bought the house in February 2005 for $3.7million meaning he's put it back on the market at a loss of $100,000.

The multi-million-dollar property is protected by gates and armed guards, and neighbours include Paris Hilton, singer Avril Lavigne and Beach Boy Brian Wilson.

Picturesque: The multi-million-dollar Mulholland property is protected by gates and is private from the street

On Monday, Robbie announced a 17 date European stadium tour supported by current UK number 1 singer Olly Murs.

But the former Take That singer warned he needs to get in serious shape before his tour kicks off in June 2013.

Taking him across Europe, from Manchester to Estonia, it will be the first time Williams has done a solo tour since 2006.

Top of the market: The house features beautiful wood flooring and open dining spaces

Chill out zone: The house also comes complete with an entertainment room

Where the magic happened! The exclusive estate is the same house which the 38-year-old Angels singers used for the location of his wedding to wife Ayda Field in 2010

Paying homage to his country: Robbie's house features lots of British memorabilia

Beautiful: The large bathroom is decorated with colours and furniture designed to create a relaxed environment

New father Robbie also said that his daughter Theadora will accompany him on parts of the tour, and revealed the it is all part of his plan to leave behind a 'musical legacy'.

Speaking about the upcoming dates, Robbie explained: 'I believe that I am at a place in my career where its time to put my foot down, that this is what I do, its legacy time for me.

'I'm getting my handicap down in golf and all that business. I'm nearly 40, that's what I'm trying to say.

He continued: 'I don't know how many times I will get given this opportunity... I want to go and seal my place in pop history.'

Peaceful: The terrace overlooks the greenery and neighbouring homes

For days in the sun: The football pitch is adjacent to the separate guest house