A former post office on the street where Robbie Williams grew up is now a stunning four-bedroom home which is on the market for £325,000. Appropriately named The Old Post Office, the property - which includes a self-contained annexe - is on Greenbank Road in Tunstall.

Available through Baddeley Green-based estate agents Dunn & Rate, the spacious property has two reception rooms - one with a log burner - and a study overlooking the large garden. The kitchen includes a freestanding Rangemaster style cooker and an American-style fridge-freezer, as well as plumbing and space for a dishwasher.

There's also a utility room with space and plumbing for washing machine and tumble dryer. And in the utility there is an 'access hatch' leading down to the basement, where there are three rooms, each with power and lighting.

READ: The house for sale where you have to sign a health and safety waiver to view it

Upstairs you'll find the bathroom and three double bedrooms. The fourth bedroom in the property can be found in the self-contained annexe, which has a combined lounge/ bedroom, as well as a and shower room - and its own front door.

The large garden is fully enclosed by mature trees and shrubbery. It has a lawn and a garden shed, and an attractive raised decked sitting area.

Click the picture below to see 22 photos of the Old Post Office in Greenbank Road, Tunstall:

The listing says: "Beautifully maintained throughout, this immaculate property comprises two reception rooms, large modern fitted kitchen/dining room, utility room, study, three double bedrooms, family bathroom and separate WC. And if that wasn't enough it has a complete basement for storage and a fully contained annex, finished to a high standard comprising a lounge/bedroom, fully fitted kitchen and shower room.

"Externally the property sits on a sizeable plot with ample off road parking to the front and a fully enclosed, private rear garden. The rear garden is laid mainly to lawn with a raised decked sitting area and sleeper flower bed borders."

Robbie Williams was living in Greenbank Road when he joined Take That in 1990. His opening words at his Vale Park homecoming concert earlier this year, to his mum Jan's disapproval, were "Allow me to introduce myself, my name is Robert f***ing Williams, from Greenbank f***ing Road".

NEWSLETTER: Sign up for email alerts from StokeonTrentLive direct to your inbox here

READ NEXT

Stoke-on-Trent school invites former pupils back to celebrate 90th anniversary

Mum quits carer job as 'excluded' son, 7, left without school for 10 weeks

Police manhunt after woman attacked in Biddulph alley

Tickets on sale for Trentham lights trail as dogs now allowed