ROBBIE Williams now lives in a beautiful £38million LA mansion after selling his homes in the UK and Switzerland.

The Angels singer, 49, whose Netflix documentary airs today, shares the perfect pad with his wife Ayda Field, 42, and their four children Theodora, Charlie, Colette and Beau.

It certainly has plenty of space for the whole family as it sprawls across 18,925 sq ft.

The property has an impressive eight bedrooms, 11 bathrooms, bespoke kitchen and formal dining room.

It also has a private tennis court, swimming pool and fitness centre for them to keep busy.

Last year it was revealed that Robbie was keen to sell his £24million mansion in Switzerland to return to the UK.

A source said at the time: “Robbie and Ayda have loved living in Switzerland the last few years, and the tranquility was a god-send during the pandemic.

“But they’ve decided they want to mix it up a bit and have a different pace of life for a bit. So they’re heading back to London.

“They’ve done quite a lot of work to it, and with the housing market on the up they reckon they’re going to make a fortune on it.”

In January last year Robbie sold his house in Wiltshire for £6.75million.

He purchased the pad for £8.1million in 2008 but it was for sale for 'just' £6.75million.

He also wound up banking a reported £13million profit - after selling his American mansion to Drake.

He sold Los Angeles property to the One Dance rapper for £37million.

Robbie is estimated to be worth a staggering £238million.

Robbie stars in a new tell-all Netflix documentary that looks back at his incredible career, starting from the early days as a 16-year-old joining Take That.

The boyband's success catapulted Robbie into the spotlight, and only increased further when he quit and went solo in the mid-90s.

But despite the awards, number one hit singles and record-breaking concerts, Robbie struggled with the pressures of fame.

In the trailer - which shows clips of him on stage, in the recording studio and on the road throughout various stages of his career - he says: "It’s astounding what’s happened in my life.

"The past has me in a headlock...Something has to give."

Robbie is then seen in the present day with a laptop in front of him, joking: "You’re only supposed to do this at the pearly gates with St Peter, this looking back at your life."

As the montage of footage continues to play alongside snippets of him singing "Let Me Entertain You", he says: "I was the centre of the pop culture world.

"I felt I was giving more and more of myself away where you get to the point you’re someone you don’t recognise."

He continues: "Being in the spotlight you can’t trust anybody. I was having a nervous meltdown in front of thousands of people."

Later in the trailer he admits: "The thing that would destroy me has also made me successful."

The trailer also features snippets of his family life now with wife Ayda and their four children; Teddy, Charlie, Coco and Beau.

At the end, Teddy is heard singing a line from his smash hit single Angels, with her proud dad cheering as she finishes.