HISTORY OF THE TOWN OF STONINGTON, County of New London, Connecticut, from its first settlement in 1649 to 1900, by Richard Anson Wheeler, New London, CT, 1900, p. 460

Birth: Dec. 24, 1622, England Death: Nov. 18, 1702 Lebanon New London County Connecticut, USA

Founding settler of Norwich and Saybrook, Connecticut. Rev. James Fitch was the first ordained minister of Saybrook Congregational Church and the First Congregational Church of Norwich. He was instrumental in getting Uncas and the Mohegans and the Pequot Indians to side with the English against King Philip's Narragansett tribes. Their fair dealings with the Indians spared these settlers who were on the very frontier at that time.

(additional source) Archbold genealogy > compiled by Don Lorenzo Stevens published privately 1976... entry of 2-26-1951:

"Rev. James Fitch. Born in Bocking, Essex, England, 12/24/1622. Emigrated to Hartford, Conn. with his mother in 1638. He was educated in England; and in Connecticut studied seven years for the ministry under Rev. Thomas Hooker and Samuel Stone. He married Abigail Whitfield of Guilford, Ct., 10-1-1648 in Saybrook. Subsequently, married Priscilla Mason of Norwich 10-2-1664 in Windham. He lived in Saybrook, Ct., where he was ordained in 1646 and was the first minister there. He removed with most of his congregation to Norwich, Ct., in 1660; subsequently moved to Lebanon, Ct.. 1696. He was a Chaplain in King Philip's War. He died 11-18-1702 in Norwich and was buried in Lebanon.

14 Children:

•by Abigail Whitfield Fitch (6)

1. James b.1649

2. Abigail b.1650

3. Elizabeth b. 1652 m. Rev. Edward Taylor 1674

4. Hannah b. 1653 m. Thomas Meeks (or Mix)

5.Samuel b. 1655 m. Mary Brewster 1678 died 1725

6. Dorothy b. 1658

•by Pricilla Mason Fitch (8)

1. Daniel b.1655

2. John b. 1667

3. Jeremiah b. 1670

4. Jabez b. 1672 m. Elizabeth Appleton 1704 died 1746

5. Ann b. 1675 . Thomas Bradford

6. Nathaniel b.1679

7. Josiah b. 1681

8. Eleazar b. 1683

(submitted by Mike van Beuren descendant)

Founding settler of Norwich and Saybrook, Connecticut. Rev. James Fitch was the first ordained minister of Saybrook Congregational Church and the First Congregational Church of Norwich. He was instrumental in getting Uncas and the Mohegans and the Pequot Indians to side with the English against King Philip's Narragansett tribes. Their fair dealings with the Indians spared these settlers who were on the very frontier at that time.On his gravestone is written in Latin..."In this grave are deposited the remains of that truley reverend man, Mr. James Fitch. He was born in Bocking, in the County of Essex, in England, the 24th day of December, in the year of our Lord 1622; who after he had been most excellently taught the learned languages came into New England at the age of sixteen, and then spent seven years under the instructions of those very famous men, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone. Afterwards he discharged the pastoral office fourteen years at Saybrook. Thence he removed with the major part of his Church to Norwich, where he spent the other years of his life in the work of the gospel. In his old age indeed he was obliged to cease from his public labors by reason of bodily indisposition and at length retired to his children at Lebanon, where after spending nearly half a year, he slept in Jesus in the year 1702, on the 18th day of November, in the 80th year of his age. He was a man as to the smartness of his genius, the solidity of his judgement, his charity, holy labors, and every kind of purity of life, and also as to his skill and energy of preaching, inferior to none."

Birth: Dec. 24, 1622 Braintree Essex, England Death: Nov. 18, 1702 Lebanon New London County Connecticut, USA

Founding settler of Norwich and Saybrook, Connecticut. Rev. James Fitch was the first ordained minister of Saybrook Congregational Church and the First Congregational Church of Norwich. He was instrumental in getting Uncas and the Mohegans and the Pequot Indians to side with the English against King Philip's Narragansett tribes. Their fair dealings with the Indians spared these settlers who were on the very frontier at that time. Grave inscription in Latin "In Hoc Sepulcro Depositae Sunt Reliquiae Viri Vere Reverendi D: Jacobi Fitch: Natus Fuit Apud Bocking in Comitatu Essexlae in Anglia, Anno Domino 1622 Decembr 24 Qui Post-Quam Linguis Literatis Optime Instructus Fuisset In Novangliam Venit Aetat. 16 Et Deinde Vitam Degit Harteordlae Per Sepennium Sub Institutione Virorum Ceeeberimorum D: Hooker Et D: Stone Postea Mtnere Passorali Functus Est Apud Saybrook Per Annos 14 Illinc Cum Ecckesiae Maiori Parte Norvicum Migravit Et Ibi Ceteros Vitae Annos Transegit In Opere Evangelico In Senectute Vero Prae Corporis Infirmitate Necessario Cessabat Ab Opere Publico : Tandemque Recessit Liberis Apud Lebanon Ubi Semianno Fere Exacto Obdormivit In Iesu Anno 1702 Novebr 18 Etat 80 Vir, Ingenii Acumine, Pondere Judicii, Prudentia Charitate, Sanctis Laboribus, Et Omnimoda Vitae Sanctitate Peritiaquoque Et Vi Concionandi Nulli Secundus." Translated "In this grave are deposited the remains of that truley reverend man, Mr. James Fitch. He was born in Bocking, in the County of Essex, in England, the 24th day of December, in the year of our Lord 1622; who after he had been most excellently taught the learned languages came into New England at the age of sixteen, and then spent seven years under the instructions of those very famous men, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone. Afterwards he discharged the pastoral office fourteen years at Saybrook. Thence he removed with the major part of his Church to Norwich, where he spent the other years of his life in the work of the gospel. In his old age indeed he was obliged to cease from his public labors by reason of bodily indisposition and at length retired to his children at Lebanon, where after spending nearly half a year, he slept in Jesus in the year 1702, on the 18th day of November, in the 80th year of his age. He was a man as to the smartness of his genius, the solidity of his judgement, his charity, holy labors, and every kind of purity of life, and also as to his skill and energy of preaching, inferior to none." Three books are available at Amazon.com about Rev. James Fitch. PURITAN IN THE WILDERNESS: A Biography of the Rev. James Fitch 1622-1702; Descendants of the Rev. James Fitch 1622-1703, Vol 1 & 2. by John T. Fitch. (bio by: Eric Crow)

Family links:

Spouses:

Abigail Whitfield Fitch (1622 - 1659)*

Priscilla Mason Fitch (1641 - 1714)*

Children:

James Fitch (1647 - 1727)*

Elizabeth Fitch Taylor (1651 - 1689)*

John Fitch (1669 - 1743)*

Jeremiah Fitch (1670 - 1736)*

Jabez Fitch (1672 - 1746)*

Anne Fitch Bradford (1675 - 1715)*

Ann Fitch Bradford (1675 - 1715)*

Nathaniel Fitch (1679 - 1759)*

Joseph Fitch (1681 - 1741)*

*Calculated relationship

Burial: Old Cemetery Lebanon New London County Connecticut, USA

http://www.pcez.com/~bigshoe/du/Mix/palmer.html#2514

http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=10842545

Citation: History and Genealogy of the Families of Old Fairfield, Volume 1, 1930-1932, edited by Donald Lines Jacobus, p. 361-362

https://minerdescent.com/2010/07/24/james-fitch/

Rev. James Fitch was born 24 Dec 1622 in Bocking, Essex, England. His parents were Thomas FITCHand Anne REEVES. His brother Capt. John FITCH was also our ancestor through the Shaw line. He came to America in 1638 and was the first minister at Norwich. He was ordained as the minister of Saybrook in 1646. He first married Abigail Whitfield on 18 Oct 1648 in Guilford, CT. James and Abigail were, according to legend at least, married by her father in the north end of the living room of the Gilford Stone House on 1 October 1648. This seems unlikely however because the 17th Century congregational church, marriage was not a sacrament, and marriages were generally performed by civil authorities rather than clergy. The marriage was recorded “after the fact” in the Norwich, Connecticut vital records. After Abigail died, he married Priscilla MASON on 2 Oct 1664 in Norwich, CT. James died 18 Nov 1702 in Lebanon, CT.

Children of James and Abigail Whitfield Name Born Married Departed 1. Maj. James Fitch 2 Aug 1649 Saybrook, CT Elizabeth Mason (Daughter of Maj. John MASON) Jan 1674/75 .

Alice Bradford 8 May 1687 Saybrook, CT 10 Nov 1727 Canterbury, CT

2. Abigail Fitch 5 Aug 1650 Saybrook, CT Capt. John Mason Jr. (Son of Maj. John MASON)

about 1668 .

John Buttolph 1682 5 Jul 1687 Wethersfield, Norwich, CT.

3. Elizabeth Fitch 2 Jan 1652 Rev. Edward Taylor 5 Sep 1674 1689

4. Hannah Fitch 17 Sep 1653 in Saybrook, Middlesex, CT Thomas Meeks (Mix) 30 Jun 1679 New Haven, CT after 1705 Stonington, New London, CT

5. Samuel Fitch 5 Apr 1655 Saybrook, CT Mary Anne Brewster 28 Nov 1678 18 Feb 1724/25 Preston, CT

6. Dorothy Fitch 16 Apr 1658 Saybrook, New London, CT Nathaniel Bissell 4 Jul 1683 Windsor, CT 28 Jun 1691 Windsor, CT

Founding settler of Norwich and Saybrook, Connecticut. Rev. James Fitch was the first ordained minister of Saybrook Congregational Church and the First Congregational Church of Norwich. He was instrumental in getting Uncas and the Mohegans and the Pequot Indians to side with the English against King Philip's Narragansett tribes. Their fair dealings with the Indians spared these settlers who were on the very frontier at that time. Grave inscription in Latin "In Hoc Sepulcro Depositae Sunt Reliquiae Viri Vere Reverendi D: Jacobi Fitch: Natus Fuit Apud Bocking in Comitatu Essexlae in Anglia, Anno Domino 1622 Decembr 24 Qui Post-Quam Linguis Literatis Optime Instructus Fuisset In Novangliam Venit Aetat. 16 Et Deinde Vitam Degit Harteordlae Per Sepennium Sub Institutione Virorum Ceeeberimorum D: Hooker Et D: Stone Postea Mtnere Passorali Functus Est Apud Saybrook Per Annos 14 Illinc Cum Ecckesiae Maiori Parte Norvicum Migravit Et Ibi Ceteros Vitae Annos Transegit In Opere Evangelico In Senectute Vero Prae Corporis Infirmitate Necessario Cessabat Ab Opere Publico : Tandemque Recessit Liberis Apud Lebanon Ubi Semianno Fere Exacto Obdormivit In Iesu Anno 1702 Novebr 18 Etat 80 Vir, Ingenii Acumine, Pondere Judicii, Prudentia Charitate, Sanctis Laboribus, Et Omnimoda Vitae Sanctitate Peritiaquoque Et Vi Concionandi Nulli Secundus." Translated "In this grave are deposited the remains of that truley reverend man, Mr. James Fitch. He was born in Bocking, in the County of Essex, in England, the 24th day of December, in the year of our Lord 1622; who after he had been most excellently taught the learned languages came into New England at the age of sixteen, and then spent seven years under the instructions of those very famous men, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone. Afterwards he discharged the pastoral office fourteen years at Saybrook. Thence he removed with the major part of his Church to Norwich, where he spent the other years of his life in the work of the gospel. In his old age indeed he was obliged to cease from his public labors by reason of bodily indisposition and at length retired to his children at Lebanon, where after spending nearly half a year, he slept in Jesus in the year 1702, on the 18th day of November, in the 80th year of his age. He was a man as to the smartness of his genius, the solidity of his judgement, his charity, holy labors, and every kind of purity of life, and also as to his skill and energy of preaching, inferior to none." Three books are available at Amazon.com about Rev. James Fitch. PURITAN IN THE WILDERNESS: A Biography of the Rev. James Fitch 1622-1702; Descendants of the Rev. James Fitch 1622-1703, Vol 1 & 2. by John T. Fitch.

GEDCOM Note

Biography

{Puritan Great Migration} [,Category:Founders of Saybrook]] [[Category: Original 35 Purchasers of Norwich]

Emigration

He came to America in 1638 on the ship 'Defense' along with Rev. Hooker, who had decided to go to America and start a church. (source needed) James immigrated with his mother and brothers circa 1638. The exact number of the brothers that came over has not been definitely ascertained. Thomas, Joseph, and James can be clearly traced.

From his tombstone, we know his year of birth, immigration at the age of sixteen, and seven years of theological instruction at Hartford. This is all that is known of him prior to his ordination at Saybrook in1646. James' father left money in his will for James to attend Cambridge. Instead, it seems, he was taken under the wings of Rev. Thomas Hooker ofChelmsford, a friend of his father's, who was also mentioned in the will. James finished his theological training at Hartford, Hartford Co., Connecticut under the Rev. Thomas Hooker and Rev. Samuel Stone. A new church was built at Saybrook, and he was ordained as its first minister in 1646. In 1659, the congregation at Saybrook obtained permission to establish a new settlement at Norwich, Connecticut. Rev. Fitch left to become the minister in Norwich. His wife Abigail died shortly before leaving. Several of his letters, treatises and sermons survive. He served as a chaplain for colonial troops in conflict with hostile Indians and later helped in resettlement programs for "surrenderers". Helearned the language of the Indians and went among them, teaching them and winning their friendship, even though the Mohegan sachems refused to come to his belief. Large tracts of land were conveyed to him either in trust or as absolute grants; a tract five miles in length and one in breadth, located in the present town of Lebanon, was conveyed byOwaneco to Mr. Fitch, and on this land some of his children settled. <ref> History of New London County, Connecticut: With Biographical Sketches of Many of Its Pioneers and Prominent Men, by Duane Hamilton Hurd, publ. 1882 </ref> In 1660, Rev. Fitch, the first pastor of the church of Saybrook, with the greater part of his church, moved from Saybrook to Norwich. He continued to be pastor of said church at Norwich until, by reason of his age and infirmity, he resigned his said office about 1696. In 1702 hemoved to Lebanon, and soon after died. He had nine sons and five daughters. One or more of his sons settled in Lebanon. Those of the name in the vicinity of Windham, Lebanon, Canterbury, Preston, Norwich, and Montville are his descendants. Those in the western part of Connecticut descended from his brother Thomas, who settled in Norwalk. Several of his letters, treatises, and sermons survive. He served as achaplain for colonial troops in conflict with hostile Indians and later helped in resettlement programs for 'surrenderers.' He preached theelection sermon in 1674, and it is the oldest election sermon of the Connecticut ministry which has been saved, and perhaps was the first one preached. In addition to his clerical labors, he educated several young men for the ministry; among those who received at least a part oftheir ministerial training from him were the Rev. Samuel Whiting of Windsor; Rev. Taylor of Westfield; Rev. Adams of New London. The reputation of the senior Fitch did not rest on his theological writing, however, but on his vigorous missionary work among the Indians of Connecticut, particularly the Mohegans. Having mastered the Indian language, Fitch worked diligently to convert the famous chieftain Uncasand his son Owaneco. For a time the work among 'those poor heathen' was so promising that the General Assembly of Connecticut acknowledged a readiness to 'encourage Mr. Fitch in the work,' and he received funds from the United Commissioners. During King Philip's War, Fitch was particularly useful to the colony, maintaining the loyalty of the Mohegans and accompanying the colony's forces into battle.

Spouses and Children

James was twice married and had fourteen children. His first wife wasAbigail Whitfield, whom he married on 1 Oct 1648. They had six children. She died on 9 Sep 1659. <ref> The Signers of the Mayflower Compact and Their Descendants, by Henry Whittemore, publ. 1889 </ref>

He married, as his second wife, Priscilla Mason. This was on 20 October 1664. James and Priscilla Fitch had eight children. <ref> The Signers of the Mayflower Compact and Their Descendants, by Henry Whittemore, publ. 1889 </ref> All the children except Elizabeth are referred to as among the living in the will of their father, made February 1696.

DEALINGS WITH THE NATIVE AMERICANS

The following records are from the book, "History of Norwich, Connecticut" by Frances Manwaring Caulkins, publ. by the author in 1866.

"The conversion of these Indians was a cherished object with the Rev. Fitch. He continually sought opportunities for sowing the seed, and his earnest faith and large-hearted charity made him hopeful of the harvest. He cultivated an intercourse with the tribe, and made use of every opportunity for acquiring their language. Rev. Fitch, having a greatpurpose in view, pursued the study of the native tongue with a systemand a fair measure of success. After a few years, he was able not only to instruct in private, or with an interpreter, but could speak in away to be understood and appreciated in assemblies of the tribe. Withthe sachems and chiefs, Christianity was never popular . . but among the poorer, gentler, and more scattered families, particularly among the tributaries and those adopted from other tribes, who were often oppressed by Uncas, Mr. Fitch found willing ears and accessible hearts. Here the gospel seemed to come as into a prepared place, bringing with it peace and comfort. Mr. Fitch rejoiced over these poor people as over lost children that had been found, and collected them into a small community, settling over them instructors and guardians from among themselves, whom he himself taught and trained for their office. The war with Philip commenced in June 1675 and raged about fifteen months. Mr. Fitch was an active agent and valued counselor of the government. . . Uncas came to consult with Mr. Fitch, and Mr. Fitch visited the Pequots to see if all was right in that quarter. the Indians consented to join the English, but apparently with a doubtful mind, and inclined to take that side only because it was the strongest. Of Uncas the English had at first deep distrust. He professed great friendship in his consultation with Mr. Fitch, but the latter thought it prudent that he should be induced to commit himself as soon as possible, by some act of hostility against Philip. The sachem saw where his interest lay, and consented to engage in immediate action. Before the end of July, fifty Mohegan warriors, staunch and well caparisoned, under the command of Owaneco, who had two other sons or near relatives on Uncas with him, wereready to start for Boston, there to offer their services against the Picasset chief. They paused in Norwich to obtain letters from Mr. Fitch and Lieut. Mason, and then proceeded to the Bay. . . On the 25th of January, 1676, Major Treat left New London on a second expedition intothe wilderness, with a force of about 300 men. Mr. Fitch accompanied him as a chaplain, - Uncas and his warriors as scouts. . . The Council, therefore, appointed three Commissioners, Samuel Wyllis, James Richards, and John Allyn, to hold a general Indian convention at Norwich onthe second Wednesday of December, and there, in concert with Mr. Fitch, as one of them, 'to received, dispose and settle all surrenderers according to order. . . Feb. 1, 1676-7. A motion was made by the Rev. Mr. Fitch with reference to a place of residence for those Indians who are listed surrenderers, where they might be entertained and accommodated with lands for their improvement in order to their comfortable living till such time as some other way may be made open for them. . . . The kind-hearted Mr. Fitch labored hard for his poor Indians, yet withunsatisfying results. Out of the hundreds that surrendered during thewar, only one village consisting of about thirty families was actually established, and this was on a reservation, laid out by the town forthis express purpose, between the rivers Shetucket and Quinebaug, where Owaneco and his people had formerly sojourned. . . .Mr. Fitch, in his report of the business to the General Court, observes: ' I am sufficiently informed there is a considerable number more abiding with Uncus, who are doubtless willing to come and settle with the others but are merely hindered by Uncus.' "The summer of 1676 was remarkable for a long-continued drought. . . At length, they applied to Mr. Fitch, entreating him to intercede with the Lord of the harvest to refresh their drooping fields with the customary showers. Of this drought and the successful prayer for rain, an account is given under Mr. Fitch's own hand, which he calls 'a true narrative of that providence.' [prayer to be entered] . . . The sachem'srecognition of the mighty power of God, in the successful prayer for rain, was in 1676. But in May 1678, Mr. Fitch depicts his character incolors of the blackest dye. He accuses him of hostility to the English, and hatred of their rulers, laws, and religion; of cunning, malice,robbery, oppression, and breaking of pledges."

LAND RECORDS

The following records are from the book, "History of Norwich, Connecticut" by Frances Manwaring Caulkins, publ. by the author in 1866.

Thomas Meeks, son of Thomas of New Haven, and there born in 1635, married June 30, 1677, Hannah, daughter of Rev. James Fitch. He settled upon a farm belonging to Rev. Fitch, east of the Shetucket. A tract of twenty acres, 'where his house stands,' was confirmed to him July 16, 1680, as a free gift from Mr. Fitch to his daughter. When King Philip's War was over, a part of this tract was assigned to the Indian fugitives, called Surrenderers; in May 1678, Rev. Fitch reported to the government that twenty-nine families of this class had settled upon it under the supervision of the English." The Patent of the Town of Norwich, A.D. 1685 lists "Mr. James Fitch senr, Capt. James Fitch" as two of the proprietors of the township of Norwich and grants them land. He was disabled by a stroke of the palsy in 1694 and replaced, temporarily, in the Norwich pulpit by his son, the Reverend Jabez Fitch, who had just completed his studies at Harvard. The record shows: 'At a town meeting Sept. 12, 1694. Inasmuch as it hath pleased God to lay his afflicting hand upon our Reverend pastor Mr. James Fitch that at present he is disabled with respect to the work of the ministry among us - Wherfore the towne appoint Left. Thomas Leffingwell, Left, William Backus, Simon Huntington Senr. Thomas Adgate and Richard Bushnella Committee to treat with Mr. Jabez Fitch with respect unto his succeeding of his father in the work of the ministry among us.' Aug. 29, 1698. The preamble of a vote alludes to the melancholy fact that the town is 'yet destitute of a preaching minister;' and nine persons were designated as a committee, who, in concert with the Rev. Mr. Fitch, were authorized to look out for a pastor. This reference to Rev. Fitch shows that his mind still retained its vigor and that his people were in the habit of resorting to him for counsel and direction. Nor were they unmindful of his support. After he was disabled from service, a rate was annually collected for his use, amounting to forty, fifty, and one year to seventy pounds. There can be little doubt that he was favored also with many free-will offerings, and that his people were studious to please and gratify him in the choice of a successor. . . The church organization in the days of Mr. Fitch not only extended over the nine-miles-square but took in the new settlements of Windham and Canterbury."

Death and Burial

James retired to what later became Lebanon, New London, Connecticut where he died and was buried at the old Trumbull Cemetery. There is a large gravestone at the site with an elaborate Latin inscription, said to have been written by his son, the Rev. Jabez Fitch (see below excerpt from book with regard to this), and a smaller footstone in English.

The translation of the Latin inscription is roughly: "In this grave are deposited the remains of that truly reverend man, Mr. James Fitch. He was born in Bocking, in the County of Essex, in England, the 24th day of December, in the year of our Lord 1622; who after he had been most excellently taught the learned languages came into New England at the age of sixteen, and then spent seven years under the instructions of those very famous men, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone. Afterward he discharged the pastoral office 14 years at Saybrook. Thence he removed with the major part of his Church to Norwich, where he spent the other years of his life in the work of the gospel. In his old age indeed he was obliged to cease from his public labors by reason of bodily indisposition and at length retired to his children at Lebanon, where after spending nearly half a year, he slept in Jesus in the year 1702, on the 18th day of November, in the 80th year of his age. He was a man as to the smartness of his genius, the solidity of his judgment, his charity, holy labors, & every kind of purity of life, & also as to his skill & energy of preaching, inferior to none." <ref> The National Magazine: (Cleveland) a Monthly Journal of American History, Volumes 18-19; publ.by Magazine of Western History Publishing Company, 1893. </ref>

Crest and Coat of Arms

Fitch, Rev. James, and Thomas, his father. Hartford and elsewhere, Connecticut.Arms: Vert, a chevron between three leopard's faces or. <ref> http://www.baronage.co.uk/bphtm-01/fitch-3.html </ref >Also (the ancient arms of ffyytche): Gold a roundel between three crosslets fitched sable.Crest: A leopard's face gold in his mouth a sword proper the hilt gules.

=== Note ===

“He was the first minister at Saybrook, Conn., (1646) and sharing the leadership with his father-in-law, Major John Mason, led his flockthrough the wilderness to found the new colony of Norwich, Conn. (1660). In his later years he retired to Lebanon, Conn., (1702) which he founded and named in memory of the ‘lofty cedars of Lebanon’ famed in the Bible as being used by Solomon to build the Temple.”<ref>Fitch: Page 96</ref>:: The Fitch family is a long and illustrious one that has been well studied. See the website for details on the books that have been written by John T. Fitch on the history and genealogy of this family.<ref>#S424: http://fitchfamily.com/</ref>: Event: a founder of Lebanon and Norwalk, Connecticut, with his father-in-law

:: Type: Moved to:: 1696 Lebanon, New London, Connecticut, USA<ref>Savage: Page vol II, pg 168</ref>: Event: first pastor of the First Church of Norwich, held office for 56 yrs:: Place: Norwich, New London, Connecticut, USA<ref>#S458 Page: pg2</ref>: Event: per Cotton Mather "the holy, acute and learned Mr. Fitch"<ref>#S458: pg 2</ref>

Sources

<references /> See also:* History of Norwich, Connecticut, by Frances Manwaring Caulkins, publ. by the author in 1866 * Fitch: Early Generations, located at http://www.baronage.co.uk/bphtm-01/fitch-1.html, accessed 9 May 2003.* Descendants of the Rev. James Fitch, Vol. 1. John T. Fitch with the assistance of Patricia M. Geisler, publ. 1996 by Picton Press, Camden, Maine.* A Fitch Family History - English Ancestors of the Fitches of Colonial Connecticut. John T. Fitch, publ. 1990 by Picton Press, Camden, Maine.* New England Families, Vol. III, Genealogies and Memorials, p. 1343.* Dexter, Franklin Bowditch. Biographical Sketchesof the Graduates of Yale College (Holt, 1885) Vol. 1, Page 383* Fitch, Roscoe Conkling. A History of the Fitch Family (College of Arms, London, England. Haverhill, Mass.: Record Pub. Co., 1930)* Savage, James. A Genealogical Dictionaryof the First Settlers of New England (Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1862)