In the Summer of 2019, Holly Marie Combs officially went off the market. September that year, she got married to longtime boyfriend-turned-fiance Mike Ryan.

The “Charmed” actress married her musician husband Ryan in Carmel, California. Only the duo’s closest friends and family received an invitation to the wedding.

Before tying the knot, Combs and Ryan were an engaged item for two years. The pair crossed paths in 2016 at the latter’s LA restaurant Xoc.

Within a year into their dating life, Combs’ then-boyfriend Ryan popped the big question.

Read Also – Lais Ribeiro Engaged, Height, Net Worth, Age, Son

Did Holly Marie Combs Have A Baby? Kids, Ex-Husbands & Married Life

The wedding marked Holly Marie Combs’ third time walking down the aisle.

A two-time divorcee, Combs was in marital relationship with actor David W. Donoho from 2004 to 2011. Following the divorce, the former married duo shared custody of their three kids: Finley (b. 2004), Riley (b. 2006) and Kelley (b. 2009).

Mike Ryan, on the other hand, fathers a daughter (b. 2002).

Actor Bryan Smith is the “Dr Giggles” actress’ first husband. Between 1993 and 1997, the duo were legally one another’s significant other.

After divorcing from Smith, Combs got engaged to Storm Lyndon. The pair called off their wedding in 2000.

Net Worth + Movies & TV Shows

Beyond a rollercoaster of a personal life, Holly Marie Combs boasts an enviable filmography.

Of all her performances, Combs gets revered for her features on three TV shows: “Picket Fences,” “Charmed,” and “Pretty Little Liars.”

Interesting – Farrah Moan Real Name, Height, Now, Age, Net Worth, Dating

Although not as illustrious, Combs’ small-screen roles are deserving of recognition. “Love’s Complicated,” “Mistresses,” “Point of Entry,” “See Jane Date,” “A Perfect Stranger” and “Sins of Silence” are her notable movies.

Through her acting talents, Combs has racked a whopping $14 million in net worth (as of 2019).

Wiki – Family & Height

45 years old Holly Marie Combs was born in 1973 to parents: David and Lauralei Combs. Her biological mother was merely 15 when she gave birth to her.

A native of San Diego, California, Combs and her family moved to New York in 1980. She possesses Irish bloodline.

Educated at the Professional Children’s School N.Y., the “Picket Fences” actress received mentorship and acting lessons from Ernie Martin and Tom Skerritt. (www.traildusttown.com) (fastfoodmenuprices.com)

Read More – Kendra Bailey Wiki, 2019, Parents, Bryson Tiller, Dating, Net Worth

Considered one of the most genetically gifted women, Combs stands five feet & two inches (157 cm) in height.