Holly Marie Combs married her husband, Mike Ryan, in 2019, and she has kept their relationship out of the public eye. The former star of Charmed was married twice before, and now, she has found the love of her life! Keep reading to learn more about Holly’s current marriage and her past relationships.

Bryan Smith

Not much is known about Holly’s marriage to her first husband, Bryan. They were married from 1993 to 1997.

David W. Donoho

Holly met David on the set of Charmed, as he worked as the key-grip for the hit supernatural series. It’s currently unclear when the former pair started dating, but they married in 2004 and welcomed their three children together: sons Riley, Finley and Kelley.

The former Pretty Little Liars star filed for divorce from David in 2011, citing “irreconcilable differences” as the reason behind their separation. They reportedly finalized their divorce later that year.

Mike Ryan

Five years after divorcing David, Holly and Mike started dating and eventually tied the knot in 2019. The actress and the restauranteur had a scenic wedding ceremony in Carmel, California, per PEOPLE. While speaking to the outlet about their marriage, Holly noted that she and Mike always prioritized their respective children over their romance.

“We had both come to the point in our lives where we were very dedicated to our kids, and OK with the fact that we would probably raise them as single parents,” Holly pointed out. “It’s that age-old story of when you’re not looking for something, that’s when you find it. And it smacked me right in the face! … We courted for quite a while. We both have kids so we were careful and cautious and slow.”

While reflecting on Mike’s sweet 2017 proposal, Holly said her husband “made sure all the kids were there and part it” and joked that by doing this, she “couldn’t say ‘no.’”

“Our connection was so immediate,” Holly gushed to the publication at the time of her wedding. “Just when I stopped looking for the perfect person, the perfect person showed up.”