He might not have as sexy a name as the other two big men the Warriors sought, but Kwame Brown just might be what the Warriors really need.

Golden State failed in its attempts to sign Tyson Chandler, who opted for New York. And the Los Angeles Clippers matched the Warriors’ four-year, $42.7 million offer for DeAndre Jordan. But in Brown — a 6-foot-11, 270-pound center who agreed to a one-year, $7 million deal to come to Oakland — the Warriors may have gotten the defensive presence in the middle they’ve been lacking.

The former No. 1 overall pick seems to have finally found his comfortable NBA niche as a reliable post defender whose limited offensive production comes as a bonus. But Brown, now entering his 11th season, did cost more than many would have expected for that skillset and is certainly not as captivating as the prospect of having Chandler or Jordan.

Brown, once known mostly as the failed No. 1 overall selection in 2001 by Michael Jordan’s Washington Wizards, has successfully reinvented himself as a solid, journeyman post player. NBA TV analyst Greg Anthony warned Warriors fans that they will be disappointed if they view Brown as anything more.

“If you look at Kwame Brown for what he is capable of doing, he’s a nice acquisition because he can defend the rim,” Anthony said via conference call Tuesday. “He’s one of the best post-defenders in our league. That’s the biggest weakness that Golden State has. His game is not about statistics, it is about impact.”

Brown had been one of the Warriors’ fall-back plans, along with Joel Przybilla (who according to a source close to the veteran center passed on the Warriors’ overtures). According to a team source, the Warriors don’t mind paying so much for Brown because it’s a one-year deal and the new collective bargaining agreement rules require they spend at least 85 percent of the salary cap.

Golden State is said to be still in buying mode for a small forward. The Warriors reached out to New York Knicks free agent Shawne Williams on Tuesday. Depending on his price, the Warriors could bring back swingman Reggie Williams, whom the Warriors renounced their rights on Sunday. Some other possibilities include Jamario Moon and Yi Jianlian.

With about $3 million left in cap space, the Warriors can no longer afford the popular remaining small forwards such as Andre Kirilenko or Josh Howard.

Brown was just 19, fresh out of Glynn Academy High in Georgia, when he was selected by Jordan, the then-Wizards executive, over Chandler — who also jumped from high school — and Pau Gasol.

After four disappointing years, the Kwame Brown experience was over in Washington. As a Wizard, he averaged 7.7 points on 45.5 percent shooting with 5.4 rebounds in 22.7 minutes, earning mention alongside the likes of Sam Bowie and Michael Olowokandi as the biggest No. 1 pick busts in history. His third season in the nation’s capital was his best, posting career highs in scoring (10.9), rebounding (7.4) and minutes (30.3).

Over the next five seasons, Brown bounced around between three teams, mostly as a back-up. He spent two-plus seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers, where his occasional offcourt issues obscured the fact he was a solid role player for a contender.

Brown was traded to Memphis in the deal that landed Gasol in Hollywood. He played just 15 games with the Grizzlies. He then signed a two-year, $8 million deal with Detroit, where he went from part-time starter to little-used sub.

Last season he signed a one-year deal with Charlotte, reuniting with Jordan. He took advantage of the reunion, putting together a solid campaign that earned him a small measure of redemption: 7.9 points and 6.8 rebounds, starting 50 of his 66 games.