The Warriors are convinced their defense is automatically better now that they’ve added center Kwame Brown, who was introduced Wednesday after signing his one-year, $7 million contract and passing a physical.

“A lot of people give credit to numbers, they give credit to guys that block shots,” Brown said. “Me, I don’t get a lot of blocked shots. But everybody that I guard, they feel me every second of every game.”

After swinging and missing on free agent centers Tyson Chandler and DeAndre Jordan, Golden State turned to a guy it had penciled in as a fallback all along.

At 6-foot-11, 270 pounds, Brown has the size the Warriors wanted. At 29 years old with 10 years in the league, he has the combination of age and experience the Warriors wanted. With a one-year deal and a reputation for being a disappointment, he has the edge the Warriors like.

“He’s going to help (coach) Mark Jackson’s defense,” Warriors general manager Larry Riley said, “because, when he’s in the game, and he’s working the low block defensively, you don’t have to go down there and double-team. And it doesn’t tear up your defense where you’ve got to do as many rotations.”

Brown’s first practice will be Thursday. Riley said since Brown has missed a week of camp and still needs to get into basketball shape, he is likely to get limited minutes to start. That suggests the starting job is Andris Biedrins’ to lose.

Brown said he is on board with the Warriors’ philosophy of defense. Known as one of the league’s better post defenders, his physical style of play is welcomed. Golden State traditionally has problems matching up with opposing big men.

“Everywhere I’ve been,” Brown said, “I’ve guarded the likes of Dwight (Howard), Andrew (Bynum) and Pau Gasol one-on-one in the post. That’s what I’m going to continue to do. … That’s just what I like to do. Get in there and mix it up.”

Both Riley and Brown said they aren’t bothered by Brown’s history. Riley said Brown is at a crossroads in his career and that he’s encouraged by Brown’s apparent motivation to prove himself.

Brown said people need to “let it go” about his being a bust as a No. 1 pick in 2001. He has. He said he is done trying to prove he was worthy of being the top pick. But he said he is not done proving himself, as he is trying to find a team to call home.

“I’m a 29-year-old man. I’m a father. My kids can Google now,” Brown said. “Everything I want to do now, both on and off the court, is positive. That’s what I set out to do last year in Charlotte, and that’s what I think I did. It was a step forward, and now I have a lot of work to do with a new team, a new system and a new coach. I think I can do it.”

Former Warriors swingman Reggie Williams has agreed to a two-year, $5 million contract with the Charlotte Bobcats. The Warriors, in the market for a small forward, had interest in bringing back Williams. But they didn’t have a bunch of minutes for him, not with rookie swingman Klay Thompson on board.

“I don’t know what the situation would have been,” said Williams, who narrowed his list to Portland, New York and Charlotte. “I would’ve maybe had to talk to Coach Jackson to see how they would have wanted to use me.”

Golden State also might add a third point guard, as a team source said the Warriors have interest in Ish Smith, who was waived by Memphis on Wednesday.