Madonna wrote a letter to actor John Enos in the early 1990s bemoaning what she saw as a lack of success while slamming the 'horribly mediocre' careers of Sharon Stone and Whitney Houston.

In the never seen before letter going up for auction next week, the Material Girl starts off by explaining that she's been in a 'foul mood lately' and is 'so uncomfortable in my own skin right now.' She goes on to say she'd 'rather die' than be 'these women.'

Madonna vents about the backlash she received regarding her recent projects. 'I have made so many people angry that I'm being punished and basically made to be quiet and sit in a corner, whole other less interesting and exciting people are reaping the benefits of the roads I've paved.'

She goes on to write 'Maybe this is what black people felt like when Elvis finally got huge.'

Scroll down for video

'It's so unequivocally frustrating to read that Whitney Houston has the music career I wish I had and Sharon Stone has the film career I'll never have.'

'Not because I want to be these women because I'd rather die, but they're so horribly mediocre and they're always being held up as paragons of virtue and some sort of measuring stick to humiliate me,' Madonna writes to her paramour at the time.

'Everything I do is so original and unique and I put so much of myself into it like my book and record and it's only brought me heartache and pain.'

The letter was written in the early 1990s, Madonna is likely referring to the 1992 Sex photo book and accompanying Erotica album, some parts of which were banned.

'I don't think I can play the game to be accepted,' she wrote, 'I'm too intelligent, I have too much pride'.

Madonna, who won her first of her seven Grammy Awards in 1992, suggested to Enos that she was 'born in the wrong place and time and probably the wrong sex!'

Towards the end, Madonna darkly refers to her state of mind at the time of penning the letter to Enos,'I feel like I have no career, no family, nothing permanent or tangible,' Madonna wrote.

'My outlook on life is black black black that's why I'm no good for you or anyone else right now. I have to regain my sense of power and my joy for living.'

Sharon Stone released her own letter to Madonna publicly on Facebook Thursday starting it off with 'Dear Madonna,' and continuing 'Know that I am your friend. I have wished to be a rock star in some private moments… have felt as mediocre as you described... I love and adore you; won’t be pitted against you by any invasion of our personal journeys. Sharon'

According to the auction site Madonna's letter to Enos comes from Darlene Lutz who is described as 'a long-time personal friend of Madonna's from her innermost circle'.

The two-page letter is expected to fetch between $US3000-$5000 when it goes to auction next week.