Filter by:

within 5 miles

Museums

17 places within 5 miles

Sorted by popularity / distance

Clayton Hall Living History Museum

Clayton Park, Ashton New Road, Clayton, Manchester, M11 4RU

1.3 miles

Elizabeth Gaskell's House

84 Plymouth Grove, Manchester, M13 9LW

1.9 miles

Gallery Of Costume

Platt Hall Wilmslow Road, Manchester, Lancashire, M14 5LL

2.2 miles

The Manchester Museum

The University Of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, Lancashire, M13 9PL

2.5 miles

Around since 1821, the Manchester Museum has about six million items for perusal, focusing on botany, zoology, Egyptology, palaeontolog, and live specimens. Handily a 15-minute walk from the city centre, the museum is part of the University of…

Greater Manchester Police Museum & Archives

57a Newton Street, Manchester, M1 1ET

2.7 miles

The International Anthony Burgess Foundation

Engine House, Chorlton Mill, 3 Cambridge Street, Manchester, M1 5BY

2.9 miles

Manchester Art Gallery

Mosley Street, Manchester, M2 3JL

2.9 miles

National Football Museum

Urbis Building, Cathedral Gardens, Manchester, M4 3BG

3.1 miles

Six storeys dedicated to the beautiful game, taking in footballing greats, the history of the game, the chance to lift some trophies, games and football challenges, an exhibition about the 1966 World Cup and a learning zone. Guided tours are available…

Manchester Jewish Museum

190 Cheetham Hill Road, Manchester, M8 8LW

3.3 miles

You'll find Manchester Jewish Museum in a former Spanish and Portuguese synagogue. The museum tells the stories, history and heritage of Jewish people of the area, via a collection of items. Located in the city centre, Manchester Jewish Museum is a…

Bureau

Ground Floor, 3 Hardman Square, Spinningfields, Manchester, M3 3EB

3.4 miles

Bureau works internationally with represented and invited artists at varying career stages to provide a platform and context for dynamic and innovative contemporary visual practice. The gallery premieres and commissions new work across a variety of…

Science and Industry Museum

Liverpool Road, Manchester, M3 4FP

3.4 miles

The Museum of Science and Industry shines a light on the inventions and innovations created in Manchester that have gone on to benefit the world. With a collection that spans 250 years, there are plenty of objects and stories to explore.

People's History Museum

Leftbank Spinningfields, Manchester, M3 3ER

3.4 miles

The national museum of democracy, the People's History Museum explores the social history of the country over the course of two floors showcasing displays, objects, items, and interactive exhibitions.

Greater Manchester's Museum of Transport

Boyle Street, Manchester, Lancashire, M8 8UW

3.6 miles

Discover Greater Manchester's public road transport history with the Museum of Transport. Open every Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday and bank holiday (and every day in August 2013) from 10am until 4.30pm. Adults £4, students/over 60s £2, accompanied…

Stockport Museum

30/31 Market Place, Stockport, Cheshire, SK1 1ES

3.8 miles

Salford Museum and Art Gallery

Peel Park, The Crescent, Salford, Lancashire, M5 4WU

4.2 miles

Popular permanent attractions of The Victorian Gallery and Lark Hill Place (re-creation of a typical northern street during Victorian times), as well as an ever-changing exhibition programme. The Museum also provides activities for children during the…

Ordsall Hall

Ordsall Lane, Salford, M5 3AN

4.2 miles