Micro Focus announced today its intent to acquire Serena Software, Inc., a leading provider of Application Lifecycle Management (ALM) software, in a transaction valued at $540 million. The acquisition is expected to close in early May 2016, subject to receipt of competition clearances in the US and Germany.

"Today's announcement marks another significant milestone for Micro Focus, bringing together two highly complementary solution sets that enable customers to build better applications, adapt to changing business conditions more rapidly and maximize the value of existing investments to drive further innovation within their business," said Stephen Murdoch, CEO, Micro Focus. "With Serena, we are further positioned to deliver richer solutions for the complex business demands customers are solving today – with greater reliability, predictability and less risk of failure."

Enterprises globally have increasing demands to build and deploy high-quality business applications to support employees, customers, partners and other third-parties. They require solutions that help them increase the quality of their applications and speed the delivery of change. The combination of Micro Focus and Serena allows companies to better:

Design and build business applications and services with greater accuracy, reliability and predictability;

Continuously deploy existing core business applications on a wider variety of platforms to meet changing business needs

Improve the speed and efficiency of new business services through automated release and deployment solutions.

Serena has extensive expertise in software application development; software configuration and change management; and business process management. Additionally, Serena is a pioneer in processes and solutions that bridge application development and operations to create true DevOps, an increasingly critical area of focus for enterprise customers looking to develop applications and services faster, with greater accuracy and agility that fully meet business demands.

"This is an exciting announcement that promises to offer substantial value to Serena customers and partners, said Greg Hughes, president and CEO of Serena. "Our complementary strengths in software development and IT Operations will only serve to provide a stronger foundation for the next-generation of applications and services they require to meet ongoing business demands."

About Serena

Serena is the largest independent Application Lifecycle Management vendor with more than 2,500 enterprise customers. Serena helps the highly regulated large enterprise move fast without breaking things – increasing velocity of the software development lifecycle while enhancing security, compliance, and performance. More information is available at www.serena.com.

About Micro Focus

Micro Focus (LSE: MCRO.L) is a global enterprise software company helping customers innovate faster with lower risk. Our software helps customers build, operate and secure IT systems that bring together existing business logic and applications with emerging technologies to meet increasingly complex business demands. For more information, visit: www.microfocus.com.