Serena Announces First Product to Deliver on Next-Generation Framework

Serena TeamTrack v.6 sets new standard in usability with real-time management dashboard portal, role-based user interface, and configurable, out-of-the-box workflows

SAN MATEO, Calif. -- Nov. 3, 2003 -- SERENA Software, Inc. (Nasdaq: SRNA), an industry-leading supplier of software that automates change to enterprise applications, today announced Serena(R) TeamTrack(R) Version 6. This is the first product release to deliver functionality at the core of Serena Application Framework for Enterprises (SAFE(TM)), the company's next-generation framework. It is also Serena's first major release of TeamTrack since acquiring the process management solution earlier this year.

With robust new features and enhancements including a real-time management dashboard portal and a unique, role-based interface, Version 6 extends the central role TeamTrack plays within Serena's Enterprise Change Management (ECM) solution offering by helping customers further enforce and more closely align business and IT processes. By ensuring process enforcement, while still allowing customers to make agile course corrections at any point throughout the application life cycle, Version 6 helps organizations reduce cumulative costs across the value chain.

"Serena TeamTrack enables us to streamline and synchronize business processes across the enterprise. This helps us efficiently and reliably provide our internal customers with timely information on the functioning of our business processes for continuous process improvement," said Brent Housenga, Quality Assurance Manager, at Siemens Transportation Systems, Inc. "The real-time management reporting, usability and customization enhancements that have been made to Version 6 will allow us to do this even better. We are very pleased with the capabilities we've seen so far, and are eager to get this new release up and running."

"We've reviewed TeamTrack Version 6 and are quite impressed with the product's strong process management capabilities and overall ease of use," said Larkin Ryder, Director of Process Management, at LookSmart. "The extended functionality will allow us to make additional and significant improvements in productivity and customer service. Further, its intuitive design makes it easy to extend TeamTrack to other workgroups within the company, helping us maximize ROI."

"Increasingly, business is driving IT to cut costs and achieve rigorous, quantifiable bottom-line goals," said Jim Duggan, Vice President at Gartner, Inc. "Solutions that help streamline processes and promote consistency enterprise-wide are critical in helping IT successfully meet this challenge."

TeamTrack Version 6 delivers advanced functionality including:

Management Dashboard Portal - By providing real-time visibility throughout the application development life cycle, this functionality enables executives, managers and users to obtain up-to-the minute information on mission-critical applications from a single source. This enables managers to make more informed business decisions, maximizes process capabilities for reducing cycle time and increases overall enterprise efficiency.

Intuitive Role-Based User Interface - This simple and unique role-based interface is designed to filter life cycle information according to a user's role and responsibilities within the organization. Its ease of use makes it natural to extend TeamTrack throughout the enterprise, minimizing the learning curve and increasing productivity.

Configurable, Out-of-the-Box Workflows - Accessible from any Web browser, TeamTrack's workflow library provides a variety of business processes that can be easily configured and enforce processes already in place. Because TeamTrack adapts to the way an organization works, the solution is much easier and quicker to implement than competitive alternatives. This increases collaboration, productivity and bottom-line results.

In addition to these key features, Version 6 easily integrates with a wide range of partner applications to help customers leverage existing investments across the enterprise. When combined with Serena's ECM products, the integrated solution enables customers to align the change approval process to the application life cycle. As Serena continues to deliver on market demands with SAFE, customers will also be able to closely link the people, tools and assets involved throughout the application life cycle - not just across platforms, but across processes.

"We have already implemented Serena's distributed change management solution and are just now becoming more familiar with the numerous process management capabilities afforded by TeamTrack, as well as the business implications by tying the two together," said Vlad Sumarokov, Manager of Configuration Management group, at Columbia House Company. "We plan to use TeamTrack to handle change and configuration management processes for all customer-facing applications, and automate project tracking enterprise-wide. We see the product becoming a real asset to our business and are very excited about this latest version."

"TeamTrack Version 6 represents a significant step in Serena's vision of process-to-process integration which is the foundation of our SAFE architecture. With this new version, TeamTrack provides tremendous new capabilities to organizations in their ongoing effort to increase productivity and enhance IT business value," said Mark Woodward, President and CEO, SERENA Software, Inc. "This release is a testament to Serena's ability to successfully integrate organizations and strategies by delivering a major release of TeamTrack in under 6 months of acquiring the product."

Availability

Serena TeamTrack v6 will be available later this month.

About Serena

SERENA Software, Inc. is the Enterprise Change Management (ECM) industry leader. For over twenty years Serena has focused exclusively on providing solutions that help companies automate change to the applications that run their businesses. Today its products are in use at over 3,600 customer sites - including 46 of the Fortune 50. Serena's Application Framework for Enterprises (SAFE(TM)) is the next step in ECM, providing cross-platform, cross-process and cross-organizational support across application life cycle processes. This approach helps streamline development, improve productivity and lower development costs, resulting in a highly efficient enterprise. With headquarters in San Mateo, California, Serena serves customers worldwide through local offices and an international network of distributors. http://www.serena.com.

Serena and TeamTrack are registered trademarks of SERENA Software, Inc. All other products or company names are used for identification purposes only, and may be trademarks of their respective owners.