NASHVILLE, Tenn., Aug. 5, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Agile2013 -- Tasktop Technologies (www.tasktop.com), the industry leader for ALM integration, and Serena Software, the leader in Orchestrated Application Development & Release Management, today announced the formation of a strategic partnership. As part of this agreement, Tasktop will develop, and Serena will offer, OEM versions of Tasktop Dev and Tasktop Sync for Serena Business Manager (SBM), which acts as the process foundation underpinning Serena's orchestrated ALM solutions. The combined solutions will extend Serena's business process automation capabilities by integrating SBM with other leading third-party ALM systems, providing process orchestration across a wide variety of products from disparate vendors. The results are improved collaboration among diverse teams and disciplines, and complete visibility, traceability and reporting across a broad range of ALM systems.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130315/LA78208LOGO)

"SBM enables IT organizations to cost-effectively streamline and automate processes across application and product development, IT Operations and business service management. The partnership with Tasktop helps us realize our vision of Orchestrated ALM," said Carl Landers, VP Marketing for Serena Software. "By coupling SBM's ability to orchestrate application development and operations processes, with Tasktop's leading integration technology, we're able to satisfy our customers' needs of automating those processes across a wide variety of systems."

As part of this partnership, Tasktop is building Tasktop Dev and Tasktop Sync connectors for Serena SBM. Tasktop Dev provides Serena users the ability to access and manage SBM directly from within the Eclipse and Microsoft Visual Studio IDEs. The task-focused interface experience for Eclipse further streamlines development and team communication by automatically focusing the developer on the artifacts that are relevant for a given task. Tasktop Sync provides server-side integration between Serena Business Manager and other leading ALM products, providing SBM users the ability to orchestrate processes across numerous third-party ALM systems such as HP ALM, HP Quality Center, IBM Rational Team Concert, Atlassian JIRA, Microsoft Team Foundation Server, Bugzilla, CA Clarity Agile, and many more.

"While individual stakeholders will continue to insist on their system of choice, to realize the benefits of DevOps the modern IT organization needs a unified layer of orchestration," said Mik Kersten, co-founder and CEO for Tasktop. "This joint solution will combine Tasktop's integration infrastructure and tools with Serena's SBM solution to provide the benefits of Orchestrated IT in heterogeneous and developer-centric environments."

General availability for both the Tasktop Dev and Tasktop Sync connectors is expected in Q4 2013 and will be demonstrated at Serena xChange in September.

Tweet this: #Tasktop and #Serena announce partnership: Tasktop #Dev and #Sync for Serena Business Manager #SBM

About Serena Software

Serena Software provides Application Development & Release Management solutions to the Global 2000. Serena's core purpose is to advance the business value of IT. Our 2,500 active enterprise customers, encompassing one million users worldwide, have made Serena the largest independent ALM vendor and the only one that orchestrates DevOps, the processes that bring together application development and operations.

Headquartered in Silicon Valley, Serena serves enterprise customers from 29 offices in 14 countries. Serena is a portfolio company of Silver Lake Partners, the leader in private investments in technology-enabled industries.

About Tasktop Technologies

Tasktop Technologies is the industry leader for ALM integration. It invented the task-focused interface and created the Eclipse Mylyn project, which transformed the IDE into a developer productivity and ALM collaboration platform. Building on Mylyn, Tasktop unifies the ALM landscape through ALM partnerships that connect leading Agile, enterprise ALM and open source tools. Commercially, Tasktop Sync provides real-time bidirectional and fully automated synchronization between ALM servers, and Tasktop Dev is the developer-centric ALM interface for the Eclipse and Visual Studio IDEs. Tasktop recently launched the Software Lifecycle Integration (SLI) initiative to connect the entire software delivery lifecycle, consisting of a new technical architecture and data model, repeatable design patterns and a new open source project called Eclipse Mylyn m4. For more information about Tasktop and SLI please visit: http://tasktop.com

Media Contact:

Guy Murrel (for Tasktop)

Catapult PR-IR

Office: 303-581-7760

Tanya Espe (for Serena Software)

Kulesa Faul

[email protected]

SOURCE Tasktop Technologies