Russian information channel “Russia 24” is the undisputed leader of fieldwork with the most important events – maximum live broadcasts, crews in the very action, access to true-to-fact information.

Three quarters of Russians note that “Russia 24” is the main source of information for them and more than half of the respondents states that they watch the TV channel regularly.

According to the information and analytics system Medialogiya, “Russia 24” holds the highest citation index among Russian TV channels in 2018.

TV channel “Russia 24” has created a single information space in the country, providing one-time access to the news to everyone from Kamchatka to Kaliningrad.

MIC Izvestia is the first multimedia information center in Russia. MIC Izvestia includes Internet news portal IZ.ru, 24/7 news channel Izvestia (IZ.RU), Izvestia newspaper, the news services of REN TV channel and Channel Five, and regional TV Channel 78. MIC Izvestia is a multi-purpose platform for generating multi-format information content (TV, print, online). Monthly online audience of MIC Izvestia is about 45 mln people, TV audience – 60 mln people. MIC Izvestia is constantly getting into the top 3 news online sources according to LiveInternet.

The Center also runs a brand new Internet portal called IZ.ru allowing for both twenty-four-hour news TV broadcasting and socio-political publishing. The editorial team works in an innovative format, and simultaneously broadcasts in several formats, including news, video, photo, and analytics.

Users can see the hottest news in the crawl line, and enjoy a number of modern visualization tools, such as 3D infographics with location-based maps, photo and video elements. The 360-degree camera provides for the participation effect. The portal has many state-of-the-art interactive features, such as auto-attendant and text-to-speech.

Gazeta.ru is the first socio-political online media in RuNet. It was established in September 1999. The monthly audience is 40,600,000 unique users.

The media occupies a leading positions among the Russian digital press in audience engagement in social networks. The number of our followers on Twitter is 1,884,000, on Facebook - 615,122, on VKontakte - 147,529. We are in the top five in citation among online media according to Medialogy.

Gazeta.ru uses all the modern information formats - news, articles, interviews, author's columns. In addition to the text form, the news are also presented in video compilations and podcasts.

RT is a global, round-the-clock news network that includes eight TV channels broadcasting news, current affairs, and documentary content, digital platforms in six languages, and a global multimedia news agency Ruptly. Round-the-clock news channels in English, Arabic, Spanish, and documentary channel RT Doc, in English and Russian, broadcast from Moscow, while RT America airs from Washington, RT UK from London, and RT France from Paris. Today, RT has a global TV audience of 100 million viewers weekly in the 47 of the more than 100+ countries where RT is available (Ipsos). RT covers stories overlooked by the mainstream media, provides alternative perspectives on current affairs, and acquaints international audiences with a Russian viewpoint on relevant events. In 2020, RT became the first TV news network in the world to hit ten billion views across its channels on YouTube. Online, RT is the top non-Anglo-Saxon TV news network in terms of traffic: as of January 2021, RT websites, collectively, had more than 150 million monthly visits (SimilarWeb). RT is also the winner of the Monte Carlo TV Festival Award for best 24-hour newscast and a nine-time Emmy finalist.

MARGARITA SIMONYAN - EDITOR-IN-CHIEF RT AND ROSSIYA SEGODNYA

MARGARITA SIMONYAN

In 2005, Margarita Simonyan was named Editor-in-Chief of RT, Russia’s first 24/7 English-language, international TV news channel. Since then RT has expanded to a global, 24/7 news network with eight TV channels, digital platforms in six languages, and sister news agency RUPTLY. Under Ms. Simonyan’s helm, RT grew its TV audience to 100 million weekly viewers in 47 countries and became the first TV news network on YouTube to reach 10 bln views, as well as a 9-time Emmy finalist – in addition to dozens of other international media accolades. Prior to heading up RT, Ms. Simonyan had reported from Chechnya during the Second Chechen War, from Abkhazia, and from the Beslan School Siege, which earned her several journalism awards. In December 2013, Ms. Simonyan was appointed Editor-in-Chief of Rossiya Segodnya, an international news agency and radio service. In 2017, Margarita Simonyan was included in the prestigious Forbes list of the world’s most powerful women, a dozen spots higher than the former US secretary of state and ex-Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.

RBC is a leading Russian media holding, with leadership positions in news and business media, as well as in domain name registration and hosting. The company’s history counts more than 20 years. RBC employs key media platforms such as the Internet,TV,and press,develops B2B media services,and provides domain registration and hosting services (RU-CENTER Group).

RBC’s aggregate monthly business audience exceeds 34m people (source: TNS data, including overlapping audience). At the same time, Rbc.ru has continually been ranked among top online media in the citation ranking (source: Medialogia data for 2014).

RU-CENTER Group provides services to more than 1 million users, with major Russian companies and leading players on the Internet market among them.

In 2013, RBC’s brand was valued at RUB 10.6bn by Interbrand, an international branding agency, making it 24th out of 40 most valuable Russian brands.

TASS is a Russian state-run news agency that was founded 115 years ago.

TASS offers its subscribers an extensive selection from 60 news feeds and subject-specific services in both Russian and English. The news agency generates more than 2,000 items a day, thus producing an integral and unbiased picture of events from around the globe. TASS’ Photo Archive contains 20 million photographs and its database has more than 10 million documents.

TASS’ special projects and infographics have repeatedly earned national and international awards.

The news agency’s press centers operate in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Yekaterinburg and Novosibirsk. Every year, TASS holds more than 1,000 various events on its own platforms and within the framework of major forums in Russia and around the globe.

TASS is a member of international and regional mass media organizations and maintains partnerships with more than 100 news agencies throughout the world.

TASS’ 1,800 employees in Russia and abroad keep the agency going in real time.

Komsomolskaya Pravda Media Group is the largest Russian multimedia holding. It comprises the Komsomolskaya Pravda daily and weekly newspapers, the online portals KP.RU, radiokp.ru and teleprogramma.pro, the Komsomolskaya Pravda federal radio station and the Teleprogramma magazine.

The Komsomolskaya Pravda newspaper is available in over 450 cities across 85 Russian regions. Komsomolskaya Pravda digests are published in 45 countries worldwide.

The KP.RU news portal is one of the Top 3 Russian businesses by audience reach in the Media and News category. KP.RU gets over 4.5 million unique visitors daily. It is a 3-time Runet Prize winner, including the 2020 Runet Prize in the Culture, Media and Mass Communications category.

The Komsomolskaya Pravda radio station covers over 400 Russian cities. It won the Best News Radio Station Award twice, as well as the Best Business Radio Station Award.

Today “Sovetsky Sport” is, first of all, the website which is visited by more than 4 million people every single month.

The flagship of “Sovetsky Sport” Publishing House is a weekly magazine “Sovetsky Sport – Football”. This magazine is a leader among sports-oriented press in Russia and its readership amount is about 958 700 people all over the country. Daily newspaper “Sovetsky Sport” was released in 1924 and since then it has been published without any breaks in 55 cities and its circulation amount reached 180 700 copies.

“Sovetsky Sport” is represented on a lot of media platforms, such as: Facebook, YouTube, VKontakte, Twitter, Odnoklassniki, Instagram, Telegram, mobile apps for Android and IOs. The amount of subscribers is about 1 million people.

The press-center of “Sovetsky Sport” is a unique sports news specialized communication platform in Russia by now.

“Sovetsky Sport” has created the national sports award, which is called “Itogi Goda”. This year the awarding of best of the best in the world of sport coincides with the celebration of a special date for “Sovetsky Sport” – 95 years anniversary of our Publishing House, which was the first one in writing sports news.

Interfax is the largest information group in the former Soviet Union and the recognized leader in the B2B Russian information market.

The history of Interfax Group begins in 1989, when it was established as the first non-state news agency in the USSR.

Interfax is the most frequently cited source in global media and provides objective, comprehensive and reliable information from Russia and the CIS as well as the most popular newswire service in the Russian financial market.

After building reputation as a provider of trustworthy breaking news reports from Russia and the countries of the former Soviet Union, Interfax spent the subsequent decades growing into a comprehensive information provider, creating professional IT solutions to assist with risk assessment, due diligence and KYC procedures, market analysis and business development.

Our reputation as a credible source of information has allowed us to enter into joint ventures with major international companies such as Experian and Dun & Bradstreet. Having partnership with Sberbank of Russia and Experian, Interfax created the United Credit Bureau – the recognised leader in the Russian credit bureau market. Interfax's joint venture with the global leader in information services Dun & Bradstreet, provides comprehensive information about foreign business.

Echo of Moscow (Russian: Эхо Москвы, Echo Moskvy) is a Russian 24-hour radio station based in Moscow, broadcasting in many Russian cities, in some of the former Soviet republics (through partnerships with local radio stations and via the Internet), which some observers describe as “the last bastion of free media in Russia”. Most of the content consists of news and talk shows focusing on social and political issues, and the station tries to represent different points of view. The current Editor-in-Chief is Alexey Venediktov.

Echo of Moscow is represented on the platform of Yandex.Live and in the mobile app for Android and iOS.

The podcasts of Echo of Moscow are available in all podcast services on the Internet.

Echo of Moscow has more than 2.9 million subscribers in such social networks as Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, Odnoklassniki, Instagram, VKontakte and Telegram.

Alexey Venediktov - Journalist, teacher, Editor-in-Chief of the radio station «Echo of Moscow»

Alexey Venediktov

Alexey Venediktov

Alexey Venediktov was born on 18 December 1955. After leaving school, he entered the evening division of the historical department of the Moscow Pedagogical Institute. He was exempt from military service due to poor vision (at the age of 17 - minus 10). He combined his studies at the university with working for five years as a postman, having time to read all the newspapers in the morning and all the magazines in the evening. Then he became a History teacher at school and worked there for 20 years.

Alexey Venediktov began his career at the radio station «Echo of Moscow» in 1990 as a journalist and was promoted to the Director of Information Services. He has been the Editor-in-Chief since 1998.

“Venediktov’s achievements in the struggle against the Soviet system are connected with his deceptive appearance and manners,” wrote The Times. “Even now, he resembles a sloppy scientist in a worn-out sweater, having dishevelled hair.” “They did not touch me,” he says about the government. “I have developed my own curriculum. They all thought that I was a little crazy. Putin calls me crazy.”

On the radio, apart from information programmes and some programmes of his own, he hosts the live broadcast, where occasionally he talks with popular theatre and cinema actors.

NTV is the largest private broadcasting company in Russia, working nationwide. It was founded in 1993. The company owns 7 brands: NTV – one of the largest generally available channels in Russia; “NTV-Series”, “NTV-Style”, “NTV-Law”, NTV-HIT” – themed channels; “NTV-World” and “NTV-America” – international versions of main NTV channel. The channel is traditionally one of the top three broadcasters in the country. It presents a wide range of content: news, social and political talk shows, series and films, entertaining and educational programs, documentaries and social projects. NTV is the largest action-packed drama producer in Russia; channel’s series have no peers on other channels of the country. NTV is the first Russian channel developing socially significant projects on and off air. The channel is a pioneer of new television ideas, formats and genre development. In early 2000, NTV started to develop life-style television. Social and political talk shows of NTV became a trademark for a whole generation of viewers.

TV Channel 360° is federal multi-platform media. In addition to traditional TV broadcasting, 360° has been represented on large online streaming platforms (Yandex.Ether, ivi.ru, Megogo and others), as well. There are more than 40 regional media outlets in the 360° partnership network.

The brand has been successfully developing digitally. We have extensive experience in content adaptation to the specific requirements of each platform where we distribute our content. The 360° YouTube channel has over 1.1 million subscribers. Our correspondents quickly adapted to the latest content production specifics and can create a full-length reportage with only an iPhone.

The 360° website is one of the biggest Moscow region news site by daily visits. For several years now, we have been among the top 5 most cited online media outlets according to Medialogia (local media monitoring company).

The @tv360 Telegram channel is the main source of information for those who follow the news. 360° was also one of the first to create an official TikTok account among Russian media. Now it has over 4 million subscribers and is the fastest growing media account in the app.

ALEXEY KAKLYUGIN - CEO “TV CHANNEL 360” JSC

ALEXEY KAKLYUGIN

In 2009 graduated from Moscow State University, Faculty of Journalism. Being a freshman started working on the “Russia 1” TV channel: first as an Intern, then became a full time employee as an International Editor in the "Vesti" program.

In 2007 started working on the “Star” channel, where he took the position of the news editor in the informational daily program “News of the day”. In 2009 returned to VGTRK as a news editor in “Vesti.ru” program. In 2010 became the CEO of “VideoExchange” company, which specialized in TV content production.

From 2013 - Chief editor “360” TV channel.

In October 2019 was appointed to the position of CEO “TV Channel 360” JSC.

Forbes is the most influential business magazine in the world. Is a symbol of success. In Business. In Career. In Life.

It’s a multimedia platform that unites the richest and most powerful people in Russia: Forbes list members, current and former leaders of state companies and banks, CEOs of private companies, politicians, opinion leaders. We tell the stories of success. We write about finances, career, world economy and investments, breakthrough ideas and technologies that are changing the world now. Forbes is a reliable tool for a modern entrepreneur.

Forbes is famous for its list of the 200 richest businessmen in Russia.

The audience of Forbes is 1 095 100 readers.

Print circulation is 90 000.

The Media euronews offers a unique perspective on world events. It empowers people to make up their own mind by delivering factual analysis and a diversity of viewpoints. Because all views matter, Euronews is “All Views”.

Since its launch in 1993 from Lyon, France, euronews has been delivering trusted news and information in a non-partisan and in-depth way to TV audiences and digital users across the world in their language.

euronews 12 editions cover world news 24/7 in Arabic, English, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish and Turkish.

Every day, euronews team of over 500 journalists of 30 different nationalities work together reporting on relevant stories to serve a global audience, driven by solid uncompromising journalism.

The concept has proven to be effective; euronews is the Number One European news channel, reaching more viewers in continental Europe than any of its rivals, in spite of the increasing competition*.

From Europe to the world, on television and on digital platforms around the world, euronews attracts a highly desirable audience, composed of curious open-minded leaders. euronews is a widely recognized brand reaching more than 430 million homes across 166 countries.

Xinhua News Agency, Xinhua in short, founded on November 7, 1931, is the state news agency of China and world news agency as well.

With its headquarters in Beijing, Xinhua has established 33 branches in China’s provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities, The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, and has resident correspondents in Taiwan Province. There are more than 180 overseas bureaus, constituting a worldwide network of news and information gathering and releasing.

Xinhua had a multi-lingual, multi-function news release system, offering its broad clients news and financial information products in the form of text, photo, graphic, audio, video 24 hours a day in eight languages of Chinese, English, Russian, French, Spanish, Arabic, Portuguese and Japanese.

Within the print media sector Xinhua News Agency has a portfolio of more than 20 newspapers and magazines. Its highly respected newspapers, such as “The Xinhua Daily Telegraph”, and news magazines, such as the popular “Outlook”, are among the most authoritative and influential publications in the country.

Xinhua also has the largest multilingual databank in China’s media industry. This constantly upgraded and daily-growing databank provides modern, fast, commercial intelligence that displays Xinhua’s news and information products in many languages and multimedia formats, directly serving its end users of China and abroad.

RUTUBE is a Russian leading video hosting platform, which hosts blogs, streams, movie and game reviews, premier shows, series, movies, and online TV broadcasts. The library counts more than 3 million items.

RUTUBE users can watch videos without having to sign up, as well as download their own videos via an intuitive studio, create thematic playlists, and profit on their content.

The RUTUBE application is available on iOS and Android, as well as Smart TV.

The video platform was launched in 2006. In 2008, it joined the Gazprom Media holding. In 2016, Ruform was established with the merger of RUTUBE and the Pladform video distribution network. The platform gained access to advanced content distribution technologies. In 2019, Gazprom Media purchased RUTUBE from OOO Solaris Promo Production and became one and only owner of the platform.

Roman Alexandrovich Maximov - Chief Executive Officer at OOO Ruform

Roman Alexandrovich Maximov

Roman Maximov was born on October 10, 1973, in Novosibirsk.

He is a graduate of Novosibirsk State Pedagogical University.

He holds an MBA degree from the Institute of Business and Business Management at the Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration.

Professional background

From 2008 until 2010, he worked as Chairman of the Kaliningrad Region Tele2 Russia division

From 2010 until 2011, he was head of the Novosibirsk ER-Telecom division

From 2015 until 2016, he worked as Deputy Chief Executive Officer at Solaris Promo Production

From 2016 until 2018, Roman worked as Executive Director at TNT-CLUB

From 2018 until 2019, he was member of the board of directors at TNT Music

Since 2019, he has been Chief Executive Officer at OOO "Rusform," a company developing RUTUBE, a leading video hosting platform in Russia.

Personal life

Roman Maximov is a multiple international ultramarathon winner.

He is married and has four children.

Radio France International is a state-owned news radio station that broadcasts internationally 24 hours a day.

Subsidiary of the state-owned French media holding France Medias Monde.

Radio France International (RFI) is:

- 46,5 million listeners weekly reach;

- 152 FM relays troughout the world and 1 400 partner radios;

- broadcasting in 18 languages;

- 33,4 million visits to the site https://www.rfi.fr/;

- a leader in the media space of France and French-speaking African countries.

The capabilities of the reputable radio station RFI allow companies to profitably present themselves in international markets and quickly gain the trust of the multimillion audience in France and Africa.

Irina Firen - Development director in Russia and CIS region

Irina Firen

Journalist, tv-presenter, producer

Development director in International media company France Medias Monde,

Exclusive media representative for Radio France International in Russia and CIS region on behalf of The lagoon company

Irina firen began her journalistic career in 2017 on the RBK TV channel in Novosibirsk.

Greetings to participants, organisers, and guests of the 27th St Petersburg International Economic Forum

“For more than a quarter of a century, the Forum has provided an opportunity for politicians, experts, business leaders, academics, and media professionals from around the world to hold in-depth discussions on key economic development trends in Russia and the world. Participants in plenary sessions, roundtables and panel discussions exchange views on ways to promote international cooperation, encourage scientific and technological progress and the development of human capital, and to effectively tackle the challenges we face.

The theme of the current meeting, The Foundations of a Multipolar World – The Formation of New Areas of Growth, is highly relevant and meaningful. A growing part of the international community is in favour of building a just and democratic system of international relations based on the principles of genuine equality, consideration for each other’s legitimate interests, and respect for the cultural and civilisational diversity of nations. It is precisely these principles that underpin the activities of BRICS, which Russia is chairing this year. It is symbolic that the history of this dynamically developing association, whose members already account for more than a third of the global economy, began at the 10th St Petersburg International Economic Forum in 2006.

Our country is open to constructive dialogue and interaction with partners and is ready to work together to address the economic, social, scientific and technological challenges of our time.

I am confident that the Forum will jump-start new and promising initiatives and projects, fostering mutually beneficial cooperation between our countries and peoples.

I wish you success and all the best.”

Vladimir Putin