On a warm spring day, a crowd has gathered on the platform of Moscow's Aprelevka railway station, to meet the children transported from warzones in east Ukraine to Russia, where new homes and an uncertain future await them.

14/02/2023 With a burst of patriotic balloons in the colours of the Russian flag, Russia's Children's Rights Commissioner, Maria Lvova-Belova, and Moscow Oblast Governor Andrey Vorobyov step forward to greet the young passengers from the Donbas region of Ukraine.

This event, staged for the cameras of Russian state media, is designed to favour two ambitious politicians, playing their part in Vladimir Putin’s war on Ukraine and eager to cement their position as Kremlin favourites.

Panning through the carriage full of children, the camera lens elicits some smiles, but other children look apprehensive as their journey to Moscow and into the unknown nears its conclusion.

In a corner of the carriage, a young boy sits quietly with his drawing things, taking refuge in his created world.

Stas' journey from state care in occupied territory in Ukraine into a Russian family is part of what Ukrainian authorities have denounced as a Kremlin operation to deport Ukrainian children and fast-track them into becoming Russian citizens.

Since the start of the war, Russian state officials have reported numerous transfers of unaccompanied Ukrainian children to what they described as loving families eager to help them overcome the trauma of war.

Stories of rescue and happy endings that are, however, in full breach of international law "Just to be very clear: there is no excuse for doing this", says Bill Van Esveld, Associate Child Rights Director for Human Rights Watch. "The Russian propaganda line is that 'we are doing this to protect these children. We're helping them. They were neglected by their parents. They were abandoned. And now we've taken them for their safety and their health'. That's not good enough. You can't take another country's children away during wartime, split them off from their families. They say that these are orphans who are being saved from war. In fact, many of these kids have families. They have parents with full parental rights and they were taken away without the parents ever being notified who are now desperate to get them back. So if you want to help these kids, release them. Don't take them out of their country and allow them to cross to Ukrainian controlled territory."

Stas’ new foster parents also took in his twin sister Dasha and an older 12-year-old sister, Nastya. The siblings had been separated for more than two years, living in different care facilities in occupied Ukraine.

When they met again at the station on that warm April day, they hugged each other tightly, hanging onto familiar faces in an unknown world.

Their new ‘guardians’ Galina-Valeryevna Bogachyova and her husband, Alexander Bogachev, greeted the siblings on the platform, waving Russian flags.

The Bogachevs told Russian media they had been eager to reunite the two sisters with their brother.

"When we found out about this situation, we immediately responded", Bogachyova said, referring to the case of the separated siblings. "We were one of the first to send our questionnaire and video clip. We really wanted to host these guys", she told journalists, reporting from the train station.

"We have a unique situation because the two girls, whom we took before, we have only had them less than a day, but they are already family, Dasha and Nastya," Bogachyova said, adding she was overwhelmed by emotions.

She proudly showed the children photos of their family on her Instagram. The Bogachev family home in Domodedovo, 37km southeast of Moscow, looked like a lively household, with two biological and four fostered children shared by the couple.

"There is a family who is taking three kids, two of them arrived from Kursk yesterday, and one of them is arriving today. The twin siblings haven't seen each other for two years,” she said, beaming with pride.” Can you imagine these emotions? Very strong."

Lvova-Belova confirmed the sisters had arrived just 24 hours before their brother Stas, travelling to Moscow from Kursk. She gave little information on how Dasha and Nastya were transported to Russia beyond saying their foster papers were prepared by local authorities in Russian-occupied Donetsk. When Stas and his sisters were brought to Moscow in April, Russian law only allowed the children to be fostered. Since that time, Putin has introduced new legislation facilitating the path to Russian citizenship for unaccompanied Ukrainian minors.

Stas and his sisters Dasha and Nastya embarked on their new life in Domodedovo and were not seen until July when they appeared alongside Vorobyov and Lvova-Belova at a ceremony in Moscow, among other orphans from Donetsk who received Russian citizenship.