President Vladimir Putin’s oldest daughter Maria Vorontsova has given a rare interview in which she described Russia as a “human-centric” state, the investigative news website Agentstvoreported Thursday.

Putin has never publicly acknowledged Vorontsova and her younger sister Katerina Tikhonova as his daughters, while the Kremlin has kept details of their lives a closely guarded secret.

“For us, the value of human life is a supreme value,” Vorontsova said in a Dec. 16 interview with Medtech.Mocsow, a non-profit affiliated with the Moscow Mayor’s Office.

“Russia is a human-centric society,” she added.

During the interview, Vorontsova, an endocrinologist, also talked about global medical advances and shared details about her literary, musical and athletic interests.

Interview host and CEO of Medtech.Moscow, Vyacheslav Shulenin, did not mention Vorontsova’s association with Putin during the conversation.

Agentstvo reports that Shulenin had served in the Moscow Mayor’s Office between 2013 and 2017, with his last post there listed as first deputy chief of staff.

The investigative outlet notes that Vorontsova’s 42-minute interview is widely promoted on the Russian social network Vkontakte, where it has nearly 225,000 views.

On YouTube, the video generated fewer than 1,000 views.

The United States and other Western nations have sanctioned both Vorontsova and Tikhonova in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

A Message from The Moscow Times:

Dear readers,

We are facing unprecedented challenges. Russia's Prosecutor General's Office has designated The Moscow Times as an "undesirable" organization, criminalizing our work and putting our staff at risk of prosecution. This follows our earlier unjust labeling as a "foreign agent."

These actions are direct attempts to silence independent journalism in Russia. The authorities claim our work "discredits the decisions of the Russian leadership." We see things differently: we strive to provide accurate, unbiased reporting on Russia.

We, the journalists of The Moscow Times, refuse to be silenced. But to continue our work, we need your help.

Your support, no matter how small, makes a world of difference. If you can, please support us monthly starting from just $2. It's quick to set up, and every contribution makes a significant impact.

By supporting The Moscow Times, you're defending open, independent journalism in the face of repression. Thank you for standing with us.

Once

Monthly

Annual

Continue

Not ready to support today?

Remind me later.

×

Remind me next month

Remind me

Thank you! Your reminder is set.

We will send you one reminder email a month from now. For details on the personal data we collect and how it is used, please see our Privacy Policy.