Arizona Summit Law School (ASLS) completed its last day of instruction on August 17, 2018. The School commenced a Teach-Out, approved by the Council of the Section of Legal Education and Admissions to the Bar of the American Bar Association (ABA) in November 2018. The school will remain accredited by the ABA and licensed by the State of Arizona through the completion of the Teach-Out on May 31, 2020. If you need information from ASLS, please use the list and links below. Thank you. 1098-T TUITION STATEMENTS Please follow the link to access the student portal: https://mycampus.azsummitlaw.edu/ to access your 2018 tuition statement. You will need your username, which is your first initial and last name entered as one word (such as jsmith for Jane Smith) and your email ( JSmith@Student.AZSummitLaw.edu ). If you have forgotten your password or user name for the student portal, please click on this link to send an email to our Support team: CVueSupport . For requests regarding prior year 1098-Ts, contact the IRS at 1-800-829-1040. For all other questions please email our Finance team: Finance@AZSummitLaw.edu . OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTS Please follow the link to order an electronic transcript. Click on the orange box in the top right corner that says "Order-Track-Verify" and then click "Order or Track a Transcript." If you are also requesting a letter of standing, please check “Yes” for the last question under Contact Information http://www.studentclearinghouse.org . This is available until 12:00 p.m. (Arizona time), Sunday, May 31, 2020. As of June 1, 2020, any student needing an official transcript will need to contact Arizona Private Postsecondary Education to obtain a copy of your student records, which includes an official transcript. Requests for records should be directed to: Arizona Private Postsecondary Education Attn: Transcript Requests https://ppse.az.gov/student ENROLLMENT or DEGREE VERIFICATION Please contact ASLS via email Registrar@azsummitlaw.edu to request dates of attendance verification or verification of conferred degree. This email address will be available until 12:00 p.m. (Arizona time) May 31, 2020. As of June 1, 2020, any student needing attendance or degree verification will need to contact Arizona Private Postsecondary Education to obtain a copy of your student records, which includes an official transcript showing attendance dates and, if applicable, degree conferral. Requests for records should be directed to: Arizona Private Postsecondary Education Attn: Transcript Requests https://ppse.az.gov/student STATE BAR FORMS AND GRADUATION CERTIFICATIONS Please email completed bar exam forms and bar certification requests to registrar@azsummitlaw.edu . This email address will be available until 12:00 p.m. (Arizona time), Sunday, May 31, 2020. As of June 1, 2020, any student needing records for state bar examiners will need to contact Arizona Private Postsecondary Education to obtain a copy of your student records, which includes a generic Verification of ASLS Graduates’ Bar Certification and Pro Bono Hours Letter that you will have to forward directly to the respective board of bar examiners. Requests for records should be directed to: Arizona Private Postsecondary Education Attn: Transcript Requests https://ppse.az.gov/student STUDENT ACCOUNT INFORMATION (payments, billing, and financial aid) Please email: finance@azsummitlaw.edu HR/PERSONNEL MATTERS Please email: hr@azsummitlaw.edu Click below to access the U.S. Department of Education’s information regarding school closures:...