REVOLT TV presents “The Produce Section,” a column where we put the spotlight on the men and women behind the beats we love so much and their contributions to the culture as a whole. From profiling and interviewing the hottest producers of today to acknowledging the greatest producers of all-time and delving deep into their discographies, The Produce Section is the hub where beats, rhymes and life connect.

Producers have long been the backbone of rap music, providing emcees and rappers alike with the sonic backdrops over which they bare their souls and share their stories. Rap artists may get much of the fanfare and are front and center. However, without the producer toiling away behind the scenes or crafting the instrumentals, the lyrics would be reduced to spoken word and hip hop would be nonexistent as we know it.

In this edition of “The Produce Section“, we cover Bink!, whose contributions to countless classic records over the past two decades have assured him real estate in the pantheon of the greatest of all time. A native of Norfolk, Virginia, Bink! earned his first major credit in 1996 with his production alongside Teddy Riley on Blackstreet’s hit single “Don’t Leave Me,” which put the relative unknown mixer on the map. Building on that momentum, he spent the latter half of the 90s establishing himself with various placements. But, the producer would truly hit his stride with the turn of the new millennium, lending his talents to some of the biggest rap stars in the game. One of those artists was JAY-Z, who opened the door for Bink! to raise his profile to the next level by seeking out his talents for him and his Roc-A-Fella roster.

Securing multiple credits on Hov’s seminal The Blueprint album, he would spend the aughts lacing material for rap’s heavyweights, while keeping an air of anonymity. With two decades worth of work on his resume, Bink! continues to provide quality production at a constant clip. He has shown the ability to adapt to the times while flourishing in various eras.

In our latest installment of our series, we celebrate and highlight 11 of Bink!’s most iconic beats that define his excellence behind the boards.

1. “Beasts From The East”

One of the first notable credits in Bink!’s production portfolio was this battle royal from the Lost Boyz’s Love, Peace and Napiness album. Crisp kicks and snares are showered atop a snippet of “One Loving Night,” providing an explosive backdrop for Mr. Cheeks to test their mettle.

2. “You, Me, Him, Her”

“What’s Your Name” by The Moments is the source material for the glorious riffs on this posse cut from JAY-Z’s The Dynasty: Roc La Familia album. Powering the track with jittery percussion, synths and vocal samples, the producer puts forth a frenetic sound bed for the Roc-A-Fella all-stars to assert their dominance.

3. “1-900-Hustler”

JAY-Z recruits Bink! to deliver this instrumental for The Dynasty: Roc La Familia, over which the Roc-A-Fella boss and his stable of hustlers lend their expertise to beleaguered street entrepreneurs. Flipping a sample of “Ain’t Gonna Happen” by Ten Wheel Drive and Genya Ravan, he constructs a riveting soundscape for Hov, Memphis Bleek, Beanie Sigel and Freeway to hold court over.

4. “Lights, Camera, Action!”

For his first release as a soloist, Mr. Cheeks reconnected with his longtime collaborator on this upbeat club banger, which recaptures the Lost Boyz frontman charismatic sensibilities. Jacking a sample of “Keep on Truckin’” by Eddie Kendricks, Bink! gifted Cheeks with the first chart-topper of his career with this infectious offering.

5. “All I Need”

JAY-Z reels off of his list of essentials on this Bink! production from The Blueprint. Pilfering vocals and instrumentation from Natalie Cole’s “Can’t Breakaway,” the boardsman enhances its original parts with festive kicks and snares, scoring one of the elite deep cuts in Hov’s discography.

6. “Blueprint (Momma Loves Me)”

JAY-Z employs the sonic architect to provide the beat for this biographic outro from The Blueprint. Drawing from Al Green’s 1973 release “Free at Last,” the beat-smith cooks up a soulful composition that inspires an earnest performance from the Brooklyn don.

7. “I Got Love”

In 2001, Bink! took his talents to the West Coast, lacing Nate Dogg with his lead single from the late crooner’s sophomore album, Music & Me. Built around Donny Hathaway’s 1970 release “I Believe to My Soul,” this composition soundtracked one of the biggest solo hits of Nate Dogg’s career and it’s evidence of Bink!’s ability to transcend regions beyond the east coast.

8. “Cigar Music”

An air of opulence and grandeur is felt on this regal selection from Rick Ross’ Deeper Than Rap album. Reworking a sample of the opening riff from “Don’t Ask My Neighbors” by Ahmad Jamal, this selection stands as one of the superior efforts from his work with Rozay.

9. “Devil in a New Dress”

The veteran producer loots Smokey Robinson’s 1973 cut “Will You Love Me Tomorrow?” for his contribution to Kanye West’s GOOD Fridays series, which preceded West’s fifth studio album, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. The track features a guest appearance from Rick Ross, now hailing as an instant classic and is a reminder of Bink!’s vaunted craftsmanship.

10. Jodeci

Bink! strips elements from Jodeci’s 1995 cut “4 U” to craft this euphoric backdrop, which finds Drake paying homage to the legendary R&B quartet alongside fellow leader of the new school J. Cole. Released to help drum up anticipation of Drake’s Nothing Was the Same album, this doubles as his first collaborative effort with the 6 God, who waxes poetic over guitar licks and crashing percussion.

11. “Santorini Greece”

Vocalist Denise Keene’s wails’ get chopped up and laid atop drum loops on this serene soundscape from Rick Ross’ Rather You Than Me album. Deconstructing elements of “Colours of My Dreams” by Judy Bailey Quartet, Bink! captures the opulence of Ross’ excursions abroad. The chemistry between the longtime collaborators reaches its apex in this track.