Bink! is looking for the music industry to put some respect on his name, and he’s calling out those who he says have bitten his style over the years.

“2023 was just scratching the surface…music from something I did for my guy Joey Majors ft Jada kiss…the inventor of the Roc & Mmg sound,” he wrote in an Instagram post on Monday (January 1). “More for yall to bite this year we are not the same!!!!”

The Roc-A-Fella beat maestro specifically targeted AraabMuzik in the comment section.

“Somebody tell Araab music to finally find his own way and get out of my pocket or say thank you for borrowing my shit lol…would @ em but I’m blocked,” Bink! continued.

The Virginia-bred producer is feeling a different energy heading into the new year and he’s speaking his truth.

Find the post below.

In addition to AraabMuzik, Bink! put “JL” (presumably J.U.S.T.I.C.E. League] and Jake One on blast, claiming they stole his production style

“Araab JL Jake One just a few who used my style to get on,” he testified in a separate post to his Instagram Story.

“My entire career I’ve been underrated, not mentioned among other greats and just plain copied verbatim by thousands of producers across the globe! Yet and still not respected accordingly.”

He continued: “Well 2024 I’m standing on business AS USUAL WITH WAY MORE INTENTION ON HURTING FEELINGS THRU MY MUSIC!”

This is far from the first time Bink! has called out peers, claming they took his sound. In the past, he’s jabbed at fellow Roc-A-Fella producer Just Blaze for the same thing.

Kanye West made similar claims in 2021 about how he and Bink! did the heavy lifting on JAY-Z’s seminal The Blueprint, while Just Blaze received a lot of the acclaim.

“I’m a leave this rt here,” Bink! reposted the clip of Ye’s explosive Drink Champs interview. “now call him bitter for telling the truth!! and yes to the guy in the background, I was super happy to hear this. GOOD MORNING…Ye and I crafted that album period! Ye brought his sound and I brought mine!!”

Bink! earned Blueprint production credits on Hov tracks like “The Ruler’s Back,” “All I Need” and “Blueprint.”

In more recent years, his standout placements came with Drake’s “Jodeci Freestyle” and “You Only Live Twice,” as well as Kanye West’s “Devil In A New Dress.”