Jay-Z's fifth joint proper (he took time out to drop Dynasty, which was more of less a Roc-A-Fella group effort) bears the auspicious title, inferring that it's the blueprint for rap/hip-hop in the new millennium. Call me a purist, but I can't help but be reminded of KRS's contribution back in 1989, Ghetto Music: The Blueprint of Hip Hop. Conversely, the first track on the album is entitled "The Ruler's Back," which is a direct lift of not only the title of Slick Rick's 1991 sophomore album, but also Rick's self-proclaimed tag name (although Rick does "pop" up chanting the chorus on "Girls, Girls, Girls"). It's hard to tell if Jigga is paying tribute or shamelessly borrowing from these legends of the genre, as he makes no reference to either in any of his lyrics.

Nit picking historical perspectives aside, The Blueprint takes everything that Jigga has explored on his other albums and coalesces them into another compilation of crossover hits, gangsta lyricism, and deep beat attitude. Production wise, Jay has opted to deal with fewer heads, with virtually none of the cats he worked with previously being visible (with the exception of Timbaland, who lends his bugged beat savvy to only one track, "Hola' Hovita"). Instead, this time around Jay allows newcomers Kanye West and Just Blaze to dominate the backbeat, with other contributions from Bink, Poke & Tone, and Eminem. The result is fairly fluid, although the tone of the album toward the end turns rather somber.

At any rate, the album begins with Jay thanking all for purchasing the album. Bink's production is all synth swirls and faux symphonic bravado, which somehow fits nicely with Jigga's self-important wordsmithing. Even the borderline cheesy fake horns work to solid effect.

With "Takeover" Jay's tone adopts an almost Eminem-esque standoffish, overtly defensive vibe, at least on the lyrical. It's offset by shouts to the new Roc-A heads like Freeway. Kanye West gets kudos for transforming The Doors' "Five To One" into a hip-hop drenched chug. And for tossing in riffs on Bowie's "Fame," twisting it up to say "Lame" when Jigga takes the piss out of Nas. In fact, taking the piss isn't quite the right term for what Jay does on this joint. His digs at his competition go beyond the Old School battle rhyme playfulness and enter the realm of downright vindictiveness. It expertly shows how the genre has turned once friendly chiding into deadly intentioned beef. Yet despite the vitriolic nature of the lyrics, you can't help but hang on Jigga's every word.

From the downright mean-spirited Jay flips the script with the playful and insightful "Izzo." While some of the content is old hat (dissing major labels), it's delivered with flair, especially when he shouts out some forgotten pioneers that many of his fans (the MTV bred kids of Middle America) probably have never heard of: "Industry shady, you need to be takin' over/label owners hate me, I'm raisin' the status quo up/I'm overcharging niggaz for what they did to the Cold Crush…" The rest of the song rolls to bouncy female voices on the chorus and an always popular Jackson 5 sample. Plus Jay flexing ghetto nursery rhyme concoctions that mix Snoop with Brooklyn borderline on the sublime. Yeah, they're corny, but mad infectious. How can you not chant along to "H to the izzo/V to the izzay/Fa shizzle ma nizzle used to dribble down in VA…"? But perhaps the most intriguing aspect is when Jay says "Can't leave rap alone/the game needs me…" it's a bizarre utterance, especially given his forthcoming retirement.

My Favorite Track on The Blueprint is:

Jigga switches gears with "Girls, Girls, Girls," which is essentially a love jammy tailored toward the ladies. It shows Jay getting mature and avoiding any of the all-too-obvious bitch baiting. It's a softer side of the Jigga that hardcore heads might balk at, but their ladies will definitely dig. The vibe continues to keep it slow and low on "Jigga That N***a," with a down-tempo strip club bump over which Jay flips back-in-the-day bragging rights (his shout out to Stan Smith Adidas is particularly sweet).

With "U Don't Know," Jay spits street game, comparing the grimy streets of Brooklyn to the Wall Street in a twisted turn of the phrase. The music is faux horn driven, with an almost Cecil B. Demille sense of Hollywood Greek epicness to it. But it eventually gets repetitive and somewhat overbearing, making it one of the weakest tracks, musically speaking, on the album.

The ever impressive Timbaland drops the goods on "Hola' Hovita," a wonderfully subversive track that has some late night Cuban jazz tinges. Hova/Jigga/Jay-Z (he's by this point adopted so many aliases, that it's hard to keep up with) rides the riddim with expert ease and flexes some creative turns of words in what could easily have been tired phrases about his ghetto upbringings. On this track the comparisons to Rakim that Jigga has gotten occasionally in the past are often merited: "I rhyme sicker than every rhyme spitter/Every crime nigga that rhyme or touch a mic because my mind's quicker/I'm a eighty-eighter, nine-six to Reasonable Doubt/Temper short, don't take much to squeeze you out/Yeah you shinin' but the only thing you're leavin' out/You're a candle in the sun - that sh!t don't even out…" Sure, Rakim's sense of alliteration may be missing, but the cleverness and quick tongued sting are certainly evident.

Jay keeps himself locked into the groove with "Heart of the City (Ain't No Love)" a slick track that bubbles with sick soul goodness thanks to Kanye West's inventive use of Bobby "Blue" Band. The lyrical aspect of the track is interesting, once again considering Jay's imminent retirement (he keeps talking about influential groups that have broken up from The Fat Boys to The Fugees). Astute foreshadowing or just coincidence? You decide.

Kanye keeps the OG soul vibe going on "Never Change," thus signally an overall musical and thematic change for the rest of the album. It's a softer, gentler Jay, at least in terms of the beats. And the smoother, softer beats make his verbals come off mellower, even when he's talkin' about "still f@#kin' with crime, cuz crime pays." Interesting, if not all the way successful.

Just Blaze commands the groove on "Song Cry," which dips into neo-gospel tinged R&B terrain. It's another love jammy for the ladies and the soft boys. The mood continues on the Bink produced "All I Need," as well. Then Eminem joins Jigga on the dark tinged "Renegade" (Em produced the track, as well). The mood is slow, somber, and slightly ominous with an ever-so-faint essence of bittersweet melancholy tucked away underneath. Interestingly enough, Em's contribution are some of the strongest lyrics he's ever dropped and they compliment Jigga rather nicely. I just wonder what they would have sounded like had they been put to a more upbeat tempo.

The album ends on a down tempo, introspective note with "Blueprint (Momma Loves Me)," in which Jigga shouts out to the love of his mother, family, and absent father, as well as his OG homey Jaz. But stay tuned as there's two extra "hidden" tracks tacked on to the end of the album; the metronome injected hi-speed click rhythm of "Breathe Easy" and a carnivalesque, quirky remix of "Girls, Girls, Girls."

While not as consistent as Vol. 2…Hard Knock Life, this album still presents Jay as a strong willed and fluent emcee able to tweak his musical tastes to hi-lite his different moods. While his slow jams didn't resonate with me, they will undoubtedly hit the ladies (and maybe a parent or two, for that matter) and open up the Jigga to a whole new audience.