Dombivili Station is the all-time busiest station on the Central Railway and a halting point for both fast and slow trains. The commercial department of Central Railway is planning to establish a movie theatre at Dombivli Railway Station and a campsite at Palasdhari. Here are the details and what is the reason behind this decision.

Central Railway Plans To Set Up A Movie Theatre At Dombivli Railway Station

The Central Railway (CR) commercial department intends to establish a prefabricated movie theatre at Dombivli station and a campground at Palasdhari in order to capitalise on rail assets and boost non-fare revenue. On the other hand, rail users stated that CR ought to prioritise making sure that trains depart on time.

The CR authorities will remain open for business for ten years after releasing a call for bids. An official clarified that the movie theatre will not be enormous but rather a prefabricated one that can be erected in a corner of the station’s property. He further stated that they are trying to obtain an interested party to bid by the end of this month. The railroads anticipate making ₹47.85 lakh off of this every year.

Train passengers reported that CR authorities were deviating from their main responsibilities. According to Nandkumar Deshmukh, head of the Federation of Suburban Railway Passengers Association, this is a prime example of priorities being out of alignment.

Also Read: Ahmedabad-Mumbai Route Expands With A Second Vande Bharat Express Train

Priorities should be set for improving passenger comfort, expanding sidewalks at train stations, and making train travel easier. In a station like Dombivli, a movie theatre will only make the crowds worse. Three lakh to five lakh commuters pass through the bustling station each day.

Campsite At Palasdhari, A Popular Tourist Spot

Shivraj Manaspure, Chief PRO, Central Railway, confirmed that they have put out a tender for the establishment and management of nature camping operations at Palasdhari dam for five years in order to create non-fare revenue from tourism activities. On November 30, the tender will be opened. A total of 10006.06 square metres of land will be set aside for this.

The licensee will be permitted to develop the land piece at Palasdhari Dam into a campground for tourists, according to sources. The location will have fish farming, a boat club, water sports upstream of the dam, tents, a garden area, a playing area, a café, restrooms, and both indoor and outdoor sports under lifeguard supervision. The railways stand to gain ₹27.92 lakh from the initiative.

The rationale behind establishing a camping site has been questioned by train commuters who live in the northern portion of MMR along the Central Railway track. Located on the Mumbai Suburban Railway’s Karjat-Khopoli route, Palasdari is both a tourist destination and a railway intersection. It is located on State Highway No. 35, Karjat-Khopoli. There is a well-known dam in Palasdari. People from Mumbai, Panvel, and Navi Mumbai frequent it, especially in the rainy season. During the monsoon, the entire area is encircled by greenery and waterfalls.

Also Read: Celebrating 130 Years Of Sarvajanik Ganeshotsav In Mumbai

There is no denying that Palasdhari is a popular tourist destination!

Cover Image Courtesy: Wikimedia

For more such snackable content, interesting discoveries and latest updates on food, travel and experiences in your city, download the Curly Tales App. Download HERE.