So, let’s take a sneak-peek into the most crowded railway stations in Mumbai.

DOMBIVLI

Falling in the Central Railway suburban line, Dombivli is the most crowded station and also the most fare generating suburban station in Mumbai division. A whopping number of 2.33 lakh passengers travel through this suburban station everyday and Rs. 14,94,538 is the collection in fares at this station. It has recently beaten the top most crowded stations, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, Thane and even Kalyan and stood first. Interestingly,

Commuters at Dombivli station

Source:firstpost.com

THANE

Known as the city of lakes, Thane has about 35 lakes. It is just not about the lakes, Thane is popular for, it is also about the crowd in the local station. With 2.25 lakh passengers travelling by this suburban station on daily basis and more than 1000 trains visit this station each day,which include 130–140 long distance trains. This station earns about Rs. 13.84 lakh in fares everyday. In fact, Apartments For Sale in Mumbai and Thane have seen a surge in pricing owing to increased connectivity.

Crowded Thane station

CST

Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (CST) aka Bori Bunder aka Victoria Terminus (VT), has a historic significance and is also a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Mumbai. Also being the headquarters of Central Railways, it attracts tourists from all over the world. Over 1250 local and long distance trains pull in and out of this station with a footfall of 6.36 lakh passengers per day.

CST station

Source:roundtriparoundtheglob.blogspot.com

ANDHERI

With population more than one million, this suburbs railway station is one of the most crowded in Mumbai. Lying in the western line of the division, Andheri station has registered around 6.04 lakh passengers per day. And that’s not all, owing to excellent connectivity and infrastructure facilities the Property for sale in Mumbai have risen considerably.

Andheri station

Source:kemmannu.com

CHURCHGATE

Being on the southernmost part of Mumbai, this suburban station attracts the working class population from all parts of the city. Churchgate is one of the busiest and crowded stations in Mumbai with 5.05 lakh passengers travelling per day. This area is a home to many banking and business organizations and reputed educational institutions situated in South Mumbai.Price of Apartment for sale in mumbai is rises from past few decades in this particular area and near by area.