All three stories are reminiscent of work by John Wyndham (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Wyndham) an English author who initially worked under various pseudonyms for early US Sc-Fi pulp magazines like Wonder Stories and Fantasy. Later, he published successful novels under his own name, most notably The Midwich Cuckoos and Day of the Triffids. I cannot put my finger on these exact titles although he was prolific at times and they are right up his street. Several collections of short stories have surfaced since he passed in 1969, Web for example and Plan For Chaos (the latter originally written around 1949).

Why do I believe it may be Wyndham? His short stories were grounded in the exploration of ordinary people / motives reacting to strange circumstances including themes of space discovery, aliens, time travel and parallel universes. Wyndham would often cross-reference characters and environments in these stories although they were not overtly linked e.g. a child with telepathic powers or an event / landscape / population on a planet would appear in another similar short story going down a different trajectory. Sometimes they were directly in sync such as his Troon series later published as The Outward Urge. This makes it great fun to read although difficult to pin his work down (and its something that directly influenced Stephen King with his Castle Rock inclusions).

To be more a little more specific to your references:

Story 1 - Wyndham wrote multiple time travel / parallel universe stories where people meet themselves or have different lives with other (romantic) partners due to a slight change in events. In one such story Wanderers in Time, the vessel is a tube like box not much bigger than 3 x 8 feet which is a squeeze enter - this story was a significant influence on what became the British TV series Dr Who.

Story 2 - Wyndham wrote several space based stories on the theme of adaptation, either forced or natural i.e. ship crashes on a planet, over time the inhabitants change into something else due to the environment years later they are re-discovered but un-recognisable. These stories were directly influenced (acknowledged in biographies) by HG Wells The Time Machine. One very similar to your description is The Last Lunarians.

Story 3 - Wyndham wrote several stories along these lines including one about a white collar criminal who jumps universe / body and arrives in an idyllic community at peace but cannot help falling back into character by taking advantage of their freedom and good nature. Eventually it comes home to roost. I cannot think of the title.

Apologies that I cannot nail it down completely for you. If it is not a Wyndham collection then the themes are so close it could be someone who came after and was influenced by him. In any respect, if these stories floated your boat, read John Wyndham as it will open up a whole new world for you.