The use of the internet has changed how players engage in games like Animal Crossing: New Horizons, opening up ways for players to communicate that weren't available when the game's first title released decades ago. An example of the new tools players can use is the creation of the Nookazon website. Nookazon was founded by Daniel Luu and launched on April 9th, 2020. The website allows fans to trade and sell items from their Animal Crossing game.

To use Nookazon, Animal Crossing players can create an account to post listings of items they want to sell. They can ask for a set number of Bells (usually based competitively on similar item prices on the site), or ask for an item they are looking for in exchange. When another player puts an offer on the item, a trade is arranged by traveling to one of the islands to do a swap. The in-game transactions are set up in good faith between players, creating a needed amount of trust within the userbase of the website.

Related: Animal Crossing: How Much Money Tom Nook Actually Makes From You

There are some restrictions put in place by Nookazon to prevent players from taking advantage of each other. No items may be sold for real currency, preventing players from making real-life profit on rare items. Nookazon also provides a safety page to help guide players in safe trading practices, like using Airplane mode to freeze a transaction and boot a potential scammer from their island. This available education helps deter anyone looking to use the website as a means to obtain goods for free by stealing other players items.

Animal Crossing: New Horizons Fans Created Nookazon To Trade Items

Another way that players can use Nookazon, is by trading Animal Crossing villagers. In order to trade a villager, players must wait until the villager in question has their house in boxes. They can then list the villager on Nookazon and a player can buy the ability to travel to the seller's island and convince the villager to move to their island. This is a great way for players to get ahold of popular characters like Raymond the cat. However, popular Animal Crossing villagers can be expensive, so it might still be better worth players' time and currency to find the villagers themselves during random mystery island encounters.

Nookazon is a great example of how gaming communities can come together to complete projects. Animal Crossing fans can all benefit from the use of the Nookzaon website, giving them a different way to make new friends and interact with others who enjoy the game. Animal Crossing: New Horizons has been a source of relief and relaxation for many during the difficult times of 2020, and Nookazon offers fans a helpful tool for completing projects that require a specific item.

Next: Animal Crossing: When Shooting Stars Actually Happen