In the Brussels' Palais des Academies, a few meters from the residence of the Belgian prime minister and the headquarters of the European People's Party, the KU Leuven Wilfried Martens Fund has been launched. Wilfried Martens, an alumnus of KU Leuven, was prime minister of Belgium between 1979 and 1992 and EPP President from 1990 until 2013.

The Wilfried Martens Fund will finance academic education activities and research projects focused on the themes that were dear to Wilfried Martens during his European political career. For instance, the Fund will create a 'Wilfried Martens Scholarship' for students from non-EU countries to follow an English-language master programme at KU Leuven in 2015-2016. The call will be published in early 2015. Fundraising will take place on a broad basis.

Speaking to an audience of politicians, journalists, and academics, European Council President Donald Tusk said: “ I hope that the new Wilfried Martens Fund will offer many opportunities and I am really happy that it will open a road to Europe for young talent from the Eastern Partnership countries. Wilfried and I both knew how important it was in our life to meet people on our way to help us.”

Wilfried Martens' widow, Mrs Miet Smet-Martens, strongly emphasised the role of young people in Europe. "Young people showing a special interest for Europe need to be encouraged. It is they who will become the political and societal leaders of tomorrow, and Europe needs them. If we can achieve that with this Fund young people really engage in the European construction, I think we will have achieved our goal."

EPP President Joseph Daul highlighted the current political relevance of the Fund’s topics as well as the central role of the KU Leuven: "Wilfried Martens wouldn't have been able to study at the university if it wouldn’t have been for funds such as this one.” On behalf of the EPP he presented KU Leuven rector Rik Torfs a cheque of 10,000 euro, the intial capital to start the Wilfried Martens Fund. And he encouraged everyone to contribute to the Fund.

Finally KU Leuven rector Rik Torfs spoke about the exemplary role of Wilfried Martens: "He was a true thinker, a man with a deep faith, and that is in my eyes of paramount importance for the future of Europe. I can’t imagine a revival of Europe without deep, philosophical, profound ideas, and in this Wilfried Martens was really a lighting example to all of us."

After having signed the Fund’s charter, rector Rik Torfs offered a copy of the charter to each of the three initiators of the Wilfried Martens Fund: Mrs Miet Smet Martens, EPP President Daul and KU Leuven professor Steven Van Hecke.

How to support the Fund? Donations can be directly submitted to the account of the 'KU Leuven Wilfried Martens Fund' (IBAN: BE45 7340 1941 7789 – BIC: KREDBEBB) with the address 'KU Leuven, Oude Markt 13, 3000 Leuven', while mentioning 400/0011/02405.