Image068h - Public domain book illustration

He's been on every front from Chateau-Thierry to the Rhine Coblenz—1919

Jemal Pacha and Musir Ahmet Izzet Pasha

An informal portrait of Jemal Pacha (rear seat, left side of car, with beard) and Musir (Field Marshal) Ahmet Izzet Pasha (rear seat, right side of car), seated in the back seat of a motor car, possibly leaving ... More

Dame Maud Mccarthy Gbe Rrc- the Matron-in-chief in France of Queen Ale...

Dame Maud Mccarthy Gbe Rrc- the Matron-in-chief in France of Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service image: a half length portrait of Dame Maud McCarthy, wearing her distinctive grey and red QAIMNS ... More

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3301...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection The reception of the Count de Salix. The British Representative at the Vatican (Count de Salix) Centre figure.

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3305...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3305...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3305...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3305...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3381...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph of a medal, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3382...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection The King decorating a Flight-Sergeant of the Royal Flying Corps.

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3397...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3400...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph of industrial workers, factory building, work, assembly line, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Q3401...

Ministry of Information First World War Miscellaneous Collection Public domain photograph related to the British military forces, World War One, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

The Boy Scouts Association in Britain, 1914-1918 Q19964

The Boy Scouts Association in Britain, 1914-1918 A member of the Sea Scouts examining the permit book and questioning Horace Nicholls, the first photographer to be officially appointed by the Ministry of Inform ... More

The Boy Scouts Association in Britain, 1914-1918 Q19965

The Boy Scouts Association in Britain, 1914-1918 A member of the Sea Scouts examining the permit book and questioning Horace Nicholls, the first photographer to be officially appointed by the Ministry of Inform ... More

Gravure des Allies (HS85-10-32410) original

A composite drawing of the political and military leaders of the Allied nations in the First World War in 1916. The French title of the image, "Gravure des alliés", translates as "Engraving of the Allies". Th ... More

Gravure des Allies (HS85-10-32410)

A composite drawing of the political and military leaders of the Allied nations in the First World War in 1916. The French title of the image, "Gravure des alliés", translates as "Engraving of the Allies". Th ... More

Cora and Henry Forrest on their wedding day (4028858258)

Studio portrait of Captain Henry Garnett Forrest (born 1895) and his wife Cora on their wedding day. Captain Forrest served with http:///units/unit_10836.asp and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross. Righ ... More

Franz Ferdinand uniform

The bloodstained uniform of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, being displayed sometime after his assassination.

I Was There with the Yanks on the Western Front, 068h

He's been on every front from Chateau-Thierry to the Rhine Coblenz—1919

Knockchis homechat during World War I

Elsie Knocker and Mairi Chisholm on the cover of "Home Chat" magazine The Heroins of Pervyse

Kartenspiel WK 1 - Public domain banknote scan

Deutsch: Ein Kartenspiel als Pause im Feldeinsatz (1. Weltkrieg) Public domain image of a banknote, paper money, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Weizmann and feisal 1918 during World War I

Emir Feisal I (right) and Chaim Weizmann (also wearing Arab dress as a sign of friendship) in Syria. At this time Feisal was living in Syria. Português: 1918. Emir Faisal I e Chaim Weizmann

Frances Stevenson 1916 - Public domain dedication image

Press photograph of Frances Stevenson at work in 1916 Public domain photograph - studio female portrait, 1900s, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Arthur Ranken Dodson during World War I

Arthur Ranken Dodson (1870-1944). British Red Cross Society and Order of Saint John of Jerusalem. Photographed in Red Cross uniform, presumably during the First World War and catalogued as such by the Imperial ... More

Personnel du Lazaret du Dr F. Cresson

Photograph of some members of the field ambulance organized by Dr Cresson to help the Russian soldiers on the german theatre. Français : Photographie des principaux membres du lazaret ambulant du Dr Cresson, ... More

Nedeljko Cabrinovic during World War I

Nedeljko Čabrinović (Serbian Cyrillic: Недељко Чабриновић) (1895 – 23 January 1916) was a member of the nationalist Young Bosnia movement, and one of a group of seven who intended to assassinate Franz Ferdinan ... More

Karl Err

Leutnant Karl Err in 1920. Public domain photograph related to the history of Russia, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

LPDF 35 19 Joffre Millerand Foch Asquith French

Français : extrait du journal. Public domain photograph related to the history of France, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

Real'ne uchylyshche

Українська: Вінницьке реальне училище Public domain photograph of a house, residential property, free to use, no copyright restrictions image - Picryl description

R. V. C. Bodley

World War I image of Captain R. V. C. Bodley (see discussion of his unit and career in Flickr commentary and notes)

Three Hawaiian Boys Aboard the Warship St. Louis, 1917

Some Hawaiian Boys Aboard the Warship St. Louis. Standing to the left is Antone Gomes; to the right is Eddie Ladd, and the one seated is Joe Kalaukoa.