EUROPEAN DESIGN - SCANDINAVIAN ROOTS

With its minimalist aesthetic, clean lines and fastidious attention to detail, the Studio7 series is a great example of form following function and ushers in a new era of performance for Jamo. Brimming with technical innovation our design team have created a speaker that is timeless and would grace any home. Inspired by nature the Studio7 series is a tribute to our two founders, Preben Jacobsen and Julius Mortensen.

CRYSTAL CLEAR HIGHS

The high frequency duties are carried out by the all new 1 inch tweeter unit featuring a copper faraday ring which increases sensitivity and reduces non-linear distortion. The tweeter and surround is made from fabric and exhibits excellent distortion characteristics and wide bandwidth, for a non-fatiguing yet detailed sound.

The High Frequency waveguide was optimised using Jamo’s exclusive COMSOL software model. Validation of the waveguide and tweeter performance was achieved through countless hours of real-world testing to ensure consistency, reliability and performance even at high sound pressure levels for extended periods.

NATURAL BASS

The bass drivers feature embossed paper cones, high strength motor assemblies incorporating aluminium inductance shorting rings that both enhance power handling and lower distortion. The aluminium shorting ring lowers distortion for clean, dynamic bass and increases power handling as the aluminium ring acts as a heat sink.

The embossed paper cone with « Thor’s Hammer » detailing increases the rigidity to improve the transient response for that snappy yet natural bass.

7° TILTED CABINET – A DISTINCTIVE DESIGN FOR A NEW SOUND EXPERIENCE

7 really is the magic number for the new Studio7. To ensure a coherent sound stage, we have time aligned the acoustic centres of the drive units by tilting the cabinet back and mounting it on a plinth that houses the speaker crossover. This helps minimise any timing anomalies that can occur in a more traditional enclosure.

REDUCING DIFFRACTION

When a speaker driver produces sound, some energy is spread across the baffle of the speaker towards the edge of the cabinet. If that energy hits a hard cabinet edge, a smaller version of this energy is reflected back towards the driver causing a time shifted, low level signal that can corrupt the sound of the driver leading to distortion. By rounding the cabinet edge, this energy gently dissipates more naturally, and does not colour the signal being produced by the driver.

QUIET CABINET FOR INCREASED RESOLUTION

The Jamo Studio speakers’ cabinet walls are thicker (15mm MDF with 18mm Front baffle) and critically braced to ensure a low degree of « self-noise ». This allows you to hear more low-level detail and increases resolution when playing at any output level compared to competing products in their class. In short, you get to hear more of what you want and less of what you don’t.

HIGH QUALITY CROSSOVER

The crossover is housed in its own sealed plinth to minimise the possibility of any interaction between the large bass driver magnet and the inductors in the crossover. Special attention was paid to the topology and component selection. Mylar and non-polarised electrolytic capacitors are used along with both iron and air core inductors and 25W resistors to perfectly blend the speaker drivers achieving the highest level of transparency throughout the audio band.

2 COLOURS – INSPIRED BY NORDICS NATURE

Our colours have been chosen from the chromatic palette of Scandinavian landscapes: the dark blue is inspired by the Norwegian fjords and the grey cloud from the fog hanging over a Finnish forest. Our signature blue fjord brings an emotional touch to your interior whilst Grey cloud integrates seamlessly into the modern home.

The Jamo Studio7 will enhance your living space no matter which colour you choose.

STUDIO7 IS ALL ABOUT HYGGE

Hygge - « To create a warm atmosphere and enjoy the good things in life with family and friends. » So, seat comfortably, relax and enjoy a sound as pure as Scandinavian air.