Studio Seven Teaching Method and Curriculum

The Visual Application Method was created at Studio Seven in 1992. This method of teaching breaks down the process of image making into steps that can be easily understood. This process is cumulative and over time our students understanding of composition and technical application deepens as well as their ability to express their own individuality through color and form.

Initially each student is given a basic understanding of the visual language. Each student will progress at their own pace. The teachers at Studio Seven give each student what they need as they need it. Techniques are taught through visualization. We show them, then we watch to make sure that the particular technique being taught is understood. As time goes by our students learn and master many visual application techniques and consequently as they advance they are able to express their visual ideas independently.

Each unit throughout the school year program is designed to strengthen the students understanding of the visual language. Drawing from life helps each student to learn to carefully observe shapes and relationships, honing their observational skills and giving them a greater understanding of the world around them. Printmaking focuses on gaining a stronger understanding of positive and negative shapes as well as an opportunity to grow in their understanding of color composition. Our sculpture unit helps students to understand three dimensional shapes and relationships. Painting is our most popular unit and is done in both the fall and the spring. Painting is the culmination of all of the other units allowing each student to work with line, color, texture, positive and negative space as well as visual rhythms and shape relationships. Each student selects their own subject matter and every painting is an opportunity to grow artistically.

Every aspect of the Studio Seven experience is interactive and cumulative. Consequently each student artist grows in their ability to express themselves from year to year.

Each school year ends with a large scale art exhibit. Students participate in every aspect of the show preparation and hanging of the exhibit. The exhibition not only allows each student to share their work with an audience it also helps to enhance their appreciation of other students work. Ultimately they inspire each other.

Studio Seven Founder