Stanley Kubrick needs little introduction.

The multi-award-winning auteur is renowned for his ground-breaking special effects, scrupulous attention to detail and choice of difficult themes.

The director would have celebrated his 93rd birthday on Tuesday, July 26, 2021.

Read more: The huge 'world-class' £700m film studio that could be coming to Broxbourne

While Kubrick was born in Manhattan, New York in 1928, he later made his home right here in Hertfordshire, in the lush green pastures just outside of St Albans, where he died on March 7, 1999.

He filmed parts of his most famous legacy, The Shining , at Hertfordshire’s EMI Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire’s Borehamwood.

All of the film’s interiors, including inside the iconic hedge maze, were shot in the Elstree studios.

Kubrick’s final film before his death, Eyes Wide Shut , which stars Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise, was filmed at the Luton Hoo mansion.

So how did the most influential director of the 20th century end up in Herts?

His cinematic career dates to when he was just 16 years old. Kubrick sold a photo of a newspaper seller surrounded by headlines of president Franklin D. Roosevelt’s death to Look magazine.

He left his studies behind to become a full-time staffer at Look when he was 17.

Get the latest Herts news direct to your inbox by signing up to our newsletter below:

After a four-year stint as a photojournalist, he took classes at Columbia University in New York before embarking on filmmaking, which began with documentaries and ended with long, twisted tales of violence (A Clockwork Orange , 1971) and suspense (The Shining , 1980).

Kubrick made his first fictional feature (on a very low budget), Fear and Desire , in 1953 and went on to make Paths of Glory (1957) and Spartacus (1960) – an epic, more than three hours long film.

Despite being billed as unnecessarily long by some critics, Spartacus won Best Motion Picture at the USA’s Golden Globes and won four times at the Academy Awards. He married his wife, Christiane Kubrick in 1958. They had two daughters together.

The family moved to England, to take advantage of a scheme called the “Eady plan” - if 80% of a film’s workforce were British, producers would be granted considerable tax incentives.

His first film in the UK was the controversial Lolita (1962) – a feature based on Vladamir Nabokov’s novel of the same name, which tells the story of an older man's relationship with a 13-year-old girl. The catholic church sent Stanley a slew of angry letters. The film was still a box office hit.

In 1965, they moved to Abbotts Mead house in Barnet Lane, an area just south of the Elstree film studios. The 19th-Century house was sold to him by the father of the X Factor’s Simon Cowell.

The family lived there for 14 years. Kubrick, who was very involved in all stages of the filmmaking process, edited A Clockwork Orange in the house’s garage. This was the director’s “favourite room” according to his daughter Katharina, where his cats used to lounge on reels of film.

Also produced and tweaked from the house were Kubrick’s most acclaimed films: the haunting science-fiction 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) and the period drama based on a novel Barry Lyndon (1975).

In 1978, the Kubricks moved to Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire, along with the 172 acres surrounding it – an ideal location for the so-called introverted director to gain inspiration from.

The grand 17th-Century mansion had 18 bedrooms and is located on a remote, gated estate. The private home played a key role in the auteur’s filmography up until his death, when he died in his sleep, in his home. He was buried under his favourite tree on the grounds.

In The Stanley Kubrick Archives book, images depict the softer homelife of Kubrick during his Childwickbury years. There’s a photo of the director giving one of his golden retrievers a belly rub on his kitchen’s terracotta tiled floor – a far cry from the vicious scenes of his films. Another shows Stanley in the same kitchen, leaning on an island strewn with Waitrose bags.

Stanley’s legacy lives on through his movies and the Childwickbury manor. Every year, Stanley’s wife Christiane, who is an artist, hosts an art fair on the grounds for the public to enjoy.

Her own art, which is available to purchase at the Childwickbury Arts Fair, depicts scenes from the beautiful grounds – twisted oak trees, deep-purple bluebells and tall grasses, everything that inspired her husband’s beautifully arranged films.