Mr Kubrick had lived in the tiny community of Childwickbury, off Harpenden Road, for more than 20 years. Few of his neighbours, however, had ever met him.

Mr Kubrick died on Sunday, aged 70, just weeks after filming finished on Eyes Wide Shut, his first film in 12 years, which was partly shot in St Albans.

Assistant curate of St Mary at Childwick Green, Mr John Hayton, said: "We held a service at the church on Sunday evening, during which we mentioned the names of people who had passed away or were ill.

"One member of the cong- regation said she had seen on Ceefax earlier that Stanley Kubrick had died. We included his name in the service."

A police spokesman said Mr Kubrick died of natural causes and there will be no inquest. His funeral is today (Friday).

A security guard was on duty this week outside the gates of Childwickbury Manor, where he lived with his wife, Christiane, who is an artist.

One neighbour, who did not want to be named, said she had only met Mr Kubrick once in 22 years. She said: "He would always wave when he went past in his chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce, just out of friendliness.

"He was a very private man, and didn't really participate in community life. That's fair enough, and people living in Childwickbury respected it.

"We are sad that he is gone."

Another neighbour, who said she had never spoken to Mr Kubrick, added: "Staff at the manor have told me before that he was basically a very kind man. If someone was in trouble, he would help them.

"He was very hard-working, though, and he made everyone else work hard too."

Mr Roger Harrop of Herts Film Link, which promotes Hertfordshire as a location for film shoots, said Mr Kubrick's death was a major loss.

"He was a strange, difficult character, and he destroyed a few people in his search for perfection, but no one could doubt the quality of the finished product," he said.

"His death is a sad loss for Hertfordshire."

Childwickbury Manor, the former home of racehorse trainer Mr Harry Joel, was bought by Mr Kubrick in 1977. He converted the stables into a cutting room where he edited his films, and was renowned for working through the night during post- production.

Mr Kubrick's work -- which included A Clockwork Orange, 2001: A Space Odyssey, Full Metal Jacket and Lolita -- was always highly acclaimed, and often controversial.

For the past two years he had been working on Eyes Wide Shut, a thriller starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, which is due for release in July.

Filming was based at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, and included scenes shot in Porters Wood, St Albans, and Luton Hoo, near Harpenden.

Mr Kubrick is survived by his widow, and daughters Katharine, Anya and Vivian.

Converted for the new archive on 30 June 2000. Some images and formatting may have been lost in the conversion.