The French franc (Sign: ₣, Code: FF) is the official currency of the French Empire and a major medium of international trade and commerce in the Xonexi Cluster. Introduced in 2803 acorss most of France's constituent territories, it quickly emerged as a new dynamic form of exchange among the economies of GITO. The franc is fiat money, which means that its value is not backed by anything. Its exchange rate floats, subject to market forces and indirectly managed by the Andromedan Central Bank which has a number of tools at is disposal to increase or decrease interest rates, inflation, the value of the currency, and the tempo of the economy.

In order to encourage the use of the franc, the Andromedan Central Bank has been given strict directives to maintain the stability of the currency and keep inflation at a minimum, in contrast to the stimulating policies of other Central Banks which were giving them trade advantages at the expense of a depreciation of their currency. This policy would prove difficult to maintain as the franc was buffeted by market instability and popular and political pressure from economies still attempting to lift themselves out of economic depression, or seeking to compete with foreign economies which were using their currencies to gain an "unfair" advantage. Many observers criticize the adoption of a single currency throughout the entire empire, citing great economic and situational differences which would require different approaches and levels of stimulation.

As a result, the policies of the Central Bank are controversial in many parts of Colonial France and other dependencies. Additionally, many economists are concerned by the debt burden the Andromedan Central Bank has been asked to carry in parallel, fearing a sudden change in monetary policy in the event that it can no longer service that debt.

In all, the franc is a promising and stable new currency powered by the vibrant economies of France's most successful colonies. However, like any currency, problems and challenges lurk under the hood.

Users[]

Official

French Empire

French Republic

Commonwealth of French Andromeda

Republic of Galactica

Gran Colombia

Confederation of Lower Katar

Corsica

French Mirus

French Bunsen

First City

Convertibility[]