ORLANDO, Fla. – If they played by the book, the Lakers would have been tied with the Orlando Magic at one victory apiece heading into Game 3 of the NBA Finals.

The Lakers’ Pau Gasol committed goaltending when he flicked the net and grazed the rim with his right hand on Courtney Lee’s missed layup at the regulation buzzer in Game2.

At least that was the opinion of Lakers coach Phil Jackson before the teams played Tuesday night at the Amway Arena. Jackson said he believed the correct call would have been to award Lee what would have been the game-winning basket.

Lee missed the shot, off a lob pass from teammate Hedo Turkoglu with the score tied at 88-all, and the game went to overtime, where the Lakers defeated the Magic, 101-96, to take a 2-0 series lead.

Replays showed that Gasol did not interfere with the flight of the ball and did not alter its path from Lee’s hands to the basket, which is why the referees did not blow their whistles.

“It’s called basket interference,” Jackson said. “Even if you hit the net, supposedly in the process, that’s part of it, but the rule is kind of archaic. It isn’t called in this day and age as much, but when we were in high school … that was something a ref might call in a high school game.”

Jackson agreed that Gasol did not affect the shot.

“He didn’t interfere with the shot, basically,” Jackson said. “That was not something that destroyed the shot.”

Jackson also said he had never seen a game end on a goaltending call in all his years as a player and a coach.

“I’m sure it’s happened, but I haven’t seen it,” he said. “We had one situation very similar to that a few years ago against the Vancouver Grizzlies, and it was not called.”

Meanwhile, Orlando coach Stan Van Gundy seemed content to let the issue die a quiet death.

“Look, I’m not going to get into calls,” Van Gundy said. “Calls didn’t decide that game.”

Sleepless in Orlando

Lamar Odom couldn’t get to sleep Monday night. The time change from California to Florida had something to do with it, but he kept thinking about Game 3, visualizing how it might unfold with him making a key play or a big shot.

And there was more.

“I kept hearing a certain Queen song playing in my head,” he said.

He didn’t name the tune, but you know he meant, “We Are the Champions.”

“I know we’re not there yet,” he added quickly. “Not to take anything away from Orlando and what they have to do, but these are just some of the things you have to go through. It was just anxiety, like, when I was 12 years old playing football in the championship game. Couldn’t sleep. Tossing and turning.”

Finally, Odom got some camomile tea and the sandman arrived.

Developmental program

The league and the NCAA have joined forces to create a new initiative called iHoops, which will provide developmental programs aimed at improving youth basketball. Duke and Team USA coach Mike Krzyzewski announced the program before Game 3.