The NBA, one of the most prestigious competitions in the world, is fundamentally driven by two teams that shaped the history of professional basketball: the Boston Celtics and Los Angeles Lakers.

They changed the course of everything, and the latter became a team that enchanted almost everyone.

A groundbreaking and disruptive franchise, whose stars are something truly unique. One of them is Pau Gasol, who is part of Lakers' history by his own merits.

Sharing the spotlight with names like Magic Johnson, Kobe Bryant, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Wilt Chamberlain.

The prestigious 'Los Angeles Times' selected the 75 best players who have ever worn the gold and purple.

Their experts, respected voices with sources, information and a relationship with the franchise, established a ranking dominated by Magic Johnson.

The leader of the 'ShowTime Lakers', with five rings (1980, 1982, 1985 and 1988), three 'MVPs', and he was the soul of a team that played a fun version of basketball. He was almost perfect.

Others will prefer Kobe Bryant, the benchmark of the franchise in the modern era. Second on the list by three points and the one who changed the team's fortunes.

His exceptional attitude, play, dominance, points and five championships, with an average of 25 points in his 20 seasons made him special.

His personality, at the same time, made people fall in love with him.

The podium is closed by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, the top scorer in NBA history. In 14 seasons he had five rings and averaged 22.1 points per game.

He was a giant among giants, and changed basketball with a way of living that transcended the court.

He is joined in the top-10 by Jerry West, Elgin Baylor, Shaquille O'Neal, LeBron James, George Mikan, James Worthy and Wilt Chamberlain.

Of the 10, the most recent inclusion is James, with just one ring. But, undoubtedly, the player who returned the Lakers to the top of the NBA.

Pau Gasol, 12th place

Ranked 12th in the list is the player who changed the direction of basketball in Spain, Pau Gasol.

He was the one who hooked a whole generation and brought the NBA a physical but analytical game, with a virtue for passing as well as scoring.

Although it can almost be said that they value him more as a legend in California. There they are very aware of the sporting 'beast' that wore their colors.

He won two rings, and his numbers are summarized in 17.7 points per game, 9.9 rebounds and 3.5 assists. With 52.2% shooting success and 78% in free throw shooting. Gasol was excellent.

He formed a fearsome duo with Kobe Bryant, who knocked down Dwight Howard's Orlando Magic and Kevin Garnett's Boston Celtics in two NBA Finals. Almost nothing..

Bill Plaschke, one of the most prestigious columnists, feels that the Spaniard has been placed too far down.

"LeBron is ranked too high. He's a 'Laker,' he won a ring in a short season in Los Angeles, but he will be remembered as a Cavaliers legend.