USA Today

Apparently, Pau Gasol can get feisty.

Following the Los Angeles Lakers' third straight loss, a 114-105 defeat to the Orlando Magic on Friday night, Kobe Bryant said that Gasol went off, per ESPN Los Angeles' Dave McMenamin:

How bad was his "tantrum?" According to the Los Angeles Times' Mike Bresnahan, pretty bad:

Can you really blame Gasol? At 16-29 following Sunday's loss to the New York Knicks, the Lakers have the Western Conference's second-worst record. More than halfway through the season, they're also over eight games back of a playoff spot. As a 10-plus-year veteran, frustration with this kind of situation is inevitable.

It's important to note, though, Bryant's initial "tantrum" description is inaccurate.

Tantrums are something Bryant despises and has called Gasol out for in the past, as recent as last season.

"Put your big-boy pants on," Bryant said of Gasol's pouting last December, via McMenamin. "Just adjust. Just adjust. You can't whine about it. You can't complain about it."

This outburst is something Bryant supports, indicating it was more of a leader taking control than it was a petulant 7-footer waxing personal grievances:

Here's where Bryant loses me personally.

Seeing the usually passive Gasol take some ownership of this Bryant- and Steve Nash-less Lakers team is encouraging. Los Angeles needs leadership beyond Nick Young; its band of misfits needs guidance.

No active L.A. player is more decorated or better suited for the role than Gasol. If he sees something he doesn't like, that thick Spanish accent of his must take center stage.

But let's not pretend it's about winning championships in Hollywood. The Lakers aren't a championship team. Not even close. Even with a healthy Bryant, they're mediocre at best.

Effort and pride is all this team has left, and that's what Gasol was calling his comrades out for.

"Bottom line is, when you lose against the worst teams in the league, you've got to ask yourself why and...what does that make you?" Gasol said following his postgame rant, per Bresnahan.

Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images

What are the Lakers? A bad team. Bottom-feeders.

Lottery bound.

That doesn't mean they must bow their heads or waver in commitment. The effort still has to be there, like it is on some nights, when we're left gushing about how much swagger this team has.

"We need Pau to step up and say stuff like that," Young said of Gasol's outburst, per Bresnahan. "We need people to fight."

Young, as he has been so many times this season, is right. This outspoken version of Gasol is what the Lakers need; they need that fight. That spirit. That big-boy-pants-wearing big man.

"We need people who have passion," Young added, via Bresnahan.