The Victoria Memorial is a large marble monument on Kolkata's Maidan and the British Indian government built it between 1906 and 1921. The monument stands on 64 acres of gardens and is now a museum under the central government.

New Delhi: The Victoria Memorial is one of the finest examples of British architecture in India, one that still inspires awe among people. Situated in Kolkata, which was the capital of British India during its construction, the monument was dedicated to Queen Victoria’s memory, who was the Empress of India from 1876 to 1901. Reportedly, it is the largest monument in the world which is dedicated to a monarch.

When was the Victoria Memorial constructed?

The Victoria Memorial is located on Kolkata’s Maidan and the British Indian government built it between 1906 and 1921. The monument stands on 64 acres of gardens and is now a museum under the central government. One of the main attractions in Kolkata, it has prominent features of Indo-Saracenic architecture.

How was the Victoria Memorial constructed?

After Queen Victoria passed away on January 22, 1901, Lord Curzon, who was then the Viceroy of India, wrote to the Secretary of State for India, Lord George Hamilton on January 24 stating the significance of the later queen’s matriarchy to promoting loyalist feeling. Curzon put forward the proposal of constructing a grand monument. The Viceroy appealed to everyone for funds and the government officials, politicians and princes responded enthusiastically, and so did the common people. The cost of the construction was a little over Rs 1 crore and it reportedly came entirely from donations.

The Victoria Memorial is situated near the present-day Raj Bhavan, but the construction was delayed by the departure of Curzon from India in 1905. However, the project soon picked up pace and on January 4, 1906, the Prince of Wales, George laid the foundation stone. In 1911, before the construction of the Victoria Memorial was completed, George V, the Emperor of India, transferred the country’s capital from Calcutta (now Kolkata) to New Delhi. In December 1921, the Victoria Memorial was formally opened to the public.

Who was the architect of the Victoria Memorial?

William Emerson was the architect of the Victoria Memorial and Lord Redesdale and David Prain designed its gardens. The monument was built in Indo-Saracenic style and blended Mughal and British features with Deccani, Venetian, and Egyptian architectural influences and was made with white Makrana marble. Its design has similarities with the Taj Mahal and the interior walls have a series of 12 canvas lunettes by Frank Salisbury celebrating key moments in the life of Queen Victoria. There is a 16-foot figure of the Angel of Victory by Esch on top of the central dome of the Memorial.