Game Day Experience

Robert E. Rich All-High Stadium

2885 Main Street

Buffalo, New York

Single game admission: $5

Family: $10

Veterans: free w/ Military ID

Tucked away in a beautiful City enclave in Buffalo’s University Heights neighborhood, All-High Stadium has been a fixture in the Buffalo sports’ scene since its Memorial Day dedication on May 29, 1929.

For decades, the jewel of amateur sports in Western New York was considered the finest amateur stadium in the United States boasting nearly 20,000 seats for spectators. After years of neglect, All High completed a multi-million dollar refurbishing project in 2005 returning the “Mansion on Mercer” to its rightful place in the Buffalo Sports pantheon.

Currently, All-High is configured for a more intimate setting of nearly 5,000 spectators. Modeled after classic European soccer stadiums, spectators at All High enjoy protection from Mother Nature’s elements with 4,500 covered seats offering protection from bright sunshine, snow, and rains so as not to compromise your outing with FC.

How to get to All High:

All High Stadium is easily accessible from the 198 and 33. Located just behind stately Bennett High School, All High is located within 20 minutes of most local destinations.

Parking:

Limited on street parking is offered on Mercer Avenue and Hill Street along with ample parking on the Manhattan Avenue side of Bennett High School.

Park and Ride:

All High Stadium is located directly on the No. 8 Metro Bus Route. For those coming to a game from the Northern Suburbs, Metro Rail service is available both inbound and outbound on 15 minute intervals to the LaSalle Street Station. Once arriving at the LaSalle Station, All High Stadium is a short two minute jaunt from the subway.

Concessions:

As FC Buffalo grows, so will our concession offerings. Ballpark food is available from local vendors along with team souvenirs and keepsakes. You can also purchase merchandise here: https://www.fcbuffalo.org/shop

For Families:

While we’re soccer fanatics, FC Buffalo strives to make every Blitzers game a family experience. Along with spacious seating for your family, All-High is handicapped accessible with seats right next to the field of play for our guests and families with special needs.

As part of the stadium remodeling, the lavoratory facilities are state of the art including ample room to be used as a baby changing station.

Does your child wish to have a soccer-themed birthday party? All-High offers a party area where families may bring in their own birthday bash to celebrate.