This paper is a meditation about the meaning of Mexico's indigenous music and culture, which is made in the frame of Edmundo O'Gorman's historical theory called the Invention of America. I quest the aspects of music that are connected with cultural phenomena and political events, to get a broader idea of the historical processes in which our music is involved. This is the first time I link the musical activities of the Indigenous people who were converted to Christianity early, and the Jews that arrived in Mexico as new "conversos" in 16th Century.

The Misiones Culturales was a Mexican rural education program lauched by the former Secretary of Public Education, José Vasconcelos, in 1923. According to the Secretary, the name of this program evoked the evagelising missions of the New Spain. Originally, the main objective of the Misiones Culturales was to provide literacy to the rural population of Mexico, which was mostly indigenous people whose mother tongue was not Spanish. According to official figures the illiteracy in the country reached 66% after Mexican Revolution. Over time, the Misiones Culturales became more complex, and the program included music instruction and the teaching of trades, following the rural education model of the United States: the training schools and some concepts enunciated by John Dewey. The so-called maestros misioneros of music were assigned not just to teach music, but to collect through the transcription the folk music they heard in the rural communities of Mexico in which they worked. This compilations conformed the first public archives of Mexican music. On the other hand, they were commissioned by the Ministry of Education to teach Spanish through music, since they believed that this was the language of the " civilized mexicans ". Rethinking the function of teaching and compiling regional repertoires and their promotion in rural education in the post-revolutionary period, it will allows us to glimpse the nationalist movement from a more complex perspective. Nationalism has usually known as an artistic movement that flourished and emerged from concert music. However, 1 This paper is an extract of my Master thesis El programa de música de las Misiones Culturales: su inscripción en las políticas integracionistas posrevolucionarias y en la conformación del nacionalismo musical mexicano, Tesis de Maestría en Historia, El Colegio de Morelos, Cuernavaca, febrero de 2017.