David Fisher (b. 1996) is a composer, poet, vocalist, and multi-instrumentalist based in Baltimore whose work has garnered acclaim for its poignancy and thematic relevance. Drawing inspiration from nature, memory, and our most urgent contemporary questions, David’s music opens space for emotion and contemplation. His compositional catalogue inhabits the liminal space between tradition and innovation, abstract and concrete, highly structured and ever-evolving aleatory. His creative spirit and flair for the dramatic thrive on collaboration with artists across various media, including visual arts, poetry, contemporary choreography, and theatrical arts. This interdisciplinary approach enriches his work, fostering a dynamic fusion of artistic expression.

Captivating audiences across North America and Europe, David has received commissions and performances by the Handel Choir of Baltimore, Fifth House Ensemble, Trio Mythos, Cantala Treble Choir, and the New Voices Choir. He holds a Bachelor’s degree in composition from Lawrence University Conservatory of Music where he studied with Joanne Metcalf and Asha Srinivasan. He further honed his craft under the mentorship of esteemed faculty members at the Fresh Inc Festival, European American Musical Alliance Summer Music Institute, and highSCORE New Music Festival. Continuing his formal education, David completed a Master’s degree in music theory pedagogy and composition under the instruction of Oscar Bettison at the Peabody Conservatory of the Johns Hopkins University. His commitment to curiosity, innovation, and the world around him propels his career as an emerging voice in the landscape of contemporary music.

I compose music that presents audiences with dark phenomena that result from modern culture, opening a space to reevaluate personal beliefs by way of emotional experiences. My music balances complexity with clarity in order to illuminate a broader human experience for all. Presenting emotional topics in abstract ways allows audiences to engage in difficult conversations by creating space to feel and contemplate before the need to respond. The flexible musical structures I often work with allow for performer(s) to claim agency, experiment, and revive the spectacle of live performance. The desire to connect more directly with audiences also stems from my passion for outreach and education. Music has a fantastic power to bring groups together, and I work to engage as many communities as I am able. The more we learn about modes of communication through music, the more we can bridge increasingly disparate gaps in society.