David Fisher is a Partner specialising in employment and partnership law.

David has a wealth of experience advising major global corporations and senior executives on a wide variety of employment law issues. David has a vast amount of heavy duty litigation experience as well as extensive experience in business restructurings and transfers (including TUPE issues).

David advises on partner team moves and lateral partner hires and enforcement of partner restrictive covenants.

David specialises in High Court injunctions, advising on enforceability of restrictive covenants, team moves and executive terminations.

David was admitted as a solicitor in England and Wales in December 1993.

Chambers and Partners UK 2024 ranked David in Band 4 for Partnership (Contentious): “I find David very helpful and sincere.”

Legal 500 UK 2024 have recommended David for Employment (Senior Executives), Employment (Employer) and Partnership, stating “David Fisher, Merrill April, Beth Hale and Zulon Begum are all talented partners.”

Chambers and Partners UK 2023 ranked David in Band 3 for Partnership (Contentious), “David is very responsible and provides commercial advice.”

Legal 500 UK 2023 recommended David as a “Key Lawyer” for Employment (Employer) and Partnership, stating “David Fisher is also a very reliable and smart lawyer.”

Chambers and Partners UK 2022 ranked David in Band 3 for Partnership – Contentious and he is noted as being “…an extremely able and subtle solicitor” who “…is prompt, a good communicator and has a good understanding of the issues involved in the case.” David is also named a “Notable Practitioner” for his Partnership – Non-Contentious expertise.

Legal 500 UK 2022 named David as a “Key Lawyer” for Partnership.

David is ranked as a “Thought Leader” by Who’s Who Legal Labour and Employment 2021.

In Chambers and Partners UK 2021, David is ranked as Band 3 for Partnership (Contentious), described as “exactly who you want to fight your corner.”

In Legal 500 UK 2021, David is recognised as “Key Lawyer” for Partnership (Contentious), Employment (Senior Executives) and Employment (Employers).

David is noted as a “Recommended Practitioner” for Partnership (Contentious) by Chambers and Partners UK 2020.

In Legal 500 UK 2020, David was recognised for Partnership (Contentious) and Employment (Employers), described as ‘focused, aggressive but never uncommercial. Excellent at what he does.’