Peter Doddy, of Trevallyn, pays his tribute to the recently passed Tony Benneworth.

Rest in peace

IT WAS with a heavy heart like many more that I woke on March 12 to news of the tragic loss of Tony Benneworth.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

A wonderful human being whose heart filled up a large part of the cavity of his chest.

A sincere, jovial, capable, caring, person whose friendly disposition endeared him to all he met.

As past chairman of the Moonbeam Charity, he unselfishly donated his expertise yearly as an auctioneer at our annual dinner.

And was instrumental in helping us raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for chosen charities.

Jovially he threatened castration if I ever forgot to make him a part of raising funds for needy children.

His contribution to Tasmanian cricket was enormous, his leadership qualities well known in bowls and politics.

He always led by example strengthening state cricket and playing for Australia, and always with a bigger than life personality

He took his expertise to make things better for the North by entering state politics and served with dignity and passion.

Meeting Benny in the streets of Launceston was an absolute joy, his friendly persona was always present, and his good and bad jokes relentless.

You once told me, life was about peace of mind, a good job, a good wife and a good red wine and you had it all.

I sincerely hope he retained that to the sad end, as the hole he has left in so many lives cannot ever be filled.

Condolences to his beautiful family, I can only imagine your pain and loss.

Rest in peace.

Peter Doddy, Trevallyn.

Domestic Violence

ONE of the often sadly overlooked aspects of domestic violence is the care of animal companions when people are considering leaving violent relationships.

The research literature consistently highlights the fact that many people choose to remain in unsafe situations precisely because they do not have the financial resources to be able to find secure short term alternative care for their beloved animals.

They will not abandon them even though staying often places themselves, their children, and their animals at risk of escalating violence.

It is heartening to learn of the Pets in Crisis Program in Queensland, where there is a coordinated and holistic response by DVConnect Queensland, the RSPCA and the Queensland Government to ensure that a very real community need receives a fitting community solution.

It would be wonderful if Tasmanian social welfare agencies, in partnership with the RSPCA and the government, could instigate a similar initiative.

To do so would be an important recognition that for many people animals are part and parcel of their households and families, and members of the wider community.

Thomas Ryan, St Helens.

Persecution

CARMEN Frelek (Letters, March 8) have you not read a single thing about the Rohingya - the most recent genocidal atrocity committed by a government against its citizens? Razed villages, widespread murder and rape and the killing of children.

In the face of this - a tragedy that has been daily recorded in this newspaper for months on end - you still have the temerity to write: 'Surely the top priority of any government is to ensure its own people's needs are met first... (that) by fleeing their country and landing on another's doorstep is cowardly and does nothing to improve the living standards of those left behind.'

Dear brave Carmen if only they were like you - oblivious to the pain and suffering of others and with a protected and contented first world barrow to push. You have absolutely no idea how lucky and privileged you are. And how lucky are we to have you - the first person to man the barricades when the revolution begins.

Tony Newport, Hillwood.

Workers compensation

WHAT has happened to Australia?

No state workers compensation insurance, I repeat no state workers compensation insurance in each state or territory, is required now under the current “work for the dole commonwealth scheme”.

It seems that members of our community, who are unable to obtain current employment, are now being considered as non-employees, even when they qualify as employees under our state workers compensation statute act.

We should all remember this action by the Commonwealth government, when under the RED. Scheme (of long ago), state workers compensation insurance was included and applied to all workers under the RED Commonwealth scheme.

F. Deane, Evandale.

Gun Age

Jack Sonnemann, Lucaston.

Wolf Grey

Leonard Colquhoun, Invermay.

Gun Laws

I JUST saw our Premier on the news announcing that he will push ahead with the watering down of the gun laws, as he has a mandate.

Since when has a policy, put out on the eve of the election without giving anyone a chance to absorb it, become a mandate?

On the radio even some landowners hadn't heard of this and weren't in favour but our Premier is determined.

Let's hope that he is not becoming somewhat autocratic.

Glennis Sleurink, Launceston.

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team. Also includes evening update.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad