One of my best friends recently offered to write for Rhythm and Swing, and I couldn’t think of a reason to decline, especially since our friendship rests on the firm foundation of discussing international matches, inter-batch cricket, and obviously, the frequent exchanges of live score updates during lectures at law school. Although his interests over the past few years have slowly receded from Cricket to Football, he still claims that Cricket will always be his first love. So here’s Anirud Sudarsan, writing on what he knows best first hand — pace bowling. While we differ on a number of opinions on the sport, and usually take away different things from a day’s play, I trust his views on this arena quite sincerely. In fact, and I apologise for the spoiler, his bit on how McGrath stood out because of his “uncanny knack of getting batsmen caught out behind the wicket” reminded me irresistibly of Kapil Dev’s brilliant stint at Melbourne in ’81, this cementing my belief.

As for now, over to Sudarsan.

My mate runs this blog and it is a pleasure for me to be writing my first piece on cricket for her. I wasn’t quite sure on what I should be writing, and made up my mind that for a debutante of sorts like myself, it would be best if I wrote on something that I do decently on the pitch. I have played at school level and now represent my university too. I am a right arm medium pacer and if my memory serves right, I have been one since I started playing the sport. For some reason, even as a kid, pace appealed to me. It was probably because when I was young, playing against older guys who used to bowl fast to get us kids out fascinated me. I fancied being the fastest bowler in my class and maybe getting a little ahead of myself, the best of the gang of kids that played along the Marina stretch. Obviously, to some extent, it also has got to do with the cricket I watched on TV. The likes of Glenn McGrath, Shaun Pollock and Shoaib Akthar were doing exceptionally well for their respective nations and I am quite positive that they had an impact on my choice to be a pacer. More recently, I have developed a liking for the guys who come armored with pace: Mitchell Johnson, Dale Steyn and Morne Morkel. As an Indian fan, I also have high hopes pinned on Varun Aaron, the rookie Indian pacer (who surprised everyone by clocking 153 kmph in one of the Ranji games), to make it big someday if he somehow successfully manages to overcome his injury woes.

With that brief personal introduction, I shall now proceed to a more meaningful discussion on the art of pace bowling. Well, at least as far as the cricket I’ve watched goes, there’s no bowler better than McGrath who came close to mastering the art of pace bowling. He had an uncanny knack of getting batsmen caught out behind the wicket. This was primarily because of his mastery over the positioning of the seam and the release point. Sometimes there were minor deviations off the pitch and that made the batsmen go for a defensive stroke (or a more inexperienced and over-ambitious batsman would have perhaps wanted to go for a drive on the off). More often than not, when the deviation does occur, the ball ended up going to the keeper or the slip cordon having caught an edge off the bat. This made me realize that it doesn’t matter how fast I bowl as long as I don’t have control over my line and length. And I believe McGrath was the greatest I watched mostly because he never lost control over his line and length. He always adapted to the conditions and bowled in the right areas. Above all, he had a virtue which most pacers of today lack- patience. With the only exception of Peter Siddle, who I rate very much, there aren’t many pacers today who are patient in their approach to try and nag the batsmen and making them grind out an innings. If you’ve watched a Siddle spell or read the Pieterson autobiography, you probably know why I’m saying this.

However, as time progressed and as I started watching more of the sport, I realized what a deadly combo it would be to have the 2 Ps of fast bowling — pace and precision. However, there is a risk that one runs into when one wants to achieve both of them. If the bowler tends to focus too much on the pace aspect, seldom would he get precision. And the vice-versa may not always be true, but it is, to some extent. Glenn McGrath was a genius as he played it safe and didn’t want to gamble bowling express pace but always ensured perfection in his line and length. McGrath’s bowling speed average was 131 kmph so that reiterates my point about him and his mastery over the art of pace bowling.

Making a leap to more recent cricket, this period saw the emergence of Steyn and Johnson as the finest pacers in the world. But what is it that these blokes did different from McGrath? They aimed for successfully achieving the 2 Ps of fast bowling. And not surprisingly, they are probably the only ones in the world to achieve it. Steyn regularly bowls 140+ kmph and has great precision over his line and length. And Johnson focusses his attention on bowling fast and maintaining a dangerous line that would threaten any batsman of knocking his head off. Steyn has been more consistent, to be fair, and Johnson on the other hand, as KP would put it, has ‘found an inner peace’ and is a different bowler especially since the last Ashes Down Under. To give you a stark contrast of another bowler during this period who failed terribly trying to achieve the 2 Ps- Shaun Tait. Shaun Tait, as we all know, is among the fastest bowlers in the world. He clocks 145+ kmph frequently but has too many off days. He loses control over his line and bleeds runs. I regard Steyn and Johnson as the best pacers in the world because they have been able to successfully achieve the 2 Ps of fast bowling consistently and that’s what makes them truly world class, in my opinion.

Having written about pace bowling and the art of it, it hurts me to think there is only a tiny mention of an Indian pacer who is yet to make it at world level. Of course, we could talk about Indian pacers who have done well at international level but it would be nothing short of disgrace to look at their starting and ending points of their career. Apart from Zaheer Khan, I can’t think of one other Indian pacer who has been the face of the Indian bowling attack for a decade. We saw the rise and fall of Irfan Pathan, who started off bowling 140 kmph and swung it both ways but eventually dropped to a meagre 125 kmph towards the latter half of the 2000s. Lakshmipathy Balaji’s career was marred by injuries and his return to the international setup never came to fruition. RP Singh, Sreesanth, Praveen Kumar and Ishant Sharma had been in and out of the team and had failed to cement their places in the squad. Sometimes it struck me as if there’s something inherently wrong with us Indians for the lack of producing world class fast bowlers. But that’s for another day.

Basu’s best one yet.

Note from the author: I had compiled some research on the bodyline tour during my high school days. The word file where I had saved this had vanished amidst the muddled clutter of folders that this laptop calls ‘My documents’ for the past 3 years. Anyhow, a brave journey through this disorganised cluster led to the resurrection of the ellusive document and instead of joblessly, whiling away a Sunday, I thought I’d write an article and share it here. Most of us probably know what the basics of bodyline were, the main actors in the drama and so on. What some of us may not know however is the role that this series played in the political set up of the time.

“…There are two teams out there, one is playing cricket. The other is making no attempt to do so.”

~Bill Woodful (Australian captain for the ‘Bodyline’ series 1932-33)

Amidst the cigarette smoke and sophisticated banter that permeated the lounge of the acclaimed Picadilly Hotel in London ,on one fateful afternoon in 1932, four men plotted the implementation of a strategy that would change not only the sport of cricket as we know it today but nearly alter the course of a relationship between an empire and perhaps its most loyal colony. These men were Douglas Jardine, the newly appointed Captain of England; Harold Larwood and Bill Voce; both coal-miners from Nottingham who had come to be recognized as the most feared pacers in the world and Arthur Carr, the Nottinghamshire captain. Jardine was the living embodiment of the ‘Man of Empire’ and saw the upcoming tour of Australia as an opportunity to avenge the drubbing they had received at the hands of an Australian highlander by the name of Donald Bradman two years back and embed his name in the history books. Little did the austere Scotsman know that the series would come to be recognized as the most infamous in cricketing history and that he would become one of the most demonized figures in world sport. This article attempts to focus both on the cricketing blasphemy that was Jardine’s ‘fast-leg-theory’ and the dire consequences that his tactics could have led to in terms of the social, political and economic ties between England and Australia-ties that needed to remain strong, especially in the context of the global political matrix that was beginning to develop at the time.

After the First World War, test match defeats to Australia became problematic for the British empire, which was attempting to impose supremacy in global affairs even though it was scarred by severe economic recession at home and the rise of anti-imperial nationalistic forces in many colonies. The humiliating defeats in the 1921 and the 1930 Ashes Series played in England were detrimental for the empire, whose symbolic superiority to its colonies was still expressed largely in terms of the nation’s prowess in athletics. Douglas Jardine, who was born in Bombay to an affluent barrister and educated at Winchester College and Oxford, where he earned laurels both as a batsman and a ‘gentleman,’ certainly believed in the enmeshing of this superiority. He had induced a most effete’ image of himself among the Australians as he would walk out to bat donning a ‘Harlequin cap’ (a symbol of the dominance of the British upper-class,) and with the general air of the pompous aristocrat, an image that made him a sitting duck for the emerging cricketing discourse in Australia known as ‘barracking,’ (derived from the aboriginal word ‘borak’ meaning to ‘chaff’,) which was characterized by the hurling of rancid verbal abuse at the players from all sections of a belligerent crowd. Eighty years may have passed but as Virat Kohli found out in 2011; the Australian crowds make no secret of their aversions and are capable of expressing it most frankly and robustly.

Over the years, Jardine had come to severely dislike Australia and Donald Bradman’s flawless 974 runs at an aggregate of 139.14 during the 1930 Australian tour of England, which single-handedly won them the series 2-1 was not particularly appreciated by the Oxford man. The prodigious boy from the Bowral highlands had to be stopped and it was at the Oval test of the 1930 series that Percy Fender, the then England captain noticed Bradman’s discomfort with balls that bounced higher than usual at a faster pace, as he attempted to swerve out of the line of these deliveries On viewing film footage of these deliveries at Fender’s suggestion and discovering this weakness, legend has it that Jardine elatedly exclaimed, “I’ve got it. He’s yellow!

So, the mission to turn Bradman yellow began. Leg theory had been implemented before by various captains but without much avail. However, Jardine was certain that his variation of the strategy known as ‘fast-leg-theory, ’implemented with the devastating pace of Larwood and Voce would easily contain Bradman and help England snatch the Ashes from the Australian backyard. The coining of the term ‘bodyline’ to describe this tactic was probably done by a Sun journalist named Hugh Buggy, who used it instead of the phrase ‘in the line of the body’ to cut printing costs and the term quickly caught on in public circles. Quite simply, the bowlers would bowl fast short-pitched deliveries, (known as ‘bumpers’) so that they would rise towards the body of the batsman in the line of leg stump. Used systematically in conjunction with a major reconfiguration of the field to place a large number of fielders on the leg side, the strategy caught the batsman between a rock and a hard place as he had the option of either deflecting the ball towards one of these leg-side fielders and getting out or getting hit on the chest. To fully understand the sinister nature of this plot, we must consider that helmets and elbow guards were items of fiction back then, that the Australian pitches were fast and bouncy and that Harold Larwood was not only the fastest bowler in the world at the time but was also deadly accurate.

So the series began with Bradman sitting out of the first Test at Sydney due to illness. Stan McCabe’s exquisite 187 not out in four hours, during the course of which which he dismissed any thoughts of receiving blows as he hooked and pulled Larwood’s bumpers to all corners of the park, became etched into Australian cricketing folklore and to this day, is considered one of the greatest test innings of all time. Despite McCabe’s efforts, Australia was thumped by ten wickets with Larwood picking up ten wickets in the match. Before the second test at Melbourne, Bill Woodful, the Australian captain had been encouraged by the media to return the bodyline barrage through Eddie Gilbert, an upcoming pacer who was capable of bowling at breathtaking speeds. Woodful blatantly declined to use such tactics that could “only hurt the game.” Australia went on to win the second test at Melbourne with Bradman, who was dismissed for a golden duck in the first innings coming back to score a match-winning century in the second as Larwood was hampered by a bleeding foot and a flat track.

It was during the third test at the Adelaide Oval that things became really ugly. A record crowd watched the Australian bowlers finish off the English innings. Shortly after the commencement of the Australian innings; Larwood stuck Woodful a painful blow on the chest when he was bowling with a conventional field setting. The scene that followed-Woodful bent over his bat in agony as the Australian crowd booed the Englishmen more loudly than ever before has come to embody the antagonism generated by the bodyline series. Jardine was nonchalant. With a curt, “Well bowled Harold!,” he asked the pacer to return to the bowling crease and introduced ‘leg theory’ field placing. The Australian public saw this as blatant injustice for it was akin to ‘kicking a man while he was down.’ The journalist Dick Whitington wrote that this was an “unforgivable crime in the Australian’s eye and certainly no part of cricket.” Throughout the eighty-nine minutes that Woodful spent at the crease sustaining multiple bruises from Larwood’s bumpers, the crowd seemed ready to erupt in violent riot.

Thankfully, they contained themselves to verbal abuse for there was not much the fencing that Jardine had learned at Winchester could have done to contest the ferocious 60,000 strong crowd at the Oval that afternoon had they decided otherwise. Wicket-keeper Bert Oldfield mis-hit a hook the next morning off a Larwood delivery and was rushed to the hospital with a fractured skull. It was at this stage that the Australian Cricket Board sent the following telegram to the MCC:

“Bodyline bowling has assumed such proportions as to menace the best interests of the game, making protection of the body by the batsman the main consideration. This is causing intensely bitter feeling between the players, as well as injury. In our opinion it is unsportsmanlike. Unless stopped at once it is likely to upset the friendly relations existing between Australia and England.”

We must consider that despite the equal footing that cricket offered the two nations, at least within the confines of the sport, the above mentioned telegram was sent by the governing body of cricket in a colony to the governing body of cricket in the Empire State. If we juxtapose this with the context of anti-colonial sentiments that were being fostered in many colonies, we can imagine the potential severity of the consequences that the series may have had on Anglo-Australian ties. The situation almost escalated into a diplomatic quagmire as the MCC—backed by the British public and still firmly believing that their fast leg theory tactic was not harmful, staunchly backed Jardine ,took major offence at being branded “unsportsmanlike” and demanded a retraction of the allegations made by the Australian Cricket Board, failing which Jardine and his men threatened to withdraw from the tour.

Public reaction in both England and Australia was manifested in pandemic discontent directed at the other nation.Antagonism on the ground turned into acrimony off it. The Governor of South Australia, Alexander Hore-Ruthven, who was in England at the time unofficially expressed his concerns to the British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs James Henry Thomas, claiming that this would cause a significant impact on trade between the nations. Citizens of both nations blatantly refused to buy goods manufactured in the other. In 1934-35, a statue of Prince Albert in Sydney was vandalized with an ear knocked off and the word ‘Bodyline’ painted on it. English migrants in Australia were shunned and persecuted till the 1940s.

Stalemate was averted only when Australian Prime Minister Joseph Lyons met with members of the Australian Cricket Board and warned that severe economic problems would be caused in Australia if the British public boycotted Australian trade. Thus, the Board was compelled to withdraw the allegation of ‘unsportsmanlike’ behavior two days before the fourth Test, thereby saving the tour and the Empire. England went on to win the series 4-1 and Jardine’s tainted goal of regaining the Ashes was fulfilled.

After the series, however, many cricket writers and the British public dismissed the strategy as a scourge on the cricketing stamp and claimed that it needed to be abated. Larwood, the coal-miner suffered much of the wrath of the British public as the architect of bodyline and was asked to submit an apology to the MCC, which he rightfully refused on the grounds that he was merely following his captain’s orders. Jardine maintained his hubris and defended his tactics to his grave and flung aside the notion that he was trying to cause physical injury to the Australian batsmen as baseless. In order to appease the Australian public and restore sanctity to the game , the Laws of Cricket were amended in the immediate aftermath of the tournament. The placing of more than two fielders behind the popping crease on the leg-side (other than the wicket-keeper ) was rendered illegal, thereby making ‘leg theory’ a practical impossibility. The amendments also conferred on the umpire the right to exercise their discretion and nullify deliveries that could potentially cause grievous physical harm to the batsman.

In September 1931, the Japanese had invaded the Chinese state of Manchuria and the League of Nations that was led by England and France had failed to come up with anything to prevent this brazen breach of national sovereignty; in January 1933, the Weimar Republic in Germany had fallen and a man by the name of Adolph Hitler had become Chancellor with a quiet vow to restore ‘glory’ to the Third Reich and in October 1932, the Wall Street Stock Market crashed in New York, plunging the world into economic pandemonium. The stage for World War II was being set and then, more than ever before, the British Empire needed it’s colonies to express solidarity with the Crown. The widespread public outrage that the test series generated among the Australian citizens, who felt sorely let down by the injudicious conduct of the representatives of Empire, could have had catastrophic repercussions on Britain’s position in the global pecking-order, had the MCC not handled the situation shrewdly.600, 000 Australians served diligently in World War II,in the honour of the Crown and played a crucial role in securing the Pacific Theatre of Operations. Relations, both on and off the cricket pitch remain sound to this day and the two nations share not only an inextricably linked history and economy but also a Queen. I shudder to think how one man with an invidious dream could have wrecked all this through his blitzkrieg using nothing more than a cricket ball and a lethally fast coal-miner.

~ Arindrajit Basu

It’s summer in Melbourne. The beaches call out to little kids with their smaller sized cricket gear to try and hit the next ball to the horizon, where the sun sinks to the sea. However, the kids stay indoors with their iPhones to keep them company. And from the same beaches, the breeze travels to the MCG, soliciting the cricket fans(?) to watch Australia play South Africa. The stands stay silent. Empty, rather. There’s hardly anything close to applause at a sublime four. Unless of course, the seagulls’ occasional squawking can be considered a whimper of a cheer.

The story doesn’t change much in India, South Africa, or the Caribbean…other than of course, a change in the city, season, and bird species.

Where are all the crowds? Isn’t the game played for them?:

“He played the long game as if he was playing the short game, looking to entertain the crowd and paying absolutely no heed to the calibre of the attack, the state of the pitch or even the situation of the match.”

~ David Mutton on Virender Sehwag (Masterly Batting: 100 Great Test Innings)

Yes, the cricketers play for the crowds, but some entertain more than others. To the multitude, the latter ones seem to be a liability, which is a notion I fail to comprehend. More importantly, it’s this sense of growing impatience of this generation that is bringing the sport, by which I mean Test Cricket to a devastating halt.

I don’t merely imply the fact that the game seems drab, but also and more pertinently, the viewer of the sport isn’t treated just as fan looking for enjoyment, but as a consumer working by the laws of supply and demand:

“The link between the duration of a Test series and the money it is likely to generate is a constant throughout the history of the game and has been made more complex over the last three decades by the introduction of the various one-day formats. The constant also remains that a five-Test series (six being a thing of the past) is the ultimate examination of the relative strength of two teams and the current fashion for a quick two-match ‘shoot-out’ can only harm the standing of Test cricket whatever the short-term financial rewards.”

~ Patrick Ferriday (Masterly Batting: 100 Great Test Innings)

And this ‘consumer behaviour’ of sorts scares me now more than ever.

Let me illustrate this theory which I’ve seen translate into my cricket watching reality: Every time I watch a test match with anyone who’s sitting with me due to force, persuasion, or plain pity, I receive the occasional look of disdain each time the game, how do I put this…decides to saunter instead of sprint. They sigh, groan, and take inextricably long restroom breaks, and finally blurt that ‘nothing’ has been happening for ages, and that the Bangalore summer isn’t as pleasant as it used to be. Initially, I used to feel quite amused, as these casual banters reminded me irresistibly of Groucho Marx, who on watching the first hour’s play of a Test match, remarked, “It’s fine, but when does the game start?”, but eventually, I couldn’t help but wonder why even reasonably frequent watchers of the game seemed upset with its pace.

Understood, watching seemingly ‘nothing’ is a tad bit boring and seemingly pointless. However, honestly, you aren’t actually watching ‘nothing’. It’s up to you, as the spectator, to rise above the scoreboard, and not let it dictate your enjoyment of a game that rests not in the runs and wickets, but the manner in which these runs and wickets are claimed. Or just listen to the legend himself, Neville Cardus, when he said,

“There ought to be some other means of reckoning quality in this the best and loveliest of games; the scoreboard is an ass.”

The scoreboard really is an ass.

Take, for instance, one of the most beautiful things the game can produce. No, it’s not the cover drive, or the inexplicable sense of satisfaction evoked in the perfectionist in you when the batman is bowled due to a fallen middle stump. It is what if feel deserves to be earnestly lauded every time it’s encountered, and yet something that brings in a sense of resentment to the crowds. Yes, I mean the maiden over.

Each maiden has so much to offer, and it’s devastating that each of these treasures is missed due to a yawn or a sigh. You actually have so much to do during the dreaded 0 0 0 0 0 0. Appreciate the flighting of the cricket ball, the tact that goes into a sudden in-swinger, the laudable yorker defended with the straightest bat you’ve seen, the most athletic stop by silly point, and if nothing else, just lazily melt into the sport with the will to relax with a Murakami and a cola. And if the crowd in your homeground is anything like mine back home at the Chinnaswamy, then rise only for the occasional Mexican Wave. Cricket is, after all, what Archbishop Fisher called “organised loafing.”

So the next time there’s a game in the city, set that alarm the previous night. Get out of bed on that Saturday. Play hooky* if you have to on that weekday (We all know that most lectures are wasted trying to elevate our scores in the latest fad of an Android game**). Whatever you do, just get there. And when you do, even if nothing happens, remember ABC Radio’s Tony Benneworth once said, “It’s been very slow and dull day, but it hasn’t been boring. It’s been a good, entertaining day’s cricket.”

After all, the game belongs not to 22 on the field, but the thousands in the stands.

~ Kruthika N. S.

* Kids, please go to school. Education is important.

** In my case, drawing caricatures of unsuspecting professors of law.

Yet another fantastic post by Basu, he dedicates this to all those who had dreams of taking guard at Lord’s some day but, like him, never made it beyond their local park. Enjoy.

Much like George W. Bush’s political career, my cricketing career has been marked by enthusiasm rather than expertise and ineptitude rather than merit of any form. Thankfully, though, cricket has offered lost souls like myself refuge and sanctum by allowing me to appease my craving for the sport though the glorious offshoot, that we have come to fondly call ‘Gully Cricket’ ( also known as backyard cricket, street cricket, alley cricket and so on); sanctum which the political arena did not offer Bush. Gully cricket has been designed exclusively for the purposes of unskilled enjoyment. Its history is as old as the game itself. If you asked me the name of the first cricketer to have wielded a cricket bat, I would name the first ‘gully cricketer.’ Whether it was W.G. Grace in his orchard in Gloucestershire, Bradman with his stump and golf-ball in the Bowral Highlands or Tendulkar in his living room in Mumbai, any man who ever took guard at the Lord’s, MCG or Eden Gardens was most certainly a player of gully cricket. While these greats tended to develop and improve themselves, the rest of us have remained at the blissful beginning and ever shall be.

Of course, a gully cricketer’s lack of merit, in no way undermines the significance that is attached to the result of such a match, though such result may be subjective. Invariably, both teams come out of a match firmly believing that they have won it. While this may seem like a win-win situation prima facie, it would be unjust of me to not tell the reader that most gully cricket match-ups end in the customary post-match verbal joust, which in turn leads to the customary post-match brawl, facets that have become part and parcel of the game as we know it today. Gully cricket has not been kind to umpires and as a result, the position has been done away with in most circles.

ORGANISATION AND FIXTURES

Organizing the World Cup finals will be child’s play, when compared to the arduous task of getting a gully cricket match together. Many impediments need to be removed. The inconsiderate driver who parks his car in the middle of pitch must be sent away. The fact that the pitch is the slot in the parking lot, which rightfully belongs to such a driver, is of little relevance. Then, the tyrannical old lady (‘Aunty Ji’), who is hell-bent on decimating the spirit of cricket and will show no hesitation in halting the game and dragging one to the parental units if the cricket ball scrapes her car or her window, must be placated. The irksome infants who waddle about the cricketing arena in their prams, engaging in trivial pursuits,must be dispensed with. When all these efforts have been made, a gully cricket-match up can finally get underway.

REQUISITIES AND SELECTION

The team:

Unlike test cricket, there are no physical or technical requirements for one to earn a spot on a gully cricket squad. “Going down to play” at the allotted time (which, for much of my career has been 1700 hours sharp) is generally enough for one to make the grade. The format of selection is fairly simple. Two captains are elected ( See ‘Captaincy’) and they alternately select an individual from the available pool of players in descending order of merit, thereby leaving the last person to be picked feeling absolutely worthless. I must add here that possession of a decent set of equipment certainly results in one getting picked faster. There was an unprecedented rise in my position in the pecking order after my eighth birthday. While, at the time, I had attributed this promotion to a betterment of my aptitude, on hindsight, I feel that a new pair of cricket gloves might have been the root cause.

Captaincy:

In test match cricket, a captain needs to be a bastion of good-will and responsibility both on and off the field, someone who needs to shepherd his men efficiently without compromising his own performance or his image in the media. In gully cricket, though, a captain needs only to be physically strong and as the sport is generally played in circles with a multitude of age groups, the oldest member of the group is by default, appointed captain. Apart from his on-field-duties, a gully cricket captain is also expected to lead the post-match verbal joust with the opposing contingent and in tandem with the other captain, negotiate the safe return of the ball when it has been smashed into unchartered territory or falls into the hands of the invidious ‘Aunty.’

TECHNIQUE

Batting: There are no rigid guidelines that can be framed in this regard as the environment from one match (or one innings) to the next can be subject to dramatic modification. Surfaces may be flat, excessively bouncy and turning at the same time. Though “playing each ball for it’s merit” is a principle all Gully cricket batsmen need to keep in mind. My pursuit of the art of gully cricket coincided with the peak in Rahul Dravid’s form during the 2002-04 spell and the cementing of his reputation as ‘The Wall.’ I had developed a keen admiration for his stellar defensive technique and sought to incorporate it into my own game. It was simple enough- get your front foot to the pitch of every ball and show the full face of the vertical bat. The technique worked. I rarely got out. Though, I hasten to add that while Dravid scored 13,288 runs in test cricket at an average of 52.38, I scored a total of 96 runs over the course of my gully cricket career at an average of 12.00.

Bowling: This is where my ineptitude manifested itself in all it’s glory and as a result, I was rarely called on for bowling duties by my captain. Hence, I have very little advice to impart in this department. I will say however that the key to success here is to keep things simple. Let the lacunae in the pitch work it’s magic for you.

Fielding: Fielding is the art that is most crucial for the future of gully cricket. Apart from the traditional function of curtailing the run flow, in gully cricket outfielders have the additional onerous burden of retrieving the ball from the ‘other side of the fence’ and the more significant one of assuaging the ‘spectators.’ If a ball inadvertently smashes a window or hits a passer-by, the initial damage control needs to be done by the fielder closest to the point of incidence before the captains can arrive on the spot. As a result, out-fielding positions must necessarily be bestowed upon those with sound diplomatic skills. I have little doubt that if the problem of the Senkaku islands were assigned to a group of outfielders, the problem would be resolved in no time. Negotiating a deal with the Chinese Politburo can assuredly be no tougher than appeasing an irate ‘Aunty.’

CONCLUSION

Jokes apart though, cricket, as played in the back-alleys and parking lots has come to be largely intertwined with the culture of our country. Perhaps there are better pastimes one can indulge in but few a s rewarding, stimulating and unifying at the same time. Everyone from the hawker to the President will have, at some point in time, indulged in a form of gully cricket. For one does not need to be a Tendulkar to hold a bat. This is cricket in it’s most cherished format and as long as we keep on playing it this way, we need have no fear for the future of this great game.

~ Arindrajit Basu

‘For their revels now are ended’: A tribute to the greatest Indian middle-order of all time. A brilliant post by Arindrajit Basu, this article is dedicated to anyone who has followed Indian test cricket closely over the past decade.

“If you get Dravid, great. If you get Sachin, brilliant. If you get Laxman, excellent. If you get all three, it’s a miracle”

~ Steve Waugh (former Australian captain)

The school bus pulled up at the curb and out I dived into the pouring rain. Time was against me. It was the monsoon of two thousand and one. Australia was 208 for 9 on the final session of the fifth day with Glenn McGrath batting in front of a vicious Eden Gardens crowd hungry for victory. It was not a question of if he would fall but when. India was on the verge of what would be one of the greatest victories of all time and I had to be home in time to see the final wicket fall. So, I ran, as fast as my feeble legs could carry me right into the streets of Mumbai, avoiding the speeding cars, puddles and potholes that were by-products of the annual monsoon onslaught. The concept of ‘mental disorders among children’ was doing the rounds in Mumbai and I wouldn’t be surprised if the passers-by felt that I needed help to that regard. Perhaps I was on the verge of insanity. After all I had recently had my first taste of cricket-cricket in it’s finest and purest form. Just the day before, two mere mortals had battled it out for an entire day in the Kolkata humidity against what was billed as the strongest Australian bowling line up in decades after India was asked to follow on. To this day, I find few things more rewarding in life than watching the recording of the fourth day of that test match as the likes of Shane Warne and Glenn Mcgrath were killed , shot and given a grand funeral, with style. It marked the dawn of a new era of Indian cricket- an era when we started to dominate rather than be dominated, when we turned into champions from challengers, an era I am proud to have followed closely, whether it was on a flat screen TV in Chandigarh or a tiny laptop in Tokyo.

From The Beatles to ABBA to the four main characters in The Big Bang Theory ,it seems that that all legendary teams seem to be quartets. The great Indian middle order was no exception. Dravid’s expertise, Tendulkar’s genius, Ganguly’s flamboyance and Laxman’s elegance had all the makings of a well-oiled machine and when in full flow, the Indian innings played out like a Beethoven symphony. The idea to compose this article occurred to me funnily enough in a Legal Methods class on fallacies when one of my eminent professors stated that, “To say that the Indian team is great based on the premise that Dravid, Laxman, Ganguly and Tendulkar are great would be a fallacy of composition.” Indeed it would be and I do not want to enter the debate about whether we can call the eleven men representing us over the past decade ‘great.’ What I seek to do is convince the reader that whatever India did achieve over the past decade, achievements that cannot be negated, were largely due to the batting prowess exhibited by the middle order. To a large extent, the reason behind this lies in the lacunae in our pace attack. Simply put, our fast bowlers seem to be incapable of bowling fast. Far too often, a Speedy Gonzales by the name of Zaheer Khan or Irfan Pathan enters the scene, hitting the deck at 90 miles an hour; contracts some form of ankle or hamstring injury;takes time off; returns hitting the deck at not above 130 kilometres an hour;claiming to have matured into a ‘swing bowler.’ On fast, bouncy pitches down under or even in England, with the clouds in the sky, pace is a necessity, without which swing is rendered ineffective. Batsmen tend to give maturity little respect. Even Kumble, who could take five wicket hauls on demand in the subcontinent tracks, was reduced to a mere containing role overseas. So, the onerous burden of winning test matches abroad fell on the batsmen and our quartet discharged this burden with splendor.

There was a paradigm shift in Indian cricket with the turn of the century. Throughout the 1990s, we were essentially a one man batting line up (Tendulkar) and a one man bowling attack (Kumble.) There were exceptions, when Srinath would take the odd five-er or Manjrekar would score the odd century but by and large, this was the case. Azharuddin’s magic was slowly beginning to fade away. This was reflecting in the results. While we were a force to reckon with at home, abroad, a defeat or a draw was more likely than victory. With the emergence of Dravid and Ganguly on the scene in 1996, things began to change, slowly but it was not until the 2001 Australian tour of India that India really hit the world stage. We became invincible at home and a force to reckon with abroad. Many claim that this shift occurred due to Dada taking the reigns. Being a Bengali and an ardent fan of both the cricketer and the person, I will not disagree. Yet, as the great man once said himself, “A captain is only as good as his team.” The first tour that epitomized this statement was the 2002 tour of England, one that is probably remembered more for Kaif and Yuvraj’s heroics and Dada’s antics at Lords at the finals of the ODI series rather than the test series. The test series was far more enthralling. We were hammered at Lords in the first test, almost hammered at Trent Bridge in the second but came back very strongly at Headingley and gave the English men a taste of their own medicine. The events of the first innings could be compared to Maradona’s second goal against England in the quarter-finals of the 1986 football world cup. Dravid came in, scored a century and left. Tendulkar came in and nearly scored a double. Ganguly followed it up with another tonne during the course of which he managed to smash a spectator’s head as Giles was hit out of the park in inimitable fashion. India won the match by an innings and 46 runs. The fourth test match progressed in much the same fashion with Dravid scoring a memorable 217 but ended in a draw. My favorite tour of the era, though was the tour of Australia in 2003-04, Steve Waugh’s last series as captain. India had reached the finals of the World Cup in South Africa that summer and were brimming with confidence, confidence that reflected in their performance as India chased down 233 in the second test match at Adelaide after Australia, propped up by a belligerent Ponting double century, had managed to post 500 in the first innings. Our very own Rahul Dravid responded in kind. We lost the third test match and although, Tendulkar managed to notch up 241 in the fourth and final test at Sydney, Waugh, the old warhorse was there for his nation till the very end as he saved the test match, the series and the Border-Gavaskar trophy in an innings that reflected the very grit and determination that earned him a spot in the history books.

It is surprising how, throughout history, one man has caused so much of detriment to entire nations and continents, whether it is Hitler in the 1930s, Idi Amin in the 1970s or Greg Chappell in the present day. I personally believe that the person who slapped Greg Chappell at Bhubaneshwar airport should be awarded the Bharat Ratna for his services to the country. Chapell,not only ostracized the one man who was responsible for taking Indian cricket to the level of greatness it has achieved but also caused a rift among the stalwarts in the middle order. This rift is what caused the downfall of the team towards the end of 2004 after the departure of John Wright. Regardless, true class knows no time frame and towards the end of 2006, ‘ Dada’ was back, as was the well-oiled middle order and by then, Virender Sehwag had cemented his role as it’s throttle. In 2007, Dravid led us to our first series win in England since the time Kapil Dev’s men captured the trophy back in 1986. In the winter of the same year, we went down under and repeated the performance that we had dished out four years back, only to be denied victory by some abysmal and almost absurd umpiring by Steve Bucknor. In 2008, Ganguly retired. The middle-order kept on fighting without him but despite being number one in the world; the signs of old age were beginning to show. Towards the latter end of 2011, the nation knew that the end was near. Dravid retired after the dismal tour of Australia this past winter and Laxman was soon to follow.

Setting up a batting line-up is as much a team effort as it is an individual one. Each position in the line-up requires a different mindset and technical expertise. Each of the quartet handled their role sublimely. The Indian line-up has a different look now with the likes of Pujara and Kohli coming into the scene. Perhaps, they will attain the same levels of excellence as their predecessors .One can never be sure but as Maximus famously remarked before the first battle in the movie Gladiator, “Whatever we do in life echoes in eternity.” The annals of these four can never be erased from the memory of anyone who considers test cricket a passion. For all those who still see the beauty of twenty-two men in white, a red ball and five days of cricket rather than scantily-cladcheerleaders, twenty-two guerillas in color and two and a half hours of mayhem: let your indulgence set them free.

~ Arindrajit

“What we have here is a clear case of Mann’s inhumanity to Mann”

– John Arlott commenting on South African bowler ‘Tufty’ Mann causing difficulties to England batsman George Mann

If memories can be compared to collecting pebbles on a lazy evening at the beach, my childhood gleamed of gems cut by the game of Cricket. Lucid memories of running home from school to catch India play Pakistan for five whole days (circa 2005), playing cricket cards during vacations which mostly involved praying for an Adam Gilchrist card to finish off the game in style (circa 2004), and the one visit to the Chinnaswamy on the first day of an India-Australia Test to see one of Ganguly’s last (9 October 2008) will never disappear from the corner of my mind where I guard anything I call treasure.

Ever since a certain Friday night of 15 November 2002, which I remember vividly as images of Rahul Dravid scoring the winning runs against a West Indian line-up, I had trained myself to watch the game and do nothing else with it but. I didn’t cheer because that would mean being told off by my mother for watching a game that has “ruined the lives of millions.” I didn’t comment on technique unless I was absolutely sure of being right, as a precaution to avoid ridicule. And needless to say, I hardly ever played. I just watched in silence sessions so long, that when I finally spoke, my own voice seemed foreign.

And in February 2010, the worst thing that could possibly happen to a person so dependent on her sense of sight occurred. Tragedy struck the bearing of my very existence. It was as though the entire world came to a standstill because of one great travesty: internet and cable television privileges were taken away on account of the dreaded board exams.

I see that I get my power of exaggeration from my mother, but it really did seem so at the time.

So there was no cable. No internet for frequent score updates. And as a cherry on top, India was playing South Africa. Waiting to seethe scorecard and a bad narrative in the morning papers simply did not seem to be plausible. Something had to be done, and it had to be done fast. Something. Anything.

It was at this point that I realised the importance of radio commentary.

Switching from a bulky music system’s FM mode to AM, following the reluctantly whispered instructions from my father, I walked into an unknown world.

So, here was the deal. The commentator spoke fluent Hindi and I didn’t. I had to imagine everything and at most times had absolutely no idea what the field placement was. The only thing I knew for a fact was that Hashim Amla was at the crease. And apparently at the other end, a man I’d never seen before, who went by the name Alviro Peterson, was playing his dream debut. My imagination involuntarily gave him the face of a younger Kevin Pieterson in white attire.

Throughout the rest of February, my thoughts were mostly something on the lines of “A chauka. Wait…is that a four or a six again..?”, or “Oh God…Why can’t they just be playing the Sri Lankans? Familiar faces and techniques would make this exponentially easier!”,and the occasional “Hmm…wonder what’s for lunch…I should be studying.”

I might have not enjoyed the series to the fullest,but it would be a blatant lie to say that I gained nothing out of it. In fact, it gave me something incredibly important. It set the stage for a clear mind while reading about the sport, which I took to a few years later. Playing and replaying cricket matches in my head. Dissecting every important ball bowled in matches I had never witnessed. Pondering over whether the bowler had come from around the wicket. If the batsman had kept a straight bat. If it had been a cloudy day.

It also pushed me to look up the greats who along the path of cricketing history, managed to convert every outswinger, and every cover drive into sound waves with sublime ease and descriptive finesse – the radio commentators.

To name a few, there was the Test Match Special’s Christopher Martin-Jenkins, who was renowned for describing the day’s play in the most lucid and accurate fashion. He also did so for the longest time, from 1973 to 1980,and again from 1985 to 1991, later making his way into cricket journalism. Taking to cricket when he was whisked away to boarding school as a little boy, he began to do ball by ball commentary of matches he made up in his head to imaginary audiences, which slowly became schoolmates, and finally most households of the cricketing world.

Going in a reverse chronological order, enter Brian Johnston. Just preceding Martin-Jenkins on the Test Match Special, Johnston was most famous for his comic style, and use of puns. His line, “The bowler’s Holding, the batsman’s Willey” when Michael Holding of the West Indies was bowling to England’s Peter Willey at the Oval in 1976 is a controversial classic. He was seen by most to be someone who more often than not saw the glass half-full and always sympathised…“He’s just dropped three catches, poor chap” he’d say. However, his going easy on the players was compensated by his rather open views on the apartheid, and he believed that sport and politics must never be mixed. It is said that the only time one remembers Johnston shedding his high spirits was while making a hard hitting speech against the boycott of South Africa by English teams at a special meeting of MCC in 1983. He had previously expressed similar sentiments in 1970, which according to some was the reason he was dropped temporarily by the BBC, adding to more controversy of a most jovial soul. These opinions however, were contrasted sharply by none other than his colleague and stalwart of radio commentary, the great John Arlott.

Arlott’s contribution to the sport is magnanimous. I read books on cricket whenever I find the time, and when I do, the little voice in my head is replaced by his. He had the extraordinary knack of imbibing the atmosphere on the ground, and exuding the same to every radio transistor that was tuned in.

From the few videos (audios, rather) of his commentary on the internet, at the risk of hasty generalisation, I have gathered that his tone adapted effortlessly at breakneck speed with the movement of the ball. Some of the deliveries were described right from the bowler running down the ground, till it was struck by the bat, with his speed, tone and intensity changing almost every second of the entire period.

However, some other deliveries went simply without description at the time they were being bowled.

Yes, he placed an enormous deal of importance on long pauses. There would be complete silence at times, when the bowler was about to bowl and all you could hear was the crowd, in anticipation of a stunner. And then there would be times when the pause would continue for what would seem like an eternity. But this time, this second time, you would hear clapping for almost entirely the second half of the silence. And that’s when you’d know. Yes. Finally. A wicket. And Arlott would wait for the clapping to subside, and then describe what he’d just witnessed right to the most intricate detail, without the fuss of speaking a word more or leaving you hanging. And this folks, is precisely how he covered the last ball played by Donald Bradman in England.

His greatest accomplishment in the art, according to me, really was the usage of the pause, and also, very interestingly the crowd. BBC Sport’s Simon Austin validates my opinion in a way I couldn’t have put across better:

“I liken the commentator to a soloist, with the crowd as the background orchestra. The crowd has a tone and pitch and you can set your voice against it to make it sound melodic, gentle, harmonious. John Arlott clearly did that.”

In fact, he used the spectators to validate his own take on the events on the field – “…and five thousand people appealed and I don’t blame them.”

Logical fallacy or not, to the listener, which includes me listening to him a few decades later, it seemed like gospel.

Another aspect of his commentary was that he didn’t seem excessively enthusiastic all the time, but when he did, you knew that something huge had occurred…something unforgettable. For instance, he finished off describing a nail-biting finish South Africa and England at Kingsmead, Durban during the series of 1948-49 with “…it belongs to a novel and not Wisden!”

However, the quality I found most appealing was his giving attention to detail, just enough to satisfy even the most imaginative of listeners – people with questions about how the shot was played, and even when it was played: “He played a cut so late as to be positively posthumous.” (Familiar Sri Lankan player, anyone?)

Yes, he was brilliant. And it would be unfair to state that his detailed commentary was restricted to merely the players. I mean, just take a look at this gem:

“The umpire signals a bye with the air of a weary stork.”

It killed me.

~ Kruthika

“Cricket is a very humanising game. It appeals to the emotion of local patriotism and pride. It is eminently unselfish; the love of it never leaves us, and binds all the brethren together, whatever their politics and ranks may be.”

These were words penned down in 1893, by Andrew Lang and I can’t help but feel an immense sense of pride when I read them, again, and again. While I sat and pondered on why I felt so, and how such a seemingly simple, rather dull play of words for any reasonable lover of literature, could have stirred my mind and made me sit up,

my shoulders a little higher, I realised that sometimes, penning the simplest thoughts down could probably leave a lasting impact on someone, even if it happens after a little more than a century.

My connection with the game has always been merely from the perspective of a spectator, and I have gone most of my life shying away from the rawness of the sport mainly due to reasons as unfortunate as not being able to catch a cricket ball to save my life. Therefore, my role in this world where I have treaded with utmost caution has always been rather limited. I use the word ‘limited’, because my role is restricted to clapping after a sublime cover drive, or a clever stumping, and the occasional treasure hunt for cricket books on people I have never seen play. And more importantly, I use the word ‘caution’, because, to put it very bluntly, I have been blessed with two X chromosomes.

Don’t get me wrong. This really isn’t going to turn into a sermon on how girls understand cricket as well as, or even better than men. It’s something that just occurred to me as I combed through Lang’s writing. He seems comforted by the thought of a fine day at the Oval being one wherein it is a pleasant sight to see “every man with his eyes riveted on the wicket, every man able to appreciate the most delicate strokes in the game, and anxious to applaud friend or adversary.” Well, understandably, Lang might have not seen many women in that vast assembly he so admires back in 1893. The poor man probably didn’t even consider gender inequality back then. However, I’m not too sure about how much I like this line of thought staying more or less the same in 2014.

I apologise for the digression.

So keeping to my limited role, I ventured deeper into Lang’s words that kept resonating in my head. He probably meant patriotism on the lines of England and Australia. I thought of the India-Pakistan deciders I witnessed in the college mess. Hell, I thought about India-Pakistan test match I remember vividly when Irfan Pathan took a hat trick and he was suddenly everyone’s hope for India’s future. Why be restricted to Indian Cricket? To be really honest, I also thought about the Barmy Army. Yes, still England-Australia. And yes, even after a century.

While penning down the part about the game being eminently unselfish, he probably thought about Dr. W. G. Grace’s relationship with the younger lads. I thought about the articles I had read about Virat Kohli deriving inspiration from Sachin Tendulkar, who along with other brilliant figures of the game like Rahul Dravid has always been supportive of the younger lot. And this unselfishness is still seen to be a vital factor in the game, and I’m sure in other sports too, even ninety-nine years after the great W. G. Grace.

On a lighter note, I don’t know if W. G.’s advice, if it can be called that, could have been of much help in itself, as I remember coming across somewhere his casual answer to repeated, curious enquiries as to how to play certain shots:

“You must strike the bat against the ball.”

~ Kruthika