'In this book, I wanted to include items from my personal archive that have played a part in my overall story, to give the detail behind the detail.' – Jimmy Page

Following the sell-out success of Jimmy Page's first book, we are delighted to introduce Jimmy Page: The Anthology. The new signed, limited edition documents Jimmy Page’s musical career through selected material from his rich personal archives. Jimmy Page: The Anthology is narrated entirely in Jimmy Page's own words, and includes contextual photography spanning six decades.

The Anthology

Jimmy Page: The Anthology

'I was seduced by the beauty of what a six-string instrument could do, whether it was acoustic or electric, and I was never happy to stay in one style for too long. I always wanted to challenge myself.' - Jimmy Page

Hundreds of items from Jimmy Page's private collection have been personally selected for inclusion. From iconic guitars and stage costumes, to rare posters and vinyl pressings; and from correspondence and diary entries to unseen photographs. Every piece has been photographed and brought to life with exclusive new text provided by Jimmy Page, placing it within the story of his phenomenal career.

The Limited Edition

Jimmy Page: The Anthology

Jimmy Page: The Anthology is published in a limited edition of only 2,500 numbered copies, each signed by Jimmy Page.

Quarter-bound in black leather, with gold leaf blocking and gilded page edging, the book is presented in a lined slipcase within a felt bag. The case design is inspired by the Selmer case of Jimmy Page's first electric guitar, his 1958 Resonet Futurama. Each copy in the limited edition is hand-numbered and individually signed by the author, Jimmy Page.

'I've really got a lot of time for the way Genesis produce their books, they're really quality items. As someone who's always been interested in having a library themselves, I appreciate fine bookbinding and their whole ethic of what they do and what they're trying to do with a whole catalogue of books.' - Jimmy Page