Juana of Aragon, Queen of Naples

The Ferdinand the Catholic's sister was born in Barcelona about the middle of the fifteenth century. She was the second child of John II of Aragon by his second wife, Juana Enríquez. Fourteen years later, her marriage with the infant Alfonso of Castile, brother of the future Queen Isabella the Catholic, was agreed. But Alfonso died unexpectedly. King Ferrante I of Naples, an illegitimate son of her uncle Alfonso V of Aragon, asked Juana's hand in marriage from John II and he accepted. His first wife had died some years earlier. The King of Aragon gave his daughter, who renounced her rights to the Kingdom of her father, a dowry of 100,000 gold florins and Ferrante gave his new wife many duchies and/or cities, such as Sorrento, Theano, Isernia, Teramo, Sulmona, Francavilla and Nocera, and an annual income of 20,000 ducats. A papal dispensation was necessary because the future spouses were first cousins.

Infanta Juana served as governor in the absence of her father and her brother Ferdinand. Two months after she was released from her post, in July 1477, the navy that had been sent by the King of Naples, in order to pick up his wife, reached the port of Barcelona. It consisted of ten galleys and other ships. At the head of the Neapolitan embassy stood Alfonso, Duke of Calabria – the heir to the throne with letters of authority from his father. Relevant figures of the kingdom: princes, dukes, marquises and admirals made the embassy of Naples shine. The farewell was highly emotive, both John II of Aragon and his daughter shed many tears. The formal wedding, with both the bride and groom present, took place on 14 September in Naples, officiated by Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, the future Pope Alexander VI, with the assistance of forty bishops. The coronation of the queen took place four days later, Cardinal Borgia officiated the mass. Juana of Aragon was crowned Queen of Naples with a crown sent by Pope.

Queen Juana inherited a love of fashion from her mother. Even back then the young infanta was a typical woman and innovative with fashion. Juana of Aragon is credited for creating the first gold pendant watch. She created a piece by taking a small gold portable desk clock and fastened it to a large gold chain – she made a second gold watch for her husband Ferrante when they married. The first child of the royal couple was born two years later. The baby was a girl called Giovanna, like her mother. Following came into the world the infant Carlo, but died aged six of typhus.

Her husband was patron of musicians and literary figures, took an interest in the new craft of printing and stimulated the dormant university of Naples into new life. Ferrante was keen to establish manufacturing industries in southern Italy, aimed to fit out a royal fleet whose galleys could reach as far afield as England, and openly welcomed to Sicilian and Spanish Jews into the kingdom of Naples. During Ferrante’s reign the kingdom was under steady attack not only from external powers such as the Turks, the French, the Republic of Venice, and the Papacy, but also by the local barons. Despite all of this, Ferrante ruled the Kingdom of Naples for thirty-six years, longer than any other Italian prince in the fifteenth century.

Ferrante was notoriously astute and treacherous by reputation. Jakob Burckhardt, the father of Renaissance studies, declared: ‘it is certain that he was equaled in ferocity by none of the princes of his time.’ and yet he was 'recognised as one of the most powerful political minds of the day', who avoided all other vices in order to concentrate on the destruction of his political opponents. It said that Ferrante kept the mummified bodies of his enemies, dressed in the costume which they wore in their lifetime, in a private museum.

Soon Queen Juana showed her political talent. She acted as Regent of Naples in her husband's absence, with the task of raising funds for the war against the Turks invaders. In August 1485, she started to randomly journey through Italy, probably to ensure loyalty to her husband in the wake of rebellions led by Baron Antonello Sanseverino and supported by Pope Innocent VIII and Cardinal Giulio della Rovere. A few years later, after the conspiracy was suppressed, Juana returned to Abruzzo accompanied by her daughter and by a large entourage. In L'Aquila she was received with great demonstrations of popular affection. During her residency visited most of the monasteries and churches of L'Aquila.

The death of her husband in early 1494 is now known to have been caused by large bowel cancer. Since then Juana took the name of the sad queen, which she signed all her documents. Because of the grief, she did not even attend her stepson Alfonso's coronation in May, although the new monarch kept Juana in her position of Lieutenant General of the Kingdom of Naples. Meanwhile, Charles VIII of France was about to conquer Naples. Juanatried to prevent the abdication of her stepson Alfonso II in the face of the French invasion. The king abdicated in favor of his son, who became Ferrante II of Naples. However, before he left to Messina, Alfonso advised his son to take the advice of Queen Juana in consideration and never do anything to upset her.

(X)

Sources:

Ferrante of Naples the Statecraft of a Renaissance Prince by David Abulafia. History Today; Feb 1995

ROYAL DIPLOMACY IN RENAISSANCE ITALY: FERRANTE D’ARAGONA (1458–1494) AND HIS AMBASSADORS by Paul M. Dover

Diplomatario Gerundense de la infanta Juana de Aragón, Lugarteniente General de Cataluña by Luis Batlle y Prats and Santiago Sobrequés Vidal.

https://jronaldreed.wordpress.com/2013/09/23/gold-watch-innovator-queen-joanna-of-naples-c1476/

http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/573905_4