Spanish history:

Ferdinand II of Aragon (1452-1516)

He was son of King John II of Aragon and his second wife, the Castilian noblewoman Juana Enríquez. In 1461, in the midst of a bitterly contested succession, John II named him heir apparent and governor of all his kingdoms and lands. Ferdinand’s future was assured when he came of age, in 1466, and when he was named king of Sicily, in 1468, in order to impress the court of Castile, where his father ultimately wished to place him. In addition to participating in court life, the young prince saw battle during the Catalonian wars. John II had great plans for his son and to that end made certain that he was well educated in the humanities and in the art of government. Ferdinand was more interested in the arts and especially enjoyed music. In 1469 he married Isabella, heiress apparent to the Castilian crown. They became joint monarchs of Castile on the death of her brother Henry IV in 1474. Their first task was to wage war against the forces of Joanna of Trastámara, wife of Alfonso V of Portugal, the supposed daughter of Henry IV. Isabella and Ferdinand were the winners. In 1479 John II died, and his son Ferdinand became king of Aragon as well as of Castile (in whose government, however, he officially occupied second place).

Isabella and Ferdinand formed one of the most powerful rulers couples in History. They are known for the conquest of the kingdom of Granada (the last Muslim enclave in the peninsula) and the Canary Islands, for ordering conversion or exile of their Muslim and Jewish subjects, for the introduction of the Inquisition, and for supporting and financing Christopher Columbus’ 1492 voyage that led to the opening of the “New World”. During the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, Spain pursued alliances with Portugal, the Habsburg Monarchy and England through the marriage of their five children. King Ferdinand also left several illegitimate children of his mistresses. The wily Ferdinand was one of the most skillful diplomats in an age of great diplomats.

Having succeeded in reuniting Spain, Ferdinand was now able to involve himself in the Italian Wars. In 1494, Alfonso II, Ferdinand’s cousin, had been forcibly removed from the throne of Naples when his kingdom was invaded by France’s King Charles VIII. Ferdinand took exception to this and allied himself with Emperor Maximilian I and assorted Italian princes and by 1496 had expelled the French and placed Alfonso’s son, Ferdinand on the throne of Naples. A second war of succession was successfully concluded in 1504 when Ferdinand’s general, Gonzalo Fernández de Córdoba reconquered Naples. With the death of his wife Isabella in 1504 Ferdinand became regent, ruling while his daughter, Joanna, now Queen, was in the Low Countries with her husband Archduke Philip. King Ferdinand planned to retain his hold over the throne and become permanent regent but the Castilian nobles foiled his plan and backed Joanna’s husband as Philip I of Castile. Ferdinand bided his time and in 1506 Philip died, Joanna was declared mentally unstable and their son and heir, Charles of Ghent, was only six years old. Ferdinand resumed the regency.

He remarried in 1505 to Germaine of Foix, the granddaughter of Queen Eleanor of Navarre and niece of Louis XII of France. His hope to father a new heir of Aragon, separating it from Castile, was not realised. It would have denied his son-in-law Philip I, and his grandson Charles I, from inheriting the crown and governance of Aragon. A son, John, Prince of Girona, was born, but died within hours (x). Ferdinand went to war again in 1508, against Venice, with other monarchs in the League of Cambrai. Though at first successful, the League fell apart when the Pope and Ferdinand began to suspect the French had ulterior motives. In response the Holy League was formed with France as the new enemy. King Henry VIII of England, who had married Ferdinand’s daughter Catherine of Aragon, joined forces with the Holy League in 1511 under the Treaty of Westminster. Ferdinand conquered the kingdom of Navarre and annexed it to the Crown of Castile. Meanwhile, In Italy, the Holy League had driven the French from Milan and restoring the Dukes of Sforza to power. Ferdinand died in Madrigalejo at the age of sixty-four. He is entombed at the Royal Chapel of Granada. Isabella I, Joanna I, and Philip I are beside him there.(x)