Shining Victory is an upcoming episode of Tomas 10.

Tomas 10 Season 6, Episode 84 Written by TomasFMaggi Directed by TomasFMaggi Episode Guide Previous

"The Creator of Everything" Next

"The Battel of Gettysburg"

Summary[]

The new season starts off with a the moon arriving at a certain location of the Earth that only reaches the certain spot every 500 years. During this point, the moon is at its brightest and closest to the Earth. However, this impressive moon awakens a new threat, an unstoppable living meteorite made out of crystal. The only way to stop it is to keep it busy until the moon passes on, only to return in another 500 years.

Plot[]

Shining Victory

It was a nice, warm Monday night. There was a full moon in the night sky. A moon that only occurred every five hundred years. This moon is the closest to Earth in all those years. Which means, it awakens a new threat. An alien made of an element that cannot be found anywhere in over twelve galaxies.

The shiny alien awakens from its cage and escapes into the streets. It wanders into the highway and begins to walk across. At five steps, a driver crashes into him. But the alien is unharmed, it didn’t budge. The driver looked up and saw the big, shiny, mysterious alien, and runs out of the car screaming.

After that, the shiny alien pushes the car to the side, causing it to crash into another car and a car behind it. A driver on the other side of the road, tries to make a U-turn, but is crashed by another car. It doesn’t take long for the alien to make a huge scene and attract the police.

The police and swat team showed up and immediately cleared the area and began shooting at the shiny alien. However, the bullets aren’t leaving a scratch on the alien. The alien walks over to the police as they keep shooting at him and struggling to keep him back.

The alien comes right up to a police, who continues shooting at him, and sticks his finger against the barrel. The gun explodes and throws the officer back, while the shiny alien is unaffected. The police continue shooting, with no luck, as the alien draws closer and begins to take them out.

“Our weapons are having no effect on his thing!” the chief stated. “We need more firepower!” The shiny alien drew closer, and all of a sudden, a giant ball of metal blasted him back fifty feet. “Where did that come from?” he asked.

“Oh yeah, direct hit!” they heard someone say. All of a sudden, Magnetude landed right in front of them. They looked up and saw that he was flying by lifting a car door, with him standing on top. “Stand back officers, it’s time to pull out the big guns.” I said.

“You think you’ve got this under control? Clearly you don’t know what you’re dealing with.” The chief said. “That creature is invulnerable.” He informed.

“Are you kidding, I just took him down, look.” I said. We looked over and saw the shiny alien get up and tear the big ball of metal in half. “Whoa, didn’t see that coming.” I admitted.

The alien was now angry. He began to charge straight at me. “Hit it with everything you’ve got.” The chief ordered. All the police and Swat blasted their guns, but had no effect.

Suddenly, their bullets were stopping and being redirected. They looked over and saw that I was bringing every bullet to me. “I’ll take those off your hands.” I said. Then, I compressed all the bullets together into a large cannonball. “Bigger is better.” I said. Next I, with all my force, thrust the cannonball and stuck the alien in the chest. “Bulls eye.” I said.

But the alien didn’t stay down for long, only about two seconds, before getting back up. “This thing is bigger than what you can handle.” The chief stated. “And if bigger is better, than that alien is better than you.” He said.

“Hey, I’m the bigger alien. By length and width.” I stated, since Magnetude is a rather fat alien. “All I need to do is where it down.” I said. The alien lifted up my cannonball and threw it right back at me. About two feet before making contact, I forced it to fall straight to the ground. “Not that easy, tough guy.” I said.

The alien ran at me again. In return, I put a car in between the two of us. The alien tossed the car aside and punched me right in the center of the chest. The blow of the hit sent me flying back, just like the giant ball of metal did to him. I was finally stopped by slamming into a car and severely smashing it.

“Ok, Shiny, the gloves are off.” I said, then remembered that Magnetude wears gloves. “Metaphorically.” I added. The shiny alien continued to run my way, clearly unsatisfied and ready to end it. I used my magnetic powers to lift up a street lamp and swung it back. “Batter up.” I said, then swung the pole like a baseball bat and threw him back. “Home run!” I said.

Now the alien was furious. He charged at me full speed. I pulled over a car door to use as a shield, but his punch broke straight through and struck me again. This was the second time he landed one of his punches; I wouldn’t be able to take many more. But now, I was angry too.

“You’re not the only one who can hit hard.” I said. Then, I activated my magnetic powers. The alien braced itself for me, but my attack came from the right. I rammed him with a tow truck and knocked him off the highway and into the lower street level. Next, I took another street lamp and wrapped it around him. “And that’s a wrap.” I said to the chief, then left.

The next day, we were going to visit the museum of ancient artifacts. But when we arrived, it was closed off by the police. We noticed the large gaping hole in the wall and knew immediately what caused it.

“It must have been that shiny alien I fought last night.” I said.

“You think it broke through the museum?” Santi asked.

“I think it was from the museum.” Fer replied.

“That alien was an ancient artifact?” Santi asked.

“Maybe it was trapped inside a tomb or something, and all this time it’s been trying to free itself.” I said.

“We’d have to go inside to be sure.” Fer said.

“But we can’t there are police everywhere.” Santi said. “What we need is a distraction. What do you say, Tomas? Can you be a distraction?” Santi asked.

“Me? I’m a huge distraction.” I replied. Then, I went to the other side of the building, activated the watch, and transformed into Ditto. “One distraction coming up.” I said.

I ran out in the open and smashed the front glass of a police car, then ran away laughing. “Hey, get that thing.” One of them said, then they all chased after me. They tried to get in the car, but the glass popped the tires. They all had to run after me.

I looked back and saw them chasing after me. “Here we go.” I said, then split in half. I went right and my clone went left, confusing the police.

Meanwhile, Fer and Santi snuck into the museum to investigate. They looked around and saw the trashed museum exhibits. “What are we even doing here?” Santi asked. “There is no way an alien came from here.” He stated.

“Are you sure about that?” Fer asked.

“Of course I’m sure; there are no signs that say the alien came from here.” Santi replied.

“What about this one?” Fer said. Santi walked over and looked to find a large hole in the ground. “If that’s not a sign then I don’t know what is.” Fer said.

Later that day, we were back at the RV, thinking this through. “So this alien came from under the museum?” I asked to clarify.

“That’s right, the museum was built over him. He wasn’t in the museum, but that is where he came from.” Fer explained.

“But how did it get there?” I asked.

“I’ve got it!” Santi said, was trying to research the alien on his computer. “According to this, the shiny alien came to Earth five hundred years ago. It say that the alien started out as a meteorite, but then evolved into a living creature before landing on Earth. The theory of this was that the moon was its closest to the Earth in human history and that the meteor gained its life from the moon.” He read.

“But could anyone burry that thing underground? It would have been impossible.” I stated.

“According to this, the moon was at its brightest for three days. Once the moon rotated to a farther distance, the alien was shut down. They buried it underground and it was never seen again.” Santi read.

“Until now.” Fer said.

“So all we have to do is keep it under control for two more nights.” I said. “That shouldn’t be too hard.”

(That night) I was shot back and crashed against a brick wall. “But I’ve been wrong before.” I said. I was currently

Atomix, trying to hold back the Shiny Crystal. Just as I was getting up, Shiny Crystal showed up and rammed me through the wall. After that, he slammed me up against the building. Hard crystals were spread along my chest and I was nailed to the wall.

Shiny Crystal had the power to generate and manipulate hard crystals. Not to mention, he was about three feet tall than Atomix and immune to all of Atomix’s abilities. He wasn’t effected by radiation, my plasma beams had no effect, and my charged electric hands had no effect on a crystal. I could only use my enhanced strength to protect myself. But even so, his strength outmatched mine by far.

I managed to free myself and jabbed Shiny Crystal right in the jaw. I cracked and dislocated his jaw, but he regenerated the cracks and his jaw popped right back into place, as if I had never even touched him. “I think I just made things worse.” I said.

Then, Shiny Crystal struck me down from above and I fell to the floor. I tried to get back up, only to be slammed back down. I tried one more time, but suffered the same consequence. All of a sudden, I bolted up and gave him a powerful uppercut.

Shiny Crystal was taken completely by surprise and could have never seen it coming. I moved in on him, arms up. He swung, I leaned back, then leaned in, and jabbed him back. I followed up with a three punch combo: right uppercut, left hook, right swing. Next, Shiny Crystal leaned in for a punch, but luckily, I ducked under and jabbed him from the inside.

I came around for a swing, but he blocked my arm and punched me back with the other. Then, he backslapped me into the wall. Next, with both arms, bashed my stomach, then double uppercut, stomach, uppercut, stomach, uppercut, stomach, uppercut, etc. He was wearing me way down. Finally he stopped, stepped to the side, watched as I collapsed, and left.

“Tomas? Hello? Are you awake?” I heard Santi say. Then I woke up, reverted back to normal. “Oh, good, you’re up, cause we’ve got a major problem.” He said.

“How long was I out?” I asked.

“About fifteen minutes.” Santi replied. “We might have been able to wake you up sooner, but getting too close to Atomix would have been harmful.” He said. “Are you ok?”

“Ugh, my head hurts.” I said.

“Alright, but we gotta go, now.” Santi said. I got up and we got into the RV. When we were inside, Fer quickly drove over and they explained it to me on the way.

“He’s threatening to collapse a skyscraper.” Fer said. “The police are doing everything they can to stop him, but they are completely outmatched.”

“So it’s up to you.” Santi said.

“And by ‘me’, you mean Fourarms.” I said.

We were getting closer to the Sears Tower. When we were getting closer, we saw Shiny Crystal breaking through the police. “There he is.” Fer said.

“Time to smash.” I said. Then I activated the watch, selected Fourarms, and transformed. But instead of turning into Fourarms, I was transformed into Elekid. “Or time to zap.” I said.

Then I got an idea. I grabbed the front of the RV and transferred electricity into it. Suddenly, the RV rapidly gained speed. It went faster and faster. Fer tried stomping on the brakes, but they wouldn’t work.

“What’s going on?” Fer asked.

“Oh, that’s me.” I said. “We’re going to ram him.” I said. Then transferred more electricity and made the horn honk. Shiny Crystal looked over, only to be crashed by the RV. After that, I jumped out of the RV and ran over. But suddenly, I was stopped in my tracks. I looked down to find my feet enclosed in crystal and unable to move.

I looked over to see how this happened, then I noticed Shiny Crystal’s arm sticking in the ground. Suddenly, two large pillars of crystal popped out and crushed me. Shiny Crystal stood back up and the crystal pillars were sent back underground. Shiny Crystal expected to find a knocked out Elekid, but instead, he found an Elekid surrounded by a force field.

I opened my eyes to my amazement. I lowered my arms and suddenly the force field dropped. “Ha ha. Didn’t know I could do that, did you?” I asked. Shiny Crystal then shot crystal shards at me. I stuck my hands out to create a force field, but nothing happened, and I was struck by the shards.

I got up now angry again. I jumped up into the air and blasted a huge thunderbolt at him. Shiny Crystal stuck out his arms and absorbed the electricity. For a few seconds, he glowed yellow and then shot the electricity right back at me. I crossed my arms, for protection, and accidentally created another force field. Once the blast was stopped, I lowered my arms and the force field dropped. “Oh, I get it now.” I said.

I ran straight towards Shiny Crystal. I shot another bolt of electricity at him. Shiny Crystal absorbed the electric bolt and shot it back at me. I crossed my arms and created a force field. I protected myself from his blast. Next, I slid under his legs and jumped on his back. Then, I inserted two thousand volts of electricity into him.

Unfortunately, he absorbed that two. After that, he released it all at once. I didn’t have enough time to protect myself, so I was struck by my own attack. The electricity didn’t do much damage to me, but it did affect my watch. All of a sudden, I was morphed into Spykeback, then Ditto, then Stinkfly, then back to normal.

“Uh oh, that’s not supposed to happen.” I said. Shiny Crystal saw that I was back to normal and saw an opportunity. He charged straight at me and turned his arms into long sharp blades of crystal. I jumped forward when he slashed and passed under his legs again. When he turned around, he was rammed into a wall by the RV.

Santi opened the door, which was right in front of me, and said, “Get in.” I quickly jumped inside and Fer drove back and away.

“What are we doing? Shiny Crystal can take a hit from the RV. He’s going to get back up and continue on his way.” I stated.

“No he’s not, he’s coming after the RV now.” Fer said. “He attacked you before because you attacked him. But this time, I attacked him in the RV, which means he’s going to come after the RV.” Fer explained.

“How can you be sure?” I asked. All of a sudden, Shiny Crystal fell from the sky and landed right in front of the RV. Fer slammed the brakes and we stopped inches away from him. “Oh, that’s how.” I said.

Shiny Crystal grabbed the RV and wouldn’t let go. Fer tried going in reverse, but Shiny Crystal kept us in place. No matter how hard Fer pressed on the gas pedal, Shiny Crystal had an iron grip and would not budge.I looked at my watch and it was still in recharge mode. “We could really use some alien help.” Santi said.

“Great idea, but a certain crystal made my watch malfunction.” I said.

“Tomas, I don’t mean to rush you, but if we don’t do something soon, that same crystal is going to tear this RV apart.” Fer said.

“I’ve got an idea.” I said. “Drop me off here and keep him busy.” I said running out the door.

“How?” Santi asked.

“Like this.” Fer said, then put it on drive and slammed on the gas. The RV surged forward with Shiny Crystal pressed against the front. Fer crashed him into a street lamp, but had little to no effect on him. Shiny Crystal pushed the RV back crashed it into the store across the street. “The RV can’t take more hits like that.” Fer said. Shiny Crystal began heading over to the RV again. Just then, I slammed a skateboard on him. Unfortunately, the skateboard shattered, but at least I got his attention. “Over here, Jewelry.” I said. Fer said Shiny Crystal attacked anything that attacked him, so now he was after me again.

I ran over and stopped in front of a fire hydrant. Shiny Crystal swung his arm, and I jumped out of the way before he hit me, and he struck the fire hydrant. The fire hydrant busted open and sprayed him in the face. Next, I led him over to a stop sign. He slashed his arm and I ducked, causing him to slice the pole and have the stop sign fall on his face. After that, I led him to a revolving door. He tried following me in, but got confused and frustrated that he was unable to hit me. My plan of angering him was working.

Next, I ran into the bathroom. When Shiny Crystal followed me in, he was struck back by Drillbit. After that, I tackled him down. Then, I picked him up, spun him around, and threw him into the wall. Shiny Crystal got back up and was now after Drillbit. I tried to strike him again, but he blocked my arm with ease. Next, he kicked me over and I crashed into the front desk.

Fer and Santi walked in the front door and saw Drillbit getting up from the smashed desk and Shiny Crystal making his way over. “Should we help him?” Santi asked.

“Don’t worry, Drillbit has incredibly thick skin and has arms alsmost as strong as Fourarms.” Fer assured.

“What? No way.” Santi said

Then, Shiny Crystal threw me against the wall. “That’s it, tough guy.” I said. Then I dug underground. Shiny Crystal began looking around and got confused. Suddenly, two hands popped out of the ground and grabbed his feet. I began moving all over the room, dragging Shiny Crystal all over the ground and crashing him into walls, tables, chairs, etc.

Finally, Shiny Crystal dug his arms into the floor and anchored himself. Next, he stuck his hand in the ground and pulled me out. He was about to punch me, but I quickly kicked him back and freed myself. Shiny Crystal lifted up both his arms and slammed them down as hard as he could. I stuck up my hands and blocked his blow. The force sent a shockwave through the two of us.

“Wow, he really is that strong.” Santi said, impressed.

Next, I head-butted him back, then followed up with a powerful uppercut. The uppercut cracked his jaw, but like before, he regenerated it. After that, he punched me back down. Then, I dug back underground, but he was prepared for that. He created a wall of crystal in my way and held me back, I couldn’t dig through it. Then he lifted me back up and he struck me down again. He tried to punch me again, but I rolled out of the way and tackled him back.

“He won’t last much longer.” Fer said. Then, they noticed it was morning, the sun was coming up. “Tomas, stall for a few more seconds!” Fer called over.

“I’m working on it.” I called back, while trying to hold him down. Then, the sun broke through and shined its light. Shiny Crystal was holding me up and my watch started beeping. All of a sudden, he was frozen. I turned back to normal still up in the air, being held by his arms. “That was too close.” I said.

Fer and Santi rushed over and helped me out of his grip. “So Shiny is only awake at night, when the moon shines?” I asked.

“Shiny Crystal only awakes when the moon appears, so that must mean he is only awake at night.” Fer said. “So what are we gonna do with him?” Santi asked.

“We need to get him as far away from here as possible.” Fer said. We tried to pick him up, but he was incredibly heavy. We kept trying to move him, but he weighted about a ton.

“Ok, we’re not moving him.” I finally said.

“So what do we do?” Santi asked. We thought for a moment.

“I have an idea.” I said.

Later that morning, I had transformed into Icepick. I was riding on top of the RV while Fer was pushing Shiny Crystal with the RV. I was using my ice powers to create an ice slide to easily push him. Once we pushed him far away, I covered him in three layers of ice.

That night, we were on top of a skyscraper, looking through telescopes. All of a sudden, I looked over and saw something shoving cars out of its way. I couldn’t make out what it was, but the shine it gave off and the all the police cars confirmed my suspicions. “Shiny Crystal is down there!” I alerted.

“What? No he’s not. Let me see.” Santi said, and looked into the telescope.

“See him?” I asked.

“No it ran out of time.” Santi replied.

“I know I saw him.” I said. I activated my watch and transformed into Fourarms. “I’m ending this.” I said. Then, I jumped down the side of the building and ran down the side. Next, I jumped out and headed straight over. Meanwhile, Shiny Crystal had just taken out all the police and only the chief was left. He turned one of his arms into a blade and lifted him up with the other. Suddenly, Fourarms dropped from the sky and landed on the ground creating a large crater.

“Let him go, Shiny.” I said. “This is about you and me.” Shiny Crystal tossed the chief asid

e and prepared to face me. He stepped forward, and I immediately urged forward and punched him back. “You had your chance, now I’m taking you down.” I said.

Shiny Crystal got up and quickly blasted crystal shards at me. I jumped up into the air, dodging them, and landed right in front of him. He tried punching me, but I stopped both his arms and punched him back with my third. Shiny Crystal slid across the floor and crashed into a police car.

Shiny Crystal got back up, but I didn’t give him time to recover. I jabbed top right, jabbed top left, uppercut bottom right, top left hook, quadruple uppercut. Next, I picked him up over my head and slammed him down on my knee. After that, I lifted him up again and threw him into another two cars.

Shiny Crystal got up and charged at me. I swung my top right arm, but he ducked under and rammed me into the wall. After that, I punched him back twenty feet with both my bottom arms. Shiny Crystal charged at me again, but this time, I pounded the ground and sent a wave that flipped him into the air.

After that, I knew what I had to do. I picked him up and threw him as hard as I could, which was four blocks away. I continued this all the way to the museum. When I arrived, I pinned him to the ground. “Alright Shiny, you’re going back where you came from.” I said.

But suddenly, Shiny Crystal created three large crystal pillars to rise up from the ground and push me off him. I got off the pillars and smacked him back down. However, the watch began beeping. “No!” I said. I quickly ran over and punched him as fast as I could multiple times with all my arms before turning back to normal.

Shiny Crystal fell down, but because of his regeneration abilities, he was back on his feet. I didn’t know what to do now. Shiny Crystal was approaching me, when all of a sudden, we heard the RV horn. We looked over to see Fer ram the RV into Shiny Crystal. Fer backed up and they both got out of the RV.

“Tomas, what are you doing?” Fer asked.

“We have to get him back underground.” I said.

“Good luck with that, they only way to get him to stay there is when the sun comes up. But the sun doesn’t come up for another eight hours.” Santi said.

“Then we’ll have to make the sun.” I said, I activated the watch, scrolled the dial, and transformed.

All of a sudden, the watch and my arm became covered with brown rocks. The stone plates were spread all around my body and up to my face. I closed my eyes and when they opened they were turned into fire. Next, my body heat was release, turning the inside of my body into molten lava, held together by the plates around my body. I was transformed into the fire alien Heatblast.

Once I transformed, I blasted the ground and shot up like a rocket. I flew up until I was directly above Shiny Crystal. Then, I exerted all my energy and turned into a huge ball of light. My plan was working, Fer and Santi were trying to get away from Shiny Crystal, but he was turning solid.

“Tomas, quickly put him back underground!” Fer called to me.

I landed back down

and began pushing him over, but I continued giving off light to hold him still. I managed to push him over and then pushed him down into the hole. Fer, Santi, and I quickly covered the hole back up. Then, I covered it with metal car parts, used my fire powers to melt them, and ceiled him in the ground.

“Great idea, Tomas. They metal should reflect the light from the moon.” Fer said.

“Yup, that was my plan.” I said, even though it wasn’t.

“Well, we solved that problem.” Fer said. “But now we have to fix all the dents in the RV.” He said.

“I think Magnetude should be able to help with that.” I assured.

The next night, a mysterious black figure appeared at the museum and saw the metal spot covered up. “Time for the ‘Shiny Crystal’ to rise again.”

The End

Characters[]

Tomas Maggi

Santi Diaz

Fer Maggi

Villians[]

Shiny Crystal

Aliens used[]