I Want Candy was a hit for the group Bow Wow Wow in 1982. They didn’t have much other success, but that one song has retained a lasting power exceeding the songs of groups that had more hits (*cough* Flock of Seagulls *cough*). Something to do with its great Buddy Hollyesque beat.

I Want Candy was a remake of a song originally recorded in 1965 by a group called The Strangeloves, who also didn’t have much other success. In the last decade, others have recorded the song, including Aaron Carter (whose version is so pre-teen and bubbly that it inspired a sarcastic reaction song called I Want Candy Dead) and Melanie C as a one-off for a movie.

I Want Candy is a sexual song, that’s pretty clear. The lyrics are suggestive, but relatively tasteful.

I know a girl who’s soft and sweet

She’s so fine, she can’t be beat

Got everything that I desire

Sets the summer sun on fire

I want Candy, I want Candy

Go to see her with her hair hung down

Ain’t no finer girl in town

Candy’s just what the doctor ordered

She’s so sweet, she makes my mouth water

I want Candy, I want Candy

Candy on the beach, there’s nothing better

But I like Candy when it’s wrapped in a sweater

Some day soon I’ll make her mine

Then I’ll have Candy all the time

I want Candy, I want Candy

The above are the original lyrics. Here’s a video:

Melanie dresses in tight leather, dances like a stripper, fondles fluorescent lights, rubs her breasts, licks her parted lips, and otherwise acts like a whore. Furthermore, the men are half-naked beefcake sex objects for her playthings. But it doesn’t end there, no.

She’s a girl now singing about “a girl who’s tough but sweet”, which could be construed as either lesbian or straight on straight girl activity, either one representing an uninhibited, gender-blind sexuality: she can sleep with men or women and she can do it in public.

This video is pretty representative of how female performers present themselves nowadays: as strippers, soaked in sexuality, without any inhibitions, mysteries, innocence, shyness, or self-respect. I won’t say that it can’t get any worse; it certainly can, and I fear that it will. In another twenty years, they’ll simply be having sex on stage.

I kind of miss the 80s version, though. There should still be some child-like fun left in the world.