L. Scott Caldwell is a versatile actress whose face you’ve undoubtedly seen in at least one of your favorite movies or TV shows. With nearly 100 acting credits and over four decades of experience, Caldwell has dabbled in various genres. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, she embraced a new challenge by taking on a role in the series Love in the Time of Corona. As the entertainment industry’s production remains halted, the show must be filmed in each cast member’s home. While this format may be unfamiliar to viewers, Caldwell’s undeniable talent ensures she can pull it off. Here are 10 fascinating facts about L. Scott Caldwell you probably didn’t know.

1. A Tony Award Winner in Her Own Right

Besides her remarkable on-screen career, Caldwell has also achieved considerable success in theater. In fact, the majority of her career has been spent on stage. She made her Broadway debut in the 1980 production of Home. In 1998, she won a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play for her role in Joe Turner’s Come & Gone.

2. Born and Bred in Chicago

Caldwell hails from Chicago, a city that has produced numerous well-known names in the industry. It was in Chicago where Caldwell first discovered her passion for acting. She eventually decided to move to New York City to pursue her career more seriously.

3. A Former Teacher

Although she has always been passionate about the arts, Caldwell initially believed her calling was to teach others to appreciate the arts. She spent a few years working as a high school teacher in Chicago before deciding to make a career change. Leaving teaching behind may have been one of the best decisions of her life.

4. A Loyola University Graduate

Not to be confused with Loyola Marymount University in California, Loyola University is located in Chicago. Caldwell attended the school after dropping out of Northwestern University to take a full-time job. While at Loyola, she earned a bachelor’s degree in theater arts and communications.

5. Social Media Isn’t Her Thing

Social media has become a popular way for actors to keep their fans updated on their projects. However, Caldwell has decided that social media isn’t for her. She has accounts on both Instagram and Twitter but hasn’t been active on either platform for years.

6. Twice Married

Caldwell has always been private about her personal life, but we know that she has been married twice. Her first marriage to John Caldwell began sometime in the 70s and ended in the 80s, though the exact dates are unknown. The couple had one child together, a son named Ominara. Caldwell married Dasal McClain Banks in 2004, but he sadly passed away the following year.

7. A Firm Believer in Empowering Women

The entertainment industry is notoriously competitive, leading to a stereotype that women can be catty and willing to backstab each other for roles. Caldwell doesn’t subscribe to this belief and is a strong advocate for uplifting fellow women in the industry and celebrating their achievements.

8. The First Black Lead in the Play Proposals

Caldwell’s career hasn’t just been about entertainment; she’s also made history. In 1997, she was cast in the leading role in Neil Simon’s play Proposals. Although the production was short-lived, Caldwell was the play’s first black lead. She was deeply saddened by Neil’s passing in 2018.

9. A Philanthropist at Heart

Once you reach a certain level of success, it can be easy to detach yourself from the struggles of ‘regular’ people. However, Caldwell has never adopted that mindset. She frequently uses her platform to give back to those in need. In 2012, she participated in a charity webcast with an organization called Cancer Gets LOST to raise money for cancer research.

10. The Mystery Behind the ‘L’

Caldwell has chosen to go by the name L. Scott Caldwell throughout her career, leaving many to wonder what the ‘L’ stands for. The answer is Laverne. She was born Laverne Scott and sometimes goes by the nickname Scotty. In 2017, she played a character named Laverne in an episode of Brooklyn Nine-Nine.