Limited Stock - Buy It Now

$14.00

| /

✅ RareVinyl.com's 100% Guarantee

We guarantee you'll be delighted with your purchase, and its condition. If not, we'll quickly resolve the issue or refund your payment.

Be the first to know if it's back in stock

Checkmark icon Thank you. Your email has been registered.

A valid email address is required.

By entering your Email Address you agree to receive marketing emails from us.

STATUS QUO Back To Back (1983 UK 10-track LP, Quo's sixteenth album & last to feature original bass player Alan Lancaster & drummer Pete Kircher. Includes the singles Ol' Rag Blues, A Mess of Blues, Marguerita Time and Going Down Town Tonight,housed in a glossy picture sleeve with lyric inner. The sleeve has some light edge scuffing, whilst the vinyl looks barely played VERH10)

TRACKLISTING AND EXTRA INFORMATION

1. A Mess Of Blues

2. Ol' Rag Blues

3. Can't Be Done

4. Too Close To The Ground

5. No Contract

6. Win Or Lose

7. Marguerita Time

8. Your Kind Of Love

9. Stay The Night

10. Going Down Town Tonight

Artist - Status Quo (click link for complete listing)

Title - Back To Back (click link for more of the same title)

Year of Release - 1983

Format - vinyl LP album (LP record)

Record Label - Vertigo

Catalogue No - VERH10 (click link for more)

Country of Origin - United Kingdom (UK)

Language - Regardless of country of origin all tracks are sung in English, unless otherwise stated in our description.

Additional info - Deleted, Picture Sleeve

Global Trade Item Number (GTIN) - 5052795217472

Condition - This item is in Excellent condition or better (unless it says otherwise in the above description). We buy items as close to Mint condition as possible and many will be unplayed and as close to new as you could hope to find. Irrespective of the source, all of our collectables meet our strict grading and are 100% guaranteed. Click here for more info.

RareVinyl.com Ref No - QUOLPBA362325

Alternative Names - Quo, Statusquo.

Related Artists - Bob Young, Boz Frost, Flying Squad, Francis Rossi, Party Boys, Rick Parfitt, Rossi & Frost, The Headbangers, The Spectres, The Traffic Jam.

GENRES

Rock.

ORDERING

Availability - In Stock - Buy Now for shipping today

Postage/Shipping Cost - Add item to your basket for a postage/shipping quote. For further delivery info click here

Email - sales@rarevinyl.com to contact our sales team.

To order by phone - Call (+44) 0147485010

RareVinyl.com Reference Number - QUOLPBA362325

SELL TO US

Got vinyl records, CDs or music memorabilia to sell? – Sell to us at our buying site https://vinyl-wanted.com