Final 1 In Stock - Buy it Now

$17.00

| /

✅ RareVinyl.com's 100% Guarantee:

We want you to be delighted with your purchase. If not, we’ll resolve the issue swiftly or refund your order in full.

Be the first to know if it's back in stock

Checkmark icon Thank you. Your email has been registered.

A valid email address is required.

By entering your Email Address you agree to receive marketing emails from us.

STATUS QUO Back To Back (1983 UK 10-track LP, Quo's sixteenth album & last to feature original bass player Alan Lancaster & drummer Pete Kircher. Four singles were released from it including Marguerita Time & Mess Of Blues which was a hit forElvis, complete with lyric inner which has a small tear & merchandise insert. The picture sleeve shows only minor wear & has a small tear on the top,whilst the vinyl looks barely played VERH10)

TRACKLISTING AND EXTRA INFORMATION

1. A Mess Of Blues

2. Ol' Rag Blues

3. Can't Be Done

4. Too Close To The Ground

5. No Contract

6. Win Or Lose

7. Marguerita Time

8. Your Kind Of Love

9. Stay The Night

10. Going Down Town Tonight

Artist - Status Quo (click link for complete listing)

Title - Back To Back (click link for more of the same title)

Year of Release - 1983

Format - vinyl LP album (LP record)

Record Label - Vertigo

Catalogue No - VERH10 (click link for more)

Country of Origin - United Kingdom (UK)

Language - Regardless of country of origin all tracks are sung in English, unless otherwise stated in our description.

Additional info - Deleted, Picture Sleeve

Global Trade Item Number (GTIN) - 5053200465303

Condition - This item is in Excellent condition or better (unless it says otherwise in the above description). We buy items as close to Mint condition as possible and many will be unplayed and as close to new as you could hope to find. Irrespective of the source, all of our collectables meet our strict grading and are 100% guaranteed. Click here for more info.

RareVinyl.com Ref No - QUOLPBA700783

Alternative Names - Quo, Statusquo.

Related Artists - Bob Young, Boz Frost, Flying Squad, Francis Rossi, Party Boys, Rick Parfitt, Rossi & Frost, The Headbangers, The Spectres, The Traffic Jam.

GENRES

Rock.

ORDERING

Availability - In Stock - Buy Now for shipping today

Postage/Shipping Cost - Add item to your basket for a postage/shipping quote. For further delivery info click here

Email - sales@rarevinyl.com to contact our sales team.

To order by phone - Call (+44) 0147485010

RareVinyl.com Reference Number - QUOLPBA700783

SELL TO US

Got vinyl records, CDs or music memorabilia to sell? – Sell to us at our buying site https://vinyl-wanted.com