Lviv (Ukrainian: Lviv, Russian: Lvov, , Polish: , , German: , Latin: Leopolis, the city of the lion) is a city in western Ukraine that was the residence of princes and kings of the Kingdom of Ruthenia, capital of the Ruthenian Voivodeship of the Kingdom of Poland, the Habsburg Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, then known as Lemberg.

Contents

Map of Lviv

Top 10 cities lviv

Things to do in lviv ukraine travel video blog 021

Geography

History

Culture

Economy

Tourism

Popular culture

Museums and art galleries

References

Map of Lviv

From the Polish recurrence after the First World War in 1918-21 until the German and Soviet conquest and dividing of Second Polish Republic, after the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, the city was known as Lwow and was the centre of the Polish Lwow Voivodeship.

During the war this eastern Polish city was first occupied by the USSR, but soon after Operation Barbarossa, the German attack on the Soviet Union, the city was instead taken by the Germans. After Nazi Germanys defeat, at the Potsdam Conference, the Soviet Union argued that the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was legal and the city should become a part of the Soviet Union; Churchill objected but America agreed. Poland was compensated with former German territory, but this also involved ethnic cleansing was added to all other Polish hardships during the war. But the city has after 1945 got its current name. It was the centre of Lviv Oblast of Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic within the USSR, and is after 1991 Ukrainian.

As the centre of the historical region of Galicia, Lviv is now regarded as one of the main cultural centres of Ukraine. The historical heart of Lviv with its old buildings and cobblestone streets has survived Soviet and German occupation during the Second World War largely unscathed. The city has many industries and institutions of higher education such as Lviv University and Lviv Polytechnic. Lviv is also a home to many world-class cultural institutions, including a philharmonic orchestra and the famous Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet. The historic city centre is on the UNESCO World Heritage List. Lviv celebrated its 750th anniversary with a son et lumiere in the city centre in September 2006.

The archaeological traces of settlement on the site of Lviv city date from as early as the 5th century AD. Archaeological excavations in 1955-56 showed old Slavic settlement between the 8th and 10th centuries. In 907 the settlement site with the rest of region was incorporated into the Kievan Rus. After the invasion of Batu Khan and destruction of previous capital Halych, city of Lviv was founded and named after Lev I of Galicia eldest son of King Daniel of Galicia. When Lev inherited power, city became the new capital of the kingdom.

The first record of Lviv in chronicles dates from 1256. In 1340 city was captured by king of Poland Casimir III the Great under whose authority city passed after 1349 together with all Galicia. In 1356, Lviv received Magdeburg Rights and belonged to the Kingdom of Poland till 1772. Under subsequent partitions, Lviv became part of the Austrian Empire. From 1918, the city of Lviv became the capital of the Lwow Voivodeship of the Second Polish Republic, until the Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939; it later fell into German hands. On 22 July 1944, following the successful Lwow Uprising, Lviv was liberated from Nazi occupation by Red Army cooperating with Polish troops.

Within the 14-15th centuries the city acted as a major German handicraft centre. Since the 16th century German-speaking population become polonised and Lviv turned to important Polish and also a Jewish cultural centre, with Poles and Jews comprising a demographic majority of the city until the outbreak of the Second World War, and the Holocaust, and the population transfers of Poles that followed. The other ethnic groups living within the city – Germans, Ruthenians (Ukrainians) and Armenians – also contributed greatly to Lvivs culture. With the joint German–Soviet Invasion of Poland at the outbreak of the Second World War, the city of Lwow and its province were annexed by the Soviet Union and became part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1939 to 1941. Between 30 June 1941 and 27 July 1944 Lwow was under German occupation, and was located in the General Government. On 27 July 1944 it was captured by the Soviet Red Army. According to the agreements of the Yalta Conference, Lwow was transferred to the Ukrainian SSR, most of the Poles living in Lwow were deported into lands newly acquired from Germany under terms of the Potsdam Agreement (officially termed Recovered Territories in Poland), and the city became the main centre of the western part of Soviet Ukraine, inhabited predominantly by Ukrainians with a significant Russian minority.

After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the city of Lviv become a part of the independent Ukraine, for which it currently serves as the administrative centre of Lviv Oblast, and is designated as its own raion (district) within that oblast.