Golden Age of American radio, period lasting roughly from 1930 through the 1940s, when the medium of commercial broadcast radio grew into the fabric of daily life in the United States, providing news and entertainment to a country struggling with economic depression and war.

During American radio’s Golden Age, much of the programming heard by listeners was controlled by advertising agencies, which conceived the shows, hired the talent and staff (sometimes drawing performers directly from the old vaudeville theatre circuit), and leased airtime and studio facilities from the radio networks. Programs became fixed in quarter-hour and half-hour blocks and featured a wide variety of formats. Soap operas such as Ma Perkins and The Guiding Light kept housewives company through the afternoon. Children listened to the adventure series Little Orphan Annie and the science-fiction show Flash Gordon. Amos ’n’ Andy, a situation comedy, was the most popular show ever broadcast, lasting more than 30 years. The Shadow, a crime drama, also had a loyal following. “Prestige” anthology shows brought together writers such as Archibald MacLeish and Norman Corwin with actors from the legitimate stage such as Helen Hayes and Orson Welles, and film-based anthology shows such as The Lux Radio Theatre and Academy Award Theater featured movie stars of the day reading live radio versions of their motion-picture roles. In 1938 Welles’s radio adaptation of H.G. Wells’s science-fiction tale The War of the Worlds created panic when listeners failed to hear the disclaimer and believed Martians actually were invading Earth.

More From Britannica

radio: The Golden Age of American radio

On radio’s musical front, the National Broadcasting Company established its own symphony orchestra, led by Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini. On live “band remotes” carried from ballrooms in New York City and Chicago, big bands led by the likes of Artie Shaw, Benny Goodman, and Tommy Dorsey played popular dance music for listeners around the country. Programming turned political when Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt used radio to talk directly to Americans in his “fireside chats.” News events such as the Lindbergh baby kidnapping and the Hindenburg disaster captured the nation’s attention.

In the early 1940s, World War II catalyzed the growth of network news, as local stations depended on the major networks’ overseas correspondents. Young reporters such as Edward R. Murrow, William Shirer, and Walter Cronkite covered breaking news at the front, while commentators such as Walter Winchell analyzed events at home. Some radio programming was used for propaganda purposes, while other programs were aimed at keeping up the morale of the public. The war years clearly raised the profile of radio’s role in society.

Nevertheless, the end of World War II in 1945 roughly coincided with the arrival of commercial television, and this new medium—which added the visual element to radio’s tried-and-true formula of sound and immediacy—soon drew creative talent, listener loyalty, and advertising revenue away from radio. Some stars and programs from the last years of American radio’s Golden Age successfully transferred to television—for instance, the comedians George Burns and Gracie Allen, the soap opera The Guiding Light, the situation comedy Father Knows Best, the police drama Dragnet, and the western Gunsmoke. Others, however, disappeared from the airwaves. Live big bands, for instance, were scrapped in favour of recorded rock and roll, which was played on local programs by voluble and irreverent disc jockeys. By the mid-1950s American radio had moved beyond its Golden Age to modern formats such as “Top 40,” “alternative” or “underground” FM, talk shows, and public-service programming.

A selection of shows from American radio’s Golden Age is presented in the table.