Here comes the bride. Nashville‘s season 4B premieres with “Forever and for Always” — Rayna (Connie Briton) and Deacon’s (Charles Esten) wedding episode, y’all! After a long hiatus, Nashville’s fourth season returns to ABC, Wednesday, March 16, 2016, at 10:00pm ET/PT. Check out the photos above and below, and get the episode description, cast, and special guest stars, too.

The cast of Nashville also includes: Hayden Panettiere, Clare Bowen, Chris Carmack, Will Chase, Jonathan Jackson, Sam Palladio, Maisy Stella, Lennon Stella, and Aubrey Peeples. Guest starring in “Forever and for Always” are: Judith Hoag, Jessy Schram, David Alford, Mark Collie, David Amatrudo, Keann Johnson , Jay DeMarcus, and Jim Lauderdale.

Here is how ABC describes, “Forever and for Always”:

It’s the wedding viewers have longed for when Deacon and Rayna tie the knot, complete with captivating music performances by series regulars Charles Esten, Clare Bowen, Sam Palladio, Lennon Stella and Maisy Stella as well as cameos by Jay DeMarcus of Rascal Flatts and singer/songwriter Jim Lauderdale portraying themselves. When the loving couple are ambushed by paparazzi after their intimate rehearsal dinner, Deacon’s hot-headed reaction casts a pall on the plans and forces a change of venue. Meanwhile, wedding guest Avery is struggling to keep up with the lies Juliette is forcing him to message to press in her absence.

Check out these episode and behind-the-scenes photos from Nashville’s season 4B premiere, “For Always and for Ever.”

“Forever and for Always” was written by Monica Macer and Dana Greenblatt and directed by Stephen Cragg. Nashville is executive produced by Dee Johnson, Callie Khouri, and Steve Buchanan. The series is produced by Lionsgate, ABC Studios, and Opry Entertainment.

In case you missed it, check out Nashville’s special wedding episode trailer, from ABC. It’s a montage of Rayna and Deacon’s love story. Watch it, here.

Despite Nashville‘s less than soaring ratings, rumors of a fifth season renewal have been circulating since November. During January’s TCA Winter Press Tour, ABC’s then-Entertainment Group President Paul Lee said Nashville has a passionate audience, which grows during delayed viewing, so the Alphabet Network’s only plans for the Country-Western series are to keep it going.

Lee abruptly left ABC in mid-February. He was replaced by Channing Dungey. Will that affect Nashville‘s chance of renewal? Stay tuned. When we know, you’ll know.

Have you been missing the Nashville TV show? Are you getting excited for the second half of Nashville‘s fourth season? Did you think Deacon and Rayna would ever get married? Let us know, below.