Upcoming Episodes / Appearances

(All listings subject to change) (Nashville Episodes In Red)

Facebook- NashvilleCMT

DVD: Nashville: Season 3

Mondays- Supergirl (Laura Benanti, CBS)

Hardcover Book: In the Waves (by Lennon & Maisy Stella)

Kindle Book: In the Waves (by Lennon & Maisy Stella)

DVD: Nashville: Season 2

HD Instant Video: Season 2

CD: Music of Nashville [S2 V1]

MP3 Album: Music of Nashville [S2 V1]

CD: Music of Nashville [S2 V2]

MP3 Album: Music of Nashville [S2 V2]

iTunes: Nashville Season 2

DVD- Nashville: Season 1

New! CD: Music of Nashville [S1 V2]

New! MP3 Album: Music of Nashville [S1 V2]

CD: Music of Nashville [S1 V1]

MP3 Album: Music of Nashville [S1 V1]

Instant Video: Season 1

HD Instant Video: Season 1

News, Rumors and Gossip

(Click Here to submit news, articles & rumors)

‘General Hospital’: Jonathan Jackson Begins Production On ABC Sudser

(8/5/24) (Photo) Lucky Spencer is officially in the house.

General Hospital posted the first picture of Jonathan Jackson Monday, his first official day back on the ABC soap.

“We are so very lucky (see what we did there) to have Jonathan Jackson back in the building,” the post reads on X. “And you won’t have to wait long to see what he has in store for Port Charles.”

He’s expected to appear on the show at the end of August.

‘General Hospital’ Is Bringing Back Jonathan Jackson As Lucky Spencer

(6/25/24) This is the announcement that General Hospital fans have been waiting for: Lucky Spencer, aka the Emmy-winning Jonathan Jackson, is on his way back to Port Charles.

Soap viewers have been salivating over the possibility of a major star returning after GH executive producer Frank Valentini teased it on the red carpet earlier this month at the Daytime Emmys. “A former cast member is coming back,” he told ABC7. “And I think that the audience will go crazy for him.”

That him turned out to be Jackson, who hasn’t been on the soap since 2015 when he returned for a brief stint. He’s coming home to the ABC sudser later this summer in what is expected to be a long run.

More characters from GH‘s past will make appearances in the next few months, too. The sudser already confirmed that Bryan Craig will reprise his role as Morgan Corinthos for one day in August.

For those who lost track, Jackson originated the role of Lucky in 1993; he’s the beloved son of super-couple Luke and Laura Spencer (Anthony Geary and Genie Francis). Jackson played the part on and off until 2011, when he left to star as Avery Barkley in ABC’s Nashville for six seasons. But he had already started branching out beyond daytime long before that, having appeared in The Deep End of the Ocean, On the Edge, Insomnia, Tuck Everlasting and Venom. Meanwhile, actors Jacob Young and Greg Vaughan took turns playing Lucky.

During his time on GH, Jackson was nominated for nine Emmys and won five in 1995, 1998, 1999, 2011 and 2012.

As a musician, Jackson has written and recorded hundreds of songs and toured internationally with the cast of Nashville, and his band Jonathan Jackson + Enation. He’s a writer, too; he penned the theological prose The Mystery of Art, which has been translated into Greek, Romanian and Russian, and the epic poem The Harrowing of Hell.

This year, Jackson starred in Unsung Hero opposite Terry O’Quinn and Candace Cameron Bure.

In 2022, Jackson was awarded the Distinction of Excellence by Royal Literary Magazine for his “contribution to the understanding of authentic art, for literary works written with inspiration and talent, for highlighting the values of Eastern culture.”

Jackson is also the Associate Dean and Primary Lecturer at Theoria School of Filmmaking in Nashville. He lives in Tennessee with his family.>

Chris Carmack, ‘Grey’s Anatomy’ Co-Stars Do An ‘I’m Just Ken’ Remake

(6/1/24) (Video) To celebrate Thursday’s season 20 finale of Grey’s Anatomy, Chris Carmack (Dr. Atticus “Link” Lincoln) provided a remake of I’m Just Ken, the Oscar-nominated song from Greta Gerwig’s 2023 Barbie blockbuster.

Joining him were co-stars Natalie Morales, Camilla Luddington, James Pickens Jr., Anthony Hill, Harry Shum Jr., and Kevin McKidd.

Pink hospital scrubs substituted for Ken’s faux fur coat, sunglasses, and a rainbow-colored cowboy hat as Carmack lip-synched Ryan Gosling’s vocals.

The series was recently renewed by ABC for a 21st season last month. Watch the performance above.

‘Elsbeth’ Rounds Out Guest Cast With Elizabeth Lail, Arian Moayed & Laura Benanti

(4/1/24) CBS‘ Elsbeth will count on three additional guest stars for its Season 1 cast: Elizabeth Lail (Five Nights At Freddy’s), Arian Moayed (Succession) and Laura Benanti (The Gilded Age). Following a brief hiatus, the show returns on April 4 with two episodes.

Elsbeth follows the titular Elsbeth Tascioni (Carrie Preston), an astute but unconventional attorney, who utilizes her singular point of view to make unique observations and corner brilliant criminals alongside the NYPD following her successful career in Chicago. The character first appeared in The Good Wife and later in The Good Fight spinoff.

In addition to Preston, Wendell Pierce and Carra Patterson round out the series regular cast, as Captain Wagner and Kaya Blanke, respectively. Gloria Reuben recurs as Wagner’s wife, Claudia Payne. The cast is small as the police procedural dramedy depends on a healthy supply of guest stars like Stephen Moyer, Jesse Tyler Ferguson, Linda Lavin and Blair Underwood, to name a few.

Lail portrays Quinn, the hot young tech CEO known for her location-based crime alert app, “Cerberus.” Quinn uses her charm and privilege to hook investors, and she’ll even use her app to deceive the authorities when she gets up to criminal activity herself. Moayed portrays Joe, the charismatic owner of an exclusive TriBeCa cocktail bar. Joe considers his establishment a refuge from this crazy world and dotes on his regulars like family. He is wildly generous, seethes at injustice, and will go to murderous lengths to punish a bully from his favorite patron’s past. Benanti portrays Nadine, a glamorous, smart and determined supermodel who is retiring from the runway while dealing with a messy divorce from her designer husband. A well-respected force in the fashion industry, Nadine will do anything to stop some disgraceful information about her from coming to light.

Elsbeth is produced by CBS Studios. The show is co-created and executive produced by Robert King and Michelle King along with Liz Glotzer and Jonathan Tolins, who also serves as showrunner.

Lail recently starred in Blumhouse’s Five Nights At Freddy’s, based on the video game series of the same name. She will also be seen in the upcoming indie film Gonzo Girl, directed by Patricia Arquette and starring Willem Dafoe. She recently appeared in the comedy film Mack & Rita opposite Diane Keaton. She is best known for her lead role as ‘Beck’ in Netflix’s You and starred as ‘Jenny’ in NBC’s drama series Ordinary Joe. Lail is repped by Authentic Talent & Literary Management, CAA and Shreck Rose Dapello Adams.

Moayed was most recently seen opposite Jessica Chastain in the Broadway production of A Doll’s House, for which he was nominated for a 2023 Tony Award. He received two Emmy nominations for his work as ‘Stewy’ in the HBO series Succession. Additional TV credits include Inventing Anna, Love Life and Ms. Marvel. As part of Waterwell Films, Moayed wrote and directed the digital series The Accidental Wolf. Up next, he can be seen on the big screen in House of Spoils for Blumhouse opposite Ariana DeBose. Moayed is repped by Kipperman Management and Schreck Rose Dapello Adams.

Tony Award-winner Benanti recently starred in Sony Pictures’ No Hard Feelings and Netflix’s Worth. She can be seen in Max’s The Gilded Age and Hulu’s Life & Beth. She was award a Tony Award for her role in Gypsy. Most recently, she debuted an original musical comedy show for Audible titled Nobody Cares, which she created, wrote and starred in. She is repped by Gersh and Untitled Entertainment.

Sofia Carson To Topline Netflix Rom-Com ‘The Life List’; Kyle Allen, Sebastian De Souza & Connie Britton Also Set

(3/5/24) Sofia Carson (Purple Hearts), Kyle Allen (A Haunting in Venice), Sebastian De Souza (Fair Play), and Connie Britton (The White Lotus) have signed on to star in The Life List, a new Netflix rom-com from writer-director Adam Brooks (Definitely, Maybe).

Based on the 2013 novel by Lori Nelson Spielman, The Life List‘s logline is as follows: When Alex Rose’s (Carson) mother sends her on a quest to complete her childhood bucket list, it takes her on a journey that will make you both laugh and cry as she uncovers family secrets, finds romance, and discovers herself along the way.

Liza Chasin (The Lost City, Stillwater) is producing for 3dot Productions. The film falls under Chasin’s first-look deal with the streamer, announced in 2019, which also covers her upcoming Morocco-set love story Lonely Planet starring Laura Dern, Liam Hemsworth, and Diana Silvers. Exec producers of The Life List include Hutch Parker, Brooks, Margaret Chernin, and Kerry Orent.

Carson is best known for starring opposite Nicholas Galitzine in the hugely popular romance Purple Hearts from Netflix and Alloy Entertainment, which spent six weeks in the Global Top 10 Films (English) upon its September 2022 debut on the streamer, reaching the Top 10 Films in 93 countries. Prior to that, she starred in Pretty Little Liars: The Perfectionists as well as Disney Channel’s Descendants films. Up next, she’ll be seen starring opposite Jason Bateman, Taron Egerton and more in Jaume Collet-Serra’s action thriller Carry On, also for Netflix.

Previously, Allen has been seen in Kenneth Branagh’s A Haunting in Venice and Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story, along with films like Rosaline and The Map of Tiny Perfect Things. His TV credits include Hulu’s The Path and American Horror Story on FX.

Most recently seen on the film side in Netflix’s buzzy thriller Fair Play from Chloe Domont, De Souza has also appeared on shows like The Great, Normal People, Medici, and The Borgias.

Britton has recently starred on shows like The White Lotus and Dear Edward, also appearing in films like Bombshell, Promising Young Woman, and Winner, the Reality Winner dramedy from Susanna Fogel, which launched out of this year’s Sundance Film Festival. Up next, she’ll be seen starring alongside Robert De Niro and many more on Netflix’s Zero Day.

Best known for writing and directing the Ryan Reynolds rom-com Definitely, Maybe, and for co-creating Bravo’s dark comedy Imposters, Brooks served as director and consulting producer on Mozart in the Jungle, also previously directing episodes of Girlfriends’ Guide to Divorce and Netflix’s Partner Track. Additional writing credits for the mutli-hyphenate include Netflix’s Nappily Ever After, Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason, Wimbledon, and Beloved, to name a few.

Carson is repped by WME, Ziffren Brittenham, and Kleinberg Lange Cuddy & Carlo; Allen by UTA, Entertainment 360, and attorneys Huy Nguyen & Steve Warren; De Souza by the UK’s Waring McKenna, Anonymous Content, and Hansen, Jacobson; Britton by CAA, Untitled Entertainment, and Hansen, Jacobson; and Brooks by WME and Jackoway Austen Tyerman.

Hayden Panettiere Leads Thriller ‘Amber Alert’ For Lionsgate & ‘Pig’ Outfit Hungry Bull Productions; Tyler James Williams Co-Stars

(2/22/24) Lionsgate has acquired world rights to under-the-radar thriller Amber Alert, which will star Golden Globe nominee Hayden Panettiere (Scream VI). Golden Globe winner Tyler James Williams (Abbott Elementary) co-stars.

In Amber Alert, which is in post-production, an ordinary ride share becomes a high-stakes game of cat and mouse. The story will follow Jaq (Hayden Panettiere) who is eager to get to her first day at a new job, and her driver, Shane (Tyler James Williams), who is just trying to earn a little extra at his side hustle. An alert of a child abduction on their phones will change all that when they discover they are behind a car that matches the description of the kidnapper’s. Unable to let a possible child trafficker escape, they begin a pursuit that will put their own lives at risk.

Kerry Bellessa directs the film which is written by Kerry Bellessa and Joshua Oram. Producers are Joseph Restaino and Tony Stopperan through their Hungry Bull Productions banner, Summer and Kerry Bellessa through Bluefields Entertainment, and Leal Naim.

The film is co-financed by Hungry Bull Productions and Three Point Capital. Panettiere and Williams will also executive-produce the film. Lionsgate will release domestically.

Hungry Bull Productions, based in Florida, is best known for Michael Sarnoski’s directorial debut Pig, starring Nicolas Cage and Alex Wolff, which was picked up by Neon. Credits also include Passing (Netflix), directed by Rebecca Hall and starring Tessa Thompson, Ruth Negga, Alexander Skarsgard, and André Holland, and Lionsgate movies The Lady of the Manor, with Melanie Lynskey, Judy Greer, Justin Long, and Ryan Phillippe, and thriller Fear of Rain, starring Katherine Heigl, Harry Connick.

Amber Alert marks Panettiere’s second screen project — after Scream VI — since her Golden Globe-nominated turn as singer Juliette Barnes in ABC’s hit series Nashville, produced by Lionsgate Television. The actress is also known for series and films including Heroes, Custody and Remember The Titans.

Williams is best known for his roles in Abbott Elementary, The United States vs. Billie Holiday and Dear White People.

Panettiere is repped by Mainstay Entertainment, Independent Artists Group, and Hansen, Jacobson. Williams is represented by The Gersh Agency and Hansen, Jacobson..

Taylor Sheridan’s ‘Landman’ Adds Four Series Regulars

(1/29/24) Taylor Sheridan‘s upcoming Paramount+ drama series Landman is rounding out its cast. Kayla Wallace (When Calls The Heart), James Jordan (Yellowstone), Mark Collie (Nashville) and Paulina Chávez (The Expanding Universe of Ashley Garcia) are set as series regulars alongside previously announced leads Billy Bob Thornton, Michelle Randolph and Jacob Lofland.

Co-created by Sheridan and Wallace, Landman is set in the proverbial boomtowns of West Texas and is a modern day tale of fortune seeking in the world of oil rigs. The series is an upstairs/downstairs story of roughnecks and wildcat billionaires fueling a boom so big, it’s reshaping our climate, our economy and our geopolitics. Thornton stars as Tommy Norris, a crisis manager for an oil company. Randolph plays Ainsley Norris, the wild and strong-willed seventeen year old daughter of Tommy Norris (Thornton). Lofland portrays Cooper Norris, Tommy Norris’ (Thornton) son.

Wallace plays Rebecca Savage, an extremely capable and intimidating liability attorney sent to West Texas to clean up a mess.

Jordan portrays Dale Bradley, a petroleum engineer and a blue-collar bear of a man who manages and works with roughnecks in the oil fields. He’s also Tommy’s (Thornton) roommate.

Collie is Sheriff Joeberg, a West Texas sheriff.

Chávez plays Ariana, a young mother whose family has suffered a misfortune.

Land Man is produced by MTV Entertainment Studios,101 Studios, and Sheridan’s Bosque Ranch Productions. Series is executive produced by Sheridan, Wallace, Thornton, David Glasser, David Hutkin, Ron Burkle, Bob Yari, Geyer Kosinski, Dan Friedkin and Jason Hoch for Imperative Development LLC, Scott Brown and Megan Creydt for Texas Monthly; Peter Feldman serves as co-executive producer.

Hayden Panettiere Accuses Nashville Writers of Exploiting Her Real-Life Woes for Drama: ‘They Weren’t Creating New Storylines’

(1/26/24) Hayden Panettiere is alleging that Nashville‘s writers lightly fictionalized her own real-life problems when coming up with storylines for her character on the country-music drama, a situation she found “traumatizing.”

Though the actress has previously acknowledged that “they really wrote my life into it” when she starred opposite Connie Britton on the ABC series, in a new interview with The Messenger, she now accuses the show’s writing team of “not doing their homework.”

She adds: “They weren’t creating new storylines. They were just looking at my life and going, ‘Oh, let’s just take what she’s going through and put our little spin on it.’ And then, ta-da! It’s done and done.”

Panettiere references Juliette’s Season 1 hasty marriage and even hastier annulment to pro athlete Sean Butler, played by Tilky Jones, as well as later seasons’ plots that showed Juliette struggling with alcoholism and post-partum depression and joining a cult.

“Straight from the beginning, it was like, I’m dating a football player, [and then] Juliette dates a football player. And then they turned her into an alcoholic. Then they turned to her leaving her daughter and going to this crazy [place] in Europe,” says the actress, who is about to embark on a speaking tour titled “A Conversation With Hayden Panettiere.”

TVLine has reached out to multiple former Nashville executive producers for comment.

In comments similar to those she made on a 2022 episode of Red Table Talk, Panettiere says playing out the personally resonant scripts made her feel like she had no respite from her troubles. And because Juliette was so frequently upset, “I was like, tear central. I don’t even think on a soap opera that I cried as much [as I did] on Nashville.”

Panettiere has previously spoken publicly about going to treatment roughly four months after Kaya, her daughter with Wladimir Klitschko, was born in December 2014; she has said she was drinking heavily at the time and was diagnosed with postpartum depression at the facility where she sought help. She had two stays before Nashville ended in 2018, and later checked in for an eight-month stay.

Nashville viewers will remember that in October 2015, Panettiere took a very public step back from the show, then in its fourth season. She returned to set the following January but then resumed treatment shortly after the season’s production wrapped.

She appeared in the show’s final two seasons; Juliette’s involvement in the aforementioned cult created a reason for Panettiere to be off-screen for a number of episodes.i

Hayden Panettiere Defends ‘Scream VII’ Co-Star Melissa Barrera, Calls Her Firing “Very Upsetting”

(1/26/24) In a recent interview, Scream series actress Hayden Panettiere called the firing of the films’ franchise star Melissa Barrera last month “very unfair and upsetting.”

Barrera was dropped from Scream VII following social media posts commenting on the Israel-Hamas conflict. At the time, Spyglass Media cut Barrera, saying in a statement, “We have zero tolerance for antisemitism or the incitement of hate in any form, including false references to genocide, ethnic cleansing, Holocaust distortion, or anything that flagrantly crosses the line into hate speech.”

Panettiere said she thought her co-star was singled out.

“After she [spoke out], then a whole bunch of other actors and people in the industry started to do the same thing, right? It was almost like she just did it earlier than everyone else.”

Barrera later called dismissal was “shocking,” since she’d been playing the lead role of Sam Carpenter since 2022’s Scream V.

“It was shocking,” Barrera told Rolling Stone. “I don’t even know what to say. I think everything that happened was very transparent, on both sides, and I know who I am, and I know that what I said always came from a place of love and a place of humanity and a place of human rights and a place of freedom for people, which shouldn’t be controversial. It shouldn’t be up for debate.”

Barrera hasn’t abandoned her stance. Barrera last week joined almost 100 protestors marching down Main Street at the Sundance Film Festival chanting a controversial mantra.

Panettiere said she reached out to her co-star after Spyglass let Barrera go.

“Melissa is such a badass as a human being and as an actress,” said Panettiere. “ She was hurt by it, but I think she took it in stride and was very, very gracious about it.”

Earlier this month, at the MPTF’s 17th Annual Evening Before Gala, Barrera, Ortega and a slew of actors from the last two Scream movies reunited for a photo that was posted on Instagram. The image included Jasmin Savoy Brown, Mason Gooding, Liana Liberato, Tony Revolori, Jack Quaid and Barrera’s on-screen father and OG Ghostface Skeet Ulrich.

Asked about the support she’s received and specifically about that photo, Barrera told Deadline, “We’re family for life. If we’re ever in the vicinity of each other, we always find each other and that’s what happened at that event.”

After news that Barrera would no longer continue in the Scream franchise, her on-screen sister, played by Jenna Ortega, also dropped out, citing scheduling conflicts with Netflix’s Wednesday.

In the same interview, the reporter asked about Ortega’s exit saying, “That didn’t seem like the whole story. It seemed like there was some sisterhood-solidarity going on.”

“Listen, Jenna is a good egg. She’s a good person and we love each other. She would show up for me and I would show up for her no matter what,” Barrera added.i

Oliver Hudson Inks Broadcast Direct Deal With Fox Entertainment

(12/12/23) Coming off a two-season starring role on Fox’s drama The Cleaning Lady, Oliver Hudson is staying in business with the network. The actor-producer has entered a broadcast direct deal with Fox Entertainment for him and his producing partner John Stalberg to develop comedy and drama projects that will be fully owned and distributed by Fox.

Hudson played one of the leads, FBI agent Garrett Miller, in The Cleaning Lady, co-produced by Warner Bros. TV and Fox Entertainment. The popular character was killed off in the Season 2 finale, which aired earlier this year.

Hudson already has a pre-existing relationship with Fox as a producer. He and Joe Buck are developing the animated comedy Daddy Issues for the network, with Fox Entertainment and company-owned animation house Bento Box Entertainment producing. The ensemble buddy comedy is inspired by the popular podcast that follows the true-life experiences of Buck and Hudson as they try to survive the numerous minefields that come with being dads, husbands and best friends.

“Oliver is a talented, versatile actor and an inspired storyteller who brings an incredible amount of energy to everything he does,” said Michael Thorn, President, Scripted Programming, of Fox Entertainment. “We are excited to build on our relationship with him and tap into his intense creativity to jointly develop and produce premium dramas and comedies that further grow Fox Entertainment’s robust slate of owned series.”

The network’s first fully owned scripted series, animated comedy Krapopolis, came out of Fox Entertainment’s direct broadcast deal with Dan Harmon. The company’s roster of talent under direct pacts also includes Curtis “50 Cent” Jackson (Power), filmmaker Rodney Rothman (Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse) and Adam Rosenberg, producers Carol Mendelsohn (CSI) and Julie Weitz, writer/producer/director McG (Supernatural); writer/ producer Justin Adler (Life in Pieces) and creator/writer/ producer Matt Nix (Burn Notice).

“I have been lucky enough to work in front of the camera with Michael Thorn and his team and am now looking forward to collaborating with them to bring my ideas to life with Fox, a network that’s unafraid to push the boundaries to tell stories that entertain and dig into the complexities and quirks of the human condition,” Hudson said. “I have always enjoyed both comedy and drama, so it’s exciting to tackle both as potentially one of the best producers this planet has ever seen!”

Hudson also recently did an arc on Max’s And Just Like That. His extensive resume includes starring roles on comedy series Splitting Up Together, and Rules of Engagement and recurring stints on Scream Queens and Nashville. In addition to Daddy Issues with Joe Buck and Oliver Hudson, he also has the popular podcast Sibling Revelry with Kate Hudson and Oliver Hudson.

On the feature side, Hudson’s recent producing credits include the Stalberg-directed Muzzle starring Aaron Eckhart and Stephen Lang, which was released by IFC Films/RLJ in September, and Bad Hombres starring Tyrese Gibson, Thomas Jane, Luke Hemsworth, and Nick Cassavetes, which won the Grand Jury Prize and Best Screenwriting at the Mammoth Film Festival, with Screen Media releasing in January of 2024.

‘Ctrl Alt Del’: Aubrey Peeples Latest To Join Kit Williamson’s Indie Drama

(11/28/23) Aubrey Peeples (Nashville) has been tapped for a role in Ctrl Alt Del, the indie drama marking the feature directorial debut of Eastsiders‘ Kit Williamson.

She joins an ensemble led by Jason Priestley and Laurel Marsden, which also includes Elsie Fisher, Mena Suvari, Cheyenne Jackson, Angel Parker, Shiv Pai, Navia Robinson, Jack Wright and Jesse Leigh, as previously announced.

Written by Amir Ohebsion and Arash Homampour, the film follows disaffected teen Ava (Marsden) and her estranged filmmaker father Greyson (Priestley) as they try to reconnect in the aftermath of a tragic incident prompted by his latest movie. Ohebsion produced alongside Sam Okun for his Sam Okun Productions. Homampour exec produced, with Nick Lyon, Lachlan Towle, Christian Jean and Constantinos Yiallourides serving as co-producers.

Previously, Peeples has been seen in Jon M. Chu’s musical drama Jem and the Holograms, as well as the indies Locating Silver Lake with Josh Peck, Heartthrob with Keir Gilchrist, and Rage with Nicolas Cage. Best known for a major role across three seasons of the ABC/CMT drama Nashville, the actress has also recurred on Freeform’s Recovery Road and USA’s Necessary Roughness. Additional past TV credits as a guest star include Grey’s Anatomy, Burn Notice and Drop Dead Diva, to name just a few.

Peeples is repped by Seven Summits Management.

TIME FOR HER TO COME HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 11/30/23

(10/13/23) TIME FOR HER TO COME HOME FOR CHRISTMAS - Hallmark Movies & Mysteries

Premiere Date: Thursday, Nov. 30 at 8 pm

Cast: Shenae Grimes-Beech, Chris Carmack and Grace Leer

Premise: Facing her first Christmas without her mother and looking to avoid loneliness, Carly heads to a quaint town to lead the church choir at Christmas. Once there, Carly meets Matthew, a man back in town after serving in the army. As she gets to know Matthew, the choir and townspeople, she stumbles across clues that suggest she may have been brought here for a life changing reason. As the mystery unravels one thing is clear, this journey will teach Carly about true love, learning to trust, and that forgiveness is needed to finally heal.

The White Lotus: Connie Britton Not Returning as Nicole in Season 3

(5/1/23) Nicole Mossbacher will not be checking back into The White Lotus after all.

TVLine has learned exclusively that franchise alum Connie Britton — who starred in the HBO dramedy’s breakout first season as the aforementioned high-powered CFO — will not be returning for the Thailand-set third season.

“She would love to do another season of The White Lotus at some point, but she is not participating in the upcoming season,” Britton’s spokesperson confirms to TVLine.

As we reported back in December, one Season 3 scenario being bandied about had Britton’s Nicole resurfacing in Season 3 alongside Laura Dern’s Abby, the estranged wife of Season 2 guest Dom (Michael Imperioli). Rumor had it that viewers would learn that Nicole and Abby (whom Dern supplied the voice of in Season 2) were, in fact, sisters.

According to sources, Britton had been in preliminary talks to return, but scheduling issues made it an impossibility. It’s unclear what impact this will have on the possible in-the-flesh introduction of Dern’s Abby character.

Britton — who recently signed on to star opposite Oscar winner Robert De Niro in Netflix’s limited series Zero Day — first hinted at a potential White Lotus return last summer, telling our sister pub Deadline, “[Series creator Mike White] wanted me to be in the second season, and there was an idea that I loved for the character. Our intention is to do it in the third season. A piece of casting didn’t work in the second season and we’re hoping to [do] that in the third season.”

The spirit of White Lotus’ Emmy-winning first season will still be felt in Season 3, courtesy of Natasha Rothwell’s returning Belinda. In a recent TVLine poll that asked readers which past characters they would like to see follow in the footsteps of Jennifer Coolidge’s Tanya (R.I.P.) by becoming the newest member of White Lotus’ loyalty program, Rothwell’s Belinda placed fifth.

Lizzy Caplan, Jesse Plemons, Joan Allen & Connie Britton Join Robert De Niro In ‘Zero Day’ Netflix Series

(4/24/23) Lizzy Caplan (Fleishman Is in Trouble and Fatal Attraction), Jesse Plemons (Power of The Dog, Fargo), Joan Allen (The Bourne Ultimatum, The Contender) and Connie Britton (White Lotus, Friday Night Lights) have been tapped for main roles opposite Robert De Niro in Netflix’s conspiracy thriller limited series Zero Day.

Caplan plays Alexandra Mullen, a young Congresswoman who has sought to distance herself from her father’s political legacy. Plemons is Roger Carlson: Former Mullen “body man” seeking a return to the national stage alongside Mullen. Allen portrays Sheila Mullen: Former First Lady and nominee to the federal bench whose professional ambitions take a backseat to her husband’s political career. Britton plays Valerie Whitesell: A savvy, intelligent political operative who was Mullen’s former Chief of Staff.

De Niro executive produces and leads the cast as George Mullen, a massively popular, but complicated, former American President who is pulled from retirement to head a commission tasked with investigating a devastating global cyber-attack.

Zero Day, from creator/writor/executive producer Eric Newman under his Grand Electric Productions deal with Netflix, and creator/writer/executive producer Noah Oppenheim, asks the question — how do we find truth in a world in crisis, one seemingly being torn apart by forces outside our control? And in an era rife with conspiracy theory and subterfuge, how much of those forces are products of our own doing, perhaps even of our own imagining?

Pulitzer Prize winner Michael S. Schmidt also is credited as creator/executive producer on the six-episode limited series; Jonathan Glickman executive produces under his production company, Panoramic Media; Lesli Linka Glatter will direct all episodes and also executive produce.

Caplan is repped by WME, Independent Talent Group, Rise Management, Jackoway Austen Tyerman & The Lede Company. Britton is repped by CAA, Hansen Jacobson Teller and The Initiative Group. Plemons is repped by TalentWorks and attorney David Matlof.

‘Dear Edward’ Canceled By Apple After One Season

(4/19/23) Apple canceled its freshman series, Dear Edward, after one season.

The Jason Katims-produced series based on the novel of the same name from Ann Napolitano, tells the story of Edward Adler (Colin O’Brien), a 12-year-old boy who survives a devastating commercial plane crash that kills every other passenger on the flight, including his family. As Edward and a diverse ensemble of others affected by the tragedy try to make sense of life after the crash, unexpected friendships, romances and communities are formed.

Dear Edward is described as a heartbreaking, life-affirming, and uplifting story about survival, resilience, connection, and the examination of what makes us human. Hailing from Apple Studios, Dear Edward is written by Katims, who serves as showrunner. He executive produces through True Jack Productions alongside Jeni Mulein. Author Napolitano also serves as executive producer alongside Fisher Stevens (Palmer), who is set to direct the first episode and serve as executive producer on the pilot. David Boyd will serve as producing director.

It also starred Connie Britton, Taylor Schilling, Carter Hudson, Amy Forsyth, Idris DeBrand, Ivan Shaw, Jenna Qureshi, Anna Uzele, Dario Ladani Sanchez, Eva Ariel Binder, Brittany S. Hall, Maxwell Jenkins and Audrey Corsa.

Michael Urie, Laura Benanti & Danny Deferrari Board ‘Goodrich’ Comedy With Michael Keaton, Mila Kunis

(4/18/23) Michael Urie (Shrinking), Laura Benanti (Gossip Girl) and Danny Deferrari (Oppenheimer) will round out the cast of the comedy Goodrich toplined by Michael Keaton and Mila Kunis, which is currently in production in Los Angeles. No details on their roles have been disclosed.

The film set in contemporary Los Angeles during the holidays tells the story of art dealer Andy Goodrich (Keaton), a man whose life is upended when his younger second wife leaves him and enters a 90-day rehab program while also threatening divorce. Andy takes charge of their nine-year-old twins, thrusting him into the world of modern parenthood for which he is deeply unprepared. With his career falling by the wayside, Andy leans on his grown and pregnant daughter Grace (Kunis) for support, and ultimately evolves into the father Grace never had. With all his relationships being put to the test, Andy learns the true meaning of having it all.

Others set for supporting roles in the film from writer-director Hallie Meyers-Shyer, as previously announced, include Andie MacDowell, Carmen Ejogo and Kevin Pollak.

Jason Cloth and Dave Caplan’s C2 Motion Picture Group (Babylon) is fully financing and producing the film alongside Daniela Taplin Lundberg (Harriet, The Kids Are All Right) and Kevin Mann (Together Together), with Keaton and Amy Pascal (Spider-Man: No Way Home, Little Women) exec producing. UTA Independent Film Group and CAA Media Finance are co-repping domestic rights, with Black Bear International handling foreign sales.

Urie currently stars opposite Jason Segel in the acclaimed Apple TV+ comedy series Shrinking, which has been renewed for a second season. He earned two SAG Award nominations as part of the cast of ABC’s Ugly Betty and has also been seen on series like Younger, The Good Fight, The Good Wife, Modern Family, Workaholics and Hot in Cleveland, among others. Past film credits include Netflix’s holiday rom-com Single All the Way and Todd Stephens’ Magnolia Pictures dramedy Swan Song, starring Udo Kier and Jennifer Coolidge. He’ll next be seen in Bradley Cooper’s drama Maestro for Netflix/Amblin.

A Tony Award-winner and five-time nominee, Benanti can currently be seen starring opposite Amy Schumer in the Hulu comedy series Life & Beth, which will be back for a ten-episode second season. She previously starred in HBO Max’s Gossip Girl reboot, also appearing opposite Keaton, Stanley Tucci and Amy Ryan in the Netflix drama Worth. Additional credits include the Darren Star series Younger, the dramedy Here Today with Billy Crystal and Tiffany Haddish, Supergirl, Nashville and Lin-Manuel Miranda’s tick, tick BOOM!. Benanti will next appear in Sony’s Jennifer Lawrence-led comedy No Hard Feelings, hitting theaters June 23rd, and in the second season of HBO’s The Gilded Age.

Deferrari played the male lead in Emma Seligman’s Independent Spirit Award-winning breakout film Shiva Baby and will next be seen in Christopher Nolan’s epic Uni drama Oppenheimer, where he plays Italian physicist Enrico Fermi, creator of the world’s first nuclear reactor. He previously played Andrew Madoff opposite Richard Dreyfuss and Blythe Danner in the ABC special event series Madoff. Additional film credits include Three Christs opposite Richard Gere, Private Life opposite Paul Giamatti and Kathryn Hahn, It Had to Be You opposite Cristin Milioti and X/Y opposite Melonie Diaz.

Urie is represented by Paradigm, Seven Summits Pictures & Management and Hansen, Jacobson, Teller; Benanti by Gersh and Untitled Entertainment; and Deferrari by Innovative Artists.

"NASHVILLE" Cast Reunites For International Tour

(4/17/23) The television show "NASHVILLE" prompted the world to fall in love with country music. The country music drama starred Charles Esten, Connie Britton and Hayden Panetierre as they navigated life, love and the highs and lows of the music business. "NASHVILLE" finished its run on CMT in 2018, but now a few of the show's stars are returning to the country music spotlight.

"NASHVILLE" The Reunion Tour is headed this way. The tour will include Clare Bowen, Charles Esten, Jonathan Jackson and Sam Palladio, who will perform classic songs from the series along with their original material. After a five-year hiatus from touring in the United States as a group, the singing actors will play shows in Nashville and Chicago before heading for a run of concerts in the U.K. Chris Carmack will join his castmates on stage in Chicago on September 23.

"I'm thrilled to be reuniting on stage with these wonderful Nashville friends here in the U.S. First, at Chicago's beautiful @rosemonttheatre and then, most fittingly, on that historic stage where @nashvillecmt said it's final goodbye and sang its last song - the Mother Church herself- @theryman," Esten wrote on Instagram.

The four artists will play the Ryman Auditorium on September 25, before heading to the U.K. on October 11. Due to overwhelming demand, additional dates were added to the U.K. tour, which will visit Glasglow, Birmingham, Manchester, London and Cardiff.

"NASHVILLE" debuted in 2012 against the backdrop of Nashville's music scene, and the show followed the lives of Clare Bowen (Scarlett O'Connor), Chris Carmack (Will Lexington), Charles Esten (Deacon Claybourne), Jonathan Jackson (Avery Barkley) and Sam Palladio (Gunnar Scott) as they tried to make lives in the country music business.

The show reached 225 territories worldwide before its final season in 2018 and spawned 22 soundtracks, including a Christmas album, which collectively sold millions of copies.

Tickets for Chicago and Nashville go on sale on Friday, April 21 at 10:00 am CST. Ticket information for all U.S. and U.K. shows can be found at www.nashvillereuniontour.com.

"NASHVILLE" THE REUNION TOUR

SAT 23 SEP 2023 CHICAGO, IL - ROSEMONT THEATRE *

MON 25 SEP 2023 NASHVILLE, TN - RYMAN AUDITORIUM

WED 11 OCT 2023 GLASGOW, SCOTLAND - SEC ARMADILLO

THU 12 OCT 2023 GLASGOW, SCOTLAND - SEC ARMADILLO – SOLD OUT

FRI 13 OCT 2023 BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND - RESORTS WORLD ARENA

SAT 14 OCT 2023 MANCHESTER, ENGLAND - O2 APOLLO - MATINEE

SAT 14 OCT 2023 MANCHESTER, ENGLAND - O2 APOLLO – EVENING – SOLD OUT

MON 16 OCT 2023 LONDON, ENGLAND - EVENTIM APOLLO

TUE 17 OCT 2023 LONDON, ENGLAND - EVENTIM APOLLO – SOLD OUT

WED 18 OCT 2023 CARDIFF, WALES - INTERNATIONAL ARENA

Laura Benanti reveals she had a miscarriage while performing onstage

(4/5/23) Laura Benanti suffered a miscarriage on Monday while performing onstage “for 2000 people” at The Broadway Cruise.

Taking to Instagram on Wednesday, the Broadway performer revealed the news, “I knew it was happening. It started slowly the night before. If it had been our first loss, or even our second, I likely wouldn’t have been able to go on. But unfortunately, I am not a stranger to the pain and emptiness of losing a pregnancy.”

Benanti — who is headlining the entertainment on the ship and even performed with her oldest daughter, Ella — shared that she and her husband, Patrick Brown, have walked “hand in hand” while dealing with pregnancy loss in the past.

However, she also expressed gratitude for the “kindest, most loving humans” who helped her during her most recent miscarriage.

The “Younger” actress, 43, went on to thank a multitude of people including the audience, her band, crew, friends, fellow performers and producers for supporting her throughout the tragic experience.

Benanti — who wed Brown in 2015 — also showed love for her “remarkable” mother and father-in-law, who helped in “shielding” her 6-year-old daughter, Ella, from “the reality of this experience and giving her the time of her life while ‘Mama’s back hurt.'”

While it is unclear how long Benanti had been pregnant, she also shared a touching message to the unborn child, saying, “Thank you to that little soul for choosing me as your home, even for a short time.”

The “No Hard Feelings” star — who also shares 8-month-old daughter Louisa with Brown — wrote that she is “so grateful” for her family and the “miracle” of their “two little girls.”

Highlighting that her youngest daughter was born via surrogate, Benanti added, “One carried by me and one carried by an angel-on-earth.”

The “Late Night with Stephen Colbert” alum ended her heartfelt message by emphasizing that she is sharing her loss not to “garner sympathy or attention,” but to remind those who “have and will suffer in this way that there is no shame in this kind of loss. That you are not alone. And to remind myself as well.”

Following her heartbreaking post, the singer’s friends showed their support in the comment section, including Broadway co-star Randy Rainbow, who wrote, “You are remarkable in every way. All my love to you and Patrick.”

Actress Brenda Strong also applauded Benanti for her strength and grace, commenting, “Most would have collapsed in the contrast of what was being demanded of you. But you used it as an opportunity to shine gratitude on others, and to receive support. This is grace.”

“An absolute light, you are so much love to you and your beautiful family,” musician Eleri Ward wrote.

Benanti first spoke out about her experience with pregnancy loss — and the difficulty of sharing that with others — in 2015, calling the topic of miscarriage the “Voldemort of women’s issues.”

“Why, if my neighbor sees me looking sad and asks me if I am okay, is it perfectly acceptable to tell her my aunt passed away, or I lost my job, or I had to put my dog down,” she wrote on social media.

“But if I tell her I experienced a miscarriage, I am somehow inappropriately oversharing? My purpose in writing this is simply to say, if you are part of this sisterhood, you are not alone.”

Hayden Panettiere, Hoping to Leave Her Struggles Behind, Is Back Onscreen

(4/4/23) (nytimes.com) LOS ANGELES — Hayden Panettiere has always been a survivor.

She survived being a child actor in the early 2000s when the media obsessively treated the lives of young women as entertainment fodder; she survived early adulthood in the 2010s when she starred in the popular soap opera “Nashville,” a role that mirrored her own issues with postpartum depression and substance abuse; and she survived the aggressive tabloid coverage of her daughter’s move to Ukraine after her father was granted custody of her.

Recently Ms. Panettiere, 33, found herself in survival mode once again, because of grief. About three weeks before the release of “Scream VI,” in which she reprises her character Kirby Reed, her brother, Jansen Rane Panettiere, died at 28. He was an actor and budding artist, and he died from heart complications, her family said in February.

Ms. Panettiere tried to push through the press tour for the film in New York, but on March 6, two days before her brother’s funeral, she could sit through only one interview. She canceled the rest of her appearances, aside from the premiere.

On an overcast morning in late March in her Los Angeles condominium, Ms. Panettiere reflected on the past month of her life. Her brother’s ashes were atop a mantel, across from which she posed for a portrait in a Christian Siriano dress. She stood in front of a canvas teeming with hidden words, which her brother had created for her.

“I always see a few secret messages that maybe he meant to put there, maybe he didn’t,” she said. Mr. Panettiere was working on it when he died. “His art, that was the thing that made him happiest,” she said, her voice cracking.

After the photo shoot, Ms. Panettiere climbed the spiral staircase in her living room and curled up under a blanket on her velvet sofa in the lofted part of her condo. Her home is “the last place my whole family ever lived together” before her parents separated, she said.

Ms. Panettiere, who was born and raised in New York, has lived most of her life in the public eye. She landed her first gig in a commercial at 11 months old and was a child actor in films like “Remember the Titans” and “Bring It On: All or Nothing” and TV shows like “Guiding Light” and “Ally McBeal.”

She said her parents gave her a great childhood where she was able to attend prom and play sports, though she was always working. “I don’t think I really had a lot of time to be a kid,” she said. “I would miss these pockets of time, and because of that, it wasn’t easy for me as a young girl to slide back into a friend group and to belong.”

She solidified her place in Hollywood through roles like Claire Bennet in “Heroes,” the high school cheerleader with special powers; Kirby, a quirky horror aficionado, in “Scream IV”; and Juliette Barnes, a troubled country diva, in “Nashville.”

But in her private life, she struggled. When she was 18, her parents separated, and she ended up in the midst of an eight-year divorce battle. There were times, she said, when she felt like she had to choose one parent over the other and would end up staying by herself or with Wladimir Klitschko, an ex-boxer whom she dated on and off between 2009 and 2018.

“Of course, kids are always caught in the middle,” Ms. Panettiere said. “But my relationship with my parents now is good and even more special to me, because we lost my brother.”

In 2014, while she was working on “Nashville,” she gave birth to a daughter, Kaya (Mr. Klitschko is the father) and began suffering from postpartum depression. Ms. Panettiere said she turned to alcohol and opioids to self-medicate.

She ended up leaving “Nashville” during the fourth season in 2015 to go to a treatment facility for her depression. In 2018, when the show ended, her daughter went to live with her father, Mr. Klitschko, in Ukraine. Ms. Panettiere said she sees Kaya as much as she can (Kaya and Mr. Klitschko live in an undisclosed location since the war broke out last year).

Ms. Panettiere said that many of her real-life experiences were reflected in the show’s script while she was going through them, which was traumatizing. But there wasn’t much she could do about its story lines, and she had spent most of her life doing what she was told by those who had power over her. “Even if something was too much for me, I would never admit to it,” she said. “It was always about making them happy.”

The demand of her career took its toll. “When I went home after acting out what I was really going through, the last thing I wanted to do was properly manage or talk about what I was feeling in a healthy way,” she said. “So I turned to unhealthy coping mechanisms.”

That meant cocktails with friends and hiding under the covers and pouring herself a drink almost every day. Her life, she said, could be summed up by the adage “Idle hands are the devil’s workshop.”

In some ways, Ms. Panettiere said, her tumultuous behavior stemmed from the time she lost in growing up as a child actor. “I wanted that control back,” she said. “I wanted to do things I wasn’t supposed to do, and I wanted to just let go and act like a kid.”

Ms. Panettiere said that at some point she couldn’t recognize herself in the mirror anymore. “My eyes were yellow,” she said, adding that doctors told her that her liver was failing and she was septic. She was 27 at the time and would wake up shaking, needing an entire bottle of alcohol to get through the day. She would often swap in opioids to stave off drinking alcohol, she said.

In 2021, Ms. Panettiere re-entered a treatment center for eight months. She has been sober for almost two years, now swapping substances for Peloton rides and organic meals, and has deleted most of the photos from her time deep in addiction, except for one.

Why? “To remind myself what I looked like,” she said. “The fact that I thought I looked OK at that time is the scariest part to me.”

At the height of her addiction, she dated Brian Hickerson on and off for about four years. In 2021, he pleaded no contest to two felony counts of injuring the actress and served time in jail. Mr. Hickerson was in the condo during our interview, walking around, vacuuming and shooting a basketball through the hoop in her living area.

Both Ms. Panettiere and Mr. Hickerson became sober and later reconnected as friends. During the photo shoot, Ms. Panettiere called him “babe” a handful of times. When asked if they were dating again, she was hesitant to define their relationship, but said, “There are feelings there, yes.”

She added that she doesn’t condone what he did. “He knows he deserved what happened to him,” Ms. Panettiere said, referring to his arrest and jail time. She noted that their relationship was “contingent on him continuing on this road of recovery,” and she is self-conscious about how people may perceive her letting him back into her life. “I did not do any of this lightly,” she said.

When Ms. Panettiere heard “Scream V” was in the works, her team reached out to see if she could be involved in the film. It was too late, but Ms. Panettiere ended up connecting with one of the sixth film’s executive producers, Kevin Williamson, with whom she had done “Scream IV.” Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett, the directors of “Scream V,” wanted to bring Ms. Panettiere back for that movie but “felt like we’d be forcing her character in as a cameo,” they wrote in an email. Instead they had her return for a more fully fledged part in the next film.

Ms. Panettiere had some anxiety about returning to set as she struggled to remember her lines. “I used to memorize things like that, within two seconds,” she said, snapping. “Suddenly it was taking me hours to memorize something. It was like that muscle atrophied, so I was terrified.”

Fans of Ms. Panettiere’s singing on “Nashville” will be happy to know that the thought of making an album has crossed her mind. “I would love to do that one day and really do it right,” she said. Ms. Panettiere also said she’d love to take on more comedy or action roles.

Perhaps Ms. Panettiere might even make an appearance in another future “Scream” movie. When she initially took on the role of Kirby, she did it with the contingency that her character’s fate was left open-ended. “I was stabbed, but you never saw me die,” she said, laughing.

Hayden Panettiere Reacts to Her BIGGEST Career Moments

(4/1/23) Hayden Panettiere Reacts to Her BIGGEST Career Moments: Video.

CMT NAMES ALL-STAR PRESENTER LINEUP FOR 2023 “CMT MUSIC AWARDS”

(3/31/23) CMT announced is an all-star presenter lineup featuring some of the biggest names across music, television, sports and entertainment, including: Carly Pearce, Carrie Underwood, Charles Esten, Dixie D’Amelio, Dustin Lynch, HARDY, Ian Bohen + Jen Landon (YELLOWSTONE), Jon Pardi, LeAnn Rimes, Madison Bailey (“Outer Banks”), Max Thieriot (FIRE COUNTRY), Megan Thee Stallion, Noah Schnapp (“Stranger Things”), Parker McCollum, Peter Frampton, Shania Twain, Steve Howey (TRUE LIES) and Travis Kelce.

Matthew Broderick & Laura Benanti Set For Weeklong ‘Love Letters’ Off Broadway

(3/28/23) Matthew Broderick and Laura Benanti will star in an Off Broadway production of A.R. Gurney’s Love Letters for a (very) limited run: The production at the Irish Repertory Theatre will run from May 30 to June 4 for eight performances.

The Gurney play will be the second of two parts of Irish Rep’s The Letters Series, which will kick off with Jerome Kilty & George Bernard Shaw’s Dear Liar starring Melissa Errico and David Staller. That play will start its eight-performance run on April 25 and conclude April 30.

Both productions will be performed on the Irish Rep’s 148-seat Francis J. Greenburger Mainstage.Melissa Errico, David Staller (Courtesy Production)

Love Letters will be directed by Irish Rep producing director Ciarán O’Reilly, and Dear Liar will be directed by the company’s artistic director Charlotte Moore.

Adapted from the correspondence between George Bernard Shaw and actress Mrs. Patrick Campbell, Dear Liar will feature Staller (Cabaret, Evita) as Shaw and the Tony Award-nominated Errico (Amour)as Campbell.

Broderick last appeared on the New York stage in the hit 2020 Broadway revival of Plaza Suite, co-starring wife Sarah Jessica Parker. Benanti, a Tony winner for Gypsy, was last on Broadway in 2018’s My Fair Lady.

A Pulitzer Prize finalist for Drama, Love Letters is comprised of letters exchanged between two friends over a lifetime, from childhood through marriages and the ups and downs of adulthood.

Hayden Panettiere tears up in first TV interview since brother Jansen’s death

(3/6/23) (Video) Hayden Panettiere paid a heartfelt tribute to her late brother, Jansen Panettiere, in her first TV appearance since his unexpected death.

“He’s right here with me,” the “Scream VI” actress, 33, tearfully said on “Good Morning America” Monday after Michael Strahan offered his condolences at the end of their interview.

Jansen was found dead on Feb. 19 in New York. He was 28.

The artist’s family revealed eight days later that his cause of death was an enlarged heart.

“His charisma, warmth, compassion for others and his creative spirit will live forever in our hearts and in the hearts of all whom he encountered,” the family added in a statement.

A police report obtained by TMZ stated that friends had grown concerned about Jansen when he did not show up to a business meeting prior to his death.

One pal rushed to check on the actor and found him unresponsive in his apartment, sitting upright in a chair, according to the outlet. They then called 911 and started doing CPR.

Jansen’s dad, Skip Panettiere, reportedly told police that he had talked to his son the night before and he sounded “OK.”

But a source told “Entertainment Tonight” that the former child star struggled with mental health issues.

“Art was his therapy and escape,” the insider shared. “In the past, Jansen was open to family and friends about his struggles. Hayden was always there for him and constantly tried to help Jansen when she could.”

The source added that Hayden, who has publicly battled addiction, was “absolutely heartbroken” over the death of her only sibling.

“She loved her brother unconditionally, and the two shared a special bond,” the insider told “ET.”

Hayden and Jansen seemed to have a close relationship, as he shared a photo with her on Instagram in January in which she smiled while cutting his hair. His final post on the social media platform was a selfie in front of a graffiti-covered wall.

As a child, Jansen had small roles in “Even Stevens,” “Hope & Faith,” “Blue’s Clues,” “Ice Age: The Meltdown” and “Everybody Hates Chris.”

He was nominated for a Young Artist Award for his work on Nickelodeon’s “The Last Day of Summer” in 2008.

Jansen also collaborated on a few movies with Hayden, including 2004’s “Tiger Cruise” and 2005’s “Racing Stripes.”

Most recently, Jansen appeared in the 2022 comedy-drama “Love and Love Not.” He had been working on four other projects prior to his death, according to his IMDb page.

Hayden Panettiere Is Standing Strong After Battling Addiction And Postpartum Depression

(3/5/23) (womenshealthmag.com) It’s the fourth consecutive day of rain in Los Angeles, and Hayden Panettiere, clad in a white sweatshirt and sweatpants, is lighting candles in the guest room of her apartment before cozying up underneath a blanket. The 33-year-old actor has owned this home since she was 16 years old— one of her first big purchases after moving from New York to L.A. and landing the role of Claire on the hit NBC series Heroes.

“This is the last place my family lived all together,” she says of her parents and younger brother, Jansen. Hayden moved multiple times over the past 15 years, including relocating to Tennessee to film the TV show Nashville. But she always held on to this place.

Recently, she’s been renovating it into her personal sanctuary since returning to L.A. after a four-year hiatus from acting. “I’ve completely redone it,” she beams, looking over her shoulder at two black-and-white prints she brought back from Montreal, where she shot Scream 6. She’s particularly fond of the lighting she installed—bulbs that change color to suit your mood. Now, they’re pink and yellow for warmth. “It feels like home,” she says.

There’s no missing the symbolism: This homecoming isn’t simply about a place. For Hayden, it’s a state of mind, a return to her roots—to herself—after years of struggling with postpartum depression and substance abuse and giving up custody of her daughter, Kaya, to her ex, retired pro boxer Wladimir Klitschko.

Hayden admits she’s nervous to do a cover tied to a movie release—it’s been awhile. But she says it’s important to her.

Plus, she has decades of experience to guide her.

Hayden started work as a child actor at 4 years old. She went from roles in popular daytime soap operas to Grammy nominee before she was 10. She starred opposite Denzel Washington in Remember the Titans at 11, and at 14, she trained to race a zebra in South Africa for the movie Racing Stripes. She’s done her own stunts (in heels) and learned to ice skate like a pro. She became a prime-time television staple for most of her teens and 20s, and while other celebrities her age were out partying, she was constantly working—and her star continued to rise.

Then, at age 22, she moved to Nashville and began drinking to cope with stress.

“I was being told how to be and how to live by so many people in my life,” she says. “I wanted certain decisions to be my own, and nobody could stop me. What I put in my body was like an act of defiance.”

Hayden maintained her professionalism on-set, and with no paparazzi following her, it was easy to hide her habit.

“Some people work out. I wish that was my coping mechanism,” Hayden says. “Alcohol might make you feel better in that moment, but it makes you feel so much worse the next day, and then you do it all over again.”

Her drinking ramped up in 2014 after giving birth to her daughter and dealing with crippling postpartum depression, which she describes as feelings of “extreme hopelessness” and “like all the walls are closing in.” (Postpartum depression occurs in about 6.5 to 20 percent of women after childbirth and can last for years.)

It was around this time that an old neck injury flared up, and Hayden began taking opioids. “I was in a lot of pain,” she says. “My tolerance got so high so fast that it became a problem.” She found herself in a vicious cycle, alternating between opioids and alcohol.

“I should have gone on antidepressants [to cope with the postpartum depression], but you have to find the right one that works for you,” she says. “They don’t mix well with alcohol, and I wasn’t ready to stop drinking.”

She entered rehab in the middle of production on Nashville’s fourth season in 2015. “I was the one who put myself in the first treatment center,” she says. “I was drowning.”

In treatment, she was told to change everything about her daily routine, from what she read to the people she surrounded herself with, yet returning to work made that advice basically impossible. In a cruel twist of fate, art was imitating life.

“They wrote my character as having postpartum depression,” says Hayden, whose daughter was going back and forth between Nashville and Ukraine (with her father) at the time. “They wrote that she abandoned her child and went to a different country. And it was very difficult to go on-set and to act out these feelings about these things that I was truly going through in my real life.”

Hayden eventually left the industry and the public eye to work on herself but returned to drinking to manage anxiety. That’s when her physical health caved. “I struggled with sleep deprivation,” she says. “Sleep is massive. It affects your motor skills, your ability to think, and your overall health.

“My body was like, ‘enough,’” she continues. “I hit 30. My face was swollen. I had jaundice. My eyes were yellow. I had to go to a liver specialist. I was holding on to weight that wasn’t normally there. My hair was thin and coming out in clumps.”

She went back to treatment in 2021, enrolled in a 12-step program, and even went to trauma therapy.

“I did a lot of work on myself,” Hayden explains of this soul-searching period. “After eight months of intensive therapy, I felt like I had this blank canvas to work with.”

Now, without alcohol or opiates, her body is recovering, and she’s choosing which habits will fill that blank canvas. At night, she sips chamomile tea with milk and honey while soaking in vanilla-scented bubble baths. She’s finally sleeping again. She works out with trainer Eddie Pavese, whom she met while in treatment, and keeps a Peloton in her bedroom—though she admits she doesn’t have a rigid workout schedule in order to keep exercise from feeling too much like a chore.

Part of her recovery process has included reclaiming herself after childbirth too.

“My body still didn’t feel like it belonged to me,” Hayden says, explaining why she decided to get a breast reduction in November 2022. “I don’t think there’s anything wrong with somebody who wants to tweak something if it makes them feel more confident. That’s all I have to say about it. My confidence is back.”

Perhaps the biggest shift is how Hayden has learned to connect to herself emotionally and view her journey with compassion. “A big part of my therapy has been living in forgiveness,” she says. “A step in the 12-step program is making amends. If somebody wants to be a good person and to be the best version of themselves, they can choose to do that.”

Speaking of amends, her daughter, for now, doesn’t know about her mother’s struggles, but Hayden’s “looking forward to the day where I get to have these conversations with her,” she says. “I’m grateful that I’m equipped with the information and with the experience that I’ve had with postpartum depression.”

Hayden’s return to acting was inspired, in part, by the desire to go back to a feeling of “home,” in the well-being sense.

“In therapy, I kept wanting to go back to the beginning of the period of time where I was really happy and healthy,” she says of reprising her role as Kirby Reed in Scream 6. (Hayden has fond memories of filming Scream 4 in 2010 and says she’s still on a text thread with her costars from the movie.)

This time around, though, she and her character have something in common: They’re both survivors. “We saw Kirby get stabbed, but we never saw her die. We didn’t see her rescued either,” Hayden says of her character’s fate. “She has that human trauma, and it’s changed her. That’s something I can obviously relate to.”

Kirby is back, and so is Hayden. Her homecoming has been hard-earned—rebuilding from the inside out to become the strongest, healthiest version of herself. This is the Hayden of the future, the woman who creates her own environment and makes her own moves. The best part? She feels like she’s just now getting started.

A version of this story ran in the April 2023 issue of Women's Health. The interview with Hayden took place in January.n oa

Jansen Panettiere Family Reveals Actor’s Cause Of Death

(2/27/23) The family of Jansen Panettiere, including his sister Hayden, have revealed that the 28-year-old actor’s death last week was caused by cardiomegaly, or enlarged heart, coupled with aortic valve complications.

“Though it offers little solace, the Medical Examiner reported Jansen’s sudden passing was due to cardiomegaly (enlarged heart), coupled with aortic valve complications,” the family said in a statement to ABC News.

“We sincerely appreciate the outpouring of love and support towards our family as we navigate this unthinkable loss, and ask that we be gifted our privacy during this time of mourning,” the family said. “We love you so much Jansen and you will be in our hearts forever.”

Jansen Panettiere, the younger brother of actress Hayden Panettiere, died Feb. 19 in Nyack, New York. He was an actor who had followed his sister Hayden into show business with appearances on Even Stevens, Blue’s Clues, Ice Age: The Meltdown and The Walking Dead.

Born September 25, 1994, in Palisades, NY, Panettiere earned his first credits as a voice actor before landing a 2002 appearance on Disney Channel’s Even Stevens starring a young Shia LaBeouf. Subsequent credits include 2003 appearances on the sitcom Hope & Faith and the drama Third Watch, and the following year he voiced the recurring character Periwinkle on Blue’s Clues.

As a voice actor, his credits include 100 Things To Do Before Middle School, Robots, Ice Age: The Meltdown, and The X’s,among others.

Panettiere, also a painter and artist, appeared alongside his sister in the 2004 Disney Channel movie Tiger Cruise. In 2019, he co-starred in MTV’s How High 2. Hayden Panettiere is best known for her roles in TV’s Heroes and Nashville, as well as the Scream movie franchise.

In the statement to ABC News, the late actor’s family, including his mother Lesley Vogel, father Skip Panettiere and sister Hayden, said, “Jansen’s heart could be seen in his eyes, and his charm in his brilliant, engaging smile; his soul in his masterful and revealing paintings, and the joy of life in his dry wit. His charisma, warmth, compassion for others, and his creative spirit will live forever in our hearts and in the hearts of all whom he encountered.”

Hayden Panettiere's Brother Jansen Panettiere Dead At 28

(2/20/23) Hayden Panettiere's brother Jansen Panettiere has died ... TMZ has learned.

A family source tells us Jansen died over the weekend in New York. His cause of death is currently unclear. Law enforcement sources tell us they got a call to a residence Sunday night around 5:30PM. We're told there's no foul play suspected in Jansen's death.

Jansen, 5 years Hayden's younger, jumped onto the scene in the early 2000s, working on projects like "Even Stevens," "Blue's Clues," "Robots," and "Ice Age: The Meltdown." He also had a recurring role as Truman X in Nickelodeon's "The X's."

At one point, Jansen worked alongside Hayden in 2004's "Tiger Cruise" and 2005's "Racing Stripes."

He went on to star in Disney Channel original movies and made-for-TV Nickelodeon films, picking up a nomination for a Young Artist Award back in 2008 for his work on "The Last Day of Summer."

Jansen kept acting through the 2010s, working on shows like "Major Crimes" and "The Walking Dead." He also was attached to 5 more projects at the time of his death.

Jansen was only 28.

‘Scream VI’ Trailer: The Call Waiting Is Over As Ghostface Returns For More

(1/19/23) (Video) (Pic, Poster) Paramount on Thursday released the official trailer for Scream VI, the continuation of the horror franchise that began in 1996. The Paramount-Spyglass pic hits theaters March 10.

The latest pic, co-directed by Matt Bettinelli-Olpin & Tyler Gillett, follows on from last year’s Scream V and returns the four survivors of the latest Ghostface killings. The cast includes returnees Melissa Barrera, Jasmin Savoy Brown, Mason Gooding, Jenna Ortega, Hayden Panettiere and Courteney Cox. Jack Champion, Henry Czerny, Liana Liberato, Dermot Mulroney, Devyn Nekoda, Tony Revolori, Josh Segarra and Samara Weaving also star.

A notable absentee in the trailer that dropped today: Neve Campbell, like Cox a franchise regular, who revealed last year that she wasn’t returning.

It’s Cox’s Gale Weathers that gets the iconic phone call in the footage revealed today.

“It never works out for the dipsh*t in the mask,” Gale tells Ghostface over the phone. “Maybe,” responds the voice, “but there’s never been one like me, Gale. I’m something different.” It looks like Barrera’s Sam might be involved in the final showdown.

James Vanderbilt & Guy Busick, who wrote Scream V, return as scribes, William Sherak, Vanderbilt and Paul Neinstein are producers. Kevin Williamson, Gary Barber, Peter Oillataguerre, Chad Villella, Cox, Ron Lynch, Cathy Konrad and Marianne Maddalena are executive producers.

Dear Edward Trailer: Connie Britton Stars in FNL Boss' Teary Apple Drama

(1/18/23) (Video) Get out your tissues, because Apple TV+ has released an emotional trailer for Parenthood and Friday Night Lights showrunner Jason Katims’ upcoming drama Dear Edward, which features FNL vet Connie Britton among its cast.

Adapted by Katims from Ana Napolitano novel of the same name, the series is described as “a heartbreaking, life-affirming and uplifting story about survival, resilience, connection and the examination of what makes us human,” per the official synopsis. The story centers on 12-year-old boy Edward (Colin O’Brien), who is the only survivor of a tragic plane crash that kills his family. “As Edward and a diverse ensemble of others affected by the tragedy try to make sense of life after the crash, unexpected friendships, romances and communities are formed.”

Britton’s character is one of those left reeling from the loss of her husband and her best friend, who may have been keeping a secret from her, hints the above trailer (which was released in conjunction with the show’s Television Critics Assoc. winter press tour panel on Wednesday).

In addition to Britton and O’Brien, the cast also includes Taylor Schilling (Orange Is the New Black) as Edward’s aunt, plus Amy Forsyth, Eva Ariel Binder, Brittany S. Hall, Idris Debrand, Carter Hudson, Maxwell Jenkins, Jenna Qureshi, Audrey Corsa, Anna Uzele, Ivan Shaw and Dario Ladani Sanchez.

Dear Edward premieres Friday, Feb. 3 with its first three episodes, with new installments debuting each Friday after that.

Robert Wisdom in Accused 1/22/23

(1/18/23) A father (Chiklis) confronts the limits of unconditional love when he comes to believe his teenage son may be planning an unimaginable crime in the all-new “Scott’s Story” series premiere episode of Accused airing Sunday, Jan. 22 (10:00-11:30 PM ET / 9:00-10:30 PM CT / 8:00-9:30 PM MT / 7:00-8:30 PM PT LIVE to all timezones) on FOX. (ACU-101) (TV-14 L, V)

Guest Cast: Michael Chiklis as Scott Harmon; Oakes Fegley as Hunter Harmon; Jill Hennessy as Lynn Harmon; Robert Wisdom as Mitch Becker; Lanette Ware as D.A. Claire Wilson; Evan Marsh as Alex Harmon, Michael Isen as Jax; Tara Rosling as Dr. Laurie Grotstein; Cyrus Lane as Eric Parker; Paula Boudreau as Judge Ruta Wells.

Dear Edward: See First Photos of Connie Britton's Apple Reunion With FNL's Jason Katims, Get Release Date

(12/14/22) (Pic1, Pic2) When they said “Texas forever,” they meant it.

Connie Britton reunites with her Friday Night Lights showrunner Jason Katims in the new Apple TV+ drama Dear Edward, which now has a release date: It’ll premiere Friday, Feb. 3 with the first three episodes, TVLine has learned, with new episodes debuting each Friday after that.

The streamer has also released a pair of photos from the series, giving us our first look at what to expect from the adaptation of Ann Napolitano’s bestselling novel. The story centers on 12-year-old boy Edward (Colin O’Brien), who is the only survivor of a tragic plane crash that kills his family. “As Edward and others all over the world are affected by the tragedy try to make sense of life after the crash, unexpected friendships, romances and communities are formed,” according to the official synopsis.

Britton and O’Brien star along with Taylor Schilling (Orange Is the New Black). Katims serves as writer, executive producer and showrunner. In addition to his Emmy-winning work with Britton on Friday Night Lights, Katims also wrote and produced NBC’s Parenthood and the Prime Video series As We See It.

Connie Britton Signs With CAA For Representation

(12/1/22) Five-time Emmy Award-nominated actress Connie Britton has signed with CAA.

Her most recent Emmy nomination came this year for Season 1 of HBO’s The White Lotus. She has indicated that she could reprise her character, possibly in the third installment of Mike White’s Emmy-winning anthology series, which was just greenlighted by the network.

Britton recently wrapped production on Apple TV+’s upcoming series Dear Edward, which reunites her with Friday Night Lights executive producer/showrunner Jason Katims. Her role as Tammi Taylor in FNL earned her two Emmy nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series.

She also received Emmy noms for her work in ABC’s Nashville, and the original installment of FX’s American Horror Story which launched the hit anthology series and kicked off the genre’s resaurgance.

Britton served as an executive producer on Nashville as well as on the highly rated first season of true crime anthology series Dirty John on Bravo. He production company, Deep Blue Prods., which has a first-look deal at Amazon Studios, has multiple projects in development.

In film, Britton can currently be seen in Luckiest Girl Alive, alongside Mila Kunis and Finn Wittrock. She recently wrapped production on Winner, alongside Emilia Jones and Zach Galifianakis.

Britton, who was previously at WME for years, continues to be repped by Untitled Entertainment; Hanson, Jacobson, Teller; and The Initiative Group.

Hayden Panettiere, ex Brian Hickerson go on a trip following July split

(11/22/22) Back on again?

Hayden Panettiere and her ex-boyfriend, Brian Hickerson, were spotted together at LAX just three months after announcing their latest split.

In photos obtained by Page Six, the pair tried to stay under the radar while wearing dark clothes and baseball caps as they made their way around the airport.

The “Remember the Titans” actress and Hickerson — who dated on and off since the summer of 2018 — also enjoyed a bite to eat before jetting off on vacation for the holidays. However, it’s unknown where they were going.

The pair’s reunion may come as a surprise after Panettiere, 33, spoke out about her abusive relationship with Hickerson following a wild hotel brawl in May.

“It was a very dark and complicated time in my life,” the actress told People about dating in the midst of her alcohol and opioid addiction. “But a lot of women go through what I went through, and I want people to know it’s OK to ask for help.”

However, the pair seemingly tried to maintain a friendship following their split, with Panettiere saying “making amends is a really important thing that you learn in treatment.”

Hickerson also confirmed that he and the actress were “absolutely not” together in July after their very tumultuous four-year relationship seemingly came to a head.

Hickerson, who was on probation at the time, told paparazzi that there was no way the exes were ever going to reconcile and said he is “looking forward to new chapters.”

He was arrested back in May 2019 for domestic violence after he and the actress got into a drunken, physical altercation in their Los Angeles home.

Although Hickerson pleaded not guilty, he was ordered to stay 100 yards away from Panettiere — only to be arrested again in 2020 for domestic violence.

Hickerson was sentenced to 45 days in jail for two felony counts of injuring a partner.

Following the second arrest, the “Nashville” star released a statement saying she would do anything she could to ensure “this man never hurts anyone again.”

“I am coming forward with the truth about what happened to me in the hope that my story will empower others in abusive relationships to get the help they need and deserve,” she wrote.

Emilia Jones To Lead ‘Winner’ Biopic From Susanna Fogel; Zach Galifianakis And Connie Britton Also Star

(10/24/22) Emilia Jones (CODA) is set to lead director Susanna Fogel’s darkly comedic biopic Winner, which has started principal photography.

After exposing Russia’s interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, Reality Winner was sentenced to five and a half years in prison — the longest sentence ever given to someone charged under the Espionage Act — for leaking a government document.

Connie Britton has been cast to play Reality’s mother and Galifianakis Reality’s father. Danny Ramirez and Kathryn Newton also will star.

The story follows Winner (Jones), a brilliant young misfit from Texas who finds her morals challenged while serving in the U.S. Air Force and working as an NSA contractor. The film will offer a fresh take on the traditional whistleblower thriller; the coming-of-age story follows an idealistic young woman persecuted for standing by her principles.

The film is written by Kerry Howley and Fogel (Booksmart) and based on Howley’s 2017 New York Magazine feature.

“As a filmmaker, I strive to tell stories that interrogate the world we live in and the systems that are broken in it. But in a fun way. Reality Winner is the perfect heroine for a film that meditates on ideas of personal power, morality, and finding your voice,” Fogel said. “She’s a true individual: she speaks many languages, she loves her guns, she could destroy you on Twitter, and her obsession with Pikachu is unmatched. Clearly, she’s the perfect mouthpiece for a generation of people who are unique and fed up with feeling powerless. And there is no one more perfect to play her than Emilia Jones, one of the most exciting young actresses working today. I hope Reality’s story will inspire others to speak up and defend their beliefs, whatever the cost. I’m thrilled to partner with this team of artists and activists to bring this movie to life.”

The film is co-financed by ShivHans Pictures and 1Community. Producers are Amanda Phillips and Fogel along with Shivani Rawat & Julie Goldstein of ShivHans, and Scott Budnick and Ameet Shukla of 1Community. Executive producers include Dani Melia, Peter Saraf, Daniel Bekerman, Connor Flanagan and Big Beach Films.

UTA Independent Film Group negotiated the financing and will represent the worldwide sales rights.

“When we first read this powerful script, we knew we wanted to help tell the story of Reality Winner. I have always been a fan of Susanna Fogel and to work with this caliber of talent to tell a female story is something we strive to do at ShivHans. We are looking forward to working in partnership with our friends at 1Community to bring this story to a wide audience,” said Rawat, founder and CEO of ShivHans Pictures.

Added Budnick: “Our company’s mission is to find bold new takes on the most pressing issues of our time, and nothing could be more urgent than defending the ideals of democracy. Reality Winner’s story is fascinating, brave and timely. We are thrilled to join our partners ShivHans Pictures and couldn’t be more excited for Susanna Fogel’s fresh and comedic approach in bringing this story to screen.”

Jones is repped by CAA, ARG, Personae Consilium and Felker Toczek Suddleson Abramson McGinnis Ryan; Fogel is repped by UTA, Lighthouse Management & Media, Chris Abramson and Patti Felker; Britton is repped by WME Entertainment, Untitled Entertainment, The Initiative Group, and Hansen, Jacobson, Teller, Hoberman, Newman, Warren, Richman, Rush, Kaller, Gellman, Meigs & Fox; Galifianakis is repped by UTA, Brillstein Entertainment Partners, and Yorn, Levine, Barnes, Krintzman, Rubenstein, Kohner, Endlich & Gellman; Ramirez is repped by CAA, Anonymous Content and Hansen, Jacobson. Newton is repped by WME, Entertainment 360, Steve Warren and Huy Nguyen at Hansen, Jacobson, Teller, Hoberman, Newman, Warren, Richman, Rush, KAller, Gellman, Meigs & Fox.

#XMAS (Hallmark) 11/25/22

(10/21/22) #XMAS (Hallmark)

Airing Friday, Nov. 25 at 6 pm

When Jen gets the chance to enter a brand’s design contest, she poses a family influencer, enlisting the help of her best friend, Max, and her baby nephew. When her video is selected as a finalist, Jen is torn on whether to go on with her perfect “family” or reveal the truth; Clare Bowen and Brant Daugherty star.

Hayden Panettiere details her, Wladimir Klitschko’s current custody arrangement

(9/29/22) Hayden Panettiere described her and Wladimir Klitschko’s custody arrangement of daughter Kaya — and her “hope” that it will change.

Since the former boxer obtained full custody of the now-7-year-old in 2018, the little one has “never been back to California,” Panettiere told the “Red Table Talk” co-hosts on Wednesday.

The “Remember the Titans” star noted that she has “seen” her daughter, who lived in Ukraine until she was taken “elsewhere because it was dangerous” when Russia invaded.

“I go over there. I wish there was more of a bringing her to visit,” the “Nashville” alum, 33, said.

However, the actress has not “gotten any hints” that the current custody situation will change.

“I’ve been told that I can go over and see her anytime,” the “Heroes” alum explained. “I just have to keep the hope that one day when she is old enough for her opinion to be respected a little bit more and her wants are heard, that there will be more proactivity on that side.”

Panettiere detailed the “heartbreaking” moment she signed full custody over to her ex-fiancé while Kaya was in Ukraine, saying that it was a “shock.”

“She was already over there in a country where her uncle is a mayor and they are icons over there,” Panettiere said of Wladimir and his brother, Vitali Klitschko. “It is a country that is very male-dominated, and there wasn’t a heck of a lot that I could do.”

Although the Golden Globe nominee considers the athlete to be a “fantastic father” and thinks he believes “he is doing the right thing,” Panettiere wants Wladimir to “fully grasp” what Kaya’s separation from her mom will mean in the future.

“Kids need their moms,” the singer told Jada Pinkett Smith, Adrienne Banfield Norris and guest co-host Kelly Osbourne. “I had never endangered her or done anything that would, in this country, they would never take a child from me.

“It never would have happened,” Panettiere continued. “When she was there, I was stuck between a rock and a hard place.”

The “Scream 6” star went on to describe her “incredibly strong” daughter’s “stoic” personality, sharing her worries over the “trauma reaction” Kaya recently exhibited.

“Kaya is going around and asking other women if she can call them Mommy,” Panettiere, who dated Wladimir on and off from 2009 to 2018, said. “That’s a cry for help.”

Hayden Panettiere Reflects on Entering Rehab While Starring in Nashville: 'I Just Wanted to Escape'

(9/28/22) On ABC’s Nashville, Juliette Barnes’ struggles mirrored star Hayden Panettiere‘s a little too closely, the actress says in a new interview.

“When I was on Nashville, they really wrote my life into it. So on the show, one of the storylines was that I was playing an alcoholic. Another storyline was that I was pregnant on the show, and then I got postpartum depression,” Panettiere says during her appearance on the newest episode of Facebook Watch’s Red Table Talk. “I had to go to work every day and be acting out what I was truly going through. So by the time I got home, I didn’t want to sit there with my own feelings and work them out. You know, I just wanted to escape.”

In a sit-down chat with Jada Pinkett Smith, Adrienne Banfield Norris and guest host Kelly Osbourne, Panettiere recalls going to treatment roughly four months after Kaya, her daughter with Wladimir Klitschko, was born in December 2014. The Golden Globe-nominated actress says that she was drinking heavily at the time, “just leaning on that crutch, and it was making things worse.” She adds that she was diagnosed with postpartum depression at the facility where she sought help.

Per Panettiere, her first visit lasted roughly a month; a subsequent one lasted longer. After the country-music drama ended in 2018, she says during the interview, her mental health issues got worse, and she checked into a facility where she wound up staying for eight months.

“I had had it with myself, and I knew it was a longer process,” she says.

Nashville viewers will remember that in October 2015, Panettiere took a very public step back from the show, then in its fourth season. She returned to set the following January but then resumed treatment shortly after the season’s production wrapped.

She appeared in the show’s final two seasons, though Juliette’s involvement in a cult created a reason for Panettiere to be off-screen for a bunch of episodes.

Hayden Panettiere on giving up custody of daughter: 'It wasn't fully my decision'

(9/28/22) (Video) Hayden Panettiere didn’t know she was losing custody of her daughter.

The 33-year-old actress – who has been candid about her struggles with addiction and depression – has opened up about losing custody of Kaya, now seven, after her daughter moved to Ukraine with Hayden’s ex Wladimir Klitschko.

In a clip from Red Table Talk revealed by Entertainment Tonight, she said: “She was almost three, and it wasn’t fully my decision. In fact, I didn’t even know it was happening until she was already over there.”

The Heroes star explained that she realized she needed to focus on herself and the “unselfish thing” would be focus on herself.

She added: “I was trying to tell myself that if I’m not OK, if I’m not good, then I cannot be the best mom to you.

“I was going through such a hard time that I knew the most unselfish thing I could do was to make that hard decision and just try to work on myself.”

Hayden – who would later spend eight months in rehab – previously addressed her battle with alcoholism after hitting her lowest point before Kaya moved to live with her father.

She said: “I would have the shakes when I woke up and could only function with sipping alcohol.

“It was the hardest thing I ever had to do. But I wanted to be a good mom to her — and sometimes that means letting them go.”

While suffering with depression, Hayden has made it clear while she “never had the feeling that I wanted to harm my child,” she “didn’t want to spend any time with her.”

Reflecting on her relationship with ex Klitschko – which ended for good in 2018 – she added: “He didn’t want to be around me. I didn’t want to be around me. But with the opiods and alcohol I was doing anything to make me feel happy for a moment. Then I’d feel worse than I did before. I was in a cycle of self-destruction.”

Laura Benanti Joins Jennifer Lawrence Sony R-Rated Comedy ‘No Hard Feelings’

(9/27/22) Tony Award winner and five-time nominee Laura Benanti will star opposite Jennifer Lawrence in Sony’s R-rated comedy No Hard Feelings from director Gene Stupnitsky.

Benanti joins Broadway and Disney+ star Andrew Barth Feldman (High School Musical: The Musical: The Series) in the pic, which hit theaters on June 16. Production is underway.

In the movie, Lawrence plays a ne’er-do-well who is hired by a wealthy couple to socialize with their introverted son. Feldman plays the kid, and Benanti plays his wealthy mom.

The screenplay is written by Stupnitsky & John Phillips. Alex Saks, Marc Provissiero, Naomi Odenkirk, Lawrence and Justine Ciarrochi are producing. John Phillips is executive producing.

Benanti recently starred in Amy Schumer’s Life & Beth, and She is set to recur in the second season of HBO’s period drama The Gilded Age. Benanti previously starred in Netflix’s Worth, opposite Michael Keaton, Stanley Tucci and Amy Ryan; hit TV series Younger; and Here Today starring Billy Crystal and Tiffany Haddish; and appeared in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s awards-season favorite, Tick, Tick Boom!

Other TV credits include series regular roles on the Samantha Bee- and Jason Jones-produced TBS show The Detour, Go On opposite Matthew Perry and Starved for FX as well as recurring and guest appearances on The CW’s Supergirl, ABC’s Nashville and Eli Stone, CBS’ The Good Wife and Elementary, Showtime’s Nurses Jackie and The Big C, NBC’s The Sound of Music Live and Law & Order: SVU, and USA’s Royal Pains.

Benanti has been a showstopper on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert in her comedic portrayal of former First Lady Melania Trump.

Benanti’s unscripted special, Homeschool Musical: Class of 2020, which was inspired by her project #SunshineSongs, aired on HBO Max.

She also guest stars on the variety show Ziwe featuring comedian Ziwe Fumudoh.

Benanti played Louise in the 2008 Broadway revival of Gypsy, winning the 2008 Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Musical.

Her other Tony noms are Best Featured Actress in a Musical for Swing! (2000), Best Featured Actress in a Musical for 2002’s Into the Woods, Best Featured Actress in a Musical for 2011’s Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown and Best Actress in a Musical for 2016’s She Loves Me. Benanti returned to Broadway in 2019 as Eliza Doolittle in Lincoln Center’s production of My Fair Lady.

Benanti is repped by Untitled Entertainment and The Gersh Agency.

‘Outer Banks’ Releases New Trailer For Season 3 On Netflix

(9/24/22) (Video) How far will you go to get your treasure?

The trailer for season three of Netflix’s Outer Banks asks that very question as the action picks up for the Pogues on a beautiful beach with coconuts and azure blue waters.

There’s also a mysterious elevator shaft and a wild beast that chases the Pogues across the island. And it all returns in 2023!

For those that missed the first two seasons, Outer Banks is a coming-of-age story that follows a tight-knit group of local teens, aka the Pogues, who are in over the heads as they hunt for treasure. It stars Chase Stokes, Madelyn Cline, Madison Bailey, J.D. and Rudy Pankow.

Joining the cast in its third season are Andy McQueen (Mrs. Davis, Station Eleven), Fiona Palomo (Control Z, La Negociadora) and Lou Ferrigno Jr (S.W.A.T., Stargirl). Previously announced returning talent also includes Austin North, Charles Esten and Carlacia Grant who has been upped to series regular for Season 3.

Outer Banks has been a hit for Netflix since the series premiere. The second season held the No. 1 spot globally in Netflix’s Top 10 TV (English) list for the four weeks following its launch. The series is created by Jonas Pate, Josh Pate and Shannon Burke, who will all return as showrunners and executive producers.

‘Nashville’ & ‘Scream’ Star Hayden Panettiere Signs With APA As Comeback Continues After Addiction Battle Reveal

(8/31/22) Nashville and Heroes star Hayden Panettiere has signed with APA.

The two-time Golden Globe nominee recently finished filming on Scream 6 in which she reprises her role as Kirby Reed.

Panettiere’s breakout role came as Claire Bennet in NBC’s Heroes and she went on to get the starring role of Juliette Barnes in ABC’s hit Nashville. She also starred in the final season of David E. Kelly’s Ally McBeal for Fox.

The actress’s other film credits include The Forger opposite Josh Hutcherson, Remember the Titans with Denzel Washington, Custody with Viola Davis, Chris Columbus’s I Love You Beth Cooper, and Bring It On: All Or Nothing.

Scream 6 marks Panettiere’s first movie in six years. She hasn’t acted in TV since Nashville ended in 2018. Last month, the actress opened up to People magazine about a long struggle with alcohol and substance abuse as well as postpartum depression. She explained how she has undergone trauma therapy and inpatient treatment within the last year in a bid to get her life back on track.

Panettiere continues to be represented by Mainstay Entertainment (who she signed with earlier this year) and Hansen, Jacobson, Teller, Hoberman, Newman, Warren, Richman, Rush, Kaller, Gellman, Meigs & Fox.

Netflix Fall & Holiday Film Slate

(8/30/22) Luckiest Girl Alive (10/7, theaters 9/30)

Luckiest Girl Alive centers on Ani FaNelli, a sharp-tongued New Yorker who appears to have it all: a sought-after position at a glossy magazine, a killer wardrobe, and a dream Nantucket wedding on the horizon. But when the director of a crime documentary invites her to tell her side of the shocking incident that took place when she was a teenager at the prestigious Brentley School, Ani is forced to confront a dark truth that threatens to unravel her meticulously crafted life. Based on the book Luckiest Girl Alive by Jessica Knoll.

DIRECTOR: Mike Barker

WRITER: Jessica Knoll

PRODUCERS: Bruna Papandrea, Jeanne Snow, Erik Feig, Lucy Kitada, Mila Kunis

EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS: Jessica Knoll, Lisa Sterbakov, Shayne Fiske Goldner, Steve Hutensky, Mike Barker

CAST: Mila Kunis, Finn Wittrock, Chiara Aurelia, Scoot McNairy, Thomas Barbusca, Justine Lupe, Dalmar Abuzeid, Alex Barone, Carson MacCormac with Jennifer Beals and Connie Britton

Samara Weaving, Tony Revolori & Hayden Panettiere Join ‘Scream 6’

(7/14/22) Samara Weaving (The Valet) and Tony Revolori (Spider-Man: No Way Home) are the latest additions to the cast of Scream 6, Deadline can confirm. They join an ensemble that also includes Melissa Barrera, Jasmin Savoy Brown, Mason Gooding and Jenna Ortega, who toplined the fifth film in the franchise, along with Hayden Panettiere, Courteney Cox, Dermot Mulroney, Jack Champion, Liana Liberato, Devyn Nekoda, Josh Segarra and Henry Czerny.

The next installment in the horror franchise from Spyglass Media and Paramount Pictures will pick up with Sam (Barrera), Mindy (Brown), Chad (Gooding) and Tara (Ortega)—four survivors of the most recent batch of Ghostface killings—as they leave Woodsboro behind and start a fresh chapter. Details as to the characters Weaving and Revolori will be playing have not been disclosed.

Radio Silence’s Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett, who helmed the last Scream film, return as directors. James Vanderbilt and Guy Busick co-wrote the screenplay, with Project X Entertainment’s Vanderbilt, Paul Neinstein and William Sherak serving as producers. Scream franchise creator Kevin Williamson and Radio Silence’s third member, Chad Villella, are exec producing alongside Spyglass’ Gary Barber and Peter Oillataguerre, Ron Lynch, Cathy Konrad and Marianne Maddalena. The film will hit theaters worldwide on March 31, 2023.

Weaving previously worked with Radio Silence on the 2019 horror Ready or Not. The actress can currently be seen in the Hulu film The Valet, having also recently starred in the streamer’s series Nine Perfect Strangers. She’ll next be seen in Stephen Williams’ drama Chevalier with Lucy Boynton and Minnie Driver, and Damien Chazelle’s buzzy period Hollywood pic Babylon.

Revolori is best known for his collaboration with Wes Anderson on films like The Grand Budapest, The French Dispatch and the upcoming Asteroid City, and for his role as Flash Thompson in the most recent trilogy of Spider-Man films. He stars in the Apple series Servant and will soon be seen in the Disney+ series Willow.

Bloody Disgusting was first to report the news of today’s castings. Weaving is represented by CAA, 111 Media and Johnson Shapiro Slewett & Kole; Revolori by WME and Circle of Confusion.

2022 Emmy Nominations

(7/12/22) This year’s Emmys will be awarded across two weekends, with the two-night Creative Arts portion set for September 3-4. The Primetime ceremony will be broadcast live Monday, September 12 on NBC and stream live on Peacock.

Outstanding Supporting Actress In A Limited Or Anthology Series Or Movie

The White Lotus • HBO/HBO Max • HBO in association with Rip Cord, The District and Hallogram Inc.

Connie Britton as Nicole Mossbacher

The White Lotus • HBO/HBO Max • HBO in association with Rip Cord, The District and Hallogram Inc.

Jennifer Coolidge as Tanya

The White Lotus • HBO/HBO Max • HBO in association with Rip Cord, The District and Hallogram Inc.

Alexandra Daddario as Rachel Patton

Dopesick • Hulu • 20th Television, Danny Strong Productions, John Goldwyn Productions, The Littlefield Company

Kaitlyn Dever as Betsy Mallum

The White Lotus • HBO/HBO Max • HBO in association with Rip Cord, The District and Hallogram Inc.

Natasha Rothwell as Belinda

The White Lotus • HBO/HBO Max • HBO in association with Rip Cord, The District and Hallogram Inc.

Sydney Sweeney as Olivia Mossbacher

Dopesick • Hulu • 20th Television, Danny Strong Productions, John Goldwyn Productions, The Littlefield Company

Mare Winningham as Diane Mallum

Trailer for Michael O. Sajbel’s drama The Mulligan

(7/8/22) Here is a new trailer for Michael O. Sajbel’s drama The Mulligan, which has been acquired by Cinedigm for a home entertainment release on August 16.

The film centers on Paul McAllister (Eric Close), who seems to have it all before his life starts to fall apart. Guided by the wisdom and advice of an old golf pro, Paul learns about playing a good game both on and off the course.

Randall Eldridge, Rick Eldridge, Roland Eldridge and Jimmy Hager wrote the pic, which also stars Pat Boone and Nancy Stafford. Watch the trailer here.

Hollywood Critics Association TV award nominations

(7/7/22) The awards will be handed out over two nights in ceremonies at the Beverly Hilton. The broadcast network and cable TV awards ceremony will be held on August 13, followed by the streaming awards ceremony on August 14.

Best Supporting Actress in a Broadcast Network or Cable Limited Series, Anthology Series, or Movie

Alexandra Daddario, The White Lotus (HBO)

Betty Gilpin, Gaslit (Starz)

Connie Britton, The White Lotus (HBO)

Jennifer Coolidge, The White Lotus (HBO)

Judy Greer, The Thing About Pam (NBC)

Sydney Sweeney, The White Lotus (HBO)

Hayden Panettiere Opens Up Postpartum Depression, Struggles With Alcoholism

(7/6/22) (Video) After four years away from the spotlight of Hollywood, actress Hayden Panettiere is opening up for the first time about the challenges she's faced that nearly destroyed her career.

"I didn't know where the alcoholism was ending and the postpartum was beginning," Panetierre said. "And I ran myself pretty ragged."

In a People and "Good Morning America" exclusive interview, the 32-year-old said that she'd been "struggling for a long time."

Since her hit show "Nashville" ended in 2018, Panettiere said the years that followed have "been difficult." She added, "The years before were very difficult for me, too. And I just needed a break."

'I was deeply depressed'

Shortly after the birth of her daughter in 2014, Panettiere was overcome with postpartum depression. She told ABC News' Kaylee Hartung she turned to "the bottom of a bottle" for support.

"I didn't have any negative feelings towards my child," she said. "I just knew I was deeply depressed." Panettiere said that she felt like she "was in this haze, this haze that just wasn't me."

"People around me were more concerned about my usage of alcohol than they ever were about the postpartum depression," she said. They thought she was "being a crazy woman" or "an overly emotional female" who was choosing to be depressed, when Panetierre said "it was so out of my control."

"I felt like I was walking blind," she said. "And I don't like to ask for help either. I wanna be that strong, stoic woman. But, I mean, when you see a happy-go-lucky girl for years suddenly on the floor in a puddle of mess and alcohol, you gotta know something is wrong."

Eventually, Panettiere sought treatment. At that treatment facility, she found the help she needed, which included making friends who could understand her struggles.

On sobriety

Panettiere says she is now sober and is taking things one day at a time.

"It's an everyday battle," she said. "It really is. I'm grateful to say that I'm sober today."

When Panetierre was in her darkest days, she described it as "somebody taking an eggbeater and scrambling around your brain." But even worse was her fight to be believed.

"Oh, it was horrible," Panettiere said. "Once you're the identified patient as the alcoholic -- and not as a girl, a woman going through postpartum depression -- then they don't believe anything that comes outta your mouth. So even when you're telling the truth, even when you're doing well, I've been told 'No' -- almost gaslit -- and told no, I wasn't."

"It's frustr