The Devil’s Own is a 1997 action thriller film directed by Alan J. Pakula. The story revolves around Tom, a policeman in New York City who houses Rory, an Irishman visiting the city, as a favor to a friend. However, Tom’s good deed takes a dangerous turn when he learns that Rory is a highly trained IRA (Irish Republican Army) terrorist.

Here’s how you can watch and stream The Devil’s Own via streaming services such as Netflix.

Is The Devil’s Own available to watch via streaming?

Yes, The Devil’s Own is available to watch via streaming on Netflix.

The film centers on Frankie McGuire, one of the IRA’s most lethal assassins, who is sent to the U.S. to procure weapons. He stays with the family of Tom O’Meara, a New York cop as an alias of Rory. The situation becomes increasingly complicated as an unexpected friendship develops between Tom and Rory.

The cast members of The Devil’s Own include Harrison Ford as Sergeant Tom O’Meara, Brad Pitt as Francis McGuire aka Frankie, Margaret Colin as Sheila O’Meara, Rubén Blades as Edwin Diaz, and more.

Watch The Devil’s Own streaming via Netflix

The Devil’s Own is available to watch on Netflix. Some of the popular television shows and movies available with Netflix subscription plans are Start-Up, Bionic, Avatar: The Last Airbender, The House of Flowers, Unauthorized Living, and more.

Netflix offers multiple subscription options for viewers to choose from, such as:

6.99 per month (standard with Ads) – This features most of the content available on the OTT platform except for a selective few. You can watch in Full HD and on two supported devices simultaneously.

$15.49 per month (Standard) – It is the same as the previous option, but is entirely ad-free. It also allows users to download content on two supported devices.

$22.99 per month (Premium) – This gives access to all the content available on the platform. It supports four devices at once, with Ultra HD. Users get to download content on up to six supported devices at a time.

The Devil’s Own synopsis is as follows:

“Frankie McGuire, one of the IRA’s deadliest assassins, draws an American family into the crossfire of terrorism. But when he is sent to the U.S. to buy weapons, Frankie is housed with the family of Tom O’Meara, a New York cop who knows nothing about Frankie’s real identity. Their surprising friendship, and Tom’s growing suspicions, forces Frankie to choose between the promise of peace or a lifetime of murder.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.