Mayor Emanuel and Chicago Public Library (CPL) today announced Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick will be the 29th selection of CPL’s One Book, One Chicago (OBOC). From October 2018 through April 2019, Chicagoans will learn more about science fiction, technology, future societies, artificial intelligence and more as they explore the book and this year’s theme—Imagine the Future.

“This year, residents across Chicago will dive into the world of science fiction and consider the role technology and artificial intelligence plays in our future generations,” said Mayor Rahm Emanuel. “I look forward to joining in as we embark on this shared reading experience together.”

Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, which was first published in 1968, introduces readers to protagonist Rick Deckard in the year 2021 as he maneuvers his way through the new world order. This iconic book was the inspiration for the blockbuster film Blade Runner.

Philip K. Dick was born in Chicago in 1928 and lived most of his life in California. In 1952, he began writing professionally and proceeded to write numerous novels and short story collections. He won the Hugo Award for the best novel in 1962 for The Man in the High Castle and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for best novel of the year in 1974 for Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said.

“At CPL, we strive to bring great cultural programming to our patrons and are always excited to do that through the One Book, One Chicago program,” said Commissioner Brian Bannon. “We hope that everyone is just as eager to explore such an expansive and interesting theme with us.”

CPL will join community partners to offer Chicagoans a variety of events and programs, including walking tours, history programs, discussions, and more, to bring people, businesses and civic agencies together to engage with the book and theme. Free citywide programs will launch in early October.

Additional highlights of this year’s One Book, One Chicago program include:

Author talks with notable science fiction authors;

Book discussions throughout the city to discuss what the future of technology holds;

Activities at CPL’s award-winning Maker Lab including building futuristic eyewear and out-of-this-world sound frequencies;

Learning Circles to learn android programming basics;

Neighborhood walking tours with author and historian Max Grinnell to talk about planned projects for Chicago;

Live performance of The War of the Worlds, the iconic radio broadcast adapted from H.G. Wells’ novel; and

Learning sessions about how to protect yourself and your family with emergency preparedness programs.

For a complete list of programs and to learn ways you can engage with other readers, visit onebookonechicago.org.

One Book, One Chicago is a citywide program that launched in fall 2001 as an opportunity to engage and enlighten Chicagoans and to foster a sense of community through reading. After more than a decade of celebrating a culture of reading, One Book, One Chicago expanded in 2013. CPL and its community partners now bring communities together by offering a full season of learning and engagement annually, focusing not just on one book but on a central theme integral to the lives of all Chicagoans.

Each year, CPL offers a diverse series of programs that explore the theme from multiple perspectives, as recounted through personal experience, imagined in literature, presented in politics, or synthesized in music and art.

One Book, One Chicago is made possible by the Chicago Public Library Foundation, funded through generous support from The Chicago Community Trust and United Airlines.

About Chicago Public Library

Since 1873, Chicago Public Library (CPL) has encouraged lifelong learning by welcoming all people and offering equal access to information, entertainment and knowledge through innovative services and programs, as well as cutting-edge technology. Through its 80 locations, the Library provides free access to a rich collection of materials, both physical and digital, and presents the highest quality author discussions, exhibits and programs for children, teens and adults. CPL received the Social Innovator Award from Chicago Innovation Awards; won a National Medal for Library Services from the Institute for Museum and Library Services; was named the first-ever winner of the National Summer Learning Association’s Founder’s Award in recognition of its Summer Learning Challenge; and was ranked number one in the U.S., and third in the world by an international study of major urban libraries conducted by the Heinrich Heine University Dusseldorf in Germany. For more information, please call (312) 747-4050 or visit chipublib.org. To follow CPL on social media, visit us on Twitter (@chipublib) or Facebook (Chicago Public Library).

About the Chicago Public Library Foundation