GHOSTBUSTERS got a huge surprise this week as Ernie Hudson made a public appearance.

Looking impossibly young, Ernie, now 78 years old, was spotted out in London on Thursday.

He was only 38 when he starred in the first Ghostbusters movie.

He appeared alongside Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, and Harold Ramis in what would become a major franchise and an inter-generational hit.

Before his Ghost-Busting career was over, Ernie appeared in Ghostbusters (1984), Ghostbusters II (1989), Ghostbusters (2016), Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021), and the Ghostbusters video game (2009).

He also appears in the 2024 Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire where he's been supporting the franchise and his younger counterparts.

On Thursday, the actor attended the UK Gala Screening of the new movie at The Ham Yard Hotel in London, England.

Photos were snapped of the star walking into the event, and he looked like the spitting image of the 38-year-old in the first film.

This man hasn't aged a day except for the salt-and-pepper hairstyle he's been rocking.

He also proved that his style has remained on point as he wore a pair of tight jeans and a chic black turtleneck.

Ernie completed his outfit with a well-worn brown leather jacket with dark brown lapels and matching leather shoes.

WHERE HAS THE TIME GONE

Fans on Reddit have seen recent photos of Ernie, and they've all been shaken to the core by his ageless appearance.

One said: "You would never think he's 78 years old."

"Ernie is looking great, he has a great sense of style," added another.

A third wrote: "Shocked me to find out he’s older than Bill Murray and Dan Aykroyd."

Others said: "He looks fantastic!" and "Legend."

FROZEN IN TIME

Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire comes out on March 22, 2024.

It was written by Gil Kenan and Jason Reitman, and Gil directed the movie.

The comedy is the sequel movie to Ghostbusters: Afterlife, and it marks the fifth film in the franchise.

Fans will see many familiar faces starring in the flick such as Paul Rudd, Finn Wolfhard from Stranger Things, and Mckenna Grace.

Bill, Dan, and Ernie also reprise their roles from Afterlife.

In the film, the original and new Ghostbusters head back to the iconic New York City firehouse to battle some ghosts.

According to Sony Pictures, they're fighting an evil force that was unleashed from an ancient artifact.

If they win, they'll protect their home while saving the world from a second Ice Age.