While fans will still have to wait six more months to see the long-awaited Ghostbusters: Afterlife, Ernie Hudson is revealing the filming process made him 'emotional.'

Hudson, 75, returns as Winston Zeddemore from the 1984 classic Ghostbusters and the 1989 sequel Ghostbusters II in the upcoming movie, where he also reunites with co-stars Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Siguourney Weaver and Annie Potts.

While promoting his new film Redemption Day, in theaters January 8 and on VOD January 12, Hudson revealed how special it was being back on set with the original cast.

Hudson also returned for the 2016 Ghostbusters reboot, though he played a different character, Uncle Bill, alongside new Ghostbusters Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon, Melissa McCarthy and Leslie Jones.

This new project returns to the original Ghostbusters roots, with a single mom (Carrie Coon) and her two kids (Finn Wolfhard, McKenna Grace) learning their connection to the original Ghostbusters.

Hudson revealed to TooFab that he didn't originally realize how profound an impact the first Ghostbusters actually had on his life.

'I look back and I don't realize how much of an impact that movie had on my life, on my career, on my everything, my world,' Hudson said.

'So, just to go back on the set and see the guys in their jumpsuits it was almost spiritual. I mean, I actually got emotional,' he added.

'It was the weirdest feeling to see Sigourney and Annie and to see the new cast, and to see Jason all grown up and directing. It was just ... honestly, I got emotional,' Hudson continued.

The Jason he's referring to is director Jason Reitman, the son of Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II director Ivan Reitman, who helms Ghostbusters: Afterlife.

There had been rumors of another Ghostbusters sequel for years ahead of the 2016 female-centric reboot, though it never got off the ground.

There were many factors at play why those proposed sequels never worked, including Bill Murray's reticence to sign on, and the death of star Harold Ramis in 2014 at the age of 69.

Now with a new script by Reitman and Gil Kenan (Poltergeist remake), Hudson is grateful this version came to fruition.

'We talked about a sequel [for years]. To actually see it happen and to do it with a script that's a really great script and Jason has proven himself to be a really great director ... I was just so thankful to be a part of that,' Hudson said.

While he wouldn't spill any secrets about the story, Hudson did make it clear he's quite proud of the finished product.

'I'm very proud of it. When it's all said and done, based on what I see, it's going to be a great movie and I'm looking forward to seeing it. I think the fans, it's what they've been looking forward to it as well,' he said.