Janet Tringham - Chair of Governors - BDAT Governor

I was born and grew up in Leeds. Then I moved around the country working as a teacher and a headteacher. A highlight was spending a year volunteering in Ethiopia. I’ve got four grown up children, one granddaughter and another one on the way! I love being with children and helping them flourish. That’s why I enjoy being a governor at Westminster School.

Naomi Tuzolano Olongo - Vice Chair of Governors - Parent Governor

Originally from Congo DRC, I grew up in London and now I call West Yorkshire home. I believe my diverse background brings a unique perspective to the governing board.

From a young age, I've always felt an instinct to nurture and care for others. Growing up in a large family with mostly brothers has undoubtedly shaped my desire to contribute to the well-being of children. Being a school governor allows me to fulfil this passion, ensuring the school prioritises both the safety and learning of its students. Accountability for their success is something I take very seriously.

Simon Gallacher - Headteacher

I am proud to be from Stoke and moved up to Leeds in 1995 to train to be a teacher - and never left! I have worked across Leeds, Bradford and Sheffield in a range of teaching and leadership roles and have been a Headteacher for a good number of years, joining Westminster in 2022.

I am a father of 2 lively girls and love sport, films and tv, reading and catching up with friends if I have any time left over after family and work!

Anna Gulland - St Augustine's Representative Governor

Kate Hart - BDAT Governor

After completing my music degree in Leeds, I trained as a teacher and worked for a number of years in primary education. I then moved to Zambia and worked on an education project in countries across Sub-Saharan Africa for six years. I love to travel, meet new people and learn about other cultures - especially the music, art and food! Now I live in Bradford with my family, including two very lively young children. I am passionate about making our city a safer and more welcoming place for all through my current job at Schools of Sanctuary. Westminster is a wonderful example of how to be welcoming, inclusive and celebrate diversity; it's a pleasure to be a governor here.

Nuzhat Khan - Staff Governor

I am proud to have worked at Westminster Primary Academy School for almost 10 years as a class teacher and as a middle leader. I am passionate about providing and supporting our children with the best possible education so that each individual thrives academically and personally to unlock their full potential for a brighter future. I am thoroughly enjoying my role as a class teacher, middle leader and a Staff Governor as I have built positive relationships with staff, families and our community to ensure our pupils receive an enriching and inspiring curriculum.

Sally Coope - BDAT Clerk to Governors

I joined the BDAT team in November 2023 as Governance and Compliance Officer.

I qualified as a Veterinary Nurse in 1998 and worked in the veterinary sector for a number of years including working as a Senior Veterinary Nurse, where I was responsible for the smooth running of 5 branches, including a 24 hour emergency centre.

I then went onto work for a Private Medical Clinic in Leeds as Clinic Manager. During my time at the clinic I successfully progressed through CQC registration and inspection.

Outside of work, I love spending time with my family, holidays, both abroad, and in my caravan and getting out and about with my dogs. Generally enjoying life!

Vacancy - BDAT Governor

Vacancy - BDAT Governor