The Governing Body is made up of:

Eleven Foundation Governors

The majority of members of the Governing Body are appointed by the diocese of Westminster. These are active members of the local Catholic community.

Current Foundation governors are:

Mr Gianluca Marcato (Chairman), Professor of Finance and Real Estate, Henley Business School (University of Reading)

Mrs Maude Plantenga Wehry (Vice Chair), Freelancer in Project Management

Ms Margaret O’ Riordan, Executive Coach and Drama Teacher (20+ years in Banking)

Mr John Lee, School Building Fund Administrator, Diocese of Westminster

Ms Maud Millar, CEO, Get Adapt Ltd; COO, The Millar Agency; Team Leader, AQA

Ms Elaine Pinkster, Marketing, strategy, and communications professional

Ms Sophie Leech, Teacher

Mr Leo Keay, Parliamentary Researcher

Co-opted Governor

Mrs Jane Carrington, Headteacher of Primary School in Westminster

Parent Governor

This member is elected by the parents of, or those with parental responsibility for, full-time students of the College.

Staff Governors

These members are elected by the staff. Both teaching and support staff are eligible for election.

Current Staff governors are:

Ms Lena Abbas, A-level Art Teacher and Head of BTEC Art & Design at St Charles

Student Governors

Zara Farooqi and Ali Mohammadipour

The Principal

The Principal is ex officio a member of the Governing Body. Current Principal is Mr Martin Twist.

Attending a meeting as a member of the public

Permission to attend is at the Chair’s discretion. If you wish to attend a meeting, please contact the Clerk to the Governors by email – s.jacobs@stcharles.ac.uk

Please state your name and the meeting(s) you wish to attend and your contact details.

The relevant Chair will then be in touch with you.

Correspondence

All correspondence for members of the Governing Body should be addressed to

Mrs Susan Jacobs

Clerk to the Governing Body,

c/o St Charles Catholic Sixth Form College,

St Charles Square,

London W10 6EY or by email - s.jacobs@stcharles.ac.uk

St. Charles College welcomes students of all religious backgrounds who wish to pursue their studies in an explicitly Christian context.

On the application form all students, including those from outside the Catholic tradition, will be asked to make clear their reasons for wanting to study at a Catholic College. This statement is not used to determine the offer of places, but represents an opportunity for applicants to acknowledge the religious nature of the College and how they could be supportive of it.

In the event of over-subscription the Governors have established the following criteria

As the College has been designed with the needs of students with disabilities in mind, the governors will give priority of consideration to applications from such students, who have an open choice of course at enrolment, assuming they meet the required entry criteria for their preferred courses.

Students from the partner Catholic secondary schools who do not have their own sixth form provision have an open choice of course at enrolment, assuming they meet the required entry criteria for their preferred courses. These schools ar eSt. Thomas More in Sloane Square and All Saints College on St Charles Square.

Catholic students from other secondary schools.

Students from outside the Catholic tradition in other secondary schools.

Students in categories 3 and 4 will negotiate a course programme prior to enrolment, and will be offered a place on this basis. We will guarantee this programme should the student reach the necessary entry criteria. Otherwise, such a student can still take up their place at the College, but their choice, of course, may be limited by their GCSE grades and the availability of course places. The entry criteria for programme levels and individual courses are published in the prospectus and the course descriptions are available at the College and on our web-site. These criteria are the same for students from the partner schools as they are for those outside this group.

Students can be refused the offer of a place at the

College if

Their reference makes it clear that they are not supported by their current teachers for further progression in full-time education.

They have course or career preferences which simply cannot be accommodated within the College's current course offer.

Their application is received after the end of April and the College is likely to have reached its target offer total. These students will be offered places on the waiting list.