Gramophone or phonograph is an instrument that reproduces sound through vibrations of a stylus or needle that follows a groove on the rotating disc. The disc or record contains the replica of sound waves in the form of undulations in a sinuous groove inscribed by a stylus on the disc’s rotating surface. Another stylus responds to the undulations and reconverts it into sound while playing back the record.

The disc is known as the gramophone record. It is an analogue storage medium that stores recorded music. It is a flat disc made up of plastic. Gramophone and gramophone records gained popularity during the 20th century.

History of Gramophone

In 1877, when Thomas A. Edison invented the phonograph, the era of playing and recording music began. The phonograph is the machine that plays records and replays sound. The sound was recorded by embossing indentations into a sheet of tinfoil through a vibrating stylus. A cylinder wrapped around with tinfoil rotated while recording the sound. Though the phonographs did what they meant, they had certain limitations. For example, the quality of sound was shallow, and they could record sound only once.

Numerous inventors tried replacing the tin foils to make a more reliable machine that could play records. However, no one succeeded; therefore, people used a phonograph to play already recorded popular music.

At that time, Tainter and Bell and Edison were part of a contest to make a better device for playing music. Thus, Tainter and Bell’s gramophones made an entry into the market.

Meanwhile, Emile Berliner researched the pros and cons of the graphophone and the phonograph. Though the cylinder made of wax was an outstanding achievement, its durability wasn’t enough for a permanent recording. In addition, the stylus’ constant skidding needed grooves that are deeper than that on the cut made vertically. Moreover, it was not feasible to produce wax cylinders in huge numbers. Hence, there arose a need for an advanced device for sound recording.

Who Invented the Gramophone?

Berliner began experimenting with the gramophone to invent an advanced sound recording device. He was confident about replacing the cylinder with a disc during trial and error. The idea to use discs came from Leon Scott’s phonautograph invention.

Berliner started making a phonautograph. However, he attempted to replicate the tracing by photoengraving on a rigid surface at first. In doing so, zinc was found to be the most suitable material. He then coated the disc made of zinc and engraved very fine lines using a stylus on the zinc. Stylus reproduced the sound, and it was easy to mount the discs made of zinc on turntables. Therefore, Berliner invented the gramophone. In 1887, he patented his gramophone and continuously modified and patented the modifications.

Working of the Gramophone

The early gramophone was quite basic compared to today’s gramophones. It contained a tiny needle tucked into the diaphragm and the groove. The diaphragm and the horn were also connected. The vibrations of the diaphragm helped access the sound recorded and produce sound.

Popularity of the Gramophone

The gramophone became popular in the 1890s. People in certain countries paid to listen to songs. After patenting the gramophone, Berliner sold it exclusively. In 1899, Hollywood used gramophones for sound effects. At that time, Berliner’s company recorded songs for the first time.

Impact of the Gramophone

People started taking an interest in songs with the invention of the gramophone. Gramophones provided a cluster of prerecorded music that anyone could play. Its invention made a considerable impact on people’s lives because music plays a vital role in an assortment of occasions.

The gramophone became a revolutionary machine that flourished in the musical industry. It opened up new careers for lyricists, music artists, etc. Therefore, it marked the beginning of various creative professionals in the music field.

Usage of Gramophone

A gramophone plays recorded music of any form. After its invention, the primary use of the gramophone was to play music recorded on vinyl discs.

Earlier, many considered the primary use of the gramophone was to provide pleasure. The gramophone played all kinds of music, from soothing to rock. It allowed people to listen to some great voices and background scores in the comfort of their homes.

The Vienna Academy of Sciences discussed the use of the gramophone records over 30 years ago. They recorded all the European languages and dialects. They also recorded the speeches of many important people. There are around 3000 records present in Vienna, 4000 in Paris, and 10,000 in Berlin.

The first use of the gramophone records in science involved a premature attempt to analyse vowel sounds’ physical nature. The slowly rotating record delivered enlarged tracings of the grooves by a lever system. They represented the original sounds.

Conclusion

The gramophone evolved through the years. After gramophone discs, magnetic tapes became an excellent way to record music. Then, came the digital recordings through CDs and the minidiscs. Later on, computers stored digital sound files in the MP3 Format. These files were easy and quick to share over the internet. Recently, vinyl records resurfaced with some DJs and music lovers. However, modern turntables have a digital output connected to electronic amplifiers and computers. As a result, they can quickly increase the volumes and manipulate the sounds further.