From Hull AWE

Jump to: navigation, search

The term gramophone is the British English equivalent of the American English phonograph. These were - or still are - machines for playing recorded sounds - mainly music - on demand, and were the main form of recorded music through the twentieth century. To store the sounds, they used what were known as records, or, later, discs, and, even more informally, as platters. These were discs of solid material which acted as an analogue to the sound waves of the original performance. There were three principal types of record, defined by the speeds, in revolutions per minute (r.p.m.) at which they rotated, and therefore the amount of material they could store, and sometimes, more colloquially, by the materials of which they were made.

The original format quickly settled at a nominal 78 r.p.m., and the standard size became 10 inches in diameter. These, which were until about the second world war the only format regularly available, were called simply gramophone records. Later, with the advent of the others, they were known as 78s. They were made of a compound including shellac resin: hence they are known, rather disparagingly, as shellac (as in "scratchy and noisy as the old shellacs were", Higgins, G. V. (1977) Dreamland xvi. 180, cited in OED).

Practical problems in the new technology of recording meant that the length of time for a piece of music which could be recorded on one ordinary 78 was about 3 to 3½ minutes. This is still sometimes referred to as a standard.

In 1949, the 45 was introduced. It was made of vinyl, much less fragile than shellac, and capable of taking a much finer groove - the microgroove. It was much smaller than a 78 (7 inches in diameter) and was played at a rotation speed of 45 r.p.m., so becoming known as a 45. This came in two forms:

the single, more or less equivalent to the old 78, with a playing time of around 3½ minutes; and the

the extended play (E.P.) record which had a playing time of about 8 minutes.

In 1948, the microgroove vinyl LP record, or album, which was played at 33 1⁄3 r.p.m. and was sometimes known as a 33, was introduced. This could have a playing time of up to 50 minutes, though it was more usually about half an hour.

It was called an album because a single LP could contain a piece of music that had required up to a dozen 78s. These had been sold separately, or as a collection, contained in a bound volume of sleeves, usually of cardboard, like a photograph album.

Some of these terms, such as album, are still applied to more modern forms of recording.