Throughout his life, Senator David Norris has devoted himself to making the world a better place. He has been a tireless advocate for LGBTQ+ rights, and was the first openly gay person to be elected to public office in Ireland. Any law student will be (or should be!) familiar with the case of Norris v Ireland, where Senator Norris successfully challenged Irish laws criminalising homosexual activities. Senator Norris has left an incredible legacy; it will be an honour to hear about his work.

*dum DUM – da da da da da da da da da da*

For those of you not musically minded, that’s the Succession theme tune. Mr Brian Cox, aka Logan Roy, will be joining us to discuss how to be rich and control the media. Only joking! Emmy and Golden Globe winner Mr Cox has had a fantastic and wide-ranging career; as a classically trained Shakespearean actor, he has played God, Hannibal Lector and most famously, the Green Dragon in Scooby Doo and the Samurai Sword. He has also been heavily involved in Scottish politics and is a patron of the Scottish Youth Theatre. We can’t wait to hear about all his writing, acting and charitable work.

Johnny Sexton (aka Big J) is perhaps the best Irish rugby player ever. We all remember *that* drop goal against France in 2018, right? A Rugby World Player of the Year, Mr Sexton is the top points-scorer in the Six Nations, was a member of two Grand Slam winning teams, and was part of the first Irish teams to beat the All-Blacks, both home and away. At the time of writing, he will be leading Ireland into what will (touch wood) be their best World Cup yet. He also carries out a huge amount of charitable work with Debra Ireland. Join us to live out your South Dublin rugby boy wildest fantasies!

Since the UK legal system was established in the 13th century, there has never been a female Lord Chief Justice – until now. Lady Justice Sue Carr was appointed to this historic role in June 2023, and will be presiding over the UK Supreme Court. She also studied law at Trinity College (Cambridge) so she’s basically one of us. Join us as we persuade her to consider us (Trinity College Dublin) her true alma mater.

We will certainly fight and burn to witness Ms Ellie Goulding receive the Praeses Elit Award. As a chart-topping artist, she has achieved incredible success with records like Miracle, Burn, Love Me Like You Do and The Outside. She is a longstanding activist and philanthropist, a goodwill ambassador for the UN, and has over 8 billion streams on Spotify. If you’re thinking ‘slay’, you’d be absolutely correct.

You’re Fired! Come along to see one of Britain’s biggest TV personalities reveal all about what it’s like on the inside of his notorious boardroom. If you’re looking to become Lord Sugar’s next Apprentice this could be your opportunity! Having left school at 16 he went from selling radios out of the boot of his car to founding a multi-million-pound electronics company known as Amstrad. Having dabbled in politics and football, this is not one you want to miss.

Writer, journalist and former Labour MP Chris Mullin is a hero. It has been fifty years since the Birmingham Bombings occurred, and since six innocent Irish men were imprisoned for this crime. Mr Mullin was instrumental in proving the innocence of the Birmingham Six, rectifying what has been described as one of the greatest miscarriages of justice in UK legal history. He has also written extensively about his life in politics and has a new book coming out in May 2023 – we can’t wait to chat about his fascinating life.

Make some midday memories with us as we welcome Mr Louis Tomlinson, musician, former One Direction star and philanthropist. We will be grilling Mr Tomlinson about the inevitable One Direction reunion tour, and that alone is worth the LawSoc membership fee.