You'd think their lives would be charmed, but often it's just the opposite.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 600

Carroll O'Connor's son Hugh had addiction issues and ended up committing suicide at age 33.

by Anonymousreply 1

Jennifer Jones daughter with David Selznick, Mary Selznick ,jumped off a 22nd story skyscraper at the age of 22. There's a lot of mystery surrounding her suicide. Angie Dickinsons daughter was autistic and killed herself in her 30s.

by Anonymousreply 2

Cheryl Crane, Lana Turner's daughter.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 3

This doesn't really belong here, but I just found out last night that Whoopi Goldberg has a daughter. I *never* knew she had any kids. I always thought she was secretly one of us and was bearding with Ted Danson.

by Anonymousreply 5

Michael Douglas’ kid has crazy addiction issues, every single one of Ryan O’Neal’s kids, and Paris Jackson if not all the Jackson kids.

Lots of others but I’m blanking on names. Feh.

by Anonymousreply 6

Marlon Brando's kids own this thread. From the son imprisoned for killing his brother in law, to the daughter who killed herself, the Brando family is dysfunctional even by showbiz standards.

by Anonymousreply 7

Zsa Zsa Gabor's daughter was severely overweight and had a sad life.

by Anonymousreply 9

Marlon Brando's kids Christian and Cheyenne. In 1990 Christian shot and killed Cheyenne's boyfriend because she said he beat her. Both of them had addiction/mental issues. Christian Brando went to prison and a few years later Cheyenne killed herself.

by Anonymousreply 11

famous or successful people dont have time to parent

by Anonymousreply 14

Olivia Newton-John’s daughter Chloe is as sad and dysfunctional as they come.

by Anonymousreply 15

Although Jane Fonda's life has turned out pretty well, I felt a lot of empathy for her after watching the HBO documentary about her. She's done well for herself, obviously, but it's clear that growing up with a distant-Henry Fonda as a dad and with a mentally ill mother who committed suicide when Jane was quite young that Jane was pretty emotionally neglected as a child and that affected affected the rest of her life.

by Anonymousreply 16

The daughter of Gene Kierney, gravely disabled (reportedly due to prenatal exposure to measles ).

by Anonymousreply 18

Terry Melcher, son of Doris Day did some Business with Charles Manson. Manson felt that he didn’t live up to his word and may have targeted Tate house because Melcher was living their prior. Melcher had a breakdown after the Murder and died in his 60’s

by Anonymousreply 19

Redmond O'Neal, son of Farrah and Ryan.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 20

R19 I never understood why Melcher couldn't have mentioned that he had a disturbed freak who had a grudge against him before he sold the Polanski's the house. I have always wondered if he and Bergen just wanted to get out of there as quickly as possible. Perhaps I'm just being cynical.

by Anonymousreply 21

Jon Voight's daughter is a complete mess.

by Anonymousreply 22

Jenny Arness, daughter of Gunsmoke's James Arness, killed herself with an overdose of sleeping pills while watching her former lover Gregg Allman appear as a guest on Cher's Sunday night TV show. Th9s was right after Allman and Cher had gotten married, and she wrote the suicide note (addressed to Allman) during the broadcast.

by Anonymousreply 23

[quote]R2 Jennifer Jones daughter with David Selznick, Mary Selznick ,jumped off a 22nd story skyscraper at the age of 22.

It was two days after Mother’s Day, or something.

Guess it didn’t go so well.

by Anonymousreply 24

that Jim Beam ad makes it look like they were fucking

by Anonymousreply 26

Quintana Roo Dunne, Joan Didion's daughter

by Anonymousreply 27

and her son, Gideon Didion.

by Anonymousreply 28

R28, I thought his name was Yucatan?

by Anonymousreply 29

Didn't Barbara Eden's son commit suicide? And wasn't he this hot-looking professional bodybuilder?

by Anonymousreply 30

George McGovern's daughter lived on the street and froze to death on a snowbank.

by Anonymousreply 31

R30 It was my understanding that Edens son , bodybuilder Matthew Ansara, died of an accidental heroin overdose.

by Anonymousreply 32

Laurence Fishburne‘s daughter did porn and has been in constant trouble with the law

by Anonymousreply 33

Tom Jones has an illegitimate son who is homeless.

by Anonymousreply 34

R34, So does James Brolin, albeit not illegitimate.

by Anonymousreply 35

R6, Patrick, the son he had with Leigh Taylor Young, escaped the O'Neal curse.

by Anonymousreply 36

R9, She died sitting on a toilet in a West Hollywood diner, obese and in major debt.

by Anonymousreply 37

Melcher had a successful career as a music producer and helped his mother get her finances in order. He died of melanoma. Sad he died in his 60s but hardly a tragic life.

by Anonymousreply 38

I wonder how Sheena Easton's adopted kids, Jake & Skylar, are doing as young adults?

by Anonymousreply 39

Wait and Melcher dated Candace Bergen? Poster upthread claimed she lived with him?

by Anonymousreply 40

Can’t wait to see what those Jolie kids will get up to....

by Anonymousreply 41

The Hemingway households must have looked like the set of "The Virgin Suicides".

by Anonymousreply 43

Do you think that celebrity parent have more of a responsibility to ensure that their offspring have the best start in life? Than those sad stories we read?

by Anonymousreply 44

R44 It's hard because fame is intoxicating but really unhealthy for the mind. Good parenting requires selflessness but for famous people, the world around them is constantly demanding that they fixate on themselves for the sake of satisfying The Public's addiction to whatever rush their person and talent is providing.

It takes a conscious effort to counterbalance that. I applaud anyone who is sincerely trying, with all their heart and soul, to be a good parent to their children while being famous. Those people are actually working harder in their parenting than everyone else.

by Anonymousreply 45

[quote]I never understood why Melcher couldn't have mentioned that he had a disturbed freak who had a grudge against him before he sold the Polanski's the house. I have always wondered if he and Bergen just wanted to get out of there as quickly as possible. Perhaps I'm just being cynical.

Melcher didn't own the house. He rented from owner Rudi Altobelli. Altobelli then rented to Polanski and Tate after Melcher's lease contract ended and he decided to move to Malibu. IIRC, Melcher and Bergen had broken up around that time.

by Anonymousreply 46

I bet Reese W and Jennifer G are ok as parents. I know they are not popular here but I do think they try.

by Anonymousreply 47

R19. Terry Melcher was not the owner of the home. The Polanski’s were renting the home. The owner, Altobelli, was a real piece of shit. He sued Sharons parents for the damage done to the home during the murders. Sharons did pretty much told him to fuck off. Altobelli then sued Sharons estate. He was awarded around $4300, which was far less than the $480,000 he was suing for.

by Anonymousreply 51

Lisa Marie Presley is not doing well.

by Anonymousreply 54

Joan Crawford’s daughter and Bette Davis’s daughter.

by Anonymousreply 55

R11 plus Brando sexually abused the daughter, too.

by Anonymousreply 56

Too bad Rebecca Welles looked like dad and not mom

by Anonymousreply 58

Ryan O’Neal just seems like a truly horrid person, and the proof is in the pudding—his children seem to detest him and they have all had horrible traumatic lives. I give Tatum ONeal a lot of credit for enduring. She seems like a decent person with a LOT of baggage.

John Phillips seems just as neglectful, though perhaps less actively malicious.

by Anonymousreply 59

Huh, R59? He did drugs with his daughter and had sex with her.

by Anonymousreply 60

[quote] I give Tatum ONeal a lot of credit for enduring. She seems like a decent person with a LOT of baggage.

And she's still trying to have a relationship with him. Her IG posts with him are heartbreaking if you know their history.

by Anonymousreply 62

Yes, gross and hedonistic and perverted. But read his autobio and Mackenzie’s. He comes off as a self-absorbed hedonist with his own set of rules, not a malicious jealous person who beats and belittles his children, a la O’Neal. (Read Tatum’s two books for more.)

by Anonymousreply 63

I turned out just swell! brrppp…..hic....

by Anonymousreply 64

If we're including adopted children, then Dion Fay.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 65

Ms. Streep's daughters are spoiled messes who think they're entitled to the world because of their mother's fame.

The fact is, most actors are deeply screwed up people. Not surprising they end up with deeply screwed up kids.

by Anonymousreply 66

Tom Hanks' rapper son - Chet something.

by Anonymousreply 67

All of them. Celebrities are extremely narcissistic and look at their kids as Assessories , extension of themselves

by Anonymousreply 68

Jenifer Jones kid that jumped off the roof of a highrise was severely messed up and had been seeing a psychiatrist for a while prior to the suicide. Apparently she use to frequent high rise building and hang out on the rooftops as a matter of course. There is even a psyciatric term for this particular behavior and it isnt all that rare.

Famous people with messed up kids..........maybe the parents didnt have enough time for the kids or being a child of the famous might be somewhat demoralizing if you dont have incredible self esteem as you cant ever top your parent etc etc.

by Anonymousreply 69

I can't understand, how can the children of rich famous celebrities be homeless? How the fuck does THAT happen?

by Anonymousreply 70

They are NOT their parents' FANS!

by Anonymousreply 71

R70 When they become drug addicts and violent and have failed multiple stays in rehabs, and just use their parent(s) for money to get drugs, that is how they become homeless (see Redmond O'Neal)

by Anonymousreply 72

Some celeb parents cut ties with kids from earlier marriages. I don't think Johnny Carson's kids inherited anything. It all went to his last wife.

by Anonymousreply 73

to the person commenting about Terry melcher and the cielo driove house. You dont have any facts on hand do you? As another poster said, it was rented and Altobelli was something of an asshole. I think a big part of his problem was he was extremely greedy his entire life. After the murders he sued Sharons estate for basically devaluing the rental market value of his hiouse because she was so careless by being murdered there (saracasm on purpose). He settled for damages to some contents that couldnt be restored due to perm blood stains.

The really ironic thing is Sharon s parents ought to have sued Altobelli. He relentlessly rented the prioperty out and it became well known as a place to score free drugs and party when Melchor lived there. Altobelli didnt seem overly picky who he rented to. Manson was on the premises at least 3 times during and after Melchor rented or vacated the property. The last time was in march if 1969 and Manson deliberately sought out Altobelli who was living in the guest house on the property as Manson was trying to get any help he could to further his music career. Altobelli was a business manager for entertainers in the industry and was well connected. He refused to help and was rude to manson. On that last visit Manson eye balled Sharon on the property as well as Abby, Jay, and Wytold.........all were together having dinner and spotted Manson loitering around. Manson knew that Melchor had moved out and he knew Melchor was living in Malibu. Charles tex watson had been on the property at least 3 times/ once, Candy Bergen found him in the kitchen waiting for Melchor (the maid had let him in) and she kicked him out in pretty hasty fashion. Another time he came over and borrowed Melchors car. Melchor knew him thru Manson. So really Altobelli unknowingly fostered antagonism in Manson by representing in a way success in Hollywood/ it was this success and the symbol this particular house had for Manson to lash out against rich white people making it in society.

Manson didnt have much imagination really and he struck houses he was familiar with. The next night Manson chose the house in Los Feliz as he had been to the house next door several times. Both houses, cielo and Waverly, were slightly remote (by LA standards) and Manson probably figured a murder could happen at those locations without alerting the entire neighborhood. He was right about that (unfortunately).

by Anonymousreply 74

Didn't one of the neighbors near Cielo hear a scream?

by Anonymousreply 75

Johnny Carson's sons were miserable.

by Anonymousreply 76

Sage Stallone, Sylvester Stallone's eldest son from his first marriage, died in 2012 at only 36, surrounded by so many drugs that police thought he was dealing and assumed it an overdose. This created a scandal because his famous father denied the son was a dealer or had a drug problem. Later, the official investigation claimed the death was due to a heart condition, but the vast amount of drugs found seemed to indicate something else. Very sad. Sage was so very handsome as a young kid Rocky 5.

by Anonymousreply 77

[quote][Francesca Hilton] died sitting on a toilet in a West Hollywood diner, obese and in major debt.

At the time of her death, she was alternating between living in her car and living from week to week in fleabag motels. She really wanted to be a star but didn't have the looks or the talent, although she tried being an actress, a photographer, and a stand-up comic. Sadly, she didn't get much love from her parents.

by Anonymousreply 78

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 79

Sharon Tate and Roman Polanski’s son.

by Anonymousreply 80

R77 Like a year before he died, Sage got all his teeth removed too.

My sister knew him because she's a film professor/scholar and he was involved in archiving grindhouse films, which is one of her research interests. She liked him a lot.

by Anonymousreply 81

R81 That's fascinating. Why did Sage get his teeth removed? I had never heard that.

by Anonymousreply 82

Paul Newman's son died of a drug overdose.

by Anonymousreply 84

[quote] Michael Douglas’ kid has crazy addiction issues, every single one of Ryan O’Neal’s kids, and Paris Jackson if not all the Jackson kids. Lots of others but I’m blanking on names. Feh.

With the exception of Latoya, all of the Jackson siblings have children and there is no evidence that supports your claims.

by Anonymousreply 85

This thread is about famous people's kids R85. Most people would struggle to name the male Jackson siblings other than the pedophile.

by Anonymousreply 86

Ray Milland's son Daniel committed suicide by blowing his head off with a shotgun at the age of 41.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 87

R73, I believe Carson’s surviving sons inherited his estate. He and his last wife were separated, and he’d paid her off before his death. One of Carson’s sons died in a car accident in 1991.

by Anonymousreply 88

Jane Birkins daughter with John Barry, the photographer Kate Barry, committed suicide by jumping out of the window of her Paris apartment. Barry was a photographer.

by Anonymousreply 89

That Christina Crawford is a piece of work, making up those heinous lies about such a treasured Hollywood legend and standing by them to this day.

by Anonymousreply 90

R66, Meryl's daughters are not any more "entitled" than anyone else. Bad example, they seem like decent people

by Anonymousreply 91

Although a lot of her mental health issues seemed to be genetic or drug related I can't help thinking Carrie Fisher was damaged by her mother. A lot of celebrities first love are themselves, their careers, and their lovers, in that order, their children come after that. I admire people like Oprah who acknowledge they're not the least bit maternal and subsequently choose a career over parenthood and don't try to do both, thus producing fucked up kids,

by Anonymousreply 92

I think both Paul Newman's and Gregory Peck's sons committed suicide.

by Anonymousreply 93

I'm surprised Liz Taylors kids turned out ok, she must have been less selfish and fucked up than she came across. Either that or she had good nannies for them.

by Anonymousreply 94

Clark Gable's grandson OD'd

by Anonymousreply 95

R23, that’s especially tragic because that marriage lasted less than two weeks.

by Anonymousreply 96

Here's a weird one (and it involves a stepson): Peg Entwistle, who's most famous for killing herself by jumping off the Hollywood sign, was the stepmother of actor Brian Keith, who killed himself with a gun.

by Anonymousreply 97

Brian Keith's daughter had committed suicide two months before him and he was also suffering from cancer and emphysema.

by Anonymousreply 98

Thank God I wasn't in this thread.

by Anonymousreply 99

Lordy race to the bottom: John Phillips vs Ryan O’Neal.

by Anonymousreply 100

Eric Douglas, Kirk's OTHER son

by Anonymousreply 101

Ry Guy O’Neal had life handed to him on a platter and still managed to be menacing and mean. What did Feral Fawcett see in him!

by Anonymousreply 102

Mercedes McCambridge's son shot to death his wife, children and himself.

by Anonymousreply 103

Elizabeth Taylors' public image was a complete opposite to the woman I knew.

I didn't know her well, but as a complete nobody, she was a kind woman. Very motherly, warm, earthy and with a mouth like a sailor.

I can see how her kids turned out well.

by Anonymousreply 104

r99, see r48. Being a ghost is no excuse for carelessness, dear.

by Anonymousreply 105

R104 Cool to hear from someone who met her firsthand, I always thought Liz had a warmth to her.

by Anonymousreply 106

R93, Paul Newman's son, Scott Newman, died of a barbiturate overdose at the age of 28. He was an actor who appeared in "Fraternity Row" and had a brief scene playing a firefighter in "The Towering Inferno."

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 108

Was it true that Scott Newman hated Joanne?

by Anonymousreply 109

R93, Greg Peck's eldest son, Jonathan Peck, was a journalist who, despondent over a failed love affair, shot himself in the head at the age of 30.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 110

Louis Jourdan's son, Louis Henry Jourdan, died of a drug overdose at the age of 29.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 111

Tina Turner's son recently killed himself.

by Anonymousreply 112

It started out pretty rough (benign neglect from mom and a parade of stepdads, one of whom raped me many times) but I ended up happy and in a long-term relationship with the love of my life. All that, and a successful career, too!

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 113

Paula Yates daughter Peaches who died of a heroin overdose aged 24.

Boobi Kristina, Whitney Houston's daughter who died of a drug overdose/drowning in a bath aged 20.

Louis' Tomlinson's 18 year old sister who died of a heart attack aged 18 (most likely due to drugs)

by Anonymousreply 114

'Although a lot of her mental health issues seemed to be genetic or drug related I can't help thinking Carrie Fisher was damaged by her mother'

More like Debby was damaged by insane Carrie and her escapades. Carrie only lived to be 60 and then killed off her 80 year old mother with her unexpected death.

by Anonymousreply 115

Charles Boyer's son, Michael Charles Boyer, died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head at the age of 21. He was supposedly playing Russian Roulette, but may have been suicidal. Years later, Papa Boyer would take his own life, two days after his beloved wife's death from cancer.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 116

Nicholas Hughes, son of Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes, committed suicide aged 30.

by Anonymousreply 117

[quote][R81] That's fascinating. Why did Sage get his teeth removed? I had never heard that.

I'm not R81. But, maybe Sage had his teeth removed due to damage from drug use. This happens quite a bit. A relative of mine was a meth addict and he went to rehab and got sober. A few years later he started experiencing dental issues due to past drug use. He had eight teeth removed and he replaced them with bridges and a couple of dental implants. Sometime before that he inherited money from his late stepfather and used some of that money to cover his dental work. He does volunteer work at rehabs and NA groups he frequently tells people to get clean as soon as possible before the drug use really fucks up your teeth and body.

by Anonymousreply 118

[quote] the stepmother of actor Brian Keith, who killed himself with a gun.

Brian doesn't belong on this list. He had terminal cancer and chose his own time and place.

by Anonymousreply 119

R82 and R118 Yes, it was because of drugs.

by Anonymousreply 120

Does anyone remember an actress named Debrah Farentino? She was on Capital in the 80s and a lot of TV in the 90s. I wondered what happened to her and looked her up a few years ago and learned that her daughter killed Sammi Kane Kraft, who starred in the Bad News Bears remake in a drunk driving accident.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 122

Diana Barrymore, daughter of John, died in her 30s of alcoholism. John was portrayed in "Too Much Too Soon" by Errol Flynn, whose son Sean disappeared in SE Asia while a photographer during the war in Vietnam.

by Anonymousreply 123

Cameron Douglas charmed his lawyer into sneaking Adderall into jail for him. She wrote a book about the incident, where she refers to Michael Douglas as, "Cameron Douglas' father" throughout.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 124

Why can't celebrities hire very qualified nannies who will do all the parenting? I've known kids who grew up rich raised by staff and I'm sure there's always something missing but they can get through life okay.

by Anonymousreply 125

Jon Bon Jovi's daughter ODed, but survived.

Bruce Willis and Demi Moore's daughter Tallulah is a drug addict and has an eating disorder. Their daughter Scout is an alcoholic.

Hugh Hefner's son Marston was convicted of domestic violence.

Al Gore III, son of the former VP, is a drug addict and alcoholic.

Robert Downey Jr.'s son Indio is a drug addict.

by Anonymousreply 126

[quote] Some celeb parents cut ties with kids from earlier marriages. I don't think Johnny Carson's kids inherited anything. It all went to his last wife.

Joan Rivers interviewed the guy who was Carson's lawyer--it's on youtube--and he said that the boys did inherit.

by Anonymousreply 127

Didn't Marie Osmond's son jump from his dorm room window?

by Anonymousreply 128

Is it true that Carson disowned one son for marrying or dating a black woman?

by Anonymousreply 129

Johnny Carson was a nasty piece of work. Petty and vindictive little man.

by Anonymousreply 130

This is a sad ass thread. Went down a google rabbit hole on Christina Onnasis. Damn, she was one sad person

Her only child does look like the grifter dad. Athina looks like she’s doing ok and seems well adjusted considering

by Anonymousreply 131

R129 I think he threatened to disown the son if he didn't break up with her. So the son did even though he had a daughter with the woman.

by Anonymousreply 132

[quote] Why can't celebrities hire very qualified nannies who will do all the parenting? I've known kids who grew up rich raised by staff and I'm sure there's always something missing but they can get through life okay.

Drugs, I think.

I know a lot of semi-messed up adult children of rich parents--they also have suffered from neglect, high expectations, narcissism, etc. I think the difference is that they see/saw their parents put a suit on every day and go to work, living a normal routine (even if on a wealthy scale).

I think when the parents are voltaile--and in a very volatile career where they're only sometimes working--and otherwise drugged out themselves, it just makes everything worse.

by Anonymousreply 133

Someone mentioned Gary Crosby above. But all four of Bing's sons from his first marriage had awful lives, with two of the four committing suicide. I guess Bing learned his lesson from that, because the children from the second marriage turned out okay.

by Anonymousreply 134

One of Jerry Lewis' sons died of a drug overdose. The other sons said that he was abusive. Jerry also had an out of wedlock daughter who ended up homeless in Philadelphia. Lewis refused to acknowledge the daughter even though a DNA test she took with one his sons showed they were half siblings. Lewis left his sons out of his will and everything was left to his second wife and adopted daughter.

by Anonymousreply 135

I don't know, R100. Ryan showed he really didn't love his kids at all, but John loved his a little too much!

by Anonymousreply 136

Art Linkletter's daughter jumped out a window. He blamed it on drugs, but Art was an abusive prick.

by Anonymousreply 137

Alice Roosevelt was the most famous bride in White House history. Her daughter Paulina was Washington DC's most notorious bastard.

Alice married the much older Nicholas Longworth more for political ambition than for love. Alice dearly wanted to be the First Lady and Nick was a likely candidate for the Presidency. Alice hated having to live n Ohio and deal with Midwestern women. The marriage was unhappy and both partners cheated.

Although Longworth treated Paulina as his own, everyone in DC knew her real father was Senator William Borah from Idaho. Paulina was devastated to be the last to learn that her beloved father was not her real father. She never forgave her famous mother.

Paulina married a rich heir named Alexander Sturm who co-founded the Sturm &, Ruger Co., makers of Ruger firearms. He died of viral hepatitis at age twenty-eight, leaving her with a young daughter. Paulina died of an overdose of sleeping pills five years later at the age of thirty-two.

Alice's White House dreams were dashed when her older husband died young in the 1920s. She never got along with Paulina though she genuinely grieved her death.. Alice adopted her orphaned grand-daughter and had a much better relationship with her.

by Anonymousreply 138

Honestly, Liza and Lorna could have turned out a lot worse.

The people I know with well-known, or wealthy parents seem mostly damaged by their parents narcissism and lack of interest in them.

by Anonymousreply 139

Doesn't Regis Philbin have a destitute son with a disability who often publicly begs him for money?

by Anonymousreply 140

We can't forget Ethel Merman Jr. (Ethel Leavitt Geary) died at age twenty-five of "an overdose of pills" in bed while on vacation with her two small children. Very sad.

by Anonymousreply 141

Phyllis Diller's oldest daughter Sally was an institutionalized schizophrenic. Another daughter, Stephanie, dropped dead from a stroke while potting flowers next to Diller on Diller's front porch.

by Anonymousreply 142

R137 but he said the darnedest things!

by Anonymousreply 143

R140 That son passed away in 2015. IIRC, he had a career in public affairs with the government, but he and his wife ended up with financial problems and hard to Regis for help even though there was estrangement.

by Anonymousreply 144

R138 bully for you! News to me. A check of images shows that Paulina sure looked like Borah. Sort of like Gable's ears on Young's "adopted" daughter. I think it was Alice R who said to someone, "If you can't say anything nice about [that person], sit by me and tell it."

by Anonymousreply 145

^ I meant to type had to ask Regis for help.

by Anonymousreply 146

Carol Burnett’s daughter, Carrie Hamilton, recovered from drug addiction but later got cancer and died in the hospital from pneumonia contracted while being treated for cancer. Very sad.

by Anonymousreply 147

Regis Philbin's former daughter in-law claims that Joy was the main reason he didn't have much of a relationship with his son Danny and daughter Amy. There was a period when I was watched Regis and Kathy Lee during college in the 90s. I mostly took classes and worked in the afternoons and nights so morning TV shows became a guilty pleasure. I remember Regis always talking about "Joy and the girls". Years later, I was shocked when some news article mentioned Regis' first marriage and the two kids from that marriage.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 148

Joan Davis's daughter (along with her mother and grandchildren) were killed in a house fire in Palm Springs.

by Anonymousreply 149

R58 Not only did she resemble her father, but to add insult to injury Orson Welles' other daughters took after their mothers AND, of course, Yasmin Aga Khan took after Rita.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 150

Kelly Preston has a son with her first husband whose existence has been mostly scrubbed from the internet.

by Anonymousreply 151

Dr. Dre son ODed at 20.

One of OJ Simpson's children drowned in a swimming pool. So did Bruce Dern and Diane Ladd's oldest daughter.

by Anonymousreply 152

One of Mike Tyson's kids died when he became tangled up in a cord that was hanging from an exercise treadmill.

by Anonymousreply 153

Briefly mentioned by R65, but Barbara Stanwyck's adopted son Dion Anthony Fay. What actually happened to him? I guess Barbara just adopted him for show, but it's pretty detestable to adopt a child and just cast them aside when they don't suit you anymore for whatever reason. Did *any* old Hollywood celebrity who adopted children treat their kids decently? Aside from Loretta Young, naturally.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 154

Peter Sellers' daughter Victoria and Dick Smothers' son were porn actors

by Anonymousreply 155

R155 Victoria Seller is also best friends with Heidi Fleiss.

by Anonymousreply 156

Sad, strange and/or tragic lives: Jaden Smith

by Anonymousreply 157

R151 Hmm... interesting...

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 158

Real piece of work, our Victoria. From The Times (London), 3 Oct 2006:

Victoria Sellers faces deportation after arrest

Victoria Sellers, the troubled daughter of the late actor Peter Sellers and the actress Britt Ekland, is to be deported to Britain after being arrested for immigration violations in Hollywood last night.

Ms Sellers, who starred in a sex tips video and has spent time in American jails for drug and robbery-related offences, is being held at an immigration centre in Orange County, California, according to a spokesman for US Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

The spokesman said Ms Sellers, 41, has been living illegally there since April 2002, when an immigration judge revoked her residency and ordered that she leave the country because of a previous criminal conviction.

Ms Sellers will be deported as soon as possible but the spokesperson declined to say when.

by Anonymousreply 159

R152 do we know where OJ was at the time?

by Anonymousreply 160

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 161

Art Linkletters daughter Diane may have been pushed out the window of her apartment. She was with a male friend when she "jumped." That same male went on vacation with Carol Wayne in Mexico. Wayne was found drowned in 4 feet of water. Her family said she never went in the water because she couldn't swim. The guy she went in vacation with left Mexico before her body was found. He said they'd had an argument and she went to the beach and he went home.

Kind of suspicious that this guy was present when 2 women died under strange circumstances.

by Anonymousreply 162

Former NFL coach Tony Dungy's son committed suicide.

by Anonymousreply 163

R149 Beverly Wills was 30 at the time. She was one of Sweet Sue's girls in Some Like It Hot, the one who tells the joke about the one-legged jockey who tells the woman he's stranded on an island with, "That's okay, lady, I ride side-saddle."

Joan Davis had died 2 years earlier of a heart attack at 48. Beverly's first husband, of 3, was a fireman.

by Anonymousreply 164

Walter Koenig's son, Arthur, committed suicide in Stanley Park.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 165

R162 LInk? I have never read heard that before!

by Anonymousreply 166

R77, I knew Sage Stallone when he was in his 20s, young and beautiful, and with a sweet personality to boot. I lost touch with him over the years, so I was shocked and saddened by his premature death from coronary artery disease. When I saw pictures of him taken during his last years on earth, I was stunned by how scruffy and bloated he became.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 167

Peter lawford’s so Christopher died at age 60 of heart attack while doing heated yoga . Christopher has over 30 years sober and Peter killed lived to 68 on drugs. Sad

by Anonymousreply 169

Burt Bacharach and Angie Dickinson's only daughter, Nikki, had Asperger's and struggled with learning disabilities her whole life. Killed herself by placing a plastic bag over her head and inhaling helium.

by Anonymousreply 170

R158 I miss the IMDB boards. They had good gossip.

by Anonymousreply 171

I hadn't heard about many of these...

by Anonymousreply 172

R166 Mr. Google tells us that the guy was Edward Durston, AKA David Durston. He directed I Drink Your Blood and a few gay pornos. Died at 88.

by Anonymousreply 173

Ray Milland's son Daniel, struggled with drug addiction and had trouble holding down a job. Put an AK7 to his head and pulled the trigger. Dead at 41.

by Anonymousreply 174

Mary Tyler Moore's only son, Ritchie Meeker, accidently shot himself in the head. He was only 24.

Carroll O'Connor's son, Hugh, struggled with drug addiction before committing suicide by gunfire. He was 32.

James Arness' daughter, Jenny Lee, was desponded over her breakup with Greg Allman. She took an overdose of sleeping pills after seeing him on Cher's Sunday night tv show. She was 25.

by Anonymousreply 175

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 176

Edward G. Robinson, Jr. was a wild guy, had brushes with the law, was a friend of Monroe, and died of a heart attack at 40. He was cute.

by Anonymousreply 177

[quote]The daughter of Gene Kierney, gravely disabled (reportedly due to prenatal exposure to measles ).

Gene Tierney's daughter was born deaf and mentally disabled; a fan broke a measles quarantine and infected the pregnant Tierney while she was volunteering at the Hollywood Canteen. Agatha Christie used the sad story as a plot point in "The Mirror Crack'd."

[quote]Briefly mentioned by [R65], but Barbara Stanwyck's adopted son Dion Anthony Fay. What actually happened to him? I guess Barbara just adopted him for show, but it's pretty detestable to adopt a child and just cast them aside when they don't suit you anymore for whatever reason.

According to Stanwyck biographers, Dion's adoption was a bust from the beginning. Stanwyck had had a terrible childhood and survived by growing up quick and tough. Stanwyck didn't like whining or neediness and her first husband, Frank Fay, was a wife-beating drunk so no love there.

Robert Taylor, Stanwyck's second husband, tried to bond with the boy and do outdoorsy stuff with him, but Dion wasn't very good at that. In fact, the boy just seemed to be a damp squib and unattractive to boot.

In later life Dion just drifted around and got busted a few times for selling porn to minors. Stanwyck kept bailing him out until she didn't. He may have tried to sell his Hollywood upbringing to the scandal sheets but nothing came of it.

by Anonymousreply 178

William Powell's only child, his son Michael, stabbed himself to death in the shower. He left a 4 page goodbye letter to his father.

by Anonymousreply 179

I hear the son of Anne Meara and Jerry Stiller turned out to be an incredible asshole.

by Anonymousreply 181

Arnella Flynn, daughter of Errol and Patrice Wymore, died at 44 after years of cocaine addiction. Her son is gorgeous Luke Flynn.

by Anonymousreply 182

Powell's son was okay until he got hepatitis, poor man.

by Anonymousreply 184

Marlene Dietrich left her daughter in the care of a lesbian who molested her.

by Anonymousreply 185

[quote] Marlene Dietrich left her daughter in the care of a lesbian who molested her.

̶M̶a̶r̶l̶e̶n̶e̶ ̶D̶i̶e̶t̶r̶i̶c̶h̶ Cher left her daughter in the care of a lesbian who molested her.

Not to mention the matter of her cross-dressing son Elijah.

by Anonymousreply 186

Richard Todd had two sons who committed suicide by shotgun to the head about a decade apart. His mother had also killed herself, by drowning in a cold stream like Ophelia.

by Anonymousreply 187

I never knew William Powell’s son committed suicide. Stabbing oneself sounds like an extremely painful way to go.

by Anonymousreply 188

Allegra Versace. An anorexic hot mess.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 189

Mia Farrow’s adopted children.

by Anonymousreply 190

Someone mentioned Zsa Zsa Gabor's daughter (Francesca Hilton) upthread and it's truly a sad story

Dead for weeks and not one soul would claim her body.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 191

I'm sure I remember reading many years ago that Sage Stallone was autistic. Was that code for something else?

by Anonymousreply 192

If you're the child of a famous person or a famous couple, it may well be that you're the child of a narcissist. Narcissists don't make the best parents, and don't usually work in the best interest of the child.

by Anonymousreply 193

“Everybody that really knows Francesca knows why she passed away. It was a massive heart attack caused by the stress of one Frederic von Anhalt.”

Ultimately, authorities ordered an autopsy and did not allow von Anhalt to claim Francesca’s body. One of Francesca’s half-brothers, Stephen, reportedly will step forward and claim the body, so that Francesca’s friends can lay her to rest in the manner they believe she would have wanted.

It was quite a fall from grace for the daughter of the woman called “glamour personified” and one the world’s most successful hoteliers of all time. With all of the time, energy and money invested into battling over her mother’s best interests, it’s too bad that Francesca did not take more care to plan for her own estate. Francesca could have planned out her funeral and burial arrangements, even if she did not have assets to plan for. Exercising that forethought would have ended any concern that the man she battled against so fervently may have been the one to plan her funeral and burial.

by Anonymousreply 194

Jesus Christ. Did Donatella Versace take a picture of H.R Pufnstuf to her plastic surgeon?

Whoever said Jaden Smith upthread made me LOL

by Anonymousreply 195

R192, Seargeoh Stallone is the autistic child.

by Anonymousreply 196

In a strange twist, the daughter of Jack Webb, [italic]Dragnet's[/italic] iconic Sgt. Friday, was killed when her car collided with an LA police car.

by Anonymousreply 197

Suicide by self-stabbing is particularly unsettling.

This blog offers a bit more info on William Powell’s son. The comments are interesting as well.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 198

R147 My sister was friends with Carrie during her newly clean phase and I met her when I was in junior high. She was darling: had the funkiest, cutest clothes and couldn’t have been sweeter to me. We all grieved when we heard of her death.

by Anonymousreply 200

Celeste Holm's son hated his mother with venom. He didn't want even her name to be mentioned. I think he became a police officer.

Someone mentioned Carrie Fisher was screwed up by her mother which I doubt that. They did have their usual mother and daughter friction when Carrie was growing up, but they patched things up. Debbie Reynolds said Carrie Fisher was bipolar like her father which is one of the main reasons why she had issues with drug use. Also, Eddie Fisher didn't give a rat's ass about ANY of his kids and Debbie tried to be there for them as best as she could. I think when Debbie was told Carrie was dead and there after Debbie said I don't want to live with out Carrie and died, I think that is very telling how much Debbie truly loved her kids and she was devoted to them.

Wow! R178, I didn't know that about Barbara Stanwyck's son. What I herd, like Celeste Holm's son, he too hated his mother and didn't want anything to do with her.

Agnes Moorhead's adopted son was crazy. He carried a gun around and did bizarre things. Eventually Agnes Moorhead threw him out.

Jerry Van Dyke's daughter was in porn ,and died from drug use. She was very messed up.

One time many moons ago I watched the Phil Donahue show with my mother when I was a kid.He was interviewing Sylvester Stallone and his son who at the time was around 12?13? something like that. His son as I recall was a good looking kid. When Phil Donahue would try to ask Sylvester Stallone's son certain questions, Sylvester Stallone kept budding in saying, he is preoccupied with WOMEN! Oh he loves WOMEN on and on about his son and women this and women that. His son looked disgusted and disturbed by his father's obvious obnoxious overbearing reinforcement that his son was girl crazy. His was only 12 or 13 years old. He was just a kid and mother and I were saying, leave the kid alone and let him be a kid.

I wonder how many of the kids of famous parents also had issues because they possibly might have been gay? That must have been difficult to deal with when you have a famous parent or parents ,and your issue could leak to the public.

by Anonymousreply 201

DL fave Angela Lansbury’s daughter was a Manson follower! She straitened out tho and now runs a popular LA Italian restaurant.

by Anonymousreply 202

Conclusion: Celebrities shouldn't breed.

by Anonymousreply 203

I wonder, this is just a guess, if William Powell's son was gay? Maybe he couldn't handle it and he was in the closet? Also, ALOT of gay men get hepatitis. My aunt used to be a nurse and she said they would get a lot of gay men who had hepatitis issues coming in for treatment in the hospital.

by Anonymousreply 204

Shirley McClain's kid wrote a scathing book about her mother who seemed to treat her as a fashion accessory. It must really hurt to see your selfish, neglectful mother or father play a great parent on the big screen--and even win awards for it. While movie fans might fantasize that the celeb is their parent, the celeb's child fantasizes about being raised by someone else.

by Anonymousreply 205

Tommy Lee's son Brandon didn't like one of Tommy's social media posts, so he drove over to Tommy's house, knocked him unconscious, and then posted a photo of his beat-up dad on his own social media account. Initially Tommy threatened to press charges, but they seem to have gotten over the ordeal, fortunately.

by Anonymousreply 206

Melissa Rivers' looks are sad, strange and tragic.

by Anonymousreply 207

R205, I have to read that book! Didn't her daughter say her father tried to molest her? She sent a copy of her book to her mother and her mother said it was ridiculous garbage. There after, you haven't heard the mother bitch and wanting to sue, etc. I think he daughter is telling the truth because the mother didn't fight the book. At least the daughter wrote the book when the mother is still alive ,and again, she sent her mother a copy of the book so I give her credit for that.

by Anonymousreply 208

R207, I always thought the same thing ,but I wonder if the real issue is she might need some plastic surgery. I wonder if she misses her mother a lot? They said those two together connected a lot like two sisters. BTW, I can't believe she auctioned off ALL of her mother's Faberge collection. She said I wish I could keep a piece ,but I can't, uh? whaa? her mother left her 100 million dollars. I would have at least kept a couple of pieces of Faberge! Gosh! what gorgeous pieces!!

Tts always been my dream to own at least one piece of Faberge. Here Melissa has access to a collection!! WHAT LUCK!! Sometimes this world sure sucks! LOL!

by Anonymousreply 209

[quote]Kelly Preston has a son with her first husband whose existence has been mostly scrubbed from the internet.

I'm not sure "being scrubbed from the internet" qualifies as sad, strange, or tragic.

by Anonymousreply 210

R209, of course Melissa Rivers misses her mother. Was she ever able to get any work outside of her mother's projects? Fortunately for her, she inherited so much money/property from her mom that she doesn't have to work anymore.

Joan was a terrible person. Even many years before her death, she used to publicly bully Amy Carter, a CHILD, for being "ugly". And then in her interviews she would ramble on about how beautiful and gorgeous her own daughter Melissa was.

by Anonymousreply 211

R183 Lord, he looks almost as old as Pitt. Who's this guy's mother?

by Anonymousreply 212

Very interesting! I think all kids of famous people wind up that way.

by Anonymousreply 213

R202 Both of Lansbury’s kids were Manson followers.

by Anonymousreply 214

What kids of celebrities have turned out well?

by Anonymousreply 215

R215 I feel that should be a new topic.

by Anonymousreply 216

r215 r216 It already exists.

by Anonymousreply 217

I've always wondered about the Will Smith kid who didn't get a showbiz career.

by Anonymousreply 218

Back in the 90s, tabloids reported that Tahnee Welch, daughter of Raquel Welch, was anorexic.

by Anonymousreply 219

Ylenia Carrisi, daughter of singing duo Albano Carrisi and Romina Powell, and granddaughter of Tyrone Power and Linda Christian, disappeared while visiting the US in 1994.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 220

We never do hear about the kids who turned out okay.

by Anonymousreply 221

Still alive but Charlie Sheen.

by Anonymousreply 222

O.K. Let me tell you a story.

I met Elizabeth Taylor for the first time the night she was on the Tonight Show .

I was working as a waiter in BH and was hiding behind a potted tree smoking.

The place was dead (as it was at night) and she came in with her group.

I called my boss and locked the door.

It's a much longer story but my point is that Elizabeth was an earthy mother. Kind and funny.

I don't get the MJ stuff, but to me she was just great.

Her kids turned out well.

by Anonymousreply 223

[quote]I've always wondered about the Will Smith kid who didn't get a showbiz career.

His son Trey from his first marriage works as DJ.

by Anonymousreply 224

I think karma will visit one of the Trump spawn years from now. It'll be a Kennedy curse type tragedy.

by Anonymousreply 226

R225 Donald Trump pressured Mara Maples to abort Tiffany.

by Anonymousreply 227

[quote] Mary Tyler Moore's only son, Ritchie Meeker, accidently shot himself in the head. He was only 24.

Was this before or after Ordinary People? That would have been very weird to film after.

by Anonymousreply 228

[quote] Al Gore III, son of the former VP, is a drug addict and alcoholic.

I was under the impression that despite a rough few years he had cleaned himself up and was married, but honestly I haven't heard much in years. I think the eldest Gore daughter who was the face of her father's 2000 campaign's youth outreach had a great deal of issues too.

by Anonymousreply 229

[quote]Was this before or after Ordinary People? That would have been very weird to film after.

She filmed it before his death. The movie was released on September 19, 1980 and her son died almost a month later on October 14th.

by Anonymousreply 230

Didn't Rita Hayworth's grandson get tangled up in escorting or something and die?

by Anonymousreply 231

[quote]I admire people like Oprah who acknowledge they're not the least bit maternal and subsequently choose a career over parenthood and don't try to do both, thus producing fucked up kids

Katharine Hepburn was the same. In her later years, Hepburn said in interviews that she didn't regret not having children because she was too self-involved and career-focused. She knew she would've been a horrible mother and any kids she'd had would've ended up hating her. She was very smart about that.

by Anonymousreply 232

r104 I've heard the same about Elizabeth Taylor. In her private life she was very warm and kind to people, and quite bawdy with a raunchy sense of humor.

by Anonymousreply 233

Mary Tyler Moore admitted that she had fault in some of the issues she and her son had. She mentioned being too focused on her career. They were estranged and later reconnected. I give her credit for admitting to her faults.

by Anonymousreply 234

Taylor must have done right as a mother. Her estate is large and also complicate, and she had four children with one adopted and fifteen grandkids. No in-fighting has occurred through all this years, and all the grandkids get along. Booze nonwithstanding she must have established sincere and meaningful connections with her off springs. They are all brought up right.

by Anonymousreply 236

R122 I remember when that happened, and, yes, news stories identified the driver as being Farentino's daughter. It seems to be mostly scrubbed from the internet too because I did a search and the only thing that comes up is Farentino being sued by Kraft's family.

by Anonymousreply 237

It's amazing that Lorna Luft turned out to be so well-adjusted, because she was Judy's caretaker for the last years, which were absolutely terrifying and insane. Most kids would've been fucked up for life after going through what Lorna went through.

by Anonymousreply 238

Rita Hayworth's grandson, son of Yasmin Aga Khan, committed suicide at age 25 in 2011.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 239

Damn, Rebecca Welles looked like Meat Loaf in drag. Poor thing.

by Anonymousreply 240

I'd like to remind you that Carrie Fisher had a FATHER too, r92. Eddie Fisher, remember him? An admitted drug and alcohol abuser who very publicly dumped Carrie's mother for the aforementioned great example of a mother, Liz Taylor.

No doubt Debbie Reynolds had her failings as a mother but she wasn't Carrie's only parent.

by Anonymousreply 241

Arthur Miller and Inge Morath had a son with Down Syndrome, he was institutionalized and Miller never visited him, spoke about him, acknowledged him, etc. I think Inge visited the son, however.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 242

Michael Musto said Hayworth's grandson did not kill himself.

I could be misremembering but wasn't he also into that sex act where you stick things in your peehole?

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 243

[quote][R207], I always thought the same thing ,but I wonder if the real issue is she might need some plastic surgery.

Are you serious? Melissa Rivers already had tons of plastic surgery. She had her father's huge nose. Joan had at least three nose jobs herself.

Melissa now resembles Melissa Gilbert, who also had a nose job.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 244

R211 JR was a nasty git. Especially toward the end. Good riddance

by Anonymousreply 245

One of Mel Gibson's daughters is married to Kenny Wayne Shephard. Which isn't tragic, but for some reason, I find it so strange and random.

by Anonymousreply 246

For whomever it was who posted Jonathan Peck, the conclusion of suicide is seen as questionable by many. Author Edward George ("Taming the Beast: Charles Manson's Life Behind Bars") suspects it was a Manson hit.

by Anonymousreply 247

[quote] Donald Trump pressured Mara Maples to abort Tiffany.

Too bad no one pressured Trump's mother to do the same.

by Anonymousreply 248

R202, the kids 'straightened out' after lansbury packed up and moved the whole family to ireland.

by Anonymousreply 249

R125 of course they have nannies. Day nannies, night nannies, drivers, housekeepers, personal chefs, tutors. His doesn’t ensure children will turn out ok. They occasionally need to be acknowledged by their parents in order for that to happen.

by Anonymousreply 250

[quote]Donald Trump pressured Mara Maples to abort Tiffany.

Donald's mother should have aborted him!

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 251

r251 What an original thought!

by Anonymousreply 252

Great minds think alike...

by Anonymousreply 253

Bette Davis's daughter claims her mother was a practicing witch. Of course, BD Hymen is a crazy old nasty cunt. But how did she get that way?

by Anonymousreply 254

I've always wondered what Spencer Tracy's deaf son grew up to be. That was a bizarre domestic situation.

by Anonymousreply 255

B.D. Hyman is also a homophobe who made anti-gay comments.

by Anonymousreply 256

R255, he lived a good life. Read below--competed in horse back riding, graduated from college, worked in the props department at Disney.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 257

Bette Davis spoiled BD rotten, and supported her well into adulthood. BD and her lazy-ass husband didn't like to work so Bette paid all the bills. When Bette had her illnesses, her doctors didn't think she would make it so BD wrote the nasty book because she was afraid there would be no more money. She's a lowlife cunt.

by Anonymousreply 258

Frances Bean Cobain. But she's alright now... isn't she?

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 259

Susan Cabot's dwarf son, Timothy, who was allegedly sired by King Hussein of Jordan, was given a steady stream of steroids and experimental hormones since childhood to stimulate growth, which may have led to neurological problems. Anyway, he lived with a mother whose mental health declined to the point that they lived in filth and her own psychiatrists deemed her irrationality emotionally draining. Poor Timothy finally snapped and beat her to death with a barbell bar.

by Anonymousreply 260

R258, Bette also allowed BD to marry at 16, throwing her a lavish Hollywood wedding. She took the role of Susan Hayward's mother in "Where Love Has Gone" to pay for it.

by Anonymousreply 261

I think she had been attacking him physically.

Her big film was Wasp Woman, in which she gives herself some wasp serum and things go VERY wrong.

by Anonymousreply 262

President John Adams had a son who drank himself to death, as did his son John Quincy Adams. The elder Adams also had a daughter who was scarred with smallpox and only capable of attracting a husband who was a reckless, violent and improvident drunkard.

Three of Abraham Lincoln's four sons died before reaching adulthood.

Franklin Pierce's son was killed in a train wreck, dying before his parents eyes shortly before Pierce's term began.

Calvin Coolidge's younger son died of an infected blister he got while playing on the White House tennis court.

First Lady Florence Harding's son drank himself to death five years before his step-father, Warren Harding was elected President.

Theodore Roosevelt's son Kermit was a helpless alcoholic (and possibly a closeted homosexual) who committed suicide in middle age. Theodore's youngest son Quentin was shot down in an airplane in World War One, dying at age eighteen. Theodore died six months later at age sixty, deeply aggrieved by the loss of his son.

JFK Jr. and his step-brother Alexander Onassis both died in small plane crashes. Alexander's sister Christina had a tragic life and she died young as well.

by Anonymousreply 263

Half the Roosevelts were terrible alcoholics.

by Anonymousreply 264

[quote]Half the Roosevelts were terrible alcoholics.

As were half the Adamses, the Kennedys, and the Bushes. That's one of many reasons why political dynasties are a bad idea.

by Anonymousreply 265

And ALL the Bushes were shits.

by Anonymousreply 266

[quote] I've always wondered what Spencer Tracy's deaf son grew up to be.

I'm going to guess deaf.

by Anonymousreply 267

[quote] Susan Cabot's dwarf son, Timothy, who was allegedly sired by King Hussein of Jordan, was given a steady stream of steroids and experimental hormones since childhood to stimulate growth, which may have led to neurological problems. Anyway, he lived with a mother whose mental health declined to the point that they lived in filth and her own psychiatrists deemed her irrationality emotionally draining. Poor Timothy finally snapped and beat her to death with a barbell bar.

Quick, someone call Peter Dinklage. We finally found another role for him.

by Anonymousreply 268

Timothy Cabot didn’t look like a dwarf. The treatments helped?

Agnes Moorehead’s son definitely looks like he’d be a problem though. Found it looking for dwarf-like pictures of Timothy.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 269

Read this shit on Aggie's adopted son.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 270

A hoot. I lost track after the 4th Winkle, but who's counting.

by Anonymousreply 271

Robert Shapiro’s son died of a drug overdose.

by Anonymousreply 272

Marie Osmond’s son jumped to his death in Los Angeles.

by Anonymousreply 273

R263, what's the source for the gay rumors about Kermit Roosevelt? He was married and had four children, born in 1916, 1918, 1919 (! – they didn’t waste any time), and 1925. This suggests a certain enthusiasm for the process. While he might certainly have been bisexual, or even preferred men, he clearly had no problem doing his marital duty on a regular basis well beyond what would have been necessary as a social screen.

He was a nice-looking man, and quite dashing, what with expeditions up the Amazon and serving active military duty in WWII at 50 years of age. His Wikipedia bio is quite interesting.

Here are Kermit and his wife, Belle, in 1926, looking very ... 1926.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 274

[quote]His Wikipedia bio is quite interesting.

Yes, it is. He was a very brave man. It's a pity about the depression and drinking that contributed to his suicide.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 275

The success or failure of the children of successful politicians could be another thread. It seems that the children of the politician have difficulties - Teddy's and Franklin's children are examples - but the grandchildren are more settled and better adjusted.

I love Theodore Roosevelt for a variety of reasons (yes, his legacy also has a number of big disappointments), think he really tried to be a good and involved father (especially for the time), but he was such a huge presence that each of his sons didn't have a chance at measuring up to him in the own minds and the public perception.

Same with Franklin and Eleanor's children.

by Anonymousreply 276

Joan was a terrible person. Even many years before her death, she used to publicly bully Amy Carter, a CHILD, for being "ugly". And then in her interviews she would ramble on about how beautiful and gorgeous her own daughter Melissa was.

R211, who didn't mention Amy Carter being ugly? Also, the kid was a horrible brat.

Posters on here are talking about B.D. you should read the book "Miss D and Me: Life with the Invincible Bette Davis" by Kathryn Sermark." This is a super book. This lady was Bette Davis secretary and she did numerus other things for Bette Davis as well.She worked for her towards the end of her life. She mentions B.D. being awful and absent. This lady grew close to Bette Davis, and at times Bette Davis could be a bit mean. However, this lady liked Bette Davis a lot. She is straight forward in her book, and she has many things to say.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 277

Rosemary Kennedy.

Lobotomised to stop her fucking.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 278

Sting laughably said he'd never support any of his children, yet most of them are unemployed, even the ones who are actresses and a son and daughter who are musicians, they sure don't earn enough money to pay all their bills.

His eldest son, Joe, from his first marriage to Irish actress Frances Tomelty, is 42. He has a band, Fiction Plane, but they sure aren't well known. His eldest daughter, Fuchsia, an actress, is 37. His daughter with Trudie, Mickey Sumner has been in several films with Greta Gerwig, She seems the most successful, but hardly a box-office name. His lesbian daughter Eliot Paulina is a bassist and singer, she looks exactly like Sting as young man. So, no nose job!

So you know he was full of shit when he made that statement years ago about not supporting his kids. He recent talked about doing a 16 show Las Vegas residency, I assume he'd do it for year.

He seems unable to come up with any new songs, his latest album is more of his older songs re-vamped. Yet he keeps plugging away, gotta keep making that money! Gotta keep supporting those six adult children of his and keeping his wife Trudie in high-end designer clothes.

by Anonymousreply 279

R279, are you his mistress? You seem to be unreasonably bitter about these people.

by Anonymousreply 280

[quote]His eldest son, Joe, from his first marriage to Irish actress Frances Tomelty, is 42. He has a band, Fiction Plane, but they sure aren't well known. His eldest daughter, Fuchsia, an actress, is 37.

That is just sad. At those ages, nothing is ever going to happen as far as a career in music or acting (esp. music) and they just need to hang it up and go do something else with their lives.

by Anonymousreply 281

[quote]expeditions up the Amazon and serving active military duty in WWII at 50 years of age

Teddy used expeditions to perk himself up when depression hit, and it was also a form of rich WASP-o rehab, since it was easier to dry out away from civilization.

Being stationed in Alaska was the Army's way of honoring the family without putting K in a position where he might cause danger or damage due to his alcoholism

by Anonymousreply 282

The children og Josef and Magda Goebels.

by Anonymousreply 283

R279 maybe he was bluffing in the hope that his moocher children will finally be inspired to get a job rather than waiting around for their inheritance.

by Anonymousreply 284

[quote][R279], are you his mistress? You seem to be unreasonably bitter about these people.

You sound like a bloody moron. A mistress?! LOOL I'm a gay man and not bitter at all. That's what you got out of my post, bitterness? I swear, so many people today do have reading comprehension problems!

I'm a huge Police and Sting fan, I've been following Sting's private life since I became a fan. I simply think it was incredibly stupid of a man, who is worth $400 million, to make such a statement, that he was NEVER going to help his children. I think he also stated he wasn't going to leave any money to them either!

What does he even do with with his endless stream of money? The money does keep coming in, he still sells his back catalogue of music. He still tours. He produces wine at his Tuscany vineyard. He's loaded, so why make such ridiculous statement? It's not as if he's strapped for cash.

Why not help your children, especially if they're all serious about their careers. I do know one son, Giacomo, is a cameraman, he's probably working.

Last I heard, Sting has 8 residences. No one needs 8 residences. A few years ago, he sold his CPW NYC co-op for about 30 million, not sure if he still has a place in Manhattan. The CPW residence was his third apartment in the city. Years ago, he lived near a close friend on Prince Street, that was Sting's first NYC residence. My friend would see Sting and Trudie all the time when they had their loft on Prince.

by Anonymousreply 285

When maths teachers get money, no one in the world will be more pretentious.

by Anonymousreply 286

Here's my two cents: Harper Simon, oldest son of Paul Simon, was a total asshole and brat in his twenties. He was banned from countless restaurants on the UWS of Manhattan for causing near-riots.

by Anonymousreply 288

I once read some online gossip many moons ago that Paul Simon was a pedophile who liked little boys. The website was usually never wrong.

by Anonymousreply 290

R277 I read that book and it was very weak tea, Sermak was more a gopher than the surrogate daughter implied, which probably suited Bette. She described 'Miss D' as a ladylike paragon which we all know and love her for not being. BD is a monster, but the adopted son Michael seems well adjusted, he didn't have the attention lavished on him that BD did, I suspect Bette was the kind of helicopter parent we all hate today, those who thinks their kid is the greatest and gives them everything except a sense of responsibility or respect. Though only the biological one got the full lazerbeam, the adopted ones not so much. Margot ,the adopted daughter who turned out to be mentally handicapped, was set up in a home and Bette took pride in telling everyone how well cared for she was. I was surprised to find out Bette was not quite as devoted as advertised and Gary Merrill paid for their daughter's care from the 60's on and set up a trust for her care after his death in 1990 , Bette made no provision in her will for Margot ( no doubt for reasons that were well known to her! ).

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 291

Another messy star kid life, tho' her parentage spared her being murdered at one point!

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 292

Susan was also known for her trenchant performance in the epic Sorority Girl, r262!

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 293

Dorothy Dandridge’s daughter was doomed from the start. Instead of going to the hospital when her water broke, Dorothy, so obsessed with her husband cheating on her, physically delayed her labor so she could find him and make him come to the hospital with her. Her daughter, Harolyn, lost a significant amount of oxygen and suffered severe, irreversible brain damage as a result. She was a pretty girl, but nothing was upstairs. Dorothy was foolish. He husband ended up leaving her to find success in Europe, saddling her with a disabled daughter. She was forced to institutionalize Harolyn while she pursued her career. After it peaked and her second husband, some white lowlife named Jack Denison, cleaned her out financially, Harolyn was kicked out of the expensive hospital and placed in state care. I don’t even think that she was aware that her mother died. Sad all around.

by Anonymousreply 294

Peaches Geldof...typically I don't care either way about celeb kids but I felt bad for this one.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 295

I always felt bad for Julian Lennon.

by Anonymousreply 296

Les Moonves granddaughter living in squalor.

by Anonymousreply 297

Yikes r292. That was a sad ass story

by Anonymousreply 298

Moonves' blonde-haired son looks NOTHING like him.

by Anonymousreply 299

"Rosemary Kennedy.... Lobotomised to stop her fucking."

Don't you mean 'to stop Joe from fucking her'?

by Anonymousreply 300

"what's the source for the gay rumors about Kermit Roosevelt? He was married and had four children, born in 1916, 1918, 1919 (! – they didn’t waste any time), and 1925. This suggests a certain enthusiasm for the process"

I don't know much about Kermit Roosevelt but Ted Haggard has like five or six kids and we know he likes guys. You don't need to have sex eight times a day to have a few kids, if your wife is fertile and not using birth control.

"Rosemary Kennedy.... Lobotomised to stop her fucking."

That's not why she was lobotomized.

by Anonymousreply 302

Poor Harolyn. Harolyn or Carolyn, r29r?

by Anonymousreply 303

[quote]"Rosemary Kennedy.... Lobotomised to stop her fucking."

[quote]That's not why she was lobotomized.

Yeah, it was -- she started taking off at night and fucking random strangers, according to Laurence Leamer in his book, The Kennedy Women: The Saga of an American Family

by Anonymousreply 304

Amy Carter flunked out of Brown.

by Anonymousreply 305

Because Joan was a bitch.

by Anonymousreply 306

Amy Stiller is far worse then the poster upthread claiming Ben is an asshole. Emotionally abuses everyone in her path and that includes every waiter on the UWS. I loved her parents growing up but they must have done some damage.

by Anonymousreply 308

Didn’t mean to claim the actual poster is an asshole.

by Anonymousreply 309

R290, vintage gossip “Simon, Paul. Humorless personality. Failed marriage to Carrie Fisher. Currently married to Edie Brickell. Linked with Shelley Duvall and various nameless boys.”

by Anonymousreply 310

R282, Kermit had served in the British army before we were officially at war and had been wounded in Norway. (This is all from Wikipedia; I have no special knowledge of the man, although my interest has been piqued.) Once we were in the war and K transferred back to the US Army, apparently FDR intervened to protect his cousin’s wife and the Roosevelt family from embarrassment. It was kindly meant, but surely being stationed in Alaska in the 1940s was the worst possible thing for an alcoholic depressive.

Is there a biography of Kermit Roosevelt in print? I couldn’t find one on Google. His life would make a great movie, albeit one with a sad ending.

by Anonymousreply 311

[quote]I don't know much about Kermit Roosevelt but Ted Haggard has like five or six kids and we know he likes guys. You don't need to have sex eight times a day to have a few kids, if your wife is fertile and not using birth control.

R302, right, but: (1) KR operated in a different world from TH. Haggard's world encourages extensive procreation. In Roosevelt's upper-class WASP world, by the early 20th century, there would have been nothing odd or unusual with having only 1 or 2 children. (2) While having 4 children close together doesn't prove KR was purely heterosexual (any more than TH's adventures prove he is exclusively homosexual), it implies nothing to suggest that he was not. That's why I asked about evidence.

There are rumors about his grandson, KR III, and I was wondering if the first post perhaps confused the two.

by Anonymousreply 312

R280 well, you nailed it. Yes, I AM bitter. I've been a fan of his for decades, but whenever I've reached out to him, zilch. Nada. ZERO. Unanswered cards. Unacknowledged gifts. No response to my request for an autograph. People like me MADE that SOB! The skinny little shit. Fuck him.

R279

by Anonymousreply 313

R281 I grew up in a small town. A handful of families owned everything. A girl from one of those families went to LA to be an actress after college. She's 38 or 39 now and her IMDB page is grim. Just a handful of parts in shorts and some stand-in work. Why do these people keep going?

by Anonymousreply 314

R314 so true! She should just finish herself off. And stop taking up space and contributing to global warming. And disgracing her family. And being untalented.

by Anonymousreply 315

R314, I know some wealthy people (kids) who went to LA to be stars and died there (figuratively speaking).

How they keep going is that they have peers exactly like them and they have made a life and a routine there for themselves. They all (aspiring starlets) go to the gym together, go to restaurants together, go to the same acting classes--hire the same acting guru for private lessons. If you have enough money that you don't need to work--and can live high on the hog without working--trying to break in can turn into a lifestyle.

by Anonymousreply 316

Alice Roosevelt said, probably in jest, that she was going to name her daughter DeBorah, but she chickened out and named her Paulina.

by Anonymousreply 317

R292 I'm a big Lorre fan, and that was all news to me. How terribly sad. As grim as Lorre's great "M."

by Anonymousreply 318

R313, well, you sound pretty self-aware of your feelings. Maybe it would help to take a break from following these people on social media/ the news: get out for a bit, make friends, go to events in your neighborhood. Life is too short to be bitter about a bunch of celebrities.

Good luck

by Anonymousreply 319

[quote]Alice Roosevelt said, probably in jest, that she was going to name her daughter DeBorah

They just don't make first daughters like that anymore.

by Anonymousreply 320

John Barrymore Sr created a lineage of damaged kids.

He begat John Drew Barrymore, messed up son, who begat Drew Barrymore, messed up daughter and granddaughter.

by Anonymousreply 321

Drew's grandmother was the beautiful Dolores Costello. She was mostly in silent films, but was excellent as the mother of cute Tim Holt in Welles' "Magnificent Ambersons." Isn't Drew ok these days?

by Anonymousreply 322

I'm in touch with two people I knew in college (a man and a woman) who went out to LA to be actors. They're both in their early 40s now and nothing has happened, but they're still plugging along. You just think "give it up already! You're both far too old to break through in that business! Go do something else."

by Anonymousreply 323

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 324

Jon Hamm said he gave himself 5 years to make a living as an actor, and if he didn't he knew he could move on without regret.

by Anonymousreply 325

Clark Gable's grandson and host of Cheaters died of a fentanyl overdose. His father, John Clark Gable, was/is a mess too, right?

R292 I didn't know Peter Lorre had any children, how sad!

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 326

R260, I remember reading that story about about Susan Cabot and her son. It was on a site like Find a Death and was a pretty gritty story including the inside of the house being filthy and run down. I dont remember the details but I think it was a strange mother/son relationship.

by Anonymousreply 328

I didn't know this about the Getty grandson--

[quote] The kidnapping had a traumatic effect on the young Getty and likely contributed to the alcoholism and drug addiction that ravaged his life. In 1981, at the age of 25, he suffered a debilitating stroke after taking a Valium, methadone, and alcohol cocktail which caused him liver failure and a stroke, leaving him quadriplegic and partially blind.

Poor man.

by Anonymousreply 329

John Paul Getty III's son is the very handsome Balthazar Getty. He struggled with a drug problem when he was young, but seemed to find stability in marriage and fatherhood. That is, until he walked out on his wife to for Sienna Miller. He eventually went back to his wife.

by Anonymousreply 330

Helen Lawson's unfortunate daughter, Elvira, the product of an earlier tryst with a Nicaraguan salesclerk from the corner five and dime, was born with clubfoot and humped back. Although Elvira was quite intelligent, she was socially awkward, nervous, and stuttered in the presence of company. As La Lawson's career took off, the glamorous stage diva became so embarrassed by such ungainly progeny that she passed her off as the help. Ironically, Elvira's congenital defects may have been the direct results of Mama Helen's penchant for embibing dry martinis throughout her pregnancy.

Poor Elvira was in the middle of penning her memoirs, "Mother Hell," when she tripped over her clumsy feet and went crashing through a plate glass window in the shabby Mount Kisco home she once shared with mama. It took weeks before her body was discovered, as nobody ever came to visit. But by then, the hungry cats had had their fill of her.

by Anonymousreply 331

Tina Cassini, Gene Tierney’s other daughter, also had quite the battle for Oleg Cassini’s estate. She died a couple of years ago.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 332

R287 What in the name of fuck is that? Is it mentally ill and anorexic?

by Anonymousreply 333

I'm surprised no one's mentioned Dominique Dunne yet.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 334

Marie Trintignant, daughter of Jean-Louis Trintignant and Nadine Trintignant, was basically murdered by her musician boyfriend Bernard Cantat. He only ended up going to jail for 4 years.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 335

Depardieu 's son Guillaume, also an actor, died young of an infection IIRC . He had long had a drug problem, possibly conquered that.

by Anonymousreply 336

Just because someone was murdered does not mean they led a sad or tragic life.

by Anonymousreply 337

^ Being murdered is rather fucking tragic – regardless of how charmed one’s life was prior.

by Anonymousreply 338

[quote]I'm in touch with two people I knew in college (a man and a woman) who went out to LA to be actors. They're both in their early 40s now and nothing has happened, but they're still plugging along. You just think "give it up already! You're both far too old to break through in that business! Go do something else."

When my Mom and Dad married, their first LA apartment was in Echo Park. The handyman/manager turned out to also be the landlord, who owned many properties around the city. He also did some sort of grunt work at one of the new TV stations, and mom and dad admired how hard he worked. Later, he made a killing on the sale of one of his big lots, and the next they heard, the 40+ year old landlord was taking acting classes.

Years later, they saw him again, playing the cop in The Odd Couple TV show and then later as the diner owner in early Happy Days. So it worked out for Al Molinaro, although plugging away doesn't have the same power as it used to.

by Anonymousreply 339

[quote]I always felt bad for Julian Lennon.

Julian isn't doing too bad, he's become a children's book author. The books have done extremely well.

by Anonymousreply 340

R300 ouch that can’t be true, can it?

by Anonymousreply 341

Peter Lorre's daughter Catharine. She only narrowly escaped The Hillside Stranglers in 1977. They had intended to kidnap and murder her -- the police were looking for a lone suspect in the series of murders that plagued L.A. in the late '70s, unaware that they were actually after a pair of pattern killers -- but she just happened to mention who her father was to them. After they were apprehended, they admitted that they only let her live because they liked her father's movies. Peter Lorre ultimately died of a stroke when she was just eleven, and her mother died from alcoholism not long after. Catharine was just seventeen, so Lorre's first wife looked after her. She married, but her husband died in a motorcycle wreck after only a few years of marriage. She would ultimately die at just thirty-two from terrible complications related to diabetes. Like Zsa Zsa Gabor's daughter, she was a forgotten person, her corpse left unclaimed in the morgue for a month before anyone could figure out her true identity.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 342

Mentioning Alice Roosevelt, I love her quote; "If you can't say something nice about somebody, come sit by me." How true,

by Anonymousreply 344

That's so terrible. Some people can't get a break.

by Anonymousreply 345

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 346

R346 Be careful, you'll summon the Mia is Bitch troll

by Anonymousreply 347

But she adopted kids that had medical problems already, I think.

by Anonymousreply 348

At least she was a doll, r332......

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 349

R346 Mia is widely represented as a sort of benevolent earth mother but there have been abuse allegations from more than one of her children. Interesting how the media glosses over these things. She was widely reported to have treated one of the adopted daughters, Lark, as a "scullery maid ". Her Son Moses said that Mia was verbally and physically abusive to him. I dislike playing this card but I wonder if the media (and public at large ) place greater value on-the-go testimony of the blonde, white children over the "foreign " Asian kids. These children certainly had pre existing issues but the level of dysfunction within one home seemed to be disproportionate.

by Anonymousreply 350

R151 he was probably scrubbed from the internet because he’s not a Scientology follower?

by Anonymousreply 351

R350, I agree with you Mia Farrow seems crazy.

by Anonymousreply 352

Mia seemed to need to hoard children. For me there's always been something unhealthy about how she went about building that brood.

by Anonymousreply 353

During the Darfur conflict when someone was being held hostage she actually volunteered to take that person's place. Pretty amazing.

I do however have an image of her as hostage and annoying her captors so much that they end up paying someone to get her off their hands. Like the O'Henry story "The Ransom of Red Chief," IIRC.

by Anonymousreply 354

Who was the actress whose son died after scaling a fence, ripping his femoral artery apart? Someone French, iirc...

by Anonymousreply 355

Romy Schneider's son R355

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 356

Wow. Never heard of that one, R356. Sounds like the kid was essentially impaled by the fence.

I would add to the list Christopher Sean Bixby, son of Bill Bixby and Brenda Benet, who at six years old fell ill and died in the hospital waiting room.

“Bixby once bitterly told an interviewer: ‘My son suffocated while the doctor inside...was removing a splinter from the finger of another doctor.’”

The pain of Christopher’s death drove his mother, actress Brenda Benet, to commit suicide in 1982.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 357

I'm blanking on some of the details, but wasn't the son of astronaut Wally Schirra arrested for sex offenses? I think he was arrested for booking child sex tours in Thailand or somewhere overseas

by Anonymousreply 358

Diana Barrymore, ill fated daughter of John....

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 360

Grace Kelly's daughter Stephanie has had some rough spots. The accident that took her mother's life likely was the start of her troubles. Caroline had some hard times, too.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 361

Just read an interview with Anjelica Huston. She sounds strange.

by Anonymousreply 362

I thought bill bixby’s son was choking?

by Anonymousreply 363

Susan Saint James and tv producer Dick Ebersol lost their 14 year-old son, Teddy, in a plane crash that Dick and eldest son, Charlie, had survived. At first it was believed Teddy was ejected upon impact and was listed as missing, but days later his mangled body was discovered pinned underneath the wreckage.

by Anonymousreply 364

Casey Johnson. Johnson & Johnson heiress. Pretty blonde rich lesbian (dated Tila Tequila, remember?), lifelong diabetic and drug addict, died alone, body wasn’t found for days.

All that money couldn’t cure any of her diseases or make her happy.

Oh, and I think she had adopted a kid, too. Jesus Christ.

by Anonymousreply 365

It's so sad to me that someone could just die, and their body not be found for days.

I've known three people who killed themselves and they were found within hours.

(Well, one was a gunshot. But still, the others made no noise, but they were still found within hours.)

by Anonymousreply 366

I feel like I could die alone and not be discovered for days.

by Anonymousreply 367

David Bowie's son was mostly raised by a nanny cause Bowie was too fucked up at the time and seems to have turned out well. Bowie left the nanny money when he died. Seems like Iman's daughter from her first marriage had her problems with Iman and was obese for a while.

by Anonymousreply 369

[quote]I dislike playing this card but I wonder if the media (and public at large ) place greater value on-the-go testimony of the blonde, white children over the "foreign " Asian kids. These children certainly had pre existing issues but the level of dysfunction within one home seemed to be disproportionate.

It sort of bothered me when Ronan and Dylan said that Moses and Soon-Yi's stories of abuse by Mia were false, yet they pretty much expect people to believe their allegations against Woody. I think Woody and Mia are both fucked up people in different ways and I don't think they will ever know the whole truth of went down. I don't believe Mia is the saint that Ronan and Dylan make her out to be.

by Anonymousreply 370

R369 According to the book Model: The Ugly Business of Beautiful Women, Iman lost custody of her first daughter due to her cocaine problem.

by Anonymousreply 371

Why doesn't anyone ever talk about Ginger Rogers ' children?

by Anonymousreply 372

r372 Because no one under 50 knows who she is.

by Anonymousreply 373

I didn't think Ginger had kids.

by Anonymousreply 374

[quote] Because no one under 50 knows who she is.

Of course, we do.

I'm in my 30s. All of us who grew up dancing (especially tap dancing) memorized and loved Ginger, Fred, Ann Miller, Vera, Gene, and Eleanor on AMC.

by Anonymousreply 375

R369 that's not what Duncan says. His nanny replaced his mother, not his father.

by Anonymousreply 376

R374 maybe that's why nobody talks about them.

by Anonymousreply 377

Ann Miller's baby only lived 3 hours after being born. Presumably there were complications after Ann fell or was pushed (depending on which version you believe) down a flight of stairs when she was pregnant.

by Anonymousreply 378

I actually think Ann Miller would have been a decent mom.

by Anonymousreply 380

they don't get nannies, or at least good ones, because narcissistic parents do not want to be replaced or have their authority usurped. especially if the nanny is remotely good looking. that's why a lot of these famous people that do have nannies have ugly ones and a rotating army so their kids cannot get too attached.

by Anonymousreply 381

[quote] Carroll O'Connor's son Hugh had addiction issues and ended up committing suicide at age 33.

Does every Norman Lear show have a drug or sex scandal attached to it now?

by Anonymousreply 382

R372, Ginger never gave birth to or adopted any children. And in interviews given up until the end of her life, she claimed she never regretted it.

by Anonymousreply 383

In 2018,it was reported that Casper van dien and Carrie Mitchums (daughter of Robert Mitchum )son, Cappy, had hung himself and was comatose. But the strange part is there was never any follow up and the story just sort of died. It's not clear if he is still in a coma, or if he has made any recovery.

by Anonymousreply 384

Forgot to mention that Casper van diens daughter with Catherine Oxenberg, India, was a former member of the NXIVM sex cult.

by Anonymousreply 385

R385, Casper was India's stepfather.

by Anonymousreply 386

[quote]Ann Miller's baby only lived 3 hours after being born. Presumably there were complications after Ann fell or was pushed (depending on which version you believe) down a flight of stairs when she was pregnant.

Baby probably had Fetal Hairspray Inhalation Syndrome.

by Anonymousreply 387

Giulietta Masina miscarried her and Federico Fellini's first child after falling down the stairs. Their second child died of encephalitis. After that, they chose not to have any more children.

by Anonymousreply 388

Klaus Kinski's daughter was sexually abused by him. Which is weird when you think that Nastassia Kinski later had an affair with Roman Polansk.i . . .

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 389

He abused his daughter Pola.

by Anonymousreply 390

The offspring of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex will OWN this thread in about 20 years, I’m afraid.

by Anonymousreply 391

R381, are you kidding? Almost all famous people use nannies

by Anonymousreply 392

R392 This is true. Even the ones that say they don't, do.

by Anonymousreply 393

R381 read the whole comment ffs. and there are several that don't and many of them are in this thread.

by Anonymousreply 394

Hemingway's granddaughter committed suicide. She was so messed up. She was molested when she was a little kid, and before she died she said the person who molested her was a well known man was an older man who was the molester.

Eric Clapton's son fell to his death from a multiple story building when the toddler was on the nanny's watch.

Marie Osmond once said she was molested by a famous older man when she was just a little kid. She said she had a lot of problems through out her life as a result of being molested.

R365, Is that the daughter who was molested by her father Seward Johnson? He was an evil man.

I once heard Mia Farrow is a shrew. That Hollywood insider who was once on DL, Susan Kastner, said she had a friend whose kid went to the same school as Mia's kids. She said her friend's kid went to the same school as Mia's kids. Susan said her friend said Mia is completely nuts. Susan said her friend was waiting for her son to gather his things to go home when Mia ran right up to her and said to Susan's friend, please take my kid home and ran off. I agree with the poster on here who says Mia and Woody are both loony in their own way.

BTW, one time I was helping my dad and his wife with their garage sale, and this old guy got into a conversation with my dad. He said he was related to one of the Barrymores I can't remember which one, but his parents inherited the man's mansion when he was a little kid. He said the mansion was extremely gorgeous ,but it was so neglected inside to the point his parents were astonished. The house was neglected as a result of being an acholic. He said he remembers this enormous chandelier that crashed at one time to the floor. He said by the look of the chandelier's shape and prisms it must have been stunning at one time. It's hard to explain ,but I believe this old man was telling the truth and he wasn't spouting BS. We live in Northern California so its not unusual once in a blue moon to come across a person who is someone who maybe famous, or maybe there is someone who may be related to someone famous.

by Anonymousreply 395

R365 I remember her! That was sad. She was friends with Paris Hilton. She was really a mess.

by Anonymousreply 396

Drew Barrymore took care of her dad at the end of his life. She paid for him to live in a senior center in Santa Monica until his death.

by Anonymousreply 397

"Hemingway's granddaughter committed suicide. She was so messed up. She was molested when she was a little kid, and before she died she said the person who molested her was a well known man was an older man who was the molester."

Are you referring to Margaux?

by Anonymousreply 398

Contested definition of ‘famous’ and circumstances may yet improve, but for now Drake Bell, son of pro-billiards Hall of Famer and G.C.B Robin Bell-Dodson, has been having some interesting challenges. I wonder if Robin still feels a proud mother.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 399

for the record:

Childcare givers a rotated regularly in BH.

It's not for poor performance but because parents don't want their spawn to become too attached.

Also, when you are embedded in a family, you see and hear too much. Way too much.

by Anonymousreply 400

When Mia Farrow and Woody Allen were going through legal battles in the 90s, a former household employee of Mia's came forward and said that she saw Mia slapping Moses. The media glossed over that back then and still glosses over the stories of abuse and mistreatment in Mia's household. I bet Ronan has made sure that certain things about Mia get buried and are never publicly revealed.

by Anonymousreply 401

Is slapping a kid really considered mistreatment, though? When I was growing up (in the 80s), most kids were slapped by their parents.

by Anonymousreply 403

Don't get the people who believe every bad story they hear about Mia....but think Woody is a saint

by Anonymousreply 404

OMG, look at Tila Tequila now! She has two kids and found God.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 405

Another ex whore who "found Jesus"

by Anonymousreply 406

R404, it’s possible to find them both creepy and awful and talented at the same time. I do.

It’s interesting to see how some DLers (and people in genera) have such strict black and white thinking. You don’t have to choose a side and attack the other. You can observe objectively like an anthropologist.

by Anonymousreply 407

I love many of Woody's films, and the more I read about Mia the more I wonder where the truth lies-

by Anonymousreply 408

r408 All because you like his films? If anything they're both awful.

by Anonymousreply 409

[quote]Is slapping a kid really considered mistreatment, though? When I was growing up (in the 80s), most kids were slapped by their parents.

I would say it varies from case to case. I got slapped as a kid after being disrespectful or doing other stupid shit. If a parent is slapping their kids for stupid little reasons then I can see it being considered mistreatment.

by Anonymousreply 410

R394 they ALL use nannies, including the ones who say they don’t. The other posters are right.

by Anonymousreply 412

Moses has cerebral palsy. It’s pretty fucked up to slap a disabled kid.

by Anonymousreply 413

Mia Kovacs, daughter of Ernie Kovacs and Edie Adams.

From findagrave.com:

“Daughter of legendary comic Ernie Kovacs and actress Edie Adams. She was just beginning a career as an actress when she was killed in an automobile accident on Mulhullond Drive in Los Angeles. Losing control over her car, she ran off the road and the car rolled, ejecting her through the sunroof and killing her instantly. She was 22 years old when she died. She had appeared in just one movie, “On the Air Live with Captain Midnight” (1979), in the role of Spunky, the blonde girlfriend of teenager Ziggy who starts a pirate radio station in Los Angeles and manages to stay just ahead of the FCC agents trying to shut down the station. Her accident is similar to the way in which her father, Ernie Kovacs, was killed. Some information about her life can be found in biographies about her father, including "The Ernie Kovacs Phile" (1975) by David Walley, and "Kovacsland: A Biography of Ernie Kovacs" (1990) by Diana Rico.”

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 415

Holy shit R415- I started googling the Kovacs and they all die so young!! Mia's sister died in her early 50's, and her daughter also died 2 years ago- Good lord/ depressing!

by Anonymousreply 416

R415, Ernie was driving a Corvair when he crashed.

by Anonymousreply 417

Can you imagine the pressure of being Rita Hayworth's daughter and looking like a fat Janis Joplin?

by Anonymousreply 418

R418 and other such pressures is probably why Rebecca Welles headed for the hills.

by Anonymousreply 419

It has to be tough to be homely AF, but you have a beautiful parent.

Look at poor Alexa Ray Joel. She's had several nervous breakdowns because her whole life she's had to hear "wow, you look NOTHING like your mother!" And then she has a half-sister who's as gorgeous as Christie. Mother Nature can be a real cunt sometimes.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 420

Pre-surgery Alexa Ray Joel. Imagine looking like this when your mother is drop-dead gorgeous.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 421

She looks like a young Patti LuPone.

by Anonymousreply 422

^^And that's NOT a compliment!

by Anonymousreply 423

She looks like Meat Loaf had a baby with Mama Cass

by Anonymousreply 424

Ben Vereen's daughter died in a car accident at age 16. Very short life.

by Anonymousreply 425

Angela Lansbury's daughter Deirdre got away from the Mansons while the getting was good, even if it resulted in LucyMAME.

by Anonymousreply 426

[quote]r40 Melcher dated Candace Bergen? Poster upthread claimed she lived with him?

Yes. They'd known each other since childhood, and when Bergen moved back to California after college they lived together for several years.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 427

[quote]Marie Osmond once said she was molested by a famous older man when she was just a little kid. She said she had a lot of problems through out her life as a result of being molested.

Copycat. Next you'll be telling us that Jimmy Osmond likes blue.

by Anonymousreply 428

All of them. Every last one. I used to think the Newman kids turned out well. Then I met the older daughter. A mess. Her, her husband, her family.

by Anonymousreply 429

[quote]r103 Mercedes McCambridge's son shot to death his wife, children and himself.

I forgot about that! They need to AT LEAST make a Lifetime Original Movie about it.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 431

R429 they weren't exactly thrilled with you.

by Anonymousreply 432

Jennifer Jones gorgeous youngest son Michael Walker reportedly became a recluse the last few years of his life and is alledged to have died from an overdose of propofol-the same drug that killed another Michael- Jackson.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 433

Candice Bergen in her prime lived for years with Terry "massive overbite" Melcher??

That is the most compelling evidence yet that she's 100% lesbian.

by Anonymousreply 434

R434 He cheated on her constantly too.

by Anonymousreply 435

And to think they called Mike Love an asshole!

by Anonymousreply 436

R86 let's see, there's Michael, Randy, Tito… and then there’s Stonewall Jackson, but I don’t remember him on the Victory Tour.

by Anonymousreply 437

R395 If you're talking about Margaux, she was molested by her father, Jack Hemingway. He molested her sister Muffet too. Mariel says she avoided he abuse by sleeping in her mother's bed as a child. Her death was initially reported as an accident, but Mariel now says it was suicide.

by Anonymousreply 438

I remember Margaux's beautiful magazine ads from the 70s.

I was very sad when she died.

by Anonymousreply 439

R409 I'll never understand why people don't want to believe things about someone because they're a fan of that person's work. Though that may be because my mom's favorite actor is Errol Flynn, and she she's read all the books about him and loves to recount his escapades.

by Anonymousreply 440

[quote][R408] All because you like his films? If anything they're both awful.

Woody is an adulterer, but not a pedo. But the more I read about Mia the more I understand why he wanted out.

by Anonymousreply 441

R441 You know, he could've just broken up with her and moved on with his life without taking nude photos of her daughter and leaving them for her to find?

by Anonymousreply 442

The daughter was old enough, and they had never been married, just cohabiting.

He also could have stayed married to Louise Lasser.

by Anonymousreply 443

No matter how old they are, nobody wants to find nudie pictures of their child in their significant other's home.

by Anonymousreply 444

[quote]r427 When Bergen moved back to California after college they lived together for several years.

I wanted to be concise, but in a nod to our saphic sisters, I should have pointed out Bergen moved back to California after college, a successful modeling career, AND making her screen debut as a FULL THROTTLE LESBIAN in [italic]The Group[/italic] ... alongside Lucille Bluth and J.R. Ewing.

Offsite Link

by Anonymousreply 445

Kurt Vonnegut's son Mark belongs in both this thread and the productive children one.

He had a breakdown after he graduated from college. He was diagnosed with severe schizophrenia and committed. Later, he graduated from Harvard Medical School and has been a pediatrician for decades. He subsequently wrote two bestselling