The dataset includes full-depth hydrographic profiles and current data collected by acoustic Doppler current profilers (ADCPs). Water samples were collected and analysed for salinity, inorganic nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon), organic nitrogen and phosphorus components, dissolved organic carbon and alkalinity. Measurements of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and helium/tritium tracers were also collected to identify ages of water masses. These core observations were supplemented by measurements made by tied PhD students: measurements of Dissolved Organic Nitrogen (DON) and Dissolved Organic Phosphorus (DOP); isotopic nitrogen signatures; atmospheric deposition of nitrogen and phosphorus; measurements of dissolved organic carbon and dissolved oxygen; and plankton respiration rates. These measurements were taken on the RRS Charles Darwin across the North Atlantic, departing from Bermuda on 1 May 2005 and arriving in Lisbon on 15 June 2005. Data were collected via a number of conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) casts and continuous underway measurements. The study aimed to examine why ocean temperatures are rising within the tropics and mid-latitudes of the North Atlantic but decreasing at high latitudes. Investigators: National Oceanography Centre, Southampton (NOCS): Elaine McDonagh, Brian King, Harry Bryden, Richard Sanders, Paula Mcleod . University of Liverpool: Ric Williams, George Wolff, Rhiannon Mather, Susan Leadbetter. University of East Anglia: Carol Robinson, Andy Watson, Tim Jickells, Ute Schuster. Proudman Oceanography Laboratory: Clare Postlethwaite.

Simple

Alternate title

British Oceanographic Data Centre record 1048108

Identifier

http://www.bodc.ac.uk/ / EDMED232

Maintenance and update frequency

asNeeded As needed

INSPIRE themes

Vertical Coverages

SeaDataNet PDV

MEDIN metadata record availability

Access constraints

otherRestrictions Other restrictions

Other constraints

No limitations apply

Other constraints

Data are freely available to all following agreement to the terms and conditions of a Data Licence

Use constraints

otherRestrictions Other restrictions

Other constraints

Usage restrictions are specified in the terms of the licence

Spatial representation type

Text, table

Metadata language

EnglishEnglish

N

S

E

W

Geographic identifier

North Atlantic Ocean

Begin date

2005

End date

2005

Supplemental Information

Publication year: 2008-11-03

Publication title: Project web site: http://www.bodc.ac.uk/36n/

Publication authors: 36 North Project

Publication editors: 36 North Project

Unique resource identifier

urn:ogc:def:crs:EPSG::4326

Codespace

OGP

Distribution format

Network Common Data Form ()

Ocean Data View ()

OnLine resource

Data management webpages

Access the BODC data management webpages for the 36 North project.This provides useful information including how to access data.

OnLine resource

BODC online data delivery service

National Oceanographic Database data delivery service; pre-filtered for the data collection.

Hierarchy level

dataset Dataset

Conformance result

Explanation

BODC protocols are based on the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) model enabling BODC to iterate towards compliance with the on-going evolution and development of community requirements including FAIR (Findable,Accessible,Interoperable,Reusable), TRUST (Transparency, Responsibility, User community, Sustainability, Technology) and CARE (Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility, Ethics). Data managers quality assure submissions and assemble the metadata necessary for curation. Submissions (as received) are placed in a long-term accession and stored in triplicate across multiple sites. Appropriate data are transferred into a standard internal format with source variable names mapped to controlled vocabularies, documentation assembled, and metadata loaded into BODC databases. Access to these data is through direct request, the BODC website and through partner repositories such as SeaDataNet. Access control is attained by assigning a data policy to each set of data and this policy is used to administer access when data are requested. Discovery metadata is aligned with EU INSPIRE (through MEDIN) and SeaDataNet community standards. Data are converted to open community formats including Ocean Data View ASCII and SeaDataNet NetCDF, with data described using terms from the NERC vocabulary server. BODC submission agreements are documented on the BODC website and customer service is assured with a dedicated requests team that serve data following local regulations including General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2018 and Environmental Information Regulations (EIR) 2004.

Pass

Yes

Statement

This dataset was created by the organisations with the "originator" role in this metadata record following their in-house data processing and quality control procedures. The data were then provided to the British Oceanographic Data Centre (BODC) for ingestion into one of the schemas of the National Oceanographic Database (NODB). During ingestion BODC undertake quality control, documentation and metadata enhancement procedures appropriate to the type of data. For an overview please see http://www.bodc.ac.uk/about/information_technology/data_processing_steps/. BODC supply full information about data collection, data processing and data quality with all data requests to enable users to assess data suitability themselves.

Instrument(s) used to collect data: meteorological packages; single-beam echosounders; discrete water samplers; continuous water samplers; CTD; current profilers; discrete air samplers.

File identifier

783e3684f155506ea46ebd52f2d75216 XML

Metadata language

EnglishEnglish

Hierarchy level

dataset Dataset

Date stamp

2021-12-20T06:31:16

Metadata standard name

MEDIN

Metadata standard version

3.1.1

Overviews

Spatial extent

N

S

E

W

Keywords

Provided by

Share on social sites

Access to the portal

Read here the full details and access to the data.

Associated resources

Not available