The dataset comprises 40 hydrographic data profiles, collected by a conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) sensor package, within the North East Atlantic Ocean area, incorporating a short section of the Ellett Line to the east of the Anton Dohrn Seamount, together with the Little Minch and North Minch sections. The data were collected during October and November 1979. A complete list of all data parameters are described by the SeaDataNet Parameter Discovery Vocabulary (PDV) keywords assigned in this metadata record. The data were collected by the Scottish Marine Biological Association.

Simple

Identifier

http://www.bodc.ac.uk/ / CSR1999

Maintenance and update frequency

asNeeded As needed

INSPIRE themes

MEDIN metadata record availability

Vertical Coverages

SeaDataNet PDV

Access constraints

otherRestrictions Other restrictions

Other constraints

No limitations apply

Other constraints

Data are freely available to all following agreement to the terms and conditions of the Open Government Licence. The licence terms and conditions are available via https://www.bodc.ac.uk/data/documents/nodb/267809/

Use constraints

otherRestrictions Other restrictions

Other constraints

Usage restrictions are specified in the terms of the licence

Spatial representation type

Text, table

Metadata language

EnglishEnglish

N

S

E

W

Geographic identifier

Northeast Atlantic Ocean (40W)

Begin date

1979-10-29

End date

1979-11-05

Supplemental Information

Publication authors: British Oceanographic Data Centre

Place of publication: Liverpool

Unique resource identifier

urn:ogc:def:cs:EPSG::6498

Codespace

OGP

Distribution format

Network Common Data Form ()

Ocean Data View ()

OnLine resource

BODC online data delivery service

Access the BODC 'all data series' National Oceanographic Database data delivery service; pre-filtered for the RRS Challenger Cruise CH16/79 data collection

OnLine resource

BODC Cruise Metadata Report for RRS Challenger Cruise CH16/79

This report collates information from the BODC cruise inventory and oceanographic databases. It presents cruise metadata and a summary of BODC data holdings for the cruise. It also links to external references, for example cruise reports.

Hierarchy level

dataset Dataset

Conformance result

Explanation

BODC protocols are based on the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) model enabling BODC to iterate towards compliance with the on-going evolution and development of community requirements including FAIR (Findable,Accessible,Interoperable,Reusable), TRUST (Transparency, Responsibility, User community, Sustainability, Technology) and CARE (Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility, Ethics). Data managers quality assure submissions and assemble the metadata necessary for curation. Submissions (as received) are placed in a long-term accession and stored in triplicate across multiple sites. Appropriate data are transferred into a standard internal format with source variable names mapped to controlled vocabularies, documentation assembled, and metadata loaded into BODC databases. Access to these data is through direct request, the BODC website and through partner repositories such as SeaDataNet. Access control is attained by assigning a data policy to each set of data and this policy is used to administer access when data are requested. Discovery metadata is aligned with EU INSPIRE (through MEDIN) and SeaDataNet community standards. Data are converted to open community formats including Ocean Data View ASCII and SeaDataNet NetCDF, with data described using terms from the NERC vocabulary server. BODC submission agreements are documented on the BODC website and customer service is assured with a dedicated requests team that serve data following local regulations including General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2018 and Environmental Information Regulations (EIR) 2004.

Pass

Yes

Statement

This dataset was collected by the originators and provided to the British Oceanographic Data Centre (BODC). Data have undergone BODC quality control procedures described in https://www.bodc.ac.uk/data/documents/nodb/63428/ prior to long term archive and management. Further information about data collection, data processing and data quality reports are linked to the individual profile references in the cruise metadata document linked to this metadata record.

File identifier

e36e407461bd52d0a758c77a888d0ef8 XML

Metadata language

EnglishEnglish

Hierarchy level

dataset Dataset

Date stamp

2021-12-23T11:31:06

Metadata standard name

MEDIN

Metadata standard version

3.1.1

Overviews

Spatial extent

N

S

E

W

Keywords

Provided by

Share on social sites

Access to the portal

Read here the full details and access to the data.

Associated resources

Not available