Nicholas Tse and Cecilia Cheung’s marital woes have been at the forefront of entertainment news from Hong Kong to Taiwan to China for the past month. Despite the multitude of rumors that have been flying around, up to this point, neither party had come forward to address the rumors or confirm if the marriage is truly ‘on the rocks’. In the past month, Cecilia has been ‘attacked’ with negative publicity, with rumors abound of her being a gold-digger, overbearing, troublemaker, using her sons to threaten her husband, etc.—all meant to paint her in a bad light. Despite the negative rumors, Cecilia has kept silent out of concern for her children – but now, after 24 days of silence, she feels that she cannot continue to suffer in silence and so has decided to come forward and reveal her husband’s ‘true colors’.

The day before yesterday, Cecilia Cheung – accompanied by her younger brother Ronnie Cheung as well as her manager Emily – left the HK airport and headed for Germany to fulfill work obligations. Yesterday, she accepted an exclusive phone interview with our paper (Oriental Daily) in which she breaks her silence and responds to various rumors that have circulated up to this point.

Ever since Eileen Cha revealed in her radio show back on 5/30 that Cecilia has been “squeezing Nicholas Tse’s $500 million personal fortune dry” and portrayed her as a gold-digger as well as troublemaker, there have been rumors that Nicholas Tse’s mother Deborah Lai, who is good friends with Eileen Cha, was the source of information for Eileen and gave her ‘authorization’ to speak about the couple’s marital issues. This was a natural ‘conclusion’ drawn by the public due to Deborah’s rocky relationship with her daughter-in-law Cecilia – however, in our exclusive interview, Cecilia reveals her staunch belief that her own husband Nicholas Tse was Eileen Cha’s true ‘source’!

R = Reporter

C = Cecilia

R: Why do you feel that Nicholas is the person who provided Eileen with the information?

C (speaking calmly): I’ve been married to him for 5 years and have known him since I was 18 years old – of course I know what type of person he is! All this time, he has always projected the image of being ‘cool’ and ‘suave’, wearing his sunglasses all the time and such. I once asked him why he always wears sunglasses, to which he replied that with the sunglasses on, people can’t tell whether he is lying or telling the truth! So him getting ‘Best Actor’ is truly ‘deserving’ then!

R: Other than knowing him for 13 years and being married to him for 5 years, what other specific reason do you have for believing that Nicholas is the ‘source’ of all the negative information out there about you?

C (starts to become slightly agitated): A lot of things only the two of us know about -- conversations that we had between the two of us as husband and wife that a third party has no way of knowing. Nic’s relationship with his mother Deborah has never been good – when he accepted the award for Best Actor and didn’t thank his mother onstage, Deborah got really upset and complained to Eileen Cha the next day. After that, Deborah stopped staying in contact with us and stopped coming to our house, therefore she did not know that I had moved to Yeung Ming Shan Chuang and definitely did not know how much rent I was paying – so how was Eileen Cha able to reveal that information? It’s obvious then who the true ‘source’ of the information was! This method of ‘using someone else’s knife to kill someone’, causing 2 women [Cecilia and Deborah] to be endlessly ‘attacked’ by the public and Media and not doing anything about it – this is absolutely despicable! If there was something that he needed to say, why not just come out and say it? Why be so sneaky?

R: It’s been almost a month since Eileen Cha revealed all that in her radio show – from that moment until now, there has been a lot of negative reports related to you. Why did you continue to keep silent all this time?

C (sounding helpless): The reason why I’ve been silent up to this point is because of my children. I didn’t want my 2 sons to grow up in a broken, single parent family – but he [Nicholas] did not appreciate it! Even up until yesterday, right before I got on the plane, he was still secretly ‘releasing’ information to the public! I truly couldn’t stand it anymore and felt that I needed to come out and say something!

R: Have you been in contact with Nicholas?

C (stating without hesitation): I haven’t been able to get in touch with him for the past month or so. Before I boarded the plane to come here, I used a phone without caller ID to call Cousin [Nic Tse’s assistant]; I told him to tell his boss that if he continues to secretly release false information to the public like that, I will not tolerate it any more! There is a lot of stuff that only the two of us [Cecilia and Nic] know about – if he continued his tactics, then I will reveal his true colors to the public and let everyone know who Nicholas Tse truly is! I told him to stop pretending to be a good man, good husband, good father!

R: In your opinion, how is Nicholas as a father?

C: He’s never cared much about the kids. Whenever he’s at home, it’s like the kids are invisible to him – he pretty much ignores them! The only reason he wanted me to have kids was so he could tie me down – he actually doesn’t even like children!

R: Back to your conversation with Cousin…so after you told Cousin that you won’t tolerate it any more and would reveal your husband’s true colors, what was Nic’s reaction?

C (slightly agitated again): I could hear him next to Cousin, yelling out: “Go ahead and (expletive) talk about me! I worked so hard to make the public have a bad image of you, let’s see who the people are going to believe!”

R: Is it because of those words that you decided not to keep silent anymore?

C (angrily states): Yes! It is precisely because of those words that I decided not to keep quiet anymore! I felt I needed to come out and say something!

R: Why would Nicholas attack you like that?

C: Because he doesn’t want me to get any of his assets, so he made it look like I was crazy for money – but the reality is far from that! I don’t need to rely on him [financially] at all! Money is not that important to me – if have more, spend more, if have less, spend less. Plus, it’s not like I don’t have any money at all! Even if I’m no longer in the entertainment industry, I still won’t have a problem!

R: With the situation getting to the point that it has, are you guys truly getting a divorce?

C (helplessly expresses): I’ve stayed silent for so long in order to preserve my family and for the sake of the children. Whether we will be divorcing or nor can be taken up later – right now, at this moment, my only intention is to reveal Nicholas Tse’s true colors!

Source: TNW