Y'all I think Japan has a lot of feelings about WWII...

I was wary to watch “Rope and Boys." And yet, director Shūji Kataoka brings the pulpy '80s sensationalism and melodrama from "S&M Hunter" (1986) to the gays. The style - and banging music - establish Kataoka as the pinku heir to Nikkatsu king Shōgorō Nishimura (particularly his late 70s - early 80s period). Simply put, this film is fun. A cracked egg as lube full of fun!

I do disagree with the capitalist / work-narratives from other reviews. The two twinks have a problematic relationship from the start: when the top ignores his bottom's pain during anal, because "they must become close together." Their relationship is quickly paced and…

S&M porn with a paper-thin soap opera plot layered on top. As pretty and likable as the boys are, I didn’t find this particularly effective as either melodrama or pornography—though this isn’t really my particular scene, so don’t take my word for it. While it’s been accurately interpreted as a simple critique of capitalism’s many degradations (implicitly linked to those of fascism, as the fetishistic decor of the club indicates), the message that came through to me was a surprisingly conservative affirmation of the family as the bulwark of safety against the dangers of sexual perversion, though obviously (being pornography) the film’s true sympathies lie with said perversion. So, um, I guess I don’t really feel the need to rate…

As is often the case with pinku eiga, the title and poster imagery here suggest a more provocative and potentially problematic experience than what the movie actually presents. That said, if you think this film isn't for you, it isn't. Unable to accept his older brother's new girlfriend, a young man runs off and starts a sexual relationship with his friend. The latter works as a performer in a gay S & M club that specializes in Nazi regalia and themes. Both young men are soon participating on stage, but there is an inevitable (and predictable) downside.

One of the most interesting aspects of this genre is a tacit agreement between the backers and the filmmakers: as long as these short…

i thought this was pretty good. the soundtrack was really good, like way better than i expected going into this. i didn’t even think about the soundtrack, yet it was one of the things i liked most. it was really nice.

user Dakota Noot said a lot of the points i was already thinking, but what the hell this is my account i’ll say what i need to say.

the nazi symbolism was a bit gnarly. it’s pretty gross seeing how much the japanese do things like that, like dress up like that, and see nothing wrong with it (i’m into japanese rock, i’ve seen more than my fair share of nazi and imperial japan costumes, and symbolism. shudders). especially…