Chennakesava Temple,Aralaguppe, Tumkur District

While traveling from Bangalore to Shimoga, after Kibbanahalli cross and

15 km before Tiptur a big signboard reads "Way to Chennakesava

temple, Aralaguppe." A couple of kilometers on this deviation bring

us to the spellbinding 13th century architectural beauty of Hoysalas.

Aralaguppe was known as 'Alariguppe' according to inscriptions from

the bygone era. The Chennakesava temple here has all the usual

characteristics of the Hoysala architectural style, which is said to

have been introduced first in the Hoysaleshwara temple, Halebid.

The raised platform following the contours of the stellate plan of the

main temple, circumambulatory path ay to go round the temple, carved

repetitive friezes for basement cornices, introduction of a second

chadya or eave between the figure sculpture, turreted pilasters and

decorative miniature towers, exuberant ornamentation of the figure

sculptures, are all the predominant features of Hoysala architecture.

In the absence of any inscription available, this style alone has

helped the art historians to assign this temple to 13th century.

The Chennakesava temple stands on a raised platform in the centre of

the village. This is Ekakuta temple a single celled temple, with its

star shaped garbhagriha and tower is of a simple ground plan consisting

of an antarala (vestibule), navaranga and an entrance ankana fitted

with pierced stone windows, which allows subdued light into the temple.

The temple follows the contours of the vimana and has a flight of steps

in the front flanked by two miniature towers on each side.

The decorative friezes running around the temple wall provides many

spectacular scenes. The row of six friezes carved one above the other,

separated horizontally by deeply cut recesses, consists of caparisoned

elephants, horses, creepers, mythological frieze, makaras and lastly

hamsas. The mythological friezes tell the story of Ramayana and

Bhagavata. The lowest friezes of elephants and horses are picturesque

representations of the turbulent wars fought by the Hoysalas to build

and consolidate their empire. The makaras and hamsas are indicative of

the peacetime prosperity, wealth and happiness of the subjects.

The wall decorations are as profuse as in any other ornate Hoysala

temple.

Here also we see the regular scheme of dividing the outer wall into two

portions by a horizontally running cornice. The lower half has the

sculptures standing below a canopy of creepers. Most of them are the

Chaturvimsati Murthy, the 24 forms of Vishnu and other deities with six

hands and are the most spectacular iconographic specialty of this

temple. Because normally they are shown only with four hands. Above

these sculptures, the upper half of the wall shows varied forms of

miniature towers, turrets on pilasters.

The vimana of this temple is in the shape of 16-pointed star and

consists of kuta aedicule each one rotated by 22.5 degrees, 45 degrees,

and 22.5 degrees successively. The tower of the vimana with four talas

has a vedike and kuta roof at the top, which follows the contours of

the sanctum below. The top kalasa is missing.

The outer wall of navaranga is of staggered squares and represents a

saptaratha structure. Some of the sculptures here bear the name of

'Honnoja' on their pedestal while some others have only 'Ho' as a short

form of the sculptor's name. This terse name without any titles or

claims keeps us in darkness as far as the sculptor is concerned.

The navaranga is of the usual nine ankanas or divisions and has two

niches containing Ganesha and Mahishasuramardini, both of exquisite

workmanship.

A six-feet tall slightly damaged Keshava idol is kept in the navaranga

and perhaps, was the original deity that adored the garbhagriha, but at

present there is a smaller idol for worship. The pillars that support

the navaranga and the ceilings are elaborately worked. The fine

workmanship of the pillars is eye-catching.

But unfortunately the exquisite beauty of this temple has been marred

by another temple, which is built for Ugra Narasimha, annexing the

southern wall of the Chennakesava temple. Unless one has access to the

garbhagriha of the Narasimha temple, it would be impossible to see the

sculptural beauty of half the southern wall of Chennakesava temple.

Though Mysore archaeological report 1935, talks of removing this

obstruction and building a separate temple for Narasimha, perhaps due

to the unwillingness of the local villagers the project has remained on

paper only. If not for this one flaw, the condition of this temple is

fairly good.

Pre-Hoysala shrine

A pre-Hoysala shrine, the Kalleshwara temple attracted the attention of

experts, as the Natesha in the middle of the ashtadikpalakas panels

over the mukhamantapa ceiling, is considered the most beautiful

sculpture found in the State.

Consisting of garbagriha, antarala, and a mukhamantapa (with three

lateral shrines), the temple's sanctum sanctorum is adorned with a huge

black-granite Shivalinga.

While the adhishtana is made of granites, the temple's walls and towers

are constructed with bricks. The outer walls are insipid without

projections and recesses, but for the lone niche at the antarala that

divides the vimana from the mukhamantapa. Pilasters built closer at the

temple's interiors however, appears more refreshing.

The extraordinary ceiling of the mukhamantapa, with the Nolambas style

portrayal of Umasahita (Shiva and Parvati together) at the central

panel, is a stark contrast with the otherwise ordinary interior.

The image of Gajalakshmi on the doorway adds charm to the place. The

four lathe-cum-pillars, with cubical bases, supports the navaranga's

ceiling. Apart from the Shiva-Parvati panel, the ceiling has eight

other carvings of ashtadikpalakas, depicted with their consorts and

vehicles. Four vidyadharas, with garlands in their hands, face up to

the Natesha (with the expression of approaching him from the corners of

the panel's beams).

These garland-bearing vidyadharas are quite common to Nolamba

architecture; a clear evidence of the elegance and comprehensiveness of

their style. The Natesha, meanwhile, is a remarkable three-dimensional

image, wearing jewels such as the katibandana and tassels. The dancing

lord is accompanied by three bhutas playing a three-headed percussion

instrument. They are also seen with ayut and other symbols.

The northern and eastern lateral shrines contain idols of Keshava and

Surya, while the southern one contains the Umasahita mounted over a

large stele with a lotus pedestal and a prabhavali with a couple of

flying vidyadharas.