ATLANTA - Chris Benoit, a professional wrestler known as the Canadian Crippler, apparently killed his wife and 7-year-old son in their home in Fayetteville, Ga., over the weekend before taking his own life by hanging himself with a cable from a weight machine in his home gym, investigators said Tuesday.

Authorities found the bodies Monday afternoon as they were checking on the family at the request of Benoit's employer, World Wrestling Entertainment, said Lt. Tommy Pope, lead investigator with the Fayette County Sheriff's Department.

On its Web site, WWE said it called the authorities after receiving several "curious" text messages from Benoit early Sunday.

Investigators searching the house found Nancy E. Benoit, 43, in an upstairs family room with her hands and feet bound and blood under her head, said Scott Ballard, district attorney for Fayette County.

Deputies found Daniel C. Benoit, 7, dead in his own bed.

Investigators said no note was left at the scene, but a Bible had been placed next to both victims.

An autopsy determined both had been asphyxiated, though mother and son were apparently killed hours apart.

"While we don't have that nailed down completely, it would appear that some period of time elapsed between the death of the two victims and the suicide, and it struck me as somewhat bizarre that perhaps he would even be in the home with their deceased bodies," Ballard said.

Ballard said a number of prescription drugs were found in the home, including anabolic steroids, and that they appeared to have been prescribed legally for Chris Benoit.

Authorities would not speculate on a motive, but said that Nancy Benoit had filed for divorce and applied for a restraining order against her husband in 2003, saying Benoit had threatened her and had broken furniture in their home.

She later dropped the complaint.

People who knew the Benoits were troubled by the deaths.

"I'm in the dark," said Kevin Sullivan, a former professional wrestler who was previously married to Nancy Benoit. "I wrestled with him a lot. I thought he was a great performer."

Though toxicology tests won't be completed for weeks, the presence of steroids in the home has led wrestling observers to speculate that the wrestler may have snapped in an episode of "roid rage."

But Christopher Nowinski, a former professional wrestler who worked with Benoit, , thinks repeated, untreated concussions may have caused his friend to snap.

"Knowing Chris," Nowinski said, "he was one of the only guys who would take a chair shot to the back of the head, which is stupid."

Benoit linked to fla. drug firm

ALBANY, N.Y. - Pro wrestler Chris Benoit had previously received drug deliveries from a Florida business that sold steroids on the Internet, according to the Albany County District Attorney's Office.

Heather Orth, spokeswoman for District Attorney P. David Soares, confirmed the connection between Benoit and MedXLife.com, first reported in The Times Union of Albany. In business for about three years, the company was selling steroids, human growth hormone and testosterone over the Internet, officials said.

MedXLife sold prescription medications, including anabolic steroids, through Orlando-based Signature Compounding Pharmacy, prosecutors said.

Material from The Associated Press was used in this report.