Post by Johnny Wrestling on

I was at OWW, and at the forums someone posted something that interested me about Chris Benoit

...Some reports found interest in the fact that the popular website Wikipedia had an entry sometime after 12:00 midnight, after Night of Champions that said that Chris Benoit’s wife was dead. This was posted from a computer in Connecticut and a good 12 or so hours before the bodies were discovered. And of course, the WWE Headquarters are located in Stamford, Connecticut. There were rumblings that the case could go from a Double Murder-Suicide to a Triple Homicide if enough evidence was found.

When I read that, I really got shocked, cause I never knew that.

Without question, the following is going to cause an outburst by someone here. However, the following needs to be expressed. From forensic analysts to former prosecutors, many have stated that something seems wrong with this case. It stems from many instances. No suicide note, the Wikipedia posting, and times of death not matching up. After all, the police stated that Nancy was murdered on Friday, Daniel early Saturday and Chris later that Saturday or early Sunday morning. Yet, police stated that Chris had been watching the Vengeance pay per view on Sunday night as well as communicating with others. How can someone do that when they had passed on? A motive had never been revealed or even hypothesized. It could be that the police are complete imbeciles. Hey, it’s not impossible. Come to my city and you’ll realize that if my neighborhood had Chief Wiggum from the Simpsons, it would be a step forward. Yet, too many mistakes were made by this force. The wrong area code was on the text messages sent, the diary Benoit kept was never examined, not to mention that the case was closed way too quickly. Something really seems fishy about this entire situation. Nothing seems to match up yet everyone’s popular belief is that what happened that weekend, according to the authorities, is exactly what happened. Case closed, pun intended.

Weird. I mean, most people when they commit suicide, they leave notes. Benoit didn't, but he had a dairy which wasn't examined. I think it does seem fishy like this guy said.

If someone wants to read all the article here's the link:

Remove the *

Post by BTL Im Not on

here is what im mean a little off

A statement regarding Nancy Benoit's death was added to the Chris Benoit English Wikipedia article fourteen hours before police discovered the bodies of Benoit and his family. This seemingly prescient addition was initially reported on Wikinews and later on FOXNews.com. The article originally read: "Chris Benoit was replaced by Johnny Nitro for the ECW World Championship match at Vengeance, as Benoit was not there due to personal issues, stemming from the death of his wife Nancy." The phrase "stemming from the death of his wife Nancy" was added at 12:01 a.m. EDT on June 25,[51] whereas the Fayette County police reportedly discovered the bodies of the Benoit family at 2:30 p.m. EDT (14 hours, 29 minutes later). The IP address of the editor was traced to Stamford, Connecticut, which is also the location of WWE headquarters.[52] After news of the early death notice reached mainstream media, the anonymous poster accessed Wikinews to explain his edit as a "huge coincidence and nothing more."[53][54]

Police detectives "seized computer equipment from the [man held] responsible for the postings" and have called the confession an unbelievable "hindrance" to their investigation, but believed he was otherwise uninvolved, declining to press charges.[55][56] The man had found several rumours on-line[57] which supported his theory about the Benoit "family emergency" as reported in wrestling news; the IP from which he made the edit in question has been tentatively traced to vandalizing the Wikipedia entries for Ron Artest, Stacy Keibler, and Naugatuck, Connecticut.[58]