Jomo Kenyatta international airport is located in Nairobi the largest city and the capital city of magical Kenya, the airport is found in Embakasi a suburb that is approximately 15 kilometers south east of Nairobi’s central business district. Jomo Kenyatta international airport a joint type of airport (civil and military) was originally known as EMBAKASI airport but in honor of Kenya’s first prime minister and president Jomo Kenyatta the airport’s name was changed to JOMO KENYATTA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT. The airport is accessed by passengers using the main entrance which is situated on Airport South Road accessed by an exit from Mombasa road (A109 highway), passengers going to or from the airport can use city Bus route number 34 and rental car services.

Jomo Kenyatta international airport using codes for NBO for IATA and HKJK for ICAO and operated by Kenya Airport Authority is used as a hub for Kenya airways, Jambo jet, fly 540 and African express Airways, this airport at an elevation of 1,624 meters offers scheduled flights to over 50 countries destinations and in 2016 it was ranked the 7th busiest airport in Africa for serving over 7 million passengers. Jomo Kenyatta international airport handles both international and domestic flights together with cargo flights to different destinations using various airlines, the following airlines operating at jomo Kenyatta international airport with their destinations for both passenger and cargo.

AIRLINE DESTINATIONS PASSENGER FLIGHTS Air Arabia

Sharjah

Air France

Paris–Charles de Gaulle

African Express Airways

Berbera

Dubai–International

Galkayo

Hargeisa

Mogadishu

Sharjah

Jambojet

Eldoret

Entebbe

Kisumu

Malindi

Mombasa

Ukunda/Diani Beach

Jubba Airways

Mogadishu

Kenya Airways

Abidjan

Accra

Addis Ababa

Amsterdam

Antananarivo

Bamako

Bangkok–Suvarnabhumi AND MANY MORE

KLM

Amsterdam

QATAR AIRWAYS

Doha

South African airways

Johannesburg or Tambo

Swiss international Airlines

Zurich

LAM Mozambique Airlines

Dar es Salaam

Maputo

Pemba

RwandAir

Entebbe

Kigali

Turkish Airlines

Istanbul

Uganda airlines

Entebbe

Precision Air

Dar-es-salaam

Kilimanjaro

Zanzibar

Oman Air

Muscat

Malawian Airlines

Lilongwe

Lufthansa

Frankfurt

Fly540

Eldoret

Homa

Bay

Juba

Kisumu

Lamu

Lodwar

Mombasa

Zanzibar

Etihad Airways

Abu Dhabi

Emirates

Dubai-international

Air India

Mumbai though resumes its operations on 27th November 2019

Air Mauritius

Mauritius

British airways

London-Heathrow

Daallo Airlines

Mogadishu

China south airlines

Changsha

FOR CARGO FLIGHTS Astral Aviation

Dar es Salaam

Entebbe

Juba

Kigali

London–Stansted

Mogadishu

Mwanza

Egypt Air Cargo

Cairo

Air France Cargo

Paris–Charles de Gaulle

Cargolux

Amsterdam

Luxembourg

Maastricht

Emirates SkyCargo

Dubai–Al Maktoum

Maastricht

Qatar Airways Cargo

Brussels

Doha

Singapore Airlines Cargo

Amsterdam

Sharjah,

Singapore

Silk Way Airlines

Baku

London-Stansted

Maastricht

Turkish Airlines Cargo

Entebbe

Istanbul–Atatürk

Khartoum

Kinshasa

Maastricht

Saudia Cargo

Amsterdam

Jeddah

Maastricht

Martinair

Amsterdam

Johannesburg–OR Tambo

Lufthansa Cargo

Frankfurt

Johannesburg–OR Tambo

Jomo Kenyatta international airport has a number of facilities which are used to meet passengers’ needs and safe comfortable flights, these facilities include

TERMINALS: Jomo Kenyatta international airport has two terminals that are terminal 1 and terminal 2.

TERMINAL 1. Terminal 1 of the airport is arranged in a semi-circular orientation, it is divided into parts i.e. 1A, 1B, 1C and 1E serving different purposes. Terminal 1A, 1B, 1C and 1E are used for international arrivals and departure while 1D is used for domestic departures.

Terminal 1A is of carrying capacity of 2.5 million passengers a year handling international departures and arrivals, a terminal of 3 levels has 30 check-in counters, 12 departure gates, ample seating with food and retail options. Terminal 1A primarily used by sky team member airlines also has an arrival area housing 5 baggage carousels.

Terminal 1B consists of common-use check-in counters, security checkpoints which lead to departure lounge on level 1, on that level, there is an Aspire lounge as well as duty-free shopping and café outlets.

Terminal 1C. Terminal 1C is used for international departures housing common-use check-in counters, security points leading to the departure lounge on level 1, on level 1 floor there is duty-free shops, Kenya Airways Simba Lounge, Turkish Airlines lounge and a café.

Terminal 1D. Terminal 1D is used for domestic flights handling departing and arriving passengers on domestic flights, this terminal is occupied by only Kenya airways and jumbojet airlines.

Terminal 1E. The terminal handles international arrivals, terminal 1E was open for handling international arrivals after the closure of the main international arrivals and departure terminals 1B and 1C after the incident of fire

2.Terminal 2: Terminal 2 sometimes referred to as Embakasi airport is the original terminal situated on the north side of the runway. The terminal is used by low-cost carrier airlines, this terminal opened for operations in 2015 primarily to combat overcrowding at the airport with a handling capacity of 2.5 passengers. The terminal is composed of international and domestic check-in desks, boarding gates and various lounges such as mara lounge and Mount Kenya lounge both situated at the airside.

Lounge: Jomo Kenyatta international airport is composed of various lounges such as Simba lounge and pride lounge situated on terminal 1A second floor, these two lounges accommodate a combined capacity of 350 passengers and used by KQ’s premier world and Sky Team’s sky priority passengers. On terminal 1B there is a Turkish Airline TAV lounge and on terminal 1C there is Swissport Aspire Lounge, these lounges are regular lounges accessed by elite status or paid-pass passengers.

Runways Jomo Kenyatta international airport has 2 runways that is the old runway and second runway. Constructed in 1978 and upgraded in 2015 jomo Kenyatta international airport run way is 4117 meters long and 45 meters, after being renovated to code E the runway can handle wide crafts like Boeing B747.

The newly opened second runway is bigger than the old runway handling double craft movement 25-45 per hour, it is a category 2 runway of 4.2kilometers length and 75 meters wide and according to ICAO it is a code F run way with a capacity of handling wide-bodied aircraft like Airbus A380 and Boeing 77447-8

Authority offices: Jomo Kenyatta international airport is houses various offices such as a head office for African express airways and the Kenya airports authority.

Restaurants and food outlets: Jomo Kenyatta international airport has many food outlets and restaurants which offer meals to passengers.

Jomo Kenyatta international airport has evolved with time hosting a rich history which makes it attractive. In the 1950s and 1960s, plans for building this airport were drawn, by 1953 the building process began and on Sunday 9th March 1958 the airport was open in names of Embakasi airport by last colonial governor of Kenya Sir Evelyn Baring. Like other airports in Africa jomo Kenyatta international airport has faced some accidents and incidents

on 20thh November 1974 Lufthansa Flight 540, a Lufthansa Boeing 747–130, D-ABYB, LH 540, crashed as it was taking off which resulted into death of 59 passengers out 157 passengers on board

on 17 May 1989, a Boeing 747 aircraft operated by Somali airlines overran a wet runway and crashed into a rice field after aborting takeoff, though the aircraft was damaged beyond repair no deaths were registered.

On 7th August 2013 fire broke out in the immigrating area spreading to the neighboring areas, it caused tremendous damages which forced operations on the airport to be suspended.

On 04th January 2015, a Fokker 50 carrying 6 passengers crashed due to landing gear failure. In this accident, no deaths or injuries were registered