Oconee Fall Line Technical College Names New President

Executive V.P. Erica Harden to lead college on February 1st

SANDERSVILLE, GA—Technical College System of Georgia (TCSG) Commissioner Matt Arthur has appointed a new president at Oconee Fall Line Technical College. Erica Godbee Harden, Executive Vice President at Oconee Fall Line Technical College, has been named President of Oconee Fall Line Technical College.

Harden will bring nearly 30 years of experience in technical education to lead the college starting February 1st. She began her technical college career in 1990 as Director of Public Relations and Marketing and has since held roles as Director of Admissions, Executive Director of Student Affairs, and Vice President of Academic and Student Affairs.

“Erica has dedicated her professional life to advancing technical education and has the right experience we were looking for in a new president,” said Commissioner Arthur. “Her leadership roles in student and academic affairs, coupled with her knowledge and understanding of the surrounding community, are tremendous assets to lead Oconee Fall Line Technical College into the 21st century.

Erica Harden received her Bachelor of Arts in Journalism from the University of Georgia and a Master’s Degree in Organizational Management from the University of Phoenix.

“I am truly humbled to be selected as the next president of Oconee Fall Line Technical College,” Harden shared. “I am fully committed to technical education in Georgia and particularly to OFTC and the eleven counties we serve. I am resolute in my belief that education and especially technical education is the key to sustaining the economic viability of our communities. I look forward to continuing to work with the wonderful faculty and staff at OFTC in providing our citizens with opportunities to complete their education, and to provide our business and industry partners with a qualified, trained workforce. I want to thank Commissioner Arthur and the search committee for this special honor to serve our communities.”

Current president, Dr. Lloyd Horadan, will retire with over 41 years of service to the state of Georgia.

The State Board of the Technical College System of Georgia approved Commissioner Arthur’s appointment of Erica Harden on Tuesday, January 8th in Atlanta.

###

The mission of Oconee Fall Line Technical College, a unit of the Technical College System of Georgia, is to contribute to the economic and workforce development of east central Georgia through quality technical and continuing education, adult education, and business and industry services. The College offers associate degrees, diplomas, technical certificates of credit, and non-credit certificates in a student-centered learning environment through traditional and distance education modes of delivery.

The 22 colleges of the Technical College System of Georgia (TCSG) are Georgia’s top resource for skilled workers. TCSG offers world-class training in 600 associate degree, diploma and certificate programs to students who are trained on state-of-the-art equipment by instructors who are experts in their fields. The system also houses Georgia’s Office of Adult Education, which promotes and provides adult literacy and education programs, including the GED testing program, throughout the state. In addition, TCSG partners with companies through Quick Start, the nation’s top customized workforce training program, and through its individual colleges, who work with local industry to provide workforce and training solutions. For more information, visit TCSG.edu.

CONTACT:

Mark D’Alessio

404-679-1617