Nathanael O'Reilly. Exploring Suburbia: The Suburbs in the Contemporary Australian Novel. New York: Teneo Press, 2012. $29.00 ISBN: 9781934844946 (Pbk) http://www.teneopress.com/teneopress.cfm?template=4&bid=541

Australian writers have long been caught up in narratives about how an individual discovers himself or herself in relation to the natural world, and these experiences-often involving struggle against and triumph over the physical challenges of the landscape-operate as allegories for Australia's national identity. National stories predominately favour the rugged arid landscapes of the bush, or azure coastal beaches, which position the Australian people generally as either tough bush larrikins or athletic beach-goers. Both narrative positions are explicitly embedded in the natural world, and they celebrate a nationalism that takes place under the sun and in connection with the land or sea. The mythologised tales of Burke and Wills, Gallipoli, and Ned Kelly are a few examples of how, in particular, stories about boys from the bush feature prominently in the national imaginary (O' Reilly, xi).

In his 2012 book, Exploring Suburbia: The Suburbs in the Contemporary Australian Novel, Nathanael O'Reilly steps outside of Australia's nationalistic tropes, and investigates the often uncelebrated domestic space of suburbia. In a comprehensive literature review, Exploring Suburbia explains how, as the space that hangs tenuously between city and the bush, suburbia has been portrayed as culturally and artistically lacking-a no-man's land, ripe for parody and comedic derision. One need not think too far beyond Barry Humphries' caricatures of suburban dwellers, immortalised most memorably in the characters of Dame Edna Everage and Sandy Stone, to see how suburbia is criticised for its alleged obsession with commodity culture.

O'Reilly argues that suburbanisation in Australia sought to achieve what was not fully accomplished in Britain-a division between domestic and work spaces. The suburbs were built on the dream of a more spacious and independent commuter lifestyle by enabling working class people to live in affordably close proximity to the city, but also stay in touch with the free and open rural spaces. For many people, suburbia represented the best of both the urban and rural environments, but however idealised suburban planning was, antisuburban attitudes formed early on in Australian history. Long before the Post-World War Two suburban boom, which saw the emergence of figures such as Dame Edna as a critical...