Superbly researched and precisely and concisely written, Suburban True Crime examines the true underbelly of Australian crime. The stories contained within the book remind us that the worst of the crimes committing in this country are not some excluded few; perpetrators from which we can separate ourselves. Instead, they are the people in your neighbourhood, on your street, even next door…

Containing an assortment of lesser known, yet no less powerful, true crimes from across a broad spectrum of timeframes and locations, Suburban True Crime takes the reader back to some of Australia’s most intriguing cases. An interesting selection of crimes which, through their re-examination, allows the reader to re-visit and analyse these cases within their historical contexts.

The depths of true crime in the Australian landscape goes far deeper than the mainstream media portrays. Beyond the famous criminals who gain near ‘cult’ status, the truth of ‘true’ crime in this country is the everyday crimes that do not receive the same attention; everyday Australians suffering some of the most horrific crimes. Powerful and compelling, Suburban True Crime is an extraordinary read about ordinary Australians.

Suburban True Crime is a powerful book in that, not only does it trace many of Australia’s most unknown true crime cases, but it leaves the reader with a sense of lack of justice. Killers going uncaught, insufficient sentences or criminals being let out early. This compelling series of Australian crime cases reminds the reader that, while the criminals receive their judicial sentences, the families and friends of the victims are left to suffer a life sentence of their own.

New True Crime Book revisits local murder

Emily Webb has spoken and written about plenty of grisly murders in the past few years.

“My passion really is about cold cases and lesser known cases, where people need to remember the impact of crime on people,” she said.

“It’s just about lived experience. People are interested in knowing about that and if it is a crime that’s happening in their neighbourhood, it’s a shock.”

The Knox-based journalist, true-crime author and podcaster’s new book Suburban True Crime: Australian cases you’ll never forget and some you’ve never heard of will be published on May 18, featuring stories from around the country of shocking and often unsolved cases.

Ms Webb said several cases have stayed with her over the years, including one close to home.

“Nanette Ellis’s murder in Boronia is a case that I’ve followed for a number of years. In fact, I reported on it when I was a journalist at Leader newspapers,” she said.

“In 1984, someone came into her house and stabbed her to death. It’s a very strange crime; it is unsolved to this day.”

Ms Webb said aside from her murder occurring during broad daylight at her own home as she prepared to go out with friends, there were other strange coincidences occurring during the time before her murder.

“She’d had her car vandalized on her driveway and a few times when she had been driving to work from Boronia up to Belgrave — she would have gone up along Burwood Highway — she had rocks thrown at her car. Was she being stalked?” Ms Webb said.

“We listen to true crime because we want to understand why this happens. We get asked a lot why do a lot of women listen to true crime and read true crime? I think subconsciously women want to try and work out how they can keep themselves safe.”

Ms Webb — who has co-hosted the Australian True Crime podcast since 2017 — said there are several other cases of violent crime occurring in the eastern suburbs.

https://ferntreegully.mailcommunity.com.au/entertainment/2022-05-13/new-true-crime-book-revisits-local-suburban-murder/