The Butterfly by Sonya Hartnett

Pages: 240

Genre: YA Realistic Fiction

Pub. Date: August 10, 2010

ARC Obtained Through LibraryThing Early Reviewers

My Rating: 2.5/5 stars

Goodreads says, "Growing up during the 1980s in the safe complacency of the Australian suburbs, Plum Coyle should be happy. But on the cusp of her fourteenth birthday - and on the fringe of her peer group - she lives in terror of the disapproval of her cruel and fickle girlfriends, and most of all, she hates her awkward, changing body with a passion.So when Plum's glamorous next-door neighbor Maureen, a young wife and mother, befriends Plum, Plum responds with worshipful fervour. Plum feels herself reinvented. With Maureen, she becomes the girl she's always wanted to be. But Maureen has an ulterior motive for taking Plum under her wing."

Plum Coyle is your typical adolescent girl growing up the 1980's in Australia. She goes through life trying to impress her friends, trying to gain attention, and essentially trying to be someone she isn't. This book is an accurate portrayal of what some young females must go through in order to feel accepted and fit in; however, Plum takes it a step further and tries too hard. Sonya Hartnett's depiction of adolescent life in The Butterfly is so awkward it hurts.

Plum, vying for attention from her cliquey group of girlfriends, makes some bad decisions. On top of that, she feels inferior when around them and is easily swayed. Hartnett does a nice job of illustrating how in some peer groups it's very "you're in" one minute and "you're out" the next. She is desperately trying to fit in, but it's like witnessing someone trying to push a circle into a square peg. Hartnett even tries to impress her older neighbor, Maureen, but their relationship ends up being an unhealthy one. Plum is desperate for a mentor. I was hoping she would find a group friend, but sadly, that never happened.

I gave this novel 2.5 out of 4 stars, because I felt that it wasn't really YA. Just like Plum, it's stuck somewhere in between. Yes, Plum is a fourteen year old girl, but some of the themes were much older. For example, this book isn't always focusing on Plum and her experiences. Parts of the novel focus on her brothers and the neighbor, Maureen, and lets just say it was rather edgy. For example, there's an affair/adultery depicted and detailed marijuana use. When the novel does focus on Plum, often times she is so eccentric and odd that I imagine many teens finding her to be annoyingly weird. She spends a lot of time focusing on puberty and body image to the point where it becomes unhealthy. I really didn't like that message especially since there was no closure around that issue.

On the other hand, Hartnett's writing style is simply beautiful. I haven't read an author so lyrical and poetic (with the exception of Maggie Stiefvater) in a long time. Her voice is extremely unique and descriptive. Hartnett can take a simple activity, such as walking down the street, and weave an extraordinary image in the reader's mind. This, I feel, may be lost and unappreciated on the average teen. In fact, this book felt very literary; it's almost like something that you might come across in a modern literature high school or college course. The theme was important and many young adults may not even take note of it. Hartnett suggests that we all go through a metamorphosis, just like a butterfly, and while some can undergo this change quite successfully, for others, it can be a challenging, messy process. Life and its situations, especially while you are an adolescent, aren't always easy or pleasant and this book certainly depicts that. Ultimately, life can be, as we like to refer to it at work, a gelatinous mess.

All in all, this book left me sort of lukewarm. I found many admirable qualities and important themes, but if I passed it on to a fourteen year old (as the ARC says fourteen and up) I think they might be bored to tears by the detailed descriptions as well as Plum's idiosyncrasies. Perhaps this book should be marketed to older high school students or as contemporary adult fiction? I think that age bracket would appreciate Hartnett's mystical writing style and controversial situations a bit more than your average younger teen.

*Pre-order the book here: The Buttefly

The Maze Runner by James Dashner

Pages: 374

Genre: YA Science Fiction

Pub. Date: October 6, 2009

My Rating: 4.5 out of 5 stars

Goodreads says, "When Thomas wakes up in the lift, the only thing he can remember is his first name. He has no recollection of his parents, his home, or how he got where he is. His memory is black. But he’s not alone. When the lift’s doors open, Thomas finds himself surrounded by kids who welcome him to the Glade, a large expanse enclosed by stone walls. Just like Thomas, the Gladers don’t know why or how they got to the Glade. All they know is that every morning, for as long as they could remember, the stone doors to the maze that surrounds them have opened. Every night, they’ve closed tight. Every thirty days a new boy is delivered in the lift. And no one wants to be stuck in the maze after dark. The Gladers were expecting Thomas’s arrival. But the next day, a girl springs up—the first girl ever to arrive in the Glade. And more surprising yet is the message she delivers. The Gladers have always been convinced that if they can solve the maze that surrounds the Glade, they might be able to find their way home . . . wherever that may be. But it’s looking more and more as if the maze is unsolvable. And something about the girl’s arrival is starting to make Thomas feel different. Something is telling him that he just might have some answers—if he can only find a way to retrieve the dark secrets locked within his own mind."

You know the moment you are reading a book and you are hooked? You NEED to know what is going on....you are desperate. Your heart starts pounding, you can't breathe easily, you are gasping for air, anxiety takes hold of you, and you are on the edge of your seat? Please tell me that I am not the only one....although that does sound mildly reminsicent of my asthma attack last year at kickboxing class...but I digress. This crazy edge of my seat, NEED TO KNOW NOW experience was how I felt about this book. I was enthralled. I lost an entire day and night to this incredible book. James Dashner's The Maze Runner was truly addicting and an unforgettable read.

Thomas can't remember where he came from, his parents, or his life before the Glade. He finds himself in this bizarre world surrounded by walls and a maze. There are other boys in his situation (think Lord of the Flies) and they have learned to make this place "home." What is even more disturbing is the fact that there are crazy animal-monsters called Grievers that surround the Glade's walls and come out at night with basically one mission: To destroy humans. I'm going to be honest. The Grievers are the stuff of my own personal nightmares. Seriously. I have an irrational fear of needles and I also don't enjoy slugs. at. all. The description of these Grievers included both needles and slugs; needless to say, I vomited in my mouth a little just reading/imagining these volatile creatures.

Anyway, Thomas is learning the ropes and becomes friends Chuck and Minho, who both happen to be my favorite characters. Chuck is just simply endearing. Thomas really wants to be a runner and work with Minho, but he isn't sure why he is drawn to the job. There are various jobs and the way the Glade functioned I thought was pretty interesting. These boys even have their own slang/vernacular (klunk-love it!) as well as laws, which keeps the "order." Everything seems hunky dory- or as normal as possible if you live in a maze- until one day this all changes. A girl, the first girl ever, arrives to the Glade delivering an ominous message. Without giving too much away, the tension increases and their world turns upside down, even more than it already is! Simply stated......Thomas must find a way to survive.

I can't remember the last time that I questioned a book so much as I did while reading this novel. I had SO many questions that I wanted answered, but brilliantly, Dashner was holding out on me, which only increased my suspense. I'm going to get a little nerdy and teacher-eque, but bear with me. I also loved the fact that this book required me to use many comprehension strategies. I would LOVE to discuss this book with my literacy classes, because it really required me to infer, question, synthesize, predict, etc. It was truly a smart read and a puzzle that I was dying to put together. My poor husband, Mike, had to deal with my one million questions. Mike, surprisingly, read this book before me, which usually never happens. He saw the cover, read the synopsis and was hooked. So, it was pretty cool to be able to discuss and question him as I was reading, because Maze Runner is truly a book to be disected and discussed.

This story had me guessing the ENTIRE time, which I think is rare when it comes to young adult novels. Ususally you can figure out the plot at some point, but I was always shocked. Even right up to the end had me guessing. I'm not kidding- even on the last page I was wondering a few things. It was a roller coaster ride that never once let me catch my breath. After my raving review, which I shared with my students, a boy immediately snagged my copy of this book. I think my students will love it!

Many people are comparing this book to Hunger Games and yes, both are dystopias, but both are extremely different. For starters, there really isn't a love triangle in Maze Runner and there's a barely there love interest, which I found to be refreshing. I needed a break from the drama-laden love triangles. Just like Hunger Games, this book focuses on survival of the fittest, but the Maze Runner has a whole different premise. I must admit, this book had me questioning way more than Hunger Games did. Don't get me wrong, I still love me some Katniss, but this book definitely gave Hunger Games a run for its money.

With all that said, I hope you pick up a copy of The Maze Runner. I highly recommend it for fans of science fiction and fans of fast-paced, action packed novels. I am eagerly anticipating The Scorch Trials, which is the sequel. It comes out October 12th and please excuse me while I go pre-order it now! :)

Watch The Book Trailer:

Sisters Red by Jackson Pearce

Pages: 336

Genre: YA Fantasy

Pub. Date: June 7, 2010

ARC Received through SLJ's Webinar

My Rating:

Goodreads says, "Scarlett March lives to hunt the Fenris-- the werewolves that took her eye when she was defending her sister Rosie from a brutal attack. Armed with a razor-sharp hatchet and blood-red cloak, Scarlett is an expert at luring and slaying the wolves. She's determined to protect other young girls from a grisly death, and her raging heart will not rest until every single wolf is dead. Rosie March once felt her bond with her sister was unbreakable. Owing Scarlett her life, Rosie hunts fiercely alongside her. Now Rosie dreams of a life beyond the wolves and finds herself drawn to Silas, a young woodsman who is deadly with an ax-- but loving him means betraying her sister and has the potential to destroy all they've worked for."

Scarlett and Rosie March appear to live an average life in a cottage in the woods....... except that they hunt and kill werewolves or Fenris. You might ask why they dedicate their lives to this? Well, their grandmother was savagely killed by a Fenris when they were children and Scarlett lost an eye protecting her younger sister, Rosie, from the evil creature. Both sisters dedicate their very lives trying to take down these monsters so no girls will suffer from the Fenris' brutality again. However, deep down, Rosie wants more for her life than just hunting and killing, but she feels obligated to help her sister, Scarlett, with this monumental task. Not many others know about the Fenris and the sisters feel it's their duty to protect people. Rosie has many other interests, but Scarlett, on the other hand, only ever has one thing in mind, and that's killing all the Fenris. Jackson Pearce's novel, Sisters Red, is a fun re-telling of a fairy tale, but towards the middle, it fell flat.

Pearce develops the characters really well; I especially like Rosie. I understand her need and desire to be more than just a hunter; however, I can empathize with her situation. She feels guilty about wanting more and doesn't want to let her sister down....after all, Scarlett did risk her life for Rosie and lost an eye in the process. Scarlett, alternatively, I really couldn't relate to. She is obsessed with hunting and can't think of anything else. I'm not kidding. It got to the point where I was saying to myself, "Yes, we get it, Scarlett. You want to go hunting." Really these frustrated moments didn't start for me until the middle of the novel. Also, I felt like a lot of the fight scenes/hunting scenes were kind of repetitive. So, in other words, the character of Scarlett really frustrated me. I admire her sense of duty, but she was a bit too OCD concerning hunting for my taste. On the other hand, I really applaud Pearce for creating characters that are independent and don't need to be constantly "rescued" by men. If you have read my reviews before, you know I can't stand that--a.k.a. Bella Swan!

One character that I thoroughly enjoyed was Silas, the best friend/family friend of Scarlett and Rosie. He's also a woodman/hunter and his character was a delight. Rosie starts to develop feelings for Silas and their relationship was very innocent. In fact, it was very PG and I could easily recommend this book to my younger students without hesitating. There's nothing scandalous here. When it came to Silas, I could easily predict parts of the novel and the main conflict; however, it didn't bother me too much.

You know that book that everyone loves, but you just don't feel passionately about it? Unfortunately, that's how I feel about this book. Don't get me wrong, it's not that I disliked it, I felt "so-so" for a lack of a better word. (By the way, I think this same situation happened to me when I reviewed Beautiful Creatures.) I must admit, I was going to give this book 2.5 stars out of 4 until I read the ending. I enjoyed the ending; it was thoughtful and it took me by surprise.

Fans of Sister Red will be happy to know that there is a companion book coming out in 2011 called Sweetly, which is based on Hansel and Gretel. Lets just say, I dig the idea of a house made out of candy and cake (although my thighs do not), but the idea of a child-devouring witch freaks me out. Is the witch in it? The third companion book entitled Fathomless is already in the works. It's a modernization of The Little Mermaid. Now that one does intrigue me. Either way, I am sure there will be many fans of this novel, but I am going to keep it real with my readers..... I'm just not sure if I will be picking up the companion books. (Booing and hissing may now commence.)

Pre-order the book here:

*Check out Jackson Pearce's blog!

Guest Post: The Bookette

The Bookette Answers All of My Questions Concerning Education in the UK

I am beyond excited for this post! Becky from The Bookette (if you haven't checked out her fabulous blog already, you need to!) has agreed to be interviewed concerning all my questions about education in the UK. As you know, I am a teacher and I find this to be extremely fascinating. If you ever wanted to know what schools are like for young adults in the UK, be sure to read her responses to my questions. I think I may share them with my students since most of our prior knowledge concerning UK education is taken from Harry Potter! In return, I answered some of Becky's pressing questions about schooling in the US. Be sure to check out her blog for my responses. The idea of guest posting is Becky's brilliant idea and I'm so appreciative that she included me. Without further ado, here's the guest post/interview:

Me: How are your schools organized? Elementary? Secondary?

Becky's response: As a general rule, English schools are organised into Primary and Seconday Schools. (I will keep these answers to England because I think things are different in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland). Primary Schools are sometimes separated into two parts: Infant and Junior. The Infant school takes children into the Nursery at 3 years old. Then the next year is called Reception. Traditional teaching starts in Year 1 when pupils are 5. So Infant schools teach Nursery, Reception and Years 1 to 2. Then the Junior School teaches Years 3 up to Years 6. Children leaving Primary school will be aged 10 - 11.

Our Secondary schools take pupils at age 11 and this is our new Year 7. They go from being top of the school in the Primary to the bottom of the school in Secondary. They are the babies all over again.

There are very few Middle Schools left in the UK. My school is in some ways one of them but because it is a Private school, it has its own unique system.

Me: How much do your schools cost?

Becky's response: State schools are free and every child in the UK is entitled to a free education. Some parents opt to put their children into the private system for many different reasons. Private school places are fiercely competitive and there is a huge demand. School fees for a private school start at around £9000 per year but they can go up to around £27000 which is roughly what Eton charges. Eton is the most pretigious private boys' school in England. This is where our Princes William and Harry studied. If you're interested in Eton, you can view there website here

Me: What's a typical class size and how many students in a building? (At least where you live....)

Becky's response: Class sizes are fairly large in state schools. They may be anything from about 25 right up to 33. (I taught a class of 33 in my training days and it was NOT a fun experience. It was tough.) In Private schools the class sizes are much smaller. At my school the maximum is 22 and the smallest is 17. Some private schools have even smaller groups. I think that must be heaven for the teachers and librarians.

School sizes again vary. State Secondary schools take from around 800 - 1200 students. Some even take up to 1500. They are certainly not the norm though.

Primary Schools are much much smaller. I would say a third of the size of the Secondary schools.

Me: Do you have state testing?

Becky's response: We have these things called SATs. They are the bane of every teacher and headteachers' life. The success of our schools is often measured against the performance of children in SATs. The government introduced them to ensure an equality of education across the country, to raise levels of achievement in Science, Maths and English. Children used to sit this testing in Years 2, 6 and 9. The Year 9 SATs are being phased out to the great relief of many teachers.

Me: What's this National Curriculum I've heard about?

Becky's response: The National Curriculum is a standard to which all pupils are taught. It lists key objectives and areas that students must be competent in during any one point in their education. On the one hand, it ensures that all pupils are covering the same amount of learning and experiencing an equality of education. On the other hand, teachers find it too target-driven. Their teaching is restricted to what is on the syllabus. Many people in education argue that the Curriculum stifles the creativity of both teachers and pupils. Others say it is the only way to ensure that all pupils receive a good standard of education.

Me: I assume you don't have GPAs. So, what do you guys have?

Becky's Response: So in Primary Schools, students get their SAT exam marks which show what level that are learning at. These go from Level 1 - Level 8. At the end of Primary school, all pupils in theory should be a Level 3, 4 or 5. If students get Level 5, this is good news indeed.

In Senior school students sit GCSEs for all the subjects that they study. GCSEs are qualifications which are recognised by employers and further education colleges. Usually their marks are made up of coursework and exams. The highest mark you can get is an A*. The lowest is a G. The government regards C or above as good. When I was in school, we took 9 GCSEs. Now students can take up to 15 GCSES I believe, which to me sounds crazy. Colleges require 5 Cs or above to get onto A Level courses.

Me: Do you have religious education? We don't unless you go after school or to a private religious school....very curious about this one.

Becky's response: Religious edcuation is part of the National Curriculum. It is usually studied up to Year 9 (when pupils are 14). It covers a whole wealth of religions and they learn the traditions and ceremonies of each one. If parents do not want their children to study RE, then they can ask for their child to be opted out of those lessons. Some of our schools are religious schools or what we describe as "faith" schools. Even they have religious education, I believe. My mum works in a Church of England school and they celebrate festivals from a host of religions, Sikh, Muslim, Judiasm. Part of our Curriculum teaches citizenship and this is about celebrating diversity as much as anything else.

Me: At what age do the students start learning a foreign language?

Becky's Response: This varies depending on the type of school. In Private schools like mine pupils begin learning French in Year 3. But even in Years 1 and 2 they explore many different languages. In state schools students are not required to learn a language until they are in Year 7. Although, there is a new Curriculum being implemented which means they will start learning French in Primary schools. I'm not quite sure which year they will be taught that in though. It used to be a requirement that students studied a foreign language for their GCSEs but now it is no longer statutory. They can choose.

Me: What's this specialist school I've read about?

Becky's Response: Specialist schools are those which have an extra emphasis on one or more subjects. They may have better facilities in this chosen area and they get extra government money for it. The specialism can be: Performing Arts, Sports, Design and Techonlogy, Maths, Science. I'm sure there must be many more too. These schools although they sound "special" are actually quite common now in England.

We also have new schools called "Academies". These are a key policy of our current government. Failing schools which do not meet the required standard get taken over by an Academy. The exisiting building often gets a complete refurb or it gets kncoked down and they start again. The Academy schools are decked out with all the latest equipment and facilities. The students get smaller class sizes up to about 25 and they are meant to produce better results. So far the evidence of their success is mixed. Oh, and the Academy schools are part-funded by private money from companies. I have worked in one and even I don't exactly understand how it all works.

Me: Do you have a lot of boarding schools like Hogwarts? I'm sorry; I couldn't resist. Do you wear uniforms?

Becky's Response: We do have boarding schools in the UK. They are mostly private schools. There is the occasional state boarding school which will often take children whose parents in the Armed forces. Are they like Hogwarts? I can't say I know the answer. I have never worked at a boarding school. I have visited one which was Dulwich college. A very prestigious and high achieving school. I guess it looked very Hogwarty from the outside but sadly I didn't see any students studied leviation or chanting "Wingardium Leviosa" :-)

Yes, uniforms are quite the norm here in Secondary Schools and at nearly every Private school. In Primary Schools it is not always the case but evn then quite often. Students hate them with a passion!

Me: What's this sixth form? What does that mean?

Becky's Response: Some of our Secondary schools take pupils until they are aged 18. We call the part of the school that takes pupils from 16 - 18 the "Sixth form". Here students study for A Levels. These are what they need to get into a UK university. Many students do not stay on for Sixth Form but instead go to a Further Education College to take their A Levels. Colleges are a much more relaxed learning environment and give more freedom to the students. Thus, students need to be excellent independent learners to achieve their potential at college. They do not get the nagging from the teachers to motivate them!

Me: What extra curricular activities are popular?

Becky's Response: This depends very much on what is offered at the school. Sports are popular. At my current school the pupils sign up for football (or as you know it soccer), cricket, rugby and netball. There are many other cultural options open to them at Private schools. We offer Army Cadets, Calligraphy Club, Ballet, Drama, Music, Choir, Book Group, Chess Club, General Knowledge Club (run by the headmaster). There are so many more. At my last school they had a huge basketball emphasis, as well as Street Dance, a Student Magazine and even an Archeology Club. There is something for everyone.

Me: Do you have a "Homecoming-ish" activity at your schools?

Becky's Response: There is no such thing as Homecoming in the UK. There is no big sports event and the leavers do not come back for a celebration. Instead, just before the final exams in Year 11 students have their school prom. It is not a big affair like in the US and it is organised by the teaching staff rather than the students. They have to pay to go. It is definitely an important rite of passage but it isn't so commercial here, I think. Everything is done on a budget. It is often at a local venue rather than in the school hall or gym.

My Thoughts: WOW! You would think as a teacher, I would be exposed to different countries and their educational systems, but sadly, I am not. This is truly interesting to me. I think the idea of "Academies" sounds worthwhile. What if we did that and actually refurbished failing schools and offered them new books, new technology, etc? I think this is a revolutionary idea. I want to learn more about this. I also find the religious education to be compelling. I like that they cover all types of religions. Sometimes I feel like my students are so sheltered and we lack diversity. Sometimes I feel like everything has to be so politically correct in the US. Also, I thank Becky for finally answering my question concerning "sixth form." I have heard the phrase "sixth form" for awhile now, but never understood it. So, readers....what do you think of UK schooling? It sounds pretty awesome to me, but I'd love to hear what you think! Lastly, thanks again to Becky at The Bookette for coming up with this idea and for putting up with my interrogation. :) You're the best! This is just yet another reason I love blogging and meeting fellow bloggers.