Puerto Plata

Number of inhabitants: 312,706

Geographic Location:It is bounded to the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean, on the east by the Espaillat province, on the south by Santiago, Valverde and Montecristi.

Tourist Attractions: It is a major tourist province of the country, with a large hotel infrastructure along almost the entire coast. Notable places: The resort cable car - Loma Isabela and the San Felipe Fortress.

Montecristi

Number of inhabitants: 111,014

Geographic Location: To the north and west, the Atlantic Ocean, to the east Valverde, and to the south Santiago Rodriguez and Dajabón provinces.

Tourist Attractions: While the tourist boom is centered on the city of Montecristi, it has been initiated development along the coast. Notable locations are El Morro, and the Key of the Seven Brothers.

Dajabón

Number of inhabitants: 62,046

Geographic Location: This Frontier Province is bounded on the north by Montecristi, Santiago Rogríguez to the East, the South by Elías Piña and west by the Republic of Haiti.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism has been minimal and only small resorts in the Masacre River, especially in Loma de Cabrera, are visited by local visitors and neighboring regions.

Elías Piña

Number of inhabitants: 63,879

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north by the provinces Dajabón and Santiago Rodriguez, the east with San Juan, the south by Independencia and west by the Republic of Haiti.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is almost nil. Only those who make pilgrimages to the Cerro de San Francisco, and the Artibonito river in Banica.

Independencia

Number of inhabitants: 50,833

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north by the provinces of Bahoruco and Elias Pina, to the east by Barahona, Pedernales to the south, and the west with the Republic of Haiti.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is concentrated around Lake Enriquillo and in the vicinity of La Descubierta. There are also some important places for the domestic tourism like Las Barías, Boca de Cachón and La Surza.

Pedernales

Number of inhabitants: 21,207

Geographic Location: To the north is the Independencia province, Barahona to the northeast, east and south the Caribbean Sea and to the west the Republic of Haiti.

Tourist Attractions: It has a great tourism potential especially in the beaches of the Jaragua National Park (Bahía de las Águilas, Playa Blanca and others), the beaches of Cabo Rojo and Pedernales and the Oviedo Lake. Of great potential ecotourism are Beata and Alto Velo islands. The Sierra de Bahoruco offers a wide variety of options for ecotourism.

Barahona

Number of inhabitants: 179,239

Geographic Location: It is bounded on the east by the Caribbean Sea and Azua, south by Pedernales, west by Pedernales and Independencia and north by Baoruco.

Tourist Attractions: It offers wide range of ecotourism, including beaches and rivers attract many visitors. For example: Saladilla, San Rafael, Los Patos. The Laguna de Rincón or Cabral attracts bird lovers as well as the Eastern Bahoruco mountains (between Paradise and Polo).

Bahoruco

Number of inhabitants: 91,480

Geographic Location: Baoruco is bordered to the north by San Juan de la Maguana, Azua to the northeast, southeast with Barahona and south and west with Independencia.

Tourist Attractions: The main tourist destination today is Lake Enriquillo. Other in importance is La Maria, water fountain next to Neiba usually frequented by locals and Sierra de Neiba, with its National Park Sierra Neyba. It has great potential for ecotourism, which has not been exploited.

San Juan de la Maguana

Number of inhabitants: 241,105

Geographic Location: To the north by Santiago de los Caballeros and Santiago Rodríguez, to the east by Azua (and partially with La Vega, in the northeast), to the south with Baoruco and west by Elias Piña.

Tourist Attractions: It has great potential for ecotourism especially in the mountains. Interesting Places: The Corral de los Indios, province theme park across from City Hall, Sabaneta Dam. Also you can swim in the waters of the Yaque del Sur river.

Santiago Rodríguez

Number of inhabitants: 59,629

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north by Montecristi and Valverde, on the east by Santiago, to the south by San Juan and Elías Piña and west by Dajabón.

Tourist Attractions: It has an ecotourism potential because they offer high quality landscapes mountains, rivers and temperate climate. Its main attractions are the mountains, including the area of Armando Bermudez National Park. The places of La Leonor, El Aguacate, Boca de los Mao, Cenovi, Lomita de La Cidra and La Peonía, The Palo Amarillo and Burende offer a warm and friendly atmosphere. The Monte Gallo with 1840 meters of elevation and nestled in the national park, offers remarkable scenery

Valverde

Number of inhabitants: 158,293

Geographic Location: It borders to the north with Puerto Plata, on the east and south with Santiago and west with Montecristi and Santiago Rodríguez to the southwest.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is minimal, reduced to a few rivers spas visited by locals.

Santiago de los Caballeros

Number of inhabitants: 908,250

Geographic Location: It borders to the north with Puerto Plata, Espaillat and La Vega to the east, south by San Juan and west by Santiago Rodriguez and Valverde.

Tourist Attractions: Of importance to the domestic tourism development. Attractions: Spanish Center, Gurabito Country Club, Kaskada Agua Park, Monument of Santiago, Yoryi Morel Folk Museum, Tobacco Museum among others.

Azua

Number of inhabitants: 208,857

Geographic Location: It has the Caribbean Sea to the south, San José de Ocoa and Peravia to the east, to the north and northeast La Vega, San Juan to the north and northwest and Baoruco and Barahona to the west.

Tourist Attractions: Azua has colonial ruins, monuments, national parks, archaeological sites, natural attractions like beaches and waterfalls. Major tourist attractions include Monte Rio Beach, Playa Blanca, Playa Caracoles (place where Caamaño led) Tortuguero Beach, Playa Chiquita, Puerto Viejo (first dock of the country) Caobita Beach, Palmar de Ocoa, March 19 Park, Duarte Park.

Espaillat

Number of inhabitants: 225,091

Geographic Location: It has Salcedo Province to the east, La Vega to the south, Santiago and Puerto Plata to the west and the Atlantic Ocean to the north. In the northeastern portion is bordered by María Trinidad Sánchez.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is mainly concentrated on the coast, forming part of the important center of tourism development Puerto Plata - Rio San Juan.

La Vega

Number of inhabitants: 385,101

Geographic Location: To the north, Santiago and Espaillat; east, Duarte, Salcedo and Sánchez Ramírez; south, Monseñor Nouel and San José de Ocoa; west, Azua and San Juan.

Tourist Attractions: It offers nature and adventure tourism. Has as Its core the Jarabacoa and Constanza populations. Mountain pleasant climate all year.

Hermanas Mirabal

Number of inhabitants: 96,356

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north and west by Espaillat, Duarte at the east, and south by La Vega.

Tourist Attractions: Has little tourism development. An interesting place is the Museum of the Hermanas Mirabal in Conuco.

San José de Ocoa

Number of inhabitants: 62,368

Geographic Location: To the north Monseñor Nouel and La Vega, to the east San Cristóbal, to the south Peravia and to the west Azua.

Tourist Attractions: Little tourist activity. The main rivers of the province are the Ocoa and Nizao.

Peravia

Number of inhabitants: 169,865

Geographic Location: To the north is San José de Ocoa, to the east San Cristobal, the Caribbean Sea to the south and to the west Azua.

Tourist Attractions: It has great potential for ecotourism. Tourist activity focuses on the Caribbean coast near the Calderas Bay.

Monseñor Nouel

Number of inhabitants: 167,618

Geographic Location: To the north and west, La Vega, to the east Sánchez Ramírez and Monte Plata, to the south San Cristóbal and San José de Ocoa.

Tourist Attractions: It has some places with great potential for domestic tourism development such as Rincón Dam and part of the Cordillera Central.

Sánchez Ramírez

Number of inhabitants: 151,179

Geographic Location: Bordered to the north by Duarte, east and south, by Monte Plata and west by Monseñor Nouel and La Vega.

Tourist Attractions: The Guácaras Taina caves, product of the geological formation of the earth, the most relevant are El Hoyo de Sanabe and guácara del Comedero, you can also visit the Hatillo dam.

Duarte

Number of inhabitants: 283,805

Geographic Location: It is bounded on the east by María Trinidad Sánchez and Samaná, to the south by Monte Plata and Sánchez Ramírez, to the west by La Vega and Salcedo, and to the north by María Trinidad Sánchez.

Tourist Attractions: Recently it is developing ecotourism, especially related to the Scientific Reserve Loma Quita Espuela.

María Trinidad Sánchez

Number of inhabitants: 135,727

Geographic Location: To the north, the Atlantic Ocean, to the east the Atlantic Ocean and Samaná, to the south Duarte and west Duarte and Espaillat.

Tourist Attractions: Among the beaches located in Maria Trinidad Sanchez are Bahía Escocesa - Diamante beach - Coletón beach - La Piscina beach - Playa Grande - Boca del Boba beach.

San Cristóbal

Number of inhabitants: 532,880

Geographic Location: To the north with Monseñor Nouel and Monte Plata (northeast), to the east Santo Domingo, on the south by the Caribbean Sea and to the west Peravia and San José de Ocoa.

Tourist Attractions: It has an intense tourist activity especially for the local tourists. The main centers are Najayo and Palenque beaches, and the resorts of La Toma and the rivers of Haina and Nizao.

Santo Domingo

Number of inhabitants: 2,731,294

Geographic Location: To the north with Monte Plata, to the east with San Pedro de Macoris, on the south the Caribbean Sea and to the west San Cristobal.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is important in the east, especially in Boca Chica, one of the main tourist centers. If you decide to visit the National District, the Colonial Zone is of great interest and great shopping in downtown. You can also visit the national park Los Tres Ojos which is a cave with lakes inside

Monte Plata

Number of inhabitants: 180,376

Geographic Location: To the north are Sánchez Ramirez, Duarte and Samaná, to the east Hato Mayor and San Pedro de Macoris, to the south Santo Domingo and on the west San Cristobal and Monseñor Nouel.

Tourist Attractions: Has little tourism development; Some rivers, like the Comate, are visited by national and neighboring provinces. Bayaguana is an important pilgrimage center (Santo Cristo de Bayaguana) and the waterfalls of Salto Alto in Bayaguana.

La Altagracia

Number of inhabitants: 182,020

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north by the Atlantic Ocean, on the east by the Mona Passage (Atlantic Ocean) to the south by the Caribbean Sea and west by La Romana and El Seibo.

Tourist Attractions: It is the largest tourist mecca development of the country, the most important places in this Tourist Pole are: Bavaro - Punta Cana, Cap Cana, Bayahibe, Boca de Yuma (with its fishing tournaments). The East National Park is visited by foreigners and Dominicans. Higüey, with the Basilica of Our Lady of La Altagracia, is a place of pilgrimage for Dominicans.

San Pedro de Macorís

Number of inhabitants: 301,744

Geographic Location: To the north Hato Mayor and El Seibo, to the east by La Romana, on the south by the Caribbean Sea and west by Santo Domingo and Monte Plata.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is concentrated on the coast, to the west of the city of San Pedro de Macoris (Guayacanes and Juan Dolio) with great hotel offer.

Samaná

Number of inhabitants: 91,875

Geographic Location: Limits to the north and east by the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by the Bay of Samaná and Monte Plata (in the southwest) and west by Duarte and María Trinidad Sánchez.

Tourist Attractions: It has great tourism development, mainly in the centers of Samaná, Las Terrenas and Las Galeras. There is also ecotourism development. You can make the observation of humpback whales that come to the area in mid-winter and spring.

Isla Catalina

Number of inhabitants: 0

Geographic Location: Romana Territory.

Tourist Attractions:It is one of the most beautiful Island of the Caribbean, is perfect for Snorkling and is one of the most beautiful dive sites in the country where you can look at beautiful species of colorful tropical fish, corals and reefs.

Hato Mayor

Number of inhabitants: 87,631

Geographic Location: Bordered on the east by El Seibo (and part of San Pedro de Macoris), to the south by San Pedro de Macoris, to the west by Monte Plata (and part of San Pedro de Macoris) and north by the Atlantic Ocean (Bay of Samaná ). In its northeastern end borders with Samaná.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism is concentrated on the coast, especially in the region of Los Haitises National Park.

El Seibo

Number of inhabitants: 89,261

Geographic Location: Adjacent to La Altagracia in the east, to the south with La Romana and San Pedro de Macoris, on the west by Hato Mayor and to the north by the Atlantic Ocean.

Tourist Attractions: Tourism in El Seibo has been increasing specifically on the coast next to Miches and around Redonda and Limón lakes. For parties of Santa Cruz, in the city of El Seibo bull runs are made.

La Romana

Number of inhabitants: 219,812

Geographic Location: Bordered on the north by El Seibo, on the east by La Altagracia, to the south by the Caribbean Sea and to the west by San Pedro de Macorís.

Tourist Attractions: It has strong tourist activity, especially in the Saona Island. Next in importance the city of La Romana, Altos de Chavon, Catalina Island and Cumayasa. It has world renowned resorts such as Casa de Campo and Playa Nueva Romana.