El Pino (English: "The Pine") is small town in the western Dominican Republic, part of Dajabón Province. The population was 6,698 at the 2012 census.

Etymology[]

The name of this community arises from the numerous pine forests at the time of its foundation.

History[]

The first inhabitants of this municipality were: Manuel Bueno, Alfonso Mera, Joseph Lombert, Bautista Franco, Emiliano Batista, Juanico Bueno, Ramón Vichin, Bobue Rodríguez, Bobue Dilóney and others.

The economy of its first inhabitants, mainly was agricultural activity and livestock, but also carried out other activities. The first tailor that existed in the community They called it José Casita, located in the vicinity of Pedro Rumaldo. The first merchants of this community were: Delfina Disla, Joseph Lombert, Sofia Lombert among others. The first trade was installed by Delfina Disla, which found in what is today El Fango, then Joseph Lombert installed another. The inhabitants moved to sell their products to Monte Cristi|Montecristi, which exchanged for salt using the so-called barter. They were also engaged in the manufacture of casabe, also to the manufacture of a type of footwear that they called soletas that were made of automobile tires. Others dedicated themselves to the manufacture of utensils of barros, sweets, puff pastry and starch rolls. In 1929, the first company that generated employment was installed. This was called Alambique and was dedicated to the manufacture of turpentine. 18 men worked there. Another activity to which women were especially dedicated was to wash gold in rivers.

Geography[]

El Pino is bordered on the north by the municipality of Dajabón, on the east by the Santiago Rodríguez province, on the south by the municipality of Restauración and on the west with the municipalities of Loma de Cabrera and Partido.

El Pino does not have important mountains, but it has a wonderful landscape and is located at a position that offers panoramic views of the central mountain range. Its most important rivers are Caño and Inaje stream. Arroyo Caño is a tributary of the Inaje River and this flows into the Guayubín River. It also has several streams, the most important being: Pinillo, Fanguito, Los Inajitos and Gurabo.

Economy[]

The local economy is based on trade (23.8%), followed by the services sector (21.1%), and manufacturing industries (16.4%). Of this last one, milk is the most important in this sector, which coincides with the fact that livestock and agriculture are the fourth main economic activity. The agricultural produces of the municipality are guandul, guandul, sweet and sour yucca, peanuts, bananas, avocados and mangos.

According to the 2002 Census, the main economic activities to which the population was dedicated were agriculture, livestock, hunting and forestry, with a representation of 14.9%, wholesale and retail 9.7%, industry and manufacturing 4.9%, other community service activities 4.0%, education 3.3%, private households with domestic service 4.5%; transport, storage and communications 2.3% and construction 2.1%. This order changes when both sexes are compared separately: male (agriculture, commerce and manufacturing) and female (domestic service, education and commerce).

Infrastructure[]

Transportation[]

The roads that link El Pino with Santiago Rodríguez, Puerto Plata and other neighboring towns is in very poor condition. The road that connects Pinocon Partido and Dajabón has some sections that need to be paved, however the conditions in general are favorable. Regarding the connectivity with the rural area is even more aggravating. Of all the roads of the municipality, only 29% are paved. This aspect adds to the fact that the vast majority of non-asphalted roads are only passable in dry weather.

Education[]

According to the territorial division of the Ministry of Education, El Pino belongs to School District 13-05. The year 2010 had the municipality with 13 schools which belong to the public administration. Enrollment for the year 2010 in this municipality was 4,824 students, of which 20.6% are male and the remaining 79.3% are female. For the year 2010, 23.1% of the population aged 15 and over did not know how to read or write.

Health[]

The municipality of El Pino has two Primary Care Units (UNAP), with a total of only 6 beds, and a staff of 6 doctors. According to statistical data, in the period comprised between 2011 and July 2012, they were treated in these units, 960 patients, in whom no contagious disease was registered. At present there is no clinical laboratory, nor is there an ambulance available for the transfer of patients requiring this service.

Security[]

In the municipality there are three police detachments, located in El Plan 1, in the Municipal district of Manuel Bueno, and in the center of the municipality. There is no Municipal Police, which is a great need for public order, much more on public holidays and when extraordinary activities are carried out that require the order of police agents. Among the priorities in this topic are mentioned: the weak work of the police and the need to have a municipal police to improve the services of citizen security.

Recreation[]

Sport[]

Among the main sports activities that take place in the municipality are the game of Softball, baseball, basketball, volleyball, domino and chess. The sports basketball facilities in the municipality are distributed as follows: one of public order and three located in the educational centers of the area. However, existing sports facilities do not meet the growing demands of the youth. It is necessary a major investment in what is the repair of existing facilities and the construction of new, in order to promote a healthy sports culture.

Heritage[]

Among the cultural manifestations of El Pino, the festivities are celebrated in honor of San José from April 22 to May 1, which includes a series of activities such as artistic and cultural presentations and traditional games.

References[]

Encyclopedia [1]