Martin O’Neill insists Geordies CAN thrive at Sunderland - and they’ve got a statue to prove it.

The Black Cats are on the verge of landing £4million-rated striker Danny Graham - a Gateshead-born, dyed-in-the-wool fan of their arch-rivals Newcastle - from Swansea.

Graham could be in for a hot reception from sections of Sunderland fans, after admitting in a Q&A while at previous club Watford that he’d hate to set-foot on Wearside.

Ex-Sunderland boss Steve Bruce insisted he was hounded out by fans 13 months ago due to his Geordie roots.

But Bruce's successor O’Neill insists it is possible to cross the great North-East divide - and that supporters will ‘forgive and forget’ as long as you do the business on the pitch.

Sunderland were, after all, guided to their celebrated FA Cup Final win 40 years ago by Tyneside-born former Newcastle player Bob Stokoe - who is still remembered fondly by fans and even commemorated with a statue outside the Stadium of Light.

While attitudes between the rival camps have hardened since Stokoe’s era, O’Neill claims the region's turf ‘wor’ is not set in stone.

The Sunderland manager said: “You can grow up supporting a team, that’s the nature of it. When you become a professional player, that’s your job - it’s your job to play the best for your team and I think that’s the case.

“There is a statute outside the football club here of a Geordie. If you can do something for the club I think the fans are willing to forgive and forget.”

Sunderland travel to Wigan without skipper Lee Cattermole, who has been forced to put back his Premier League return by at least a week after suffering a setback in training.

The midfielder came off the bench in the midweek FA Cup defeat by Bolton to make his first appearance since suffering knee ligament damage at the end of November.

But the 24-year-old enforcer is denied a return against his old club at the DW Stadium after tweaking the same knee in a training match on Thursday.

O’Neill added: “Lee just stubbed himself, he kicked the turf and felt a pain shooting through his knee. It’s nothing to overly concern us, but when you’re coming back from injury the aches and pains become more magnified.

“You start to think of every negative but I’m hoping it’s not too serious. If he declares himself fit he’s in immediate contention because we’ve missed him.

“It is settling down and if it’s not a concern we’re hoping he should be okay for the next game.” Top scorer Steven Fletcher is set to return after missing the Bolton game through illness.

Cheap and cheerful is Martinez's way

By Alan Nixon

Roberto Martinez is vowing that Wigan will not go down the road that leads to financial ruin in a bid to stay in the Premier League.

Latics manager Martinez has watched relegation-battle rivals Queens Park Rangers spend heavily last summer and again this month as they try to buy safety, while he looks at bargain deals under the tight rein of owner Dave Whelan.

But the Spaniard is happy to tread that path, rather than venture onto the slippery slope towards massive debt that has claimed the likes of Portsmouth in the past.

Martinez, who played over 200 games for Wigan in the lower divisions between 1995 and 2001, is too much a part of the Latics' past, and too cautious about their future, to take major financial gambles.

He said: "I will never put our club in danger and spend what we have not got.

"We pride ourselves in running the club in a good way where our fans should never worry about us being in danger in the future.

"We want to make sure about our structure and our players when we invest. We look at the other clubs and what they spend, but it is down to them."

Martinez knows that Rangers signing the likes of Loic Remy makes his job harder. He has signed a free and a loan and is after two more loans and possibly a small buy.

The QPR cash splash puts extra strain on themselves and their rivals at the bottom end.

But Martinez won't flinch and said: "You need to spend the money that you can afford.

"If QPR can afford that it is fantastic news as long as it doesn't hit their future in a similar way as some clubs we have seen in the past.

"It brings a great competitive edge to the league. I'm sure that will put lots more pressure on their performances and results."