Dell Equallogic has some of the world’s most popular SAN (Storage Area Network) products but they are rapidly hitting their EOSL (End of Service Life) dates – and in many cases, already have. Procurri continues to offer third-party maintenance past their EOSL point for Dell Equallogic products and here, we cover the basics of this brand and what can be done to sustain their product usage.

Is Dell Equallogic a sub-brand of Dell EMC?

Equallogic was originally a standalone company based in New Hampshire, USA, and formed in 2001. It embarked on some impressive fundraising efforts from investors in its first few years and in doing so considered floating an IPO on the NASDAQ stock exchange – but instead, they accepted an offer from Dell and they were acquired by them to become part of the company in January 2008. This deal was prestigious in the industry at the time, becoming the highest price paid for a company financed by venture investors at the time at $1.4 billion in an all-cash take-over transaction!

Today, Dell Equallogic acts as one of three sub-brands offering SAN products alongside Dell Compellent and Dell PowerVault.

Are any new products branded as Dell Equallogic?

Products continue to be manufactured under the Dell Equallogic brand and their reputation precedes them into remaining one of the most popular SAN product ranges on the planet. At present, all three of Dell’s sub-brands have fairly clear-cut identities but it would not be unrealistic to assume that they may combine their SAN offerings into one brand at some point in the future.

Have all Dell Equallogic products reached their EOSL?

Dell Equallogic products continue to be manufactured and so although many have already reached their EOSL, this is not the case for every piece of their hardware.

Most recently to reach their OEM stipulated EOSL date were the Dell Equallogic PS6000X, PS4000XV, PS6000S, and PS6000SXV in 2018, and the PS6010X and PS6010XV in 2019. However, in many cases, their expert manufacture and high-quality build speak for themselves – and this equipment still functions just fine for many businesses reliant on their service.

What can be done to maintain Dell Equallogic products past their EOSL point?

The EOSL date is the point at which Dell Equallogic no longer offers a warranty or service support on their own products and recommends that customers uninstall the hardware to replace it with something newer – preferably still Dell-branded, of course! But where the equipment still performs, this can be both expensive and wasteful. Customers are able to switch their hardware maintenance and break/fix support from that provided by the OEM to a third-party, such as Procurri. Procurri offers support on all Dell Equallogic products, even those well beyond the OEM EOSL point with continued 24/7/365 access to specialized Dell technicians that are able to provide assistance both remotely and on-site as required.

If your business continues to operate with Dell Equallogic hardware in place and would like to continue to derive value from these assets while they still work, get in touch with Procurri to discuss third-party maintenance options – in order to extend their lifespan and prolong their optimum performance for as long as possible!