Partnering with the Globally Renowned Brands in IT

Dell Inc. is a multinational computer technology company based in Texas and, along with Dell EMC, is a subsidiary of Dell Technologies, one of the largest technology companies in the world with 138,000 employees. Dell manufactures, sells, repairs, and supports personal computers (PCs), servers, data storage devices, network switches, computer software, computer peripherals, high-definition televisions, cameras, printers, and electronics built by other manufacturers. The company is well known for its innovations in supply chain management and e-commerce, particularly its direct-sales model and its "build-to-order" or "configure to order" approach to manufacturing—delivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications.

With a market share of 15.9%, Dell was the third largest PC vendor in the world in the first quarter of 2017, after Lenovo and HP Inc. In the first quarter of 2016, Dell was the largest manufacturer of computer monitors in the world, with a market share of 16.8%. Dell is the third largest employer and largest private employer in Austin, Texas.

On September 7, 2016, Dell Inc. merged with EMC Corporation (now Dell EMC) and both companies became subsidiaries of Dell Technologies. Dell markets specific brand names to different market segments.

Its Business/Corporate class brands are focused on long life-cycles, reliability, and serviceability. Such brands include:

OptiPlex (office desktop computer systems)

Dimension (home desktop computer systems)

Vostro (office/small business desktop and notebook systems)

nSeries (desktop and notebook computers shipped with Linux or FreeDOS installed)

Latitude (business-focused notebooks)

Precision (workstation systems and high-performance notebooks)

PowerEdge (business servers)

PowerVault (direct-attach and network-attached storage)

Force10 (network switches)

PowerConnect (network switches)

Dell Compellent (storage area networks)

EqualLogic (enterprise class iSCSI SANs)

Dell Electronic Medical Records Solutions (EMR)

Dell's Home Office/Consumer class brands are focused on value, performance, and expandability. These brands include:

Inspiron (budget desktop and notebook computers)

XPS (high-end desktop and notebook computers)

Alienware (high-performance gaming systems)

Venue (Tablets Android / Windows)