Land investment opportunity ! Discover the immense potential and explore the vast opportunities that this land offers, including its strategic location, excellent connectivity, and other resources, for future residential, warehouse, logistics or industrial development. The land for sale is located on the European Road E70, the National Road DN5 Bucharest - Giurgiu, in the Călugăreni- Uzunu area, an south region of Romania, in Eastern Europe. Moreover,it is not very far from the Black Sea either, with the ports of Constanța, Varna, or even Istanbul, having a good network of roads and the main transport routes to the main logistics points in the South East European area. Being located in an excellent strategic location and at the intersection of a viable transport network and relatively close to the big cities in South-Eastern Europe, it offers great potential for future development and exploitation. https://lnkd.in/dUcJ4JNk

Land for sale on DN5 Bucharest - Giurgiu, Calugareni - Uzunu area, 4Ha, with street opening of 112.5m. The land with a total area of approx. 4Ha (39,600 square meters), composed of 18,300 square meters within the village and 21,300 square meters outside the village arable, according to the cadastre and has the possibility of expansion. It has double access to DN5 and secondary on an access road, good location, electricity across the street. It is suitable for residential-parcel constructions, or industrial, warehouses, halls. It has cadastre and tabulation. No intermediaries please. Price = 10 Euro/sq.m

"The power to be yourself in a world that constantly trying to change you it is one of the greatest achievements of your life" - Ralph Waldo Emerson - "Puterea de a fi tu însuţi într-o lume care încearcă în permanenţă să te schimbe este una dintre cele mai mari realizări din viaţa ta" – Ralph Waldo Emerson

“If you can't fly then run, if you can't run then walk, if you can't walk then crawl, but whatever you do you have to keep moving forward.” ― Martin Luther King Jr.