We are hearing that Glasgow Airport is back up and running.

A spokesman tells us that the runway was cleared by 11:30 and the airport is now working to resume flight schedules.

He said: “While adverse weather conditions can be disruptive and frustrating, the safety of our passengers and people must always come first.

“We would like to thank our passengers for their continued patience and ask that they continue to check with their airlines regarding the status of their flights.”

The airport's winter operations team will remain in place and continue to monitor weather conditions.

The snow and freezing temperatures have allowed some of Scotland's mountain snowsports centres to open early for the winter season.

Cairngorm Mountain, near Aviemore, is preparing to open this weekend while Glenshee, near Ballater, has had some skiing available since Monday.

Glencoe Mountain and Nevis Range have said they will have areas available for sledging.

The Lecht has reported drifting snow filling its runs, but roads to the site have been closed due to the wintry weather.

FlightradarCopyright: Flightradar

Glasgow Airport has apologised as its runway remains closed.

The airport tweeted: "Three hours of heavy snow, intermittent rainfall and ground temperatures well below freezing have created very challenging conditions on our airfield."

It said winter teams were working hard to resume operations.

Emirates flight EK27 was due to land at 11:30 but can be seen circling on flight path website Flightradar.

Its arrival time has changed several times and seems to be waiting to land.

BBCCopyright: BBC

Douglas Bell, 77, who has lived in Auchterarder since 1961, says getting around this morning has been “a nightmare”.

He says the council should have done more to clear the snow from the pavements.

He had planned to go to Perth today but has changed his mind and is going “to stay in and keep warm” once he gets home from the shops.

Getty ImagesCopyright: Getty Images

So far we are aware of the following school closures.

Perth and Kinross

North Inch Campus and Perth Grammar School due to a burst water main.

Severe weather has closed: Community School of Auchterarder, Comrie Primary, Crieff Primary, Dunning Primary, Madderty Primary, Muthill Primary, Cleish Primary, Portmoak Primary, Logiealmond Primary. Fairview Primary is open to local pupils only.

Stirling

Schools and nurseries with delayed opening: Aberfoyle Primary and Nursery, Balfron Primary and Nursery, Braehead Primary, Bridge of Allan and Nursery, Buchlyvie Primary, Callander Primary and Nursery, Cornton Primary, Crianlarich Primary, Doune Primary and Nursery, Drymen Primary, Dunblane Primary and Nursery, Fintry Primary and Nursery, Gartmore Primary, Killearn Primary, Kincardine-in-Menteith Primary, Kippen Primary, Newton Primary and Nursery, Port of Menteith Primary, St Mary’s Episcopal Primary, Strathblane Primary and Nursery, Strathyre Primary, Thornhill Primary, Wallace High School.

Schools moving to remote learning: Balfron High School, Dunblane High School, McLaren High School.

Clackmannanshire

Muckhart Primary School and Coalsnaughton Primary School are closing due to low numbers of staff managing to travel.

Highland

More than 30 schools and 20 nurseries are closed or partially shut.

The affected sites include five high schools - Farr, Gairloch, Kinlochbervie, Plockton and Portree.

ScotRailCopyright: ScotRail

Rail strikes are in force today so there are very limited services.

ScotRail asks passengers still travelling to plan ahead and take extra care in stations as it may be icy underfoot.

A signalling fault between Westerton and Milngavie affected services between the two stations.

It was repaired earlier but has now reoccured.

Network Rail Scotland warned that trains may need to slow down or be cancelled in severe conditions.

Here at Glasgow Aiport a queue has formed running the length of the departure check-in hall with only one member of staff at the desk dealing with frustrated passengers.

Passengers from different airlines have been told to collect their baggage and all head to one desk to find out what their options are. Lots of people in the queue are on the phone to airlines trying to find alternative routes.

Beyond boards saying which flights are cancelled and a few announcements, there has so far been little information as to what’s happening.

One member of staff told me some flights were being cancelled because there was ice on the runway and it’s been a struggle to clear it away.

Although given that other flights are still scheduled to take off and people are arriving to check in the picture from the airport and exactly what is going on is unclear.

Dunblane and surrounding areas have seen some of the worst of the weather that has hit the central belt this morning. Conditions on the A9 have been treacherous and many side roads are impassable.

Joanne Hicks moved from Dubai to Dunblane two years ago. She said she was lucky to be working from home and added: “It’s absolutely beautiful if you don’t have to go anywhere.”

Her daughter is meant to be going to France tonight but she doesn’t know if she‘ll be able to fly.

Stephen Whitelaw is due to travel to Blairgowrie to fit kitchen equipment but his work vehicle is too heavy and couldn’t make it up a local hill.

He said local children had attempted to help plough it out. He and his colleague Martin were throwing snowballs while they waited for conditions to ease.

Lisa Scott said it wasn’t just cars that had been struggling in the conditions on the roads: "It sounded like the gritter couldn’t even get up here this morning so it’s not ideal,” she said.

BBCCopyright: BBC

BBCCopyright: BBC

It’s been a cold and very wintry morning from icy roads in Glasgow before 0700 to a slow, slushy drive north up the M80. Conditions can change within a very short distance.

At a service at a service near Stirling I spoke to a nurse, Melissa Kelly, on her way to work at Forth Valley Hospital who described her drive as “absolutely horrendous”.

She said some colleagues hadn’t been able to make it in and they were expecting a really busy day.

We’re now heading into the Stirlingshire countryside to check conditions there. A number of schools have been affected.

It’s Christmas-card beautiful with snow across the fields but driving on packed snow and ice isn't easy.

As you've been hearing over the past few days, the bad weather has really hit home in Shetland.

A major incident was declared with thousands of homes in Shetland left without power. There has been some respite overnight with many homes having supplies restored.

But there is still severe disruption in the north of Scotland. The snow has led to more than 100 schools being closed in Aberdeenshire, Moray and the Highlands.

A further warning for snow and ice in Orkney and Shetland runs until 10:00.

In Orkney, all schools are closed on the mainland and the Stagecoach bus service across the islands is suspended.

Police Scotland has issued a travel warning for the whole of Scotland and are advising people to travel with caution.

So far, Stirling and Dunblane seem to be faring the worst.

The Met Office map shows the areas covered by the two warnings.

"Snow will initially fall to low levels, with five to 10cm accumulating in places this morning in two to three hours," the Met Office said.

"From late morning, snow at low levels will turn to sleet or rain, but further snow is likely above 200m where up to 20cm may accumulate by afternoon."

The Met OfficeCopyright: The Met Office

BBCCopyright: BBC

A Met Office amber warning for snow and ice is in place in parts of central Scotland today, from 05:00 until midday.

The alert warns that 5-10cm of snow could accumulate in some places within two to three hours and power cuts are likely in some areas.

Many other parts of Scotland are covered by yellow warnings for snow and ice, including Shetland where engineers are still trying to reconnect about 1,700 homes.

Traffic Scotland said on Friday morning that snow was affecting many major trunk roads and urged people to drive with care.

Wintry conditions have already been affecting some of Scotland's main commuter routes with heavy snow hitting the central belt.

We will keep you updated on what's happening throughout the day.