Flybe joins a long list of brands whose owners had high hopes - but ended up in that big airline graveyard in the sky. Scotland’s aviation history is littered with names for whom the hangar door no longer opens. We take a look back at a few of those which have flown off into the sunset.

Scotairways

Having started life as Suckling Airways in 1986, Roy and Merlyn Suckling’s planes were rebranded as Scotairways after Stagecoach tycoons Brian Souter and Ann Gloag bought a 90% stake in the business for £5 million. They sold their holding in 2006 for an estimated £10 million, with Scotairways eventually being swallowed up by Loganair in 2011.

Flyglobespan

Just days before Christmas 2009, Flyglobespan collapsed, stranding 4,500 passengers on holiday in resorts in Cyprus, Spain and Portugal, and leaving its 800 staff facing a miserable Hogmanay. Launched in 2002, Flyglobespan grew to become Scotland’s largest airline, but – at the time of its collapse – administrators at PricewaterhouseCoopers questioned why credit card payments had not reached the company.

Laker Airways

No-frills pioneer Sir Freddie Laker’s planes were a regular sight at Prestwick airport from the 1960s through to the airline’s sudden collapse in 1982. When Laker died in 2006, Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary and Virgin founder Sir Richard Branson were among the captains of industry who led the tributes to the man whose business model they embraced.

Caledonian Airways

Launched in 1961, Caledonian Airways became a dominant force in transatlantic flights during the 1960s. Following the Edwards Report into the airline industry in 1969, Caledonian took over British United Airways in 1970 to form British Caledonian, the “second force” to state-run operations, and was itself swallowed up by British Airways in 1988. The Caledonian brand was then used by BA to revamp its British Airtours operations before it was sold to Inspirations in 1995, with the livery once again disappearing in 2000 when Inspiration was taken over by Thomas Cook and rebranded as JMC Air.

Air Scotland

Hailed as “Scotland’s first low-cost airline” when it took to the skies in 2003, Air Scotland was the brainchild of Dhia Al-Ani, who owned Glasgow-based tour operators Viva and Discount Holidays. The airline was set up as a joint venture with Greece’s Electra Airlines and hit the headlines in 2005 when it unveiled plans to land planes in Baghdad. The carrier was grounded a year later when the Greek authorities suspended its licence.

Highland Airways

Captain Ernest Fresson made the first scheduled flight from Inverness to Kirkwall – via Wick – in a Gypsy Moth biplane in 1933 and, in doing so, inaugurated Europe’s oldest continuously running air service. Fresson founded Highland Airways and his achievements were marked in 2008 when a cairn was unveiled in Orkney and a bronze model in Inverness to mark the 75th anniversary of his maiden flight.

Air Alba

Air Alba took to the skies in 1991 and was rebranded as “Highland Airways” in 1997. It initially ran “paper plane” services to deliver newspapers, before expanding into carrying oil industry workers and eventually a broader range of passengers. Highland Airways was grounded in 2010 after Pricewaterhousecoopers was appointed as its administrator amid criticism of HM Revenue & Customs from local politicians for the airline not being given longer to pay its taxes.

Highland Express

Sporting perhaps the most attractive livery of any Scottish-related airline with its Saltire-inspired design, Highland Express operated transatlantic flights from Prestwick to Newark. The company was set up in 1984 by Randolph Fields, a former business partner of Sir Richard Branson and part of the team behind Virgin Atlantic, and its first flight took off in 1987. Its short-lived journey came to an end later that year when it collapsed with debts of £8.4 million.

Air Ecosse

Founded in 1977 as a subsidiary of Fairflight Charters, Air Ecosse initially ran mail plane flights and passenger services from Aberdeen to Wick, before expanding its network to include Dundee, Glasgow, Manchester and Sumburgh. Snazzy catch-lines during the 70s and 80s included “Your Friendly Scottish Airline” and “The Businessman’s Wings”. The brand was taken over by Peregrine Air Services in the late 80s but fell into administration, before being revived as “Aberdeen Airways”.

Aberdeen Airways

Aviation pioneer Eric Gandar Dower launched the first “Aberdeen Airways” in 1934, operating services to Orkney and Shetland via Wick and Thurso. The original business became Allied Airways in 1937 and was merged into British European Airways in 1947, but the Aberdeen Airways name took to the skies again in 1989 as the brand for the revamped Air Ecosse, which had gone into administration two years earlier. Flights ceased in 1992.