"Fálite air bórd!"

―Scottish Air’s official motto.

Scottish Air is an airline located in the Northern part of the United Kingdom, Scotland. It is the largest airline in Scotland other than Loganair[1].

Early History[]

Scottish Air was first founded on March 2nd, 1965 in Perth, Scotland[2] by William Wickerson. William originally wanted the airline to be a short regional airline with destinations across Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom[3]. Their first plane to be delivered to the airline was a Hawker Siddeley HS 748[4]. Approximately 4 were delivered[5]. However, due to the influx of tourists across Europe as a whole, William decided to expand the airline’s destinations, providing travel from Ireland and France as well[6]. Despite the airline being small, it became increasingly popular during its first few years of operations, especially with the collapse and closure of Scottish Airlines in 1961. In 1967, the airline began operations in West Germany and Italy[7] as well, providing more travel. With more destinations available, the airline bought more HS 758s, creating the fleet with a total of 8 aircrafts[8]. By this time, Scottish Air had carried over 19,384 passengers Europe wide[9]

By the 1970’s, Scottish Air decided to retire its fleet of HS 748’s to replace with more advanced and bigger airliners such as the Boeing 727. Because of the amount of tourists and passengers that travel with the airline, William became interested in the Boeing 727 because of its efficiency and reliability. With more seats available, more passengers can travel faster. The Boeing 727 also provided use to the airline as it was made for short-haul flights and was used for domestic flights and on international flights within its range. All 8 HS 748s were replaced with 7 Boeing 727s. Due to this, the airline also opened a few more destinations, allowing travels from Poland and Spain. It also created changes within its lounges and hubs. As a result, demands for the airline increased. This caused Scottish Air to buy 4 more Boeing 727s.

After the collapse of the Berlin Wall in the late 1980’s, Scottish Air provided destinations to what was then, East Germany. This means that the airline now operates in Germany fully. A few months later, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, demands for Scottish air in the Baltic regions skyrocketed. This was later called “The Scottish Save” as hundreds of Baltic citizens flew on Scottish Air to live in the other countries as a way to “find a new life”. Even though the operations were intended to be temporary, Estonia became an official destination according to the airline.

Modern history[]

In the late 1990’s, Scottish air began to retire it’s Boeing 727s with the Boeing 757 and 737. 7 Boeing 757s were delivered and 9 Boeing 737s were delivered to the airline on June 8th, 1998. This caused Scottish air’s Boeing 727s to be short lived.

After the September 11 attacks, Scottish air grounded it’s entire fleet of aircraft. This caused a ruckus financially within the airline, however, after 2 weeks, the airline opened again and began operating normally. Though, security increased within the airlines as it re-opened again. Later on in 2002, Scottish air went out and bought 5 more Boeing 757’s.

As the airline grew it’s destinations, it had also bought smaller planes such as the CRJ 900, Airbus a319s, and so on. The airline also officially provided almost every location in Europe available to them. To this day, the airline has an official fleet of 33, most of which are Boeing 757s and Boeing 737s.

Destinations[]

Controversy[]

Incidents[]

Fleet Size[]

Trivia[]

Gallery[]

References[]