The Duchy of Brunswick was a state of the Cosminian Empire. It was led by Josef Baumann who was the Duke of the Duchy of Brunswick. He controls the House of Gardwin. Josef also goes by his reigning name, Paul Fredrick Augustus Gardwin. He was appointed Duke of Brunswick on 11.2.2022.

History

Brunswick is thought to have been founded as a merger of two settlements founded by a Saxon named Bruno, the other side on the Oker River was founded by Dankward. Now entering it's medieval age, it was ruled by the Brunoids, which was a Saxon house, it fell through marriage to the House of Welf. Henry the Lion became Duke of Saxony and named Braunschweig the capital of his new state which also included the Duchy of Bavaria. Under Henry's rule, structures like the Cathedral of St. Blasius was built and he also had the statue of a lion, his heraldic animal, erected in front of the castle. The lion subsequently became the city's landmark. Henry was however, banished, by German Emperor Fredrick l Barborossa for not sending military aid. Henry's son, Otto later became Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, continuing into the middle ages, Brunswick was a city of trade and of political centers as well as economic, in the 13th century, it joined the Hanseatic League.

Modern Brunswick

A few hundred years Rudolph Augustus took Brunswick by siege, in 1806, Brunswick was invaded by the French who were under Napoleon Bonaparte. Brunswick was briefly apart of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Westphalia. The removed Duke, Fredrick William, raised a volunteer corps whom would fight the French many times, The Congress at Vienna decided to make a new state called the "Duchy of Brunswick" a revolution would force Charles ll to abdicate due to his absolutist way of governing, Brunswick eventually went through a period of industrialization meaning more population as it also went through liberal reforms. The first railway in Northern Germany was built and thus Brunswick was connected to Wolfenbüttel.

Post WW1 Brunswick

After the last Duke Ernst was forced to abdicate by the Socialists, the Socialist Republic of Brunswick was proclaimed in November 1918. It would become a parliamentary state as the "Free Republic of Brunswick" until the Nazi takeover in January 1933 after Chancellor Paul Von Hidenburg had died. Brunswick would be a place of Military Division XI and the Hitler Youth Headquarters. An Allied air raid on October 15, 1944, destroyed a lot of infrastructure including churches and the "Altstadt". Small sections of Braunschweig, the capital of Brunswick, had survived the raids, it found itself poor as it was in close proximity to the Iron Curtain. On 28 February 1974, as part of a district reform in Lower Saxony, the rural district of Braunschweig, which had surrounded the city, was disestablished. The major part of the former district was incorporated into the city of Braunschweig, increasing its population by roughly 52,000 people.

Second German Empire Era

In June 2021, Brunswick was established as a state of the Second German Empire which is one out of the 19 other states. Josef Baumann, also known as Paul Fredrick Augustus l, was appointed "Duke" on 12 February 2022. Josef would go on to resign before March 1, 2022.

Cosminian Empire Era