Against All Odds 2009 was a professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA), which took place on February 8, 2009 at the TNA Impact! Zone in Orlando, Florida. It was TNA's first PPV event broadcast in High-Definition and the fifth event under the Against All Odds chronology.

Background[]

See also: Professional wrestling

The event featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds, plots and storylines. Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of events which build tension, culminating in a wrestling match or series of matches.

Results[]

Numbers in parentheses indicate the length of the match.

(c) refers to the champion(s) heading into the match.

Alex Shelley (c) defeated Eric Young to retain the TNA X-Division Championship (13:04).

Scott Steiner defeated Petey Williams (11:18).

Brutus Magnus defeated Chris Sabin (6:57).

Awesome Kong (w/ Raisha Saeed, Rhaka Khan & Sojournor Bolt) (c) defeated ODB to retain the TNA Women's Knockout Championship (5:31).

Booker T (c) (w/ Sharmell) defeated Shane Sewell to retain the TNA Legends Championship (6:01).

Abyss defeated Matt Morgan (15:40).

Beer Money Inc. (James Storm & Robert Roode) (c) (w/ Jacqueline) defeated Lethal Consequences (Consequences Creed & Jay Lethal) to retain the TNA World Tag Team Championships (15:43)

Sting (c) defeated Brother Devon and Brother Ray and Kurt Angle in a Four Way Match to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship (14:36).

Other on-screen talent[]

Commentators

Mike Tenay

Don West

Interviewers

Don West

Mike Tenay

Ring announcer

Jeremy Borash

Referees

See also[]

Against All Odds

[]

Against All Odds 2009 at CAGEMATCH.net

2009 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling pay-per-views Genesis • Against All Odds • Destination X • Lockdown • Sacrifice • Slammiversary

Victory Road • Hard Justice • No Surrender • Bound for Glory • Turning Point • Final Resolution