This article examines how, in the course of modernization, Japan learned from Germany and Britain about ideas and institutions concerning social reform, and attempted to implement and develop them at home. It focuses on Fukuda Tokuzo, a pioneering liberal economist and social reformer, who studied under the German historical economist Lujo Brentano, and who was also inspired by the British scholars Alfred Marshall, A. C. Pigou, and J. A. Hobson. By examining how Fukuda's ideas and work were developed and assimilated in Japan, this article shows how Japanese social reformers navigated the two key strands of economic thinking that witnessed a process of globalization during this period: neoclassical welfare economics, on the one hand, and an ethical-historical style of economics, on the other. It shows how the latter was stronger in a latecomer country to modernization such as Japan.

2 Hicks, J. R.scope, ‘The and economics’, status of welfare, Oxford Economic Papers, 27, 3, 1975Google Scholar, in Collected essays on economic theory, vol. 1, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981, p. 218. See, e.g.,

Hutchison, T. W., On revolutions and progress in economic knowledge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978Google Scholar, chs. 3 and 4.

6 Rutherford, M., ‘Institutionalism and its English connections’, European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 14, 2, 2007, pp. 291–323CrossRefGoogle Scholar.

Backhouse, Roger E., ‘J. A. Hobson as a welfare economist’, in Roger E. Backhouse and Tamotsu Nishizawa, eds., No wealth but life: welfare economics and the welfare state in Britain, 1880–1945, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010, pp. 114–135CrossRefGoogle Scholar.

8 This was the first translation of a Western economic book in Japan, being based on the Dutch translation of William Ellis's Outlines of social economy (1846). See Tamotsu, Nishizawa, ‘The emergence of the economic science in Japan and the evolution of textbooks 1860s–1930s’, in Massimo Augello and Marco Guidi, eds., The economic reader: textbooks, manuals and the dissemination of economic sciences during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, London: Routledge, 2012, pp. 305–323Google Scholar.

9 Chuhei, Sugiyama and Hiroshi, Mizuta, eds., Enlightenment and beyond: political economy comes to Japan, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1988Google Scholar. For the economic history of this period, see

Konosuke, Odaka and Yuzo, Yamamoto, eds., Bakumatsu, Meiji no nihonkeizai (The Japanese economy of the Bakumatsu and Meiji periods), Tokyo: Nihon keizai shinbunsha, 1988Google Scholar.

11 Shiro, Sugihara, Seio keizaigaku to kindai Nihon (Western economics and modern Japan), Tokyo: Miraisha, 1972Google Scholar. For the influence of List's ideas in latecomer countries, see

Metzler, Mark, ‘The cosmopolitanism of national economics: Friedrich List in a Japanese mirror’, in A. G. Hopkins, ed., Global history: interactions between the universal and the local, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, pp. 98–130CrossRefGoogle Scholar.

16 For a detailed account of the adoption of German Sozialpolitik in Japan, see Pyle, Kenneth B., ‘Advantages of followership: German economics and Japanese bureaucrats, 1890–1925’, Journal of Japanese Studies, 1, 1, 1974, pp. 127–164CrossRefGoogle Scholar. See also

Takashi, Fujii, ‘The Japanese social policy school: its formation and breakup’, in Sugihara and Tanaka, Economic thought, pp. 44–59Google Scholar.

17 Shakai Seisaku Gakkai shiryo, bekkan (Japanese Association for Social Policy, historical documents), supplementary volume, Tokyo: Ochanomizu shobo, 1978. For a longer-term perspective, see Garon, Sheldon, The state and labour in modern Japan, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1987Google Scholar. For the economic history of this period, see

Takafusa, Nakamura, Meiji, Taisho-ki no keizai (The economy of the Meiji and Taisho periods), Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1981Google Scholar.

38 In 1873 Marshall gave lectures to women on ‘Some economic questions directly connected with the welfare of labour’. See Raffaelli, Tiziano, Biagini, Eugenio, and Tullberg, Rita M., eds., Alfred Marshall's lectures to women: some economic questions directly connected to the welfare of labour, Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 1995Google Scholar. His initial inquiry resulted in ‘The future of the English working classes’, a paper read at the Cambridge Reform Club in 1873, and reprinted in

Pigou, A. C., ed., Memorials of Alfred Marshall, London: Macmillan, 1925Google Scholar.

44 Fukuda used the fourth edition of Marshall's Principles. Thus the structure of Book I of his Lectures is as follows: ch. 1 ‘Introduction’, chs. 2 and 3 ‘The growth of free industry and enterprise’, ch. 4 ‘The growth of economic science’, ch. 5 ‘The scope of economics’, ch. 6 ‘Economics as science’. Book V is something called ‘Circulation’ (in fact, exchange and distribution); it is not Marshall's Book V ‘Theory of the equilibrium of demand and supply’ or ‘General relations of demand, supply and value’, which is the core of the economic analysis. Fukuda thought historical narrative more important and did not recognize the significance of the static core of Marshall's Book V.

45 After a period studying abroad, Otsuka returned to Japan and completed the first full Japanese translation of the eighth edition of the Principles in 1925–26. It was not until the mid to late 1920s that the general equilibrium theory was understood in Japan, first by Nakayama Ichiro and Takada Yasuma in the 1920s, and later by Yasui Takuma in the 1930s.

53 Ibid., vol. 1, pp. 24–5. Fukuda's interpretation of Marshall is complex, just as Marshall himself was complex. Keynes wrote of his ‘double nature’, i.e., while Marshall was a member of ‘the tribe of sages and priests’, he was very much a scientist too (Keynes, ‘Alfred Marshall’, p. 173). See also Fetter's interpretation below.

65 Hobson, J. A., Work and wealth: a human valuation, London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press, 1992Google Scholar (first published 1914), p. 9. Following Ruskin, Hobson defined ‘the essential work of the political economist’ as being ‘to determine what are in reality useful or life-giving things, and by what degrees and kind of labour they are attainable and distributable’ (ibid., p. 10).

82 From the autumn of 1957, Nakayama wrote a series of articles entitled ‘Industrial relations from now on’ for the Asahi newspaper; in 1958 he wrote New managers, new workers, and also published The labour management consultation system as one of the Productivity Library series. See Nishizawa, ‘Ichiro Nakayama’, p. 10Google Scholar.

85 I organized a conference with the help of Roger Backhouse and others on the ‘History of welfare economics reconsidered: from Ruskin to Sen’ in March 2013 at Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo. We shall continue this joint project, which is supported by the Japanese Society for Promotion of Science.