20 years ago, Chauncey Billups played a pivotal role in leading the Detroit Pistons to their third NBA championship. Thanks to his contributions during that time, as well as throughout his career, he will be forever immortalized in basketball lore in Springfield.

According to The Athletic, Billups is set to be inducted into the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame as part of the 2024 class. The official announcement is expected to take place on Apr. 6 during the NCAA men’s basketball Final Four.

During this season’s NBA All-Star Weekend, Billups was among the 14 finalists announced for election into this year’s class. Of those 14, he and eight-time NBA All-Star Vince Carter are the only two reported names set to be inducted this year as of now.

During his eight seasons with the Pistons, Billups was a key figure in the ball club reaching six straight Eastern Conference Finals appearances and two NBA Finals appearances between 2003-2008. In 2004, he won his sole NBA Finals MVP after helping lead the Pistons over the Los Angeles Lakers to win the 2004 NBA Championship. For the series, Billups averaged 21 points while shooting 51% from the field and 47% from three-point range along with 5.2 assists, 3.2 rebounds, and 1.2 steals.

On Mar. 17, Billups and several of his teammates from the 2004 “Goin’ To Work” squad celebrated the 20th anniversary of their NBA Finals victory over the Lakers with two celebrations—pregame and halftime—at Little Caesars Arena during the franchise’s game against the Miami Heat. The first was a “Walk of Champions” where Billups and his ex-teammates greeted fans in attendance. The second was a brief presentation at center court.

“It will never die,” Billups said regarding the Pistons’ 2004 title. “What we did, it can never be undone. We had a lot of success. We only won one championship, we felt like we should’ve won more, had more. But we did win that one. I always say this, the way that we did it—the personnel, the talent, the salary cap, and all of those things—it will never be done again. We love that. We talk about that all the time. We took pride in that.”

Several games into the 2008-09 NBA season, the Pistons traded Billups to the Denver Nuggets for his second stint, along with Antonio McDyess and Cheikh Samb in exchange for Allen Iverson. Billups would return to the Pistons in July 2013, signing a two-year deal for $5 million. He finished his NBA career on Sept. 9, 2014, retiring after 17 seasons. The Pistons retired his No. 1 jersey on Feb. 10, 2016.

With the Pistons, Billups averaged 16.5 points and 6.2 assists while also earning three NBA All-Star selections, two All-NBA (second and third team), and two All-NBA Defensive Second-team honors.

Billups will join Dave Bing, Bob Lanier, Isiah Thomas, Joe Dumars, Chuck Daly, Dennis Rodman, Ben Wallace, and former owner William Davidson as integral figures in the franchise’s history to be elected to the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame.

Currently, Billups is the head coach the NBA’s Portland Trail Blazers.