Former Detroit Pistons star Chauncey Billups thinks his old team is on the right track. And he believes Pistons fans — and players — should be “happy and hopeful” as the team begins a new era under head coach Dwane Casey.

On Friday, "Mr. Big Shot" was back in the city where he earned his nickname and won an NBA title. Billups, who played for the Pistons from 2002-08 and 2013-14, is a point guard for the Killer 3s of the BIG3 basketball league, which played at Little Caesars Arena. Billups, now 41, sat out his team’s game with an injury as the Killer 3s lost, 52-39, to Trilogy in a game that was not without its share of drama.

“It’s always good to be here,” Billups said after the game. “Everybody knows how much I love this city, love the fans. Obviously, I never had the opportunity to play in this building. I wish I would’ve. I wish we played in the city when we were here. But The Palace was good to us, the city was good to us, the fans, so it’s always good to be back here."

Although Billups doesn’t speak with many of the current players, he remains “such a big Pistons fan” and repeatedly spoke of his excitement for the coming season. He believes Detroit can contend in the “wide open” Eastern Conference.

More: Metta World Peace ejected from BIG3 basketball game in Detroit

Jamie Samuelsen: Could BIG3 basketball league happen in other sports?

“I feel like they got two All-Stars on that team, obviously with (Andre Drummond) and Blake, and when Reggie’s healthy, he can play on an All-Star level,” Billups said. “And if you have that kind of talent in the Eastern Conference, you should be able to make some noise. Obviously, they have a really good coach in Dwane that they brought in. So I’m just excited for the squad. I think that they have the chance to make a huge leap from not making the playoffs at all last year to hopefully being able to make some noise.”

When asked about Casey, who was hired to replace former head coach Stan Van Gundy — also the team’s former president of basketball operations — Billups said he thought Van Gundy did a good job and was a “very good coach.”

But Billups was also candid. He believes that sometimes, a team needs a new voice and a new message. And he had high praise for the newest voice in the Pistons locker room.

“When you listen to the same coach, same message every single day, he’s on top of you, sometimes you stop listening,” Billups said. “Coach Casey obviously has been a very good coach the last few years. He’s really ascended to the top of the ranks in the league, and whatever happened in Toronto presented an opportunity for him to come here.

“Just different, you know? Different message coming across a different way. And you’ve seen the success he’s had. Only really LeBron has beat Toronto the past couple times. If it’s not for him, maybe they’re in the Finals.”

Billups also reiterated his desire to eventually join a team’s front office. This spring, the Pistons denied a report that linked them to Billups. At the time, Van Gundy was still employed by Detroit.

While Billups still feels strongly about the Pistons, his desire is to be a front office executive — whether that’s in Detroit or not.

“Obviously, you all know how I feel about the Pistons. But my desire is to one day run a team, be in the front office and try to build a champion,” Billups said. “And I know that I will, and I know that I’m going to do a good job, when that opportunity presents itself and it’s a good opportunity. I’ll be ready to go.”

In the meantime, he’s traveling the country with Ice Cube — the founder of Big3 and a visionary, according to Billups — and a plethora of retired NBA players. The appeal of the Big3 doesn’t lie in basketball. Instead, the league has provided him with something else he’s been longing for since he retired.

“You miss the camaraderie in the locker room, just being around the guys and laughing and joking, and so this gives us all an opportunity to do that again, every week,” Billups said. “That’s what I think is one of the most beautiful things about the Big3.”

And while Billups is working his way back from injury so he can help his team (now 1-3), there isn’t too much of a rush.

“It’s feeling a little better. But I’ll tell you what, at 41, you don’t heal as fast,” Billups said. “But it’s all good. I’m going to try to push it to get back. But if I don’t, I’m not going to be crazy all about it. I’m not trying to get hurt and mess up my golf season.”