Yo-kai Watch Episode 48 Information Season 2 Number 48 English titles Year 3 Class Y, Mr. Nyanpachi: Episode 4, The Missing Yo-kai Pad, A Yo-kai Report Card, Too! Japanese titles "San-nen Wai-gumi Nyanpachi-sensei Dai-Yon-Wa" (３年Y組ニャンパチ先生 第四話), "Kieta Yōkai Paddo" (消えた妖怪パッド), "Yōkai mo Tsūshinbo!" (妖怪も通信簿！) Original air date December 19, 2014 English air date TBA Channel Disney XD Previous Yo-kai Watch Episode 47 Next Yo-kai Watch Episode 49 Discussion -

Yo-kai Watch Episode 48 is an episode of Yo-kai Watch Anime. It consists of Year 3 Class Y, Mr. Nyanpachi: Episode 4, The Missing Yo-kai Pad and A Yo-kai Report Card, Too! stories.

Part 1: Year 3 Class Y, Mr. Nyanpachi: Episode 4

A short 2-part episode focusing on Jibanyan and other Yo-kai in a high school setting. In the first part, Jibanyan is giving the class their final exam. The student Yo-kai try to worm their way out of the test, but no matter what they do they end up taking the test. All of them fail and Jibanyan gets very angry with them.

In the second part, Jibanyan is sitting in the staff room with Melonyan. Melonyan is talking with Jibanyan about his student’s poor test scores and giving him advice. However, he’s also eating a cantaloupe, which makes Jibanyan a little bit uncomfortable due to Melonyan’s strong resemblance to what he’s eating.

Part 2: The Missing Yo-kai Pad

Whisper is cleaning his precious Yo-kai Pad, which prompts Jibanyan to comment on how much effort he puts into it. Nate also notes that he cleans it a lot—so much that he doesn’t clean anything else. Whisper counters by saying that he also helps out with cleaning the Yo-kai Watch… by licking it whenever Nate puts his hand in Whisper’s mouth. Nate is understandably grossed out by this and immediately takes the Yo-kai Watch off to properly clean it.

Later, Whisper is heading to the bathroom with his Yo-kai Pad in tow, but as he’s sitting down the pad slips into the toilet. To make matters worse Whisper accidentally pushes the button to flush the toilet and before he can save it, it gets flushed away. Without a moment’s hesitation Whisper also flushes himself down the toilet to go after his prized pad. Later, Jibanyan and Nate finally run into Whisper as he pops out of the sewers in the middle of the town market. Aside from Whisper being rather stinky now, Nate points out that Whisper can’t do anything at all without the Yo-kai Pad, as he relies on it for information. Of course Whisper argues that he can recognize Yo-kai without his device. To prove his claim, he attempts to “identify” a nearby Yo-kai… but it turns out that it’s just a shop mascot.

Attempting to cover for himself, Whisper claims it was just a joke—but then Happierre shows up, and Nate asks Whisper if he can remember his name—but of course Whisper can’t. When Nate returns home, he finds his mom lifting the sofa up with unusual strength to vacuum underneath it.

Immediately suspecting a Yo-kai, Nate uses the Watch to reveal a rectangular Yo-kai which Whisper claims is the “soap Yo-kai.” Unsurprisingly, Whisper’s wrong again, it’s just Mochismo.

Whisper quickly tries to recover by making up a bunch of nonsense about Mochismo’s special attributes, but Mochismo denies everything he says. At wits’ end, Whisper has a meltdown before zooming out the window to search for his Yo-kai Pad once more. Later in the evening, Nate and Jibanyan are pondering ordering a new Yo-kai Pad for Whisper.

Jibanyan says they’re not easy to get, but Nate has an idea: He asks Hidabat to help him order a new Yo-kai Pad, since Hidabat spends all day on the computer. The next morning, the new Yo-kai Pad has already been delivered to Nate’s house. Whisper shows up shortly after, conspicuously hiding something behind his back.

Jibanyan presents the new tablet to Whisper, who graciously accepts it. However, Nate and Jibanyan have noticed that something smells… it’s Whisper’s old Yo-kai Pad hiding behind his back! Whisper insists it’s totally safe and clean now, but Nate and Jibanyan are considerably more concerned about Whisper’s hygiene.

Part 3: A Yo-kai Report Card, Too!

Nate’s having a chat with Bear and Eddie about their upcoming school report cards. When Nate returns home, he finds Jibanyan having a fit over something. It turns out that Yo-kai also get report cards, and Jibanyan is very worried about it. Whisper is not concerned, but all of a sudden Verygoodsir shows up in Nate’s room.

Verygoodsir is in charge of grading Yo-kai for their report cards, and has come to grade Jibanyan and Whisper. The catch is that there’s a punishment for bad grades. Yo-kai grades run from A to E, and in the event a Yo-kai receives all Es, they get turned into a plastic figurine and sold to children!

Terrified by the prospect of being turned into figurines, Whisper and Jibanyan work their hardest to get good grades—however, their efforts often have the opposite effect. Verygoodsir first grades them on “helpfulness.” Whisper and Jibanyan attempt to help Nate with his homework, but end up just spilling orange juice all over Nate’s homework. Not good. The next category is “being helpful at any time” so the duo attempt to help Nate in the shower, but end up just causing a ruckus instead. Finally, Verygoodsir grades them on singing a bedtime lullaby to their master. Unsurprisingly, Whisper and Jibanyan decide the best way to do this is to sing very loudly.

Nate tells the two of them to shut up and then gets out of bed, angrily pointing out that Whisper and Jibanyan aren’t acting like they normally do—in fact, they’re being way more annoying than they would normally be. Verygoodsir doesn’t seem to care as he points out Whisper and Jibanyan’s poor performance, saying he’ll return with their report cards in the morning.

Whisper and Jibanyan are convinced they’ll be turned into figurines for sure now. In the morning, Verygoodsir returns with their report cards. Jibanyan checks his first—and finds that all of his grades are E, except for one that’s covered up with a sticker. Pulling off the sticker reveals an A for Jibanyan! Verygoodsir explains that he also graded them on how much their master likes them, and Jibanyan passed with flying colors because Nate really likes him.

Next, Whisper checks his—and finds all Es, even in the bonus category because Nate doesn’t really like him!! Verygoodsir has already set up the figurine-making machine, and the episode ends with poor Whisper screaming in horror.

Characters

Humans

Nate

Eddie

Bear

Yokai