Yo-kai Watch Episode 18 Information Season 1 Number 18 English titles Kyubi: Operation Heartbreak, Yo-kai Gargaros, Komasan: Movin On Up! Episode 2 Japanese titles Kyūbi no Kyunkyun Daisakusen Deai-hen (キュウビのキュンキュン大作戦 出会い編), Oni Jikan (鬼時間), Komasan Shīzun 2 Inakamono wa Bara-iro ni Episode2 (コマさんシーズン2 田舎者はバラ色に Episode2) Original air date May 16, 2014 English air date January 6, 2016 (AU); January 11, 2016 (US) Channel Disney XD Previous Yo-kai Watch Episode 17 Next Yo-kai Watch Episode 19 Discussion Episode 18 Forum Post

Yo-kai Watch Episode 18 is an episode of Yo-kai Watch Anime. It consists of Kyubi: Operation Heartbreak, Yo-kai Gargaros, and Komasan: Movin On Up! Episode 2.

Kyubi: Operation Heartbreak

On a foggy day in Springdale, a beautiful fox yo-kai, Kyubi, leaps through the trees on his way to steal young girls’ hearts. He’s collected 99 hearts and needs one more to be promoted to “senior fox.” Kyubi spies Katie walking down the street, and he targets her. He transforms to a boy with fox-ear-looking hair and luscious eyelashes. The fox tries to compliment Katie, but she accidentally dodges it and puts it on a rose she has in a basket. She even gives Kyubi a rose thinking this is all about rose appreciation. Kyubi uses his magic to make it rain, and he offers to walk Katie home under his umbrella, but she has her own. He makes another move, protecting her from a puddle with his sweater vest, but Katie walks a shorter route away from the puddle. Kyubi desperately chases her down to dramatically introduces himself. Katie loves it. Because the QB is her favorite position on a football team. So she gives Kyubi a pickle to help him pass better. Kyubi demands to know Katie’s name hoping to find some way to her heart. She tells him and goes inside, leaving the fox with a crush and a pickle.

Yo-kai Gargaros

Nate is woken up by his mother going out on an errand. She requests that Nate stay home because she’s expecting a delivery that someone needs to be there to receive. Both Nate and Whisper wake up famished and they go downstairs to grab the last cream-filled doughnut, but somebody ate it. The somebody was obviously Jibanyan, who gives himself away by, first, acting too natural and, finally, by falling for Whisper’s “there’s sugar on your whiskers” trap.

Nate really wants a doughnut, and the easy solution is to go get one, but Whisper reminds him of his mother’s request. So Nate, Whisper and Jibanyan all simply run to the bakery. As they’re walking home night falls all at once. They pick up the pace, but the begin to hear loud stomping sounds. They try to ignore them at first but they get too close. When they turn around, they see they’re being followed by a bright red giant with fangs and an iron club. This yo-kai is Gargaros. He comes for people who leave their houses when they aren’t supposed to. The three friends commit to each other that they’re all going to make it home, but

Jibanyan trips and falls. He tells Nate and Whisper to leave him behind. So they do that. The cat catches up, partly out of annoyance, but drops a fanzine and some of his chocobars. He goes back for them and gets completely flattened by Gargaros. The remaining two try and fail to hide from the oni. When Gargaros gets the jump on them, he smashes Whisper with his club. Nate takes off and summons Jibanyan back while Whisper reconstitutes himself. Jibanyan’s heart is so warmed when his friends say basically what they did before abandoning him the first time, he digs up the courage to face Gargaros. When Jibanyan comes at Gargaros with his paws of fury, nothing happens. Gargaros is much larger than even a truck, so Jibanyan gets batted into the distance. In a final gambit, the yo-kai convince Nate to throw his doughnut as bait, but Whisper catches and eats it. Luckily, it doesn’t matter because they make it home, and night turns back into day. Gargaros is gone, but the delivery man is at the door looking nervous in front of what looks like a purple storm cloud. That cloud is coming from Nate’s mother, who got her package but didn’t get her son to listen to her.

Komasan: Movin On Up! Episode 2

Komasan, vice president of strategy at a major toy company, still thinks he’s a janitor. While he’s mopping the lobby, a lower employee tries to take the mop because the company does have actual janitors, but Komasan doesn’t care. He focuses very closely on the floor, apparently neglecting his actual job except for his ability to accidentally produce hit ideas. Two of the yo-kai’s ideas, Twirly-Whirly and Softy-Wofty, have even been stolen by a lead competitor. The president is startled by this and calls a board meeting to address the problem.The board determines there must be a corporate spy at work. The room is brewing with strategies and concerns, but all Komasan has to say is “that’s colder than a frog’s bottom.” Everybody loves it They come up with a plan to release “Froggy Bottoms” in place of the stolen toys. But the executive who brought the theft to the company’s attention stands back with a sinister gleam on his glasses. At dinner that night, Komajiro offers to teach Komasan how to use the laptop he was given that morning. The next day, the rival company has already announced their Froggy Bottoms toy.

The slimy executive suggests that the leaks are coming from Komasan himself. This conjures the image of a Komasan in a backroom meeting trading the company’s strategies for literal bars of gold. The president refuses to accept that suggestion and runs out to find him. Because Komasan thinks he’s a janitor, he steps into the slimy executive’s office with a mop, and accidentally knocks some documents onto the executive’s keyboard. Because he refused to learn how to use his laptop, Komasan doesn’t know what to do and hits everything with his mop even further. The two bigwigs find Komasan by his panicked shouts. When they catch up to him, Komasan is scrambling to collect all the papers he printed on accident. Komasan knows less than nothing about what’s happening, but the papers he printed out were the slimy executive’s incriminating emails. Later, Komasan is being congratulated and celebrated in front of everyone. He only understands the part about making the company sparkling clean, but he is still “pleased as punch.” As a result, the next unleaked toy will be Punching Punching Robot.

At home, Komajiro asks if his big brother used the computer at work today. Komasan “sorta did.”

Characters

Humans

Nate

Bear

Yokai