Yo-kai Watch Episode 8 Information Season 1 Number 8 English titles Manjimutt: Part 7, Yo-kai Fidgephant, Yo-kai Hidabat Japanese titles Jinmenken Part7 (じんめん犬 Part7), Yōkai Morezō (妖怪モレゾウ), Yōkai Hikikōmori (妖怪ヒキコウモリ) Original air date March 5, 2014 English air date October 26, 2015 Channel Disney XD Previous Yo-kai Watch Episode 7 Next Yo-kai Watch Episode 9 Discussion Episode 8 Forum Post

Yo-kai Watch Episode 8 is an episode of Yo-kai Watch Anime. It consists of Manjimutt: Part 7, Yo-kai Fidgephant, and Yo-kai Hidabat stories.

Manjimutt: Part 7

This short episode opens with a brief recap of Manjimutt’s previous attempts to become a potter. After that we see that Manjimutt is now free from jail again and is walking down a street as he ponders potential creative outlets. When he passes by a movie poster, he is struck by inspiration to become a Hollywood actor! He envisions himself as the star of a blockbuster spy thriller, living a life of fame and glamor as he gets to walk the red carpet and cruise around in fancy limousines. Later, just as Manjimutt is about to get on a plane to Hollywood, he gets arrested… by Homeland Security! Looks like it’s back to jail for Manjimutt…

Yo-kai Fidgephant

It’s another day at school, and this time something seems to be bothering Nate. He’s fidgeting and sweating like crazy, and it looks like he desperately to visit a restroom. The school bell finally rings much to Nate’s relief, as he can finally make a dash to the restroom. However, Nate quickly discovers there’s an unusually long line for the restroom, so he quickly runs up to the second floor of the school… only to find there’s a huge line there too. Nate runs up to the third floor and is greeted by yet another long line for the bathroom!

What could possibly make everyone need to go to the bathroom at the same time? Nate suspects it’s the work of a Yo-kai, and his suspicions are proved correct when the Yo-kai Watch reveals Fidgephant is the culprit! Nate snatches the Yo-kai Pad from Whisper and learns that Fidgephant makes people have to use the bathroom, especially during inopportune times.

As Fidgephant causes more and more people to rush to the restroom, Nate realizes he’s got to take action. He attempts to summon Roughraff but in a hurry he puts the medal in wrong, prompting his recently-upgraded Yo-kai Watch to audibly remind him of his mistake. Nate quickly put the medal in the right way and successfully summons Roughraff. Roughraff attempts to intimidate Fidgephant, but this quickly backfires when Fidgephant makes Roughraff have to use the bathroom too!

Nate and Whisper are not impressed with Roughraff’s failure, and Nate decides to summon Manjimutt next. Manjimutt shows up with his jail cell once again, and then proceeds to try talking some sense into Fidgephant. That doesn’t work either, as Manjimutt soon finds himself needing to use the restroom as well. Gloating over the fact that he’s a dog and can “go” wherever he wants, Manjimutt attempts to pee on a telephone pole, only to be recaptured by the police and hauled back off to jail. So much for Manjimutt!

Running out of options, Nate decides to summon Illoo this time. Rather than talk some sense into Fidgephant, Illoo creates illusionary toilets all the way down the hallway. Everyone in line for the bathroom quickly runs to these toilets much to Nate’s horror as he realizes everyone will actually just be peeing on the floor, so he tells Illoo to get rid of the illusion. At the end of his rope, Nate finally summons Wazzat to take care of the situation.

Wazzat clamps onto Fidgephant’s head and eats his memories, which causes Fidgephant to “relieve” himself. Fortunately, this solves the problem, as nobody needs to go to the bathroom any more. Fidgephant also “gives” Nate his Yo-kai Medal in an unusually gross way, but a Yo-kai Medal is a Yo-kai Medal.

Yo-kai Hidabat

Nate’s just getting home from school and is about to get ready for soccer with Bear and Eddie. When Nate tries to open the door to his room, he finds it locked. Jibanyan has locked himself inside and doesn’t feel like coming out. Whisper notices some kind of supersonic waves that Nate can’t hear. Using this information Whisper figures out that it’s got to be the Yo-kai Hidabat who is enspiriting Jibanyan and making him want to stay cooped up in Nate’s room.

Hidabat causes the enspirited to stay locked up in a dark room and not want to come out. That’s going to be a big problem because Nate is already late to soccer, so he needs to find a way to get Jibanyan to come out. Nate tries luring Jibanyan out with some chocolate bars and a magazine featuring Jibanyan’s favorite band but Jibanyan just snatches them away before slamming the door shut again! Nate decides that it’s time to summon a Yo-kai to get Jibanyan to come out. His first pick is the hotblooded Blazion, who attempts to get Jibanyan fired up… but it doesn’t work very well, and Blazion eventually gets so fired up himself that he starts smashing on the doors and walls before he dashes off.

Next, Nate summons Dismarelda and Happierre to cheer Jibanyan up. They successfully manage to get Jibanyan out of Nate’s room, but it looks like Jibanyan is still enspirited. Nate decides to take a chance and summon his new friend Fidgephant, who works his magic on Jibanyan and makes him have to go to the bathroom, revealing Hidabat in the process.

After a quick bathroom break, Hidabat tries to enspirit Jibanyan again, but this time Nate stops him. Hidabat is scared of the outside world and wants a place to hide, so Nate offers to let Hidabat stay in his closet. This works out for everyone, as Hidabat has a place to stay, and Jibanyan gets a new roommate too. For his effort, Nate scores Hidabat’s Yo-kai Medal… but the door to his room is still locked! No problem though, Whisper reveals he can just pass right through the door and unlock it from the inside, which irritates Nate as he wonders why Whisper didn’t just do that in the first place.

Characters

Humans

Nate

Bear

Eddie

Yo-Kai