“ This time, I was able to go out and cooperate with director Matthew Vaughn and several other international movie stars, thanks to the support of my fans....

I was able to go out and cooperate with director Matthew Vaughn and other international movie stars As soon as Cheng Shiyuan wrote, he didn't stop. He wrote nearly a thousand words

Cheng Shiyuan then sent the notice to Zhang Zilin

……

In an exchange group of loyal fans, many people found this announcement at the first time

Not only on the official website of Tangren entertainment company, but also some celebrities on the Internet have forwarded this announcement

“ I don't understand. What's the meaning of this announcement? My family Shiyuan doesn't want to play in the entertainment industry this time. That's why it's so sensational. "

Someone in the group guessed

“ No, it can't be

Seeing this speculation, the fans in the fan group can't sit still. If it's true, it's really too bad

“ Your guess is too much. "

A fan in the group said a word

“ What do you mean? If you have anything to say, everyone is talking about it. "

The person who speculated that Cheng Shiyuan might quit the entertainment industry had seen so many people lose their views and felt a sense of accomplishment. However, he would be a little angry when a person suddenly appeared who despised his views

“ You think my guess is too exaggerated. Tell me about you. "

The fan didn't continue to say anything, but uploaded some pictures

These pictures are all screenshots of those media reports in South Korea

“ What do you mean by these pictures? "

Other people in the fan group are a little depressed. They don't know what it means to send this picture

Before long, the person who sent the picture came out and explained

“ These screenshots are reported by some South Korean newspapers and media. Since Cheng Shiyuan announced that he would take over the new film directed by Matthew Vaughn, they began to publicize that South Korea's film industry is about to enter the spring, their actors are about to enter Hollywood, and South Korea is about to become the second Hollywood in Asia....

Because most of the people in the group don't understand Korean and can't read these reports

After listening to the man's explanation, people in the group felt thoughtful, but they couldn't understand what they knew

“ Cheng Shiyuan's announcement is obviously in the face of these Korean media. It is very clear in the announcement that he can take over the new film directed by Matthew Vaughn, which is the result of his own efforts and the support of fans. It doesn't match what the Korean media said about the careful cultivation of South Korea... "

< br After reading that person's explanation, the fans in the group responded

Yeah, that's how it works