UPCOMING EVENTS Tangren Culture Group, in collaboration with Youth Folk Arts Club, proudly presents this comedic event to Chinese audiences in Australia Region. Originated since 2007, Youth Folk Arts Club - Cross Talk (青曲社) has brought much joy to Chinese Audiences in China whilst maintaining its legacy and traditional values. By collaborating our marketing efforts with Youth Folk Arts Club, we seek to introduce top quality entertainment of Chinese culture and performing arts to locals and Chinese community in Australia. Performed by famous comedic pair, Miao Pu and Wang Shen, our audience can anticipate in an evening of laughs and cultural immersion. Adding satirical puns and various social phenomena through humorous storytelling, Chinese audiences can look forward to a night of witty banter and raucous laughter. Tour Dates: Saturday 28 April 2018 The Plenary, Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre, VIC Sunday 29 April 2018 ICC Sydney Theatre at Darling Harbour, NSW Saturday 1 Sep 2018 Brisbane Convention & Exhibition Centre, QLD Get your tickets here: http://bit.ly/2plI2vf\ Australia TangRen Culture Group is a highly qualified film company with exclusive Asian movie distribution rights in Australia and New Zealand. Our core business includes film promotion, film and television drama, investment and production of variety shows. We intend to accelerate Chinese film distribution in Australia and New Zealand’s cinemas, whilst focusing on the development and production of outstanding films and television works. We provide professional production, investment, promotion, marketing and other integrated services. TangRen Culture Group aims to strengthen its long-term, reliable and close business relationship with merchants through film investors club and to achieve further business growth with our business partners together. Our notable partners includes Hoyts, Villiage, Events Cinemas and many established business partners.

Website

http://www.tangren.com.au/

External link for Tangren Culture Group

Industry

Entertainment

Company size

51-200 employees

Headquarters

Brisbane, Queensland

Type

Public Company

Founded

2017