Mudvayne was an American heavy metal band from Peoria, Illinois formed in 1996. They are known for their sonic experimentation, innovative album art, face and body paint, masks and uniforms. The band has sold over six million records worldwide, including nearly three million in the United States.

The group consisted of Chad Gray (lead vocals), Greg Tribbett (guitar, vocals), Ryan Martinie (bass guitar) and Matthew McDonough (drums). Formed in 1996, Mudvayne became popular in the late-1990s Decatur, Illinois underground music scene. The band released an EP, Kill, I Oughtta, in 1997 and a successful debut album, L.D. 50, in 2000. They had global success with The End of All Things to Come, Lost and Found and The New Game.

Since their formation in Massachusetts during 1998, All That Remains have built an undeniable legacy upheld by airtight songcraft, knifepoint precise metallic instrumentation, and stadium-size hard rock hooks. As a result, they’ve outlasted trials, tribulations, and trends to stand tall as as one of this century’s most consistent purveyors of heavy music with a bulletproof canon of arena-worthy anthems. All That Remains’ discography is highlighted by success at Active Rock including radio hits in the top 10 such as “Two Weeks,” “What If I Was Nothing,” and their first number one “Stand Up,”. Averaging 1 million monthly listeners on Spotify (an unprecedented feat for a metal band in any era), while cumulative sales eclipse 1 million albums worldwide. Not to mention, they’ve earned five consecutive Top 10 debuts on the Billboard Top Rock Albums Chart and four in the Top 5. Most recently, 2017’s Madness spawned the smash cover of Garth Brooks’ “The Thunder Rolls,” which trended on VEVO and generated 21 million plus total views and 8 million Spotify streams in under a year’s time. In addition to packing houses as a headliner, they’ve practically burned down festival stages everywhere from Rock on the Range to Welcome to Rockville.

In 2018, the quintet—Philip Labonte [lead vocals], Oli Herbert [lead guitar], Mike Martin [rhythm guitar], Jason Costa [drums], and Aaron Patrick [bass, backing vocals]—perfect their patented pummeling by wasting no time or energy at all on their ninth full-length album, Victim of the New Disease [Fearless Records].