Todd Woodbridge is one the most successful doubles players in tennis history, having won 22 grand slam titles. He anchors Nine’s coverage of Wimbledon, which starts tonight.

Fitz: Todd, we’ll get to the obvious – Wimbledon, McEnroe, what you taught Tiger Woods, whether you’ll welcome the Saudis, and all the rest. But first, last time we talked long and deep, you told me how as a little boy growing up in St George you gravitated to the tennis court because it was a place of solace.

TW: Well, it was certainly a place where I knew I could grow to be someone I wanted to be. But with an oldest brother, Greg, who was a heroin addict and dealer – and a father who was a cop – there was a lot of upset in the house. I always wanted something more and I quickly realised that tennis could give me that opportunity.

Fitz: Briefly sharing a court with you a couple of years ago, I came away from it realising that your skill was like a circus act, only achievable after thousands of hours of practice.

TW: Thousands. From the age of five, I would hit the ball against the fibro wall on our verandah, with Mum and Dad’s bedroom on the other side. And even after Dad had come back from police night shift and was trying to sleep, he never complained and just kept encouraging me to keep hitting it. Later, in my career, he would call some of my stuff my “verandah shots”, the ones that won big matches, with strong reflexes and always understanding where the racket head was.

Fitz: When did you realise you might well become one of the most successful doubles players that ever lived?

TW: Early. I made the Wimbledon (singles) semis in 1997, but obviously I found my niche in doubles. In singles, it sometimes felt like I was in a different weight division of boxing. I’d lose to Boris Becker who was six inches taller than me and in big moments I’d just get overpowered. But in doubles I came into my own, had space, could find the gap, and always had tactical awareness.

Fitz: Your great partner was Mark Woodforde – hence “the Woodies”. Did you two just have a powerful chemistry that made your whole bigger than the sum of your parts?

TW: Yes. The key to our success was we both had a really innate ability to lead at different times. When we needed some fire and energy I would deliver, and when we needed calmness and experience, Mark could bring that.

Fitz: In the course of winning 11 grand slam titles, 65 ATP events and Olympic gold together, you seemed very close but there was a recent reported rift in retirement. How long since you’ve called him and said “Mate, how are you?”

TW: [Pause] I saw him at the Australian Open, in January, but yes, we’ve taken different paths now. In 2005, I moved back to Australia. Tash and I wanted our kids to be brought up in the Australian environment, and if I’d stayed in America, I was going to be just one of another 1000 former tennis pros. Whereas in Australia, obviously due to the success of the Woodies, I was going to get that opportunity to move into media.

Fitz: Sure. But now – bearing in mind whatever you say will go no further than The Sun-Herald – did you and the other Woodie never raise voices on a particular issue, post-retirement?

TW: The one thing I always say is that no matter what happened in that relationship, neither of us would have been anything without each other, and that’s very important to remember.

Fitz: I recall you telling me that when you lived in a gated community in Florida with Tiger Woods in the 90s, you taught the poor bastard how to do your slice backhand. Surely quid pro quo ’twixt pros applies, and he taught you some unbelievable golf shot?

TW: [Laughs] I did have the privilege of getting on the range with him, but all he could say was, “Do it like I do it.” I wish!

Fitz: What sort of a guy is Woods? You were in his close coterie and often went on his private jet to various places?

MW: We like him very much. But to see him up close, you realise just what it must be like to live your life under a microscope, where everything you do is endlessly examined. I vividly remember going to big golf tournament down the road from our community, and he saw me and he looked and gave a little nod, but kept going. And that’s what his life was like out in public; he just couldn’t stop and talk to you. But four years ago, when I was hosting the opening day of the President’s Cup in Melbourne, he saw me, walked over, and gave me a massive hug. And that actually showed me where Tiger has come to now, within his maturity, because there was a time in his career where he just wouldn’t and couldn’t do that.

Fitz: Your own career has blossomed in the media. Early on, was there a Richie Benaud figure who took you aside and gave you precious tips?

TW: The best bit of advice came from an executive at Seven, which is where I started. He said, “Watch, listen, learn. And don’t forget to be yourself. Because if you try to be somebody else, you won’t be successful.”

Fitz: You’ve watched, listened, learnt and worked a lot in commentary with the great John McEnroe. What’s he like?

TW: [Rueful laugh.] Mac either likes you or doesn’t, and there’s no in-between with him. I think he likes me. I certainly like him.

Fitz: But let’s say you’re calling the Australian Open together, and the men’s final has just finished. Would McEnroe ever say, “Hey, Todd, why don’t you get Tash, and I’ll get Patti, and we’ll see you at that bar on Southbank”?

‘[I] felt a pressure on my chest. First like a thumb, then like a fist. I knew I was in trouble.’

Todd Woodbridge on his heart attack

TW: No, he’d more likely just go back to his hotel and then fly out. He’s very private. But he’s also really hard-working. He’s a nonstop workaholic, working for a couple of networks at a time, and absolutely gets every minute out of every day. He goes hard.

Fitz: I’ve worked with you, and you work hard. Is that why you had a heart attack?

TW: It was last September and it rattled me. I was in our downstairs gym, and felt a pressure on my chest. First like a thumb, then like a fist. I knew I was in trouble, and Tash got me to the hospital.

Fitz: I am sure the doctor said, “You’ve got a straightforward case of working alongside John McEnroe. We get it all the time.”

TW: [Laughs] I thought I was in good shape. And I still am, but the key that I’ve found out of this is you’ve got to look at your family history. And what happened to me happened at a similar age to both my parents. But at least they both made it to their late-80s, so I should have plenty of time left. I just have to manage it, monitor it, keep getting tests, and my cholesterol and stress levels down.

Fitz: Speaking of stress ... what about Nick Kyrgios? There seems such a gap between his genius talent and his actual results on the board.

Loading

TW: He is a genius talent. His first set in the Wimbledon final against Djokovic last year was one of the very best first sets of grand slam final that any player who’s making their debut in that space has ever done. But he hasn’t yet found a way to push through with the physical requirements that are necessary to be able to sustain that intensity and win a major in this modern game. The demands are greater than they’ve ever been because the points are longer. They’re played more laterally now, not forward. Twenty-five years ago, the points were shorter, a lot more like Kyrgios tennis.

Fitz: Kyrgios said this week he’d love the Saudis to get involved in tennis, and clearly had no moral qualms about it. What do you make of the Saudis? Are they sniffing about and will tennis hold its nose and take the blood money?

TW: [Long pause] Well, I don’t know the answer to that. I’ll probably hear more during Wimbledon. I don’t have a clear point of view at the moment on the rights and wrongs. But what I would say is that throughout my own career, I played in Moscow. I played in Beijing. I played in Johannesburg. I played in all places around the world that have had major political issues. Tennis has been there, and so it’ll be interesting to see how the Saudi thing plays out.

Fitz: Hopefully, by tennis refusing to sell out to filthy money! As to Wimbledon, is it fair to say that right now tennis has a problem, in that a slew of stars have recently departed, starting with Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and the Williams sisters? We’ve been blessed with these phenomenal players and right now they’re just a bit thin on the ground?

TW: Well, we already have Carlos Alcaraz, who’s world No.1, at the age of just 19. He’s a young kid that has the determination and spirit of Nadal, the movement of Djokovic, and the hands and all-court game of Federer.

Fitz: When you were that age, and getting all the plaudits, was there no resentment from your troubled brother Greg, that you’d become the golden child with the silver trophies?

TW: Look, he never came to my matches, or told anyone we were brothers. But a few years ago, when my son Beau sang on the Carols by Candlelight broadcast – doing an amazing job as an 11-year-old – Greg was unbelievably proud to tell his friends and neighbours that Beau was his nephew, and I was his brother. He was just thrilled. And so that was the first time Greg and I spoke about why he’d stayed away to that point. And he told me the truth. He was protecting me. He didn’t want any of his criminal mob hassling me for money, trying to get me to pay his debts, or seeking retribution on him by going at me. But he was finally at the point where he could talk about it, as could we, and get people who were in similar situations to understand that they weren’t on their own. He died shortly afterwards.

Fitz: Vale, Greg. Bravo your Mum and Dad. Go well, be of good heart, and thanks.

Quote of the week

“Ms Berejiklian engaged in serious corrupt conduct.” - The ICAC, in its report handed down on Thursday morning.

Joke of the week

I was administering an achievement test to David, a precocious six-year-old, and I began by asking him when his birthday was. “February 20,” was his quick response. Next I asked him, “What year, David?” He looked at me quizzically at first and then hit upon the obvious answer. “Every year,” he said.

Get the day’s breaking news, entertainment ideas and a long read to enjoy. Sign up to receive our Evening Edition newsletter here.