Today marks the 35th anniversary of the death of ‘El Santo’ (The Saint) , a Mexican wrestler, film actor, and folk hero who dazzled audiences from all around the world with his skills and talent. Rodolfo Guzmán Huerta was one of the most famous and iconic of all Mexican ‘luchadores’ and eventually became a legend and a symbol of justice for the common man through his appearance in comic books and movies.

Today we bring you a list of some of his most famous films to watch on a Friday night with your friends .

1- Santo contra los Zombies (1962) : Directed by Benito Alazraki , the movie tells the story of an evil scientist who has created a race of zombies and wrestling superhero ‘El Santo’ is the only one who can stop them. [SPOILER ALERT] Their weakness? Chili powder.

File photo/EL UNIVERSAL

2- Santo vs. las mujeres vampiro (1962) : A professor recruits a professional wrestler to protect his daughter from vampires intent on kidnapping her and marrying her to the devil.

File photo/EL UNIVERSAL

3- Santo y Blue Demon contra los Monstruos (1970) : To foil his plan for world domination, wrestling superheroes El Santo and Blue Demon battle the mad Dr. Halder and his army of reanimated monsters.

File photo/EL UNIVERSAL

4- Las momias de Guanajuato (1972) : The mummy of the legendary wrestler Satan awakes 100 years after his death and it’s up to El Santo, Blue Demon, and Mil Máscaras to stop him from taking revenge over the city of Guanajuato.

File photo/EL UNIVERSAL

5- Santo vs. las lobas (1976) : Luba, a she-wolf, comes back to life and sets out to destroy humanity. César Hacker, a man who fights werewolves on a daily basis, asks ‘El Santo’ for help.

File photo/EL UNIVERSAL

Drinking Game (Not for the faint of heart)

Wanna step it up a notch? Here is a list of rules for our Santo Drinking Game !

Take one shot every time...

a) El Santo goes to a priest for help

b) A child talks in a very squeaky voice

c) El Santo or Blue Demon give moral lessons to a random kid

d) Characters talk about God or “good morals”

c) There is a hi-tech machine that is actually a cardboard box packaged in aluminum foil

Take two shots every time…

a) A man of important social standing asks El Santo for help

b) A random citizen is killed and no one seems to care

c) “El Santo is the only one who can save us” cliché

d) A priest is in danger

dm