Frederick Heather immigrated to Canada from England in 1921, bringing only $250 in his pocket. His limited funds were overshadowed by his unlimited passion for the sport of cricket. Upon settling in East York, Heather quickly joined the St. George’s Cricket Club and won a Toronto Championship after only 18 months in his new country. This would be an indicator of what Heather would accomplish in Canadian cricket over the next 50 years until his death in 1976 in Toronto. While Heather is recognized by the Cricket Canada’s Hall of Fame, his recognition by Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame is long overdue, according to the cricket community.

Heather joined the Bell Telephone Company as an employee and was a regular player on their cricket team from 1926 until 1929. The Bell Telephones were Ontario Cricket Champions in 1926 and 1928 playing McGill both years for the John Ross Robertson Cup for the Canadian Championship. In 1926, Bell narrowly missed taking the title, losing by a single wicket! In 1928, inclement weather stopped play before the match was finished. McGill’s captain declared victory, as they were leading when play was halted, and the match was never fully completed. Consequently, the Bell Telephones boycotted the championship for 1929.

This controversial ending was a pivotal moment for Canadian cricket. Heather was in the process of beginning a legendary 40-year umpiring career and was a founding member and secretary-treasurer for the Toronto and District Umpire’s Association and the Umpire’s Control Board. Heather ran a school for cricket umpires and encouraged experienced and new umpires to attend. The Umpire’s School, of which Heather wrote the curriculum, would pose challenging questions each week for discussion, in addition to reviewing the Laws of Cricket.

Heather was also instrumental in starting a junior cricket league in Toronto, serving as a founding member of the Toronto Junior Cricket Board, resulting in the formation of 18 junior cricket clubs in 1931. Heather became the first secretary for the new Toronto Junior Cricket League, which provided cricket for 300 junior players each season. This league also gave Heather a place to put new umpires to gain experience before graduating to higher level matches.

When Canadian cricket teams had international matches, it was usually Heather who was appointed to these assignments. Nationally, Heather also umpired the John Ross Robertson Cup matches to determine the Canadian Championship.

Heather has been recognized by Sport Ontario and is a member of both the United States Cricket Hall of Fame and Cricket Canada’s Hall of Fame. His autographed cricket bat from the 1920s and four game balls presented to him during his umpiring career will be prominently displayed at the Canadian Museum of Immigration at Pier 21 in 2015.

Cricket Canada has nominated Heather to Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame in the builder category. Despite cricket being Canada’s first national sport and first international sport victory, there is not a single cricketer recognized among 548 Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame honoured members.

Kevin Boller, Cricket Canada historian, says: “Frederick Heather’s exceptional contributions to Canadian cricket over five decades is worthy of induction to Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame.”