At this point in his long NBA career, Blake Griffin just isn’t the same high-flying dude he was a decade ago. But the Celtics hope Griffin can still bring value to a title-contending squad, which is why they signed him to a fully-guaranteed one-year deal.

The Celtics don’t need Griffin to be the All-NBA guy from years past, but they do need the 33-year-old veteran to shore up their front court depth amid some injury injuries. Danilo Gallinari is likely out for the season with a torn ACL, Robert Williams III is out for 8-to-12 weeks, and Luke Kornet will miss 1-2 weeks because of an ankle sprain.

All those injuries prompted the Celtics to sign Griffin. They’ll have to adjust their training camp roster as they’re at the max of 20 players, but there were multiple guys on non-guaranteed deals they can cut. That opens the door for Griffin to be a partial contributor during the season — and potentially win his first ring.

But how does Griffin fit on the Celtics?

Griffin should immediately slide in as a backup big option for interim coach Joe Mazzulla’s squad. Griffin will likely be behind Grant Williams in a similar role, but could see the court on occasional nights. He’s not going to be throwing down dunks with regularity anymore, but he did mature his game over the years. In his most recent All-NBA season for the Pistons, Griffin played like a point forward who also shot 3-pointers.

That’s perhaps where Griffin will be able to contribute the most for the Celtics. Griffin could provide some playmaking in a pinch and the C’s could use him from the high post. If Griffin can also knock down some open 3-pointers, that should help the Celtics stretch the floor. It’s a similar concept to when Derrick White was traded to Boston: The quality of looks of their 3-pointers should go up considering the other weapons.

Defensively, Griffin’s going to be a huge question mark when he’s on the court. The Celtics took advantage of that last playoffs against the Nets, when Jaylen Brown continually went at Griffin. That’s going to be an issue come the playoffs, but the C’s need some regular season production first. Boston can also hide Griffin defensively when he is on the court considering its personnel, though that’s more a regular season tactic.

It also never hurts to add another NBA veteran to a locker room feeling the external pressure. With Ime Udoka suspended for the season, the Celtics are still working through the unknown. Griffin isn’t going to be the go-to leader in the locker room — the C’s already have their own set hierarchy — but another steady presence should help out the younger players.

Griffin played in 56 games (24 starts) in Brooklyn last season, averaging 6.4 points, 4.1 rebounds and 1.9 assists per game. He didn’t get too many minutes against the Celtics until coach Steve Nash needed to shake things up. The Celtics don’t need Griffin to play a huge role on their team. If anything, if Griffin plays heavy minutes for Boston, that likely means there have been even more injuries on the roster.

All in all, the Celtics were initially rumored to be linked to Carmelo Anthony as a scoring big option. But they elected to go a different route in Griffin, signing him a few days into camp. How Griffin exactly fits with the team still remains to be seen, but the C’s at least have more options when it comes to the front court.