The strangest news in the lead-up to the N.B.A. playoffs was that Steve Blake, backup point guard for the Los Angeles Lakers, has chicken pox. This is notable, first, because Blake is thirty-one, but even more so because three of his team’s best players—including Kobe Bryant—have never had it.

The prospect, however unlikely, of the most dominant team of the past ten years being downed by a childhood disease was a fitting cap to a weekend that suggested a changing of the guard. A decade that had been dominated by half-court players seemed to be giving way this season, ever so slightly, to an era of fast breaks and darting point guards. And over the weekend, the Lakers, the Spurs, and the Magic, royalty of the last half-decade, each dropped Game Ones to members of the N.B.A.’s Young Turks: athletic, up-tempo teams with names like the Hornets, the Grizzlies, and the Thunder.

By rights, the Boston Celtics should have been on the list of fallen bluebloods, and the newly rejuvenated New York Knicks on the list of inspired upstarts. But, on Sunday night, the young, exciting members of this year’s Knicks played in a later game, as members of the Denver Nuggets, where they were traded earlier this season for Carmelo Anthony.

Anthony, as pure a scorer as exists in professional basketball, spent much of Sunday night standing in place, waiting for the ball, facing his defender once he received it, and, having seemingly considered no other options, shooting and missing a guarded, long-distance jump shot. For much of the game, Amare Stoudamire did the same thing, making a few more, but not many. Anthony is by a wide margin the best player in this series, and Stoudamire might be the second, but the team missed anything resembling the quick-hitting playmaking of Derrick Rose (Bulls), Chris Paul (Hornets), or Russell Westbrook (Thunder), leaders of the new generation.

For me, the Knicks game was summed up when, at the one-minute mark, with the game tied, Ronny Turiaf—who, with four blocked shots, had been the most exciting Knick to watch for much of the night—scrambled for an offensive rebound and passed the ball to Anthony on the wing. Turiaf then watched as his superstar teammate immediately took yet another guarded, long-distance jump shot—and again, missed. A few minutes later, after Anthony missed another long, guarded jump shot, TNT switched games in time to watch Wilson Chandler, Danilo Gallinari, and, in reserve, Raymond Felton, all former Knicks now with the Nuggets, leap to a 16-6 lead with a barrage of fast breaks, slashing drives, and quick passes—moves seemingly outside the arsenal of the Anthony-led squad they left behind.