On March 29, 1982, Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau presented Warren Beatty with an Oscar for Best Director for his epic film Reds, about the life of the journalist John Reed. It was Beatty’s first Academy Award, after 11 nominations that included recognition for him as an actor, director, screenwriter and producer.

He might have been forgiven some triumphalism. After all, he had beaten industry veterans Louis Malle and Mark Rydell and the boy wonder Steven Spielberg, as well as the hotly tipped debutante Hugh Hudson, riding high with Chariots of Fire. But during his speech, Beatty frowned professorially, nervously thanked then-girlfriend Diane Keaton and co-star Jack Nicholson – “I know that you’re enjoying my being up here almost as much as I’m being here” – and modestly acknowledged that “I get good people”.

It was a political and measured speech, but one tinged with understandable irritation. His film had lost most of the 12 awards that it was nominated for, most notably Best Original Screenplay, to Chariots of Fire, whose screenwriter Colin Welland – himself a card-carrying socialist – had triumphantly whooped “The British are coming!” Reds had only won two others: Best Supporting Actress for Maureen Stapleton, for her performance as the anarchist Emma Goldman, and Best Cinematography for Vittorio Storaro.

Beatty alluded to behind-the-scenes difficulty when thanking his producers, but managed to make a joke out of it. “No matter how much we would have liked to strangle each other from time to time, I think that your decision, taken in the great capitalistic tower of Gulf & Western, to finance a three-and-a-half-hour romance [that] attempts to reveal… something of the beginnings of American socialism and American communism… reflects not only credit upon you, but credit upon Hollywood, and the movie business.”

At the mention of “socialism”, a single handclap can be heard. Beatty soon went on to acknowledge “the freedom of expression that we have in our American society”, and “the lack of censorship that we have from the government, or the people who put up the money”.

Forty years after its initial release, Reds remains its director’s magnum opus. A film of astonishing ambition and scope, as well as length – three-and-a-quarter hours – it is virtually unique in Hollywood history as a serious attempt to analyse Left-wing politics from a sympathetic perspective. A decade before, Beatty had established himself as a serious player in the arena of Democratic political activism, having supported the presidential campaign of the anti-war candidate George McGovern in 1972. (That McGovern was soundly defeated by the incumbent Richard Nixon was of little consequence, although Nixon’s original 1968 election offered a mordant backdrop to Beatty’s 1975 sex comedy Shampoo.)

Rumours that Beatty himself might be interested in standing for the Presidency – notwithstanding a notoriously hectic romantic life – were rife throughout the 1970s, but the filmmaker sought another means of expressing his political opinions. He would make, effectively, the anti-Dr Zhivago, which had painted the Russian Revolution as a tragedy and the rise of communism as a menace to free thought throughout the country.

By telling the story of the Left-wing writer John Reed, author of the seminal 1919 book Ten Days That Shook The World, and his love affair with the journalist Louise Bryant, Beatty would thereby give an accessible human dimension to what might otherwise be a forbiddingly dense account of the rise of American communism during and after World War One.

It was ambitious, to say the least. But Beatty was riding high after the tremendous success of both Shampoo and his fantastical comedy Heaven Can Wait, a remake of the 1940s classic Here Comes Mr Jordan. Not only was it nominated for nine Oscars – it won one, for Best Art Direction – but it was a massive box office success, making nearly $100 million on a budget of $6 million.

Its grateful production company Paramount Pictures was therefore keen to work with the wunderkind once again, and his choice of picture was Reds. One imagines that there were a few deep breaths taken when granting Beatty the $20 million budget he initially asked for – Chariots of Fire, another period piece, cost a quarter of that – but he was the hottest property in Hollywood. Even his pitch didn’t deter them – “This is an iffy project about a communist hero who dies in the end. It may be a very dodgy commercial subject. If you say no, there’s no hard feelings, and I’ll take it somewhere else.” Beatty was allowed to do what he wanted.

One man who was not thanked when the filmmaker took to the stage at the Oscars was the credited co-screenwriter Trevor Griffiths. He and Beatty had not had a happy collaboration. Griffiths was a committed Marxist whose angry, political plays The Party and Comedians stemmed from his commitment to “analysing Marxism and [condemning] Stalinism without discrediting socialism in the eyes of the world”. He had written some television drama, and stated that “I simply cannot understand socialist playwrights who do not devote most of their time to television… if for every Sweeney that went out, a Bill Brand went out, there would be a real struggle for the popular imagination… people would be free to make liberating choices about where reality lies.”

Yet Griffiths had never worked on a film before, let alone a mega-budgeted epic. Understandably wary of what working with Beatty might involve, he said “I’m a historian, a playwright. You’re a Hollywood movie star. What can you tell me about how to tell the story of John Reed?” Beatty’s friend Jeremy Pisker subsequently commented to Vanity Fair magazine that “I couldn’t imagine two less likely people to have an effective collaboration.”

However, Beatty had not seduced countless women without a peerless charm, and Griffiths found himself similarly lured into his web. As the latter put it: “Warren spoke as if he were the reincarnation of Jack Reed… Reed was a golden boy. I would get that sense as we talked that Warren had been born to play him. Or Jack Reed had been born so that at a later moment Warren could play him.”

The two men, unfortunately, quarrelled bitterly from the outset. Beatty was driven to say, “What kind of an idiot is this guy Trevor Griffiths? It must be some sort of English thing”, over what he perceived as the humourless and anti-romantic early drafts that his screenwriter produced. They worked on the script in 1978 at the Carlyle Hotel in New York, an experience that Griffiths described as “a pretty unpleasant four and a half months… really painful. I was sitting in a room for six or eight hours a day with a guy that I was increasingly growing to detest, and who was increasingly growing to detest me. That’s the Sartrean version of hell.”

Beatty took pride in breaking his collaborators by imposing his will, treating script conferences as a form of no-holds-barred gladiatorial combat. This had worked well with his Shampoo and Heaven Can Wait co-writer Buck Henry, and would lead to passionate and productive dealings with veteran screenwriters Robert Towne and Elaine May on Reds, but Griffiths was unimpressed. When he fled New York, Beatty followed him back to London for what the writer called “messy, vile, foulmouthed” script conferences in a “poisonous and terrible” atmosphere.

Eventually, after a torrid disagreement about an action scene set on a train, Beatty announced “in a movie, one bullet is worth a thousand words”. Griffiths responded “That’s terrible, because I’m a writer, and all I’ve got are words.” The argument proved the final straw in their working relationship. Griffiths recalled that “Beatty exploded, and I exploded again and walked out of the room, packed my bag and left. And never saw him again.”

The screenplay (of which Griffiths estimated “about 45 per cent” made it into the finished film) was then rewritten by Towne and May, after which Beatty began the casting process. He wished to cast Keaton as Bryant, believing that their off-screen chemistry would translate into the on-screen relationship between Reed and Bryant. As he announced to the press, “If Diane Keaton had not made Reds, I don’t know what I would have done.”

In the key role of the playwright Eugene O’Neill, who falls hopelessly in love with Bryant, Beatty cast Nicholson, on the grounds that, as his co-star said, “There is only one actor who could convincingly seduce Diane Keaton away from you —me!” Nicholson initially turned up shambling and overweight, fresh from filming Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining, but soon managed to return to his usual suave self in time for production. He was nominated for an Oscar for his brilliant performance – in many regards, the highlight of the film – but lost to John Gielgud’s impeccable comic timing in Arthur.

The supporting cast was full of major American actors including Paul Sorvino, Stapleton and, in a striking two-scene cameo as a magazine editor, Gene Hackman. For his part, Hackman found Beatty a hard taskmaster, demanding endless takes, and he subsequently said “I think I disappointed him… the fact that I hadn’t solved the character well enough to get it even close was never brought up.” He subsequently refused to take a part in Beatty’s troubled film Dick Tracy, saying “I love you, Warren, but I just can’t do it.” (Beatty, when asked about this much later, denied it.)

Once the film began shooting in August 1979, the budget soon spiralled, along with the shooting schedule. “Do it again” became the most commonly used phrase on set, along with Beatty refusing to call “Cut” at the end of a take, as was customary. Instead, he kept rolling cameras almost indefinitely, occasionally resulting in burning out the camera motors as a result.

Some of the actors thrived on the macho, competitive atmosphere that this engendered. Sorvino said, “It was a point of pride with me to do as many [takes] as Warren wanted. It was like ‘Yeah? You want another one? How about 10 more? How about 20 more?’”

Others did not. When Stapleton was asked for an 81st take, she angrily said “Are you out of your f---ing mind?” A smiling Beatty responded, “I might be, darling, but just do it again anyway.” And Nicholson – who had recently graduated from the Stanley Kubrick academy of punishing shooting schedules – was so frustrated during one scene that he had with Keaton that he broke down, shouting “Just tell me what the f--- you want and I’ll do it!”

As the production wore on, Paramount became increasingly concerned that they had backed a megaflop. Similar rumours had circulated about Michael Cimino’s epic Heaven’s Gate, which ended up ruining United Artists, and Reds’ budget crept up to $33.5 million, an astonishing amount for any film of its time (Raiders of the Lost Ark had cost $20 million), let alone one that even Beatty admitted was uncommercial.

And the relationship between the director and Keaton was strained by the tumultuous production schedule; the executive producer Simon Relph called Beatty “completely obsessive, relentless” and they would separate shortly after the film finished production. Beatty’s status as the self-described “biggest narcissist in Hollywood” came to the fore at points. An assistant editor remembered the director demanding that his best take of a scene be omitted because his crow’s feet were visible around his eyes, saying “It’s not quite the tone I want. Find something else.”

When Reds was eventually finished, an exhausted Beatty declined to publicise it – perhaps fearful that questions about his frayed relationship with Keaton would dominate – and a nervous Paramount engaged in a complex financial gamble that offset the film’s vast cost against the dollar-pound exchange rate. Yet the early signs were promising. Beatty, knowing that conservatives as well as liberals would have to see the film for it to make any kind of profit, screened it for President Reagan at the White House, and the one-time film actor gave it his approval, although he regretted the absence of a happy ending.

Beatty was too tactful to ask whether this would have connoted Reed living or communism being defeated. And the reviews were laudatory. The New York Times called it “extraordinary” and “the best romantic adventure since David Lean’s Lawrence of Arabia”, and Roger Ebert, probably America’s best-known critic, praised it as “the thinking man’s Dr Zhivago, told from the other side, of course”.

Upon its release, box office was decent but unspectacular – Beatty later said that the film made “a little money” – but the fear of a vast flop was avoided, not least because Paramount’s dollar-rate gamble paid off. Yet its competition with Chariots of Fire at the Oscars felt like a personal as well as professional battle for its maker. Chariots’ producer David Puttnam gave an interview in which he incredulously said “it is a desperately damaging thing for [Beatty] to have indulged himself as he has”, and called Paramount’s funding the film “despicable”. For good measure, Puttnam added that “Beatty should be spanked in public”.

Thus, when Puttnam and Beatty faced off against each other for Best Film that night in 1982, it was no wonder that Beatty wore the same frown that he had displayed when winning Best Director a few moments before. He knew that Reds was a demanding passion project about an unfashionable topic, and that Chariots’ simpler, more crowd-pleasing narrative had captured both public and Academy voters’ imagination in a way that his picture had not. And his animosity towards Puttnam remained. Beatty, as Griffiths had discovered, did not like being contradicted or insulted.

The veteran actress Loretta Young announced the result: Chariots of Fire had won. The look on Beatty’s face was a masterpiece of contained emotion, disappointment and near-anger. He turned to Keaton and Nicholson, and seemed to shrug, “Oh well”. But he did not applaud, or show any signs of being a good loser.

Subsequent Beatty films such as Love Affair, Town & Country and his most recent picture, Rules Don’t Apply, have all been enormous flops, suggesting that Beatty’s heyday has passed. He turned down supporting roles in such films as Tarantino’s Kill Bill and Paul Thomas Anderson’s Boogie Nights: his filmography is notably lacking in collaborations with major auteur directors.

Reds, in all its complex, demanding glory, remains his crowning achievement. It is proof that, sometimes, a chaotic production, intense relationships (personal and professional) with the leading actors and troubled collaborative partnerships can result in something distinctive and unrepeatable. And that, surely, is worth all the Oscars in the world.