Rock Star Death Notices - July 2008

(4904) Page Views

the Legend, Bo Diddley

Farlan Myers (Farlan I. Myers) - Died May 27 at age 89 in Los Angeles, CA. He was a composer and musician . He wrote the theme song for TV’s, Our Miss Brooks and music for the film, The Incredible Flight Of The Snow Geese and jingles for Ford Motors and Hunt Foods.

Jerry Cole (Jerald Edward Kolbrak) - Died May 28 at age 68 in Corona, CA of a heart attack. He was born in Green Bay, WI. He was a guitarist and singer. He was also a member of The Champs. They did, “Tequila.” He worked with The Beach Boys, Gene Vincent, B.B. King, The Byrds, Roger McGuinn, Frank Sinatra, Nancy Sinatra, Lee Hazlewood, Ricky Nelson, Paul Revere And The Raiders, Elvis Presley and Roger Miller. He was inducted into the Rockabilly Hall Of Fame.

Danny Moss (Dennis Moss) - Died May 28 at age 80 in Perth, Western Australia. He was a saxophonist. He worked with The Vic Lewis Orchestra, Basil Kirchin, Tommy Sampson, Ted Heath, The Oscar Rabin Band, The Squadronaires, Tony Bennett, Ella Fitzgerald, Bing Crosby, Sarah Vaughan, Rosemary Clooney, Humphrey Lyttelton, John Dankworth and The Pizza Express All-Stars. He was married to singer, Jeanie Lambe.

Barry Dunnery (aka Baz) - Died May 29 at age 56 from cancer. He was a guitarist and a member of Jug, Hot Spring Water which was renamed Taurus and then renamed Heavy Hand and finally renamed Necromandus and Violinski. They did, “Clog Dance.”

Charlie Newman (Charles S. Newman) - Died May 29 at age 80 in Hattiesburg. He was a drummer and a member of The Modernists.

Steve Rhodes (Stephen Bankole Omodele Rhodes) (aka Uncle Steve) - Died May 29 at age 82 in London, England. He was a composer, conductor, producer and bassist. He led The Steve Rhodes Orchestra and Steve Rhodes’ Voices. He also worked with The Oxford University Band Beats.

Sammy Needle (Samuel Odeh) - Died May 29 in Lagos, Nigeria of an illness. He was a singer and producer. He owned The Sammy Needle Rhythm and Culture (SNRC) label.

Campbell Burnap (Campbell Crichton Mackinnon Burnap) (aka Mr. Charm) - Died May 30 at age 68 in London, England. He was a trombonist, singer and broadcaster. He worked with Terry Lightfoot, Monty Sunshine, Alan Elsdon, Ian Armit, The Midnite Follies Orchestra, Pat Halcox’s All Stars, Pete Allen, Acker Bilk and Keith Smith.

Nat Temple (Nathan Temple) - Died May 30 at age 94. He was a bandleader and clarinetist. He led The Club Royal Orchestra. They did, “Nattering Around.” He worked with Sam Costa, Syd Roy’s RKOlians, Joe Daniels, Hoagy Carmichael, Eartha Kitt, Matt Munro, Mel Torme and Harry Roy.

Hugh Jarrett (aka Big Hugh Baby) - Died May 31 at age 78 from injuries from a car accident. He was a singer and DJ. He was a member of Elvis Presley’s back up quartet, The Jordanaires (“Don’t Be Cruel”) He was inducted into the Country Music Hall Of Fame, the Gospel Music Hall Of Fame and Georgia Music Hall Of Fame.

Michael Kahan - Died June 1 at age 39. He was stabbed. He played violin and was half of the duo Shta’im Lecha’im renamed The Klezmer Gourmets.

Alton Kelley - Died June 1 at age 67 due to complications from a long illness. He was an artist. He created posters, album covers and tour logos for The Grateful Dead, Journey, Steve Miller, The Beatles, Jerry Garcia, Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix. He also created posters for concerts at The Fillmore Auditorium, Winterland arena, The Fillmore West and The Avalon Ballroom. He collaborated with Stanley Mouse.

James Steinhafel - Died June 2 at age 90 from complications of a bladder infection. He played trumpet and drums. He was a member of The Four Aces.

Bo Diddley (Otha Ellas Bates) (Ellas McDaniel) - the Originator - Died June 2 at age 79 from heart failure in Archer, FL. He was a guitarist, songwriter and singer. He did, “Who Do You Love?, “I’m A Man” and “Bo Diddley.” He was a member of The Hipsters and Langley Avenue Jive Cats. He was inducted into the Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame, the Mississippi Musicians Hall Of Fame, the Washington Area Music Association’s Hall Of Fame, the Blues Foundation’s Blues Hall Of Fame, the Blues Hall Of Fame and the North Florida Music Association’s Hall Of Fame.

Gerry Holley - Died June 2 at age 66 due to an illness in Vernon, British Columbia. He was singer. He was a member of Roger And The Playboys. They did, “Heart” and “Too Blind To See.” He worked with The Pete Porter Orchette.

Alfred Nokwe (Alfred D. Nokwe) - Died June 2 at age 73 in KwaMashu, Durban, South Africa. He was drummer, singer, guitarist and manager. He was a member of The Rockets, The Three Aces, The Black Cowboys and Thomas Ndaba’s Swingsters Band. He was husband of singer, Patty Masuku and father of singers, Tu Nokwe and Marilyn Nokwe and musician, Papi Nokwe.

Veeva Ellen Daniels Hamblen (aka My Suzy) - Died June 2 in Santa Clarita of congestive heart failure. She was born 1907 in Gage, OK. She was a singer and songwriter. She was a member of The Cowboy Church Sunday School. They did, “Open Up Your Heart (And Let The Sunshine In).” She was married to singer and songwriter, Stuart Hamblen.

Pecos Kanvas (Hernan Jesus Gonzalez) - Died June 2 at age 54 of a heart attack. He was a singer. He did, “Tu Carino Se Me Va”, “Amame” and “Maldito Orgullo.” He was a member of Hierbas and Escena.

Bo Roberts (Boyd Gorman Roberts) - Died June 3 at age 39 of an illness in Mobile. He was a singer, songwriter and keyboardist. He was a member of The Port City Allstars.

Jose Antonio Ramos - Died June 4 at age 38 in a recording studio. He was a timple and guitar player. He worked with Trio Simple, The Chieftains, Carlos Nunez, Kepa Junkera, Pedro Guerra, Orquesta Filarmonica de Gran Canaria, Bela Fleck & The Flecktones, Jorge Pardo and Juan Manuel Canizares.

Bill Finegan (William J. Finegan) - Died June 4 at age 91. He was a bandleader, pianist, arranger and composer. He worked for Glenn Miller, Tommy Dorsey and Mel Lewis’s orchestra. He was a member of The Sauter-Finegan Orchestra. They did, “Doodletown Fifers.”

Peter Kapetan (Peter Murray Kapetan) - Died June 4 at age 51. He was a singer, dancer and actor. He appeared in Broadway’s, The Wedding Singer and Got To Go Disco and Off-Broadway’s, Camelot with Richard Burton.

Marlys A. Nelson - Died June 6 at age 86 of an illness. Pianist and a was a member of The Harris Nelson Family who appeared on TV’s, Hollywood Palace and a Walt Disney production.

Bill Coday - Died June 7 at age 66 of a stroke in Memphis, Tennessee. He was a singer. He did, “Get Your Lies Straight” and “When You Find A Fool, Bump His Head.”

Adam Thomas - Died June 7 at age 22 in Mucla, Turkey. He fell or jumped from a hotel balcony. He was a guitarist, drummer and singer. He was a member of The Big Shiny Cave.

Ross Kinnear - Died June 7 at age 20 in Berlin. He fell from the roof of a building. He was a bassist and a member of Go Vegas, Suicidal Pussycat, The October Effect and Co: Pilot Down.

Saban Bajramovic - King of Roma music - Died June 8 at age 72 of a heart attack in Nis, Croatia. He was a singer, composer, poet and actor . He did, “Maruska” and “Kamerav.” He led Crna Mamba and worked with Cubismo.

Prince Kupi - Died June 8 at age 36 near Heidelberg, Johannesburg. He was in a car accident that also took the life of his wife actress, Zandile Ngcobo. He was a singer and guitarist. He did, “Livin’ In Da Pocket ” and “Song For Bheki.” He led Ba’Agisane. He worked with Hugh Masekela and Judith Sephuma.

Moto Silumo (Obed Siluma) (aka Tiny) - Died June 9 at age 42 in Joubert Park, Joburg. He was shot. He was a musician and actor. He worked with his cousin, Lucky Dube.

Diane Muise - Died June 9 at age 59, four days after a heart bypass operation. She was a singer and a member of The Majestic Singers.

Jim Hinde - Died June 9 at age 56 of a heart attack in West Seattle. He was a singer, songwriter and guitarist. He did, “Frank, Dennis And Me” and “Raise Your Glass, Raise Your Voice.”

Colin Lumsdale - Died in June at age 51 of a lung embolism in a hospital a week after a car accident in South Africa. He was a singer and a member of Radiation.

Richard Mikuls - Died June 9 at age 56 of a heart attack in Palm Desert. He was a guitarist. He worked with Rufus, Lee Ritenour, Donny Hathaway, Freddie Hubbard, BB King, Unplugged, Ike & Tina Turner, James Moody, Stan Getz, Chuck Berry, Sly Stone, Quincy Jones, Ray Charles, Little Richard, Jerry Lee Lewis, The Pointer Sisters, Bobby Bradford, Daryl Coley and Peter Tork And Shoe Suede Blues.

Nick Sanderson - Died June 9 at age 47 of lung cancer (Rock) He was 47 years old. He was a drummer and singer. He worked with Clock DVA, The Gun Club, Earl Brutus and Freeheat.

Red Shea (Laurice Milton Shea) - Died June 10 at age 70 of pancreatic cancer in Aurora, Ont., Canada. He was a guitarist and a member of The Red And Les Trio. He worked with The Good Brothers, Ian & Sylvia Tyson, Gordon Lightfoot and Great Speckled Bird. He was a regular on TV’s, The Tommy Hunter Show.

Raymond Sambolin - Died June 10 at age 81 due to injuries he suffered in a fire at his home in East Meadow, NY. He played saxophone, trumpet, mandolin and flute. He worked with Kako y su Combo, Tito Puente, Ray Barretto and Mongo Santamaria.

Alf Coward (Alfred Reginald Coward) - Died June 10 due to illness in Mississauga, Ont., Canada. He was a pianist and composer. He led The Alf Coward Band and starred in TV’s, The Alf Coward Show.

Ernest Booth Watmough - Died June 10 at age 93. He played piano, clarinet and saxophone. He led The Melody Booth Orchestra. He worked with Ozzie Nelson.

Paul Smith (aka Smithy) - Died June 10 at age 42 in Attleborough, Nuneaton. He was a guitarist and a member of Jesus Deluxe, Lazy Eye and Eusebio.

Kirby Small (aka Chop Chop) - Died June 10 and was born in Washington D.C. He was a guitarist, singer, arranger and composer. He worked with The Three Degrees, Martha And The Vandellas, Harry Belafonte, The Hot Tamales, Ebony Band, EBO 2, Clear Image, The Thrusters, The Sidewinders and Ruby And The Romantics.

Robby Stamps (Robert Stamps) - Died June 11 at age 57 due to complications from pneumonia in Tallahassee, FL. He played keyboards. He wrote, “If Only You Were Mine.” He was wounded during the 1970 shootings at Kent State University by the National Guard.

Omondi Tonny (Anthony Omondi Mumbo) - Died June 11 due to injuries from a car accident. He was born 1970 in Siaya District. He was a singer, drummer and guitarist. He did, “Dunia ni ya Mungu” and “Suzzy Suzanna.”

Danny Davis (George Nolan) - Died June 12 at age 83 of a heart attack in Nashville, TN. He was a bandleader, trumpet player, singer and producer. He did, “The Object Of My Affection.” He led The Nashville Brass. They did instrumental versions of, “Wabash Cannonball” and “Columbus Stockade Blues.” He worked with Gene Krupa, Bob Crosby and Les Brown. He produced Connie Francis, Willie Nelson, Dottie West, Don Gibson and Waylon Jennings.

Leon Austin (Leon Rhodes Austin) (aka The Burner) - Died June 12 at age 74 from medical complications in Augusta. He sang and played piano. He led Leon Austin And The Buicks. He worked with The Mello-Tones, The Swanee Juniors, Pastor James Cleveland, The Caravans, Sister Pope And The Pearly Gates and James Brown. He also was James Brown’s hair stylist.

John T. Smith (aka J.T.) - Died June 12 at age 51 due to an illness. He was a pianist and music director. He worked on the shows, “Stardust” and off broadway’s, “Applause.” He was a voice coach for Liza Minnelli, Lorna Luft, Kaye Ballard, Marni Nixon, Faith Prince and Leslie Uggams.

Ian Robinson - Died June 12 at age 81 due to diabetes complications in Toronto, Canada. He was a saxophonist and led The Sax Family Robinson Band and The Ian Robinson Trio.

Jack Rootoo (Rick Galvin) (Richard J. Galvin) - Died June 13 at age 52 from cancer of the esophagus in Abington, MA. He was a guitarist. He was a member of Lou Miami & The Kozmetix. They did, ” Ghosts” and ” Dance With Death.” He worked with Girl On Top. They did, “Sue Is Sane” and “Protect Yourself.”

Michael Murphy (aka Murph) - Died June 13 at age 31. He was hit by a van while retrieving his dog that had run into traffic. He played bass, accordion and mandolin and was a singer and songwriter. He worked with The Larkin And Moran Brothers band, Joe V, Leave and Week Back.

Traci Michaelz - Died June 13 in Ft. Worth, Texas. He was born in 1974. He was a drummer and singer. He was a member of The Peppermint Creeps. They did, “Rock N Roll Love Letter” and “Bodies.”

Titi Winterstein - Died June 13 from an illness and born in 1956. Violinist who led The Titi Winterstein Quintett. They did, “Lime House Blues” and “Milko.” Also worked with Hansche Weiss.

Bill Koggenhop - Died June 13 at age 55 of pancreatic cancer in Commerce Township. He was a bassist. He worked with Kog’s Cats and Atlantez.

Jimmy Ekho (aka Arctic Elvis) - Died in June at age 48 of respiratory problems. He was a singer and guitarist. He did, “Guti.”

Charles L. White - Died June 14 at age 78 of pulmonary fibrosis. He was a singer and a member of The Orangemen.

Jamelao (Jose Bispo Clementino dos Santos) - Died June 14 at age 95 of multiple organ failure in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. He sang and played the cavaquinho and tamborim . He did, “Mora No Assunto” and “Matriz ou Filial.” He worked with Severino Araujo’s Orquestra Tabajara.

Esbjorn Svensson (Bror Fredrik Esbjorn Svensson) - Died June 14 at age 44 from a scuba diving accident near Stockholm, Sweden. Pianist who led The Esojorn Svensson Trio (E.S.T).

John D’Angiolini (aka Johnny De Lange) - Died June 14 at age 102! He played guitar and banjo. He worked with The Ferko String Band and The Hegeman String Band.

Tom Mooney (Michael Mooney) - Died June 15 at age 64 of a heart attack in Sherman Oaks, CA. He was a tour manager. He worked for Neil Diamond, Bob Dylan, Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, The Rolling Stones, Luis Miguel and Rod Stewart.

Gift Fumulani - Died June 18 at age 26 of tuberculosis in Blantyre. He was a musician. He did, “Tiye Kwathu.”

Junior Thomas (Cecil Roy Thomas Jr.) - Died June 18 of a heart attack. He was born 1952 in Chickasaw, Alabama. He was a singer and harmonica player. He led Junior Thomas & The Automatics. They did, “Milkin’ A Cow” and “Red Light’s On.” He was a member of The Blues Cruise. He worked with Uncle Ben Perry and John Anthony.

James M. McKinney Jr. - Died June 18 at age 70 of a heart attack. He played saxophone and keyboards and was a singer. He performed as a one man band known as Mambo Jim.

Matt Butler (Matthew Butler) - Died June 19 in Garland, TX. He was shot at age 28. He was a guitarist, drummer, pianist and recording engineer. He was the owner of the Zion Gate Records studio.

Steve Swan (Stephen Swan) - Died June 19 in Garland, TX. He was shot at age 26. He was sound engineer for the Zion Gate Records studio.

Tom Hunter - Died June 20 at age 61 of Jakob disease. He was a singer, guitarist and songwriter. He did, “Coloring Outside The Lines” and “The Lines on Your Face.”

Oliver De Coque (Oliver Sunday Akanite) - King of highlife music - Died June 20 of a cardiac arrest. He was a guitarist and singer . He did, “Funny Funny Identity” and “Ugbana.” He worked with Sunny Agaga And His Lucky Star Band, Jacob Oluwole And His Friendly Unity Band and Sule Agboola And His Moonlight Star Band.

Roy Boss (Roy Anthony Boss) - Died June 20 at age 51 of a motorcycle accident in Laconia, NH. He was a singer. He was a member of Shadow Canyon.

Carl Eilers (Carl G. Eilers) - Died June 20 at age 83 of a heart attack in River Forest, Il. He was the co-inventor of stereo FM radio and MTS stereo TV. He was inducted into the consumer Hall Of Fame.

Dr. Emmanuel Tumusiime (aka Tom Rush and The Old Fox) - Died June 21 at age 67 of pneumonia. He was a bassist, keyboardist and writer. He created the cartoon strip character, Ekanya and wrote the books, “Sons Of Dread” and “Soul Brother-In-Law.”

Chris Johnson (Christopher A. Johnson) - Died June 21 and was born in 1976. He was stabbed during a fight. He was a singer and a member of Useless Wooden Toys (UWT). They did, “Trash Pits” and “Drews Clues.”

Timo Ansah (Timothy Ansah) - Died June 22 at age 92. He was a musician. He composed, “Momoane Beyennzo” and “Dzin Pa Sen Ahonya.”

Charles J.L. Banks (Charles John Lincoln Banks) - Died June 22 at age 83 of stomach cancer in Mumford. He played saxophone and clarinet. He worked in the bands of Mercer Ellington and Gerald Wilson. He was inducted into the Duke Ellington Hall Of Fame.

Ira Tucker Sr. - Died June 24 at age 83 from complications from heart disease in Philadelphia, PA. He was a singer and producer. He was a member of The Royal Lights, The Gospel Carriers and The Dixie Hummingbirds. They did, “Christian Automobile” and their “Amazing Grace” has been inducted into The Grammy Hall Of Fame. He worked with Paul Simon (“Loves Me Like A Rock”) He was a Vocal Group Hall Of Fame Inductee and International Gospel Music Hall Of Fame And Museum Inductee.

Snuffy Miller (Len Miller) - Died June 24 in Nashville, TN. He was a drummer and singer. He worked with Bill Anderson’s Po’ Boys, Dottie West and Nat Stuckey.