CLEVELAND, Ohio — Mavis Staples baptized a State Theatre crowd in waters formed by the confluence of rivers of tears, love, joy, hope, determination, memories and music Friday night in the inaugural Rock Hall Honors concert.

Staples, a 1999 inductee in the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame as the gritty-voiced lead singer of the Staple Singers, shared her gift and her love with the fans with the kind of story you might expect from a woman who got her start singing in the churches of her Chicago hometown.

“I done talked to Pops about it,” said Staples, referring to her father, Roebuck Staples, who founded the group in the mid-1950s and died a year after their Rock Hall induction. “He’s walking around heaven talking to the angels and saying, ‘That’s my baby daughter!’

“He knows that I’m happy and he’s happy for me,” Staples said in the reimagined incarnation of the Rock Hall’s Music Masters. In this iteration, rather than the artist listening to others sing his or her songs and maybe taking the stage for a single tune, Staples was onstage the entire time. So, this was a Mavis Staples concert, in all its considerable glory.

And that made it beyond special, because Mavis Staples is beyond special.

Rock & Roll Hall of Famer Jackson Browne, who with Dawes’ frontman Taylor Goldsmith and singer-songwriter Valerie June (who wrote the title cut of Staples’ “Higher Note” album and performed the song with her Friday) was among the guests who shared the stage with Staples and her band for the show, pretty much put things in perspective:

“I’ve been listening to Mavis’ voice since I was about 15, so that makes it about 55 years now,” said Browne, who joined her for the title cut of her latest album, “We Get By.” “It’s meant the world to me.”

Browne, noting the impact Staples has had on music and the nation since breaking out with “Uncloudy Day” as a 13-year-old, praised the Rock Hall’s choice of their first Rock Hall Honors recipient.

“They could not be honoring a more deeply influential and powerful voice in American Music and I’m proud to be part of it,” he said.

At no time was that more clear than when Staples performed her family’s big hit from the Civil Rights era, “Freedom Highway.” It was a seminal performance in the show of a song that resonates even today. Or perhaps especially today.

“This is the first song we wrote when we joined the movement,” Staples said. “We’d sing this song in from morning to night, and we sang this song as we marched down the southern highways with Dr. Martin Luther King, down through Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia and all down through the South.

“One day, we were marching and singing and the police caught up with us,” Staples said. “They come to me asking questions and the main question that wanted to know was did we have papers to sing and march? We didn’t have no papers so they said, ‘you have to go to jail.’

“We went to jail that night, but we got back out and we started all over again,” she said.

Staples drew a solid round of applause and cheers when she took the current administration to task without mentioning the president by name.

“This is the ’60s,” she said of the request for papers. “We might need ’em today. Never know what that old guy gonna do.”

She followed that with “Change,” another Ben Harper song off her new album “We Get By,” that really sounds as if it could have been written in the 1960s. The night ended with Goldsmith, June and Browne joining her for a killer cover of her version of the Band’s “The Weight.”

Staples has always been about the message first, a premise that’s a part of her very DNA, courtesy of her late father, so it’s really no surprise that she continues her battle against those who would hold down others.

Some people today seem to forget the role that music played in the 1960s in the Civil Rights movement, the anti-war movement and the push to make America as great as it can be . . . for all its citizenry. The call to “shut up and sing” has become a cry heard all too often, and one that should not be heeded, else we surrender to complacency. It’s artists like Staples and her peers in the 1960s who taught us the lesson that should have been learned and remembered.

Staples’ performance Friday night and her refusal to back down then and now make her the ideal inaugural Rock Hall Honors recipient. So when she does songs like “For What It’s Worth,” it has special meaning, largely because she has, in her own words, been the one who followed through when she promised, "I’ll Take You There.”