Las Vegas, NV (January 11, 2010) -- Petroglyph today has announced the release of the Panzer General: Allied Assault board game and contest, immediately available through the official game website and retail partners.

"With the successful release of Panzer General: Allied Assault for Xbox Live Arcade, the board game enhances our presentation of the Panzer General series." said Chuck Kroegel, General Manager of Petroglyph. "We are delighted to present the board game and contest to everyone who shares our passion for World War II strategy games."

The board game retails for $60 USD in the top game and hobby stores everywhere. Those who pre-ordered through the official website will receive exclusive General Patton and General Rommel playing cards. Participation in the contest does not require purchase of the board game.

"Our community has eagerly anticipated the board game's arrival, ever since the Xbox Live Arcade version was released in October 2009. With the associated contest at Geekdo.com, we are celebrating the resurgence of the Panzer General legacy." said Mathew Anderson, Community Manager at Petroglyph.

To purchase the board game and participate in the contest, visit www.petroglyphgames.com

About Panzer General: Allied Assault

Panzer General: Allied Assault is an all-new single and multiplayer card game with versions for Xbox Live Arcade and as a board game. The game takes place during the last phase of World War II, from 1944 to 1945. Players can recreate actual battles such as Utah Beach, Operation Market Garden, and the infamous Battle of the Bulge. Build, customize and fight with your custom deck of 60 cards. For more information about Panzer General: Allied Assault, please visit www.panzergeneralalliedassault.com.

About Petroglyph

Founded in 2003, Petroglyph is an award-winning, independent game development studio located in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Petroglyph team specializes in the Real-Time Strategy (RTS) and Action-Strategy genres, leveraging the experience gained from developing original hit franchises for PC and consoles. Petroglyph uses their proprietary GLYPHX Online game engine, tools and technology to power their next-generation titles. For more information about Petroglyph, please visit www.petroglyphgames.com.

###

Company Contact:

Mathew Anderson

Community Manager

Petroglyph Games, Inc.

mathew_anderson@petroglyphgames.com