San Francisco, CA - Today, Ubisoft announced that Panzer General Allied Assault is available on Xbox LIVE Arcade, exclusively for the Xbox 360 video game and entertainment system from Microsoft.

Panzer General Allied Assault takes place during the last months of World War II, when the Allies were pushing the Germans back to their lands. In this unique turn based strategy game, with its own personalized deck of 60 cards the player recreates history by fighting this world conflict most famous battles: Utah Beach, Operation Market Garden and even the Battle of the Bulge.

Available for 800 Microsoft points, Panzer General Allied Assault features not only an immersive single player campaign but also an online player versus player mode.

About Panzer General:

After five successful releases under its belt, Panzer General is back with an all-new strategy game set to release exclusively on Xbox LIVE Arcade for the Xbox 360 video game and entertainment system from Microsoft. Ranked as one of the top 50 computer games of all time by PC Gamer magazine, the franchise has spawned a loyal following of dedicated fans eager for more turn-based strategy action.

About Petroglyph:

Founded in 2003, Petroglyph is an award-winning, independent game development studio located in Las Vegas, NV. The company is composed of industry veterans with a studio-wide average of over ten years in game development. The Petroglyph team specializes in the Real-Time Strategy (RTS) genre, leveraging the experience gained from developing original hit franchises for PC and consoles. Petroglyph uses their proprietary GLYPH game engine, tools and technology to power their next-generation titles. For more information about Petroglyph, visit www.petroglyphgames.com

About Ubisoft:

Ubisoft is a leading producer, publisher and distributor of interactive entertainment products worldwide and has grown considerably through a strong and diversified line-up of products and partnerships. Ubisoft has teams in 28 countries and distributes games in more than 55 countries around the globe. It is committed to delivering high-quality, cutting-edge video game titles to consumers. For the 2009-10 fiscal year, generated sales of 1.058 billion Euros. To learn more, please visit www.ubisoftgroup.com.