Las Vegas, NV (August 2, 2010) -- Today Petroglyph announced the immediate availability for the Heroes of Graxia TM deck-building card game, the Guardians of Graxia TM board game, and the Panzer General: Russian Assault TM board game, sequel to Panzer General: Allied Assault TM .

"With the success of Panzer General: Allied Assault board game, we are proud to present these new board and card games, independently developed and distributed by Petroglyph,” said Chuck Kroegel, General Manager. “Gen Con 2010 gives us an excellent opportunity to share with the public these three new games that continue Petroglyph's experience in board game development."

Petroglyph is celebrating the new releases with a contest at Geekdo.com which will run for two weeks, starting today. A special low rate for each game will also be exclusively available to Gen Con attendees at the company's Booth #2225. Chuck Kroegel and Daniel Kroegel, Lead Designers for the games, will be on-hand to showcase the new products.

"While Heroes of Graxia and Guardians of Graxia share an intriguing fantasy-strategy background, they are unique in one being a Deck-building Card Game and the other a Board Game.” said Daniel Kroegel, Lead Designer for Heroes of Graxia. "Eager to dominate several of your friends in a fast-paced card game? Heroes of Graxia is for you. Interested in the solo experience or going one-on-one on a full board game layout? Guardians of Graxia is for you."

All games will be available from top game and hobby stores in the coming days. Guardians of Graxia will also be available as a digital download PC title at around the same time.

To learn more, please visit http://www.petroglyphgames.com/boardgames.

About Heroes of Graxia and Guardians of Graxia

Heroes of Graxia deck-building card game features dynamic gameplay using cards in a fantasy-strategy based 2-6 player vs. player setting. The game contains miniatures and more than 240 unique unit, spell, and equipment cards. Since Heroes of Graxia is exclusively a card game, your main gameplay objective is to purchase cards to gain powerful units and abilities, and then use those to defeat your opponent.

Guardians of Graxia also features spell and unit cards, miniatures, and both single and player vs. player gameplay in a fantasy-based setting, but on a board layout similar to the Panzer General games.

About Panzer General: Russian Assault

Panzer General: Russian Assault is a sequel to the hit title Panzer General: Allied Assault and is a quick playing game of WWII tactical / operational combat using a unique blend of cards, miniatures, and a board game. The game will support both solo and 2-Player gameplay. New to the Panzer General game system with this sequel are 80 Plastic miniatures depicting tanks, infantry and artillery. There are also over 100 new Action cards, Units, and abilities. The game provides 12 solo and two-player scenarios depicting combat situations between the German and Russian forces in such battles as Stalingrad, Kursk, Moscow, Leningrad and many others.

About Ubisoft

Ubisoft ® is a leading producer, publisher and distributor of interactive entertainment products worldwide and has grown considerably through a strong and diversified line-up of products and partnerships. Ubisoft has teams in 28 countries and distributes games in more than 55 countries around the globe. It is committed to delivering high-quality, cutting-edge video game titles to consumers. Ubisoft generated sales of €1.058 billion for the 2008-09 fiscal year. To learn more, please visit http://www.ubisoftgroup.com.

About Petroglyph

Founded in 2003, Petroglyph is an award-winning, independent game development studio located in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Petroglyph team specializes in the Online Real-Time Strategy (RTS) and Action RPG genres, leveraging the experience gained from developing original hit franchises for PC and consoles. Petroglyph uses their proprietary GLYPHX ® Online game engine, tools and technology to power their next-generation titles.

For more information about Petroglyph, please visit http://www.petroglyphgames.com.

Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/petroglyphgames

Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/petroglyphgames

YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/petroglyphgames

Heroes of Graxia Stock Number: PTG20003 - MSRP: $34.99

Guardians of Graxia Stock Number: PTG20002 - MSRP: $60.00

Panzer General: Russian Assault Stock Number: PTG20004 - MSRP: $60.00

Panzer General: Allied Assault Stock Number: PTG 20001 - MSRP: $60.00

###

NOTE TO EDITORS:

Art assets for this press release are available at: http://www.flickr.com/photos/petroglyphgames. Additional assets are also available in high resolution; please contact graxia@petroglyphgames.com or panzer@petroglyphgames.com to request them.

Company Contact:

Mathew Anderson

Community Manager

Petroglyph Games, Inc.

mathew_anderson@petroglyphgames.com