SAN FRANCISCO - Today, Ubisoft announces it will be releasing Panzer General: Allied Assault on Xbox LIVE Arcade for the Xbox 360 video game and entertainment system from Microsoft in the Fall 2009. Developed by Petroglyph, Panzer General: Allied Assault is an all-new single and multiplayer digital card game that takes place during the last phase of World War II, from 1944 to 1945. The dramatic events of D-Day finally gave the Allies a foothold on Fortress Europe, allowing them to push the Germans back to Berlin. Players can recreate actual battles such as Utah Beach, Operation Market Garden, and the infamous Battle of the Bulge in the hopes of turning back the German tide. Build, customize and fight with your personalized deck of 60 digital cards. History is in your hands.

Ranked as one of the top 50 computer games of all time and quoted by PC Gamer Magazine as "Criminally Addictive", the Panzer General franchise has spawned a loyal following of dedicated fans eager for more turn-based strategy action. This all-new strategy game title comes after five successful releases under its belt.

Panzer General: Allied Assault key features:

CARD GAME MEETS BOARD GAME: Thanks to the Collectible Card Game mechanics, players can swap out Unit Cards in decks for the perfect mix of tanks, artillery and infantry. Add in special Action Cards to "break the rules" and surprise opponents with air strikes and reinforcements. Players can retool decks with new cards awarded after each single or multiplayer victory.

A TASTE OF HISTORY: Panzer General Allied Assault lets players dive into the history of World War II. 3D models of vehicles used during the War march across the board and players can discover the cities where desperate battles took place. It's a new and exciting way to learn history.

PLAYER V. PLAYER (PVP) MODE: Players can play with a friend and have access to the special Unit and Action Cards you have unlocked in the single player Campaign. The more you play, the more cards you unlock!

Panzer General: Allied Assault is scheduled for release in Fall 2009.

In conjunction with the game's release, Petroglyph has licensed with Ubisoft to publish a physical board game based on Panzer General: Allied Assault on Xbox LIVE Arcade for the Xbox 360 video game. Combining the best of a card game and board game, this World War II "lite" wargame includes 240 action and unit cards, provides solo and 2 player scenarios and can be played in under an hour. This will be released in the Fall of 2009 with a MSRP of $59.99.

For more information, please visit https://www.panzergeneralalliedassault.com

About Ubisoft

Ubisoft is a leading producer, publisher and distributor of interactive entertainment products worldwide and has grown considerably through a strong and diversified line-up of products and partnerships. Ubisoft is present in 28 countries and has sales in more than 55 countries around the globe. It is committed to delivering high-quality, cutting-edge video game titles to consumers. For the 2008–09 fiscal year Ubisoft generated sales of 1.058 billion euros. To learn more, please visit www.ubisoftgroup.com.

About Petroglyph

Founded in 2003, Petroglyph is an award-winning, independent game development studio located in Las Vegas, NV. The company is composed of industry veterans with a studio-wide average of over ten years in game development. The Petroglyph team specializes in the Real-Time Strategy (RTS) genre, leveraging the experience gained from developing original hit franchises for PC and consoles. Petroglyph uses their proprietary GLYPH game engine, tools and technology to power their next-generation titles. For more information about Petroglyph, visit www.petroglyphgames.com