Marguerite Snow Actress - Born 9 Sep 1889 Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

Died 17 Feb 1958 Los Angeles, California, USA (kidney complications)

Height 5' 5" (1.65 m)

Mini Bio (1) Although Marguerite Snow was born in Salt Lake City, her father--a comedian in vaudeville minstrel shows--traveled extensively, so she grew up all over the country. When her father died, she and her mother settled in Denver, Colorado. Marguerite took drama lessons with the intentions of becoming a stage actress, and made her stage debut in 1906. She was soon playing on Broadway, and after that joined a touring stock company. Her entry into films was somewhat accidental. One day in 1911 a girlfriend was playing in a film being made by the Thanhouser Co., and Marguerite went along to satisfy her curiosity as to how films were made. The studio head saw her and convinced her to appear in the film also. She found that she enjoyed film work, and soon quit the stage to concentrate on films exclusively. After appearing in scores of two-reelers for Thanhouser and Kinemacolor, among other companies, she married actor (later director) James Cruze in 1913. In 1915 she journeyed to Hollywood, and appeared in many productions for Metro, both full-length features and serials. She and Cruze divorced in 1923. Two years later she married comedian Neely Edwards, and retired from the business.

- IMDb Mini Biography By: frankfob2@yahoo.com

Spouse (2)

edit

Neely Edwards (1925 - 17 February 1958) her death

James Cruze (1913 - 1923) divorced 1 child

Bio A silent star of some magnitude, brunette Marguerite Snow ("Peggy" to her friends), is perhaps best remembered as the wife of actor/director James Cruze, opposite whom she starred in innumerable one- and two-reel melodramas for the New York-based Thanhouser Company between 1911 and 1915, including a still extant version of H. Rider Haggard's She (1911). The daughter of a minstrel performer, Snow made her Broadway debut in 1909 and went on to perform opposite the likes of James O'Neill (father of Eugene) and Thomas Jefferson. She made her screen debut in a 1911 Thanhouser production entitled Baseball in Bloomers but the experience, which involved changing into a rather skimpy outfit in the middle of a New York winter, so repelled the young actress that she immediately returned to Broadway. She was back soon enough, however, and along with Florence LaBadie and Mignon Anderson, became one of Thanhouser's most important stars, acclaimed as Countess Olga, the villainess of the 1914 serial The Million Dollar Mystery. The Cruzes, who had wed in 1913, left Thanhouser in 1915, in favor of California, where Snow became a leading lady for newcomer Metro. She never regained the stature she had enjoyed at Thanhouser, however, and the marriage to Cruze was dissolved in 1922, shortly before he embarked on his most famous project, the first true epic Western, The Covered Wagon (1923). Miss Snow later married comedian Neeley Edwards and retired from performing in the mid-'20s. At the time of her death from kidney failure, the veteran leading lady was residing at the Motion Picture Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California.

Biography by Hans J. Wollstein [-]

http://www.allmovie.com/artist/marguerite-snow-p66691