Vazha-Pshavela in English dictionary

Vazha-Pshavela

Sample sentences with "Vazha-Pshavela"

Declension Stem

Host and Guest is an epic poem by the Georgian poet, writer and philosopher Vazha-Pshavela.

His main works are Flight Without a tun and biographical novel Vazha-Pshavela.

In 1961, a museum and memorial was built in Chargali to honor Vazha-Pshavela, its most famous son.

Furthermore, Vazha-Pshavela's compositions have also become available to representatives of other nationalities of the ex-USSR.

The mountaineer poet Vazha-Pshavela is indeed, as Donald Rayfield writes, "qualitatively of a greater magnitude than any other Georgian writer".

One of the greatest Georgian poets Vazha-Pshavela dedicated his epic Aluda Ketelauri and The Host and the Guest to the story of Kist-Khevsur conflict which occurred in the 18th and 19th centuries.

In the best of his epic compositions, Vazha-Pshavela deals powerfully with the problems raised by the interaction of the individual with society, of humankind with the natural world and of human love with love of country.

In January 2012 construction was scheduled to start on a frozen extension of the Saburtalo Line from the Vazha-Pshavela station to the new Sakhelmtsipo Universiteti (State University) station, of which 80% of the work was completed during the Soviet era.

In January 2012 construction will start on a frozen extension of the Saburtalo Line from the Vazha-Pshavela station to the new Universiteti station, 80% of work is already done in soviet time, it is financed by the Asian Development Bank.

Vazha-Pshavela is the author of many world-class literary works – 36 epics, about 400 poems ("Aluda Ketelauri", "Bakhtrioni", "Gogotur and Apshina", "Host and Guest", "Snake eater", "Eteri", "Mindia", etc.), plays, and stories, as well as literary criticism, journalism and scholarly articles of ethnographic interest.

The five epic poems of Vazha-Pshavela ('Aluda Ketelauri' (1888), 'Bakhtrioni' (1892), 'Host and Guest' (1893), 'The Avenger of the Blood' (1897) and 'Snake Eater' (1901)) are composed on the principle of the Golden ratio, and thus invite comparison with the works of Ancient and Renaissance authors similarly inspired.

The Georgian language, and the Classical Georgian literature of the poet Shota Rustaveli, were revived in the 19th century after a long period of turmoil, laying the foundations of the romantics and novelists of the modern era such as Grigol Orbeliani, Nikoloz Baratashvili, Ilia Chavchavadze, Akaki Tsereteli, Vazha-Pshavela.

To date, his poems and narrative compositions have been published in more than 20 languages Vazha-Pshavela died in Tiflis on 10 July 1915 and was buried there,in the ancient capital city of his native land, being accorded the signal honour of a tomb in the prestigious Pantheon of the Mtatsminda Mountain, in recognition both of his literary achievements and his role as a representative of the National Liberation movement of Georgia.

"Georgian poet Vazha Pshavela".-"Russkaya Mysl", August, 1911 (in Russian)

Vazha-Pshavela was born into a family of clergymen in the little village of Chargali, situated in the mountainous Pshavi province of Eastern Sakartvelo.

Akhvlediani is famous for her depictions of Georgian towns, for her illustrations for the works of Ilia Chavchavadze and Vazha-Pshavela, and for designing plays in the Marjanishvili Theater in Tbilisi, Georgia.

The play is going to be performed in the legendary Rustaveli National Theatre on the 24th of October, and in the Vazha Pshavela Theatre – which is the oldest in Sakartvelo – on the 26th of October.

Authors