جمهورية جيبوتي

Jumhūriyyat Jībūtī

République de Djibouti

Gabuutih Ummuuno

Jamhuuriyadda Jabuuti

Republic of Djibouti

Motto

Unité, Égalité, Paix

Unity, Equality, Peace Anthem

Djibouti Capital Djibouti Government Semi-presidential republic President - From 1999 Ismail Omar Guelleh Prime Minister - From 2001 Dileita Mohamed Dileita Legislature National Assembly History - Established Area 23,200 km² Population - 2009 864,000 Density 37.2/km² GDP 2009 (PPP) - Total US$ 2.2 billion - Per capita US$ 2,554 Currency Franc French Territory of the Afars and the Issas v

The Republic of Djibouti is a semi-presidential republic in Eastern Africa.

Background

The French Territory of the Afars and the Issas became Djibouti in 1977. Hassan Gouled APTIDON installed an authoritarian one-party state and proceeded to serve as president until 1999. Unrest among the Afars minority during the 1990s led to a civil war that ended in 2001 following the conclusion of a peace accord between Afar rebels and the Issa-dominated government. In 1999, Djibouti's first multi-party presidential elections resulted in the election of Ismail Omar GUELLEH; he was re-elected to a second term in 2005. Djibouti occupies a strategic geographic location at the mouth of the Red Sea and serves as an important transshipment location for goods entering and leaving the east African highlands. The present leadership favors close ties to France, which maintains a significant military presence in the country, but also has strong ties with the US. Djibouti hosts the only US military base in sub-Saharan Africa.[1]

Economy

The economy is based on service activities connected with the country's strategic location and status as a free trade zone in the Horn of Africa. Two-thirds of Djibouti's inhabitants live in the capital city; the remainder are mostly nomadic herders. Scanty rainfall limits crop production to fruits and vegetables, and most food must be imported. Djibouti provides services as both a transit port for the region and an international transshipment and refueling center. Imports and exports from landlocked neighbor Ethiopia represent 70% of port activity at Djibouti's container terminal. Djibouti has few natural resources and little industry. The nation is, therefore, heavily dependent on foreign assistance to help support its balance of payments and to finance development projects. An unemployment rate of nearly 60% in urban areas continues to be a major problem. While inflation is not a concern, due to the fixed tie of the Djiboutian franc to the US dollar, the artificially high value of the Djiboutian franc adversely affects Djibouti's balance of payments. Per capita consumption dropped an estimated 35% between 1999 and 2006 because of recession, civil war, and a high population growth rate (including immigrants and refugees). Djibouti has experienced relatively minimal impact from the global economic downturn, but its reliance on diesel-generated electricity and imported food leave average consumers vulnerable to global price shocks.[2]

President

Ismail Omar Guelleh (₩) ( - )

Prime Minister

Dileita Mohamed Dileita (₩) ( - )

Nation

Djibouti

Djiboutian Polities

French Somaliland

French Territory of the Afars and the Issas

Neighbouring Nations

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Somalia

References