DJIBOUTI, Djibouti, October 23, 2008/African Press Organization (APO)/ — The African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF) and the Government of Djibouti, through the Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization, signed a Grant Agreement of US$700 000. The grant will assist the Government of Djibouti to mitigate the impact of poverty by improving access to basic services; stimulating economic activity at the local level; building the capacity of local government entities; and empowering civil society to participate more effectively in local development.

Speaking at the grant signing ceremony, Dr. Edwin Forlemu, Executive Secretary a.i. of ACBF, stated that the support for decentralization in Djibouti signals the Government’s efforts to build the human and institutional capacity of local government communities. Dr Forlemu also pointed out that the relationship between ACBF and the Government of Djibouti continues to grow from strength to strength and expressed the hope that Djibouti would become a Full Member of ACBF in the near future.

During the two-day mission to Djibouti, the ACBF delegation met with several ministers and Government officials, including H.E. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime Minister; Honorable Yacine Bouh, Minister of the Interior and Decentralization; Honorable Ahmed Ali Silay, Minister-Delegate in charge of International Cooperation; Honorable Mohamed Barkad Abdillahi, Minister of Justice; Mr. Bourhan Daoud Ahmed, Secretary General of the National Assembly; and Mr. Mohamed Ahmed Awaleh, Secretary of State in the Office of the Prime Minister in charge of National Solidarity. Discussions with the officials mainly centered on capacity building challenges in Djibouti and on strategies for deepening the relations between Djibouti and ACBF.

Total resources committed thus far by ACBF to various projects and programs in Djibouti since 2001 amount to about US$ 3.5 million. ACBF is currently supporting three interventions in Djibouti. The “Projet de Renforcement des Capacités de la Chambre des Comptes et de Discipline Budgétaire de la République de Djibouti (CCDB)” supports the judicial branch of government in overseeing the management of public finances. The “Projet de Renforcement des Capacités de la Gouvernance Financière et de Contrôle de la République de Djibouti (IGE)” aims to improve economic and financial governance in Djibouti. The “Projet d’Appui à la Décentralisation et aux Collectivités Locales (PADCL)” focuses on building capacity of local government entities.

ACBF is Africa’s premier capacity-building institution. Established in February 1991, it is the outcome of a partnership between African governments and the international donor community. Its mission is to build sustainable human and institutional capacity for sustainable growth, poverty reduction and good governance in Africa.

The Foundation intervenes in six core competency areas – namely, economic policy analysis and management, financial management and accountability, strengthening and monitoring of national statistics, public administration and management, strengthening of the policy analysis capacity of national parliaments, and professionalization of the voices of the private sector and civil society.

The Foundation’s 45 Full Members comprise 4 international development institutions (the African Development Bank, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) and 41 countries (Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo-Brazzaville, Congo-DRC, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark, France Gabon, Ghana, Greece, India, Ireland, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Rwanda, Sao Tomé & Principe, Senegal, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Tanzania, Uganda, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Zambia and Zimbabwe). The African Union is an Honorary Member.

Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, ACBF has a three-tier governance structure comprising a Board of Governors (chaired by Mrs. Louise Clément of Canada), an Executive Board (chaired by Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda), and a Secretariat (headed by Dr. Edwin N. Forlemu).

For more information, please contact:

Rutendo Kambarami

Outreach Officer

The African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF)

Tel: +263-4-700208/790398/9

Fax: +263-4-702915, 792894

E-mail: r.kambarami@acbf-pact.org