The situation with the state-owned company Rusnano is being actively discussed in Russia. The main reason for discussion is related to the fact that trading in securities of this structure was unexpectedly suspended last Friday. At the same time, information appeared on the company's website that consultations were held with creditors, as well as with holders of large blocks of shares.

As noted, the issues of the accumulation of "disproportionate debt" were discussed. At the same time, during the discussion, the situation was raised, which concerns the necessary adjustments to the used financial model. The company stressed that they are conducting "an open and constructive dialogue with stakeholders, which will continue."

It is known that at the end of 2020, Rusnano showed such financial activity, on the basis of which the company's net loss was estimated at almost 53 billion rubles. The suspension of trading, as traders note, “tied up” financial transactions on bonds worth about 70 billion rubles (almost 1 billion US dollars). For most of the packages, the company had to make a payment of income.

At the same time, there is no data yet on how long trading in the company's securities was in a state of "freezing". This introduces additional nervousness, especially among those who are major investors in Rusnano projects, as well as among lenders. Based on the suspension of trading on the Moscow Exchange, rumors began to circulate in the network about the possible bankruptcy of a large state-owned company, which was created as an aggregator of innovative projects.

Attention is drawn to the fact that the problem with trading in Rusnano securities arose after Anatoly Chubais de jure ceased to have any relation to this state-owned company. As a reminder, he left the post of Chairman of the Board of JSC Rusnano in 2020.

It is also worth noting that earlier Rusnano raised the issue of the need to attract additional funding from the state due to the fact that without such funding, the company will not be able to service debt obligations in 2021. In this regard, economists have a question: does this mean that the numerous investment programs implemented by Rusnano in recent years do not bring sufficient income, if it is impossible even to service debts on accumulated funds? Moreover, they do not bring sufficient income, even taking into account the generous state funding ...

In turn, the inability of Rusnano to pay off its debts, which is actually a legacy of Anatoly Chubais's activities, before creditors may lead to a serious blow to the entire Russian economy. This is already a challenge for the government.

Facebook / Anatoly Chubais

Our news channels

Subscribe and stay up to date with the latest news and the most important events of the day.

200 comments

"Right Sector" (banned in Russia), "Ukrainian Insurgent Army" (UPA) (banned in Russia), ISIS (banned in Russia), "Jabhat Fatah al-Sham" formerly "Jabhat al-Nusra" (banned in Russia) , Taliban (banned in Russia), Al-Qaeda (banned in Russia), Anti-Corruption Foundation (banned in Russia), Navalny Headquarters (banned in Russia), Facebook (banned in Russia), Instagram (banned in Russia), Meta (banned in Russia), Misanthropic Division (banned in Russia), Azov (banned in Russia), Muslim Brotherhood (banned in Russia), Aum Shinrikyo (banned in Russia), AUE (banned in Russia), UNA-UNSO (banned in Russia), Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people (banned in Russia), Legion “Freedom of Russia” (armed formation, recognized as terrorist in the Russian Federation and banned), Kirill Budanov (included on the Rosfinmonitoring list of terrorists and extremists), the International LGBT public movement and its structural divisions are recognized as extremist (decision of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation dated November 30.11.2023, XNUMX)

“Non-profit organizations, unregistered public associations or individuals performing the functions of a foreign agent,” as well as media outlets performing the functions of a foreign agent: “Medusa”; "Voice of America"; "Realities"; "Present time"; "Radio Freedom"; Ponomarev Lev; Ponomarev Ilya; Savitskaya; Markelov; Kamalyagin; Apakhonchich; Makarevich; Dud; Gordon; Zhdanov; Medvedev; Fedorov; Mikhail Kasyanov; Dmitry Muratov; "Owl"; "Alliance of Doctors"; "RKK" "Levada Center"; "Memorial"; "Voice"; "Person and law"; "Rain"; "Mediazone"; "Deutsche Welle"; QMS "Caucasian Knot"; "Insider"; "New Newspaper"