Gabriella Wilde is a multi-talented star of English descent who has excelled in various spheres of show business. She started as a model during her teenage years and in 2009 she ventured into the world of film and television. She has garnered numerous films in different genres, including the 2011 action film The Three Musketeers and the 2013 horror film Carrie. To British viewers, Wilde is best known for her starring role as Caroline Penvenen in the BBC historical drama series Poldark

Gabriella Wilde’s Bio & Age

Wilde was born on April 8 in Basingstoke, Hampshire County, England. Interestingly, her birth name is Gabriella Zanna Vanessa Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe and she comes from a line of aristocrats. Her father, John Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe, is a real estate mogul and former chairman of the Watermark property group. Her mother Vanessa Mary Theresa (née Hubbard) is a former model and socialite.

Wilde began his secondary education at Heathfield St Mary’s School, Ascot, but later transferred to St Swithun’s School, Winchester. She also enrolled in fine art at the City and Guilds of London, while pursuing her modeling career. However, she eventually dropped out of school when she ventured into acting.

Wilde’s modeling career dates back to her teenage years. She was discovered at the age of 14 by legendary supermodel Naomi Campbell, after which she signed a contract with the latter’s agency, Premier Model Management. Soon after, she featured in ad campaigns for brands such as Lacoste, Abercrombie & Fitch, Burberry, Topshop and several others. She has also appeared in international fashion and lifestyle magazines like Cosmopolite and Vogue

In 2009, 20-year-old Gabriella Wilde made her comedy adventure film debut. St Trinian’s 2: The Legend of Fritton’s Gold starring as Saffy. The following year, she made an appearance in the long-running Sci-Fi series. Doctor Who (2010). The talented actress played the role of Constance Bonacieux in the film adaptation of The Three Musketeers (2011) with Orlando Bloom and Logan Lerman. She also featured in the short film Il Maestro (2012) and she portrayed the character Sue Snell in the horror film Carrie (2013). Wilde appeared opposite Alex Pettyfer in the romantic drama film Eternal Love(2014) and she also had a role in the American independent film The Squatters (2014).

Wilde’s first major television role came in 2016 when she joined the main cast of the BBC series Poldark (2016-19) with Caroline Enys ( née Penvenen). She remained a series regular from the 2nd through the 5th series finale. In July 2018, Gabriella Wilde landed a spot in the cast of the superhero film Wonder Woman 1984, the ninth installment in the hugely successful Wonder Woman film series, slated for release in 2020.

The multi-talented star has continued to excel in her modeling career even as she navigates her way to stardom. In 2015, she signed on as the spokesperson and face of international beauty brand Estée Lauder.

Family, siblings

Gabriella Wilde comes from a fairly large family, she has a younger sister named Octavia and 5 half-siblings from her parents’ previous marriages. Olivia and Arabella Llewellyn, from his mother’s first marriage, and Georgiana, Isabella and Jacobi, from his father’s first marriage, are his half-siblings. Interestingly, some of her sisters are just as famous as her. Isabella Calthorpe is a model and actress, while Olivia Llewellyn is an actress.

Is she married? Husband

Gabriella Wilde is the wife of an English-born singer-songwriter Alan Pownall. The couple got married on September 13, 2014 and they have at least 2 children together. Their first son, Sasha Blue Pownall, was born on February 3, 2014, and they welcomed their second son, Shiloh Silva Pownall, in 2016.

Height and other body measurements

Along with her brilliant acting skills, Gabriella Wilde is also famous for her stunning looks. The stunning model stands at an impressive height of 178cm (5ft 10in). She maintains her imposing physique at a weight of 60 kg (132 lb). Her bust size is 34 inches (86 cm), while her waist and hip measurements are 25 inches (63.5 cm) and 35 inches (89 cm). The model-turned-actress also has a gorgeous mane of long blonde hair and her eyes are blue in color.