Franz (film)

Franz is a 1971 Belgian-French film directed by Jacques Brel.

Plot

The story takes place in a Belgium seaside town, at a boarding house for civil servants recovering from surgery and illness. The six male residents' lives change dramatically when two women arrive. Catherine is a lively, sexually liberated woman willing to kiss, dance, and sleep with the men. Leonie is reserved, formal, and conservative. Leonie finds herself attracted to Leon, a Belgian who was a mercenary in Katanga in 1964, He was wounded and carries psychological scars of war. The other men play practical jokes on Leon, some of them cruel. As Leon courts Leonie, his mother brings him emotional distress as do his memories of war. The unlikely pair struggle to get past these obstacles.

Cast

Jacques Brel – Leon

Barbara – Leonie

Danièle Evenou – Catherine

Fernand Fabre – Antoine

Louis Navarre – Armond

Ceel – Pascal

Serge Sauvion – Serge

François Cadet – Jules

Luc Poret – Henri

Jacques Provins – Grosjean

Catherine Bady – Madame Grosjean

Franz (crater)

Franz is a small lunar crater identified during the Apollo mission in August 1971 and located along the eastern edge of the Sinus Amoris, a bay that forms a northern extension to the Mare Tranquillitatis. It lies to the southwest of the prominent crater Macrobius. To the north is the smaller Carmichael, and to the northwest is the diminutive Theophrastus.

The rim of this crater has been eroded due to subsequent impacts, although it retains a generally circular form. The interior has been flooded, leaving only a narrow inner wall and a low surviving rim. This floor has the same albedo as the surrounding terrain, and is not as dark as the lunar mare surface to the north and west. Attached to the exterior of the eastern rim is Proclus E, a merged double-crater formation. Proclus lies to the east across the Palus Somni, or Marsh of Sleep.

References

Gender Recognition Act 2004

The Gender Recognition Act 2004 is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that allows transgender people to change their legal gender. It came into effect on 4 April 2005.

Operation of the law

The Act gives transsexual people legal recognition as members of the sex appropriate to their gender (male or female) allowing them to acquire a new birth certificate, affording them full recognition of their acquired sex in law for all purposes, including marriage. The two main exceptions are a right of conscience for Church of England clergy (who are normally obliged to marry any two eligible people by law), and that the descent of peerages will remain unchanged. Additionally, sports organisations are allowed to exclude transsexual people if it is necessary for 'fair competition or the safety of the competitors'.

People present evidence to a Gender Recognition Panel, which considers their case and issues a Gender Recognition Certificate. If the person involved is in a legally recognised marriage they will be issued an 'Interim Gender Recognition Certificate', which can then be used as grounds for annulment of the marriage, but otherwise has no status. After annulment, a full Certificate will be issued.

Yugra

Yugra or Iuhra (Old Russian Югра, c.f. Byzantine Greek Οὔγγροι) was the name of the lands between the Pechora River and Northern Urals in the Russian annals of the 12th–17th centuries, as well as the name of the Khanty and partly Mansi tribes inhabiting these territories, later known as Voguls

The Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug of Russia is also called Yugra.

The name Yugra also gave rise to the modern adjective Ugric.

History

The 12th century missionary and traveller Abu Hamid al-Gharnati gives one of the earliest accounts of the region, which he calls Yura in Arabic:

The Golden Lady of the Obians was apparently an idol of the Yugrans. The first reports of the Golden Lady are found in the 14th-century Novgorod Chronicles, with reference to Saint Stephan of Perm. Next, the golden idol is mentioned in the 16th century by the subjects of the Grand Duke of Moscow, commissioned to describe the trade and military routes of the expanding Russia. The first non-Russian we know of to comment on the golden lady is Mathias from Miechov, Professor of Krakow University. The golden idol appeared on Sigismund von Herberstein's map of Moscovia published on 1549, and on a number of later maps, e.g. Gerhard Mercator's "Map of the Arctic (1595)", where it is labeled Zolotaia Baba (from Russian Золотая баба - "Golden Lady" or "Golden Idol").

Franz Ferdinand - Take Me Out (Video)

Franz Ferdinand: Buy/Listen: https://lnk.to/FFalbum!yttmo About the album: Franz Ferdinand is the debut studio album by Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand, released in early 2004 through Domino Records. It was recorded during 2003 at Gula Studios in Malmö, Sweden and was co-produced by the band and Tore Johansson. It entered the United Kingdom album charts at number three in February 2004 and contains the UK top ten singles "Take Me Out" and "The Dark of the Matinée" (often referred to simply as "Matinée"), as well as UK top 20 hit "Michael". Follow Franz Ferdinand: Spotify - https://lnk.to/FFalbumYS!tmo Facebook - https://lnk.to/FFalbumYF!tmo Twitter - https://lnk.to/FFalbumYT!tmo Instagram - https://lnk.to/FFalbumYI!tmo Website - https://lnk.to/FFalbumAW!tmo YouTube - http...

published: 03 Oct 2009

What Is Kafkaesque? - The 'Philosophy' of Franz Kafka

New Pursuit of Wonder book available here: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08D4VSD88 Franz Kafka's work and views are often dark and disorienting, and yet they connect with a great many readers. His work provides a paradoxical comfort in its confrontation with the inexplicable discomfort we can often all feel in life . If you are interested in supporting the channel, you can shop Pursuit of Wonder merch here: https://www.pursuitofwonder.com/store Or contribute to our Patreon here: https://www.patreon.com/pursuitofwonder Special thank you to our very generous Patreon supporters: Christian Villanueva George Leontowicz Julio Villafuerte Follow Pursuit of Wonder on: Instagram at: https://www.instagram.com/pursuitofwonder Facebook at: https://www.facebook.com/PursuitOfWonder Recommended read...

published: 28 Jan 2020

Franz Ferdinand performs 'Take Me Out' | T in the Park 2014 - BBC

Subscribe and 🔔 to the BBC 👉 https://bit.ly/BBCYouTubeSub Watch the BBC first on iPlayer 👉 https://bbc.in/iPlayer-Home Franz Ferdinand perform Take Me Out from King Tut's Wah Wah Tent at T in the Park 2014. T in the Park is a Scottish music festival which began back in 1994 and hosts some of the biggest names from the Rock, indie, electronic & pop genres. T in the Park | 2014 | BBC #BBC #FranzFerdinand #TinThePark All our TV channels and S4C are available to watch live through BBC iPlayer, although some programmes may not be available to stream online due to rights. If you would like to read more on what types of programmes are available to watch live, check the 'Are all programmes that are broadcast available on BBC iPlayer?' FAQ 👉 https://bbc.in/2m8ks6v.

published: 13 Jul 2014