Benito "Ben" Ribera was born March 21, 1953, and passed on May 13, 1923. He was a wonderful brother and friend. He enjoyed playing Bingo and going to the casinos. He loved his cat. Once you got to know him, Ben was fun to be with. He had a close friendship with Paul who was like a brother. Paul is a wonderful person and could never be repaid for all he did for Ben.

Ben is survived by his sister Helen Garcia, his brother Romaldo Garcia, many nieces, nephews, and uncles, and his best friend/ brother Paul Trevino.

He is preceded in death by his mother Graciella Trevino, his father Poncho Ribera, his brothers Juan Trevino, David Ribera, and Ciriaco Ribera, his sisters Beatrice Hernandez, Mary G. Rives, Elbida G. Bracno, and Mary G. Morgan, his aunts Juanita Torres, Clara Valdez, and Antonia Rodriguez, and his uncle’s Santos Trevino and Pete Trevino.

Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil ~ Psalm 23:4

Jose "Joe" Mata, died on May 8, 2023. He was born April 29, 1973.

He married Alice Flores September 19, 1998, in Lubbock, Texas at Our Lady of Grace Catholic Church, and they were blessed with six amazing children. He at-tended Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church. He served as an usher. Joe worked for the United States Postal Service for over 25 years.

He is survived by his wife Alice Mata of Lubbock; father Joe Mata, III and wife Mary of Brownfield; mother Elizabeth Thomas and husband Jerry of Lubbock; chil-dren Joseph, Samuel, Alyssa, Abigail, Judith, and Naomi Mata; siblings Diana Bowmen (Mike), Melissa Esquibel (Dylan), Mike Mata (Roxanne) all of Lubbock, Joe Daniel Mata and Crystal Morin (Daniel) all of Brownfield; along with many niec-es, nephews and loved ones.

Jose Tirso Perales, 70, of Lubbock, passed away on May 9, 2023. He was born on June 20, 1952, in Crystal City, Texas to Tirso Perales and Dominga Rodriguez. He was raised in Lubbock, TX. He graduated from Lubbock High school in 1973. He worked for Texas Tech in the grounds department before his retirement in 2012. Jose served America as a member of the United States Army for three years, before he was honorably discharged on July 2, 1975. He was a Catholic.

He was a dog breeder and raised many pit bulls. He loved talking about the military and his dogs.

Those left to cherish his memory include his daughters, Erica Perales and Gabriella (William) Fred; sisters, Rosa Garza and Mary Helen Romo; granddaughters, Lena Perales, Breanna Rangel, Dicie Perales, Alexandra Rangel, and Isabella Fred. He is proceeded in death by his parents, Tirso and Dominga Perales and sister, Mary Lou Lucero.

Alex "Hondo"

R. Rodriguez, 67, passed from this life on May 17, 2023. He was born November 24, 1955, in Lubbock, TX to Catarino and Josephine Rodriguez. On November 10, 1973, he married his beloved wife Janie, and they shared 49 years together. Alex enjoyed listening to music, especially his favorite band Little Joe Y La Familia.

Alex is survived by his wife Janie, his daughters Sandra Aguilar (Joseph) and Monica Rodriguez (Thomas), his 10 grandchildren and 26 great-grandchildren, his siblings Margaret Hernandez (Joe), Gloria Solis (Margarito), Jesse Rodriguez, and Joaquin Rodriguez. He is preceded in death by his parents, his brothers Lupe Rodriguez and Catarino Rodriguez Jr., and his great-grandson Bellemy Aguilar.

Frances L. Hernandez passed from this life on May 22, 2023 at the age of 80. She was the wife of Nasario Hernandez, Jr. They married on January 19, 1965, and shared 56 years together building their family. Frances loved her family and enjoyed cooking for them. Her tamales were her specialty.

Frances is survived by her children Estella Hernandez, Normalinda Vasquez, Armando Hernandez, Leandro Hernandez, Christina Hernandez, and Inez Luna; 7 grandchildren; and her six great-grandchildren. She is preceded in death by her beloved husband Nasario Hernandez, her parents Manual and Maria Luna, her sister Mercedes Lechuga, and her brothers Rufus Luna and Antonio Luna.

God blesses those who mourn, for they will be comforted. ~ Matthew 5:4

Arturo Moreno

Garza, 64, of Lubbock, Texas, went to his eternal rest on May 22, 2023. He was born March 5, 1959. He was a loving father, grandfather, brother, son and a friend to all who knew him, and he will be greatly missed.

Arturo graduated from Frenship High School and worked for Lee Lewis and Vaughn Construction. He was preceded in death by his parents Jesus and Feliz Garza as well as his sisters Flor Moreno, Irene Garza and Yolanda Rodriquez and his nephew Israel Garza. Arturo is survived by his three children and their spouses: Maria (Jerry) Brito, Adreana Garza, and Arthur Jr. (Sarah) Garza, five grandchildren; his siblings and their spouses as well as his beloved nieces and

Jesus Escobedo

Xavier Ryan Caballero, 23, of Lubbock was born in Oklahoma on November 11, 1999. He was known as “Red” or “Fireball”. He graduated from Estacado High School with honors in 2018. He was involved in the ROTC program and was employed by NPL.

Xavier departed this life with his high school sweetheart, Melodi and his two children, Marcellus, AKA, “Marshmallow” and Lezlie, AKA, “Mammas”.

He is survived by his parents, Ricky and Agatha Caballero; his grandma, Rosa Caballero; his two brothers, Micheal Caballero and Brandon Hinjos and his spouse; sister, Sydney and her spouse. He had a total of 2 nephews, 2 nieces, 18 aunts and uncles and 25 cousins.

Melodi P. Boivin came into this world on April 17,2002. She was a beautiful, talented young woman. She was a co-captain on her color guard team in high school. She had a beautiful singing voice, she was an exceptional writer of short stories, and she was an amazing baker as well. Melodi was planning on attending Texas Tech for the fall of 2023 to major in criminal psychology. Xavier was preceded in death by Refino and Email Maldonado, his Maternal Grandparents and his Paternal grandfather, Jesse Ruiz Caballero.

She married her high school sweetheart Xavier Caballero in April 2022. She became a mom on Sept. 2,2020 to Marcellus Boivin, then she had Lezlie Caballero on Sept. 24, 2021. She and Xavier were so excited to be welcoming another child in November 2023, his name is Jaxson Caballero

Memorial Richard

Lopez

Fidencio R. Hernandez,88, went to be with his Lord and Savior on May 24, 2023. He was born January 2, 1935, in McMahan, Texas to Juan Santos Hernandez and Maria (Hila) Hernandez. On August 18, 1956, he married Elodia G. Hernandez in San Patricio County, and they shared 50 years together. He was a member of St. Joseph's Catholic Church. He and his wife Elodia will be remembered for starting a Christian band "Los Talentos de Cristo." He is survived by his sons Jesus Jaime Hernandez (Ana), Fernando Hernandez (Emma), and Daniel Hernandez, his daughters Yolanda Roe (Clint) and Amanda March (Winfred), his 11 grandchildren, 15 great-grandchildren, and his sister Rufina Oyervidez. He was preceded in death by his beloved wife Elodia Hernandez, his parents Juan Santos Hernandez and Maria (Hila) Hernandez, his grandson Samson Valdonado, and multiple siblings.

Barron Sr., 81, of Lubbock, passed away May 5, 2023. He was born April 25, 1942, to the late Abundio and Agustina Escobedo Barron in Burnet, Texas. In 1959 he married the love of his life Esperanza Villarreal in Brownfield, Texas, she preceded him in death in 2002. Jesus was a hard worker, working many years for McWhorter’s Tire Shop and then becoming self-employed, working in the roofing and construction businesses. Jesus was a faithful Dallas Cowboy fan. He is preceded in death by his wife Esperanza Barron (2002); sons Raul Barron (2019) and Valentine Barron (2019), a daughter Agustina Barron (Nov. 2022). Those left to cherish his memory are his sons Jesus (Gracie) Barron Jr., Richard (Leticia) Barron, his daughter Lisa (Marcus) Hays; a sister Maria Miranda of Brownfield; 10 grandchildren, 22 great grandchildren.

NOTE: American Flag displays that the individual was a veteran.

She is preceded in death by her husband Xavier Caballero, her son Marcellus Boivin, her daughter Lezlie Caballero, unborn son Jaxson Caballero, her great grandma Mercedes Lechuga, her great grandpa Ignacio Lechuga, her great uncle Alejandro Lechuga, her aunt Joyce Trevino, and her cousin Tess Dominguez.

She is survived by mother Jennifer L. Perez-Boivin of Lubbock, her step dad Gavino Valdez Vll, a brother Dakota D. Boivin, sisters Mercedes Perez, and Cheyenne Boivin of New York; her grandma Janice Perez of Wolfforth, grandpa Stanley Perez of Wolfforth, and a number of nieces and nephews, aunts and uncles, and several cousins.

Marcellus Boivin, 2, of Lubbock was born September 2, 2020, in Lubbock and passed away on May 6, 2023. He was a fun-loving boy who loved Spider Man and playing with dinosaurs.

Lezlie Lynn Caballero,1, of Lubbock was born September 24, 2021, in Lubbock, Texas and passed away May 6, 2023. She was a bundle of joy the short time we were able to spend with her. Her favorite toys were a little piggy and Minnie mouse.