Since joining Accel in 1996, Peter has led investments in dozens of early stage companies, many of which have gone on to complete IPO's or successful acquisitions. These include Acopia Networks (acquired by F5), Airgo Networks (acquired by Qualcomm), Amber Networks (acquired by Nokia), Arrowpoint Communications (IPO 3/00, subsequently acquired by Cisco), Broadjump (IPO 6/04 after merger with Motive, subsequently acquired by Alcatel-Lucent), iBEAM Broadcasting (IPO 5/00, subsequently acquired by Williams), Infinera (IPO 6/07), New Edge Networks (acquired by Earthlink), Northpoint Communications (IPO 5/99, subsequently acquired by ATT), Peribit Networks (acquired by Juniper), Tellium (IPO 5/01), TiMetra Networks (acquired by Alcatel), Topspin Communications (acquired by Cisco), Transitive (acquired by IBM) and Trapeze Networks (acquired by Belden). Peter was also part of the team responsible for Accel's investments in Redback Networks (IPO 5/99, subsequently acquired by Ericsson) and Motive (IPO 6/04, subsequently acquired by Alcatel-Lucent). Peter currently serves on the Board of Directors at Altor Networks, Consentry Networks, Kickfire, Nimble Storage, Omneon Video Networks, ON Networks and Wichorus. In addition to his US-focused investment activity, Peter led Accel’s original initiatives in India culminating in the formation of Accel India in 2008. He has a deep interest in the region and works closely with the Accel India team on investments and strategy. Peter is also a member of the investment committee of Meritech Capital Partners, an affiliate of Accel focused on later-stage venture investing. Prior to joining Accel, Peter was a line manager at Silicon Graphics, responsible for several generations of digital media and graphics workstation products. Before Silicon Graphics, Peter worked with McKinsey and Company, consulting to market leaders in technology, energy, aerospace and financial services. Peter began his career as a physicist working in nuclear fusion research and aerospace. Peter is a Director and past President of the Western Association of Venture Capitalists. He holds an A.B. in Physics from Harvard College, summa cum laude, and an M.B.A. from Harvard Business School, where he was a Baker Scholar.