Crispin Glover is known for his eccentric onscreen characters—think George McFly from "Back to the Future" and Andy Warhol in "The Doors"—but since the 1980s, he's dabbled in publishing, writing and film production, too.Chattanooga's Secret Weave will team up with Glover's Volcanic Eruptions to present two evenings of programming at Barking Legs Theater. The shows are scheduled for June 25 and 26, and each will feature a different film and programming. Guests are encouraged to attend both shows. Tickets are $20 each night and can be purchased here.Thursday evening will feature the second installment of Glover's "IT Trilogy," a film called "It Is Fine! Everything Is Fine," originally released in 2007. Prior to the screening, "Crispin Hellion Glover's Big Slide Show Part 2" will be shown. On Friday, the first film in the trilogy, "What Is It?"(2005), will be screened, as will "Crispin Hellion Glover's Big Slide Show Part 1."In addition to screenings, Glover will present a screening of his next directorial feature film, conduct a question-and-answer session with the audience and sign copies of his book. An overview of Glover's work can be found here."Audiences will be hard-pressed to say that they aren't getting a serious bang for their buck," Secret Weave co-founder Evan Lipson said. "I think it will appeal to fans of Crispin Glover's work, as well as anyone who has a sense of fun, curiosity and adventure."

Lipson started a correspondence with Glover in 2013. He invited the actor to present his films in Chattanooga, and the idea for the screenings was born."As I understand it, Glover's films were made as a psychological response to the increasing corporatization of Hollywood he's witnessed and observed firsthand over the past 20 or 30 years," Lipson said. "Both movies are composed of material that would never be permitted in any present-day Hollywood film."The first film in the series—"What Is It?"—has been described as a "bewildering, unnerving, surreal, blackly comic film ... that tells the inner and outer struggles of a young man facing villains and demons on multiple planes." The second film is an autobiography of actor Steven C. Stewart that follows the psychosexual fantasies of a man with cerebral palsy. You can view trailers of the films here and here, respectively.Lipson said audiences should enter the screenings with an open mind. The material will venture into "some pretty dark and/or ugly places," Lipson said. And Glover is very particular about making sure his films are viewed with people who know what they're getting into ahead of time."These films can only be experienced in Glover's presence, presented according to and under his exacting precision," Lipson said. "There is no way of checking them out online or anywhere else. It's pretty much a one-shot deal. And no one else in the world is making movies like this."