Slowdive

Shoegaze titans Slowdive today announced they’ll release their fifth album, Everything Is Alive, this September and it’s preceded by the dreamy first single “Kisses” — which you can hear below — and will be supported by a just-announced North American tour this fall.

The Dead Oceans label will release the nine-song album on Sept. 1 — it’s the band’s second post-reunion record — and it can be preordered now in a variety of vinyl, CD and cassette formats, as well as digitally.

The band’s 15-date North American tour — which follows summer dates in the U.K. Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan — opens Sept. 23 in Toronto and continues through a Los Angeles date on Oct. 14, and it will be followed by six dates in the U.K. and Ireland in late October and early November.

See the full tour dates below. Tickets for the newly announced shows go on sale at 10 a.m. local time Friday, June 23. More details at slowdiveofficial.com.

The new album is described by the label as featuring “the duality of a familiar internal language mixed with the exaltation of new beginnings. Everything is Alive is transportive, searching and aglow, the work of a classic band continuing to pitch its unmistakable voice to the future.”

The band — vocalists and guitarists Rachel Goswell and Neil Halstead, guitarist Christian Savill, bassist Nick Chaplin and drummer Simon Scott — started work on what was envisioned as a “more minimal electronic record,” the label says, but eventually gravitated back toward its “signature reverb-drenched guitars, but that first concept seeped into the compositions.”

Speaking of that process, Halstead says: “As a band, when we’re all happy with it, that tends to be the stronger material. We’ve always come from slightly different directions, and the best bits are where we all meet in the middle.” Goswell adds: “Slowdive is very much the sum of its parts. Something unquantifiable happens when the five of us come together in a room.”

Below, check out the new single “Kisses,” the album’s full tracklist and artwork — and Slowdive’s tour dates.

Slowdive, Everything is Alive

1. “Shanty”

2. “Prayer Remembered”

3. “Alife”

4. “Andalucia Plays”

5. “Kisses”

6. “Skin in the Game”

7. “Chained to a Cloud”

8. “The Slab”

Slowdive tour dates 2023

UNITED KINGDOM

June 24: Exeter, UK — Phoenix

June 25: Glastonbury Festival, UK

AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND JAPAN

July 17: Perth, Australia — Astor Theatre

July 19: Brisbane, Australia — Princess Theatre

July 21: Sydney, Australia — Enmore Theatre

July 22: Melbourne, Australia — Forum

July 23: Adelaide, Australia – Hindley St Music Hall

July 26: Auckland, NZ — Powerstation

July 29: Fuji Rock Festival, Japan

EUROPE

Aug. 5: Off Festival, Poland

Aug. 11: Ypsigrock Festival, Sicily

Aug. 18: Green Man Festival, Wales

NORTH AMERICA

Sept. 23: Toronto, ON — Queen Elizabeth Theatre

Sept. 25: Boston, MA –- Citizens House of Blues Boston

Sept. 27: New York City, NY — Webster Hall

Sept. 28: New York City, NY — Webster Hall

Sept. 29: Philadelphia, PA — Union Transfer

Sept. 30: Washington, D.C. — 930 Club

Oct. 2: Cleveland, OH — The Roxy @ Mahall’s

Oct. 3: Chicago, IL — Riviera Theatre

Oct. 4: St. Paul, MN — Palace Theatre

Oct. 6: Denver, CO –- Cervantes’ Masterpiece Ballroom

Oct. 7: Salt Lake City, UT -– The Union

Oct. 9: Portland, OR — Crystal Ballroom

Oct. 10: Seattle, WA — Showbox SoDo

Oct. 12: San Francisco, CA –- The Warfield

Oct. 14: Los Angeles, CA –- The Bellwether

UK AND IRELAND

Oct. 30: Glasgow, UK — QMU

Oct. 31: Manchester, UK — 02 Ritz

Nov. 1: Bristol, UK — SWX

Nov. 3: London, UK –- The Troxy

Nov. 5: Belfast, UK -– Mandela Hall

Nov. 6: Dublin, Ireland – National Stadium

PREVIOUSLY ON SLICING UP EYEBALLS

Listen: Ride, ‘Home is a Feeling’ — shoegaze legends debut 2nd new track this week

Listen: Ride, ‘Charm Assault’ — shoegaze legends’ first new music in 20 years

Rudy Tambala teases some sort of A.R. Kane “dreampop shows” this spring

My Bloody Valentine prep vinyl reissues, announce plans to record 2 new albums

Pale Saints’ ‘The Comforts of Madness’ to get expanded 30th anniversary reissue