Rajan is currently working on a multi screen immersive ride that tells the story of ‘the sugandhi family’ (DS Group). Currently in production, this state of the art musical marvel will combine animation, live action, holography, mapping and 360 degree projections.

Birsa Munda (2021) is a biopic of the leader, and a tribute to his 19th Century tribal uprising against the British in a 360 degree immersive environment with large screens and holography at Birsa Munda Park in Ranchi, India.

Rajan co-wrote / directed / exec. produced feature film GATTU (story of a boy fulfilling his dreams against all odds). It premiered and won at Berlin International Film Festival in 2012, a Screen Award in India and subsequently won 20 other international awards (including Best Director, Best Actor and several Audience Awards). Gattu was released in India by Rajshri and sold internationally by All Rights Entertainment.

Now based in Mumbai, Rajan started his filmmaking career in London in 1990 and practiced there for fifteen years, until 2005. Rajan’s acclaimed debut feature film Dance of the Wind, 1997, (produced in London) was set in the world of Indian classical music and dealt with teacher/disciple relationship.

Dance of the Wind was an international co-production between six countries, first of its kind in India, and also in Europe. The co-producers were Film council, UK; Cinematheque, France; NFDC India; also various cinema funds from Germany, Switzerland and Netherlands. The film premiered at Venice Film Festival and won major awards (Best Director, Best Actor, Best Composer, Audience Award) at various festival including Rotterdam, Chicago, London, Nantes, while enjoying a successful worldwide theatrical release. It is still a favorite repeat on Art House circuits, and on UK, French and German TV.

In 2009-10, Rajan created India’s first feature length multi-media biopic, combining film and holography, on Sadhu Vaswani, the well know social worker and spiritualist during Indian independence and after. Rajan’s passion for multiple screen storytelling started with his collaboration on Escapade show at London’s Royal Festival Hall, 2003; and later on the opening show of Khalsa Heritage Museum.

For his conceptual and writing skills, Rajan has been recipient of the Huber Bals Award in Rotterdam, Montecinemaverite Award in Locarno, and was invited to the prestigious Equinoxe Workshop in France, led by legendary and late Jeanne Moreau.

Rajan is an alumnus of the Royal College of Arts in London. In India, he graduated in Film Direction from FTII, Pune, and spent his formative years at the design school in NID, Ahmedabad.

His half hour FTII diploma WISDOM TREE (Bodh-vriksha), dealt with the theme of nursing and caring for the old people. It garnered him a National Award in India and three International Awards at Oberhausen. He has been the youngest Indian filmmaker ever to receive such accolades.

Rajan created his innovative production outfit – Elephant Eye, first in London, where it implemented production of Dance of the Wind, and now in Mumbai, where it executive-produced GATTU, various film installations, several short films and music videos.

His short film Flower Girl was an installation at World Expo 2005 in JAPAN. Later it played at the London Film Festival, IFFLA (Los Angeles) and Pusan Film Festival.

Rajan takes film-making workshops occasionally, serves on various juries, and is a permanent voting member of BAFTA awards (British Academy of Film and Television Arts).