We focus on developing platform capabilities for our ecosystem-centric businesses like HarmonyOS, Kunpeng, Ascend, cloud computing, and intelligent automotive solutions. We also openly collaborate with a wide range of partners to develop business ecosystems that thrive on shared success. Together, we aim to unleash ecosystem-based innovation and create greater value for our customers while achieving shared success with ecosystem partners and developers.

We have launched multiple programs like the Huawei Cloud Partner Competency Program, the Kunpeng Partner Program, and the openEuler Partner Program to encourage innovation among partners. By the end of 2022, we have worked with more than 43,000 ecosystem partners, released over 10,000 products on KooGallery, and have certified more than 12,000 Kunpeng application software solutions, over 2,000 innovative Ascend solutions, and 50,000 feature abilities (FAs) for HarmonyOS. Together with our partners, we currently serve more than 20 core industries, including government, finance, energy, transportation, manufacturing, healthcare, and education.

Huawei actively advocates for co-creation, sharing progress, and sharing success. We continue to expand access to more technologies, enrich toolchains, share industry experience, and increase funding for developers. These efforts aim to improve developer experience and support them in hardware and software design, development, testing, release, and operations, ultimately paving the way for greater success. As of the end of 2022, we serve and support about nine million developers.

In 2022, we invested CNY1.94 billion to support developer innovation through programs like the Huawei Cloud Developer Program, the OpenMind Program, and the Shining-Star Program. In the same year, we provided 3.65 million training opportunities to developers both online and offline, and issued Huawei technical certifications to 220,000 developers.

Huawei has launched a variety of programs, including the Huawei Cloud Developer Program (for universities), the Harmony 100 School Seeds Program, the Business-Academia Talent Development Program, and the Talent Development Acceleration Program. We also sponsor various programs like talent cultivation and competitions in colleges and universities. Over the past three years, these programs have benefited over 600,000 students and 6,000 teachers from 370 universities, and we will continue to expand these efforts moving forward.

Collaborating for the common good: We are committed to operating with integrity and complying with all applicable laws and regulations, and continue to enhance sustainability risk management. We work to ensure that our employees can develop and realize their personal value. We conduct due diligence on our global supply chain to ensure its sustainability. We actively contribute to the communities we operate in. Our goal is to work with all industry partners to build a healthy and harmonious business ecosystem.

17 billion

Huawei invested over CNY17 billion in employee benefits

66 hours

Every Huawei employee received an average of 66 hours of training

1,600

Huawei assigned CSR risk ratings to over 1,600 major suppliers, representing over 90% of our procurement spending

270

Huawei operated over 270 social contribution programs worldwide