Ascend Communications, a global provider of remote networking solutions based in California, has opened its north Asian headquarters in Hong Kong.

Ascend expanded into Asia less than two years ago with an exploratory office in Japan. 'We have been smart and we have been lucky,' Larry Jackson, director in charge of the Pacific region, said.

'Our products are perfect for the Internet, and the Internet is booming.' In 1994, the Pacific region accounted for 28 per cent of Ascend's international revenue. In 1995, this figure swelled to 56 per cent despite growth in the European market.

In the past six months, the region contributed 67 per cent of revenue.

'Japan is a very large reason for this,' Mr Jackson said, emphasising that the establishment of the Hong Kong headquarters meant Ascend was set to fully capitalise on the north Asia market, and China in particular.

Ascend was founded in 1989 and has customers in financial, computer, telecommunications and general manufacturing markets. Its equipment is used by almost 90 per cent of ISPs (Internet service providers) in the United States. Hongkong Telecom is already an important customer.

To date, Ascend's niche market has been access, with products such as Ascend MAX which provides the equivalent of stacked modems in one box.

This, according to international vice-president, Curtis Sanford, brings the advantage of a single phone number for all users with minimal cabling requirements.

Ascend plans to expand into routing and switching to fully encompass a networked environment. 'Players are now moving into other areas,' Mr Jackson said. 'We also want to expand because our customers are asking that of us.' The company recently acquired several strategic companies.

Morningstar, a maker of security software, was bought a few months ago to integrate access from a remote site at the firewall - used to keep Internet users from accessing private company intranets.

Ascend also acquired Netstar, which has the highest IP switching hardware in the world, Mr Jackson said.

Ascend is hoping that emerging markets will take off and Isdn (integrated services digital network) standards, which have yet to be determined in Hong Kong, will be set up as quickly as possible.

The company, already employing 90, plans to add more staff. 'We intend to localise,' Mr Jackson said.