A few weeks ago things were looking serious for Jim Allen. The writer of films like Land And Freedom and Raining Stones was drifting in and out of consciousness, beyond coherence when awake. At the same time it was announced that his play, Perdition, which caused one of the most furious rows in theatre history, was finally to be given a proper run in London.

I asked whether he was up to being interviewed, but he was too ill even to comment on Perdition. Last week, though, I received a surprise call - Jim is in remission, he's talking again, he'd love to chat to the Guardian. I asked his son David whether his dad would be up to going down the local for a drink or two. Allen has always liked to do business in the pub surrounded by real people, rather than professional arty-farties. No, David says quietly, he's not really been out of the house for a few weeks.

Allen is in bed when I arrive at his home in Middleton, Manchester. He is propped up on a throne of pillows - six or seven of them. He was always such a strong, belligerent man. His face is hollowed out, his voice is slurred with anaemic weakness, but his brown eyes still burn through the bones. He slowly lifts an arm and lights a cigarette. I ask him whether the low-tar Silk Cut is a concession to the cancer. 'I've never stopped smoking,' he says. Growls, actually. And there's something comforting about Jim Allen growling. He's still capable of summoning up the old disdain.

Allen began working life as a labourer - on the docks, down the mines, hod carrying. Wherever he went he organised unions, got sacked 'because I was a pain in the arse' and moved on to the next job. What politicised him? 'Life. Life made me political.' He was born in 1926, and the poverty of the depression left its mark on his childhood. Allen often got into fights with the Mosleyites. I look at his knobbly boxer's nose, and wonder whether every bump commemorates a political scrap. 'We were all good fighters. We had to be.' Although he edited leftist propaganda news-sheets while labouring, Allen says it was prison that really turned him towards words. 'While I was in the army, I went to prison for three months for fighting police in a coal town called Dalkieth outside Edinburgh.' He seems fired by the memory and launches into an anecdote that reminds me why he is such a fine writer.

'While I was in, there was a man called Jimmy - the Man with the Arm. I was 21, young, cocky, and I said, "How long you been in?" and he said, "Ten days". Ten Christmas days. He was in his 10th year. Nice man. He was a gardener on the big estates, and he got this servant girl in trouble. She panics, threatens to tell his wife, so he strangled her. And he buried her in the garden, got caught, sentenced to death, commuted to life. And while in prison, he got polio, so one arm was useless, so we called him "the man with the arm". And the screws loved him. In his cell he had carpets, painting, books... here you are, lad.' Allen passes me the ashtray, over a duvet pock-marked with fag burns.

'...They allocated me the duty to clean his cell out. I'd never read a book till then. And the very first book he lent me was Jack London's The Iron Hill. He gave me the book, but he forgot to give me a dictionary so I could read it. So we sorted that out. Then he got me reading Dickens, all kinds of stuff. And when I came out he had whetted my appetite.'

Allen has always had great feel for the rhythm of language. He knows that at its messiest and most fractured it can be most truthful. One of his great triumphs was turning a dry debate on collectivisation into a thrilling piece of drama in the Spanish civil war film, Land And Freedom. Allen left prison, got demobbed, and found himself a job in London, cleaning at Bart's Hospital through the night. Through the day he wrote a script, which somehow found its way back to Manchester, and Coronation Street. They were impressed, told him if he kept his head down and nose clean he could go places.

But Coronation Street was all fake fronts, watered pints and frothy values. No strikes and everyone was happy - except Allen. He wrote 12 scripts, learned the grammar of television and got fed up. 'There was a story conference and I said I've got an idea for a plot. It'll be fantastic. We get every member of the cast, put them on a bus on a mystery tour to the Lake District, then we send the bus over a cliff, and kill everyone. Well, that didn't go down well, so I was in trouble again.' There's the faintest trace of a smile on Allen's exhausted face. He eventually found his way to the BBC and teamed up with the director Ken Loach. Loach was shy and Oxford-educated, Allen was loud and self-educated.

They couldn't have been more different, except for the politics. 'Ken's a very private person, I'm not.' Yes, I say, you were always a bit of a gobshite, weren't you? He ignores me. 'But basically we agree on the politics, so that's the chemistry.' And then he stops. 'What did you just say? Did you call me a gobshite?' He looks as though he'd clout me, if only he could summon up the energy.

Allen and Loach made The Big Flame, a film about a dock strike and the first of many collaborations. They only teamed up once in the theatre, for Perdition. Allen's play was a fictional libel case about Hungarian Jewish leaders who had collaborated with the Nazis in exchange for a homeland. Allen was not only accused of being anti-Zionist (which he is) but he was also labelled an anti-Semite, to which he took great objection.

He was told that he had to be more balanced when dealing with such an incendiary subject. 'But I don't accept the position of balance,' he says. 'People who sit on the fence only get splinters up their arse. You have to take a position. Knock me down, argue, but don't drown it.' In the end, the Royal Court Theatre's director Max Stafford Clark pulled Perdition - he said it wasn't censorship, he had simply lost faith in the truth of the play. Allen, and many others, called it censorship.

Perdition is typical of Allen's works, in that it is about the betrayal of hope by those in whom people have put their faith - as the Jewish leaders sell out their people, so the communists kill off the anarchist Poum forces in Land And Freedom, and the rightwing union leaders destroy the possibility of successful collective action in his television series about the development of the labour movement, Days Of Hope. His work has always been a curious mix - bleak optimism or utopian pessimism, depending on your perspective. Critics say he gives succour to the right by exposing division within the left.

For Allen it is simple - there can be no justice without truth. And to be silent is to be complicit. Above his bed is a copy of Pastor Neimoller's famous poem: 'First they came for the Jews, but I did not speak out because I was not a Jew. Then they came for the communists and I did not speak out because I was not a communist. Then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speak out because I was not a trade unionist. Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me.' His bedroom has an air of the communal squat - a couple of Allen's kids are milling around, occasionally popping in with drinks. The Scottish terrier strolls lazily round the room. 'That's Leon - after Trotsky. He had a sister, Rosa - after Luxemburg. She just lay down and died.' Allen's wife, Clare, died 11 years ago.

Allen has always loved film and television, and thought it a miracle that his words could be turned into a movie and provide so much work for so many people. But he knew he was an outsider and was determined to remain one. If he had to go down to London for meetings, he'd travel light with three changes of shirt on his back. The first thing he did when he arrived was check the time of the trains back home.

The writer Paul Laverty tells me how Allen used to love embarrassing everyone by taking out his false teeth in important meetings and plonking them on the table. 'I never felt comfortable in the world of television,' says Allen. 'It was just endless conversations about nothing, pretentious bullshit.' He's getting tired. 'My nurses will be here soon,' he says.

Allen has one project he is desperate to finish, a script about James Connolly, the Irish labour leader who led the Easter Rising and was executed by the British. He is one of Allen's few political heroes. His children have bought him an electric wheelchair and he talks about regaining sufficient strength to drive over to his desk and start working again. We have a quick natter about contemporary politics, and he says that the New Labour project is consistent with his life's writing - the betrayal of working people by those they trust.

Over the past 20 years Allen has seen his political dreams rubbished, sidelined and dismantled. Can he afford to be hopeful these days? Yes, he says, you've got to be, or you may as well give up. 'Engels once said it's either socialism or barbarism. Look at the war in Kosovo, that's barbarism. I think events may compel people to look for an alternative. And the only alternative is socialism.'