Last Updated: 2024/08/05

UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO (PCT Patent Analysis Report) (PCT SDGs Patent Report)

The highest number of filings in 2014 with 0 cases, and their lowest number in 2022 with 0 cases.

The mean of the number of filings over the last 10 years (2013 to 2023, 0 cases in total) is 0, and the median is 0. The coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean) is nan, and there have been small fluctuations in the number of filings from year to year.

Filing information for the last 10 years (2013 to 2023) Index Value Average 0 patents Std Dev 0 COV nan

This report provides the latest patent analysis information (the IP landscape, including a patent map) on the patent search results of the PCT patent database for UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO for the period of the last 10 years (2014-01-01 to 2024-07-31). You can compare the information in this report with the trends in your competitors’ patent filings and technologies, and use it to search for important patents.

This service provides, free of charge, a patent analysis report based on the latest patent data (Japanese, U.S., European, and PCT application publications) for use in patent searches, patent analysis, and IP landscaping. The service is offered by "Patent Integration" a firm specializing in patent search/patent analysis.

This report includes basic information to help you understand the IP strategy and management of UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO, such as changes in the number of patents/patent applications they have filed, comparisons of the numbers of patents/patent applications filed by their peers and competitors, their top coapplicants (joint research partners, alliance partners), and their most important patents. It can be used in various intellectual property business operations such as IP landscaping, patent search/patent analysis, preparation of intellectual property business evaluation reports, selection of M&A candidates, and selection of alliance partners.

Article supervised by: Yoshiyuki Ose (Japanese Patent Attorney)

He is a patent attorney at a patent office. He specializes in invention counseling, patent filing, and intellectual property strategies for start-up companies and new businesses in the fields of software, information technology and artificial intelligence. He runs a patent course for beginners on Udemy, an online course provider.

After studying physics at the University of Tokyo as a doctoral student, he was engaged in intellectual property analysis and technology trend research as an in-house patent attorney at a precision equipment manufacturer and at Toyota Central R&D Labs. Inc..

Introduction

The concept of the "IP landscape" (IPL) has been attracting attention recently.

An IP landscape is not limited to patent information, but also integrates and analyzes business information (e.g., non-patent information such as papers, news releases, stock information, and market information). Intellectual-property-based business management is realized through the analysis of intellectual property information applied to the formulation of management strategies and business strategies. This is a comprehensive approach that includes but not limited to planning of open and closed strategies, selecting M&A candidates, searching for alliance partners, and formulating intellectual property strategies, through the exploitation of intellectual property information.

IP landscaping usually includes patent search and patent analysis. In patent search and patent analysis, it is important to grasp the market position of each company and the overall technological trends and development trends for each technology. More specifically, it is important to understand what intellectual property your own company and other companies hold, what the strengths and weaknesses of other companies are, and how other companies are trying to exploit their intellectual property. In other words, it is important to understand both the business strategy and the intellectual property strategy of each company.

After reading this search report, you may be interested in more detailed patent searches and patent analysis. We offer a service called Patent Integration, which is an integrated patent search and patent analysis service. With reasonable pricing and a simple user interface such that even beginners can quickly search for and analyze patent information by company or technology from a web browser, please consider using it for detailed patent searches, patent analysis, and IP landscaping.

Patent Integration has a patent-landscaping function that can visually represent a set of tens of thousands of patents/patent applications. This allows you to convincingly show the technical positions of your company and its competitors to your management and business strategists in order to formulate management strategies and business strategies.

Foreign Patent Analysis Report

By clicking, you can check the patent application trends in each country of UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO.

Patent Filing Trends in Each Country

Foreign Patent Analysis Report

The following foreign patent analysis reports have been found for UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO. The trends of patent filings of UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO for each country can be found by clicking on the Applicant/Patent Holder name next to each country.

Patent Filing Trends in Each Country Country Applicant / Patent Holder

UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO, Changes in the Number of PCT Patents/Patent Applications

The changes in the number of patent filings of UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO over the last 20 years (PCT) are shown below.

The change in the number of patents/patent applications is the most basic index in patent analysis. By examining the change in the number of patents/patent applications, you can see the status of technological development and R&D focus for each company or technology. It should be noted that since there is a one and a half year lag between the filing and the laying open of patent applications, it is not possible to analyze the situation more recently than one and half years prior to the present.

In this report, you can only see the change in the number of patents/patent applications by company or technology, whereas Patent Integration allows you to quickly compare the number of patent applications with your competitors in each technical field by cross-referencing with other keywords and patent classifications.

Counting of the Number of Cases using the Patent Mapping Function

By examining the change in the number of patents/patent applications, you can see the status of technological development and R&D focus for each company or technology.

You can select a graph type from the menu on the upper left. Data can be output as a file to the clipboard, or in CSV format or TSV format. You can also output graph images as files in the SVG, PNG, and JPG formats. For the terms of use when using the data, please see "About this Site."

Search Set (Analysis Patents)

This patent analysis report was created for a patent search set of 0 cases retrieved by applying the following search formula and analysis period to the following patent database. Patent information such as a patent analysis result, a patent map, and a patent landscape can be freely used for patent searches, analysis, and work on intellectual property strategies, including IP landscaping.

Patent Database

PCT Publications

Patent Search Formula

Applicant / Patent Holder:

UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO

Patent Analysis Period

2014-01-01〜2024-07-31

Number of Patents

0 patents

Analysis results are determined on the basis of patent gazette data issued by the patent office in each country.

Related Patent Analysis Report

A patent aanlysis report on the following synonyms was found in the technical term "UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO".

Same industry / competition company information (PCT)

The number of patents and changes in the number of patents of other companies (competitors) in the same industry as UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO are shown below.

Comparison of changes in the number of patents with peers and competitors is an important analytical index for understanding the intellectual property strategies of each company. By checking the transition of the number of patents for each company / competitor, you can check the status of focus on technology development and R&D for each company / technology.

It should be noted that patents have a time lag of one and a half years from filing to publication, so it is not possible to analyze the situation more recent than one and a half years.

If you want to find out more information, " Patent Integration , You can compare the number of patent applications with competitors in each technical field in a short time by multiplying with other keywords and patent classifications.Please use it for more detailed patent information analysis such as selection of M&A candidate destinations and alliance destinations.

Introduction of patent search function

Competitive analysis can be performed in a short time by using various search functions such as applicant, filing date, and similar patent search.

Same industry / competition company, Change in the Number of PCT Patents

Below is a patent map showing changes in the number of applications for PCT patents of 0 companies in the same industry over the past 20 years.

You can select a graph type from the menu on the upper left. Data can be output as a file to the clipboard, or in CSV format or TSV format. You can also output graph images as files in the SVG, PNG, and JPG formats. For the terms of use when using the data, please see "About this Site."

Top coapplicant information (PCT)

The changes in the number of patents shared with UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO’s top coapplicants are shown below.

By searching for the top coapplicants, you can discover what companies UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO is partnered with to develop technologies and use this information for R&D and intellectual property strategies.

Also, by looking at the change in the number of filings, you can see what companies UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO conducted joint research with in the past, and check the history of UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO’s alliances, partnerships, and joint research and development.

If you want to search for more detailed information, you can use Patent Integration to quickly find out specifically what company they filed a joint application with and what invention it was for.

Search for Coapplicants

Patent integration allows you to find coapplicants in a short amount of time.

Top coapplicant, Change in the Number of PCT Patents

Below is a ranking of the number of PCT patent applications by UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO’s top 0 coapplicants over the last 20 years.

Below is a patent map showing the changes in the numbers of PCT patent filings by UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO’s top 0 coapplicants over the last 20 years.

You can select a graph type from the menu on the upper left. Data can be output as a file to the clipboard, or in CSV format or TSV format. You can also output graph images as files in the SVG, PNG, and JPG formats. For the terms of use when using the data, please see "About this Site."

Top coapplicant Details (PCT)

Information on important patents (PCT)

The following shows PCT patents held by UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO that have had an invalidation trial against them demanded or an opposition filed against them by a third party, and UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO’s PCT patents/patent applications of high importance cited by Examiners in patent examination processes.

By noting the most important patents, you can obtain knowledge of the competitive business environment in which UNIVERSIDAD%20T%C3%89CNICA%20ESTATAL%20DE%20QUEVEDO is placed (e.g., whether it is a fiercely competitive environment or an oligopolistic market and the like). In general, it can be understood that a company with a large number of demands for invalidation trials is developing their business in a business environment where IP disputes are common.

If you want to search for more detailed information, you can use Patent Integration to retrieve and download by company cited patents/patent applications or patents undergoing invalidation trials. You can quickly extract important patents from a patent set that includes multiple competitors by cross-referencing with other keywords and patent classifications. Please consider using it for searches for important patents/patent applications.

Search for Information on Important Patents

You can quickly search for important patents/patent applications, such as patents/patent applications that were cited many times and patents that have had invalidation trials demanded against them many times.

Glossary

Cited

Indicates that the patent/patent application has been cited (by Examiners) in notices of reasons for rejection in the examination process of other (Japanese, U.S., or European) patent applications. The higher the number of citations, the more important the patent/patent application is considered to be.

Request for invalidation trial

Indicates that a third party has requested a procedure to invalidate the patent. It is likely to affect the business of third parties and is considered to be of high importance.

Opposition

Indicates that a third party has filed a petition with the Patent Office to hear the validity of the patent again. Like the trial for invalidation, it is considered to be of high importance.

Information provision

Indicates that a third party has provided the Patent Office with useful information for examination for the patent filed. It is usually considered to be of high importance because it is done to prevent the patent from being granted.

Browsing request

Indicates that a third party has requested the Patent Office to view the patent bag (a set of documents exchanged between the Patent Office and the applicant). The bag is often checked prior to trial for invalidation, opposition, and provision of information, and is considered to be a highly important patent.

Providing patent information to the media (newspapers, magazines, etc.)

"Patent Integration Report" is a web service provided by "Patent Integration Co., Ltd." operated by patent attorneys who are experts in intellectual property rights. Based on the latest patent data, this is one of the largest patent report services in Japan that provides information on technology trends in various companies and technology fields.

The purpose of this web service is to make intellectual property information familiar to many people, regardless of whether they have an interest in intellectual property rights, and to make use of it.

We actively provide various types of patent information that can be used in various media articles such as newspapers, magazines, and web media. Please feel free to contact us from "Inquiry form for details on the content of patent information that can be provided, conditions for provision, etc. Please contact us.

About this Site

All rights related to the data, documents and charts belong to "an integrated patent search/analysis service provider, Patent Integration". Please specify the source “Patent Integration Report, URL: https://patent-i.com/report/en/" when inserting them into in-house materials, external report materials, etc., regardless of whether they are paid or free of charge.

Patent data is obtained by aggregating and analyzing the latest patent data issued by the Patent Offices of respective countries and jurisdictions and by WIPO. Although we take great care in publishing and analyzing the results, we do not guarantee the correctness of the data. We appreciate your understanding.

If you have any concerns about this service, please feel free to contact us.

All rights to the data, documents, figures and tables are reserved by e-Patent. When publishing internal documents, external reports, etc. (whether paid or free of charge), please use the following URL: https://e-patent.co.jp/.

Please note the following points for use.

e-Patent will not be liable for any damages or losses arising from the use of the global patent application status, ranking information, or population search formula in the "SDGs Global Company Ranking from a Patent Perspective". Items with ● in front of the target are not supported at this time (judged to be difficult to approach from the patent information analysis).

Citation of patent application status and ranking information

There is no problem to cite patent application status and ranking information, but please clearly indicate "Source: e-Patent Co.

Graphs are image data.

Please note that the various graphs are image data, but we cannot provide them in text data.

Scope of coverage for each goal/target

Based on the description of each goal and target of the SDGs, we have set the scope of technologies to be covered based on our and e-Patent's past experience, etc. (in some cases, the search is based on social issues themselves). Therefore, please note that there is a possibility that this "SDGs Global Company Ranking from Patent Perspective" may not cover 100%.

A population search formula is clearly indicated for each goal/target (database: Patent Integration). You may use the population search formula as it is, or you may improve it by yourself.

This search covers patents and utility models, including both published and registered patents (design and design patents are excluded). The unit of count is the number of applications, not the number of patent families.

About the name collation and name control of applicants and right holders

Company rankings are based on the results calculated by "Patent Integration", with Japanese organizations in Japanese and other companies in English (some are in Japanese).

Company names may be the names of the companies at the time of application, but the results calculated by Patent Integration are used as is. Company names are used as they were at the time of application.

Because of the fluctuation in the names of companies (i.e., applicant/right holder names in the patent information), there are cases where the same company appears more than once in the top 10. The number of applications filed by the same company in the top 10 is the total number of applications filed by the company.

Credit notation

・MeCab user dictionary for science technology term © National Bioscience Database Center licensed under CC Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International

Our Commitment to Safety and Security

Patent Integration Co., Ltd. is committed to providing high-quality patent information based on the latest patent data on more than 45 million cases collected from the Patent Offices in Japan, the U.S., Europe, and Taiwan and from PCT publication.

Patent Integration Co., Ltd. collects the patent data from the Patent Offices in Japan, the U.S., Europe, and Taiwan and from PCT publications to provide it widely in the form of reports so that anyone can check patent information and patent trends with confidence.

Patent Integration Co., Ltd. is committed to various efforts to enhance the reliability of the information and to allow users to search patent information with confidence.