How was your academic formation at UTEQ?

I began my studies in marketing at the Technical State University of Quevedo, I have always liked the business world, so I chose a career with this focus. Studying at UTEQ gave me the tools and strategies to be able to apply in my entrepreneurship. Thanks to the knowledge acquired at the university I have been able to maintain my business.

I graduated in August last year and immediately applied for a half scholarship for a master's degree in digital marketing.

Do you like Marketing very much?

I really like the subject of marketing and even more digital marketing. In the future I would like to be a mentor on social media about this career and help entrepreneurs to grow their business.

What is your venture about?

It started as a handmade jewellery business, but now I have changed the type of product and I am focusing more on a niche market of people who like to look good but also try to satisfy a need, in this case I sell "Anti-Stress" accessories.

It's a combination of looking good and combating stress or calming anxiety.

How did you start the venture?

It started when I was in my fifth semester, that's when the idea of having my own resources came up.

I've done some studies, talking to psychologists, and they say that the "Spinner" objects help us in times of stress or to reduce anxiety levels.

My star products are the anti-anxiety necklaces and rings. The rings are made up of a simple ring with little balls that when you use it, you start to rotate it, calming the person and at the same time the little chains are are rotating.

How was the "BeMagic" brand born?

First I had a brand name that was very difficult to remember, then with the help of my family through a survey with several names and the one I liked the most was "BeMagic" which means "to be magical", and that is what I want to imply that our accessories go beyond the normal that they are made for magical and special people.

Is the business run online only?

I have kept the business purely online, taking advantage of the social media marketplace Facebook, Instagram, Tik Tok and WhatsApp Business. I am constantly self-educating myself to adapt to changes and to be able to maintain that connection with customers.

Although my projection is to have stores nationwide, in shopping centres such as Islas, that all carry the same business model and also continue in the digital part and at some point have a wholesale shop.

What advice would you give to university students, especially entrepreneurs?

It is to take seriously the career you are studying and in this case marketing. Learn the correct use of the tools and techniques that teachers teach us. We can also use the internet to reinforce the knowledge we knowledge that we acquire in the classroom.