1. Digital Catapult Azita Esmaili Chief Development Officer #DigitalCatapult

2. Who are we? A national centre to rapidly advance the UK’s best digital ideas Completely neutral Not for profit, private limited company

3. New jobs New services New products GVA for the UK economy We’re here to create…

4. Our mission… We are NOT a funder, incubator or accelerator! Our aim is to work with these organisations, not duplicate To unlock proprietary data in faster, better and more trusted ways

5. Our focus is on the Data Value Chain How We Do This

6. Why Proprietary Data? Closed or personal data90% If data is the new oil, then personal and closed data is the new rocket fuel

7. Closed Organisational Data Within the Data Value Chain Creative Content Our 4 key challenge areas Personal Data Internet of Things

8. Creating secure environments What is the Catapult Doing? Closed Organisational Data UK organisations can safely mix closed data Open data up to data innovators Greater Manchester Data Synchronisation Programme Trusted Data Hub What is the Catapult Doing?

9. 9 “2.5% can be added to the value of UK GDO by unlocking potential value of personal data” - McKinsey & Nesta Personal Data What is the Catapult Doing? Best Practice Network Developing UK data industry voluntary best practice code Capability hub MiData citizen projects What is the Catapult Doing?

10. 10 Creative Content UK is a leader in the Creative Industries What is the Catapult Doing? Copyright Hub Extra £2bn to the UK economy What is the Catapult Doing?

11. 11 Internet of Things 50 billion connected devices by 2020 Only 0.2% of things that can be connected, are connected China investing $800m in test-beds India, Singapore and Korea doing similar… What about the UK? What is the Catapult Doing? Connected Products Studios Convening projects around large-scale demonstrators

12. Our Centre Easy to convene organisations across the UK & Europe Agile, collaborative & innovative Great transport linksDigital Catapult Centre brings our focus to life 300+ organisations in our contributor programme NVI infrastructure

13. Our Product Portfolio Pit Stops Showcase Application Use of the Centre Become a Supporter Join a Network Industry Secondment Programme Research Bids Tech Services Capability Hubs Events

14. Some of Our Partners/Supporters