1. People dream about smart living How to create secure, convenient and easy to manage homes

2. What is a smart home?

3. Convenient

4. Convenient

7. Quality of Life Quality of Life

8. Affordable

9. What do the customers want?

12. How to accelerate the adoption? •Providing peace of mind regarding the security •More affordable •If it could be simpler to understand •If it could save significant amount of money •If it could be more integrated

13. What can we get on the market?

14. Discrete chaos Low motivated users with massive suspicion

16. COME TO SEE THE DIFFERENCE

17. SENSORS COMMUNICATIONS CLOUD UNIFIEDINTERFACE UNIFIEDINTERFACE END TO END CYBER SECURITY WITH LOW SOFTWARE FOOTPRINT

18. Happy marriage of technology and security •Battle-tested, highly secure platform •Easy to extend and to further develop •Fast prototyping: 2 weeks •Integration-friendly connection to any Apps •Passwordless authentication for extreme security •Enterprise open source with 24/7 support •No locked-in with one vendor

19. •Replaces the traditional username / password •Initial connection must be authorized by the owner •Authorization can be managed and revoked easily from mobile devices •No extra security threat for lost password Secure access control for convenience

20. Weeks from idea to launch •Prototyping: 3-4 weeks •Deploying: 6-7 weeks •Interfacing: depends •Go live: in 8 weeks

21. Value for money •Business needs go fast to market •Short ROI period (starting from 6 weeks) •Lienar growth hand in hand with linear costs •Same IT stack may host hundreds of apps and devices

22. Summary •Competitors moving ahead with IoT •Proven way to quick and high ROI •Be secure, be flexible, so you’ll be alright •Fast to market •Battle-tested technologies

23. YOU CAN HAVE IT: WHITE LABEL

24. White label solutions •Customer can create end user products •Customer can be fast to market •Easy extensible solution kit •High measure of security •Product development support • Third-party application integration •Unique flexibility by internationally proven use cases