SUNNYVALE, Calif., Oct. 28, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Arrayit Corporation (OTCQB: ARYC), a leading life sciences and diagnostics company, announces today that the company has signed a seven-year commercial lease for its new corporate headquarters in Sunnyvale, California.

Arrayit's new corporate headquarters, located at 927 Thompson Place, Sunnyvale, California, 94085, feature 15,000 square feet of modern industrial space including 45 parking spaces, offices, conference rooms, demonstration laboratories, class 100 cleanrooms, and manufacturing and shipping facilities. The new headquarters was leased from Dollinger, the prestigious Silicon Valley firm whose current tenants include Alcatel Lucent, Bed Bath & Beyond, Best Buy, Clear Channel, FedEx Corporation, Honeywell International, Kinko's, Samsung, Starbucks and Trader Joe's.

Arrayit is a microarray technology leader that sells its patented and proprietary discovery platform to researchers and clinical laboratories worldwide to empower exploration of the human genome, presymptomatic disease diagnostics and the development of safer and more effective pharmaceuticals. The new Arrayit headquarters, located off East Argues Avenue near Apple and Pharmacyclics, will facilitate the company's ambitious expansion plans that include greater capitalization, expansion of the company's staff and board of directors, revenue and earnings growth, and appreciating shareholder value through a recent upward trend in ARYC stock price.

About Arrayit CorporationArrayit utilizes its patented and proprietary microarray platform to lead and empower the genetic, research, pharmaceutical, and diagnostic communities through the discovery, development and manufacture of proprietary life science technologies and consumables for disease prevention, treatment and cure.- Powerful Science for Life(TM)- Visit www.arrayit.com for more information.

Safe Harbor StatementWe have identified forward-looking statements by using words such as "expect", "believe", and "should". Although we believe our expectations are reasonable, our operations involve a number of risks and uncertainties that are beyond our control, and these statements may turn out not to be true. Risk factors associated with our business, including some of the facts set forth herein, are detailed in the Company's Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012 and in Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2013.