Bruce J. Ferguson, 87, of Grantham N.H., died on Sunday, July 25, 2021. He passed peacefully in his sleep at Maplewood Nursing Home in Westmoreland, N.H. Bruce was born the son of the late Beatrice E. (Lang) and James A. Ferguson MD on Jan. 27, 1934, in Lancaster, N.H.

Bruce attended Lancaster Academy and graduated President of his Senior class in 1952. Bruce continued his studies, attending Norwich University in Northfield, Vt., from 1952 to 1954. He then transferred to the University of Vermont in Burlington, Vt., where he became president of Delta Psi Fraternity in his senior year, earning a B.S. in Chemistry/Biology, class of 1956.

Bruce first met Carolyn A. Hirschmann (Brooklyn Heights NYC) at the Mountain View House in Whitefield, N.H., in 1953 where they both worked summers. On Dec. 31, 1956, they were married in Burlington, Vt. The Ferguson's have been married for sixty-four years.

Following college graduation in 1956, Bruce was employed by Ayerst Laboratories in Rouses Point, N.Y., where he enjoyed 25 years of success, reaching the Director level. He left Ayerst in 1981 to pursue opportunities in the rapidly-expanding world of generic-drug manufacturing. He worked in leadership positions for several generic drug firms in the 15 years leading up to his retirement in 1996.

Bruce had many interests in life. In his younger years he enjoyed snow and water skiing, hiking/camping, photography, building/flying model airplanes and playing trumpet in the school band. He was also an avid Boy Scout, attaining the rank of Life Scout. As an adult he carried on with his childhood interests. Bruce also had a strong sense of civic duty. He was a member and past President of NCCS School Board in Champlain, N.Y.; a member of the Niagara Hose #1 Volunteer Fire Department in Champlain; he served on the Town of Champlain Planning Commission; he was also a long time member of the "Straw Hatters" marching band in Rouses Point, N.Y. Time was also spent mentoring young men as a Scout Leader for the Boy Scouts of America, Troup 41 in Champlain. Following retirement, Bruce was a volunteer for CASA (Court Appointed Special Advocate) in New Hampshire, where he mentored troubled children who had few or no sources for direction in their lives.

Two of Bruce's greatest pleasures were spending time at his family camp and snow skiing whenever he could. Purchased by his father in 1949, the family camp is on Martin Meadow Pond in Lancaster, N.H. The camp remains in the family to this day. Many summers were spent climbing various trails in the White Mountains of New Hampshire with "The Mountain Group," a small tight-knit group of couples from the Champlain/Rouses Point area who used the camp as their gathering point before and after hikes. Bruce was also a founding member of the Martin Meadow Pond Association, now known as The Friends of Martin Meadow Pond. He was very proud of the work done by the association and the stewardship they provided for the pond and its surroundings. Bruce was an excellent snow skier by all accounts. He learned to ski at Mt. Prospect ski area in Lancaster and skied for the Lancaster Academy ski team at Cannon and Wildcat Mountains. He skied all through college and was a member of the UVM Ski Club. Later in life he skied frequently in the mountain west with his two sons Ian and Tim as well as with his brother Ian.

Mr. Ferguson is survived by his wife, Carolyn A. Ferguson of Keene N.H. His children and their spouses, Ian J. Ferguson and wife Maryanne of Marlborough, N.H., Kathryn A. Fiske and husband Robert of Chazy, N.Y., and Timothy J. Fergusson and wife Tricia of Altona, N.Y. He is also survived by eight grandchildren, Matthew Guay, Mallory Fletcher (Nick), Colin Fergusson, Heather Guay (Arman Rashidi), Will Ferguson, Spencer Fergusson (Chelsea), Stuart Ferguson and Nolan Fergusson (Kellie). He is also survived by three great-grandchildren, Ethan Fletcher, Jackson Fletcher and Harper Fletcher. Bruce was predeceased by his brother, Ian G. Ferguson, who passed on July 14, 2015.

In keeping with Bruce's wishes there will be no calling hours. A memorial service and burial will take place at the family plot in the Summer St. Cemetery, Lancaster, N.H., at 11 a.m. Monday, Aug. 9, 2021.

In lieu of flowers, the family suggests a donation in Bruce's name to CASA of NH, 138 Coolidge St., Manchester NH 03102. All services are under the care of Cheshire Family Funeral Chapel and Crematories, 44 Maple Ave., Keene, NH 03431. WWW.cheshirefamilyfh.com