The Godfather Part II is the 1974 crime film that was the continuation of the Corleone family saga that began with 1972's The Godfather. The film follows the path of Michael Corleone (Al Pacino) as the head of Corleone crime family as well as traces the roots of his father Vito (Robert De Niro) and the beginnings of the empire in the New York of the early 20th century. Francis Ford Coppola returned as director and the film would become one of only two sequels to receive the Academy Award for Best Picture. The Godfather trilogy would be completed with 1990's The Godfather Part III.

The following weapons were used in the film The Godfather Part II:

WARNING! THIS PAGE CONTAINS SPOILERS!

Handguns

Merwin & Hulbert break-top revolver

In the 1917 flashback, a young Peter Clemenza (Bruno Kirby) pulls a Merwin & Hulbert break-top revolver when he and Vito Corleone (Robert De Niro) break into his "friend's" house to steal a rug. Similar revolvers are also seen used by the Italian actor on stage and inside the gun bag Clemenza tosses to Vito.

Webley Mk VI

During the 1921 flashback, Vito Corleone (Robert De Niro) uses a Webley Mk VI, wrapped in a cloth to slightly suppress the shots when he confronts Don Fanucci (Gastone Moschin) in his apartment building. Vito is then seen going to a rooftop to break the revolver apart and scatters the parts.

Colt New Service

The Cuban police officer pulls what appears to be a Colt New Service revolver when he confronts Michael's bodyguard (Amerigo Tot) in the hospital room of Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg).

Colt Detective Special

Carmine Rosato (Carmine Caridi) draws a nickel Colt Detective Special revolver when the policeman enters the bar after the attempted hit on Frankie Pentangeli. Willi Cicci (Joe Spinell) fires a regulard Colt DS during the subsequent shootout outside. Rocco Lampone (Tom Rosqui) also uses what is possibly a Detective Special when confronting Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg). Agents who exchange gunfire with Rocco also appear to be using the Colt revolver.

Colt M1911A1

MPs outside Frankie Pentangeli's barracks also appear to have holstered Colt M1911A1 pistols.

Smith & Wesson Model 10

The Smith & Wesson Model 10 appears to be carried by NYPD officers during a shootout with hitmen after the attempted hit on Frank Pentagelli. Al Neri (Richard Bright) also is seen with a Smith & Wesson Model 10 revolver.

Submachine Guns

Madsen M50

Madsen M50 submachine guns appear to be the weapons used during the attempted hit on Michael Corleone (Al Pacino) in his bedroom. When the assassins are discovered, a Madsen is found and is examined by Rocco Lampone (Tom Rosqui) and Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall).

M1928A1 Thompson

Cuban soldiers are seen armed with M1928A1 Thompsons.

M1A1 Thompson

After the attempted hit on the Corleones at the Lake Tahoe estate, some of the guards on the Corleone compound are seen around the grounds carrying M1A1 Thompson submachine guns.

Rifles

M1 Carbine

The M1 Carbine is seen in the hands of some Corleone soldiers after the attempted hit on Michael in Lake Tahoe. Cuban soldiers are seen with M1 Carbines as well. MP's also are armed with M1 Carbines while standing guard outside the barracks housing Frankie Pentangeli (Michael V. Gazzo).

FN FAL

Some Cuban soldiers are seen armed with what appear to be FN FAL rifles after a rebel explodes a bomb in a car.

Shotguns

Double Barreled Shotgun

Some of the men guarding Don Ciccio carry 12 Gauge Double Barreled Shotguns with exposed hammers. While in the novel the two use "Lupara" sawed-off shotguns, the movie instead shows their weapons with full barrels and stocks.

Ithaca 37