An Unforgettable Voice

A new Dori Caymmi album is always a welcome addition in my personal collection. A superb arranger and master songwriter and guitarist, Dori also has a voice that soothes and carries the timbre of his late father and Brazilian legend Dorival Caymmi. Inner World was produced and arranged by Dori and features some very special guests, including Renato Braz and Edu Lobo.

Born in Rio de Janeiro (1943), Dori Caymmi has been blessed as one of the many musical talents in the Caymmi family. His well-known siblings are Nana and Danilo. Dori began his musical studies on the piano at age 11. In 1959, he was already accompanying his sister Nana Caymmi on the piano. In addition to various special recording appearances, Dori has recorded 11 solo albums and has won prizes both in Brazil and abroad. His song “Saveiros” (with Nelson Motta) was the Brazilian entry in the 2nd International Song Festival and took home a second place award in the finals. He received various prizes from the Brazilian press and was also the winner of a Latin Grammy in addition to being a constant presence among the nominees of that award year after year. As an arranger, he has appeared in recordings by Tom Jobim, Nana Caymmi, Marcos Valle, Edu Lobo, Caetano Veloso, Sarah Vaughan and Josee Koning, just to name a few.

Inner World features Bill Cantos (piano), Mike Shapiro (drums), Jerry Watts (bass), Paulinho da Costa (percussion), Scott Mayo (soprano sax), Abraham Laboriel (bass), Gary Meek (flute) and other very talented musicians. However, it is Dori’s voice and acoustic guitar that unifies all these talents in beautiful and touching performances. Though it is hard to isolate tracks in such a magnificent collection, the two special appearances — Edu Lobo in “Chutando Lata” and Renato Braz in “Quebra-Mar” — make the album soar beyond anyone’s expectations. Dori possesses a voice that can lullaby you into sweet, memorable dreams. “É o Amor Outra Vez” and “Someone” are two of those such magical dreams. The words come from deep in his heart. His inner voice whispers softly into your ears. Inner World is priceless and brilliant.

ALBUM INFORMATION

Dori Caymmi

Inner World

MusicTaste 1001 (2009)

Time: 45’25”

Tracks:

All songs by Dori Caymmi & Paulo César Pinheiro, except where noted.

Your Smile (Dori Caymmi – Ina Wolf)

Spring (Dori Caymmi – Tracy Mann)

Obsession (Dori Caymmi – Gilson Peranzzetta – Tracy Mann)

Dança do Tucano

Colors of Joy (Dori Caymmi – Tracy Mann)

Chutando Lata – w/ Edu Lobo

Quebra-Mar – w/ Renato Braz

Flauta, Sanfona e Viola

É o Amor Outra Vez

Someone (Dori Caymmi – Tracy Mann)

Fora de Hora (Dori Caymmi – Chico Buarque)

Rio Amazonas