Dori Caymmi is an internationally celebrated composer and singer, having an expressive production recorded by many important artists worldwide, along with a prominent career as arranger and producer.

Dorival Tostes Caymmi, better known as Dori Caymmi was born August 26, 1943 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazi. He is the son of the composer Dorival Caymmi and former singer Stella Maris.

Dori began studying piano at eight with Lucia Branco and Nise Albino, attending the Conservatorio Lorenzo Fernandez for musical theory, he also study harmony with Paulo Silva and Moacir Santos and arrangements with Eumir Deodato. In 1959 he debuted on a TV show, “Cancao de Nana”, with his sister Nana Caymmi.

After his debut he has work in all the areas of the music business, as a musical director for many plays: Opiniao, Arena conta Zumbi and for the actors group called Grupo dos sete, as album producer for Philips (today Universal) producing the first albums for such artists as Caetano Veloso, Gal Costa and Gilberto Gil. For TV Globo as music director for many mini series and programs doing the sound tracks for “Dona Flor “, “Irmaos Coragem”, Sitio do Pica Pau Amarelo and so many others.

As a producer and arranger he has worked with the biggest stars in Brazil, Tom Jobim, Elis Regina, Milton Nascimento, Chico Buarque among others. His songs have been recorded not only by the biggest names in Brazil, but as well as the most internationally recognize names such as Sarah Vaughn, Carmen McRae, Natalie Cole just to mention a few. He also wrote many sound tracks for movies for Bruno Barreto, “Tati a Garota”, “Cronica da Casa Assasinada” in partnership with Tom Jobim, “Be! la Dona” for Fabio Barreto, “Lara” for Ana Maria Magalh?es.

Dori moved to the USA in 1990. He recorded three albums for Quest (Quincy Jones’ former label), another for Hori-Pro (Japan) that was released in the United States by Zebra Records, and another two to the same Japanese company released in Brazil by Universal.

Discography: