UCSF's PleasePrEPMe.org site is a searchable, location-responsive PrEP provider directory for California. Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is an effective HIV prevention strategy available by prescription. The PleasePrEPMe team chose Hook 42 to migrate their website from Angular to Drupal 8 with a React front-end for their interactive map.

Design Direction

Maintain Existing Design, Responsive Layout, Interactive, User-Friendly, Accessibility

Technical Considerations

Custom Data Structure Migration, Enable New Content Structures, Form Redesign, Time-Challenged, Budget Constrained, Improve SEO, Improve Device Support

Key Features

Custom Angular DB to Drupal 8 migration, Decoupled React.js Front-End Google Maps Integration, Custom Automated Provider Feed Import, Large Amount of Mapping Data, Content Editor Tools, Content Workflow, 3rd Party Chat Integration (SnapEngage)

Summary of Work

PleasePrEPMe is a website to promote the education of and provider access to the HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). The website provides national and state-based PrEP resources for the public, press, and other medical providers. PrEP selected Hook 42 for a new site rebuild and migration for their custom Angular site to an SEO, content editor friendly Drupal 8 migration project.

We audited their custom Angular / MySQL site implementation and estimated the effort to migrate it to Drupal 8. We provided a scalable content strategy, Drupal 8 architecture and implementation, custom feed creation, a progressively decoupled React / Drupal / Google Maps integration, and backend and frontend development. Hook 42 performed manual content migration, developed automated content migrations, and ran device and browser testing of the systems. The team ran SEO and accessibility health checks, Drupal 8 migration scripts, and ran the launch support process for site cutover.

We continued to work with the PrEP team by providing training to their internal staff, ongoing Drupal 8 development maintenance and support, and feature enhancements.