WASHINGTON, D.C., Tuesday, Jan. 12, 2021—As of Friday, January 15, 2021, HealthHIV will be the new home of PleasePrEPMe.org, an online platform that expands access to pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP). Initially launched in 2015 as a searchable and location-responsive provider directory for the State of California, PleasePrEPMe.org has expanded to provide HIV prevention resources in English and Spanish for consumers and providers in all 50 states. The platform features an online PrEP navigation training program with multiple modules/courses and downloadable resources which offer comprehensive insights and highlight best practices for PrEP consumers, navigators, and prescribers.

“I am delighted PleasePrEPMe has found a home at a national organization with online expertise,” says Shannon Weber, Founder and former Director of PleasePrEPMe. “As PleasePrEPMe transitions to HealthHIV, a huge round of applause for the extraordinary team members and many collaborators who helped build this innovative program. The opportunity to have been a part of creating a trusted, inclusive, welcoming source of HIV-prevention information has been my honor. I am confident HealthHIV will steward PleasePrEPMe to adapt and change in response to community needs.”

“HealthHIV is very excited to add PleasePrEPMe to our expanding portfolio of HIV prevention programs and services,” said HealthHIV Executive Director Brian Hujdich. “We regularly engage with a vast network of clinical and service providers, advocates, patients, and consumers through our HIV prevention programs and initiatives, so PleasePrEPMe will be of great interest to this expansive HIV prevention workforce.”

HealthHIV leads a variety of HIV prevention-related training and education programs, including the HIV Prevention Certified Provider (HIV PCP) medical education program, which educates and expands the HIV prevention workforce. Other notable medical education programs include Steps to PrEP and PrEP Forums, which engage constituents in training and engagement opportunities around HIV prevention and PrEP. HealthHIV also conducts numerous online training and certificate programs in HIV primary care, LGBT health, and ASO/CBO leadership and sustainability. In addition, HealthHIV manages an eLearning Center on HIV prevention for the Centers for Disease Control Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention’s capacity building branch.

“Users can expect PleasePrEPme.org to maintain its unique and user-friendly search in English and Spanish and support of PrEP navigators with enhanced resources from HealthHIV’s diverse capabilities in education, capacity building, advocacy, research, and technology,” said HealthHIV’s Communications Manager Cory France.