He graduated from the Faculty of Law and Administration at the University of Warsaw. In 2004 he obtained the title of tax advisor. He then began his legal (attorney) apprenticeship, and after passing the exam he started practising law as an attorney. In his work he combines knowledge from both fields in which he holds titles, as a tax consultant and an attorney.

He has many years of experience in conducting litigation before commercial and administrative courts, acting as an attorney for both individual clients and businesses. Thanks to his extensive professional knowledge and involvement, litigation in which he participated was successfully resolved to the benefit of his clients. He gained experience in, among others, the law firm of legal counsel Witold Modzelewski, a recognised specialist and expert in the field of taxes, in particular VAT.

Tomasz Krześniak is the author and co-author of publications in the field of tax law, including a joint study, one of the first published commentaries on the Act on the Tax on Goods and Services from 2004.

He graduated from the Faculty of Law and Administration at the Cardinal Wyszyński University in Warsaw, where he defended an MA thesis entitled “Exclusion of a partner in a limited liability company” (“Wyłączenie wspólnika w spółce z o.o.”. He also graduated from the Faculty of History at the University of Warsaw, where he specialised in the economy.

His interests lie primarily in commercial, civil and administrative law. He gained experience in local government and state institutions, and a law firm.

He is a graduate of the John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, where he defended his thesis on the protection of business secrets and "know-how" in Polish law. He gained professional experience working with law firms of legal counsels in Lublin.

In June 2013 he completed postgraduate studies in the field of arbitration, mediation and legal negotiation at the John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, obtaining the authority to act as a mediator in economic and civil matters. His interests lie primarily in civil, commercial and capital markets law.