Newly crowned Malaysia Super League (MSL) champions Johor Darul Ta'zim (JDT) extended their unbeaten home streak this season but conceded a potentially damaging away goal in Tuesday's AFC Cup first leg quarterfinal 1-1 draw against Hong Kong's South China AA.

The Southern Tigers seemed on course for victory before allowing the visitors to score in the 63rd minute to take the spoils ahead of the return leg at the Mong Kok Stadium on Sep. 15.

Following the weekend's celebrations after winning their second successive MSL title, JDT were brought back to earth at the Larkin Stadium by a determined and tactically astute South China.

Mario Gomez's side would have gone behind in the third minute had it not been for a brilliant save by custodian Izham Tarmizi -- diving away to his left to parry away a breathtaking overhead kick by South China's big Serbian defender Bojan Malisic from a corner.

It was evident that the Hong Kong side were creating problems for the home side as Izham had to advance to the edge of the box in the 14th minute to make a clearance -- the total disarray between the JDT lines of defenders and defensive midfielders a sign of the organisational inadequacies that were to follow in the second half.

It was only in the 27th minute that JDT came up with the semblance of a spark in the final third, that too off a mistake by the South China custodian. He spilled a cross from the left by Asraruddin Omar but recovered just in time to keep the lurking Luciano Figueroa out of harm's way.

However, then onwards till the end of the half it was the Malaysian champions in full form. The Johor-based outfit got their combination play right and came up with a flurry of exciting movements in the final third to put the South China defence under pressure. The end result was winning three successive free kicks at the edge of the box, none of which were put away.

On the stroke of half-time, the Malaysian champions nearly went ahead when a glancing header by Fadhli Shas off a laser-guided free kick from left by Safiq Rahim went narrowly wide.

The Southern Tigers began the second half just as they had ended the first. And they drew first blood four minutes after restart when Figueroa calmly slotted in a spot kick which the home side won when a South China defender was adjudged to have handled the ball.

The 41-time Hong Kong domestic champions nearly equalised in the 59th minute when defender Che Runqiu made a run into the JDT area to direct a downward header from point blank range. But Izham kept JDT in the game yet again by bringing up a breathtaking reflex save.

One minute later, JDT nearly earned another penalty when substitute forward Safee Sali went down in the South China area with the referee ruling there was no foul by Malisic, much to the consternation of the partisan home crowd still in a celebratory mood.

JDT's period of dominance ended in the 63rd minute when Casemiro Mior's side secured the crucial away goal thanks to a scintillating one-two between forwards Chan Siu Ki and Mahama Awal. The Cameroonian passed to Chan Siu Ki, darted ahead to receive and from an acute angle calmly put the ball into the far corner.

Twelve minutes later, the visitors almost took the lead. Nobody knew how their Australian forward Boima Karpeh managed to shoot off target with the goal at his mercy and JDT back four totally out of position after having being served a dream cross from the right by Awal.

In the 78th minute, JDT had a chance but Figueroa could manage only to hit straight at South China custodian Cristian Moura.

South China showed their tactical supremacy in the closing minutes of the game keeping possession in midfield and never allowing the home team to strike any rhythm in the final third.

The Southern Tigers have a mountain to climb in Hong Kong on Sep. 15.

In another first leg quarterfinal, MSL runners-up Pahang FA visit Istikol FC of Tajikistan with the second leg to be played in Kuantan on Sep. 16.