South China Morning Post

Hong Kong to field only domestic soccer players for Asian Games in South Korea

Naturalised talent Wisdom Agbo and Andy Nagelein will miss out on the Incheon event

Chan Kin-wa

Hong Kong coach Kim Pan-gon has given up hope of using naturalised talent in his Asian Games campaign, naming a 20-strong squad consisting wholly of domestic players.

Defenders Wisdom Agbo, originally from Ghana, and Andy Nagelein, of German descent, hold Hong Kong passports and are plying their trade on the mainland, but were not released by their clubs for the Incheon tournament that kicks off in mid-September.

The Asian Games soccer competition is limited to under-23 players, but each team are allowed to field three overage competitors.

"We have had contact with their respective clubs but since the Asian Games are not under [world governing body] Fifa and their own league competitions are at a crucial stage, they could not support us," said Kim.

"Both Agbo and Nagelein fitted into our plans as overage players but we cannot use them. However, the silver lining is that upcoming players get the opportunity. In the long run, it should also help Hong Kong soccer."

Leung Kwun-chung and his younger brother, Leung Nok-hang, both playing for Yokohama FC (Hong Kong), will become the first choices in central defence with Kim selecting goalkeeper Yapp Hung-fai, midfielder Ju Yingzhi and flanker Christian Annan as the overage players.

"The presence of Yapp between the posts will help stabilise the defence as the Eastern goalkeeper is the best in Hong Kong," said Kim.

"Ju proved himself with Pegasus last season with his power to read the game and vision in midfield, while Annan did a very good job in Kitchee's match against French league champions Paris Saint-Germain."

Kim had at one stage considered Pegasus defender Festus Baise but the Nigerian-born veteran, who fulfilled the seven-year residence rule last year, has yet to obtain his Hong Kong passport. "Li Ngai-hoi and Wan Chun can also play central defence," said Kim. "If these promising youngsters rise to the occasion in Incheon, they will become much more mature players."

The coach also expected Rangers striker Lam Hok-hei to shine in Incheon. "Lam can be the star of the next generation, provided he is fully committed to the game," said Kim. There will be 24 teams in the Asian Games, featuring East Asia powers such as Japan, South Korea and China as well as Middle East strongholds including United Arab Emirates, Iran and Saudi Arabia.

A draw for all the six groups will be made next month. Hong Kong qualified for the knockout stage at the last Asian Games in Guangzhou before being eliminated by Oman (3-0) in the round of 16.

South China Morning Post

Tickets from HK$490 to HK$1,800 for Hong Kong's match against Argentina

Chan Kin-wa

Ticket sales for Hong Kong's international soccer friendly against Argentina in October were released on Thursday, confirming the highest price is HK$1,800.

Other categories are HK$1,300, HK$850, HK$590 and HK$490 respectively for adults and HK$250 for students and senior citizens. The previous highest ticket price was set at HK$1,500 when Real Madrid visited Hong Kong in 2003.

Brain Leung Hung-tak, chairman of the Hong Kong Football Association, said the prices were set to offset the staggering cost of staging the October 14 match at the Hong Kong Stadium, believed to be close to HK$30 million.

"We need a full house to make a small profit, but are quite confident as Argentina are making their debut in Hong Kong with the likes of captain [Lionel] Messi, Angel di Maria, Sergio Aguero and Ezequiel Lavezzi," he said.

He said more than 27,000 tickets would be available for the public and advised fans to buy tickets in advance.

Tickets will go on sale from August 21, with half of the available seats priced at HK$590 or under.

Mark Sutcliffe, chief executive officer of the association, said: "The opportunity to watch a team of the stature of Argentina doesn't come round very often. We are indeed honoured to host the Argentina team and its array of star names.

"I am sure demand for tickets will be high and that the Hong Kong fans will want to support their team whilst admiring the skills of the Argentinian players."

The South Americans will play rivals Brazil at the National Stadium in Beijing on October 11 before heading for Hong Kong.

South China Morning Post

Eastern ready to shell out for live match broadcasts

Chan Kin-wa

Ambitious Eastern plan to broadcast all their home soccer matches in the new season even if they may have to bear a production cost of more than HK$1 million.

Club director Peter Leung Shou-chi said they wanted to further promote the team through the electronic media, which had a better audience rating.

"We will stage eight home matches in the league and even if the television station charges us HK$150,000 per match, we may still be able to offset it through income from ground advertisements and other commercial sponsorship, provided the broadcaster has a good audience rating," said Leung. His club have splashed out HK$20 million to mount a serious challenge in the inaugural Premier League.

Following the completion of a three-year deal with Now TV, the Hong Kong Football Association is unlikely to renew the contract as clubs have openly rejected the pay-TV station's HK$6 million cost for the new season.

The association has approached TVB, the free network, which has agreed to submit a proposal before the season kicks off with the Community Shield between league champions Kitchee and Senior Shield champions South China on August 31.

"As far as we understand, even when the matches were covered live on paid television, the ratings were very poor and that's why we want to change it back to the free network. We hope the association can work out a deal with TVB as soon as possible, so we can plan for our coverage," said Leung.

A TVB source said: "We are interested, but we have to convince our management it is worthwhile to help promote soccer in Hong Kong. If we are given the green light, we still have to decide how to charge the association, either as the host broadcaster or simply charge the clubs involved match by match. We have a much better audience rating and perhaps that's why the club wants us."

South China Morning Post

Hong Kong call up veteran player Lee Chi-ho for national duties in international friendlies

Fullback, 31, intended to retire to make way for fresh talent, but coach Kim Pan-gon convinces him to change his mind

Chan Kin-wa

Veteran Lee Chi-ho was a surprise call-up as national coach Kim Pan-gon named a 35-member training squad on Thursday for their three upcoming international friendly matches and the East Asian Cup qualifiers.

The fullback had earlier said he would quit the Hong Kong team to give the younger generation more international exposure but changed his mind after persuasion from the coach.

“Kim told me my experience can always help and wants me to stay,” said the 31 years old, who joined ambitious Eastern this summer.

“I don’t mind offering them help as long as they need me.”

Hong Kong will play Singapore home and away before meeting Argentina on October 14. The three matches will be part of their build-up for the qualifiers in November when they meet North Korea, Guam and the hosts Taiwan.

Only one team will qualify for the final featuring China, Japan and South Korea next year.

The training squad and details are as follows:

Goalkeepers LEUNG Hing Kit, TSANG Man Fai, WANG Zhenpeng, YAPP Hung Fai

Defenders Wisdom Fofo AGBO, CHAN Wai Ho, CHE Runqiu, CHEUNG Chi Yung, CHEUNG Kin Fung, FONG Pak Lun, KWOK Kin Pong, LEE Chi Ho, LEUNG Nok Hang, LEUNG Kwun Chung, LO Kong Wai, NAEGELEIN Andy Hannes Ling Fung, SEALY Jonathan Jack, TSANG Chi Hau

Midfielders BAI He, HUANG Yang, IP Chung Long, JU Yingzhi, LAM Ka Wai, LEE Hong Lim, LEUNG Chun Pong, LO Kwan Yee, LUK Michael Chi Ho, WONG Wai, XU Deshuai

Forwards Christian Kwesi ANNAN, CHAN Man Fai, CHAN Siu Ki, CHUCK Yiu Kwok, Godfred KARIKARI, LAM Hok Hei.

South China Morning Post

The Rational Ref

HKFA's efforts to get everyone reading off the same page requires a more inclusive approach to be truly effective

William Lai

Referees are often the butt of jokes through no fault of their own, but in Thailand they have only themselves to blame after spending their preseason swearing oaths to the Emerald Buddha to help clear match-fixing allegations.

Apparently the powerful green giant will keep referees on the straight and narrow. In case this fails, the Football Association of Thailand has also forced referees to take lie-detector tests.

Would similar measures work for Hong Kong soccer? Could paying homage to the Big Buddha on Lantau help end match-fixing?

Joking aside, when tackling corruption why do authorities and the media always seem to focus on referees?

Last season two top-tier Hong Kong clubs - Happy Valley and Tuen Mun - were suspended following match-fixing allegations.

In recent years, Hong Kong players have been charged with fixing games and handed life bans, whereas referees have never been implicated or charged.

Rather than focus only on referees, it would make sense for authorities to promote ethical standards for all involved in the game, which includes club owners, team officials and players.

The push for professionalism in the new Premier League means clubs must become more transparent in the management of their operations and business dealings.

Conflicts of interest should be declared too. Other preseason initiatives in Hong Kong have seen the HKFA give information seminars to referees and club representatives.

But the HKFA remains fixated on referees rather than encouraging clubs and all players to participate. This seems to be because the HKFA can make it mandatory for its 200-plus registered referees to attend seminars, but cannot force clubs or players to attend.

In one seminar organised for clubs which referees were expected to attend, it was obvious many club representatives left before the second session started.

The first session was a rundown on league rules (which rarely change) and the list of fixtures.

The second session was the referees department explaining how the rules will be applied.

And since HKFA seminars are conducted only in Chinese, no foreign players or coaches among the sparse assortment of club representatives attended.

So what can we expect for the new season in Hong Kong?

The 50 registered clubs within the HKFA are categorised into four new divisions. The Premier League has nine teams and the first, second and third divisions have 15, 12 and 14, respectively. No Premier League side will be demoted; in the other divisions the top team wins promotion and the bottom two are relegated.

The First Division catches the eye: there are five former top-tier teams - Citizen, Happy Valley, Southern, Sun Hei and Tuen Mun - competing against 10 others to win the one promotion berth to the Premier League.

On another matter, this season the EPL, La Liga, Serie A and Ligue 1 will use vanishing spray, but the Hong Kong Premier League will not. The official reason is the HKFA is required to purchase at least 2,000 cans of the Fifa-endorsed product.

Surely the HKFA can get around this. In India, the Calcutta Football League has no qualms sourcing its vanishing spray from a Chinese manufacturer rather than from the official supplier.

But would obtaining such products from mainland China be seen as "unclean" for Hong Kong's new Premier League?

Image is everything in soccer, and referees know this only too well.