Name: Dennis Robbins

Age: 49

Education: BA ­California Lutheran University JD – Pepperdine University

Occupation: Midas Auto Service Franchisee and Attorney

Website: www.votedennisrobbins.com Visit Site

E-mail: azdrob@aol.com

Our great city is at a crossroads. There are candidates running for City Council who are trying to hold the city back from becoming a renowned city unlike any other in our country. These candidates attempt to tear down our city with their misguided and worn out campaign rhetoric.

This election is about selecting positive leaders who know Scottsdale is a special place to live and who are willing to make it even better, which is what I have done over the last four years while serving you on the Council. Four years ago, I made promises to balance our budget and to improve our economy and our quality of life. I have kept those promises.

Positive and constructive decisions don’t happen by accident. A city must elect leaders who see what a community can become and then provide the leadership to make the collective vision become a reality. As your councilman, I stand for the fine qualities that have become hallmarks for Scottsdale. I am very committed to our community and its’ future.

All cities face certain challenges. Perhaps our biggest challenge is to continue growing our diverse business sectors while we strive to maintain the southwest character and the open spaces in Scottsdale. Industries like technology and healthcare present great opportunities for employment, more commerce and economic growth. As aproven leader, Iwill advance initiatives that ensure proper job growth, improve our quality of life, and secure a viable vision for Scottsdale’s future.

With your vote on November 4th, I will continue to focus on economic development, private-sector job creation, a balanced budget and the revitalization of the mature areas of our city. I truly believe that Scottsdale’s best days are ahead of us. I respectfully and humbly ask for your vote.