NORTH actor Craig Conway has opened his heart over his split from Jill Halfpenny to reveal they are still firm friends.

The couple separated early this year after four years of marriage, having moved from their Northumberland home to London to concentrate on hectic acting careers and raising young son Harvey.

But the pair - who are both now dating new partners - still spend time lots of together, focussing all their love and attention on their three-year-old son.

And Craig - who starred in last week’s episode of ITV drama Vera - even told how he, Jill and their new partners recently spent a family day out in the park with their little boy.

The 35-year-old said: “We care for each other an awful lot but we were happier to be good parents - that’s why we made our decision.

“It was one of those things but we are good friends and good working colleagues.

“There’s been no negatives in this split - it’s working out great. We live 20 minutes apart in London and Harvey spends lots of time with both us.

“She’s got a new partner and I get on really well with him and I’ve started seeing someone too. The other week all of us went for a picnic in Hyde Park with Harvey and it was great.

“Harvey is just beautiful. He’s a very fun, intelligent, happy child and I’m sure he’s going to be involved in the arts in some way.”

Craig told of his relationship with Jill - who won an Olivier Award for her role in the Legally Blonde musical - during a return trip North to make a new psychological drama.

The South-Shields born star has teamed up with Face Films Ltd - made up of writer Simon Fantauzzo, director Adam Levins, editor Ben King and producer Will Borthwick - to make January, a taut thriller set against the dramatic backdrop of a North stately home.

With a cast including Being Human star Amy Manson, Teachers regular James Lance, Simon Quarterman, Eileen Nicholas and Nora Jane Noone, filming starts next Sunday at the hall, near Washington, Tyne and Wear, where all the cast and crew will stay during the five-week shoot.

Craig, who has starred in a range of movies including Vera Drake, The Descent, Doomsday and Dog Soldiers, is co-producing with Will, and also plays Thomas the butler.

And he’s especially proud to bring a production North at a time when terrestrial TV companies have axed major productions, such as Wire in the Blood.

It will be around a year before we get to see January in cinemas, after it is shown at the Cannes and Sundance film festivals, but film fans can get to see Craig in the British romantic comedy How To Stop Being A Loser later this summer, in which he plays love guru Ampersand.

Both Craig and Gateshead-born Jill, also 35, star in the movie, which was filmed soon after they went their separate ways.

Some may have found that timing a bit tense, but the two took it all in their stride and thoroughly enjoyed working together again.

They’ve starred on stage together many a time, including in the Live Theatre production of The Bodies and in pantomime at Newcastle’s Theatre Royal.

“We’ve worked together lots and I would work with Jill anytime,” said Craig.

“They asked me if they could approach Jill for a role they needed and I said ‘of course’.”

Later this year he’ll be making the horror movie Hybrid Theory here in the North East and Four, a dark comedy co-starring Sean Pertwee, is due for release soon too.

It should be easy to recognise Craig’s character in all three forthcoming films . . . which is more than can be said for his role as beard-sporting Davy Turner, a character who was sleeping rough, in last Sunday’s episode of Vera.

He added: “I was sat watching it with my mum and she said ‘he looks familiar’. I said ‘yes mum, it’s me’.”