It is kind of perplexing for local rock and pop fans to see Weymouth’s Casey Desmond on the new TV show, “The Voice.” After all, fans in this area already know the 24-year-old songwriter can sing with the best of them from her gigs in Boston and the surrounding area over the past five years.

TV’s newest singing competition, “The Voice,” airs at 9 p.m. Tuesdays on NBC. Contestants were initially heard but not seen by a panel of pop star “judges” comprised of Christina Aguilera, Cee Lo Green, Adam Levine and Blake Shelton. The pros themselves compete to assemble a team of would-be pop stars, with the goal of guiding one toward a record contract and a $100,000 prize.

The judges aren’t judges. They’re “coaches” who also serve as hands-on mentors; each coach has to dump half of his or her team before the audience steps in to vote, starting in June. Desmond is part of Levine’s group.

“The Voice” skips an “American Idol”-style extended audition process. The NBC series jumps into action with singers either recommended by industry insiders or otherwise scouted.

“The producers of the show found Casey’s music on the Internet and invited her to audition,” explained Casey’s mother, Katherine Desmond. “She auditioned and they invited her to be on the show so she had to go out there and tape her performances. She does have a pretty loyal fan base, and they’re all excited to see her on this show.”

Unfortunately those fans might not have seen as much of Desmond as they’d prefer, as editing for the second episode that aired last week cut out five performers’ performances, including one of Desmond’s.

“It was just for time purposes, that they were skipped, but it was not the exposure she’d been hoping for,” said Katherine Desmond. “There has already been a lot of interest, however, and lots of press on the Internet, which has brought her new fans.”

NBC has heavily promoted “The Voice” and is also seeking an edge by ramping up the role of the Internet and social networks to entice viewers to engage with the show.

“The good news is that Casey has another performance scheduled for the Tuesday show, and since they’re using her in their commercials for that show, we expect she’ll get plenty of exposure this week,” added Katherine Desmond.

Casey Desmond has a new single, “Talking to God,” with accompanying video, ready for release. They are just waiting to see how the TV show turns out before planning the record release party gig at one of the Boston clubs she plays regularly.

If the TV show goes really well, of course, she might just have to move up to a bigger venue, and that’s the kind of career jumpstart everyone’s hoping for.

Material from the Associated Press was used in this report.