They say music is and can be of great comfort, inspiration and strength to those enduring difficult times such as heartbreak, loss and periods of despair. Producer and songwriter CARV.R and song-writer/vocalist Casey Desmond are big believers of this and have, by combining their many talents, taken the often unbearable pain of loss – of which they’ve both felt – and channelled it into “Struck”, their stunning new-synth pop single which PopWrapped are delighted to premiere.

Many find it hard to put into words, or to music, the hurt and pain they feel when they lose someone close to them, need it be a family member or a friend. “Struck” is a track which does exactly that for those unable to express such hurt for themselves and, through its creation, provided both artists with an outlet through which they could come to terms with their own pain.

CARV.R shares of the collaboration: “’Struck’ is what we consider to be the silver lining from a time when both Casey and I were going through the loss of friends. For me, Struck became a reminder to always live life as fully as I can on my own terms because it is fleeting and fragile. Casey was able to direct the energy of her own loss in a positive way through her heart wrenching lyrics. I am grateful that her performance complimented my production beautifully and we were able to come together and transmute our experiences into this collaboration.”

Casey adds: “Without a doubt, every one of us has tasted the flavor of betrayal. In the case of ‘Struck,’ it’s the guttural, abusive, and heart-wrenching kind. The lyrics invoke the essence of deep personal experience while remaining relatively ambiguous and socially applicable. When one is facing down the reality of the death of a relationship, they must do so through forgiveness or risk a lifetime of the aftermath. It’s at the crossroad that we battle our own consciousness and morals.“

She goes on: “I am very grateful for ‘Struck,’ as a song and as a creative project with CARV.R. Not only was I given the opportunity to express myself during a very difficult time, and face my – literal – demons, but I became close with Cristian as we formed a special musical bond that I see lasting for a long time.”