Please note, this is mostly a standing room show, with only limited seats. If it is important for you to get a seat, it's first come first serve!

The Security Project is a collection of musical heavyweights exploring the early years of Peter Gabriel's illustrious solo career. Heavily focused on the singer's four eponymous albums from 1977 to 1982 (known among fans as Car, Scratch, Melt and Security), The Security Project has none other than the singer's '77-'86 drummer, Jerry Marotta, keeping the beat. And when this intriguing supergroup hit the stage at the Tupelo Music Hall in Londonderry, NH on December 13, the results were extraordinary.

Considering that Marotta's Security Project bandmates have also carved impressive individual niches performing left-field music (Trey Gunn with King Crimson, Michael Cozzi with Shriekback and Sky Cries Mary, Brian Cummins with Marillion's Mick Pointer, David Jameson with Beyond The Wall), it came as little surprise that the group succeeded in honoring the esoteric spirit of some of the most challenging material in Gabriel's 40-year post-Genesis adventure. (from LIVE REVIEW - The Security Project/Casey Desmond, Tupelo Music Hall (Londonderry, NH) 12/13/15

Get tickets!

Left

LEFT is a labor of love comprised of 5 of Southern Oregon's most accomplished and creative players. Originally conceived in 2009 as a local "side project" and vehicle to showcase Levick's extensive catalog , the band gradually moved closer to everybody's front burners as they began gaining popularity.

Because of the lineup and instrumentation (tons of acoustic and slide guitars), LEFT tends to create very rootsy/retro interpretations of Bret's songs which almost always, albeit sometimes surprisingly, works quite nicely.

Over the years they have also peppered their sets with a few choice covers including some songs by The Stones, Lou Reed, David Bowie, Dylan, Rickie Lee Jones and JJ Cale.

LEFT is an acronym for the last names of the 4 original members.

The current lineup is:

Bret Levick: Vocals , Guitars

Bob Evoniuk: (of One Horse Shy & Siskiyou Summit): Electric dobro, Vocals

Greg Frederick: (Eric Burdon, Buddy Miles, Bo Diddly, Nickel & Nail): Bass, Vocals

Matt Terreri: (Rebel Train, Funkamungus, ex Florida studio drummer): Drums, vocals

Don Harris: (Pat Travers Band) Keyboards (most recent addition)

- See more at: http://www.bretlevick.com/music/left.html#sthash.pKg6hfVG.dpuf