Biography A contestant on the first season’s NBC’s the Voice, Casey Desmond is a thoroughbred artist and modern-day renaissance woman. A previous Sonicbids and Diesel Music US & Japan branding & marketing model, Casey’s captivating unique style and music combine her impressive vocal melodies, synth-driven electro dance rhythms & socially conscious lyrics with a retro yet ahead-of-the-curve fashion sense that keeps today’s tastemakers wanting more & comparing her to electro-pop icons like David Bowie, Cyndi Lauper, Blondie, and today’s dance pop divas like Lady Gaga and Katy Perry. Practically raised in her musician parent’s recording studio, its no wonder she now lives amongst a rare collection of vintage synths, keyboards, guitars and state of the art recording gear and her living room is mostly used as a rehearsal space for her band. No one can deny that Casey’s world is making music — but her artistry doesn’t stop there. Drawing from her education in Illustration and Fashion...

Read more

Biography A contestant on the first season’s NBC’s the Voice, Casey Desmond is a thoroughbred artist and modern-day renaissance woman. A previous Sonicbids and Diesel Music US & Japan branding & marketing model, Casey’s captivating unique style and music combine her impressive vocal melodies, synth-driven electro dance rhythms & socially conscious lyrics with a retro yet ahead-of-the-curve fashion sense that keeps today’s tastemakers wanting more & comparing her to electro-pop icons like David Bowie, Cyndi Lauper, Blondie, and today’s dance pop divas like Lady Gaga and Katy Perry. Practically raised in her musician parent’s recording studio, its no wonder she now lives amongst a rare collection of vintage synths, keyboards, guitars and state of the art recording gear and her living room is mostly used as a rehearsal space for her band. No one can deny that Casey’s world is making music — but her artistry doesn’t stop there. Drawing from her education in Illustration and Fashion Design (AIB-Lesley), Casey incorporates one-of-a-kind style and dramatic flair into her always colorful hand-made custom stage oufits for her fashion line OHDEERGOD. Her accomplishments include writing and recording with multi-gold and platinum producers Robert Ellis Orrall (Taylor Swift, Martina McBride, Lindsay Lohan), Chris Henderson, (R Kelly, Trey Songs, Jamie Foxx) Anthony J. Resta (Elton John, Collective Soul, Shawn Mullins, Duran Duran), Grammy-Award winner Will Ackerman and bassist Tony Levin (Peter Gabriel). She has garnered over two-dozen songwriting awards & prizes, film/tv placements, composition work with major networks and music libraries as well as two tracks on a Universal Music compilation alongside Amy Winehouse & Duffy. Named one of the “Top 10 Artists of 2010” at Indie-Music.com, selected a 2010 New Music Seminar Artist to Watch. Casey has shared the stage with The B-52’s, David Cook, Johnny Lange, Ed Kowaszyk (from Live), The Motels, Luka Rossi and Kate Voegel. She has performed at dozens of colleges & venues all over the country including: Billboard’s Music & Advertising Conf, CMJ, NXNE, Sundance, Virgin College Mega Tour, South Park, London Calling, MMS, MPMF, Head of the Charles, NACA, COCA, DBMC, Chickfest, Collegefest, Intl. Folk Alliance, NAMM, & DFEST. Casey has licensed her music to: *Make Up Forever -ad * “The Mysteries of Pittsburg” * HBO “Bad Girls Club” -OXYGEN Network * “America’s Psychic Challenge” — LIFETIME Television * “Human Giant” — MTV Network * “Road Rules/The Real World” — MTV Network * “My Super Sweet 16” & *“I Used to be Fat” — MTV Network * World Bank Global Tiger Initiative Conference- NatGeo, Discovery, PBS * “Port O’Call” — The Water Channel