What is the Ontario College of Teachers?

The Ontario College of Teachers (the College) is responsible for the licensing, governing and regulating of Ontario’s teaching profession. It was established in 1996, with the enactment of the Ontario College of Teachers Act. All Ontario public school teachers and administrators must be certified by and in good standing with the College to be employed as a public school teacher. Certification allows members to use the designation OCT (Ontario Certified Teacher).

As of 2022, Ontario remains the only province in Canada that entirely self-regulates their teaching profession. In other Canadian provinces and territories, the powers to certify, discipline, and govern members of the teaching profession are divided among provincial departments of education and teachers’ associations.

The College is comprised of a governing Council of six Ontario Certified Teachers and six members of the public.

According to the College, it exists to:

issue, suspend and revoke teaching certificates

set ethical standards and standards of practice

investigate and hear concerns and complaints about members

accredit teacher education programs and courses

How can a teacher become certified with the College?

The College lists the following requirements that a teacher must meet in order to be certified:

complete a minimum three-year postsecondary degree from an acceptable postsecondary institution

successfully complete a four semester teacher education program

apply to the College for certification and pay the annual membership and registration fees

successfully complete the sexual abuse prevention program

What benefits does the College provide for members?

Members of the College receive access to several ongoing professional development programs and Additional Qualification (AQ) courses. In 2021, the College introduced the Professional Advisory on Anti-Black Racism, and the Indigenous Ways of Knowing in Teacher Education Webinar Series as two new professional development programs available to members. Members of the College can also access the Margaret Wilson Library, a professional collection of education and teaching resources and databases. The College also provides members with access to various discount programs.

How does the College deal with complaints against members?

The College has a duty to protect the public interest. This includes investigating complaints made against its members and disciplining members accordingly. To maintain openness and transparency, disciplinary decisions are available to the public.

If a complaint is made about a College member and the College decides to investigate, the case is referred to the Discipline Committee, a three-member panel of members of the public and the profession who will hear and decide the case. All disciplinary hearings are usually open to the public. If a member of the College is found guilty of professional misconduct or to be incompetent, discipline can range from fines and counselling, to a teaching certificate being suspended or revoked.

How to file a complaint

To make a complaint, call the College Investigations and Professional Conduct Department at 437-880-3000. If the issue is not resolved, information regarding a concern can be filed with Intake staff.

View the College of Teachers Complaints and Discipline Process for more information, or refer to 1407 How to complain about staff misconduct or suspected abuse of students.

Can a teacher certified in one province or territory teach in another?

Under the Canadian Free Trade Agreement (CFTA), a teacher certified to teach in one Canadian province or territory will not need to complete any additional training to qualify to teach in another Canadian province or territory. However, an out-of-province teacher must still apply for a teaching certificate from the province in which they want to work. For example, a teacher certified by the Ontario College of Teachers who wishes to teach in British Columbia must apply for a British Columbia teaching certificate.

What other organizations exist for teachers?

In addition to the Ontario College of Teachers, there are several other organizations that Ontario teachers can refer to:

Elementary Teachers’ Federation of Ontario (ETFO)

Ontario Secondary School Teachers’ Federation (OSSTF)

Ontario Teachers’ Federation (OTF)

Ontario English Catholic Teachers Association (OECTA)

Canadian Teachers’ Federation (CTF)

Canadian Association for Teacher Education (CATE)

Canadian Society for the Study of Education (CSSE)

Canadian Union of Public Employees (CUPE)

More info

For more information on the Ontario College of Teachers, including details on becoming a member and teacher certification, visit their website at oct.ca.

You now have 3 options: