The Ontario College of Teachers is the provincial body that certifies candidates to teach in Ontario’s publicly funded schools. The college provides information that will help candidates to assess their own readiness to apply, as well as to prepare their application. You will find out about College registration requirements, College information sessions, English courses and how your credentials are evaluated.

Internationally Educated Teachers – applying to register in Ontario

ETFO’s listing of Occasional Teacher locals provides contact information as well as website links where available. This is where the answers to many employment-related questions can typically be found; answer will vary depending on your local agreement. The best thing a member can do to ensure that her or his negotiated rights are being upheld is to read the agreement and consider the implications. Members are encouraged to contact their local for clarification and/or assistance if they think that their rights are being violated by any party, including other members, administrators, or members of other unions.

Know Your Local Collective Agreement

The Ontario College of Teachers’ website lists the approved Ontario Ministry of Education websites used by school boards in Ontario to recruit teachers.

Jobs in Education

The Canadian Teachers’ Federation (CTF) has a huge section on their website with information about teaching in Canada. Occasional Teachers and Internationally Educated Teachers searching for work should be aware of the information listed.

Teaching in Canada

If you’re looking for work, we can help you with your job search. School boards in Ontario recruit elementary and secondary teachers using a list of websites approved by the Ontario Ministry of Education.

Jobs in Education

The Standards of Practice for the Teaching Profession provide a framework of principles that describes the knowledge, skills, and values inherent in Ontario’s teaching profession. These standards articulate the goals and aspirations of the profession. These standards convey a collective vision of professionalism that guides the daily practices of members of the Ontario College of Teachers.

Standards of Practice for the Teaching Profession

Ontario College of Teachers is the self-regulatory body that governs the teaching profession in the public interest. This link is to their website which contains a good deal of information of interest to teachers.

The Ontario College of Teachers

The Ontario College of Teachers has established the Ethical Standards for the teaching profession. The Ethical Standards for the Teaching Profession represent a vision of professional practice. At the heart of a strong and effective teaching profession is a commitment to students and their learning.

The Ethical Standards for the Teaching Profession

All textbooks used in Ontario’s schools must be approved by the Ministry of Education. The Trillium List contains the titles of those textbooks approved by the Minister of Education for use in Ontario schools. The textbooks named on the Trillium List have been subjected to a rigorous evaluation in accordance with the criteria specified in Section 4 of Guidelines for Approval of Textbooks.

The Trillium List