Newfoundland

Here is my collection of Newfoundland history and facts that you might not have known, even if you’re from the island.

Nickname The Rock.

It is officially called Newfoundland and Labrador. Formerly known as just “Newfoundland” as a colony, dominion, and province, in 2001 they officially changed the name to Newfoundland and Labrador to reflect the larger piece of land on the continental mainland. They had to amend the Canadian constitution to do this.

94% of the population lives on the island of Newfoundland. Almost half the population is in the capital of St. John’s.

In 1907 Newfoundland was given dominion status by the UK along with New Zealand, Australia, and Canada. It remained on an equal status until 1949 when it joined the Canadian confederation. Before that it was the Dominion of Newfoundland under British rule, before that independent.

Icebergs. You can view icebergs from your doorstep in certain areas of the island, or if you really want to get up close and personal with an iceberg you can book a boat tour, and for the adventurous, kayak to one.

We even produce Vodka and Beer out of iceberg water

Crush Pineapple is bottled in St. John’s, the capital city, and therefore found everywhere throughout the island, and a few locations outside of Newfoundland, most notability Fort McMurray.

Newfoundland Rail system, run by Canadian National Railway (CN). Narrow gauge railway, but has since been removed.

Royal Newfoundland Regiment primary reserve infantry of the Canadian Army and Memorial Day for a morning of the tragic loss of life on that day in 1916.

Types of power on the island

Hydro (Church Falls is under some ridiculous contract with Hydro-Québec until 2041, yes you read that correctly)

Wind

Biomass

Oil and Gas

Newfoundland Television, CJON-DT, the province’s only privately owned station to this day. Available on many cable and satellite providers around the global.

Island has it’s own Newfoundland Time Zone (NST), complete with daylight savings NDT.

Home of several Ex-USA Air Force Bases (AFB). Ernest Harmon AFB and Pepperrell AFB. Naval Station in Argentina. Among other military bases throughout history.

Gander Automated Air Traffic System (GAATS) is one of two contacts for air traffic control for the northern hemisphere.

Location of foggiest place on Earth, Grand Banks of Newfoundland. Close proximity to the site of RMS Titanic.

Has it’s own species of Beaver, Black Bear, and Dog. There also exists a Newfoundland pine marten. Among other mammals.

Arrival to the island is possible by air to the four (4) airports, Stephenville, Gander, St. John’s and Deer Lake, or by sea to the two (2) seaports operated by Marine Atlantic.

Cod fishing was a huge industry at one time until over-fishing caused entire fish stocks to collapse, forcing a moratorium to help restore the fishing stocks.

Home of the band Great Big Sea

Gordon Pinsent, a native of Grand Falls-Windsor, is a 60-year veteran of theater, film, and television as well as an Order of Canada recipient.

Writers Lisa Moore, Wayne Johnston, and Michael Crummey continue our oral storytelling tradition on paper as critically-acclaimed authors.

Maclean’s magazine rates Newfoundland and Labrador people as one of the Top 10 friendliest in the World

The only known case of German’s landing in North America during WWII was in Newfoundland. On October 22, 1943, German submarine U-537 landed on Martin Bay in the north of Labrador and set up a remote weather station. It was forgotten and wasn’t visited again until 1981.

The first known European presence in the Americas was in Newfoundland. Yep, Christoper Columbus wasn’t the first European in America. That honor belongs to the Vikings. L’ase aux Meadows at the very northern tip of Newfoundland island was the location of a Viking colony. It was discovered in 1960 and it is believed that the settlement was founded around the year 1000.

Three (3) craft brew companies currently exist on the island, Yellowbelly Brewery, Quidi Vidi Brewery, and Storm Brewing in Newfoundland Ltd.

We love McNuggets. McDonald’s Chicken McNuggets Capital of Canada.

Part of Operation Yellow Ribbon during the crisis of September 11, 2001. Helping passengers from all over the world with housing, food, and other amenities in the time of need.

Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro is the primary supplier of electricity in the province. They have a wind farm in St. Lawrence, Newfoundland.

Tsunami of 1929. Grand Banks Tsunami was a magnitude 7.2 earthquake that caused a tsunami that killed 28 people in Newfoundland.

Gros Morne National Park is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Gros Morne National Park is a park located on the west coast of Newfoundland. It is the second largest national park in Atlantic Canada. The park takes its name from Newfoundland’s second-highest mountain peak (at 806 meters) located within the park.

Iceberg Alley is a region in the Atlantic Ocean where icebergs are commonly found. It stretches from the coast of Labrador to the northeast coast of Newfoundland.

Newfoundland pony is a breed of pony that originated in Newfoundland. It is one of the rarest horse breeds in the world.

George Street in St. John’s is known for its bars and pubs. It is the most bars and pubs per square foot in North America. It is also the only street in North America to have bars on both sides of the street.

Signal Hill is a hill located in St. John’s. It is the site of the first transatlantic wireless communication. It is also the site of the final battle of the Seven Years’ War in North America.

More as I think of what to add…