One of the various casualties of the fall-out from France’s ‘No’ vote on the EU constitution was Jean-Pierre Raffarin, the prime minister, who was replaced by the political equivalent of philosopher-turned-football star Eric Cantona.

Dominique de Villepin, a poet and diplomat, once compared Europe to a seagull and the US to a shark.

He wrote: “The seagull is intoxicated by the sky. She turns, carried by the winds, with undulating wing, uttering from time to time her agonising peal of laughter.”

The 51-year-old admirer of Napoleon’s prose has, predictably, been a target for the foreign journalists’ ridicule with the Washington Post declaring him ‘Poseur of the Year’ while he was still French foreign minister.

In making the award, the paper cited this gem from the preface of his book In Praise of Those who Stole the Fire.

“This eulogy,” he wrote, “owes nothing to artifice or chance. It has ripened inside me since childhood. From the bottom of my pockets, stuck to the back of my smock, hidden in the corner of abacuses, poetry gushed out…”

Those European Council meetings will never be the same again.

Another casualty was Claudie Haigneré, the Europe minister and former astronaut, who has been sent into orbit, or brought back down to earth, depending on your choice of metaphor. In the French government reshuffle, she has been replaced by Catherine Colonna, who was French President Jacques Chirac’s spokeswoman from 1995 until last year. She probably has more expertise on foreign policy and knowledge of European ambassadors, than the new Foreign Minister, Philippe Douste-Blazy, who was previously minister of health. Colonna has been at Chirac’s side for the last decade, working especially on preparations for the EU summits and G7 meetings and putting the case for French opposition to the invasion of Iraq.

As well as knowing Chirac’s mind, she has the confidence of the new prime minister, Villepin. The two worked together in the French embassy in Washington DC and then later at the Quai d’Orsay when Alain Juppé was foreign minister. All of which means that Colonna is well placed to be a much more forceful European affairs minister than her predecessor. France’s position in Europe may be weakened, but expect Colonna to lead a fight back.