Have you ever been tired of listening to the same songs or artists? Or have you wanted to explore your musical taste? Well, this article might be for you. I’m going to talk about a band that has been getting some recognition on the app TikTok. The majority of people listen to The Neighbourhood because they feel a connection to the music and because the lyrics describe their past experiences.

Before we get into their music let’s get you some background information. The Neighbourhood sometimes recognized as “THE NBHD” is an American rock band founded in 2011 in Newbury Park, California. According to Nicole Shaker in the article The Evolution Of The Neighbourhood “The Neighbourhood has released four albums, all possessing a distinct theme and sound but connected through the band’s loyal devotion to mellow production and signature lyricism”. Members of the band include Jesse Rutherford the lead singer, Jeremy Freedman and Zach Abels which both of them are on the guitars, Mikey Margott on bass, and finally Brandon Alexander Fried on drums. Many of The Neighbourhood listeners feel somehow connected to their music; it’s the meaning behind the lyrics that really hits home to their personal life. I interviewed Alexis Wilcoxen, a former junior SPASH student and a The Neighbourhood listener if she feels connected to the lyrics of their songs. A song from the band that connects to her is Daddy Issues. When the singer sings “Go ahead and cry, little girl Nobody does it like you doI know how much it matters to you I know that you got daddy issues” she said that those lyrics made her remember all the damage her dad caused to her and her family it made her feel all the hurtful emotions she felt. In addition, we also have Fernando Martinez who also feels good listening to The NBHD said “ One song that gives me good vibes from them is Sweater Weather because it reminds me of when I used to live in Texas. It’s a song that I use to think back to all the good times I had with my friends and family”.

Have you ever felt scared of loving someone or them loving you back? Well, then Scary Love by The Neighbourhood is for you. A lot of people have gone through heartbreak and if you haven’t there’s a big chance you’re going to go through one. Many people have been through a relationship that left them with insecurity where they wonder if someone could really love them one day. “Your love is scaring me. No one has ever cared for me As much as you do”. By these lyrics in the song, I can tell that maybe the lead singer of the band. Has been heartbroken before or in really bad relationships. Or that he’s been neglected or abused and not shown any care and attention. So when his lover shows love, Care, and affection he’s surprised and it seems unreal to him. He, says that her love is scaring him, which can give us a clue that he hasn’t been loved properly. That when he gets the love any person should receive he gets scared because he doesn’t recognize this type of good healthy love. Juliana Johnson, a fan of this band who also feels connected to this analysis, said “ I went through a pretty rough relationship where it left me with a lot of insecurities. When I started dating my current partner in the beginning I started getting scared because in my past relationship I didn’t go through this type of love that my current partner is giving so I started questioning if this love is really real”.