Getting to know Santa Maria

Santa Maria is located on the famed Highway 101 at the mid-point of California’s Central Coast and is the largest city in Santa Barbara County with a population of over 103,000. Santa Maria encompasses many industries industrial, commercial, agriculture and a retail hub for a region that includes approximately 153,000 residents located in Southern San Luis Obispo and Northern Santa Barbara County

Known for our famous Santa Maria-style barbecue and our many rolling grapevine covered hills producing a fabulous wine industry, is becoming home to an increasing number of vineyards, wineries and wine makers! The Santa Maria Valley region produces strawberries, celery, lettuce, peas, squash, cauliflower, strawberries celery, lettuce, peas, squash, cauliflower, spinach, broccoli and beans.

Santa Maria is also home to thriving industries including aerospace, communications, high-tech research and development, energy production, military operations, and manufacturing. 1902 marks the date that oil was discovered at the Orcutt Oil Field and has produced more than $640 million of oil over the years. Manufacturers in our area produce a wide array of products raging from medical testing supplies to aircraft interiors and baby care products to fire hoses.

Some Quick Links

About the city – This link gets you to the City Council meetings, Human Resources and Employment Opportunities, Bus Routes and Schedules, a Recreation Guide and the latest news and City Calendar.

Demographics - This city site provides Links to demographics and statistics about the City of Santa Maria

Doing Business in Santa Maria – This link provides an overview and links to the various departments. Here are some of the most popular links:

Business License – This link shows the most commonly asked questions such as: Why is a business license required?, Who is required to have a business license and How to apply for a business license

Business Directory – This link shows the businesses that are members of the Santa Maria Chamber of Commerce. For a listing of all of the businesses in the city of Santa Maria, contact the City of Santa Maria business licensing department (805) 925-0951 extension 2422. If you wish to visit the office in person, the Finance Division is located at 110 E. Cook Street, Room 6, Santa Maria, CA, 93454. Office hours are 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

Santa Maria Valley Chamber of Commerce - This link provides information on the Chamber, the Visitor’s Bureau and the Economic Development Council

City Government – This link lists all of the city departments, mayor and council, city clerk plus services, parks and recreation and library

Connecting to SCORE in Santa Maria