Collin County is located north of Dallas County and includes some of the most populous suburbs of the DFW Metroplex including Plano, Frisco, McKinney, and Allen. Collin County is approximately 886 square miles and has a population of over one million. Frisco and Plano are its two most populated suburbs, and the northernmost suburbs, including Frisco, have seen some of the highest rates of population growth in the United States over the last several years.

Median Sales Price Chart for Homes in Collin County, Texas

With all the population growth comes higher real estate prices, and this is quite apparent in Collin County. As older, more established cities are built out, smaller ones farther to the north began growing at a more rapid pace and homes were built to quench this demand for housing.

>

Median Sales Price Per Square Foot Chart for Homes in Collin County, Texas

The price per square foot has risen as well, especially over the last several years.

Median List Price Chart for Homes in Collin County, Texas

The median original list price has also increased but has leveled off somewhat recently.

Average Days on Market Chart for Homes in Collin County, Texas

The average days on market shows the rapid decline that came along with all of the growth, and the recent cooling of the market shows marketing times have increased slightly.

Average Days on Market Chart by Price Range for Homes in Collin County, Texas

The average days on market has almost always been lower for the sub-$250K price point, but the divergence between this and the higher price points has become greater over the last few years. This is partially due to the decrease in inventory at that price point.

Months Supply of Home Inventory Chart for Homes in Collin County, Texas

Collin County real estate entered a very strong seller’s market once the recovery from the Great Recession kicked into high-gear in 2012 and has only recently cooled off from its highs. Inventory levels below four months still indicate a market that favors sellers overall.

Months Supply of Home Inventory by Price Range in Collin County, Texas

Looking at inventory levels by price point shows just how much less inventory there is at lower price points. There was less than a one-month supply of homes under $250K and less than a two-month supply of homes in the $250K-$500K range at various times during the peak of the housing boom.

Active Listings For Sale in Collin County, Texas

The number of listings peaked substantially during the Great Recession many years ago and then dropped significantly once the housing market recovered. In recent years, the inventory of listings has increased to nearly those same levels. Although some may read this data as concerning, one must factor in the explosion of population growth that’s occurred in Collin County over the last 10-15 years. There are simply many more homes available now, and thus more homes are available to purchase. Many new homes were sold directly by builders and thus were never counted in the original data when they sold, but once the owner decides to sell that data is captured here (if they listed with a real estate agent).

Active Listings For Sale by Price Point in Collin County, Texas

An interesting piece of data when looking at listings by price point is the substantial decline in listing inventory at the lower price points, especially under $250K. At one time there were over 3,000 active listings priced under $250K and there have been less than 1,000 since 2014. Some months there may only be a few hundred.

Average Percentage of List Price Received for Homes in Collin County, Texas

The supply of homes greatly affects how much they sell for relative to their list price. When there’s not enough supply to meet demand, homes may sell at or even above their list price if multiple buyers make offers on the same property and have to compete against each other. Although this has subsided somewhat over the last few years, multiple offers and bidding wars can and do still happen to homes that are priced well and have appealing characteristics relative to their competition.

New Listings of Homes in Collin County, Texas

As is the case with markets in North Texas, Collin County sees a surge of new listings in the spring and summer months whereas new listings taper off substantially in the late fall and winter. The significant drop in new listings in 2020 shows the effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on the market supply.

New Listings of Homes by Price Point in Collin County, Texas

New listings spike during these same times for all price points, and the decrease of newer listings at lower price points over time as a result of rising home prices is evident in this chart.

Pending Sales of Homes in Collin County, Texas

Pending sales tend to peak in the late spring and early summer in Collin County. Although this is mostly true for all areas of North Texas, the variances are a bit more pronounced in Collin County and this is likely due to the fact that many people choose to move and buy homes here because of the many highly-desired school districts. Thus many home buyers with children try to close their purchase before the school year begins. The slowest month for pending home sales in Collin County is almost always December, which means the slowest month for closings is usually in January.

Closed Sales of Homes in Collin County, Texas