While driving around Hollywood with album designer Gary Burden, Graham Nash spotted an old abandoned house near the corner Palm Avenue and Santa Monica Boulevard, Hollywood.

Graham Nash: “Henry Diltz photographed us on a sofa outside an old abandoned house on Santa Monica Boulevard close by the Santa Monica car wash, but when we saw the shots, we realized we were in the wrong order for the name.We went right back to re-shoot it but the house had been torn down, so on the cover of the first album I’m Crosby, David is Nash and Stephen is the only one with the right name over his head.” Photomontage of the “couch album”: album cover and black-and-white outtake, both by © Henry Diltz, combined with a view from Google Street Maps of the parking lot.The small house, built for local railroad workers is no long there. The space is now an open parking lot.But, had the house remained, this is what it the view might have looked like today, along with the album cover. 4WaySite added a small side wall to the house (via popspotnyc.com) to show depth. Graham Nash: “I spent one morning at breakfast with Neil on Bleecker Street in New York City and when we were finished I was completely sold on Neil joining. He was incredibly funny and very committed to music. He wanted to be a full member of the band with equal billing etc. This made sense to me and so we became CSNY.

Neil’s effect on the band was immediate and very fulfilling. He adds a certain edge to the sound and, of course, he is an incredible musician. We became a better band because of the inclusion of Neil Young.” The exact place is subject to investigation. T he current owner is the son of the man who rented it to Crosby and writes in to 4WaySite: “The tree has lost some limbs – yet has kept it’s mystical charm and impresses almost everyone who sees it.” Here is the backyard where the Déjà Vu photo was taken. The owner of the house further writes to 4WaySite: “My parents somehow got in with the local rock & roll network, as our house was also leased by members of The Grateful Dead, and Dave Mason. Steve Miller lived up the hill from us for a time during the late 70’s. Neil Schon and another Journey band member also lived nearby. My parents bought the property in the early 60’s (c. 1962) as a second home and winter rental property. I can remember my father talking about the lease for the house to CSN. He had a ‘NO CROSBY’ clause built into the lease preventing David from setting foot on the property. Crosby had a reputation for trashing places and my father wanted to keep the house in tact. Well, as you can see, that clause was ignored. However, all our living room furniture was removed and placed in the open air car port during the time they were there. Needless to say the furniture did not do well in the car port.” The “town in North Ontario” referred to in the opening line of the song is often presumed to be Ontario native Young’s hometown; Young himself cleared up the rumors in a 1995 Mojo interview with Nick Kent: “Well, it’s not literally a specific town so much as a feeling. Actually, it’s a couple of towns. Omemee, Ontario, is one of them. It’s where I first went to school and spent my ‘formative’ years. Actually I was born in Toronto…”. Omemee, just west of Peterborough, is well within what is now considered Southern Ontario, and 130 km from Toronto by road. The photo was taken by photographer Joel Bernstein, most likely sometime in early 1970, as the album came out in August of that year.In the book: “Shakey: Neil Young’s Biography”, author Jimmy McDonough writes that Bernstein, 18-years-old at the time, was “shocked” that Neil chose that photo for the cover. Bernstein described it as an “accidental shot” of Neil walking through Greenwich Village (during an outdoor photo session) and he even “solarized the print in order to hide its soft focus.” Joel Bernstein recently wrote to Bob Egan (PopSpotsnyc.com): “The photo was not a ‘mistake.’ I saw the small, old woman coming towards us down the sidewalk, was intrigued, and wanted to catch her passing Neil. The mistake, to me, was that I had in my haste focused the lens just past the two figures, closer to the fence than to Neil’s face. That was the original reason why I made a small-sized print and solarized it; to help with the apparent sharpness. But the solarization in this case added a somewhat spooky dimension to the image, which Neil took to immediately.” Stephen was a big Civil War buff and Manassas is the initial land battle of the American Civil War. In July of 1861, this tiny railroad community became one of the most important places in American history as the site of historic battles in the Civil War.The Manassas Station Operations included the operations known as Bristoe Station, Kettle Run, Bull Run Bridge, or Union Mills. It took place August 25–27, 1862, in Prince William County, Virginia. After the Civil War, the first depot on the present site was a long frame building constructed in the 1880s. On June 25, 1914 a fire broke out in the baggage room and the depot burned, leaving only the foundation and walls. Work on the third and present depot was completed in October 1914, in a red-brick Victorian style with a ceramic tile-covered hipped roof. The structure partially incorporated the walls of the burned depot, which measured about 20 feet by 77 feet, and had four new rooms; an office, a ladies’ waiting room, men’s waiting room and a baggage and express room. The “new” structure is about 32 feet longer than the earlier one permitting a modified room arrangement and included the addition of an umbrella shed on the front and east side, the installation of electric lights, and an attractive tile roof.. Graham Nash to 4WaySite: “The photograph was taken not far from the Pioneer Inn in Maui, Hawaii… we were all there rehearsing for the album… Neil had rented a house on the beach…on Friday at sunset, our last day, I decided that it would be a good idea to photograph ourselves. Stephen had his Hasselblad camera with him and I borrowed it. I figured out the exposure and placed the camera on the ground… I arranged it so that we would all be in the shot and had my friend Harry Harris press the trigger… there were only two shots left… one is the shot you’re talking about and the other is one of us and the family members who were also there outside the rented house. In the shot that was released, our friend Gary Burden airbrushed out the young son of Gwen Roberts who was Elliot Roberts girlfriend… the child was to the left of the shot partially hidden behind Stephen”. From thrasherswheat.org: Neil Young’s “On The Beach” album cover is considered to be one of his most creative and intriguing designs in his vast catalog. It would seem that many of his album covers have a rather tossed off feel. For example, the “Living With War” cover is literally stenciled letters on a brown paper bag. In contrast, “On The Beach” album is meticulously designed right down to the inside of the album jacket matching the pattern of the inside of the umbrella on the cover. “On The Beach” — the final link of Neil Young’s Ditch Trilogy — is considered by many fans to be one of his best and their most favorite of all Neil Young album covers and artwork. Designed by Gary Burden, photographed by Bob Seideman, and graphic lettering by Rick Griffin, the cover is quite enigmatic with a Cadillac car fin jutting from the sand like a crashed rocket being buried by time. A shoeless Neil stares out into the ocean near a forlorn potted palm. A jaunty yellow beach umbrella matches Neil’s jacket. The yellow theme is even continued with a Coors beer can on the table. Inside the album, things become even more crpytic with the album’s liner notes. Fans have poured over Rusty Kershaw’s strange handwritten note for clues and meaning often to no avail. Apparently, the recording sessions’ heavy use of Honey Slides took a toll … possibly to the creative sides’ benefit? David Bright: “The building in the background is the Raddison Hotel on East Cesar Chavez (the old 1st Street), which still looks like that. It would be easy to figure out exactly where Clinto (as everyone called him) was standing at that moment and where Bob was when he snapped it.” It started as the Sheraton Crest then changed into a Radisson in 1992. David Bright: “I remember seeing the black and white photo at Bob’s house around that time, and I think he was considering making it into a poster of some type. A few years later, after Bob had moved to San Francisco, he showed the photo to Larry Cragg, whom he had become friends with through music, and Larry showed it to Neil and the rest is history. The lines on the picture were all done after the fact. With the next leg of the CSN touring about to begin, Stills was busy arranging a surprise for his cohorts: a visit with the President of the United States. CSNY had spent so much of their carreers denouncing the policies of the Unites States government, it seemed inconceivable that they would ever enter the White House, let alone the Oval Office. On June 9, 1977 CSN met President Jimmy Carter in the White House. The house was typical Neil: a redwood box situated on top of an extremely steep hill overlooking the canyon. Tom Willkies: “It’s a totally ridiculous piece of architecture. Three stories, skinny, straight ip like a quart of milk. I can’t believe it hasn’t fallen down the hill.” Neil Young, Bernie Leadon, and Patti Davis all lived here. As Patti Davis said in her autobiography, “There are so many windows in this house, its like living outside. Every room has a stunning view.” Later on the house was owned by Bernie Leadon of the Eagles, who sold it to the current owner. Perfect Fernwood location, close-in yet on a very quiet street. It doesn’t get more Topanga than this. David Crosby: “I was a natural sailor, and it’s one of the reasons I later wrote ‘Déjà Vu.’”

After forty years of ownership, David Crosby has decided that it is time for this magnificent sailboat to become part of someone else’s life. Many of David’s songs have been created on board this spiritual platform. These are the songs he wrote on the Mayan:”The Lee-shore”

“Wooden Ships”

“Carry Me”

“Page 43″

“Shadow Captain”

“Rusty and Blue”

“That House” ADavid Crosby: “I still take the Mayan out sailing every chance I get with my wife, Jan, and Django, our son. But honestly, I haven’t been able to afford the boat’s upkeep for a while given my mortgage and other expenses. It’s been on the market for a few years, but my wife would break my arms if I actually sold it.”

In 2014 David Crosby finally sold The Mayan. He said in an exclusive interview to 4WaySite: “Very painful. Not a happy thing at all. I had it for like 45 years. Sailed it all over, half of the world. And I didn’t want to sell it but, you know, at a certain point you have to pretend you’re a grown up.”