Release Date To Be Announced pre-order your copy today! Orders with both pre-order and in stock items will have all in stock items shipped immediately!

This item not eligible for any further discount offers!

180g 45rpm Double LP!

CSNY's First Album as a Quartet, No. 1 on the Billboard 200!

Mastered Directly from the Original Master Tape by Chris Bellman at Bernie Grundman Mastering!

Pressed at QRP!

Atlantic 75 Historic Reissue Series from Analogue Productions!

Rolling Stone 500 Greatest Albums of All Time - Rated 220/500!

"Déjà Vu" is the title track to Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young's first album as a quartet. With Neil Young now in the mix, the album reached No. 1 on the Billboard 200 after its release in March 1970. The album remains a high point for the supergroup, having sold more than 7 million copies. Also on the record are hit singles "Teach Your Children," "Our House," and a cover of Joni Mitchell's "Woodstock."

The late David Crosby penned "Déjà Vu" for the group. Though it wasn't released as a single, it gave that iconic album its name and has subsequently received its fair share of love from CSNY fans.

"I'm one of those people who thinks we go round again," said Crosby back in 2008. "The Buddhists have got it right. It's a wheel and we get on and get off. I think life energy gets recycled. That's why I wrote 'Déjà Vu.'"

CSNY took a while to craft the album—which is largely considered their magnum opus. "Getting that second album out of us was like pulling teeth, there was song after song that didn't make it," Stephen Stills once said. "The track 'Déjà Vu' must have meant 100 takes in the studio. But 'Carry On' happened in a grand total of eight hours from conception to finished master. So you never know."

All the hallmarks of a top-notch Analogue Productions reissue are here for you to savor: Mastered directly from the original master tape by Chris Bellman at Bernie Grundman Mastering and cut at 45 RPM. Pressed at Quality Record Pressings, and housed in a tip-on old style gatefold double pocket jacket with film lamination by Stoughton Printing.

The 75th Anniversary of Atlantic Records

"75 for 75" is a series of 75 vinyl releases from Atlantic Records' storied catalog to celebrate the label's 75th Anniversary. This great label includes some of the best artists and records of all time.

Features

Atlantic 75 Series

180g Vinyl

45rpm

Double LP

Mastered Directly from the Original Master Tape by Chris Bellman at Bernie Grundman Mastering

Pressed at Quality Record Pressings

Tip-On Old Style Gatefold Double Pocket Jacket with Film Lamination by Stoughton Printing