Daniel Calhoun Roper (April 1, 1867 – April 11, 1943) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the 7th United States Secretary of Commerce under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and was the 5th United States Ambassador to Canada from May 19, 1939 until August 20, 1939.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Daniel C. Roper has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Intelligent, Independent, Brave, Intuitive, Diplomatic, Perceptive, and Caring.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Daniel C. Roper is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who is known for being a good partner.

Warm and Caring

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Daniel C. Roper well know them as someone who can be warm, caring, and compassionate, like a lamp or torch.

Methodical and Exacting

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Daniel C. Roper as someone who is careful, methodical, and a perfectionist.

A person who forms successful business partnerships, who appreciates the variety the world has to offer, who takes a frugal approach to life and tends to be a workaholic, and who engages in things that let them express their opinion.

Perceptive and Visionary

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Daniel C. Roper is someone who has a natural awareness about what is going on in the surrounding environment and the world at large, and a refined vision of how to navigate it.

They are also someone who is confident and creative, and who has a love for starting new projects, inventing new things, and giving back to the community.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Daniel C. Roper tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Daniel C. Roper's challenges

While Daniel C. Roper has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Daniel C. Roper can be Unrealistic, Critical, Short-tempered, Impulsive, Indecisive, Hesitant, and Narcissistic.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Daniel C. Roper's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Daniel C. Roper must also exercise caution as they can be short-tempered and aggressive.

Sensitive and Critical

Daniel C. Roper is someone who can be insecure, critical, and pessimistic, who can have difficulty relaxing, can be possessive and jealous, and who can have difficulty listening to others' opinions and perspectives and make hasty decisions.

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Daniel C. Roper also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.