Since the company's inception in 2003, K1 Speed is well known for their indoor electric go karts. The new Fairfield center has K1 Speed's latest go karts - the Superleggero - which K1 Speed imported directly from Italy. These state-of-the-art karts are capable of reaching speeds in excess of 45 miles per hour, making them the fastest in the entertainment industry. Karts are also available for kids 48" and taller. This Junior Kart is capable of speeds approaching 20 miles per hour, still a respectable speed for a child's first driving experience.

These modern karts will race on California's very first elevated indoor kart track, and is only the third K1 Speed to offer this exciting feature. The track is also lined with LED lighting. The elevated indoor track, in addition to the LED lighting, transforms the traditional karting experience into something fresh, new, and exciting.

The entertainment doesn't stop when the checkered flag flies, either. Away from the track, visitors can enjoy a full gaming area complete with video arcade games, pool tables, air hockey, and prize machines. An onsite eatery, the Paddock Lounge, will serve mouth-watering favorites such as pizza, wings, nachos, and burgers, in addition to refreshing ice-cold beverages.

K1 Speed Fairfield will also have a private event room, perfect for the many birthday parties, corporate events, bachelor parties, and other group events that will fill their calendar soon.

More information about K1 Speed Fairfield can be found at http://www.k1speed.com/fairfield-location.html

ABOUT K1 SPEED

Founded in 2003, K1 Speed is the world's largest indoor electric kart racing operator, and is soon to have 73 locations in seven different countries and 23 states. K1 Speed offers a unique upscale entertainment concept for casual consumers, racing enthusiasts, and corporate or group events. Each location features a unique track layout, cutting-edge electric go karts, the safest track barrier system, an onsite Paddock Lounge café, sophisticated decor, and authentic motorsport memorabilia. K1 Speed offers both an International Franchise and United States Franchise and is currently accepting applications. More information about K1 Speed can be found at http://www.k1speed.com.

Media Contact

Ryan Jurnecka, K1 Speed, 949-250-0242, [email protected]

SOURCE K1 Speed