(1928–2008). The American singer, songwriter, and guitarist Bo Diddley was an influential performer during the early years of rock music. He created a beat—chink-a-chink-chink, ca-chink-chink—that became one of the most widely imitated rhythms in rock. This signature sound has been called the Bo Diddley beat.

Diddley was born Ellas Bates on December 30, 1928, in McComb, Mississippi. He was raised mostly in Chicago, Illinois, by his adoptive family, from whom he took the surname McDaniel. He studied violin but switched to guitar after hearing the music of blues master John Lee Hooker. After playing for several years in Chicago, in 1955 he signed with Checker, a subsidiary of the legendary blues record label Chess. He recorded for Chess as Bo Diddley—a name most likely derived from the diddley bow, a one-stringed African guitar popular in the Mississippi Delta region.

The sound that became known as the Bo Diddley beat was a variation of the hambone, a beat with African origins that had surfaced in some big-band rhythm-and-blues songs of the 1940s. Diddley made his version of this beat into an irresistible rock rhythm. Johnny Otis’s “Willie and the Hand Jive” (1958), the Strangeloves’ “I Want Candy” (1965), and the Rolling Stones’ version of Buddy Holly’s Diddley-influenced “Not Fade Away” (1964) are just a few of the many songs that borrowed the beat. For all his influence, however, Diddley hit the pop charts just five times and the Top 20 only once (even though his 1955 debut single, “Bo Diddley,” backed with “I’m a Man,” was number one on the rhythm-and-blues charts).

The lyrics to Diddley’s songs were filled with African American street talk, bluesy imagery, and raunchy humor. He used tremolo, fuzz, and feedback effects to create a unique guitar sound. During his stage shows, he often dressed in a huge black Stetson hat and loud shirts, no doubt influencing the dress of the Rolling Stones and other British Invasion groups. The odd-shaped guitars that he played added to his arresting look.

In the 1960s Diddley recorded everything from surf music to straight-ahead blues. His last big hit was the song “You Can’t Judge a Book by the Cover” (1962), although the British Invasion reinvigorated his music long enough for a minor 1967 hit, “Ooh Baby.” Diddley toured only sporadically after the 1970s, appeared in a few movies, and made occasional albums. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987. Diddley died on June 2, 2008, in Archer, Florida.