There are plenty of instances of artists releasing a lone album and nothing else, but I was wondering how many examples there are when the artist's only release was a single. I think it may be a little too difficult to find some artists who released one single and then were never heard from again because a lot of them are very obscure, so I'm also counting one off supergroups, solo releases and singles by singers or groups who later changed their names or joined/became other groups and may or may not have had success afterwards. However, I'm not counting singles released by already-established artists under one-off pseudonyms.

At the moment I can only think of three examples: the first is The Dum Dum Ditty / Sophisticated Boom Boom by The Goodies - no, not the British comedy trio; I'm referring to the American girl group signed to Blue Cat Records. This single was released in 1965, but after that there was nothing else from them (though it turns out they nearly got to record Leader of the Pack before it was given to The Shangri-Las, but the label were anxious about the song so they chanced it by giving the song to an already-established artist to record instead. Talk about so close yet so far).

The second is another single from 1965, Weekend People / I Get So Disgusted by The Mystics (or Mystic as they're named on the label). The group are still around from what I've heard, but this is the only record they've released.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JwrTRguDQEw

(For the record, the 'George Martin' credited as coproducer of this song is not the George Martin - it's someone else with the same name)

The third is Bev Bevan's Let There Be Drums / Heavy Head, released in 1976. This is one of the lone solo releases; he was already an established drummer, having played with The Move and ELO, but this single is his only solo release to date. It's nothing too special, but it did result in a reunion of sorts of the original ELO line-up on the b-side.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKvVokm7NYU

EDIT: Just removed the Emerson single because it turns out they released another song called Maybe Someday that appeared on a comp sometime after their single.

Yeah, it's most likely the majority of artists who've existed never got past one single, but it's also most likely that they're greatly overlooked and lots of music listeners haven't heard of them at all, and most likely it's as a result of the fact that they never released anything else and only have a couple of songs to represent them (at least performance-wise) when compared to artists who released other singles, even if the lone single charted. Even if the artist went on to have greater fame afterwards in another band or under a different name, the lone single is still often overlooked, especially by those who aren't familiar with the successful act the artist joined/became. Take the Larry Lurex single you mentioned for example - I can guarantee that there are a lot of Queen and Freddie Mercury fans who either haven't heard of it or (in my case) hadn't until much later after they became more familiar with Queen or Freddie Mercury outside a handful of the hit singles. I'm sure there are people who've heard of it who aren't too familiar with Queen, but honestly the reason the single is best remembered for is because of Freddie Mercury's involvement.

All I'm trying to do is highlight these overlooked lone singles, get users to participate by giving examples and hopefully introduce others to these artists.

Great idea for a thread, but The Goodies don't really qualify-- They had other records: Condition Red and an incredible version of Double Shot (Of My Baby's Love). More details:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Goodees