In 1965, a year after Beatlemania blasted through America, Capitol Records made sure to saturate the market by releasing four albums by the Fab Four.

Now these U.S. releases — “The Early Beatles,” “Beatles VI,” the soundtrack “Help!” and “Rubber Soul” — have been released as a four-CD box set. A follow from 2004’s ‘64 collection, also released as a box set, this latest collection shows just how far the band came in a span of a year.

Capitol originally cobbled together the albums from the group’s British recordings, making the critical decision to include singles, unlike the British versions, and limit the number of songs to 11 or 12, instead of 14.

Presented for the first time on CD and in both stereo and mono form, these albums still thrill — 40 years later — with the band’s pop chops.

The harmony-laden cover odes of “The Early Beatles” (songs recorded for 1963’s UK debut “Please Please Me”) are cleverly simplistic in their sincerity, from rowdy rocker “Twist and Shout” to doe-eyed “Anna.”

The harmonica thrust of “Love Me Do,” released as a separate single in Britian, gives an early twinkle of John Lennon and Paul McCartney’s future songwriting brilliance.

“Beatles VI” consists of one memorable number, the rollicking hit single “Eight Days a Week,” while the rest of the album is a decent mix of tracks from the British version of “Beatles For Sale” and a few covers.

“Help!,” the soundtrack album for the group’s second film, replaces seven original British tracks, including “Yesterday,” with the movie’s trippy instrumental score, aided by George Harrison’s newfound love of the sitar.

It’s “Rubber Soul,” though, featuring Ringo Starr’s drumming, Lennon’s rock wit, McCartney’s balladry and Harrison’s expert guitar licks, where the group’s genius truly starts to manifest.

Most similar to its British equivalent, “Rubber Soul” is a glorious folk-pop collection, from the funky bump of “The Word” to the sitar-acoustic guitar swirl of “Norwegian Wood” and lyrical ominousness of “Run For Your Life.”

As box sets go, this one isn’t earth-shattering, but still a reminder of The Beatles’ lasting poignance.