Seeing baby faced Anna May Wong, just one year out of high school at 17 and in her breakout role, is enough to make this film worth checking out. The film was shot in two-color Technicolor (red and green), which I found added to the images, rather than awkwardly detracting from them as I feared it might. Unfortunately, the plot is typical of the period, a variation of the popular Madame Butterfly story of 1898, and it’s pretty maddening. At least here it wasn’t a Caucasian actor in yellowface, ala Mary Pickford in the role of Butterfly in 1915.

While we’re made to feel sympathy for the young Asian woman who has been impregnated by a visiting American (well, one…

"The garden knew she loved him, for her laughter stirred the rose leaves."

It's difficult to say how one should rate The Toll of the Sea, TCM's first screening in honor of the channel's Star of the Month, Anna May Wong. It's an important film, both as a vehicle for an Asian-American leading actress in a Hollywood feature film - 17-year-old Anna May Wong in a truly moving first starring role, displaying her remarkable ability to cry on cue as the young Chinese woman who is so callously abandoned by her white American lover - and as an example of the two-strip Technicolor cinematographic process, which is quite a pretty effect. Even so, there's no getting around how depressing the…

One can immediately notice the meritorious love that went into the restoration of this film, an immaculate reconstruction thanks to the UCLA film and television archive, under the meticulous supervision of Robert Gitt, Richard Dayton and Peter Comandini, who gave themselves with unwavering dedication to the recovery of this historically important film for cinema that for many years was thought to be lost. The final product is astonishing, that is beyond dispute, but unfortunately I cannot say the same about the film itself. However I must make one thing clear, The Toll of the Sea is the kind of film where my heart tells me ''it's a great film'' but my brain tells me ''no, it's not''. Desperately, it leaves…