This article is about the Cronenberg film. For the play, see M. Butterfly. For the Butterfly Lovers legend, see Butterfly Lovers. For the Madame Butterfly original story, see Madame Butterfly (short story). For the Puccini opera Madama Butterfly, see Madama Butterfly. For the 1915 Madame Butterfly film, see Madame Butterfly (1915 film). For the 1919 Madame Butterfly film, see Harakiri (1919 film). For the 1932 Madame Butterfly film, see Madame Butterfly (1932 film). For other uses, see Madame Butterfly (disambiguation).

1993 American romantic drama filmTemplate:SHORTDESC:1993 American romantic drama film

M. Butterfly is a 1993 American romantic drama film directed by David Cronenberg. The screenplay was written by David Henry Hwang based on his play of the same name. The film stars Jeremy Irons and John Lone, with Ian Richardson, Barbara Sukowa, and Annabel Leventon.[1]

Plot[]

Loosely based on true events (see Bernard Boursicot and Shi Pei Pu), the film concerns René Gallimard (Jeremy Irons), a French diplomat assigned to Beijing, China, in the 1960s. He becomes infatuated with a Peking opera performer, Song Liling (John Lone), who spies on him for the Government of the People's Republic of China. Their affair lasts for 20 years and they subsequently marry, with Gallimard all the while apparently unaware (or willfully ignorant) of the fact that in Peking opera, Dan roles are traditionally performed by men. At the end of the film Gallimard kills himself (although the man he is based on, Bernard Boursicot, did not do this in real life.)

Cast[]

Jeremy Irons as René Gallimard

John Lone as Song Liling

Ian Richardson as Ambassador Toulon

Barbara Sukowa as Jeanne Gallimard

Annabel Leventon as Frau Baden

Shizuko Hoshi as Comrade Chin

Vernon Dobtcheff as Agent Entacelin

Themes[]

One theme of the film (as with the play) is Orientalist stereotypes, but Cronenberg removed many of the political overtones from the story[citation needed]

in order to focus more intensely on the relationship between Gallimard and Song.[citation needed]

A key line in the film is "Only a man knows how a woman is supposed to act."

Reception[]

M. Butterfly grossed $1,500,000 in the domestic box office.[2]

On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 43%, based on 21 reviews, and an average rating of 5.60/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "David Cronenberg reins in his provocative sensibility and handles delicate material with restraint, yielding a disappointing adaptation that flattens M. Butterfly into a tedious soap opera."[3] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 43 out of 100, based on 19 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[4]

See also[]

M. Butterfly

Cross-dressing in film and television

References[]

[]

M. Butterfly at the Internet Movie Database

M. Butterfly at AllMovie

M. Butterfly at Box Office Mojo

M. Butterfly at Metacritic

Template:David Henry Hwang Template:David Cronenberg Template:Madama Butterfly