1980 In Review - September

When the Order of St. Ambrose the Unlikely finds itself broke, the monks pin their hopes on the generosity of televangelist Armageddon T, Thunderbird (Andy Kaufman), and send the naive Brother Ambrose (Marty Feldman) to Los Angeles to ask for $10,000 in person. En route, Ambrose is ripped off by travelling preacher Dr. Sebastian Melmoth (Peter Boyle), and subsequently rescued from the street by a friendly prostitute who helps him to track down the elusive Thunderbird.

Marty Feldman is more well known for being in a couple of Mel Brooks movies, his performance in Young Frankenstein in particular is brilliant. Here he writes and directs a very uneven comedy with a good cast. that has…

Because literally everything that made good money at the box office in the late 70s/early 80s begat imitators, the success of Life of Brian (1979) meant we saw a short run of religious parody films follow in its wake: Wholly Moses!, History of the World: Part I, and Marty Feldman's In God We Tru$t. Feldman's film is a little different from the others in that it is set during the present day (and in America rather than the Holy Land), and because of that actually gets in a few pretty good pointed pokes at the murky spiritual milieu much of the culture seem to find itself in at the end of the 70s.

Because I love me some historical context…

Viewed on Hollywood Suite

According to IMDB: One of two Biblical comedies from 1980, which were released a year after the box-office success of Monty Python's Biblical spoof Life of Brian (1979). The two pictures, Wholly Moses! (1980) and this movie, were, unlike the Python film, commercial and critical failures which probably annoyed Richard Pryor more than anyone else: He appeared in both bombs.

In God We Tru$t (1980) or as it's also known as, In God We Tru$t

(or Gimme That Prime Time Religion) was written and directed by Marty Feldman.

It's a satire of religious figures, televangelists and the state of religion in modern times.

Feldman plays Brother Ambrose, who was born and raised in a Trappist monastery,…

I appreciate what this is going for with this written/directed/starring Marty Feldman film, because it intends to criticise the domination of religion in American politics and society, and it does find its way to some salient points.

I'm less sure if it really does a good job getting to those points, though, and honestly I'm not sure it gets much use out of the monk Ambrose, which is Feldman's character (though he's good for a bit of culture shock). There's a lot more I'd have liked to have seen particularly when it came to televangelist Armageddon T. Thunderbird (Andy Kaufman) because that's really the thesis statement of this, it seems, but his usage feels a bit rushed. For that matter,…

Marty Feldman gives his best tribute to the comedy works of Chaplin, Keaton, and Lloyd with plenty of slapstick and stunts throughout his religious satire. While Feldman has the physicality to pull off all the stunts, he unfortunately doesn't have the charm and/or timing of those silent greats.

The film about an innocent monk, sheltered from the real world having to leave his secluded home to find money in order to save his monastery from bankruptcy, is primarily about a monk struggling with his hormones and desire to understand adulthood. This leads to a lot of unfunny sex jokes that make the tone of the film rather off putting when it suddenly switches back to silent movie slapstick.

The script…

"Where there is string cheese, sin cannot be far behind."

I wonder if there was a time where this was subversive and fresh. Nowadays, all the satire in this movie is so hackneyed that this just feels like a dull slog.

It starts. . .not strong, but fairly clever. Jokes I more appreciated than found funny. Quickly, it just becomes about religious grifters and their grifting ways. Which, sure, point that stuff out, but here's my problem with religious satire: the people who need the message most likely aren't going to hear it.

And it's just not funny. I laughed out loud once at a very silly bit. Peter Boyle's character is definitely the strongest and has the most bits…