LANSING, Mich. (WLNS) – The 6 News Investigates Team has published a series about a Livingston County man who has embellished his rank and military service. The series is called ‘Stolen Valor.’

The term is one in general use to describe the actions of a person who claims to have attained certain ranks, earned certain medals, or to have served in the military when they haven’t.

In his original email tip to 6 News, Edgar Jones, a former volunteer for Veteran Service Dogs Organization, referred to the situation as “Stolen Valor.”

The original federal law making such actions was declared unconstitutional in 2005 by the United States Supreme Court. The decision came in a case of a man convicted of claiming to have service in the Marines, been wounded and received a Congressional Medal of Honor.

He plead guilty to one count of falsely claiming to have received the Congressional Medal of Honor, with the right to appeal the constitutionality of the law.

“The Stolen Valor Act makes it a crime to falsely claim receipt of military decorations or medals and provides an enhanced penalty if the Congressional Medal of Honor is involved,” is how the U.S. Supreme Court defined the country’s original “Stolen Valor Act.”

On appeal, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals found the federal laws were a violation of the First Amendment, and therefore were unconstitutional. It was subsequently appealed to the SCOTUS, which ruled in 2012, 4 to 3, that the law was unconstitutional on First Amendment grounds.

Congress created a new, narrower law in 2013 that makes it a crime to falsely claim to have received several name medals “with intent to obtain money, property, or other tangible benefit.”

Michigan lawmakers have attempted to adopt legislation to prohibit falsely claiming military service, rank, or commendation. Legislation was introduced in 2009 by former Michigan State Sen. Randy Richardville. It did not receive approval from the state House.

Sophia Lavrick and Duncan Phenix contributed to this report.

Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.