A little background on who James Lepp is:

 Born November 19, 1983 in Abbotsford, BC, Canada

 4 time BC Amateur Champion

 2 time Canadian Jr Champion

 4 time NCAA Division 1 All American

 2002 Big Ten Freshman of the Year

 2003 Big Ten Player of the Year

 2003 Pacific Coast Amateur winner by 10 shots

 2005 NCAA Division 1 Champion (beat Michael Putnam in a Playoff)

 Academic All American

 Graduated from University of Washington in 2006 with Business Degree with a focus in Entrepreneurship

 2 time winner on the Canadian Tour, once as an amateur in 2003

 Shot 59 first round back after not playing in 6 weeks

 Considering switching to left handed. Played 4 rounds thus far and already down to a 4.2 index.

Here's my interview with the founder of Kikkor golf, James Lepp.

Golfspy Matt: What made you decide to get into the golf shoe business?

James Lepp: Well, it was the lack of cool options really. Growing up playing golf all the time, in saddle golf shoes, was somewhat frustrating. We didn't even have a choice back then! I, along with friends and fellow players, wanted something to wear that matched our personal style, something that was comfortable, and something that didn't sacrifice performance.

GM: In terms of designing shoes, where do you look for inspiration?

JL: Haha, good question. We actually have a policy at Kikkor to take ZERO inspiration from other golf shoe companies. There are great golf shoe companies out there, don't get me wrong, but we don't want to get lost in what they're doing already. Instead we look a lot at lifestyle brands, other ‘more athletic' sports, and what our customers are saying. There are a lot of golfers out there who have some fantastic ideas about how golf shoes should be. And they are the people wearing them after all.

GM: What was behind the decision to go with non-replacable spikes on the some of your models? What kind of traction and durability can players expect from these?

JL: Removing the spike system allows us to produce a better shoe in many facets – more comfort, lower profile, better look, and performance wise we get the player much lower to the ground producing increased feel and stability. The drawback is obviously that they will wear out over time. But hey, when you wear them out you can wear them out.

GM: What technologies has Kikkor developed/does Kikkor use in their shoes?

JL: We haven't developed any technologies...yet...but we're getting there. Our story and product is about having fun on the course and being comfortable in all ways possible, so we make shoes that players look good in, feel good in, and of course perform well in.

GM: What advantages (performance or otherwise) do Kikkors offer over other shoes?

JL: If you can call it an advantage, it's our style and comfort. Kikkors allow you to comfortably be yourself.

GM: It seems like more and more companies are doing "street" or sneaker-style golf shoes now, even Footjoy. What are your thoughts on that? Also, where do you go to stay one step ahead?

JL: I always knew there was a market for this style of shoe, so it doesn't surprise me that other brands are now entering the market since it's been validated. I expect more to enter it going forward. Initially I was worried about all these other brands, but really, it has helped Kikkor tell its story.

The nice thing about all the other companies is that they are still deeply focused on that core 50 year old golfer. Everybody knows that demographic spends the most on golf, but it doesn't mean that the younger demographic should be completely ignored. At Kikkor we focus on gearing our products, marketing, and communication to that younger group. They are the future of golf after all so somebody should pay attention to them.