Created in 1992, The Legend of White Fang is an animated series that’s based on the White Fang book by Jack London. The show tells the story of 12-year-old Wendy Scott and her wild canine friend, White Fang.

When Wendy saves the animal’s life, her action prompts the beginning of a unique and lasting friendship. Episodes feature the duo as they traverse the rugged and mystical Yukon together during the Klondike Gold Rush of the 1890’s. White Fang, part husky and part wolf, is the hero of the story, as he and Wendy clash head on with the booming growth of civilization. Along the way, they meet their share of gold miners, con men, thieves, Indians, otter poachers, and avalanches.

Series voice actors include: Mark Hellman (White Fang), Patricia Rodriguez (Wendy), Terrence Scammell (Weedon/Alex), Pierre Lenoir (Sgt. Oakes), Neil Shee (Raven Moon), Michael rudder (Beauty Smith), Rick Jones (Matt), Thelma Farmer (She Wolf), and Anik Mattern (Jeannie/Bella).

In addition to the 26 action-packed episodes, this DVD also includes five bonus episodes from Busytown Mysteries, The World of Richard Scary, Flight Squad, Ripley’s Believe It or Not!, and Country Mouse and City Mouse Adventures!

You can purchase The Legend of White Fang or you can also try to win a copy here. To enter, you need to merely post a comment below.You can enter once per day.

If you’d like an additional chance to win, leave a comment on our Facebook page under the wall post about the contest. If you don’t have a Facebook account, you can email us for another way to enter.

Guidelines: This giveaway is open to participants with a United States mailing address only. (International readers can enter if they have a friend in the States who can accept their prizes by mail.) Many may enter but one person will win. You must be 18 and older to enter and no purchase is necessary. Contest ends December 20, 2010.

UPDATE: Congratulations to “Ray C.” who won this DVD set in our contest. Thanks to everyone who played and we’ve got more contests coming!