That funny pop punk band, Redd Kross – engineered by the McDonald brothers Steve and Jeff – has got to be the second most famous band out of Hawthorne and will be doing a show at the Garage Saturday night in Ventura. While Redd Kross hasn’t exactly earned half of Metallica’s money, they haven’t gone away, either. They are peerless practitioners of that necessary quality to be a musician: perseverance.

They’ve played all over with lots of famous (and infamous) rock stars, including a Friday afternoon gig at 2008 Coachella. It’s goofball rock, often inspired by inspirational popular culture – who else has songs about Tammy Faye Baker and Linda Blair and covered songs by David Bowie, the Stones, and...Charles Manson? They even appeared on the soundtrack of "Desperate Teenage Lovedolls." Yikes.

Over the years, Redd Kross has released half a dozen albums and three extended play records, with a new one coming next year. Meanwhile, cool indie label, Merge Records, is re-releasing some of their classic stuff.

Originally, the Tourists, and then a few years later in 1980 they became Red Cross, but that other non-musical organization was not into sharing, leading to the well-known, but spelling-challenged Redd Kross. And they owe it all to punk icons Black Flag, not to mention their Hawthorne neighbor, Lisa Stengel. Steve McDonald made sense of all that during a recent phoner.

Hey Bill, it’s Steve McDonald. My cellphone doesn’t really work at this location.

And my tape recorder is feeling sketchy – welcome to 2018. Anyway, so almost 40 years of this – who knew?

Yeah, I know, it’s crazy.

Tell me about all these Redd Kross re-issues on Merge Records.

What Merge is doing is re-releasing "Teen Babes From Monsanto" and "Hot Issue," which is sort of an odds and sods collection. My brother Jeff put both those out last year on his own little label, but there’s a greater demand for them so Merge is doing it now. The next year, supposedly in the spring time, Third Man is putting out vinyl re-issues of "Phaseshifter" and "Show World."

Not only is vinyl still with us – it never left.

Yeah, it’s true. It’s true, and just to finish that thought, Merge is putting out a new Redd Kross record in the fall. We’re putting the finishing touches on it right now.

Back in the day in Hawthorne, you were the Tourists and then the Beach Boys through their music, convinced zillions of tourists to move to SoCal. Now, we have to pay to park at our own beaches. Not sure where I’m going with that. Anyway, what was your big break or have you had it yet?

(laughs) Have we had a big break? I don’t know but probably our biggest break – the greatest impact break – was in the first year of our inception when Black Flag, who no one knew and was just starting at that point, invited us to come down to their rehearsal and watch them play and then after their rehearsal was done, they handed us their instruments and said, "Hey, if you’re a band then why don’t you show us?" So we auditioned to be their friends, and that happened in the first year of the band, and I would totally say that had the most lasting impact.

What a great story. What year was that?

’79.

Of all the gigs you’ve played, could you pick one that was the strangest?

Oh, jeez, I dunno but back to the beginning of the band, our first sort of show was opening for Black Flag but we got them the gig, and it was an eighth-grade graduation party in Hawthorne, California, at Lisa Stengel’s house. No one remembers Lisa Stengel, but it’s one of those neighborhood names that is burned into my consciousness. So Lisa Stengel’s eighth-grade graduation party in Hawthorne, California, was maybe the strangest gig.

So, no fun-hating school administrators present to freak out and call the cops?

No administrators. It was at a house, Lisa Stengel’s house. I was graduating sixth-grade that year, but it was our drummer’s eighth-grade class, and the kids felt at liberty to heckle us the entire time because we were their peers.

So it’s 1979, and it looks like the first 10 minutes of "Boogie Nights"’ so there were all these kids with feathered hair yelling at us. At that time the cover band still reigned supreme, especially in the suburbs, and so they thought we should be playing Zeppelin covers or whatever. So we were playing that first batch of songs we had written and my brother, Jeff, stood up and said, "We’re gonna do an unreleased Led Zeppelin song," and the kids got all excited and went, "Yeah!" and cheered, but why would they think we would have access to unreleased Led Zeppelin music?

I guess, because we had guitars that somehow made us mystically entitled, so we were immediately music world insiders, so they believed that we had Led Zeppelin songs and that we had learned them, but all we had up our sleeves was noise rock inspired by say, Teenage Jesus and the Jerks. So we counted off, "One, two, three, four," and then after about 30 seconds they realized that they were being played so they started heckling us again. This taught us early on how to deal with an antagonistic crowd, so we did it twice. They were booing, so my brother said, "OK, just kidding. Now we’re going to do an unreleased Black Sabbath song," and they started cheering but all we had was more of a free form Teenage Jesus vibe, so that’s my story about a weird gig.

Mystically Entitled – that’s gotta be a song or an album title.

Yeah.

More from Bill Locey:

Thomas Fire Remembrance concert brings Big Bad Voodoo Daddy, Charles Law Band to Ojai

Ojai's Char Man celebrates 15 years together at Deer Lodge with free show

SuicideGirls bring their 'beauty redefined' burlesque show to Ventura

So how’d you get to be the bass player? I’ve been doing this for a long time and I’ve discovered that there’s more bands than bass players, so you’ll always have work&mldr;

Yeah, that’s true, but like most of them, I became a bass player by default&mldr;because someone else already picked guitar. In time, I learned to appreciate the bass, but at first, I could tell them apart by counting the pegs on the neck. "Let’s see, there’s four pegs."

Later, I learned to listen for the bass parts on Beatles songs or whatever, and I also credit the first Ramones’ album for teaching Jeff and I how to essentially start a garage rock band. So the way it was mixed and using the balance knob, you could hear the Ramones without Johnny or the Ramones without Dee Dee, so Jeff and I would practice filling in the missing parts on that album. I always suggest that to the parents of a young kid that is just learning how to play.

How many priors have you guys had in Ventura, quite a few I would think?

Not many, which is why I’m really glad you wanted to do this preview. I was getting a little sketchy about Ventura. Redd Kross played some ill-fated festival around 2011 at some fairgrounds.

Yeah, that was the Indie Fest West, or something like that. I went to that one. What a great line-up.

Yeah, we had a fun time playing, but it was kind of drizzly and under-attended. The time before that would’ve been sometime in the '90s at the Ventura Theater. I’ve been there before. I played rhythm guitar in Courtney Love’s ill-fated first solo band. That was one of only two performances. The next night at the Hollywood Bowl opening for Jane’s Addiction, they rightly pulled the plug on Courtney, so I don’t know&mldr;

Anyway, so Off! played at the Garage about three years ago, and it was a really great show so I’m hoping we can recapture some of that. This tour is going to be really fun – we’re in a really good place.

OK, Steve, thanks for talking to me – look forward to seeing you at the Garage

Cheers&mldr;

If you go

Who: Redd Kross, Dale Crover Band, Slow Caves, Moth Waves

Where: The Garage, 1091 Scandia Drive, Ventura

When: Saturday

Cost: $14

Call: 866-468-3399

Bill Locey's picks