Jules Verne (1828-1905) was a French author of adventure and science fiction novels, in addition to being a poet and a playwright. He is best known for his Voyages Extraordinaires series, which makes up the vast majority of his work. His work is not meant to be science fiction, although he is considered to be one of the foremost pioneers of the genre. Although he was not a scientist or an inventor, he wrote about space, air and underwater travel before such the forms of transportation were out of their infancies (or in the case of space travel, created).

Jules Verne became a published novelist in 1863 with the novel Five Weeks in a Balloon. Below is a list of Jules Verne’s books in order of when they were first released:

Publication Order of Voyages Extraordinaires Books

Publication Order of Children Of Captain Grant Books

Publication Order of Barsac Mission Books

Into the Niger Bend (1905)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe City in the Sahara (1905)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Adventures of Captain Hatteras Books

The Desert of Ice (1866)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe English at the North Pole (1866)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Captain Nemo Books

(with)

Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea (1869)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Mysterious Island (1874)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Second Fatherland Books

The Castaways of the Flag (1900)Amazon.com | Amazon.deTheir Island Home (1924)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Steam House Books

Tigers and Traitors (1976)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Demon of Cawnpore (2008)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Two Years Holiday Books

Adrift in the Pacific (1888)Amazon.com | Amazon.deSecond Year Ashore (1940)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Paris in the Twentieth Century (1863)Amazon.com | Amazon.deUnderground City (1877)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Golden Volcano (1906)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Meteor Hunt (1908)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

A Fantasy of Dr. Ox (1872)Amazon.com | Amazon.deIn the Year 2889 (1889)Amazon.com | Amazon.deCarpathian Castle (2018)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Doctor Ox And Other Stories (1874)Amazon.com | Amazon.deYesterday And Tomorrow (1910)Amazon.com | Amazon.deJules Verne Collection, 33 Works (2004)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

The Exploration of the World (1879)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Publication Order of Anthologies

Science Fiction Stories(1988)Amazon.com | Amazon.deClassic Sea Stories(1996)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Arctic: an anthology of the finest writing on the Arctic and the Antarctic(2007)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Wesleyan Anthology of Science Fiction(2010)Amazon.com | Amazon.deThe Great Sea Adventure(2019)Amazon.com | Amazon.deBeach Books Anthology(2023)Amazon.com | Amazon.deTales of the Restless Sea - Adventure Anthology(2023)Amazon.com | Amazon.de

Notes: Five Weeks in a Balloon was also titled Journeys and Discoveries in Africa by Three Englishmen. A Journey to the Centre of the Earth was also published as A Journey to the Interior of the Earth. In Search of the Castaways was also published under the title The Children of Captain Grant. The Survivors Of The Chancellor was also known as The Chancellor. Hector Servadac was also known as Off on a Comet. The Underground City was also titled Black Indies. Eight Hundred Leagues on The Amazon was also published as The Cryptogram. The Southern Star was also known as The Vanished Diamond. Robur the Conqueror was also known as Clipper of the Clouds. North Against South was also titled Texar’s Revenge. Claudius Bombarnac was also known as Adventures of a Special Correspondent. Propeller Island was also titled Floating Island. Facing the Flag was also known as For the Flag. The Aerial Village was also known as The Village in the Treetops. The Sphinx of the Ice was also published as An Antarctic Mystery. The Chase of the Golden Meteor was also titled The Hunt for the Meteor. The Lighthouse at the End of the World was written with Michel Verne.

If You Like Jules Verne Books, You’ll Love…

Robert Louis Stevenson

H.G. Wells

Charles Dickens

Jules Verne Synopsis: In The Kip Brothers by Jules Verne, Karl and Pieter Kip are castaways on a deserted island when they are rescued by the ship James Cook. After stopping a mutiny aboard the brig, they end up being accused of the murder of the ship’s captain.

Shop Worldwide: Amazon.com | Amazon.co.uk | Amazon.ca

We do our best to get everything listed but the occasional book gets by us. If you see anything missing please let us know so we can add it ASAP. You can also use this form to request we add new authors. Thanks. You can also e-mail us with any feedback at site@orderofbooks.com.

E-mail:

Book/Author To Add:

Δ

While I appreciate all offers of donations to show your appreciation for the site, I’d much rather you do that by supporting causes that need the money far more than I do. Each month I pick a few select charities broken down by our most popular countries that you can support instead. Thanks!

World Central Kitchen

Ronald McDonald House

Reach Out And Read

The Bail Project