by Gary Romeo

On April 3, 1968, Fritz Leiber wrote a postcard to L. Sprague de Camp discussing his workload. Apparently, Glenn Lord had asked Mr. Leiber to continue the adventures of King Kull. But Fritz had to turn down the job as he was busy consolidating his own Fafhrd & Gray Mouser series.

I do not have de Camp’s prior letter or any response. It is unclear what Fritz meant by saying “CONAN OF ATLANTIS is surely an accurate title …” Perhaps de Camp was considering that as a Lancer title or perhaps Fritz was mixing up Kull with Conan? No way of knowing for sure.

What we do know for sure is that Fritz Leiber never wrote a Kull adventure. But he did write a Tarzan one. First I’m going to say a little bit about Leiber and his career. Every sword & sorcery fan should be thankful for his swimming in that pool.

From Wikipedia: “Fritz Reuter Leiber Jr. (/ˈlaɪbər/ LEYE-bər; December 24, 1910 – September 5, 1992) was an American writer of fantasy, horror, and science fiction. He was also a poet, actor in theater and films, playwright, and chess expert. With writers such as Robert E. Howard and Michael Moorcock, Leiber is one of the fathers of sword and sorcery and coined the term. In 1936, he initiated a brief, intense correspondence with H. P. Lovecraft, who “encouraged and influenced [Leiber’s] literary development” before Lovecraft died in March 1937. Leiber introduced Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser in “Two Sought Adventure”, his first professionally published short story in the August 1939 edition of Unknown, edited by John W. Campbell.”

Although Fritz’s tales of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser deserve a lengthy discussion I’m going to table that for now and discuss his Edgar Rice Burroughs pastiche/novelization of the Clair Huffaker screenplay of Tarzan and the Valley of Gold.

From Wikipedia: “Tarzan and the Valley of Gold is a 1966 Eastmancolor adventure film starring Mike Henry in his debut as Tarzan. The Panavision film, produced by Sy Weintraub, written by Clair Huffaker, and directed by Robert Day, is remembered for its very James Bond-like portrayal of a tropical suited, globetrotting Tarzan. It was released on July 1, 1966. The novelization by Fritz Leiber was the first authorized Tarzan novel by an author other than Edgar Rice Burroughs, and was officially the 25th book in the series.”

I’m not going to spend too much time discussing the film as I want this article to be primarily about Fritz Leiber’s novelization. I will say, I liked the first half of the movie quite a bit and was impressed with Tarzan in a suit. Mike Henry was extremely fit, and clothes didn’t much hide his Tarzan physique. The lobby card below says it all. Tarzan dodging bullets and getting ready to blind the sniper with the car’s broken off mirror. Prior to this scene was the best line in any recent Tarzan movie. Tarzan had been picked up at the airport and asks the chauffeur about “the smell of blood” near the vehicle. Tarzan’s developed senses are usually ignored in favor of his muscles or kinship with animals. But this movie nailed it. Tarzan’s sense of smell alerts him to danger. Fantastic! But of course, the movie has the usual low budget flaws: bad acting and cheap effects. Worse, the producers displayed a schizoid mindset. There was action aplenty, but it was bloodless and less intense than it should have been. Also “family-friendly” elements like Dinky, a Cheeta like chimpanzee; Major, a too docile lion; and Manuel Padilla Jr., a young boy in danger; weakened Tarzan’s animal nature rather than enhancing it, IMHO. (Those family friendly elements worked fine for the Tarzan TV show though.)

Leiber’s novelization is quite a bit different from the film itself. The book, like the film, was heavily influenced by Ian Fleming’s prose and the James Bond movies. Rereading it today, I still enjoy the Fleming-esque style, but I can see where a modern audience might be baffled or even turned off by the details of food choices, clothing choices, and especially the details concerning race.

Post WW2 was a time of rising incomes and expectations. Air travel was glamorous and still mostly reserved for the wealthy or upper middle class. But the average person could now see an immediate future where they could afford recreational travel and started plans to see these “Thrilling Cities” that James Bond visited. The Ian Fleming books were like a travel guide informing the reader of the sites and tastes (and the women) being offered. The USA/Western European centrist view of the world was not questioned.

The basic plot of the book and movie is simple. A young boy emerges from the jungle, hopelessly lost, with a pet leopard and a gold relic. The news of the gold attracts the attention of an international criminal. Tarzan is contacted by a friend who runs the animal sanctuary where the boy and leopard are waiting. The criminal’s henchmen kidnap the boy before Tarzan arrives. Tarzan follows their trail. The henchmen try to kill Tarzan. Tarzan kills them instead. There is a final confrontation between Tarzan and the main criminal at the “Valley of Gold” and Tarzan saves the day. I really like the story; it’s simple and has the potential for violent action.

Fritz Leiber adds a lot to the story that is missing from the movie. Leiber works to include the Burroughsian details that the movie ignores. Tarzan is referred to as both John Clayton and Lord Greystoke. Jane is mentioned. Immortality is mentioned. There are numerous references to other Tarzan adventures. Ape talk is used throughout the book. The novel is long, over 300 pages, and Leiber expertly combines the Burroughs and Fleming writing styles.

Probably to add glamor (or to make a statement), Leiber starts the novel with Tarzan going to a bullfight. Leiber, like Fleming would have, narrates the costumes, attendees, and accouterments of the “sport.” Tarzan admires the skill of the matadors, “But far more deeply and strongly, the big Englishman was revolted and angered by the bloody spectacle.”

Tarzan doesn’t imbibe alcohol as Bond does but Tarzan enjoys his fruit juice, “Tarzan sipped, recognizing lime, orange, plum, grape, pineapple, and papaya. He drank off half and smacked his lips appreciatively.” Not as cool as “Vodka martini, shaken not stirred” but it is Tarzan. Being able to differentiate all the flavors speaks to his sense of taste.

Tarzan’s villain, in a very Flemingesque way, categorizes nationalities by their stereotypes. “The Germans are still the world’s finest chemists and mechanics when they’re allowed to be. Workmen worthy of their hire, though too tactless and overbearing and – yes, too hysteric – to be trusted in the crucial stages of an operaton. Worse even than Slavs. While all Orientals are hysteria squared and cubed. Give me the cold-blooded Latin or Anglo-Saxon always.”

Tarzan is flirtatious with airline stewardesses but stays faithful to Jane. On his plane flight Tarzan muses about tarmangani, gomangani, and malmangani. I remembered tar is white, go is black, but mal as yellow was new to me.

I could go on, but I’ll quit now. Simply put, Leiber does one helluva Burroughs/Fleming pastiche. I can only imagine what his King Kull would have been like. Entertaining for sure. The slight differences between the movie and novel continue throughout the book. But perhaps my favorite line (other than the scent of blood one) is the same in both book and movie. Tarzan is pursued by a helicopter and downs the machine with a primitive bola. Tarzan has a communications radio and hears the transmission from the chief villain inquiring, “You men in the helicopter come in!” Tarzan, matching Bond with the one-liners, says, “One of your aircraft is missing.” Cool AF.