Our Campuses

Roger Williams University has two campuses that provide students with diverse learning experiences and opportunities. Both campuses are home to a tight-knit community of citizen scholars, leaders, world travelers, athletes, environmentalists, artists, music fans, thinkers, and doers.

But it's not all about the academics at RWU. Our campuses are full of fun and adventure. From a quaint New England Town to the center of the capital city, RWU students find plenty of both.

Discover RWU!

Bristol Campus

Our main campus is located in Bristol, Rhode Island, a historic town home to the nation's oldest Fourth of July parade. Our campus sits on a sprawling 143 acres overlooking Mount Hope Bay and is just minutes from downtown Bristol – home to restaurants, ice cream shops, boutiques and antique shops, the East Bay Bike Path, and Colt State Park. We’re just a half hour drive from both Providence and Newport, Rhode Island's beach capital, and a 60-minute drive from Boston. New York is just a three-hours away.

In 2019, Bristol was ranked as one of the top 25 Best Small Towns in America by Architectural Digest. In 2022, Bristol was ranked the #1 Safest College Town in America by Safewise.com.

RWU is home to nine professional schools that offer several undergraduate and graduate programs for students. Eight of our schools are located at our main campus in Bristol, including the School of Law. All schools provide students with unique experiences, program offerings, centers and initiatives, special programs, a chance to showcase work, and personalized one-on-one interactions with faculty. Many of our facilities have been recently renovated and are equipped with state-of-the-art technology and modern classrooms. All our resources – from our expert faculty to our information and career centers – are available to students and serve to provide the dynamic, self-directed education students need to pursue interests and passions.

RWU is home to a vibrant campus community. We offer a variety of living options on campus. Our residence halls offer spaces with spectacular views of Mount Hope Bay, the Mount Hope Bridge, and even our academic quad. Our students live in singles, doubles, suites, and apartments. It’s easy to meet new people at RWU and encounter smiling faces, even start a game of wiffle ball or catch on the quad.

With more than 70 clubs and organizations and 22 varsity sports, opportunities are almost endless and range from student senate to the student newspaper. We know that a big part of an enjoyable, well-rounded learning experience happens outside the classroom. We make it easy for students to explore new interests and discover more about themselves.

Providence Campus

A short ride north from our main campus in Bristol is our Providence campus, located in the heart of downtown Providence, Rhode Island's capital city. It provides all RWU students with access to a vibrant hub of businesses and community partnerships for a wide variety of hands-on experiences and internships. The Providence location is equipped with modern classrooms, smart-board technology, and has several lounges and a cafe for study and relaxation. Through partnerships with a multitude of community organizations, nonprofits, public school districts, and federal, state and local governments, the Providence Campus is a key component in fulfilling the university’s commitment to community.

The Providence campus is home to University College, which provides all types of students with opportunities to start or further their education or careers with over 30 flexible programs. The Providence campus is also home to the School of Law’s Experiential Campus, housing clinics for the state’s only law school and providing free services to those in need.

RWU will also uses its space in Providence to cultivate its service mission, partnering with and housing a diverse cadre of non-profit organizations such as the Latino Policy Institute, the Center for Workforce & Professional Development, and Housing Works RI.

Additionally, students find that in Providence, as in all of Rhode Island, adventure awaits. Dubbed the Creative Capital, the city is home to amazing restaurants, concerts, festivals, and the internationally-acclaimed WaterFire. It’s consistently rated as one of America’s favorite food cities by Travel + Leisure magazine and is filled with great shops and a thriving music scene.