The history of the University of Bristol dates back to 1876 when it had only two professors and about 300 students. Since its creation, the school has been a hub of research, culture and science. Indeed, a place that always used innovation to thrive and create great minds.

Now home to around 20,000 students and 8,000 staff members, the University of Bristol has a very busy event life. Considered to be one of the top 10 universities in the United Kingdom, the school organizes a number of high-profile events each year. For example, open days, public engagement events, conferences, talks and lectures. These events are open to current and prospective students, as well as the public.

For this case study, we talked to Laura Pugh, Events Coordinator with Communication and Marketing at University of Bristol. Aside from organizing ceremonies and events, Laura and her team also offer support to other teams across the school when they are organizing their public events.

In this post, you will learn how the University of Bristol is using the Timely Event Calendar Software for Schools, Colleges and Universities to manage all these events more efficiently.

Prior to using Timely’s software, the University of Bristol employe an in-house event listing that was very limited in functionality. “It was an old system, and there were very few people at the University that were able to fix it”, added Laura.

The University also had issues with event submissions from users. In fact, the submission form was not very user friendly and limited in scope.

Another big challenge was the lack of visual identity. With their old platform, they could not add their branding and style to user submitted events. “We were unable to use pictures for any of the events. The look of the published listing was not very appealing, or user friendly. For example, we were not able to search for events, or use filters”, recounted Laura.

In short, the University of Bristol's event management goals included:

Since May 2020, when the University of Bristol launched its new events webpage and created a Timely university event calendar, it has seen huge increase of engagement with its website.

In addition, more faculty and staff members now want to add their events to the university calendar. As a consequence, it is bringing the number of university events showcased to higher levels.

Timely Event Calendar Software has assisted the University of Bristol in several ways, including: