Bristol University has confirmed 300 students are being quarantined in their halls of residence after an outbreak of COVID-19.

Some 40 students tested positive at The Courtrooms residence, and all students living there have been asked to isolate.

The news comes after it emerged that more than 1,000 Newcastle University students have tested positive for coronavirus over the past week.

A total of 254 students and three staff members are confirmed to have tested positive at Bristol University.

Students have been asked to remain in their flats and only socialise with people in their “living circle”.

The university said it is offering “full support” to those affected and isolating students will have food and laundry delivered to their doors.

The students are the latest to be told to self-isolate, with others across the country finding themselves confined to their halls of residence. Some have claimed they did not have access to food or other services.

Professor Sarah Purdy, pro vice-chancellor for student experience at The University of Bristol, said: “The health and safety of our students is a top priority at this very difficult and challenging time.

“We have been actively monitoring coronavirus case numbers across the university community throughout the pandemic and have implemented a range of planned, increasing measures to reduce the risk of the virus spreading.

“This has included the self-isolation of a number of living circles within our residences.”

Coronavirus: More than 1,000 students at Newcastle University have tested positive over the past week

She went on: “Having reassessed case numbers with colleagues from the Public Health Team today, we have decided that further measures are appropriate at this stage.

“We know this is a stressful situation and full support is being offered to those affected. This is available 24/7 via our Student Support and Wellbeing teams.”

By last Friday, more than 50 universities in the UK had confirmed cases of coronavirus, with a survey suggesting that more than 2,500 COVID-19 cases had been identified among students and staff.