The Law School

The University of Bristol has been a leading provider of legal education for more than a century. The Law School is housed in the iconic Wills Memorial Building with easy access to the rest of the University and to the many cafés and shops in the Park Street area. Representing a unique blend of tradition and innovation, the School offers an educational experience which challenges and empowers exceptionally talented, highly motivated students.

With a strong and sustained reputation for the quality of teaching and research, the Law School enjoys entrenched links with the legal profession, locally, nationally, and internationally, and an impressive record in terms of graduate employment. The many benefits of studying law at Bristol are evidenced not least by the success and continued commitment of our alumni community, many of whom continue to be involved in supporting and developing the school and its students, most prominently through the Distinguished Alumni Lecture series which is integrated into the core curriculum.

The School offers a range of courses and programmes to a diverse body of students from all over the world, including qualifying law degrees at undergraduate and Masters’ level. These programmes are distinguished by an international outlook and operate within established partnerships with universities in Europe, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore and Australia, offering undergraduates the opportunity to study abroad.

In addition, the curriculum is richly supported by opportunities to participate in extra-curricular activities such as mooting or undertaking pro bono work with the Law Clinic. Teaching takes the form of small-group seminars and the School prides itself on its strong pedagogic ethos, sustained commitment to the personal and professional development of students, and the provision of a research-rich curriculum delivered by an intellectually distinguished cadre of legal scholars at the forefront of their research fields.

Watch Professor Conaghan's inaugral lecture "Civil liability: Addressing police failures in the context of rape and sexual abuse" below.