The Courtrooms hall of residence in Bristol City Centre has gone into lockdown, Bristol Uni has announced.

40 students have tested positive for COVID-19 in the Courtrooms, meaning that the whole hall – around 300 students – will be restricted to their Living Circles (or “bubbles”) for 14 days.

The university confirmed that 254 students and three staff members are currently confirmed to have COVID, meaning that 136 new cases have been confirmed since Wednesday.

The university confirmed that two mobile testing units have been set up for exclusive use of Bristol students and staff, with one located near The Courtrooms, and the other at the Stoke Bishop halls of residence.

Bristol SU said in a statement that although this is the first hall to go into lockdown, “there may be more to follow”.

In an email to all students at 10:54am this morning, the university said: “We are offering them our full support, including the delivery of food parcels, medication and the collection of laundry and waste for the duration of their self-isolation.”

Professor Sarah Purdy, Pro Vice-Chancellor for Student Experience, said: “The health and safety of our students is a top priority at this very difficult and challenging time.

“We have been actively monitoring coronavirus case numbers across the University community throughout the pandemic and have implemented a range of planned, increasing measures to reduce the risk of the virus spreading. This has included the self-isolation of a number of living circles within our residences.

“Having reassessed case numbers with colleagues from the Public Health Team today, we have decided that further measures are appropriate at this stage.

“We know this is a stressful situation and full support is being offered to those affected. This is available 24/7 via our Student Support and Wellbeing teams. Regular support and contact with students will ensure everyone is kept up-to-date and can ask any questions. Our Residential Life teams are ensuring that everyone has access to food, supplies and clean laundry which will be delivered straight to their door.

“All affected students will continue to access online teaching if they’re well enough.

“We will do everything we can to support the students at The Courtrooms. If everyone follows the rules, we hope that this situation will pass, and things can return to relative normality as quickly as possible.

“We have reminded all students that it is vitally important to observe self-isolation requirements in line with both the law and our acceptable behaviour policy. If necessary, the University will take action to ensure students are following this guidance.”

Story featured image: Google Maps