channing-frye-040412.jpg

Unrestricted free agent Channing Frye said he would welcome a return to Portland.

(The Associated Press)

The Trail Blazers are not expected to be major players when free agency opens late Monday night.

But that isn't stopping one former Blazers player from expressing interest in rejoining Rip City.

Unrestricted free agent Channing Frye, who played for the Blazers from 2007-2009, told The Oregonian on Monday he would be open to returning to Portland.

"Of course coming back would be an option," Frye wrote in an e-mail to The Oregonian. "I love the city, the fans, and the players they have are top notch."

It's unclear whether the Blazers — who only have the midlevel exception and biannual exception to use in free agency — are interested in Frye. But his unique skillset, which includes the ability to shoot three-pointers, would seem to be an ideal fit in a bench role under coach Terry Stotts.

The 6-foot-11, 255-pound power forward has played with the Phoenix Suns since the 2009-10 season, averaging double figures in scoring and at least 5.0 rebounds each season since leaving Portland as a free agent. He averaged 11.1 points and 5.1 rebounds and shot 43 percent from the field, including 37 percent from three-point range, last season for the surprise Suns, who battled for a playoff spot down to the wire in the competitive Western Conference.

It was a heartwarming bounce-back season for Frye, who missed all of 2012-13 because of an enlarged heart.

Frye opted out of a $6.8 million contract with the Suns to become a free agent, so it's possible the Blazers would not be able to offer enough money to entice him back to Portland. At most, the Blazers can offer $5.3 million per year, for a maximum of four years, by using their midlevel exception.

Blazers general manager Neil Olshey has not revealed what positions he's targeting in free agency, but a backup point guard and backup big are needs. According to one league source, the Blazers have a strong desire to sign a "stretch four" like Frye, or perhaps, Spencer Hawes, Josh McRoberts or Boris Diaw, who are also free agents.

Fyre, who is currently traveling through Italy, wrote that he couldn't get into great detail about his free agency plans, but his interest in Portland is genuine. Frye has openly praised playing and living in Portland, where he met his wife, Lauren — a Tualatin High School graduate — and still owns an offseason home. In the past, Frye and his family have spent much of his summer here and he's been active in the community, hosting a charitable kickball tournament.

If the Blazers do have interest in Frye, they likely won't be alone. Phoenix, which has raved about his leadership and across-the-board improvement, almost certainly has interest in bringing him back. And it's possible the Golden State Warriors and Cleveland Cavaliers also will be suitors. Warriors coach Steve Kerr brought Frye to Phoenix, signing him to a five-year free agent contract when Kerr was the Suns' general manager, and Cavaliers general manager David Griffin worked in Kerr's front office at the time.