For a while, Mark Chapman has considered being, in his own words, “more than just a gob on a stick”, and before the coronavirus outbreak was six months from completing a master’s degree in sports directorship.

For years, Chapman, 46, has been a knowledgeable and familiar voice on everything from Match of the Day 2 to Radio 5 Live to The NFL Show, but since 2018 he has been found in the lecture halls at Manchester Metropolitan, where the seeds for something bigger than sports administration have been sown.

At university, Chapman forged a friendship with Clare Wheatley, Arsenal’s director of women’s football. As the pair exchanged views on women’s sport, his mind lingered on what this meant for his two elder children, Ben, 17, and Jessie, 12.

Chapman has since joined the board of trustees at Women in Sport, the UK’s leading gender equality charity, in a bid to address the more alarming statistics around girls and exercise. A 2018 survey from Sport England revealed that just 14 per cent of girls were achieving the recommended daily hour of exercise; the Youth Sport Trust Girls Active survey, from 2017, said that 42 per cent of girls aged 14-16 reported that their period stopped them taking part in sport. One in three from the same age range were unhappy with how they looked.

“That struck a chord, to me,” Chapman says down the phone from his home, where he is isolating with his wife, three children and their dog. “That is something really important that, just as an individual, I try to understand. I’ve never had to understand that because it’s not something I’ve gone through. Jessie will be my first daughter to go through puberty.

“Now I need a deeper understanding as a father, and a father who encourages her sport, to understand where the difficulties might be through these very difficult teenage years for her.

“And if I’m thinking that, I would argue that the majority of supportive dads in particular – and mums, if they haven’t been sporty – will need some help with understanding what their daughters are going through.”

Chapman is not the only new addition to Women in Sport: also joining him as a trustee is the British ultra-runner Sophie Power, below, who became a household name last year when a photo of her breastfeeding her three-month-old baby at an aid station during the 106-mile Ultra-Trail du Mont Blanc went viral.

Mother-of-two Power, who works in finance and as a tech entrepreneur, will focus on ensuring women carve out time to focus on their fitness.

Rupen Shah, company secretary at the Football Foundation and a football coach with Arsenal, and Nick Rusling, whose portfolio of sporting events includes overseeing the Tour de Yorkshire and the Manchester Marathon, are the other latest arrivals.

The children of those who work in sport do not always find it easy to form their own love for it: footballer Clarke Carlisle reflected in his autobiography that his son was always dubious of football because it was the reason his dad was injured, tired or away from home. The Chapmans have faced no such issues. Mark has “never been one to force any of the sports I’m doing on any of my children” but has tried – all while withstanding their pleas to never embarrass them on television – to “allow them to find their own sport and their own interest”.

He has tried, however, to make sure they watch sport together: all five will watch NFL, all five the Netball Superleague. They will not buy tickets to watch Lancashire Lightning cricket side without then going to watch the women’s team, Lancashire Thunder.

It was not until Jessie’s final year of primary school that she played girls’ football. “But that was only really introduced because a teacher had arrived and thought, ah – there isn’t really a girls’ football team,” Chapman says. “And it may sound ridiculous, and I may come across as a dinosaur, which is the last thing I want to do, but I suddenly thought: why has it taken until she’s 10 to actually be given the opportunity to play football?

“Then I started to properly look at it. All the way through education, quite often we do immediately go down a gender-specific role when allocating the sport to the kids. The boys will do football and the girls will do netball. The boys will do cricket and the girls will do hockey. The boys will do rugby and the girls will do rounders. I thought, this is utterly, utterly bizarre.”

Jessie plays cricket in mixed competitions where teams must contain at least one girl – “Jessie was hands up, I want to be the girl, but that was still a girl being part of a boys’ team” – but the more Chapman has thought about it, the more he has wondered how much the preconceptions of his own generation are holding his children back.

Son Ben, a talented cricketer, has not yet gone a season without playing either with or against a girl. It was commonplace when he was younger but, as recently as last year, he competed in an under-19s T20 tournament where opposition sides fielded women players.

“And I have never once heard my children question why they had a girl on the team, or why the opposition had two girls,” Chapman says.

Peer pressure can sometimes be half the battle, but Jessie’s friends have never wondered why she would want to play on the boys’ cricket team; her team-mates never ask her, either. “It’s never been a question – it’s never arisen in conversation. They’ve always taken it as a normality.”

It is a parents’ issue, then, as much as anything? “Absolutely,” he says.“That’s where the questioning comes from, most definitely. Never from the kids themselves, in my experience. Quite often, my generation see sport through the gender lens, in a very different way to how my children see it. Sometimes I think the debate in the media could more positively reflect our kids’ experiences.

“I think I would like everybody to be given the opportunity to do a sport, whether they’re male or female, boy or girl. They all do football together, netball together, cricket together. I think that is the starting point: being given equal opportunities to try different sports. I think that’s where we start.”

How can sport be made accessible to all children, regardless of gender? Share your view in the comments section below.