Carol Jackson

Executive Director

Carol brings more than 20 years of management and human resources experience to Families Matter. She managed, engaged and trained associates within The Bell System (AT&T, Lucent and Avaya) for 21 years prior to retiring in 2001. Carol’s support of research and development associates in Colorado, New Jersey, Ohio and Arkansas enhanced her ability to work with diverse groups of people, and this experience has served her well at Families Matter. She has been involved with marriage-strengthening programs for more than 20 years and has been part of the Families Matter team since 2008.

Herman Jackson

Director of Fatherhood Initiative

Herman, a veteran of the United States Armed Services and a father of six, served as an executive with Safeway Stores Inc. for 21 years and also is a business owner/manager and REALTOR®. That experience has taught him the value of personal encouragement, and he believes in the importance of helping others develop the skills to become their very best. As the master trainer for the Dynamic Dads program, he guides fathers into discussions that initiate change in their behavior. He and his wife, Carol, work together to teach marriage education to couples, and he serves his church as church administrator.

Kheli Pearson

Office Manager

Kheli holds a Bachelor of Science in Health Care Administration and Planning from Tennessee State University and a Masters in Health Care Administration and Informatics from University of Phoenix. Kheli joined Families Matter as a Case Manager in March 2010. She most recently served as a Clinical Administrative Coordinator for Well Child Inc. Prior to that position, she served as a Hospital Development Coordinator for Community Tissue Services and a Public Relations and Development Coordinator for New Directions Inc. Substance Rehabilitation Center.

MeiAngelo Taylor

Program Director

MeiAngelo holds a Bachelor’s degree in Psychology from Christian Brothers University. He is the author of Victory in Defeat, a non-fiction book that is designed to be a guide to men on how to maintain, regain, or cultivate father-child relationship. He uses his extensive knowledge and experience in motivation and inspiration to cultivate Families Matter’s advocacy of strengthening families through education and promotion.

Pastor Ivory Jackson

Pastor Ivory Jackson attended State Technical Institute of Memphis (Southwest Community College) majoring in Electronic Engineering. After retiring from The Kroger Company in 1997 he began helping his father as Assistant Pastor of Faith Temple Ministries, later taking over as Pastor in 2016. Pastor Ivory is also a part of several pastoral organization in Memphis: Pentecostal Churches of North America (PCCNA), Concerned Pastors of Whitehaven, (CPOW), and MCPN, a network of pastors in Memphis. He is also the president of a nonprofit group called Family Focus Community Outreach (FFCO), an outreach arm of Faith Temple.

With his love of ministry and family, he began working for Families Matter in 2009, leading the Dynamic Dads classes at area hospitals. As Families Matter expanded so did the work for Pastor Ivory. He now provides support to the entire family but focuses on mentoring boys, men & fathers, as the Pastoral Coordinator and Educator.