Carol Jackson biography

Carol R. Jackson serves as Independent Director of the Company. Ms. Jackson is Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer of Harbison Walker International, the largest supplier of ceramic refractories in the U.S. with operations in the U.S., Mexico, Europe, and Southeast Asia and commercial interests globally. The 150-year-old company is private and generates revenues of between $500 million to $1 billion annually. Prior to joining Harbison Walker, Ms. Jackson held a number of senior corporate roles at Carpenter Technology Corporation and PPG Industries. Ms. Jackson holds a B.S. in Business Administration from Duquesne University, an MBA from Carnegie Mellon University, and a Juris Doctorate from the University of Pittsburgh.

What is the salary of Carol Jackson?

As the Independent Director of Sensient Technologies, the total compensation of Carol Jackson at Sensient Technologies is $7,633. There are 18 executives at Sensient Technologies getting paid more, with Paul Manning having the highest compensation of $5,819,140.

Insiders trading at Sensient Technologies

Over the last 21 years, insiders at Sensient Technologies have traded over $506,130,949 worth of Sensient Technologies stock and bought 2,091,019 units worth $179,367,326 . The most active insiders traders include Investment Pte Ltd Freemont..., Investment Pte Ltd Haldor F..., and Kenneth P Manning. On average, Sensient Technologies executives and independent directors trade stock every 18 days with the average trade being worth of $2,111,717. The most recent stock trade was executed by Gebhardt Deborah Mc Keithan on 14 August 2024, trading 2,000 units of SXT stock currently worth $142,160.

What does Sensient Technologies do?

we bring life to products. our name communicates what we do: enhance sensory experiences through specialized ingredients, delivered through proprietary technologies. sensient technologies corporation is a leading global developer, manufacturer and marketer of colors, flavors and fragrances. sensient uses advanced proprietary technologies at facilities around the world to produce a broad range of innovative products. we provide customized food and beverage systems, pharmaceutical colors and coatings, cosmetic and personal care formulations, inkjet and specialty inks and colors, and other fine chemicals to most of the world’s best-known consumer and industrial companies. sensient is in the business of innovation. all of our units emphasize technology-based products that provide a competitive advantage. we serve our customers by continuously delivering innovation and streamlined product-development expertise, helping them extend their existing brands as well as create new products. learn