US-based Newton Running is the new running shoe partner of DATEV Challenge Roth powered by hep. This latest partnership for the iconic long course triathlon in Germany, has a focus on sustainability. A new exclusive, sustainable Roth shoe produced by Newton will shortly be released for this year’s event.

Newton has created its all-rounder Fusion model in an exclusive Roth design. As with all of this season’s Newton shoes, the upper material and the laces of the Fusion model are made from 100% recycled materials.

In addition, the entire sole construction features EcoPure technology. This helps to ensure that the Fusion biodegrades up to 75% faster than shoes without this technology. ‘What is then left is biomass and biogas.’

Newton shoes have a mix of comfort and high-energy return. The patented Newton Action / Reaction cushioning technology provides a unique underfoot feel and helps to promote a natural running form.

The entire Newton Running shoe collection for the 2021 season is made entirely from recycled and biodegradable materials. Additionally, the company has become ‘the world’s first vegan running shoe brand certified by the animal rights organization PETA.’

Felix Walchshöfer, Race Director at DATEV Challenge Roth powered by hep, said “From the first conversation with Newton Running we noticed both of us are on the same wavelength.

“We are both family businesses with a focus on sustainability, and Jerry, the founder of Newton, is as passionate about his shoes as we are about triathlon, so we realised straight away: it fits!

“We are really looking forward to the new partnership and the new Challenge shoe, which I personally really like.”

Jerry Lee, CEO of Newton Running, said “We are incredibly pleased to be the official shoe partner in Roth. What could be better than to be part of the world’s largest triathlon event as a committed partner who thinks the same way in terms of sustainability.

“Especially because for Newton Running, we have come a full circle here. We developed the first shoe in our company history, the Gravity (2007), for triathletes, and initially sold it at triathlon events across the USA. The partnership with DATEV Challenge Roth powered by hep is like coming home for us, so to speak.”

www.NewtonRunning.com

www.challenge-roth.de