Boulder-based shoe company Newton, entering its ninth year of business, is attempting a transformation of identity. Born in the mid-2000s, Newton has been seen by many as part and parcel of the minimalist movement that focused on running form. While other companies made a variety of shoes designed to fit any runner, Newton made essentially one shoe that helped you improve your stride.

Co-founder Danny Abshire taught seminars on form and wrote a book on natural running. The inside of Newton’s shoebox contained a short course on running with better form, and the protruding forefoot lugs on the shoes made them look like a built-up track spike. Outside of the triathlon world where Newtons have been widely adopted (they were reportedly the third most popular brand at the Kona Ironman last year), many runners saw the company almost exclusively as making training tools for those wanting to transition to a forefoot strike. Today, Newton wants to alter that perception.

A Newton for Every Runner

To start, the company has released more models in the past two years than it did in its first six years of business. These new models use Newton’s patented technology but are tuned differently to accommodate a variety of runners’ preferences in underfoot feel.

A look at how Newton's forefoot lug technology works.

Newton shoes are categorized in terms of “P.O.P” (which stands for Point of Power). P.O.P 1 models like the Gravity, Motion, and Distance have the company’s original, highly-responsive forefoot rebound. This is produced by large forefoot lugs compressing into air-pressure chambers behind a patented springy membrane, designed to have the same recoil properties as the body’s tendons and fascia.

These shoes also have the lowest heel-toe drop. Contrary to their appearance, every Newton has some heel-toe drop (the midsole in the Gravity has a 3.0mm drop, but it's higher when accounting for the sockliner, outsole, and the travel that occurs when the forefoot lugs compress into the sole), and they all provide heel cushioning using the same bouncy membrane that backs the forefoot lugs.

In the P.O.P. 2 category (Fate and Kismet models), the lugs are more rounded and flexible. The forefoot rebound is less springy, and the heel-toe drop is higher (4.5mm midsole drop).

P.O.P. 3 shoes (Aha and Energy) have the highest heel-toe drop with a 6.0mm midsole offset and the shortest forefoot lugs. Those lugs sink into foam-backed chambers (rather than pressurized air), creating the softest feel.

Each P.O.P. category has a neutral model and a stable model in which the medial (arch) side of the midsole is more filled in and has more rubber on the outsole.

Feel, Not Form

Along with the variety of shoes now offered for different strides, the company is changing its marketing tactic to highlight the unique feel the Newton shoes provide, not just their ability to change your form. Marketing materials now link the shoes to big emotions of being alive, free, brave, and—closer to the specific feelings that the shoes provide—fast, peppy, smooth, and lively. Gone are instructions on improving your form inside the boxes. Instead, runners find an inspirational message that touts, “We’re confident you’ll feel a sensation unlike any other.”

Newton's flagship store in Boulder, Colorado.

On the run, that sensation is more subtle than newcomers might expect from the unique design. The forefoot provides a stable platform, especially since Newton figured out how to have five lugs under your five toes rather than the original four that was required by early manufacturing techniques. The compression of the lugs is not that dissimilar to what you feel from a foam midsole.

Where the difference comes is when the lugs rebound, which Newton calls its “action/reaction” effect. This effect works best when you are running with strong hip extension (your leg driving out behind your body) so that the toe is rolling off the lugs and the rebound action propels the foot forward. While any stride will work in Newtons, particularly now with their variety of drops, the action of the midsole technology rewards a forward-balanced posture and stride.

Despite all these changes, Newton still seems interested in helping people run better. But as one of the founders, Abshire insists the message has never been that you have to run a certain way. Whatever your preferred pattern, he believes that every runner can improve their stride, and Newton shoes can help make you more efficient. Whether or not you care about that, Newton now has a shoe for you.