Newton Running, the American running shoe company that has made a name for itself with its innovative running shoe technologies promoting a natural, healthier running form, is the new running shoe partner of DATEV CHALLENGEROTH powered by hep. This partnership further reinforces TEAMCHALLENGE’s focus on sustainability, as demonstrated by the exclusive, sustainable Roth shoe that Newton has launched for this year’s event and will be available soon.

Roth shoe in sustainable Newton quality

As a launch highlight of the new cooperation, the company has created its all-rounder model “Fusion” in an exclusive ROTH design. As with all of this season’s Newton shoes, the upper material and the laces of the versatile Fusion model are made from 100% recycled materials. In addition, the entire sole construction features EcoPure® technology. This technology ensures the Fusion biodegrades up to 75% faster than shoes without this technology. What is then left is biomass and biogas. Newton’s Fusion is the perfect shoe for an active lifestyle.

Newton is different

The family owned business based in Boulder, Colorado is passionate about endurance sports. In order to provide the athletes with the best possible support, Newton has always placed a special focus on technologies and innovations. The patented Newton Action / Reaction ™ cushioning technology provides a unique underfoot fell and promotes a natural running form. The mix of comfort and high-energy return allows runners to you better, faster and healthier. Newton Running is building shoes that are different. Not just to be different, but to make every step better.

The entire Newton Running shoe collection for the 2021 season is made entirely from recycled and biodegradable materials. Additionally, Newton Running has become the world’s first vegan running shoe brand certified by the animal rights organisation PETA.

With its commitment to the environment, the company fits in perfectly with the Roth triathlon, which is already a leader in this field compared to other large triathlon events and committed to continuous improvement, year on year.

The perfect match

Felix Walchshöfer, race director at DATEV CHALLENGEROTH powered by hep, is enthusiastic about the new partnership. “From the first conversation with Newton Running we noticed both of us are on the same wavelength. We are both family businesses with a focus on sustainability and Jerry, the founder of Newton, is as passionate about his shoes as we are about triathlon, so we realised straight away: It fits! We are really looking forward to the new partnership and the new Challenge shoe, which I personally really like.”