Wiz Khalifa has been in the game for quite some time, so it’s safe to say he’s a rap veteran at this point in his career. The Pittsburgh native has seen a lot in his career, even the ugly side with all the recent murders of his rap peers.

On Sunday (December 19), Wiz Khalifa jumped on Twitter to offer his fellow rappers advice on entering the new year. According to Wiz, entertainers need to move smarter and be there for another.

“As entertainers lets try some shit next year,” Wiz wrote on Twitter. “Minding our own business. Not dis respecting each others family, dead homies, or area they come from. Stop using someone else’s significant other as a one up to the other person. Actually showing the same love you expect to get.”

He added, “Not sayin any of these are a direct cause of violence but changin em could help.”

Wiz’s sentiments come days after Drakeo the Ruler was stabbed and later succumbed to his wound over the weekend at the Once Upon a Time in LA festival in Los Angeles, California. A week before that, YG affiliate Slim 400 was shot and killed in LA and last month, Young Dolph saw his life end when he was gunned down in his hometown Memphis, Tennessee.

And in Wiz may not be speaking directly to other rappers, but there’s one who’s going against what he was preaching in his tweets. Blac Youngsta performed at a club in Dallas on Friday (December 17), but it wasn’t a show that people seemed to enjoy.

In the video clip shared online, Blac Youngsta performed his 2016 diss record “Shake Sum” aimed at Young Dolph. Fans in attendance seemed taken aback by Blac Youngsta’s move while people on social media dragged him for the lame performance.

Wiz Khalifa is doing his part to spread the happy vibes with his latest release Wiz Got Wings. The album finds Wiz linking back up with his Kush & Orange Juice collaborators, Cardo Got Wings and Sledgren, for a smooth, breezy stroll through the positive mind of the Taylor Gang stoner.

Stream Wiz Khalifa’s Wiz Got Wings below.