Wiz Khalifa , Amber Rose and their son Sebastian Taylor Thomaz were all smiles at the 2023 Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards at Microsoft Theater on March 04, 2023 in Los Angeles, California. The trio were joined by other celebrities and their kids, icluding YG, Lil Baby, Kel Mitchell, Charles Oakley, and Lance Gross.

The Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards 2023 aired on March 4th, and it was a night to remember! Hosted by Nate Burleson and Charli D’Amelio, the awards show featured extreme logic-defying stunts, illusions, and tricks, as well as exciting surprises that revealed fans’ favorite TV shows, movies, music, and more.

The show started with a show-stopping opening performance by Bebe Rexha, which included a dance medley featuring Burleson, D’Amelio, and content creators Michael Le and Markell Washington. The performance culminated with Bebe Rexha singing her chart-topping hit single, “I’m Good (Blue).”

One of the highlights of the night was when Adam Sandler received the Special King of Comedy Silver Blimp for his prolific career in comedy as an actor, writer, producer, comedian, and musician over the past 30 years. Sandler accepted the award from a giant, opulent throne on the KCA stage before getting decimated in Nickelodeon’s iconic Slime.

Another highlight was the Lifetime Achievement Award given to Transformers’ heroic leader of the Autobots, Optimus Prime, presented by Pete Davidson, Dominique Fishback, and Anthony Ramos, cast members from the upcoming sci-fi action film, Transformers: Rise of the Beasts.

There were also many exciting performances, including Lil Baby’s rendition of “California Breeze” from his chart-topping third studio album, It’s Only Me. Lil Uzi Vert also had a drum-off with 8-year-old drumming prodigy Justin Wilson II, which ended in a messy surprise with Slime jets activating.

In addition to the performances and awards, there were also exclusive teaser clips from highly anticipated feature films like Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem, presented by cast members Chris Pine, Michelle Rodriguez, Seth Rogen, and the voice cast of the Ninja Turtles.

The night was full of celebrity appearances, including Landon Barker, Bella Poarch, Dove Cameron, Miranda Cosgrove, Dixie D’Amelio, Dwayne Johnson, Keegan-Michael Key, Peyton List, Jenna Ortega, MrBeast, Olivia Rodrigo, Kelly Rowland, Lilly Singh, SeanDoesMagic, and more.

See More Photos Below!

Lance Gross and Family

Christopher Massey and Daughter