COMPLETE SMARTPHONE VIDEO KIT - with Shotgun Microphone, ultra bright LED30 light, and adjustable tabletop tripod for recording videos, podcasts and more.

HIGH QUALITY AUDIO - Shotgun microphone delivers clear, crisp, directional audio

1-YEAR WARRANTY: We’ve got your back. Our products are designed to ease your technical woes, not add to them. Our friendly US-Based support is here to help

ESSENTIAL ACCESSORIES: Adjustable desk top tripod with phone mount, rechargeable LED with 3 brightness levels, rail mount bracket to accommodate any cold shoe or 1/4” thread accessories, and 3.5mm TRRS and USB Type-C cables.

EASY SET UP: Microphone and accessories are designed for easy use and quick set up. Perfect for vloggers, podcasts, Live streaming, youtube and more.

The Movo uVlogger Smartphone Vlogging Kit is the ultimate All-In-One package for Smartphone Content Creators. Perfect for new creators the kit comes with everything you need to start producing high-quality content today.

Plug in the Shotgun Microphone for an instant upgrade in your sound quality. The microphone features a Super-Cardioid Polar Pattern which zeros in on the audio you want to capture and cuts out unwanted background noise and audio distractions. Built with a 1/4-20 thread for mounting, an integrated shock mount, and a low-cut filter to eliminate low-frequency rumble, this mic is phantom powered so you never need to buy new batteries. It also comes with both 3.5mm TRRS and 3.5mm Lighting cables for your convenience. The LED-30's mixture of warm 3200K and cold 5500K color temperature lights and 3 brightness levels ensure that your subject is always properly lit. Mini LED Panel is rechargeable and mounts to DSLR cameras, camcorders, or smartphone video rigs that have a standard cold shoe. Additionally, there's a 1/4" thread on the bottom for tripods and other accessories. Mini Ball-head phone tripod has 360? rotation and features adjustable legs for a maximum height of 12.5". Mount lights, microphones, monitors, and other accessories to your mini tabletop tripod using the rail mount extension bracket for a fully customizable setup. Whether you're looking for a filming kit for youtube videos or vlog equipment for your podcast, the iVlogger is the perfect choice for all your smartphone recording needs.