1. movo Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDE Version 2.0 © 2015 MOVOX PTY LTD

2. Before you start The MOVOX Mobile Application uses a WiFi connection or 3G/4G Mobile Data when making and receiving calls. We recommend that you connect to WiFi where possible and to verify there is suﬃcient Mobile Data allowance included in your mobile phone plan. Refer to your mobile phone user- guide for instructions on selecting WiFi connection or 3G/4G Mobile Data usage. Data usage The amount of Mobile Data used by the MOVOX Mobile Application will vary depending on the duration of a call. A 1-minute phone call using the application will use approximately 1.5MB of data. If you estimate your monthly usage of the application will be 1-hour then you would use approximately 90MB of data. You will need your account details to activate the application. These details have been emailed to you or your account administrator. Help & Support Support requests can be submitted by phone, email or via Contact us in the Help section of the application. Help Desk - 1800 100 800 Our help desk is open Monday to Friday from 9am - 5pm (AEST). Email - support@movox.com.au Email support 24-hours a day, 7-days a week and your enquiry will be manually reviewed, logged in our ticketing system and escalated to the correct person for speedy resolution. 2 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo

3. Activation Download Search App Store for MOVOX and download to your mobile. Open Click the icon on your mobile phone to open the application. Activate When you open the application for the ﬁrst time you will be presented with the Create Account screen. Enter your Username, Password, Domain and Display Name then tap ‘Done’ to register and activate. Open Activate 3 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 1 2 3 2 3

4. Are you connected? To check that your application is registered click the Keypad icon located in the main menu at the bottom of any screen. On the keypad screen you will notice your 4-digit extension number in the top left hand corner. If this is GREEN, then the application registered, if RED the application is not registered. Phone settings Notiﬁcations To ensure notiﬁcations are received for incoming calls go to your mobile Settings > Notiﬁcations > and select MOVOX under the ‘Include’. Check that all settings are set ‘ON and that Alert Style is set to Alerts or Banners. Microphone permission The ﬁrst time you make a call using the application a pop-up message will display on your mobile screen asking permission to use the microphone. Select Allow to use your mobile phone microphone. Access to Contacts The ﬁrst time you tap the Contacts icon the application a pop-up mes- sage display on your mobile screen asking permission to access your contacts list. Select Allow to view your contacts list on the Contacts screen in the application. 4 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo

5. Settings Tap the Settings icon located in the main menu at the bottom of any screen to access: SIP Accounts Select SIP Accounts to view and edit your user accounts. To edit your SIP Account or Advanced settings tap the i icon next to the account extension number. Preferences Select Preferences to edit features such as: ring tones, audio, call recording and more. SIP Accounts Preferences 5 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 1 2 1 2

6. Settings Tap the Settings icon located in the main menu at the bottom of any screen to access: Help Select Help for Setup, Preferences and Troubleshooting guides. Or contact us to raise a ticket with our support team. About The About screen displays the version number of the application. Help About 6 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 43 3 4

7. Advanced Settings To edit Advanced settings navigate to Settings, tap the i icon next to the SIP Account extension number. Edit Account To edit your SIP Account settings or Advanced settings you will need to disable the application by swiping the Enabled button. When done re-register the application by swiping the Enabled button again. Advanced Tap Advanced to change Codecs, Enable Video calls or forward incoming calls to another number. Edit Account Advanced 7 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 1 1 2 2

8. Preferences Run in Background Set ‘OFF’ to save battery life. The application will be unregistered when your mobile screen is locked. Ringtones Select from 25 ringtones. Audio See Audio Settings on page 9. Call Recording Email Address: Recorded calls will be sent to this email address. Warning Beep: Set 'ON' to hear a sound when Recording is activated. Single Touch Dial Set ‘ON’, the default conﬁrmation dialog is not displayed and the call is made immediately. Contact Image Set ‘ON’, the contact photo is shown in the in-call view. Try to keep contact images as small size as possible so they load faster. VPN Support Set ‘ON’, the application will look for a VPN network interface rather than choosing the default. Do not enable if there is no VPN. Custom Image Select a photo from your mobile phone camera roll to display in the background when on an active call. Call Forwarding A global setting that over-rides the Call Forwarding setting. Forward calls: Set 'ON' and calls are forwarded to the speciﬁed number. In addition to this setting you will need to enter a Forward Number in the 'Advanced' section of each account (see Advanced Settings point 2 for further details). 8 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 1 5 6 8 9 7 2 3 4

9. Preferences Enable Video A global setting that over-rides the Enable Video setting. Set ‘ON’ to make and receive video calls. In addition to this setting you will need to turn 'ON' Video Calls in the 'Advanced' section of each account (see Advanced Settings point 2 for further details). Video Quality Select Low, Normal or High as the resolution of video calls. Audio settings Play Ringtone Set ‘ON’ to play the ringtone on incoming calls. Vibrate Set ‘ON’ and your phone will vibrate on incoming calls. Microphone Volume Slide to adjust the microphone volume. Playback Volume Slide to adjust speaker output volume. Keypad Volume Set ‘ON’ to hear tones when digits are pressed on the keypad screen. Bluetooth Support Set ‘ON’ for in-call options. Tap ‘Audio Sources’ for ear-piece, speaker or Bluetooth headset as your audio output. Set ‘OFF’ to turn speaker on and oﬀ. Preserve Audio Route Set ‘ON’ to use the audio source from the previous call. Set ‘OFF’ to use Ear- piece as the default audio source. Echo suppression Set ‘ON’ and the phones in built echo suppression algorithms will be used. Preventing the called party hearing an echo. 9 Mobile Application iPHONE EDITION USER GUIDEmovo 10 11