Prince2 Practitioner Training Courses In Derby

Derby / Central Region

Regular Derby Venue

Unit 10, Derwent Business Centre, Clarke St, Derby, Derbyshire, Derby, Central, UK, DE12BU. t: 0844 335 8882 e: [email protected]

Opening / Training Hours

Monday - Friday | 8.00am to 5.30pm | Weekend on request

Course Information

The course aims to provide relevant and substantive training to anyone working in or coming in contact with Project Management during the normal course of their occupation

Who Should Attend?

Any person who requires the need to be trained in through the course of their normal working duties. This course is suitable for anyone working in the Project Management arena or Business sector.

Joining Instructions

Specific joining instructions will be supplied to you (if appropriate) once your booking is confirmed. If, once confirmation has been received, you are in anyway unsure of what prerequisites or items you need to bring or provide, then your dedicated training manager or the trainer conducting your course will be able to confirm this with you. Contact numbers and ways to get in touch will be provided.

About Derby

Motto: "Industria, Virtus, et Fortitudo" Derby shown within Derbyshire and England Coordinates: 52°55.32′N 1°28.55′W / 52.92200°N 1.47583°W / 52.92200; -1.47583 Sovereign state United Kingdom Constituent country England Region East Midlands Ceremonial county Derbyshire Admin HQ Derby Settled AD 600 City Status 1977 Government • Type Unitary authority, City • Governing body Derby City Council • Leadership Leader & Cabinet • Executive Labour • MPs Margaret Beckett (L) Chris Williamson (L) Area •..

More Information

Are you looking to take your project management skills to the next level Look no further than Xyz Training Groups PRINCE2 Practitioner course. As one of the UKs largest dedicated training groups, we have the expertise and resources to provide top-notch training to individuals and groups alike. With over 50 centres across the UK, we offer the convenience of open courses or the flexibility of dedicated courses for our clients. And with our Lowest Price Guarantee, you can be sure youre getting the best value for your investment. ##$$##Our PRINCE2 Practitioner course is perfect for candidates looking to enhance their project management knowledge and skills. With our expert trainers and comprehensive curriculum, youll gain a deep understanding of the PRINCE2 methodology and be able to apply it to real-world projects. Plus, our personable and engaging teaching style will make the learning experience enjoyable and effective. ##$$##For clients with a group of people, our PRINCE2 Practitioner course is the perfect choice. Not only can we deliver the course at any of our 50 centres, but we also offer the option of a dedicated course specifically tailored to your teams needs. This means you can customize the training to align with your organizations goals and projects, ensuring maximum impact and return on investment. ##$$##At Xyz Training Group, we are committed to providing the highest quality training at the best value. Thats why we offer our unique Lowest Price Guarantee. We guarantee that our PRINCE2 Practitioner course will be the most affordable option for you, and if you find a lower price elsewhere, well match it. So why wait Enrol on our PRINCE2 Practitioner course today and take your project management skills to new heights with Xyz Training Group.

Group Bookings