Moving And Handling Of People Training Courses In Derby

Derby / Central Region

Regular Derby Venue

Unit 10, Derwent Business Centre, Clarke St, Derby, Derbyshire, Derby, Central, UK, DE12BU. t: 0844 335 8882 e: [email protected]

Opening / Training Hours

Monday - Friday | 8.00am to 5.30pm | Weekend on request

Course Information

Patient manual handling training courses are primarily aimed at the health and care sector. Today the manual handling of people remains the biggest cause of injury to both staff and service users in the care sector. Our moving and handling of people courses are there to help remove the risk associated with moving and they teach correct procedure as well as the basic principles. Our courses have also proven useful to the education sector as we have trained a number of people within schools and special needs/disabled schools.

Who Should Attend?

Staff who come in contact with or have the need to help move people during the normal course of their occupation. The courses are also geared towards both experienced users and those with little or no previous experience in health social care or special education.

Joining Instructions

Specific joining instructions will be supplied to you (if appropriate) once your booking is confirmed. If, once confirmation has been received, you are in anyway unsure of what prerequisites or items you need to bring or provide, then your dedicated training manager or the trainer conducting your course will be able to confirm this with you. Contact numbers and ways to get in touch will be provided.

About Derby

Motto: "Industria, Virtus, et Fortitudo" Derby shown within Derbyshire and England Coordinates: 52°55.32′N 1°28.55′W / 52.92200°N 1.47583°W / 52.92200; -1.47583 Sovereign state United Kingdom Constituent country England Region East Midlands Ceremonial county Derbyshire Admin HQ Derby Settled AD 600 City Status 1977 Government • Type Unitary authority, City • Governing body Derby City Council • Leadership Leader & Cabinet • Executive Labour • MPs Margaret Beckett (L) Chris Williamson (L) Area •..

More Information

Enrolling on a Moving and Handling of People training course with Xyz Training Group is a smart decision for both candidates and clients. As one of the UKs largest dedicated training groups, we have the expertise and resources to deliver high-quality and comprehensive training. Our course is designed to equip individuals and groups with the necessary skills and knowledge to safely move and handle people in various settings. ##$$##Our course is delivered by experienced and qualified trainers who are passionate about promoting safe practices in the workplace. With over 50 centres across the UK, we offer the flexibility of attending an open course or arranging a dedicated course for your team. This allows us to cater to the specific needs and requirements of each client, ensuring a tailored and effective training experience. ##$$##At Xyz Training Group, we understand the importance of providing affordable and accessible training. Thats why we offer our unique Lowest Price Guarantee to every client. This means that if you find a lower price for the same course elsewhere, we will match it. We believe that everyone should have access to high-quality training without breaking the bank. ##$$##By enrolling on our Moving and Handling of People training course, candidates and clients can expect to receive top-notch training from a reputable and established training provider. Our course will not only equip you with the necessary skills and knowledge, but it will also give you the confidence to handle people safely and effectively. Dont miss out on this valuable opportunity to invest in the safety and well-being of your team. Enrol with Xyz Training Group today.

Group Bookings