Educate yourself!

In all seriousness, The 411 were a one-album wonder with only 3 noteworthy singles who got dropped for not selling enough albums. Mis-teeq had two successful album eras with multiple hit singles and were initially much bigger than the Sugababes (who ultimately overtook them in terms of sales and longevity), but got dropped thanks to Posh Spice bankrupting their label. One of Mis-teeq's members was Alesha Dixon who had a brief stint as a national darling as the 2000s gave way to the 2010s and enjoyed some limited solo success, which means the name-brand didn't completely disappear from memory.

Honestly I'd put Big Brovaz on that list too but that's another conversation.

The won't a thing here in Australia. I think I remember a song called 'Scandalous', but I'm not sure if that was Misteeq or Liberty X?

Light Up should be released already and spending its fourth week at number 1.

The girls still have a lot of sophisticated material from the Polydor era too good to stay unreleased. 'The Lost Tapes' better not be the closure of the MKS era's music

I’m more interested in hearing what the Sugababes will sound like in 2024 than 10 year old songs. I’m sure what they are working on will be so much better than the stuff that didn’t make “The Lost Tapes”.

Five words: stop living in the past.

I wouldn’t mind getting those in a 20 year anniversary release of The Lost Tapes. But not now. We need new, current music.

Oh I mean, I’m absolutely here for new music over anything else. I was more coming from Open Book having its moment.

Whilst we all had some of this material before the official release / leaking - some folk haven’t heard the demos and if done right, they could quite easily reintroduce or rework some of the “unheard” material if they wanted to? I don’t really see the issue with that? It’s some of their best work.

I tend to think an excess of material can be harmful, as it dilutes attention/appreciation of subsequent releases.

16 tracks on "The Lost Tapes" was a lot - do we really need (at this present moment) more tracks from that era, when another album with 10 - 16 tracks is probably on the way in the next 12 months?