Big Brovaz who are supporting the Babes, are best known for their hits, Nu Flow, Favourite Things, and We Wanna Thank You.

Comprising of three girls, Cherise, Dion and Nadia and two boys, J-Rock and Randy, plus two producers, Skillz and Fingaz, they released their debut single in October, 2002 and were dubbed the next big thing.

I caught up with Dion, aged 23, to find out what it's like being in a top R&B bands.

Dion, whose father is a deacon, tells me that singing is something that is second nature to her, as she grew up flexing her vocal chords in a church choir.

Her brothers and sisters also sang, as well as her mother.

"When I was four, I wanted to be the fastest woman in the world, or a singer," says Dion.

"I ran for London but I had a leg injury, and I was in a lot of pain, so I started singing.

"I decided to give 100 per cent to singing when I was 17. I entered competitions and stuff and sang whatever songs I liked with instrumental backing tracks."

Big Brovaz was brought together by band member Skillz, one half of a budding South London production team, who already used the name Big Brovaz.

The various members' singing and rapping saw them asked by the Big Brovaz production team to feature alongside other underground London R&B/hip hop artists on a compilation album they were putting together called Big Brovaz - Watching You.

On the compilation album, rather than giving individual artists a track of their own, the producers decided to feature several artists on the same track.

This soon created a different sound, and the chemistry between the different performers worked so well that slowly Big Brovaz turned from a compilation album into a group.

"I didn't expect it to take off so quickly," says Dion.

"It was real quick - we were running around like mad chickens but now everything's settled down."

Big Brovaz debut single Nu Flow, charted at number three, then OK hit the charts at number 7, and Favourite Things at number 2.

The band's debut album, Nu Flow is now gold, and fans should expect the next album to be released in September.

"It's untitled, but the first single will be out in July or August," says Dion.

Films

Aside from hitting the top 10 in Europe, New Zealand and Australia, Big Brovaz have broken into the world of films, and perform and play cameo roles in the Scooby Doo 2 movie released in April this year.

The single they play in the movie is We Wanna Thank You.

"We got the job through our first single," says Dion.

"It's very different from making a video which you know is going to take a long time.

"With a film, they need you for 10 minutes then they don't need you for about four hours."

Gates for the concert, at Ragley Hall, near Stratford-upon-Avon, open at 5pm with the concert beginning at around 7.30pm. It will finish at 10.30pm with a fire work display.

For details and ticket prices, and to buy tickets call 0870 608 8282 between 9am and 5pm, or log onto www.bdw-promotes.co.uk

Make a date with the Modfather

THE Modfather Paul Weller has announced an 11-date tour throughout November.

His gigs will follow the release of his eagerly anticipated album of cover versions.

The legendary solo artist and former frontman of The Jam and the Style Council will be playing at Wolverhampton Civic on Tuesday, November 9.

Album

The album, as yet untitled, is released on Monday, September 13.

Paul has sold out his three-night run at the Albert Hall in June and nearly all tickets have gone for his forthcoming Music In The Forest shows throughout June and July.

Tickets for the Wolverhampton gig cost £28.50 each.

They can be bought from Midland Box Office on 01902 552121.

or online @ www.wolvescivic.co.uk

Droitwich festival headliners really Somethin' Else

AN eclectic mix of 50s rock 'n' roll, blues classics and 1960s pop and soul favourites will be wowing the crowds when the band, Somethin' Else play on the opening night of the Droitwich Festival.

The band, which featured on BBC Hereford and Worcester last year, will be playing their floor-filling covers when they play at The Castle Inn, Worcester Road, Droitwich, on Sunday

Somethin' Else consists of Richard Smith on vocals, Graham Alexander on guitar and vocals, Pete Kay on bass guitar, Gerry Forrester on keyboards and vocals, Becky Nichol on saxophone, Paul Bott on tenor saxophone and vocals, and Keith Barker on drums.

The Worcestershire based band has been going for three years, and the age of its members ranges from mid-20s to mid-50s.

"We do cover music that people like to dance to, and that we like to play," says Keith.

"Everybody in the band has been in other bands at some stage or another.

"Our music gets people of all ages on their feet and dancing."

The live festival will take place all week, and the last night is Saturday, July 10, at Droitwich Rugby Club, with a grand firework display.

Local talent showcase at Caesars

BUDDING singers and players are being reminded that an open mike session starts at Caesars, Westside, Hylton Road, Worcester, next Friday.

A few acts have already put their names down for the night, but the venue still has room for some more.

The event is for up and coming artists, semi-professionals, professionals, or for anyone to come along and sing a few songs for fun, or to practice in front of an audience.

People taking part do not need to bring any equipment as equipment will be set up at the venue, but they will need to bring a mini disc.

A free drink will be given to anyone who has a go at singing or playing.

The open mike night will take place every Friday from 8pm until midnight. Ring 01905 429300 or 07788421071 to be sure of a place, or just turn up on the night.