CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Gerald Wallace had 25 points and 16 rebounds and the Charlotte Bobcats frustrated Carmelo Anthony and Denver in a 107-95 victory Tuesday night that snapped the Nuggets’ four-game winning streak.

Anthony, the NBA’s leading scorer, had 34 points and seven rebounds, but Wallace outplayed him down the stretch and a frustrated Anthony picked up a technical foul with just under a minute left to help seal Charlotte’s second straight win.

Stephen Jackson had 25 points, seven rebounds and six assists, and Nazr Mohammed added 15 points for the Bobcats, who outscored Denver 20-8 over the final 6 minutes.

J.R. Smith had 16 points for the Nuggets, who played without injured forward Kenyon Martin.

In a matchup of the NBA’s highest-scoring team (Denver, 109.7 points a game) and the league’s stingiest team (Charlotte, 90.4 points allowed), spurts were dictated by pace.

Anthony did most of his damage in transition and by getting to the foul line on drives. The Nuggets had trouble defending Wallace in the halfcourt, and both players attempted 11 free throws.

Coming in averaging 29.6 points a game, Anthony scored a season-low 14 on 5-of-21 shooting a night earlier in Philadelphia. He regained his touch, but Denver struggled without Martin, who dislocated his left pinkie against the 76ers.

It meant a lot of minutes for Chris Andersen, and the Bobcats attacked him defensively in the fourth quarter. Raymond Felton twice beat him to the hoop on drives, the second layup putting Charlotte ahead 95-89 with 3:24 left.

Wallace, the NBA’s leading rebounder, had a putback of his own miss with 1:50 left over Anthony that gave Charlotte a 97-91 lead.

Anthony soon lost his cool.

Called for a foul on Jackson with 52.6 seconds left, an upset Anthony drew a technical foul – his second in as many nights. Jackson hit all three free throws to put Charlotte up 102-93.

Joey Graham, twin brother of Bobcats forward Stephen Graham, started in Martin’s spot. Denver got off to a similar poor start as they did in Philadelphia, trailing early 21-14 against the Bobcats.

While the Nuggets went on a 14-0 run in the fourth quarter to finally put away the 76ers, they had no similar run in them for the Bobcats, who had struggled of late and are remembered as the first team to lose to New Jersey after the Nets’ 0-18 start.

Bobcats coach Larry Brown tweaked his rotation early. D.J. Augustin, who had been a healthy scratch in consecutive games, and rookie Gerald Henderson, who had played sparingly of late, both played before Flip Murray.

Murray, 10 of 45 from the field and 8 of 17 from the foul line in the past six games, hit two free throws and a 3-pointer at the end of the half to help Charlotte to a 54-49 lead despite center Tyson Chandler again getting into foul trouble.

Murray’s 3 early in the fourth quarter put Charlotte ahead 81-78. Murray had 10 points and Charlotte hit 31 of 37 free throws.

NOTES: Nuggets coach and North Carolina alum George Karl said there is a “harmony or karma” in returning to the state. “The North Carolina fraternity of basketball is the best in sport, in my opinion,” he said. … Tar Heels coach Roy Williams and Carolina Panthers LB Jon Beason sat together courtside, but Beason declined Williams’ offer to dip into his popcorn tub in the third quarter. … Bobcats F Alexis Ajinca has made just 3 of 13 shots in two games with Maine in the NBA Development League.