Charlotte | Gerald Wallace scored 27 points and the Charlotte Bobcats dominated New York 105-95 on Friday to send the listless Knicks back to their losing ways.

Nazr Mohammed added 20 points and 14 rebounds and Jason Richardson and Emeka Okafor scored 17 points apiece for the

Bobcats, who rolled out to a 24-point second-quarter lead.

While the Knicks made it respectable late, the game was never in doubt as Charlotte won its second consecutive game since part-owner Michael Jordan practiced with the team.

With point guard Stephen Marbury not with the Knicks again as he continues to grieve his father's death, New York proved incapable of building off a blowout win over Cleveland on Wednesday.

That victory came two days after embattled coach Isiah Thomas questioned his team's heart and toughness, but the harsh words worked for only one game.

Consistently beaten off the dribble and allowing the Bobcats free reign inside, the Knicks allowed the league's second-lowest scoring team to shoot 50 percent.

Thomas spent most of the game sitting on the bench emotionless, as the calls for his ouster followed him on the road. One fan in a Knicks jersey held up a sign reading "Hey Isiah, Santa's got your pink slip."

Nate Robinson scored 20 points for the Knicks, who dropped to 1-10 on the road and failed to win consecutive games for the first time in nearly a month.

Jamal Crawford added 16 points and Zach Randolph scored 15, but they combined to shoot 11-for-30.

The Bobcats improved to 2-0 since Jordan's hands-on involvement earlier in the week, when he jumped into a practice drill with the team a day after sitting in on a film session.

On Wednesday, the Bobcats rallied from 12 points down with less than six minutes to play against Utah. They needed no such comeback this time.

Coming in as the NBA's second-lowest scoring team at 92.1 points a game, Charlotte shot 58 percent in rolling out to a 67-44 halftime lead. Wallace had his way driving to the basket, scoring 20 points in the half. Richardson hit 3 of 4 3-pointers as the Knicks put up little resistance.

The Bobcats built the lead to 29 in the third quarter, with Thomas only getting off the bench during timeouts. The Knicks did rally late, getting within 10 points with 3:35 left on Robinson's 3-pointer, but then went over two minutes without scoring to end their faint hopes.

David Lee, who scored 22 points against the Cavaliers, had 11 points and 11 rebounds on 5 of 13 shooting.

Mohammed hit 8 of 11 shots and all four free throws.