Gerald Wallace and the Bobcats reached an agreement in principle that would keep the team’s leading scorer in Charlotte, executive vice president of basketball operations Bernie Bickerstaff said Wednesday.

“There’s still some paperwork issues to work out before we can get everything signed, but we’re happy,” Bickerstaff told The Associated Press. “It’s been a collaborative effort on both sides.”

Wallace, who turns 27 later this month, led the Bobcats with 18.1 points per game last season. He also averaged 7.2 rebounds, 2.6 assists and 2.0 steals in 72 games.

Wallace became an unrestricted free agent last month, and the Bobcats faced heavy competition in their efforts to re-sign the forward. But Bobcats part-owner Michael Jordan had said keeping Wallace was one of the team’s top offseason priorities.

Around the league

Rashard Lewis formally joined the Orlando Magic, leaving the Seattle SuperSonics after nine seasons when the teams completed a sign-and-trade deal for the high-scoring forward.

The Magic sent Seattle a conditional second-round pick, while the SuperSonics earned a trade exception believed to be in the $9 million range.

Lewis agreed to terms with the Magic earlier this month, yet no deal could be closed until Wednesday, the first day that the league’s free agent moratorium was lifted. The six-year deal — Lewis agreed to a five-year pact, but the sign-and-trade allows an extra year to be worked into the contract — is expected to be worth at least $110 million.

Lewis’ acquisition is the first formal move in what could be a busy week for the Magic, who reportedly plan to announce an $85 million, five-year extension with All-Star center Dwight Howard today. ….

Chauncey Billups signed a $60 million, five-year contract with the Detroit Pistons, returning to the team he helped reach five consecutive conference finals.

The contract is worth $46 million guaranteed over four years and includes a team option for the fifth year.

Pistons president of basketball operations Joe Dumars said he was “very pleased” to have Billups back.

“We said from the beginning that re-signing Chauncey was our top priority, and now we can move forward knowing that Chauncey will continue to lead this team,” Dumars told The Associated Press on Wednesday afternoon. “One of the toughest positions to fill in this business is the point guard position, and that’s why it was imperative that we re-sign Chauncey.” …

The Philadelphia 76ers signed a pair of first-round draft picks, inking 12th overall pick Thaddeus Young and 7-footer Jason Smith.

Young, a 6-foot-8, 220-pound forward, entered the draft after averaging 14.4 points as a freshman at Georgia Tech. Smith was picked 20th by Miami and traded to the Sixers for the rights to 21st pick Daequan Cook, cash and a 2009 second-round pick.

Young will make $1.525 million in the first year of his contract and $1.640 million in the second. Smith will make a little over $1 million both seasons. The 76ers hold options for third and fourth years on both players. …

Kevin Durant missed the Seattle SuperSonics’ summer league game on Wednesday night against the Milwaukee Bucks to attend the taping of the ESPY awards in Los Angeles.

Durant will return to the team today and is scheduled to play in Seattle’s final two games on Friday and Sunday, team spokesman Kurt Fedders said.

Miami Heat forward Antoine Walker said that he remains shaken after an armed robbery at his Chicago home.

“When your life’s threatened, it’s obviously going to take some time to get over it,” Walker said in his first public comments since the robbery. “I’m not Superman.”