Oran Etkin is a jazz hotshot from New York, fabulous clarinet player and also a Grammmy Award winner. As he absorbs music themes from Africa, Far East, Europe or Israel, Etkin’s birthplace, his palette of harmonies and motives contains a vast range of musical traditions. It can be said that its Oran Etkin who has been pioneering “world music” in the very sense of the term. For the first time in Prague, Oran Etkin will serve fresh portions of jazz frenzy seasoned with swing rhythms together with his Trio.

Yet Oran Etkin neither keeps his musical secrets for himself nor does he expose only adult concert attendees to his passionate musical expression. His children’s album Wake Up, Clarinet won many awards. As a keen and dedicated musical caretaker he created a new educational method Timbalooloo that teach children both music and love for music. As part of the Mladi Ladi Detem project Oran Etkin will tour the country to perform series of his exclusive Timbalooloo workshops.

http://www.oranetkin.com/

CIRILIC

The more they appreciate national traditions, the less they stick to traditional arrangements. CIRILIC is a cosmopolitan quartet staying one day in the Czech Republic, the other one in Netherlands, whose members come from corners stretching from the Czech Republic, across Ukraine and Russia all the way to South Korea. The same way their roots do, CIRILIC‘s music flows like a water nymph over genres of world music, jazz and alternative rock. In their lively improvisations and arrangements, the inspiration is drawn from the tradition of the 19th century Russian romantic music by authors such as N. Rimsky-Korsakov or M. Glinka.

In 2014, the band recorded their first album A Golden Age with central themes topics such as national heritage, personal roots or cultural references. Thanks to their prolific creativity, they will celebrate the release of their second album Memories of Heaven at the end of April.

Tickets for sitting are available at https://www.jazzdock.cz/en/program

ADMISSION AT THE DOOR (UNDER 26 Y.O. / ABOVE 26 Y.O.): 250,- KČ / 400,- KČ