What is typhus?

Typhus is a disease caused by infection with one or more rickettsial bacteria. Fleas, mites (chiggers), lice, or ticks transmit it when they bite you. Fleas, mites, lice, and ticks are types of invertebrate animals known as arthropods. When arthropods carrying around rickettsial bacteria bite someone, they transmit thebacteria that causes typhus. Scratching the bite further opens the skin and allows the bacteria greater access to the bloodstream. Once in the bloodstream, the bacteria continue to reproduce and grow.

There are three different types of typhus:

epidemic (louse-borne) typhus

endemic (murine) typhus

scrub typhus

The type of typhus you are infected with depends on what bit you. Arthropods are typically carriers of a typhus strain unique to their species.

Typhus outbreaks usually only occur in developing countries or in regions of poverty, poor sanitation, and close human contact. Typhus is generally not a problem in the United States, but you may become infected while traveling abroad.

Untreated typhus can lead to serious complications, and it’s potentially fatal. It’s important to see your doctor if you suspect that you may have typhus.

Typhus is not transmitted from person to person like a cold or the flu. There are three different types of typhus, and each type is caused by a different type of bacterium and transmitted by a different type of arthropod.

Epidemic/louse-borne typhus

This type is caused by Rickettsia prowazekii and carried by the body louse, and possibly by ticks as well. It can be found around the world, including in the United States, but is typically found in areas of high population and poor sanitation, where conditions promote lice infestation.

Endemic typhus

Alternatively known as murine typhus, this type is caused by Rickettsia typhi and is carried by the rat flea or cat flea. Endemic typhus can be found worldwide. It may be found among people in close contact with rats. It isn’t commonly found in the United States, but cases have been reported in some areas, primarily Texas and southern California.

Is it a fleabite? Symptoms and treatments »

Scrub typhus

This type is caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi and carried by mites in their larval stage when they are chiggers. This type of typhus is more commonly found in Asia, Australia, Papua New Guinea, and the Pacific Islands. It’s also called tsutsugamushi disease.

The louse, flea, tick, or mite becomes a carrier of the bacteria when they feed on the blood of an infected person (epidemic typhus) or an infected rodent (any of the three typhus forms mentioned above).

If you come in contact with these bacterium-carrying arthropods (for example, by sleeping on bed sheets infested with lice), you can become infected in a couple ways. The bacteria, in addition to being transmitted through your skin by their bites, can also be transmitted through their feces. If you scratch the skin over an area where lice or mites have been feeding, the bacteria in their feces can enter your bloodstream through the tiny wounds on your skin.

Symptoms vary slightly by the type of typhus, but there are symptoms that are associated with all three types of typhus, such as:

headache

fever

chills

rash

Symptoms of epidemic typhus usually appear suddenly and include:

severe headache

high fever (above 102.2°F)

rash that begins on the back or chest and spreads

confusion

stupor and seeming out of touch with reality

low blood pressure (hypotension)

eye sensitivity to bright lights

severe muscle pain

The symptoms of endemic typhus last for 10 to 12 days and are very similar to the symptoms of epidemic typhus but are usually less severe. They include:

dry cough

nausea and vomiting

diarrhea

Symptoms seen in people with scrub typhus include:

swollen lymph nodes

tiredness

red lesion or sore on the skin at the site of the bite

cough

rash

Read more: What’s causing my skin to be red? »

The incubation period for the disease is five to 14 days, on average. This means that symptoms won’t usually appear for up to five to 14 days after you are bitten. Travelers who get typhus while traveling abroad may not experience symptoms until they are back home. This is why it is important to tell your doctor about any recent trips if you have any of the above symptoms.

If you suspect that you have typhus, your doctor will ask about your symptoms and your medical history. To help with the diagnosis, tell your doctor if you:

are living in a crowded environment

know of a typhus outbreak in your community

have traveled abroad recently

Diagnosis is difficult because symptoms are common to other infectious diseases, including:

dengue, also known as breakbone fever

malaria, an infectious disease spread by mosquitos

brucellosis, an infectious disease caused by Brucella bacterial species

Diagnostic tests for the presence of typhus include:

skin biopsy: a sample of the skin from your rash will be tested in a lab

Western blot: a test to identify the presence of typhus

immunofluorescence test: uses fluorescent dyes to detect typhus antigen in samples of serum taken from the bloodstream

other blood tests: results can indicate the presence of infection

Antibiotics most commonly used to treat typhus include:

doxycycline (Doryx, Vibramycin): the preferred treatment

chloramphenicol: an option for those not pregnant or breastfeeding

ciprofloxacin (Cipro): used for adults who are unable to take doxycycline

Some complications of typhus include:

hepatitis, which is inflammation of the liver

gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which is bleeding inside the intestines

hypovolemia, which is a decrease in blood fluid volume

Early treatment with antibiotics is very effective, and relapses aren’t common if you take the full course of antibiotics. Delayed treatment and misdiagnosis can lead to a more severe case of typhus.

Epidemics of typhus are more common in poor, unsanitary, and crowded areas. People who are most at risk of dying are generally those who are unable to afford quick treatments. The overall mortality rate for untreated typhus depends on the type of typhus and other factors, such as age and overall health status.

The highest rates are seen in the older adults and those who are malnourished. Children usually recover from typhus. People with underlying diseases (such as diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, or chronic renal disorders) also have a higher risk of mortality. Mortality for epidemic typhus that goes untreated can range from 10 to 60 percent, and mortality from untreated scrub typhus can range up to 30 percent.

Read more: Nutritional deficiencies (malnutrition) »

Endemic/murine typhus is rarely deadly, even without treatment. Death occurs in no more than 4 percent of cases, according to an article in Clinical Infectious Diseases.