CHARLESTON — Leaders of the board that oversees West Virginia Public Broadcasting and the foundation that brings in major grant and endowment funding for its news, education and cultural programming believe it can weather the new changes in management.

The Educational Broadcasting Commission held its regular quarterly meeting at the headquarters of West Virginia Public Broadcasting (WVPB) in downtown Charleston Wednesday morning. It was the board’s first meeting since Gov. Jim Justice signed Senate Bill 844, redesignating the Educational Broadcasting Authority as the Educational Broadcasting Commission, by the 15-day day deadline last Friday.

“I’d be remiss if I didn’t bring up the fact that there are changes,” said EBC Chairman William File III. “We all recognize there are issues that have occurred recently and some bills have been passed that will alter to a certain extent the way we were formed.”

SB 844 reduces the number of board members for the renamed commission from 11 to nine members, reduces the number of members appointed by the governor from seven to five, and reduces their terms from seven to five years. The EBC announced it already lost a board member with the resignation last week of Tom Susman, a lobbyist and owner of WMOV Radio in Jackson County.

Until SB 844, the authority hired the executive director of WVPB. However, the new law placed the power to select a new executive director for WVPB in the hands of Randall Reid-Smith, whose title was changed this year from curator of the Department of Arts, Culture, and History to the department’s first cabinet secretary since it was known as the Department of Education and the Arts.

During Wednesday’s meeting, the Educational Broadcasting Commission unanimously recommended Eddie Isom, the current interim executive director of WVPB, to be the next permanent executive director in a unanimous vote. It will be up to Reid-Smith to accept the recommendation or choose an executive director of his own.

Isom, who has served as interim WVPB executive director since August following the abrupt resignation of embattled WVPB Executive Director Butch Antolini, was the chief operating officer and director of programming. He has worked at WVPB since 1996 in various roles, including TV traffic, broadcast operations, television programming and underwriting.

According to sources, Isom had been slated to retire on May. 3. WVPB has posted a number of staff vacancies in the last three weeks, including for chief financial officer, director of engineering and IT and TV operations manager.

File, whose term on the EBC ends on June 30, said he has been in communication with Reid-Smith along with Michael Farrell, the chairman of the West Virginia Public Broadcasting Foundation, about what the bill means for WVPB going forward. File said the board will hold Reid-Smith accountable, but he feels confident that the future of public broadcasting in West Virginia is secure.

“We feel that we’re going to get through this,” File said. “We’ve been assured that things are going to remain basically the same as is. Jobs will remain the same. We’re going to continue to have the support from the Legislature. We’re going to work hard to keep public broadcasting advancing.”

“I’m persuaded that change is an opportunity for us to expand our influence,” Farrell said. “(Reid-Smith) has new clout as a secretary. He has access to resources. He is working in our best interests. We’re going to hold him accountable to do that. That’s the pledge he has made to us.”

According to WVPB’s 2023 annual report, more than 35 percent — or more than $3.8 million of its funding — comes from state tax dollars, with more than 18 percent ($1.9 million) coming from federal sources and more than 46 percent ($4.9 million) coming from private donations.

The West Virginia Public Broadcasting Foundation – one of two nonprofits that help fund WVPB – handles major gifts, grants, awards and bequests. The Friends of West Virginia Public Broadcasting Board handles annual membership donations.

In its quarterly meeting three weeks ago, the Friends board raised concerns about SB 844, the possibility of political interference in WVPB’s news division by Reid-Smith on behalf of lawmakers or the governor and the effect the new structure could have on future donations, with past donors concerned about giving while WVPB is more directly under state control.

According to a financial report given Wednesday, WVPB was down 280 donors compared to March 2023, with more than 11,500 donors, though sustaining membership is up. Underwriting is also down according to Wednesday’s report. WVPB will begin a fund drive on April 12.

Farrell told EBA members Wednesday that at least one major national donor, the Margaret A. Cargill Philanthropies, wants to meet with him, Isom and Reid-Smith on April 15 to address concerns they have with SB 844. The foundation has applied to the Margaret A. Cargill Philanthropies another $600,000 grant for WVPB’s Folkways Reporting Project, which showcases Appalachian arts and culture. The grant would fund the project for another three years.