CHARLESTON, W.Va. – The West Virginia Department of Education has entered into a partnership with West Virginia Public Broadcasting (WVPB) to deliver student engagement content for West Virginia students amid the COVID-19 school closures. This partnership will provide students with access to a twice weekly program called “Education Station,” helping them to keep their skills sharp; keeping them connected to the learning process; and supplementing other resources from their schools and counties.

On Tuesdays and Thursdays, beginning March 31, West Virginia Public Broadcasting’s statewide television network will deliver two, 30-minute programs from 9 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.

“Education Station” will be developed and provided by educators at the West Virginia Department of Education as well as those in the field, and will address the critical need to provide access to learning opportunities, regardless of internet connectivity or operational devices at the student’s home.

“The partnership with WVPB helps us to stay engaged with children and families during this challenging time,” said West Virginia Superintendent of Schools W. Clayton Burch. “The school closure has required us to be creative, flexible and focused on meeting the needs of our children, and I am grateful for West Virginia Public Broadcasting, and their enthusiasm for helping us meet this need.”

“We are excited to be collaborating with the West Virginia Department of Education in providing an educational resource in this time of need,” said West Virginia Public Broadcasting Executive Director Chuck Roberts. “Our mission is to educate, inspire, and inform using our statewide television, radio, and digital network and we are so pleased to work with the WVDE in providing this essential at-home learning service. The hope is that we can help keep teachers and students connected and engaged during this unprecedented time.”

WVPB is available on many cable systems throughout the Mountain State as well as over the air.

The WVDE has compiled additional resources for educators and families on the WVDE website. These resources include both technology-driven and screen-free options for grades pre-k through 12. Visit https://wvde.us/covid19/resources/ for details and guidance.