WVPB Staff,Aug. 09, 2024

Keeping A Farming Tradition Alive And Our Song of the Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, a few farmers in southwestern Virginia still work their land the old-fashioned way – with a horse. And Hot Tuna has our Song of the Week.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 08, 2024

Drought-Resistant Agriculture And Jobs For Former Inmates This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, drought conditions have ravaged agriculture in West Virginia, and sustainable farming techniques could be the path through a changing climate. And a look at former prisoners filling the state’s workforce gaps.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 07, 2024

Needles And HIV Plus A Virginia Author’s New Book, This West Virginia Morning

Major HIV outbreaks in Huntington and Charleston over recent years have exposed conflicting views on the disease among state officials and national experts. Most disagreement surrounds a single topic: needles.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 06, 2024

A Medical Disinformation Campaign And The Hope Scholarship This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, a series of ads promotes disinformation and lies about a federal healthcare program, and a look at the Hope Scholarship program.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 05, 2024

Negotiating Higher Ground And Emerging Appalachian Voices This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, differences in opinion on how to build high ground communities in Eastern Kentucky and a conversation with the editor of a new collection of essays.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 02, 2024

Dietary Misinformation On Social Media And Our Song of the Week, This West Virginia Morning

Social Media is filled with life advice from 5 minute crafts to how to live a healthier lifestyle. However some information can be harmful or down right untrue. Briana Heaney sat down with Dietitian Gina Wood at the West Virginia University Extension to discuss navigating food and diet information on social media.

WVPB Staff,Aug. 01, 2024

Communities In Schools And School Discipline, This West Virginia Morning

While educators across the nation are getting ready for the start of another school year, coordinators for an innovative school support program are meeting in Morgantown this week. As Chris Schulz reports, they’re gathering to learn how best to help their most vulnerable students.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 31, 2024

Revisiting An HIV Outbreak And Building Homes On Old Mine Sites, This West Virginia Morning

At the height of the COVID outbreak, Charleston was sideswiped by a second deadly epidemic: what the Centers for Disease Control called the most concerning outbreak of HIV in the entire country. There was a bitter tug-of-war over how to respond. But where did that leave the patients, and the people most at risk? And what’s happened to the outbreak since then?

WVPB Staff,Jul. 30, 2024

Navigating The Drought And Crisis Mental Health Care This, West Virginia Morning

Most of the state is experiencing drought conditions, but the Eastern Panhandle and its agricultural industry are feeling the worst of it. Eastern Panhandle Reporter Jack Walker traveled to Jefferson County to see the drought’s impact firsthand.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 29, 2024

Native American History And Climate Migration, This West Virginia Morning

Much of Appalachia has a deep-seeded history connected to the original inhabitants of the land. But often, West Virginia is presented not as a homeland for Native Americans, but simply a transient hunting ground and trading path.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 26, 2024

Stitching Stories And Memories Along With Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, crocheters started making “temperature blankets” as a way to document daily life, but the tradition of telling a story through textiles goes way back. For Inside Appalachia, folkways reporter Wendy Welch looks at how this ancient tradition is being carried on.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 25, 2024

Coming Home From Prison, Assessing The Political Landscape, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, a look at the challenges of reentry into society after a prison sentence, as well as the country’s current political situation.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 24, 2024

Back To School Immunization And Restoring Native Bamboo, This West Virginia Morning

A species of bamboo native to Appalachia was nearly wiped out, but volunteers in southwestern Virginia are trying to restore the plant.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 23, 2024

W.Va. Voters React To Biden Decision And Martinsburg Dancer To Join Touring Cast Of ‘Hamilton,’ This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, President Joe Biden stepped away from his bid for a second term on Sunday and has now endorsed his vice president and running mate Kamala Harris. Briana Heaney spoke with West Virginia voters about how this decision affects what they will decide to do in November.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 22, 2024

Electricity Prices And A Look At New Film Office’s Impact, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, electricity prices in West Virginia have increased faster than the rate of inflation. A recent report concluded that the state’s heavy reliance on coal is the reason. Curtis Tate spoke with the report’s author, Brendan Pierpont, director of electricity modeling for Energy Innovation Policy and Technology.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 19, 2024

A Taste Of Eastern European Pierogi And Jason Carter Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, chicken and dumplings are an Appalachian tradition, but different kinds of dumplings from all over the world have made their way here, including the pierogi from eastern Europe. For Inside Appalachia, Folkways Reporter Will Warren went to a weekly pierogi making session in Wheeling and has this story.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 18, 2024

More On Cognitive Decline And The Allegheny Front Explores Advanced Recycling, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, in Wednesday’s show, News Director Eric Douglas spoke with Teresa Morris, the program director for the West Virginia Chapter of the Alzheimer’s Association, about cognitive decline in older adults. In part two of this conversation, we discuss more signs to look for.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 17, 2024

Protection Against Ticks And Recognizing Declining Mental Acuity, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, as summer kicks into full swing and people head outside, exposure to ticks increases. Appalachia Health News Reporter Emily Rice spoke with West Virginia state entomologist Eric Dotseth who urges vigilance against tick bites that could cause major health issues.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 16, 2024

New Play Explores How AIDS Epidemic Affected Black Americans, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the AIDS epidemic beginning in the 1980s took hundreds of thousands of lives across the country, and even more around the world. A new theater production at this year’s Contemporary American Theater Festival (CATF) in Shepherdstown highlights how the disease impacted the lives of Black Americans in particular.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 15, 2024

Navigating Early Childhood Nutrition And How A Plant Closure Is Affecting A PA City, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, from allergies to introducing solids, the first few years of a child’s life have a surprising number of decisions for parents to make. In our latest entry of “Now What? A Series on Parenting,” Chris Schulz talks with Isabela Negrin, an assistant professor of pediatrics at WVU Medicine, about the ins and outs of early childhood nutrition.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 12, 2024

Making Natural Dyes From Roadside Plants And Steve Poltz Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we learn about using common roadside plants to make natural dyes for fabrics. Also, folk hero and storytelling master Steve Poltz has our Mountain Stage Song of the Week.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 11, 2024

Pennsylvania Festival Stars Fireflies And ‘Us & Them’ Explores Mental Health Challenges In W.Va. Jails, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, every summer, fireflies emerge for a few weeks — sending love signals in the dark. Those fireflies — including synchronous ones — are the stars of a festival at a farm in Forest County, Pennsylvania. As WPSU’s Anne Danahy reports, that farm draws both firefly fans — and researchers — looking to learn more about lightning bugs.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 10, 2024

Inaugural Year Of Governor’s School For Tourism On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, imagine packing all the highlights of things to do in West Virginia into one fun-filled trip. That’s what the inaugural Governor’s School for Tourism did recently for several dozen high school students. But as Maria Young reports, there are some high hopes riding on the career choices these students will make in the years ahead.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 09, 2024

A Conversation With Harpers Ferry Author John Michael Cummings On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, John Michael Cummings is an author in Harpers Ferry. He’s published three novels, two novellas and many short stories. Cummings recently spoke with Bill Lynch about writing and his latest collection of short stories, The Spirit in My Shoes, available from Cornerstone Press.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 08, 2024

Preserving W.Va. History And How To Read And Socialize In Silence, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Eastern Panhandle saw major military activity in the Civil War. But, driving through the region today, you wouldn’t know some of these historic sites exist. Also, in this show, one group in Morgantown has found a way to read and socialize in silence.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 03, 2024

New Online Tool To Check Vaccination Status And How To Protect Seniors From Scams, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, cases of seniors being scammed by strangers, or even victimized by loved ones and caretakers, are common in West Virginia and the country at large. U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of West Virginia William Ihlenfeld prosecutes these crimes far too often. He spoke with Chris Schulz to raise awareness of these crimes and how to avoid them.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 02, 2024

Art Exhibit Celebrates Pollinators And Appalachian Writer Talks Book ‘No Son Of Mine,’ This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, writer Jonathan Corcoran grew up in Elkins. While in college, his mother discovered he was gay. She disowned him and told him to never come back to West Virginia. She died in 2020. They never reconciled. Corcoran, a writing professor at New York University, has written a book, No Son of Mine, which explores grief and his relationship with his mother.

WVPB Staff,Jul. 01, 2024

Chasing Bigfoot And Campus Carry, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, roughly 20,000 people traveled to Braxton County for an annual Bigfoot Festival hosted in the small town of Sutton. One of them was Reporter Briana Heaney, who spoke to festival goers about the annual celebration of cryptids.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 28, 2024

Ohio Poet Laureate Talks New Book ‘Dirt Songs’ And Alisa Amador Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Ohio poet laureate Kari Gunter-Seymour has a new collection of poems titled Dirt Songs. In it, she recalls her small-town upbringing in the ‘70s and ‘80s. But also thinks of the people who owned the land where she lives. Bill Lynch spoke with Gunter-Seymour about her new book and what she sees as good in Appalachia.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 27, 2024

Annual Report Deadline For State Businesses Looms And 50 Years Since Textbook Controversy On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, there’s a deadline looming for business owners across the state. Tens of thousands of them still haven’t filed their annual reports as required by state law. Assistant News Director Maria Young sat down with Secretary of State Mac Warner – who’s hoping all of them get the job done by midnight Sunday night – just, not all at once.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 26, 2024

Gold Star Families In W.Va. And Addressing Chronic Absenteeism On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, West Virginia students are struggling to achieve proficiency in basic academic skills like reading and math, according to national test scores in recent years. One possible contributing factor: chronic absenteeism. But as Chris Schulz reports, a new law hopes to address the issue this fall.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 25, 2024

Flood Prevention Along The Ohio And A Conversation With An Expert BASE Jumper, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, dozens of BASE jumpers leap from the New River Gorge Bridge during Bridge Day each year. High school students Dylan Neil and Nella Fox of the Fayette Institute of Technology got curious about how to become a Bridge Day BASE Jumper. For Inside Appalachia, they talked with expert BASE jumper Marcus Ellison.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 24, 2024

A Conversation On Documentary ‘King Coal’ And W.Va. Town Advocates For End To Gun Violence, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, each year, tens of thousands of Americans die from firearm injuries. In 2022, that figure included more than 300 West Virginians. Nationally, U.S. residents are split on a solution. But residents of a town in Brooke County are advocating for an end to gun violence through political organizing, public art and prayer.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 21, 2024

Celebrating Juneteenth And A Conversation With WVPB’s First Eastern Panhandle Reporter, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Wednesday was the federal holiday Juneteenth, which celebrates the emancipation of enslaved people in the United States. Briana Heaney talked to West Virginians as they hit the streets to celebrate the nation’s, and the state’s, newest holiday.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 19, 2024

The Power Of Old-Time Music And Drive-By Truckers Have Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, people have always used music to do everything from soothe children to sleep to revving up the crowd for the big game, but it can do so much more. For Inside Appalachia, Folkways Reporter Liz Pahl learned about the healing power of old-time music when she visited a weekly jam session at the home of a couple in Athens, Ohio.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 18, 2024

Plans For The Opioid Settlement And Understanding What Happened To Kyneddi Miller On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the foundation responsible for divvying up West Virginia’s opioid settlement money chose its executive director in March. After taking on the position full-time at the beginning of May, Executive Director Jonathan Board sat down with Appalachia Health News Reporter Emily Rice to discuss his qualifications for the job and plans for the future.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 17, 2024

Latest On Mountain Valley Pipeline And A Talk With Doug Skaff Following Copperhead Bites, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, some residents living near the Mountain Valley Pipeline have been watching it for several years. Now that the pipeline is carrying natural gas, they say they’ll continue to do so. Curtis Tate has the story from Bent Mountain, Virginia.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 14, 2024

Appalachian Hip Hop And Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Folkways reporter Vanessa Peña explores the history of hip hop in West Virginia and beyond. Plus, Mountain Stage provides our the Song of the Week — “So Much Love” by Southern Avenue.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 13, 2024

Pharmaceutical Contamination And Residents React To Pipeline, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, pharmaceutical products are winding up in West Virginia waterways, contaminating local rivers and wildlife. Chris Schulz spoke with two researchers about the issue and its environmental implications.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 12, 2024

The CPS Process And A New Plant Powered By Solar On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, two companies are working side by side to build a new titanium plant in Jackson County, powered by solar. Also, even in ideal circumstances, the removal of a child from their home by CPS is always traumatic. We talk with community advocates about the process and resources available.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 11, 2024

The Role Rural Libraries Play Today, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we talk with Emily Dubinsky, president of the American Library Association, about the role rural libraries play in the digital age.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 10, 2024

Summer Fire Safety Basics On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, with the summer season in full swing, grills, fireworks and campfires are making a comeback into our lives. Chris Schulz sat down with Mark Lambert, director of the West Virginia University (WVU) Fire Service Extension about some fire safety basics.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 07, 2024

Conversation With W.Va. Black Pride Foundation And Stephane Wrembel Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Pride Month is underway, and the West Virginia Black Pride Foundation is carving out a space specifically for Black LGBTQ community members. Jack Walker spoke with founder and Executive Director Kasha Snyder-McDonald to discuss her organization’s vision for a better West Virginia for Black LGBTQ residents.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 06, 2024

Herbicide Contamination And Oil Well Wastewater, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, reporter Chris Schulz spoke with a master gardener from Monongalia County about difficulties with this year’s crops — and two plant scientists who say it’s likely the result of herbicide contamination.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 05, 2024

Changes To The FAFSA On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, commonly known as the FAFSA, is meant to help students access funds to pursue higher education. But as Chris Schulz reports, recent changes to the federal form have left students and schools scrambling for answers.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 04, 2024

Young Voter Turnout And Summer Fun At New River Gorge, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we talk with National Park Ranger Eve West to learn about ways to enjoy the nation’s newest National Park at the New River Gorge this summer. Also, we explore the state’s low voter turnout and the impact it has on young voters.

WVPB Staff,Jun. 03, 2024

Regulating The Mountain Valley Pipeline And High School Student Takes Up Band Director Role, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Mountain Valley Pipeline is under scrutiny from federal regulators after it failed a pressure test in Virginia last month. Curtis Tate spoke with Cynthia Quarterman, the former head of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration from 2009 to 2014, about the federal agency’s role in regulating 3 million miles of pipeline.

WVPB Staff,May. 31, 2024

Sticker Shop Celebrates W.Va. And Nick Lowe, Los Straitjackets Have Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Elizabeth Elswick couldn’t find a lot of merchandise to represent her home state of West Virginia while she was growing up. But today, she represents Appalachian culture and sayings through her sticker shop. Folkways Reporter Maddie Miller brings us this story.

WVPB Staff,May. 30, 2024

Electric School Buses, State Foster Care Ombudsman Resigns And A Conversation On The Mountain Valley Pipeline, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, federal officials are encouraging more school districts to switch to electric buses. Also, in this show, the appointed watchdog of the state’s Foster Care System has resigned and The Allegheny Front interviews WVPB’s Curtis Tate.

WVPB Staff,May. 29, 2024

Solar Growth And Sharpe Hospital Patient Files Lawsuit, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, solar is expanding in West Virginia, thanks to shifts in federal and state policies. Curtis Tate spoke recently with Dan Conant, founder and CEO of Solar Holler, about solar growth in the Mountain State. Also, in this show, a patient at Sharpe Hospital has filed a lawsuit against the facility, its CEO and state health officials. Emily Rice has more.

WVPB Staff,May. 28, 2024

Preserving Black Churches And Training Child Care Professionals, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we dive into the preservation of historic Black churches across the Mountain State and the nation. Plus, in the latest installment of our series “Now What? A Series on Parenting,” we’ll hear about efforts to train new child care professionals.

WVPB Staff,May. 24, 2024

TikTok Sensation ‘Appalachian Forager’ And Ruthie Foster Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we learn about an incident at a state-run psychiatric facility, we meet a TikTok sensation who forages in Appalachia and we listen to our Mountain Stage Song of the Week.

WVPB Staff,May. 23, 2024

Return Of Vandalia And Latest ‘Us & Them’ Explores Childhood Trauma, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Memorial Day weekend brings the return of the Vandalia Gathering at the state capitol. Also, we listen to an excerpt from the latest Us & Them. In this episode, host Trey Kay explores childhood trauma.

WVPB Staff,May. 22, 2024

Latest On USPS Charleston Processing And Distributing Center, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the United States Postal Service (USPS) announced last week it would postpone delivery network changes that would downsize the Charleston Processing and Distribution Center. But this news hasn’t remedied months-long tensions between local workers and USPS officials. As Jack Walker reports, union representatives are now filing grievance claims for some workers.

WVPB Staff,May. 21, 2024

Pipeline Safety Concerns And Radioactive Waste, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Mountain Valley Pipeline failed a water pressure test in Virginia earlier this month and the Pipeline Safety Trust is urging federal regulators to take a close look at the failure. Also, in this show, we hear about radioactive waste in the Marcellus Shale fields, one of the country’s largest natural gas producing formations.

WVPB Staff,May. 20, 2024

Funding Emergency Shelters And National Pro Road Championships Comes To Charleston, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, West Virginia’s mechanism for funding emergency shelters shifted earlier this year to an application-based system. As Chris Schulz reports, that change has proved a boon for some – and a problem for others.

WVPB Staff,May. 17, 2024

A Visit To KY Mountain Laurel Festival And Kim Richey Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Kentucky Mountain Laurel Festival in Pineville, Kentucky has staged a formal dance for nearly a century that has remained the same for generations. Folkways Reporter Will Warren takes us for a visit.

WVPB Staff,May. 16, 2024

A Look At The Upcoming Gubernatorial Race On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the stage is now set for a two man, two party political race for governor of West Virginia. Randy Yohe gives us an initial look at what we can expect from the Republican and the Democratic nominees.

WVPB Staff,May. 15, 2024

Primary Election Recap And A Discussion On Child Nutrition, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the results from Tuesday’s primary election came in mostly as expected. Government Reporter Randy Yohe has covered the intense campaigning leading up to the primary and he joins us live in the studio with results and reactions.

WVPB Staff,May. 14, 2024

W.Va. Primary Election Day Underway And The Risks Of Raw Milk On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Tuesday’s primary election may be the most important the state has seen in a while. Voters have endured a gubernatorial media campaign blitz with unprecedented mudslinging – coupled with a dominant charge to see a new but familiar face representing West Virginia in the U.S. Senate. Randy Yohe has our story.

WVPB Staff,May. 13, 2024

Pipeline Problems, Student Protests And A Voter’s Guide, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, a pipeline safety watchdog said federal regulators “should be on notice” about a pressure test failure on the Mountain Valley Pipeline earlier this month.

WVPB Staff,May. 10, 2024

Mountain Valley Pipeline, Children’s Mental Health And Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Curtis Tate tells us about problems with the Mountain Valley Pipeline as it nears completion, Emily Rice discusses children’s mental health with state expert and Mountain Stage brings us the Song of the Week with Watchhouse performing “The Wolves.”

WVPB Staff,May. 09, 2024

W.Va.’s Legislative Scorecard And A Look At Compassion Fatigue On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we speak with Judy Ball, chair of the Legislative Action Workgroup for the League of Women Voters of West Virginia, to break down the state’s 2024 Legislative Scorecard. Also, we hear an excerpt from our Us & Them episode, “Compassion Fatigue.”

WVPB Staff,May. 08, 2024

Preserving A Historic Black Church And A Conversation With Mike Pushkin On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we hear from Del. Mike Pushkin, D-Kanawha, chair of the West Virginia Democratic Party, on the efforts to rebuild the party and restore Democrats to state offices ahead of this primary election. Also, we hear about preservation efforts for a historic Black church in Harpers Ferry.

WVPB Staff,May. 07, 2024

Jefferson Commission Confusion And Pipeline Problems, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, a West Virginia circuit court removed two members of the Jefferson County Commission from office, but a last-minute party change has cast confusion over who will name her successor. Also, the construction of a pipeline in western Pennsylvania and a rupture in the Mountain Valley Pipeline has left environmentalists asking questions.

WVPB Staff,May. 06, 2024

Attorney General Responsibilities And Ramp Season Is Winding Down, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, as chief legal officer for West Virginia’s citizens, state office holders, agencies and boards, the attorney general’s (AG) responsibilities cover the litigation gamut. The four candidates in the upcoming primary races for AG have diverse views on how those responsibilities should be handled – and prioritized. Randy Yohe has our second story on this race.

WVPB Staff,May. 03, 2024

Appalachian Filipino Cuisine And Joachim Cooder Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Asheville, North Carolina is home to an eclectic dining scene with hidden gems like Neng Jr.’s, which serves up elevated Filipino cuisine. Tucked away in an alley, it’s a slice of home no matter where you’re from. Folkways Reporter Margaret McLeod Leef has more.

WVPB Staff,May. 02, 2024

Books In Prisons And How The Role Of ‘Dad’ Is Shifting, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, being a parent is a 24-hour role, and a lifetime commitment that has historically fallen to women. As men have started to take on more domestic work, what it means to be a father has started to shift. Chris Schulz looks at these changes in our latest installment of “Now What? A Series on Parenting.”

WVPB Staff,May. 01, 2024

Attorney General Race And A Conversation With Poet, Professor Sara Henning, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, according to state code, the attorney general’s job is to enforce West Virginia’s laws as they relate to – listed in order – consumer protection, unfair trade practices, civil rights and other important areas. As Randy Yohe shows us, the four primary candidates running for attorney general, two Republicans and two Democrats, have diverse views on the overall mission of the office.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 30, 2024

Investing In Mountain State Energy Communities, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, West Virginia is seeing a boom in low and no-carbon manufacturing, thanks to tax credits and other federal programs designed to spur investment in energy communities. Curtis Tate spoke recently with Brian Anderson, a senior adviser on energy communities at the U.S. Department of Energy. They spoke at the University of Charleston.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 29, 2024

Passover Amid The War In Gaza On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Jewish holiday of Passover is coming to an end. It is a time for celebration and reflection. This year, it has been a bit more difficult, according to Rabbi Victor Urecki from Charleston. He spoke with News Director Eric Douglas to discuss the holiday and the struggle with the war in Gaza.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 26, 2024

An Experimental Orchard And Larry Groce Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, an experimental apple orchard in the state is helping to fight pollution, improve food scarcity and some hope even heal veterans. Briana Heaney has the story.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 25, 2024

Funding Medicaid And Navigating The Nation’s Foster Care Crisis, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, health care services for nearly 30 percent of West Virginia’s population may be difficult to access if lawmakers don’t fully fund the Medicaid program in an expected special session. Emily Rice has more.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 24, 2024

Voices Of Voters And Wyoming Co. Water Pollution This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, drinking water in Wyoming County is making people sick but it’s unclear who is responsible. Also, a look at voter concerns ahead of May’s primary election.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 23, 2024

Funding Needs For Domestic Violence Shelters On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, domestic violence prevention advocates lined the State Capitol rotunda in February, seeking a budget increase. They said lawmakers were receptive to the idea. But no increase was passed before this year’s regular legislative session ended. Jack Walker checked in with domestic violence prevention advocates on funding needs as a potential special session approaches.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 22, 2024

Campaign Ads Targeting Transgender Youth And Understanding W.Va.’s Water Resource, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, as the primary race for governor enters the home stretch, some candidate’s negative attack ads running endlessly on broadcast and social media target a minority group – transgender children. But what is the fallout from these ads for this vulnerable group, and West Virginia children and families in general? Randy Yohe has the story.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 19, 2024

Appalachian Couple Shares Lifelong Dream And Sam Weber Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Sue and Stan Jennings for 30 years have run Allegheny Treenware, a company that makes wooden kitchen utensils. But they started off as a couple of coal miners. Folkways Reporter Capri Cafaro has more.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 18, 2024

Navigating ‘Climate Anxiety’ And Officials Talk IDD Waiver On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, uncertainty about the future amidst a changing climate has given rise in recent years to a phenomenon known as “climate anxiety.” Ahead of Earth Day Monday, Chris Schulz spoke with Amy Parsons-White, sustainability manager for Marshall University, to discuss this mental health issue and potential solutions.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 17, 2024

Balancing Digital, Online Access For Kids And The State’s First Commercial Composting Facility On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, digital devices and social media command more and more of our attention these days. Balancing this and creating healthy boundaries for increasingly younger children is becoming a bigger part of being a parent. Chris Schulz takes a look at this issue in the latest installment of, “Now What? A Series On Parenting.”

WVPB Staff,Apr. 16, 2024

Naloxone And Natural Gas, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, harm reduction advocates celebrate an anniversary and a discussion about the state’s role in supplying the global market of natural gas.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 15, 2024

Chair Caning And Keeping Utilities In Good Shape, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, when your power goes out, water bill comes in or your nearby fire hydrant looks ancient, there’s a state organization keeping tabs on all of that and more. Randy Yohe talks with Charlotte Lane, chair of the West Virginia Public Service Commission, on how this regulating entity balances public protection with keeping utilities viable.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 12, 2024

The Many Uses Of Violets And Ed Snodderly Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, violets bloom across Appalachia throughout spring, but the flowers are more than just some extra color in the yard. They’ve long been a key ingredient in herbal remedies.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 11, 2024

The Future Of The American Chestnut And Our Latest Us & Them, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, WVPB last spring covered efforts at Shepherd University to regrow American chestnut forests in Appalachia. One year later, that project has incorporated new technology and a familiar tree variant. Jack Walker caught up with a pair of self-proclaimed “chestnutters” to discuss the project at large, and the future of the American chestnut.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 10, 2024

Foster Care Communication And An Iftar In Morgantown On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Tuesday marked the end of the holy month of Ramadan in the Islamic faith. Like millions across the world, Muslims in West Virginia fasted from sunup to sundown each day of the month. Their fast is traditionally broken with a meal called iftar. Chris Schulz takes us to an iftar in Morgantown.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 09, 2024

WVU Students Gather For Solar Eclipse And Grandson Of Woody Williams Weighs In On Failed Legislation, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, across the country Monday, people took a moment out of their day to watch the solar eclipse. West Virginia was no exception, and at West Virginia University’s (WVU) Morgantown campus, a large crowd gathered to experience the celestial event. Chris Schulz has the story.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 08, 2024

Election Filing Changes And Solar Eclipse Safety This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, we learn from graduate students about how to view Monday’s eclipse safely. Also, changes to how and when political parties can fill vacancies after the candidate filing deadline in state elections.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 05, 2024

Remembering Upper Big Branch Mine Disaster And Sarah Jarosz Has Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the Upper Big Branch Mine Disaster, which caused the deaths of 29 miners, happened 14 years ago. Ashton Marra worked for WVPB at the time and covered the trial of Don Blankenship, CEO of the company that owned the mine. Briana Heaney sat down with Marra to talk about what it was like being a reporter covering the trial.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 04, 2024

A Bicycle Ride Through Morgantown On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, as temperatures start to rise, people are taking the opportunity to get outside. One group in Morgantown is taking to the streets on their bicycles. Chris Schulz takes us with him as he tags along to explore the city in a new way.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 03, 2024

The Growing Need For Foster Families On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, in the latest installment of our occasional series “Now What? A Series On Parenting,” Chris Schulz speaks with Terri Lynn Durnal of the National Youth Advocate Program about the unique experience of fostering children – and the need for foster parents in the state.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 02, 2024

History Of Martinsburg Mural Coming To Berkeley County, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, Berkeley County in 2022 celebrated its 250th anniversary. Now, the county is looking back at its history through a public art lens. By early June, a mural will be on display in the heart of Martinsburg tracing the history and culture of Berkeley County over the years.

WVPB Staff,Apr. 01, 2024

How The Baltimore Bridge Collapse Is Affecting Coal Producers In W.Va., This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the closure of the Port of Baltimore to most shipping has a ripple effect for coal producers in northern West Virginia. Curtis Tate takes a deeper look.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 29, 2024

Issues In A Mercer County Mobile Home Park And Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, after a new owner took over a Mercer County mobile home park, rents quickly went up while repairs slowed. One resident did some digging and found a reporter in California who had some unexpected answers about who this new owner was. Inside Appalachia Host Mason Adams spoke with reporter Julie Reynolds.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 28, 2024

How COVID-19 Affected National Parks And Us & Them Looks At Changes In Local Journalism, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, tourists from around the world visit Harpers Ferry each year to immerse themselves in U.S. history. But the number of visitors fell in 2020, as public health restrictions ramped up nationwide. Jack Walker visited the town to learn how things have changed since the COVID-19 pandemic began.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 27, 2024

Updates One Year Later On State Police Investigation, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, it has been a year since allegations of illicit recordings of cadets and other women at the West Virginia State Police barracks launched federal and state investigations into the law enforcement department. We speak with the superintendent of state police for an update.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 26, 2024

COVID-19’s Continued Impact On Schools And A Look At The U.S. Senate Race, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, political analysts say the two Republican candidates for the U.S. Senate in the upcoming May primary election give voters some particular, and troubling, food for thought. The candidates themselves say voters need to focus on the positives, not the negatives.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 25, 2024

How COVID-19 Affected The Way We Shop On This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, shortly after the first COVID-19 case hit West Virginia four years ago, our way of simple day-to-day living drastically changed. Many of those alterations dealt with how we went shopping. Randy Yohe spoke with West Virginia Retailers Association President Bridget Lambert on COVID-19’s effect on retail – and how our shopping lives have forever been changed.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 22, 2024

A Quest For A Lost Mug And Our Song Of The Week, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, our program Inside Appalachia features stories about all things Appalachia, including an epic quest to find a lost coffee mug. Folkways Reporter Wendy Welch has this story.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 21, 2024

Fourth Anniversary Of COVID-19 In W.Va. And A Look At The ‘Moonshine Bill,’ This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, March 17, 2020 marked the day West Virginia became the last state in the U.S. to test positive for COVID-19. Appalachia Health News Reporter Emily Rice spoke with two state health leaders about the fourth anniversary of the COVID-19 pandemic arriving in West Virginia.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 20, 2024

Infant Sleep And Longtime Tradition Returns To W.Va. Schools For Deaf, Blind, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, sleep is a key part of both mental and physical health for everyone. But for many parents, ensuring their baby is getting good sleep can be frustrating and elusive. We talk with an expert on infant sleep. Also, we visit the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and the Blind to learn about a longtime tradition that has returned.

WVPB Staff,Mar. 19, 2024

Possible Changes Coming To Student Vaccination Rules, This West Virginia Morning

On this West Virginia Morning, the state has long been a standards bearer for vaccination rates across the country, but the legislature this year passed a bill to loosen restrictions for certain students in the state. But it has one final hurdle to clear before it’s implemented.