Who Is Henry Cuellar?, Age, Height, Education, Career, Family, Net Worth: Henry Cuellar, also known as Enrique Roberto “Henry” Cuellar was born on September 19, 1955.

He’s an American attorney and politician serving as the U.S. representative for Texas’s 28th congressional district since 2005. Cuellar is a member of the Democratic Party.

Cuellar’s district extends from the Rio Grande to San Antonio’s suburbs. He served in the Texas House of Representatives for 14 years, from 1987 to 2001

Cuellar briefly served as the Texas Secretary of State in 2001, making him, as of 2022, the most recent Democrat to have held a statewide office in Texas.

Cuellar was first elected to Congress in 2004 after defeating Ciro Rodriguez. He’s considered a leading centrist within the House Democratic Caucus.

Cuellar has since been reelected in every general election while surviving a number of competitive primary races, most notably in 2020 and 2022.

In October 2023, Cuellar hit significant headlines after he was reportedly carjacked by three armed robbers on Monday 2, October.

In a statement, Cuellar’s chief of staff, Jacob Hochberg said: “As Congressman Cuellar was parking his car this evening, 3 armed assailants approached the Congressman and stole his vehicle. Luckily, he was not harmed and is working with local law enforcement”

Hochberg said police recovered Cuellar’s vehicle. According to reports, the robbery happened in Washington’s Navy Yard area, about a mile from the U.S. Capitol.

Monday’s carjacking happens to be the second assault on a member of Congress in the District of Columbia this year (2023).

In February, Angie Craig was assaulted in her apartment, suffering bruises while escaping serious injury. Her chief of staff said the attack did not appear to be politically motivated.

Henry Cuellar Age

Henry Cuellar celebrated his 68th birthday in September this year (2023). He was born on September 19, 1955, in Laredo, Texas, United States

Henry Cuellar Height & Weight

Henry Cuellar has a great physique but his height and weight are unknown in this writing. From 1984 to 1986 he taught at Texas A&M International University as an international commercial law adjunct professor.

Henry Cuellar Education

Henry Cuellar attended Buenos Aires Elementary School and completed J. W. Nixon High School. He received an associate of arts degree from Laredo Community College.

Cuellar then attended the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University and graduated cum laude with a Bachelor of Science in foreign service.

He also earned a Master of Arts in international trade from Texas A&M International University, a Juris Doctor (JD) from the University of Texas School of Law, and a PhD from the University of Texas at Austin.

As of 2023, he is studying toward a degree at Naval War College.

Henry Cuellar Family

Henry Cuellar is the son of Martin Siller Cuellar Sr. (father: 1926–2019) and Odilia Cuellar (mother: 1928–2015).

Although he’s famous, there’s no relevant information regarding his parents as their date of birth, age, and occupation are unknown to us at this time of writing.

His father was born in Tamaulipas, Mexico, and immigrated to the United States while his mother is a native of Zapata, Texas.

Henry Cuellar is not the only child of his parents. He’s said to be one of eight children. Unfortunately, we do not have information regarding all his siblings.

However, the American politician has a brother, Martin Cuellar who serves as Sheriff in Webb County, and a sister, Rosie Cuellar, who’s the municipal judge in Rio Bravo.

Henry Cuellar is married to Imelda Cuellar. It’s unclear when they met and when they tied the knot. Also, owing to the fact that Imelda lives away from the spotlight, we do not have any information regarding her date of birth, age, and occupation at the time of this report.

The couple are blessed with two daughters; Catherine Ann Cuellar and Christina Alexandra Cuellar. The American attorney hardly opens up about his family life hence his children’s date of birth, age, and occupation are unknown to us as of this writing.

Henry Cuellar Net Worth

Henry Cuellar’s net worth is unknown to us as of this report. However, he’s believed to have earned a reasonable amount of money from his job as an attorney and politician.

Henry Cuellar Social Media

Henry Cuellar owns a verified X (Twitter) account with over 31K followers and a verified Instagram account with over 4K followers. The American attorney and politician is very active on these social media platforms.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jqGcp6qpYrC2sculmKtlkZyybrTEop6hrF2asbavwK2gqKZdmK6zscSrZJ%2BZnZ65uns%3D