For Immediate Release (July 8, 2022) – In January of 2022 the Town of Barnstable was officially recognized as a Complete Streets community. The Cape Cod Commission and the Town of Barnstable are working together to analyze the Town’s transportation network to identify opportunities to create a more connected, efficient, and accessible roadway network and are seeking community feedback on priority projects at upcoming village meetings.

As elaborated within the Complete Streets Introduction Video, a “Complete Street” provides accommodations for all users, including motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and transit users for people of all ages and abilities making streets safer, sustainable, and more accessible to promote a more livable community.

Staff is currently working to develop a draft Prioritization Plan which is a list of potential roadway improvements that incorporate Complete Streets design elements ranked by defined evaluation criteria such as safety, mobility, ability to implement and community support.

The Cape Cod Commission and the Town of Barnstable want to hear from you. Staff will hold five family-friendly village meetings open to the public. Residents are encouraged to stop by to learn more about this effort and share ideas for potential Complete Streets projects that would better support walking, biking, and safe driving in the Town of Barnstable. All residents are welcome to attend one or more of the following meetings:

Monday July 18th 4:30 PM

Villages of Osterville & Cotuit

Osterville Village Library 43 Wianno Ave, Osterville

Wednesday July 20th 4:30 PM

Village of Marstons Mills

Liberty Hall 2150 Main Street, Marstons Mills

Tuesday July 26th 4:30 PM

Village of Hyannis

Barnstable Adult Community Center 825 Falmouth Road (Route 28), Hyannis

Thursday July 28th 4:30 PM

Village of Centerville

Centerville Public Library 585 Main Street, Centerville

Wednesday August 3rd 4:30 PM

Villages of Barnstable & West Barnstable

Saint Mary’s Episcopal Church 3055 Main Street (Route 6A), Barnstable

Based on feedback from the village meetings, Town of Barnstable and Cape Cod Commission staff will work together to develop a draft Prioritization Plan which will be presented at a public meeting to occur Winter 2023. The final Prioritization Plan will be submitted to the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) as part of the town’s ongoing participation in their Complete Streets Program. Approved projects will be eligible for up to $400,000 in construction funding from MassDOT.

For more information visit the project website at https://www.capecodcommission.org/our-work/barnstable-complete-streets/ or contact: Colleen Medeiros, Transportation Program Manager, Cape Cod Commission: 508-744-1226 or Kate Maldonado, Assistant Director of Planning and Development: 508-862-4791.