City of Lawrence

City Clerk’s Office

On May 22, 2012, the City Commission considered a request from Liberty Hall to close a portion of the 600 block of Massachusetts from 1:00 p.m. – midnight on Friday, June 22, 2012, for a celebration of Liberty Hall’s 100 year anniversary. The City Commission directed staff and the applicant to bring a revised request for consideration at the June 5 meeting, which would close the 100 block of E 7th and also the sidewalk and parking spaces in front of Liberty Hall.

Staff has prepared a map of the proposed event area. Notice that the City Commission will consider this street closure has been mailed to property owners and tenants adjacent to the event area. The event organizers have also been discussing the proposed event with adjacent businesses.

The new plan effects traffic movements at the intersections of 7th and Massachusetts as well as 7th and New Hampshire. Staff plans to require as a condition of the permit that the applicant provide MUTCD (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices) compliant signage and barricades at both intersections, and barricades along the outside edge of the parking stalls on Massachusetts. This likely will increase the organizer’s event costs compared to the previously proposed Massachusetts Street location, but staff believes following these federal standards for traffic control is necessary to provide adequate protection to attendees of the event.

The event would feature the sale, possession and consumption of alcohol on the public right-of-way. Possession and consumption on the right-of-way is generally prohibited unless a specific area is exempted by ordinance. On May 22, the Commission adopted on first reading Ordinance No. 8735, which would allow possession and consumption of alcohol on the sidewalk and parking stalls in front of Liberty Hall and on the block of 100 block of E 7th Street during the event. That ordinance requires approval on second reading before it is effective. The city’s Standard Conditions for Alcohol on the Public Right-of-Way would apply to this event.

ACTION: Approve a Temporary Use of Public Right-of-Way Permit for Liberty Hall, allowing the use of the sidewalk and parking stalls on the east side of the 600 block of Massachusetts Street in front of Liberty Hall, and the closure of the 100 block of E 7th Street, from 1:00 p.m. – midnight on Friday, June 22, 2012.