This post may contain affiliate links. Disclosure

Colmar is an Alsatian city in northeast France. Halfway between a theme park and a Grimm Brothers story tale, Colmar has a plethora of frozen-in-time houses and charming canals and shouldn’t miss from any France itinerary. If you’d like to know more about this medieval jewel, here are 10 Colmar facts.

1. Colmar is the capital of Alsatian wine

Colmar is situated on the Alsatian Wine Route, the oldest wine trail in France, and is home to world-renowned winemakers and wine-regulating organizations. Due to this, it is considered the capital of Alsatian wines, an unofficial yet well-respected title. Colmar also organizes plenty of wine events and festivals throughout the year and is the only Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée region in France to produce mostly varietal wines (wines made from a single grape variety).

2. Colmar is impossibly pretty

Colmar is best known for its well-preserved old town with cute half-timbered houses, labyrinthine cobbled streets, and flower-laden windowsills. It’s incredibly picturesque, like something out of a fairy tale. Due to its proximity, Colmar can be visited on a day trip from Strasbourg.

3. Colmar belonged to both France and Germany

Historically, Alsace had been a region sandwiched between France and Germany, and an interesting, although maybe not a surprising fact is that both countries had claimed it over the years. Colmar was conquered by King Louis XIV (also known as the Sun King) in 1673. Later on, Colmar (as part of Alsace) was twice annexed by Germany — from 1871 to 1919 and again during World War II before it reverted to France.

4. Voltaire lived in Colmar for a while

Voltaire lived in Colmar for a little over a year between 1753 and 1754 and described it as ‘half German and half french’. To this day, Colmar (and Alsace as a whole) are known as the place where German efficiency meets French finesse.

5. Colmar saw the last WWII battle on French soil

Colmar and the nearby area were the last German stronghold on French soil. This territory was called the ‘Colmar Pocket’. After heavy battles, the American and French offensive managed to liberate it between January and early February 1945, which marked the end of WWII in France.

6. Colmar gave the world the Statue of Liberty

Colmar is the birthplace of Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, the 19th-century sculptor who designed the Statue of Liberty. He also designed other monumental sculptures around Colmar and France. His birthplace in Colmar is now a museum that can be visited. What an unexpected fun fact, right?

7. Colmar is often dubbed ‘Little Venice’

Over 600km apart, Colmar and Venice have something magical in common — delightful canals lined by colorful architecture brimming with the charms of the past. These houses used to be the (ofter unsanitary) living quarters of butchers, fishermen, and boatmen. Nowadays, Colmar is not only one of the most beautiful small towns in France, but the pretty canal views have given it the nickname of ‘Little Venice’.

8. For half a century, Colmar had a treasure hidden in a wall

In 1863, an array of silver coins, silver tableware, and several Jewish marriage rings were discovered in the wall of a house in Colmar. Buried by Jews during the Black Death in the 14th century, these precious objects are now known as the ‘Colmar Treasure’. It is believed some of the items were sold before a full inventory could be made.

9. Colmar is one of the driest cities in France

Colmar has a sunny microclimate with low annual precipitations thanks to its location at the foothills of the Vosges Mountains. You’d think this might be bad for agriculture, but in fact, this creates the ideal conditions for winemaking.

10. One of Colmar’s houses made an appearance in an anime

Maison Pfister was built in 1537 for the wealthy hatter Ludwig Schurer. It stands out due to its octagonal turret, spiral stairway, mural paintings, and wood gallery. It gets its name from the family who restored it and lived there at the end of the 19th century and can be spotted in ‘Howl’s Moving Castle‘, a cute Japanese anime written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki, co-founder of Studio Ghibli.

***

I hope you’ve found these fun facts about Colmar interesting. If you know someone who would find them interesting as well, don’t forget to share.