LOS ANGELES, Calif. – For the first time in her career, Shakira Austin has earned herself a spot on the 2021-22 John R. Wooden Award Late Season Top 20 Watch List, as the center rolls through her highly productive senior season.

The list is comprised of 20 student-athletes who are front runners for the Wooden Award All American Team and Most Outstanding Player Award. Since 1976, the John R. Wooden Award program is one of the top honors in college basketball recognizing the best of the best throughout the sport. The list will be narrowed down during the 2021-22 season with the Wooden award late season list and the National Ballot.

The senior center continues to pace the Rebels throughout a historic 2021-22 season, as Ole Miss got off to its best start in SEC play since the 2009-10 season at 5-1. Midway through SEC play, Austin leads the team in points (14.4) and rebounds (8.6) per game. The Fredericksburg, Va., native currently leads the SEC in active rebounds with a total of 968.

The Wooden Award All-American team will be announced the week of the Elite Eight round of the NCAA Tournament. The winner of the 2022 John R. Wooden Award will be presented by Wendy's following the NCAA Tournament in April.

Previous Wooden Award All-Americans include, Paige Bueckers, UConn, Aliyah Boston, South Carolina, Rhyne Howard, Kentucky and NaLyssa Smith, Baylor.

For up-to-date information on the Wooden Award, please go to www.woodenaward.com and follow the Wooden Award on Facebook at www.facebook.com/woodenaward and @WoodenAward on Twitter and Instagram.

About the John R. Wooden Award:

Created in 1976, the John R. Wooden Award Program hosts the most prestigious honors in college basketball recognizing the Wooden Award Most Outstanding Player for men and women, the Wooden Award All American Teams for men and women and the annual selection of the Wooden Award Legends of Coaching recipient. Honorees have proven to their university that they meet or exceed the qualifications of the John R. Wooden Award as set forth by Coach Wooden and the Wooden Award Steering Committee, including making progress towards graduation and maintaining at least a 2.0 cumulative GPA. Previous winners include Larry Bird ('79), Michael Jordan ('84), Tim Duncan ('97), Kevin Durant ('07), Candace Parker ('07; '08), Maya Moore ('09; '11), Chiney Ogwumike ('14), Breanna Stewart ('15 and '16) and last year's recipients, Paige Bueckers of Connecticut and Luka Garza of Iowa.

Since its inception, the John R. Wooden Award has contributed nearly one million dollars to the universities' general scholarship fund in the names of the Wooden Award All American recipients and has sent more than 1,000 underprivileged children to week-long college basketball camps. Additionally, the John R. Wooden Award partners with the Special Olympics Southern California (SOSC) each year to host the Wooden Award Special Olympics Southern California Basketball Tournament. The day-long tournament brings together Special Olympics athletes and Wooden Award All Americans and coaches in attendance. It is hosted at the Los Angeles Athletic Club during the John R. Wooden Award Weekend.

Follow the Rebels on Twitter at @OleMissWBB, Facebook at Ole Miss WBB and on Instagram at Ole MissWBB. You can also follow head coach Yolett McPhee-McCuin on Twitter at @YolettMcCuin