Date of Birth/Age

24/10/1954

Birthplace

Los Angeles, CA, United States

Occupation

Politician

Brad Sherman (born October 24, 1954 in Los Angeles, California) is an American Politician best known for his time in Congress. He is a member of the U.S. House, representing California's 32nd Congressional District and has served as Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific.

Sherman began serving in the House of Representatives in 1997. He has worked as a senior member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and a senior member of the House Financial Services Committee. From 2019 to 2023, Sherman served as Chairman of the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Investor Protection, Entrepreneurship and Capital Markets.

While in Congress, Sherman developed a reputation as a strong advocate for the interests of working families. He also supported policies to expand U.S. exports, prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and promote a just and effective U.S. foreign policy. In 1997, while still serving on the House Budget Committee, Congressman Sherman authored an amendment to the annual Budget Resolution providing an additional $700 million for the acquisition of environmentally important lands in FY ‘98.

We promote concerts on a monthly basis, and use Bookingagentinfo.com to have quick access to the booking agents for different artists. Bookingagentinfo.com has saved us time and money. — Martin Tinnell, Las Vegas Concert Promoter

I signed up for Booking Agent Info because I was having a hard time finding management and publicist info for artists that I wanted to interview for the publication that I write for. At first I was really skeptical about things, I didn't know if the site was trustworthy. But I'm really glad I signed up! Rather than taking the time to dig through the internet, I can just go to Booking Agent Info and its all there for me. The site is very straightforward and any information I need is easy to search for. — Chelsea Smith, Music Editor, SWGRUS

With Bookingagentinfo.com I have been able to reach the managers of various celebrities and influencers that I wasn't able to reach before for product endorsements and placements. It has also saved me time by providing me with the right person to talk to. — Shane Fairbrother, CEO, Medtainer

I've been able to get in contact with representation for celebrities and am finding it much easier to get interviews for our podcast thanks to Booking Agent Info. — Matthew Ardill, Comedy Album Book Club Podcast