Chelsea Clinton may have inherited an even keel, obvious polish, and matter-of-fact pragmatism from her parents, but that doesn't mean she's immune to the occasional moment of zero chill. Despite her familial ties and her own impressive career—previously: McKinsey consultant, hedge fund analyst, NBC News correspondent; currently: vice chair of the $2 billion Clinton Foundation—the 35-year-old still marvels at just how much her mother has been able to do. Sleep on command, motivate the masses, put herself forth on this most contested ticket: The Hillary Clinton that Chelsea Clinton describes is fearless. And Hillary is, Chelsea is sure to add, the best candidate to be president of the United States in 2016.

As of this morning, she is one step closer—sort of. While it looks like she technically beat out rival Bernie Sanders for first place in the Iowa Caucus, the race was so neck-and-neck that Sanders declared it a "virtual tie" and some outlets still haven't called it for Clinton. And, anyway, both candidates have now moved on from Des Moines. They're headed for New Hampshire, where Sanders is heavily favored to win. Even so, Team Clinton projects confidence. With just hours to spare before the vote, Clinton told ELLE.com why. More than ever, her passion is obvious. On the brink of primary season, Chelsea chatted about the role of social media in politics, why young women can be enthusiastic about her mom, and whether we can expect to see her name on the ballot some day.

You spoke out over the weekend about the hate speech that has dominated this political cycle. What do you think the antidote to it could be?

I think we continue to give it no purchase [and continue to] stand up to hate speech, whether it's directed at us individually or directed at anyone or any group. I think that even just ignoring hate speech, whether it's misogyny, sexism, racism, homophobia, jingoism, Islamophobia, you know, anti-immigrant rhetoric...gives greater implicit permission to all of it. And I think that's not good for our country today or in the future, and I feel that way partly, I think, because I want my daughter and her future little brother or little sister to be able to be whomever they are and to be embraced for that and supported in that. And not just tolerated, and certainly not treated with disdain, for whoever they are and whoever they choose to love and whatever they choose to do.

I think that even just ignoring hate speech...gives greater implicit permission to all of it.

So for me, this is not just about what's in this political cycle. It's really a question about our country and the values that we stand for. I think it's such a fundamentally important question and one that we all have a stake in answering, and I think we have to answer it every single time it comes up.

Given that you're a mom, what kind of online world do you envision for your children? And how would you like to see social media be used as a force for good?

We see incredible examples of social media being forces for raising awareness and catalyzing real change, whether that's Black Lives Matter or Change.org petitions. I think we see so many examples of people who are looking to build a more inclusive and equitable and just country and even world. But...too often, too, social media is used to perpetuate hatred and stereotypes. Certainly, what gets directed at me on social media has been less than pleasant and that's an understatement, sometimes. I know not to take that personally. I'm an adult, and I know that's not about me, you know. But for kids to be bullied online, to hear the hate speech online that's directed at all Muslims, you know, all members of the LGBT community, all women, all African Americans—I find that deeply troubling. Which is why I think we have to continue to confront hate speech, whether it's online or offline.

"Certainly, what gets directed at me on social media has been less than pleasant and that's an understatement."

And so when I think about my children—and right now my daughter's 16 months old and she's really just starting to walk—but when I think about the future, you know, I think it's very much incumbent on me and on my husband to ensure that Charlotte and our other children know what it means to be a good digital citizens in the same way we hope to raise good offline citizens as well.

People have made comments over the past few months that young women aren't as passionate as they used to be. Now that you're traveling on the road, what have you seen that counters that stereotype?

Oh, I have seen so many incredibly passionate and engaged young women and young people broadly. I mean, I was just at a coffee shop with my mom and, you know, at least to me, ten different young women came up in the coffee shop and outside the coffee shop, [to say to my mom], 'Thank you for running again. I can't wait to stand up for you tonight.' My experience has been that there is a tremendous amount of support among young women for my mom, and I feel that enthusiasm and excitement at her events—certainly in the last couple days here in Iowa, and even in the unplanned, serendipitous spots like in coffee shops.

But I do think there is this larger question, which is 'How do we ensure that young people are engaged in the political process, not just every four years, but all the time?' There's a lot of [enthusiasm] during presidential cycles, but members of Congress are elected every two years during the midterm elections. A lot of cities and states have elections that are not synchronized with presidential and midterm elections for mayor or governor or state assembly and legislators, and I think it's so important that young people are engaged in the political process—of course, in presidential election years, but really all the time.

"How do we ensure that young people are engaged in the political process, not just every four years, but all the time?"

For those of us, like me, who clearly believe in people who run for and hold political office, it's hugely important. We just have to keep doing more to try and help make that happen. It's one of the reasons I'm so grateful to my mom for being an early and vocal supporter of automatic voter registration at 18, because the greatest predictor of whether or not someone votes is whether they're registered. But I also hope it's a place where the media will continue to pay more attention to young people who either are participating or should be participating and to what's happening in the local mayoral races or governor races or races for the Senate or the House. It's really important to ensure that young people are not only fully enfranchised, but also that they participate in the election of people who, by definition, are gonna have a big impact on making decisions that will have a big impact in our lives.

There is only one Hillary Clinton, but we need so many more women candidates out there, sharing their perspectives. Does being on the trail ever make you think that that's something you may want to do?

I hope that's a question you're asking every young person you interview. Because I think it's a really important question for any and all of us who care about who runs for and holds political office. And while I understand why people ask me that question, because my last name is Clinton and my dad was president and my mom's running for president and I'm talking to you from Iowa on the day of the caucus, I think it's a question that every young person who cares about change should be asking themselves.

For me, I think about this question in a few ways: Am I satisfied with whomever's representing me or wanting to represent me, whether that's at the city council level in New York or at the mayor's level or at the congressional level or at the senate level or at the presidential level? And right now I really support my councilwoman. I think [Councilwoman Mendez] does an amazing job. I support my mayor. I love our governor…. I love my congresswomen and my senators. I think Senator Gillibrand is just an amazing advocate for the world that I want to live in, that I want my children to grow up in.

To help each of us answer this question, we have to think, 'Are the people who are representing us now doing a good job in standing up, fighting for, defending, and advancing our values?' And if they're not doing a good job, do we think we could do a better job because of our vision, our values, our competencies, our experience? Right now, I don't get to the second part of that question, because I'm really grateful to have the representation that I have now and I also think I can make a real positive impact and difference in areas I care about through my work with the Clinton Foundation and through my teaching. So, that was probably a longer answer than you wanted, but that's my honest answer. That's how I think about that question. And I hope that helps whoever might read that answer to think about themselves, because I do think it's a question anyone who cares about change should be asking themselves periodically.

Your mom told Jimmy Fallon a few weeks ago that when she was Secretary of State, she mastered an unusual way to stay awake: digging her fingernails into her palm. Between coffee and that tactic, do you have any tricks to staying active, staying up there, on the trail?

My mom has...an amazing gift to sleep wherever and whenever she can. So she can literally sleep in any car or train or plane. If she has 20 or 30 minutes, she can grab that sleep and can cobble together enough sleep in that kind of patchwork way. I don't have that skill, so I have to think about how to make sure I have enough energy…so that I can work as hard as my mom during the day. I drink lots of water. I think a lot of water helps keep me awake. And when I'm not pregnant, I probably drink water and caffeine in equal quantities.

What's your coffee order?

I really like coffee. I like the taste of coffee. I understand that some people feel the need to put sugar and milk and other things in their coffee, but I really like black coffee or espresso. I just like the straight up coffee.

The final question: Has your mom has ever fallen asleep mid-sentence?

No—never with me, never with me.

This interview has been lightly edited and condensed.