This PVAMU grad is using his new master’s degree to maximize residents’ quality of life in his hometown

Eli Washington ‘24 PRAIRIE VIEW, Texas (July 22, 2024) - Recent Prairie View A&M University graduate Eli Washington ‘24 is back in his hometown of Missouri City, Texas, after earning his Master of Community Development on May 11. Washington, 26, is now the Economic Development Manager for the city where he grew up. [...]

Voyage Houston: Meet PVAMU alumna, graphic designer Jade Harper ’22

Today we’d like to introduce you to Jade Harper. Hi Jade, so excited to have you on the platform. So before we get into questions about your work-life, maybe you can bring our readers up to speed on your story and how you got to where you are today? My journey in graphic design began [...]

Opinion| Securing Legacies: Strategies for Resolving Heirs’ Property Issues in Cities

In January 2024, the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas invested $2 million with nonprofits and banks to educate and assist clients with heirs’ property issues, and in Atlanta, the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta made $1 million heirs’ property grant funding available in 2022. While this is a bold move in the right direction from the financial industry, most view heirs’ [...]

Page: Why Diversity Matters: Perspectives on Black Representation in the AEC Industry

Dean of Prairie View A&M University's School of Architecture, Dr. Ikhlas Sabouni, comments on Prairie View A&M University's role nationally to educate and prepare African American students for careers in architecture and related fields.

Opinion| PVAMU is home to a masterpiece by one of the greatest sculptors ever

Richard Hunt is one of America’s most renowned sculptors. He also so happened to be African American. This renowned sculptor died on December 16, 2023, at the age of 88. Known foremost for his abstract public sculptures, Hunt learned his craft at The Art Institute of Chicago. Richard Hunt is credited with more than 160 [...]

Denton Black Film Festival: PVAMU Director, Artist Lauren Kelley on Texas femininity, power of play

The Denton Black Film Festival kicks off its 10-year anniversary this week, with screenings, concerts, art exhibits and more. Prominently featured at the festival is Lauren Kelley — a visual artist, curator and cultural producer who works in various media. In recent years, her primary medium has been stop-motion animation. She is a graduate of the Maryland Institute College [...]

A Creative Calling

Black history is a vital thread woven into the fabric of the human story. It is a repository of diverse cultures, traditions and languages that have evolved and survived, deserving recognition, celebration and understanding. Historian Carter G. Woodson recognized the importance of acknowledging the rich, collective past to move towards a more inclusive, equitable and [...]

Faculty PROfiles: PVAMU professor finds meaning in teaching the history of the land, shifting a generation

PRAIRIE VIEW, Texas (Jan. 25, 2024) – Why do some neighborhoods have grocery stores when others do not? Why are some streets always paved and dry when others are riddled with potholes and perpetually wet? Tiffany D. Thomas ‘08 Tiffany D. Thomas ‘08, program coordinator and assistant professor of community development in the [...]

The Endowed Effect

Endowed professors hold a distinctive and revered position within the academic landscape of Prairie View A&M University. These distinguished faculty members embody excellence in teaching, research and service. These endowed positions serve as a testament to the University’s dedication to intellectual growth, cutting-edge research and the cultivation of exceptional talent. Indeed, endowed professors embody the [...]