Fine. No more, no less. Reservation road is a textbook thriller/drama that follows the ordinary flow of the genre: the mounting tension, the connecting of dots and then an impractical revelation that unlocks the third act. It's run of the mill stuff that's passionlessly directed and written, but the marvellous acting (that the film quite frankly doesn't deserve) elevates the intrigue.

The concept is one that could be infused with plenty of emotion. Yes, we may have it seen it all before, but the idea of a child's death and the family's struggle with such will always have the ability to move. Terry George's Reservation Road however is frigid and devoid of passion; somehow disconnected in its depiction of a…

after watching this film i could say that i’m left unease? the performances from the cast, joaquin phoenix, jennifer connelly and mark ruffalo were amazing, but through out the film it just felt like dull at some point and the ending made me mad for some reason because i wanted Dwight to be brought to justice. this film is sad, but i didn’t cry, i mostly felt frustrated. overall, it’s a good film and joaquin phoenix looked may i say, very attractive in this. (thirsty moment)

I really loved this for the most part, mostly with Joaquin Phoenix and Mark Ruffalo’s performances. The story was very engaging and definitely kept me interested throughout. I will say I didn’t love the ending. Not sure how I would’ve liked it to end up but I still thoughtless enjoyed it.

What I appreciate about this film is it feels like real life. The story feels like something you would hear about in the news. Nothing over the top happens in the story. The performances by two of my favorite actors, Mark Ruffalo and Joaquin Phoenix, are brilliant in their restraint. They are simple, masterful in the subtle nuances. Jennifer Connelly is also an actress who I've just realized is great in every single performance I see of her.

When the big encounter happens at the end it isn't a big thrilling sequence. It is quiet and awkward, because these aren't action heroes, these are everyday men. No big David Finchet style thrilling sequences in the middle of the movie. Joaquin's character spends a lot of time looking up info on the computer.

Some people might not get into the lack of major suspense, but I dig the underplaying.

It was a pretty decent drama. With extraordinary performances from Joaquin Phoenix, Mark Ruffalo, and Jennifer Connelly, this movie can be more emosional and heartbreaking. Joaquin Phoenix as a father who lost his son, but the anger made him lose control and explode. Jennifer Connelly as a mother who lost her son, felt guilty, but was trying to move on and thinking about her only daughter. And Mark Ruffalo as a man who felt so guilty for that child and his family, but he's also a father who has a son which made his mind even more complicated.

But unfortunately, I think the script isn't well executed. The plot felt empty and I couldn't feel any sympathy for the characters. The script just didn't go well. As if it couldn't explore the whole story and the feeling of the characters.

Painfully realistic and emotional , what a hidden gem. Joaquin Phoenix,Mark Ruffalo and Jennifer Connelly all of them killed it...I miss the time when Ruffalo wasn't a joke. This showed up on TV and I said fuck it let's give it a watch. I didn't regret it.

P.S. If Phoenix and Connelly went through with that sex scene I genuinely think they would've given birth to satan.