That 1937 final was the first All-Ireland decided to be played outside of Croke Park and, indeed, Dublin for 30 years. Not that the choice of venue was met with universal approval. In a recorded interview on the subject two years ago, Tipperary left half-forward that day Jimmy Butler Coffey says there was a feeling that the staging of the final was more a hindrance than an honour.

" They didn't want us, simple as that! We were upsetting their tourist trade and you had country fellas tearing in round the town looking for this and that when there was nothing to be had," Coffey said with a smile in an interview with the website HurlingWorld.com.

Indeed, a Kilkenny man writing in The Kerryman the week before the match said the main concern for the Noresiders was that there wouldn't be enough 'catering' to cope with the crowd that would be in Killarney for the final!

Patsy Cremin, President of the County Coiste na nOg, who was only six years old at the time remembers the town trying to cope with that particular problem.

"I was living out in Ballaugh at the time and I remember my uncle travelling around to all the nearby farms trying to collect every drop of milk possible to cope with the crowd that was around the town for the match. The buses and old cars travelling towards the town is still a vivid memory in my mind and this was a pretty new experience for the town because the hosting of Munster Finals, etc hadn't really started then," the Spa man said.

The front page of The Kerryman the week before the match featured a detailed plan of the area around the Stadium as well as a picture of the Archbishop of Cashel, Most Reverend Dr Harty, who would be the ceremonial match starter. The sports section covered the game in detail with the paper's hurling correspondent S O'C giving a detailed breakdown of the two sides competing in the final. The edition after the final hailed the event as a major organisational success and it was felt the town had put its best foot forward in the staging of the prestigious event, even if the game itself proved to be a bit of a damp squib.

Butler Coffey, who died at the age of 101 last Christmas, was the last surviving member of the Tipperary team that won the final convincingly, while Kilkenny full-forward that day, Martin White, is the only player still alive from that final, now at the grand old age of 102.

An attendance of 43,638 attended the final in Fitzgerald Stadium in '37, just below the all-time record of 43,994 set in 1998 for the Munster Senior Football semi-final between Kerry and Cork.

The hurling final produced a pretty convincing 17-point victory for the Premier county, 3-11 to 03, with two goals from Denis 'Bunny' Murphy and one from Coffey putting the game beyond the Cats.

Another noteworthy fact about the game is that it was the last ever appearance of Lory Meagher in a Kilkenny jersey. Meagher was his day's DJ Carey or Henry Shefflin and the fourth tier GAA Hurling Championship is named in his honour. The Tullaroan native came off the bench in the second half to score his side's only point of the half and somewhat disappointingly bring the curtain down on a glorious career that saw him win three All-Irelands as well as nine Leinster Championship medals in a 13-year career.

The 1937 final would also be the last game Kilkenny would play on Kerry soil until 1980 when Kerry snatched an incredible draw against the Cats in Division 1B of the National Hurling League in Austin Stack Park, Tralee.

The allure of the small ball never quite caught on in Kerry despite the hosting of an All-Ireland Hurling Final, the county staying loyal to the big ball to the present day. However, Tipperary certainly has a love affair with Fitzgerald Stadium and have subsequently won the three Munster hurling finals they played there in 1950, 1971 and 1987.

The 1950 game against Cork is memorable for several pitch invasions by Cork supporters throughout the match Former Taoiseach Jack Lynch and Cork legend Christy Ring were busy trying to keep a lid of the Cork supporters' excitement that led to the match being held up for 10 minutes, but despite the scenes of anarchy Tipperary emerged victorious by 2-17 to 3-11.

The Premier county's 1971 triumph against Limerick in Killarney was decided by the odd goal in seven as Tipperary won an absorbing contest by 4-16 to 3-18. They would have to wait 16 years for their next provincial triumph with Fitzgerald Stadium a happy hunting ground again as they won the replay with Cork by 4-22 to 1-22 in 1987 with Tipperary captain's Richie Stakelum's speech afterwards fairly memorable as he declared "the famine" over for the Premier county and broke into a spontaneous verse of 'Slievenamon'.

Cork did triumph in one Munster hurling final in Killarney, that being the 1986 decider with Clare by 2-18 to 3-12, the last of five Munster senior hurling final defeats Clare's Ger Loughnane suffered as a player.

Killarney has hosted only one major hurling match since, the 2004 AllIreland senior hurling championship qualifier between Cork and Tipperary. The match was overshadowed by many complaints about the traffic management on the day as well as complaints about the condition of the pitch after the Summerfest concerts that had taken place only a couple of weeks prior to the match, but nonetheless the Rebels broke their jinx against Tipperary at the venue with a 2-19 to 1-16 victory.

It's hard to say whether the complaints about the hosting of that particular match subsequently affected Fitzgerald Stadium's ability to attract major hurling matches to Killarney but the fact there are 'home and away' agreements between the major hurling counties in Munster, similar to Kerry and Cork's in football, unfortunately lessens Killarney's chances of getting more marquee games into the famous venue.

It will probably take a breakthrough by the Kerry senior hurlers in the coming years to bring top class hurling back to Killarney. In a vote of coinfidence for the home of football, Kerry's hurling team manager John Meyler expressed his satisfaction with the pitch in Killarney when they played Down there in the National League last February, but for the moment one can only reminisce on the stories of games past played in the Stadium, like when the 1937 All-Ireland final came to town.