Egil Map — Satellite Images of Egil

original name: Eğil

geographical location: Diyarbakir, Turkey, Asia

geographical coordinates: 38° 15' 24" North, 40° 5' 0" East

detailed map of Egil and near places

Welcome to the Egil google satellite map! This place is situated in Diyarbakir, Turkey, its geographical coordinates are 38° 15' 24" North, 40° 5' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Eğil. See Egil photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Egil in Turkey. Egil hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Egil or add new placemark for Egil.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Egil hotel reservations

Book hotel in Egil online and save money

Egil hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Turkey »

Egil hotels – sortable list of all Egil hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Egil hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Egil, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Egil, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Egil hotels map

The location of each Egil hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Egil hotel map is available where all hotels in Egil are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Egil hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Egil hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Egil hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Egil hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Egil

Dedeman Diyarbakir **** (in Diyarbakir, distanced approximately 39 km)

Prestige Hotel **** (in Diyarbakir, distanced approximately 39 km)

Miroglu Hotel (in Diyarbakir, distanced approximately 40 km)

SV Business Hotel **** (in Diyarbakir, distanced approximately 40 km)

The Green Park Hotel Diyarbakir ***** (in Diyarbakir, distanced approximately 41 km)

Elazığ Mavi Göl Hotel ** (in Sivrice, distanced approximately 69 km)

Buyuk Bingol Hotel *** (in Bingol, distanced approximately 79 km)

more Egil hotels »

Egil car rental

Compare Egil car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Egil rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Egil car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Egil — we will do it for you!

Car hire Egil and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Egil the city centre. Compare Egil car rental offers by various suppliers.

Diyarbakyr - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 40 km)

Malatya car rental (distanced approximately 160 km)

Mersin car rental (distanced approximately 170 km)

Erzurum - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 210 km)

Gaziantep car rental (distanced approximately 270 km)

more offers and Egil car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Egil

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Egil »

Overview of flights to and from Turkey »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Egil. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Egil and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Egil are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Diyarbakir Airport (distanced approximately 42 km) – airport hotels

Tuluksak Airport (distanced approximately 58 km) – airport hotels

Zugapa Airport (distanced approximately 61 km) – airport hotels

Elazig Airport (distanced approximately 79 km) – airport hotels

Batman Airport (distanced approximately 97 km) – airport hotels

Egil 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Egil in Turkey

You can also dive right into Egil on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Egil 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Egil, Turkey in Google Earth »

Get more out of Egil map

Add placemark to Egil

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Egil map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Egil google map link options

link to us:

small Egil google map image link

medium Egil google map image link

large Egil google map image link