Egil 3D map in Google Earth

geographical coordinates: 38° 15' 24" North, 40° 5' 0" East

geographical location: Diyarbakir, Turkey, Asia

original name: Eğil

Google Earth – visit Egil

Welcome to the Egil Google Earth 3D map site! Original name of this place (including diacritics) is Eğil, it lies in Diyarbakir, Turkey and its geographical coordinates are 38° 15' 24" North, 40° 5' 0" East.

Note: Current version of the Google Earth Plug-in ONLY operates on Microsoft Windows XP and Vista operating systems. Support for other operating systems is planned in future releases.

Do you like this map? Recommend it to your friends!

Register at Egil or add new placemark for Egil.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Egil hotel reservations

Book hotel in Egil online and save money

Egil hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Turkey »

Egil hotels – sortable list of all hotels in Egil »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Egil hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Egil, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Egil, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included. Many photos and unbiased hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision. Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Egil hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Egil flight reservations

Compare flights to Egil

Search flights to airports close to Egil, compare prices »

Overview of flights to and from Turkey, compare prices »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Egil. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Egil Google Earth 3D map

see Egil 3D map in Google Earth

With Google Earth plugin you can see the unique 3D satellite map of Egil within you browser. You may download Egil KML file and view the Eğil 3D map with Googe Earth software installed at your PC.

Want to know more about Egil? Dive right in — Google Earth combines detailed satellite imagery, maps and the power of Google Search to put the world's geographic information at your fingertips. Google Earth enables to tilt and rotate the view to see Egil 3D terrain and buildings and much more (flying inclusive). Get Google Earth (free version) now and install it. When completed, simply click the link below. Explore the Egil! Explore the Turkey! Explore the world!

recommend Egil 3D map

If you would like to recommend Egil 3D map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is an easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

latest placemarks

Alternative Cleaning Ltd in Aldershot, Hampshire County, South East, England, United Kingdom

Alternative Cleaning Limited in Aldershot, Hampshire County, South East, England, United Kingdom

National Review illumishare Gehlert in Aschaffenburg, Aschaffenburg, Unterfranken, Bayern, Germany

Diamond Cleaning Services in Etobicoke, Toronto Metropolitan Municipality, Ontario, Canada

Roof Repairs Perth in Perth, Cambridge, Western Australia, Australia

random google map locations

Hay V in Bozoum, Ouham-Pende, Central African Republic

Grosnica in Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro

Kosob in Charodinskiy rayon, Republic of Dagestan, Russia

Salency in Compiegne, Oise, Picardie, France

Gaotian in Quanzhou, Guangxi, China

Batey Campina in La Romana, Dominican Republic

Maplandia.com is not sponsored by or affiliated with Google.