The Livestrong Foundation, the Austin-based cancer nonprofit, is selling its sleek East Austin headquarters in a move it says will allow it to reach more cancer patients.

Greg Lee, the foundation's CEO, said Livestrong purchased and renovated the 30,000-square-foot building for $5.8 million in 2008. Now, Livestrong has sold the property to Notley Ventures, an Austin-based venture firm that backs for-profit startups that make a social impact as well as nonprofit ventures.

The sale price of the property at 2201 E. Sixth St. was $17 million, Lee said.

"Since day one I've had people approach me and ask if we have ever thought about selling it," Lee said. "Over the last 18 months the frequency of those people who were reaching out and the visibility of those people who were reaching out only increased. We were able to close on a sale of the property for almost triple the amount that we paid."

Lee said the decision to sell the headquarters was not made because the foundation is struggling financially. Rather, he said, Livestrong decided to sell because the money will enable the foundation to expand its services.

"We're not in the business of real estate development. We're in the business of helping people with cancer, and this was just a natural way for us to do that," Lee said. "Our 23-year history has always been focused on taking aims at the gap in cancer care and we will continue to do that. Financially this provides resources for us to say how can we best deploy 16 to 17 million (dollars) to help the cancer community."

Livestrong was founded in 1997 by cancer survivor and cyclist Lance Armstrong and was originally named the Lance Armstrong Foundation. The organization struggled through years of turmoil and declining revenue after the downfall of Armstrong, who admitted to using performance enhancing drugs during his seven Tour de France victories. Armstrong resigned from the foundation in 2012.

Between 2011 and 2015, contributions fell 85 percent, according to the Associated Press. In its annual report, Livestrong said it had revenue of $12.1 million in 2017, $13.1 million (estimated based on pre-audited numbers) and projected revenue of $13.1 million in 2019.

Today, the foundation carries out a number of programs including Livestrong at the YMCA, which is a physical activity and wellness program designed to help adult cancer survivors achieve their health goals. Livestrong has served 67,000 participants through the program.

Regarding the sale of the Livestrong headquarters, Daniel Borochoff, president of Chicago-based CharityWatch, which rates and evaluates charities for donors, said that "a lot of groups sell their building when it appreciates — it's not odd or unusual."

"It may very well be the prudent thing for them to do if they can find more economical office space that suits their needs," Borochoff said. "As a charity, they don't necessarily need a super deluxe office. It's better that they're able to direct more resources to their cause, so that could make a lot of sense to do that."

In 2017, its most recent audit year, the foundation had over two years' worth of reserves and a total fund balance of $57.8 million, of which $13.7 million is permanently restricted, Borochoff said. The foundation in 2017 also cut its deficit in half, and its major source of revenue is from investment income, he noted.

"They're not in dire straits," Borochoff said. "They're certainly not (selling the building) because they have to have that money in order to operate."

Lee said the foundation will lease back the headquarters from Notley for six months while it conducts a search for a new home. Livestrong hasn't decided if it will buy or lease space for its 23 employees, he said.

Before Livestrong bought the East Sixth Street property, the site housed a warehouse that provided janitorial and paper supplies to the hotel industry. The foundation oversaw a year-long renovation that transformed the building into a showcase headquarters with high ceilings, natural light and lots of open space for collaboration and community gatherings.

Notley Ventures, which is headquartered on Springdale Road, will lease the building to a new tenant when Livestrong moves, said Matt McDonnell, Notley founder and managing partner.

"The Livestrong headquarters has been an amazing space for nonprofits in East Austin, and we feel very fortunate to be the stewards of the next chapter in its history," McDonnell said. "We are committed to building upon its legacy and continuing its mission as a home for innovative, transformational social impact."