The Magnificent Ambersons (1941) is notorious for the studio interference that cut 40 minutes of footage, but nothing quite prepares one for the terrible ending added without Welles’s approval. As Joseph Cotten’s Eugene Morgan and Agnes Moorehead’s Fanny walk towards the camera, imagining the ghostly blessing of their lost love/sister Isabel (Dolores Costello) in a truly awful bit of saccharine dialogue, it’s really the absent presence of the undoubtedly furious Welles that haunts the scene.

The ending feels so egregiously awful because, until the last few minutes, The Magnificent Ambersons is an outstanding indictment of class and wealth that yet still manages to contain more warmth than anything else Welles ever directed. It’s a funny, satirical, angry, nostalgic and sad film, whose final act redemptions betray rather than resolve.

The film centres boldly around an utterly unlikable man, Tim Holt’s George Minafer, last of the Amberson clan. The Ambersons are the big family of Indianapolis, and George a spoiled brat, who rides around town whipping the locals and loudly proclaiming ‘Don’t you know who I am?’ when challenged. Born into privilege, he intends not to work, and cannot fathom why things don’t go his way when he meets and falls in love with Lucy (Anne Baxter)

Lucy comes from a different kind of wealth. Her father Eugene was rejected by Isabel Amberson, George’s mother, as a young man, and he has instead gone on to take a leading role in inventing the automobile (brilliantly rendered here, a rickety contraption with smoke-belching funnel). Eugene comes back into the Ambersons’ circle just as George’s father Wilbur dies, and Eugene and Isabel resume their relationship. It’s here that George’s spoiled nature manifests. He is fixated on his mother and adamant that the self-made man will come nowhere near her; yet insists on having Lucy for himself. George’s treatment of the Morgans (along with the increasingly deranged behaviours of Isabel’s sister Fanny, who holds a torch for Eugene) drives the Morgans away, and they continue to ever greater prosperity while the Ambersons’ fortunes decline.

The story of wealth isn’t interesting in itself; what makes it extraordinary is Welles’s direction. Long tracking shots capture the splendour of the enormous mansion in its heyday and the bustle of early twentieth-century high society. The amazing staircase (which reappeared in Cat People and elsewhere) is a theatre unto itself, with the Amberson clan meeting on it and conducting much of their family business. The low angles give a sense of open space in the scenes of prosperity, while the increased tightness of the camera as the Ambersons fall into poverty – culminating in a harrowing sequence as Fanny screams and screams against the house’s boiler – gives a sense of the walls closing in.

The performances are outstanding, the stiff formality of the upper classes breaking down into near-madness in Fanny’s case, desperation in George’s, and, in Baxter’s brilliant performance, a brave face that conceals a woman whose heart has been broken by the spoiled brat she dared to love. Costello is radiant as Isabel, the mother figure adored by all, who becomes so fragile in her final scenes. And Richard Bennett as the elderly Major Amberson, a relic of a past age, has the privilege of close-up on his face with flames flickering on it as his death approaches, the last spark in his eyes still shining even as the rest of the screen fades to black.

Welles’s technical skills are poorly served by the film’s weak ending, but as he captures the Ambersons, it’s possible to feel the love for this strange world that he is critiquing; and even while it can’t last, he gives full weight to the magnificence of the ideal. And as broken as this family is, it’s full of heart.