Coins of Dinars, Dirhams, and Fals in the era of Abd al-Malik bin Marwan had many developments until the issuance of the new Islamic style. But during these stages, they issued coins have the portrait of the Umayyad Caliph was something new among Muslims and the Islamic State. Abd al-Malik produced the most exceptional coins in several stages to form the Arab-Islamic coins without any foreign influences, the stage of the imperial portraits 692-694 CE and the stage of the Arab portrait 694-697 CE. The coinage after the reform contained Arabic texts only, without any foreign influences, which contained Quranic texts in Kufic script and some phrases that show the place and date of the minting. the coins minted in Syria are the best example of studying coinage of this stage because Syria is the center of the Umayyad caliphate, and Damascus was the capital and the most important mint.

This article suggests there were quite specific reasons for the change in A.H. 77/696-7 to a reformed dīnār, the change from a figural to an epigraphic Islamic currency even though this reformed currency carrying only script was itself bida. It is suggested that this reform was associated with the arrival in Damascus in 696-7 A.D. of the third envoy from Emperor Justinian II demanding the return of the Christian Trinitarian tiraz to the coinage and to other official items, with the associated threat that if this was not done an imprecation on the Prophet would be struck on the widely circulated East Roman currency. It is suggested the depiction of the ‘Standing Caliph’ struck on the obverse of ‘Abd al-Malik’s dīnārs from 74 to 77 A.H. was misunderstood by some Christians as carrying a depiction of the Prophet, or of an idol of the Almighty, an idol thought have been to be worshipped by Muslims, rather than being a depiction of the Caliph. To prevent any further confusion concerning the relationship between legend and image on the obverse of the dīnār, the image was dispensed with, resulting in the epigraphic type of dīnār.

In the first decades after the Islamic conquest until Umayyad rule, the region of Syria and northern Mesopotamia remained in regard to its monetary organization mainly a dependent Byzantine province. Copper coins were provided from Constantinople until 655-658. On the basis of the gold hoards only a diminishing number of post-Heraclius solidi are observed. On logical reasons might be assumed that the treasury in Constantinople was able to draw (through unknown intermediaries) gold from the Arab-occupied, former Byzantine territories in exchange for imperial copper coins in order to balance the trade. Perhaps with the rise of Umayyad rule in Syria, imitation of Byzantine copper coins occurred. It can be regarded as an indicator of a shortage of copper coins. We do not know exactly the measures applied, but they led step by step to a monetary independence of Syria and northern Mesopotamia from the Byzantine money supply. The demand for small change was met by a multitude of mints. First they produced mere imitations but their iconography and their inscriptions more and more abandon the Byzantine models. Finally Abd al-Malik’s reforms - beginning with silver and gold around 72/691-2 - separated both currencies through the introduction of an indigenous Islamic coin type. The gold was struck only in one imperial mint, except for the far western parts of the empire. The organization of the gold and copper coinage in Syria did not follow the Byzantine pattern. Although the stock of Byzantine gold circulating in Syria was very efficiently reminted, there are thus far no traces of a continuous reminting of the coinage as in Byzantium. But it can be assumed that the reminting of the entire existing gold stock in Syria was somehow connected with the taxation system. In Byzantium the copper coinage was part of the central imperial fiscal system, but for the Islamic Empire that does not seem to have been the case. cAbd al-Malik tried to regulate the copper coinage at least in Syria and northern Mesopotamia. He introduced a fixed pattern - the standing caliph - but the details of the coins show, that the organization of the minting was on the level of the military district (jund). There are no hints in the literature that silver in Syria and northern Mesopotamia was part of the early Islamic fiscal system there. But the various silver hoards examined, reveal that there had been a massive influx of silver coinage in the region. It probably reached Damascus as tax payments in Sasanian drahms. These coins, which originally weighed 4.00g, were temporarily selected and clipped according to the prevailing weight standards, first to 3.90g then to the dirham weight of 2.90g. The standardization of the silver coinage in circulation was not enforced to the same degree as it was done in the case of the dinars.