About

The Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead is a short break destination in South East England combining 1,000 years of history, contemporary shopping and fine dining with sports, leisure activities and events. Eton, Maidenhead and Bray and the smaller villages of the Royal Borough, such as Cookham, reflect that special character.

Explore the landscapes, the buildings and fine arts and crafts. And with 1,000 acres of National Trust land and 4,800 acres owned by the Crown Estate there’s plenty of places to enjoy the outdoors.

Windsor and The Royal Borough lie to the west of London in the charming rural countryside of Royal Berkshire. This is an exciting, fashionable and sophisticated area, rich in things to see and do with interesting walks and tours, boat trips and open top bus tours, historic gardens and world-famous racecourses. All this, together with a host of international events, makes Windsor and The Royal Borough a year round visitor destination. It’s perfect for a day trip or for a short break.

It is home to 13 attractions including Windsor Castle, Eton College, Changing the Guard and LEGOLAND Windsor. The River Thames flows through the whole of the Royal Borough and it is along or near the river that many of its historic and attractive towns and villages can be found including Bray, Eton and Maidenhead. Follow the Thames Path National Trail from Windsor towards Runnymede and you will pass some of Englands's historic sites, including the site of the sealing of the Magna Carta. It offers easy strolls and the chance to visit many attractions.

Whether your interest is heritage, shopping or family fun, there is plenty to see and do. Check out the Daily Express's 10 Things to Do in Windsor. Blue Badge Guided Tours are available in Windsor.

Blue Badge Guide, Graham Horn, Tours2Order, has developed a series of local online heritage talks including The Royal Wives of Windsor and the River Thames at Windsor and Eton.

Use Windsor's accommodation booking service to find the right place to stay – we have over 100 establishments ranging from B&Bs to luxury hotels. Stay nearby, close to Old Windsor at The Runnymede on Thames Hotel & Spa.

10 Things to Do in Windsor

For a leisurely trip, join a French Brothers Cruise with unique views of Windsor Castle as well as Eton College. The 40 minute or 2 hour return trips should be on every visitors “to do” list. French Brothers also operate special sailings throughout the year, including steamboat tea cruises and bird and wildlife cruises.

Take a walking tour with a blue badge guide to discover Windsor’s rich heritage. Or download our Windsor & Eton Walks leaflet.

Windsor Castle is another ‘must do’. It is the oldest and largest occupied castle in the world. Today The Queen spends most of her private weekends at the Castle, which is also used regularly for ceremonial and State occasions. Within the grounds is St George’s Chapel the setting for the Royal wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, Duke and Duchess of Sussex. A visit to the Chapel is included in Windsor Castle admission ticket.

Watch Changing of the Guard. The Guards can be watched as they march up the High Street and into the Castle, but to see the actual ‘changing’ ceremony you need to have paid to go into the Castle, you need to be positioned in the High Street at 10.50am.

Float leisurely along the Thames and glide past the royal home of the Queen at Windsor Castle with London Kayak Tours. Enjoy the awesome view of Windsor Castle, the oldest inhabited Castle in Europe. Windsor Tours start and finish at: SL4 5JB, at the Public Slipway beside Windsor Leisure Centre. All Tours are guided by a friendly BCU Instructor. Tuition given at the beginning of Tours by a qualified British Canoe Union Instructor.

Windsor Leisure Centre - a multi-purpose leisure centre offering fantastic health and fitness facilities. With services such as a 150 station gym, swimming pool, leisure pool, sports hall and brand new spin studio, there’s sure to be something to suit all tastes!

Find out the history of Windsor and the other towns and villages across the borough at The Windsor & Royal Borough Museum; a small local history museum in a Grade 1 listed building completed in 1689.The collection includes a100,000 year old mammoth’s tusk, pre-historic tools,together with objects and ephemera from before Victorian times up to World War II and beyond.

Relax in a woodland garden: The Savill Garden, in Windsor Great Park, known as Britain's finest ornamental garden. With 35 acres of interconnecting gardens and exotic woodland; Or the formal gardens, open glades and majestic beech woodland that leads down to the Thames at Cliveden National Trust Gardens. A great place for children with its storybook-themed play area and 500 metres of winding paths in the Maze.

Go racing… Windsor is home to two racecourses – Royal Windsor Racecourse and Ascot Racecourse. French Brothers offer a river boat shuttle to Windsor Racecourse on race days.

Explore Windsor and Eton in a fun-filled and challenging game – A Scavenger Challenge organised by Team Activity Group. Teams of up to six people are challenged to reach certain goals by performing various missions around the town. They also offer Ghost Walks in Windsor…Come armed with your garlic and a pinch of salt! For in a town that is nearly 1000 years old, there are plenty of ghosts lurking around shops and restaurants, with even a few royal ghosts who dwell in the oldest inhabited castle in Europe.

Where to Stay?

Cliveden

One of the world's finest luxury hotels, this grand stately home is set in the heart of the Berkshire countryside, surrounded by 376 acres of magnificent formal gardens and parkland. It was where Meghan Markle spent the night before here wedding.

The Runnymede on Thames

Set on the banks of the Thames just minutes from Royal Windsor. The Runnymede offers luxury accommodation, along with an award winning spa and wonderful riverside dining.

Sir Christopher Wren Hotel

Where to Eat?

The Boatman

Did you know?