Towns and cities in Spain are being renamed on Google Maps after their former incarnations as Islamic kingdoms almost a thousand years ago.

First to be affected was the Andalucian city of Algeciras, near Gibraltar, which suddenly showed up on the online map service as Taifa de Algeciras, in reference to its brief existence as an independent Muslim principality in the early 11th century.

Then on Friday morning Niebla, also in Andalucia, was replaced by Taifa de Niebla, and a Taifa de Albarracín appeared in northern Teruel province.

Taifa was the term used to describe around 30 small Islamic kingdoms which formed after the Caliphate of Córdoba descended into civil war in the 11th century.

"We have fixed it now," said a Google spokesman in Madrid. "We ask users to help us by adding information, but sometimes instead of this possibility being used for a positive reason, like someone adding their local knowledge, you get this kind of cyber vandalism."

It is not known who is behind the spate of renamings.

Google encourages users to moderate incorrect material and has a policy of barring accounts which are found to have acted maliciously or supply wrong information three times.

Google said it takes this kind of incident very seriously, but stressed that its Maps service is used by billions around the world and "occasional inaccuracies are a risk with this kind of collaborative system".

Andalucia's Islamic past is still a live political issue for some.

View across the Gibraltar roadstead and the Bay of Algeciras in Andalucia, Spain

A video by the Right-wing Vox party ahead of Sunday's regional election showed a mock newscast from 2018 in which a Left-wing government had turned the cathedrals in Córdoba and Seville into mosques, leading to the arrival of two million Muslim immigrants.

Both al-Qaeda and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil) have stated their aim to "liberate" Spain, which they refer to as Al Andalus, from what they consider Christian rule.

"For [Islamic] extremists, Al Andalus is a theme for violent mobilisation," according to Manuel R. Torres Soriano, an author and lecturer at Seville's Pablo de Olavide University.