Name Melissa McKnight Wedding & Marriage / Husband / Engaged / Fiance / Partner Divorced twice. Check the full bio for relationship details.

Wikipedia Biography / Profile Background

Introduction :

Melissa McKnight is a former model and actress, most famous for being the ex-wife of Matt Leblanc, the famous actor who played the role of Joey in the hit TV series Friends.

Personal Life : Parents, Family and Education

This former model and actress was born on March 10, 1965, in England, though she had the American citizenship as well.

Melissa has three children in total, two of them as a result of her first marriage with Anthony Espósito, and the last one from her relationship with Matt.

Two Marriages :

Melissa’s first marriage was to filmmaker Anthony Espósito, with whom she had two children, named Tyler Espósito and Jacqueline Espósito.

This relationship allegedly failed inevitably for the lack of commitment of both of them, especially from Anthony.

After her first divorce, Leblanc & Melissa met each other through a couple of friends that knew them. These two friends where Kelly Phillips & her husband Lou Diamond Phillips.

The lovely couple finally married on May 2003, after five years of dating. Two years after marriage they welcomed their first child in 2004, a little girl named Marina Pearl LeBlanc.

Currently, however, she does not share much of her personal life with the media.

Career as a Model and Net Worth :

Though more famous for been Matt’s ex-wife, nevertheless, few people know that Melissa was also a former model, working with one of the top modeling agencies in New York (Elite Models). Her modeling career went far beyond her relationship ending with Matt.

She was the face of several publicity campaigns for top brands and was also the cover on fashion and lifestyle magazines.

She also worked in a few movies with a fair amount of success. One of her first movies was “Triangles and Tribulations.”

Marina’s Health Issues :

Melissa went through a couple of situations that made her life difficult. However, nothing can compare to her child’s sickness, which her daughter faced in the first few years of her life.

Matt & Melissa’s daughter Marina suffered a neuronal disease that made lowered her capacity of movement.

Thanks to medical technology, the young child overcame this difficulty and she is now a young and healthy girl.

Interesting Facts, Height and Trivia :

Matt’s & Melissa’s relationship ended primarily because of cheating accusations against Matt that he later confirmed. He even apologized to Melissa after getting drunk and groping a stripper, while partying with his friends.

Despite the split-up, the two of them maintained a healthy and loving relationship as friends. The couple remain devoted parents to young Marina.

Age / How old / Birthday / Date of Birth / DOB As of 2024, she is around 60 years old.