Dallas' tallest skyscraper is for sale.

The 72-story Bank of America Plaza is the second-tallest building in Texas and one of the five skyscrapers with the most floors west of the Mississippi.

The 1.85 million-square-foot Main Street office tower outlined with miles of green lights has been owned since 1998 by Metropolis Investment Holdings, a Chicago-based real estate firm that manages assets for a German family investment group.

Cushman & Wakefield is marketing the landmark skyscraper for sale — one of several downtown buildings now up for grabs.

The last time Bank of America Plaza sold, it fetched more than $300 million.

The building is about 70 percent leased to major tenants including Bank of America; Carrington, Coleman, Sloman & Blumenthal; and Compass Professional Health.

Cushman & Wakefield officials confirm that they are marketing the property but would not comment on the transaction.

Leasing agents with Peloton Commercial Real Estate also declined to discuss the possible sale.

Metropolis Investment officials did not respond to requests for further information about the proposed sale.

Bank of America Plaza is one of Dallas' most iconic buildings and is likely to attract attention from investors around the world.

"Dallas has a great buzz about it right now," said Gary Carr, vice chairman of CBRE's Dallas office. "There is a lot of international capital in the market."

There is also a cachet to owning the biggest building on the skyline.

Real estate brokers who are tracking the sale said a buyer will have to invest more money in the landmark building.

Bank of America Plaza's owners have received approvals to construct a 15-story, 1,500-car parking garage on Commerce Street that would serve the high-rise.

"You are going to have to build the garage and work to activate the area," said Jack Crews, managing director with commercial property firm JLL. "You bought the biggest building, now what are you going to do with it?

"It's a lot of space to lease."

In 2011, Metropolis also offered Bank of America Plaza for sale but instead decided to make upgrades to the property and hang on to the tower.

Completed in 1985, Bank of America Plaza has maintained its top spot on Dallas skyline and is unlikely to soon be surpassed in height.

Canadian developer Bramalea Ltd. eschewed elaborate architecture and went for sheer size with its construction of the Dallas skyscraper.

In 2013, Bank of America Plaza's owners replaced the original problem-plagued lighting tubes that outlined the tower with 9,000 feet of LED lights. The new display allows an endless variety of color combinations. However, most of the time the high-rise maintains its signature green night show.