Founded in 1932 by two Pennsylvania farm boys, Sensenich has remained an American powerhouse in the propeller industry for almost 90 years. It manufactures fixed-pitch propellers for light aircraft, and metal-fixed-pitch propellers for general aviation.

We offer competitive pricing, and we have the most popular models new, in stock, and ready for delivery. In addition, we can adjust your fixed pitch propeller at ground level to make it higher or lower pitch. This adjustment can make your aircraft improve either your altitude or your speed.

Need help selecting the correct prop for your application?

Contact us with the make and model of your aircraft, and we will be glad to assist you. We have in stock Cessna aircraft 152 and 172 STC’d propellers. We stock these because they have a better climb and cruise performance over OEM propellers.

For your convenience, the Sensenich website provides an application guide to determine which propellers can be used on your aircraft.

Is it time to overhaul your propeller?

There are a variety of reasons your propeller may need to be inspected. These include, but are not limited to:

Bird strikes

Landing on a dirt or grass air strip

Heavy rock damage

Hail

Moving from sea level to a higher elevation

Obvious corrosion on the blades

Time limit determined by the manufacturers’ recommendations in the owner’s manual

When you bring in your propeller, we will first perform a visual inspection to make sure your propeller can safely be overhauled. If it can, then we will strip down your propeller and governor using Non Destructive Testing, or NDT. This process will check for cracks, defects, and stress fractures. After this, we will shot-peen the knobs and blades if necessary. Your safety is our first priority, while still being committed to a quick turn around time.

Do you need a Sensenich Certified Wood Propellers?

Wood props are less sensitive to the vibrations in an engine. They are lighter and allow for an increased payload, and they can be more affordable. If you’re interested, these are available by special order only. Please contact us to order today.