Reading, UK (Sept 8th, 2006) -Sierra Entertainment, a division of Vivendi Games, will deliver Scarface: The World Is Yours, the hotly anticipated video game based on the 1983 film classic, to UK store shelves on October 13th for the PlayStation®2 computer entertainment system, the Xbox® video game and entertainment system from Microsoft and Windows PC. In addition, Scarface fans will have an opportunity to score additional bonus material through a special "Collector's Edition" of the game.

Scarface: The World Is Yours is licensed by Universal Studios Consumer Products Group.

"Sierra Entertainment is excited to announce that, beginning October 13, gamers can finally BECOME Tony Montana by playing what will surely be one of the most thrilling action games of the year, based on one of the most beloved franchises in film history," said Cindy Cook, chief strategy and marketing officer for Vivendi Games. "Scarface fanatics and action game enthusiasts alike are in for an extremely compelling combination of thrilling gameplay, a robust in-game soundtrack, customizable features and collectible bonus material that will transport gamers into Tony's world like never before."

"Scarface: The World Is Yours is a fantastic example of fiction extension in a game," said Bill Kispert, vice president, interactive, Universal Studios. "While featuring an original storyline and intense new adventures and scenarios for Tony Montana, it remains painstakingly true to its beloved source material. We are excited to deliver the game to fans, both as a high-quality piece of standalone entertainment and as an authentic addition to the Scarface mythology."

For the true Scarface fans, a Scarface: The World Is Yours Collector's Edition will be available in limited quantity for PlayStation 2. The Collector's Edition will include the entire game and a variety of extras packed into an exclusive metal case. The Collector's Edition will feature a bonus DVD including the "Making of the Game" behind-the-scenes documentary, a game walk-through with producer commentary, cast interviews and hints and tips, as well as a full map of the in-game world, game concept art and more.

Scarface: The World Is Yours will plunge players deep into the seedy underbelly of 1980s Miami as the one-and-only Tony Montana. Players are challenged to re-enact the climactic mansion shoot-out from the original film, but in the game Tony survives. As Tony, they must then rebuild his fallen empire and seize vengeance on his enemies. The game features Hollywood film-caliber production values including an unprecedented Hollywood ensemble cast, a script penned by renowned script writer David McKenna (American History X, Blow), industry-leading sound effects provided by Skywalker Sound and an enormous lineup of music from the 80s and current artists.

Scarface: Money. Power. Respect., a unique game designed specifically for the PSP® (PlayStation®Portable) system that combines turn-based strategy gameplay with real-time combat, this November.

For more information about Scarface: The World Is Yours, please visit the game's official Web site at www.scarfacegame.com.

About Universal Studios Consumer Products Group

Universal Studios Consumer Products Group (USCPG) is responsible for global licensing and retail strategies as well as building brand recognition of the extensive catalogue of NBC Universal properties. Universal Studios Consumer Products Group is a unit of NBC Universal, one of the world's leading media and entertainment companies in the development, production, and marketing of entertainment, news, and information to a global audience. Formed in May 2004 through the combining of NBC and Vivendi Universal Entertainment, NBC Universal owns and operates a valuable portfolio of news and entertainment networks, a premier motion picture company, significant television production operations, a leading television stations group, and world-renowned theme parks. NBC Universal is 80% owned by General Electric and 20% owned by Vivendi.

About Vivendi Games

Vivendi Games ( www.vivendigames.com) is a global developer, publisher and distributor of multi-platform interactive entertainment. The company is the leader in the subscription-based massively multi-player online role-playing games (MMORPG) category, holds leading positions in the PC, console, handheld and mobile games markets, and is an emerging player in casual online games. Vivendi Games' two principal studios and publishing labels include Blizzard Entertainment, headquartered in Irvine, CA, the creator of World of Warcraft®, Diablo®, StarCraft®, and Warcraft®; and Sierra Entertainment, headquartered in Los Angeles, which includes Radical Entertainment, Swordfish Studios, High Moon Studios, and Massive Entertainment. Sierra's IPs include Crash Bandicoot®, Spyro The Dragon®, Empire Earth®, SWAT®, Darkwatch, TimeShift, Ground Control® and Leisure Suit Larry®. Vivendi Games is also home to Vivendi Games Mobile, publishing games for the emerging mobile market, and Sierra Online, dedicated to publishing casual games for online play and distribution on all platforms. Vivendi Games maintains strategic relationships with industry leading content partners, including Universal Music Group, NBC Universal, Twentieth Century Fox, and Ludlum Entertainment. The company has 16 offices around the world conducting business in 75 countries.

"Scarface: The World Is Yours" interactive game ® 2006 Vivendi Games, Inc. Scarface is a trademark and copyright of Universal Studios. Licensed by Universal Studios Licensing LLLP. All Rights Reserved. "PlayStation", "PS" Family logo and "PSP" are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Memory Stick Duo may be required (sold separately). Microsoft, Xbox and the Xbox logos are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. and/or in other countries and are used under license from Microsoft.