The ball is back and guess who’s coming

The Be Wise Ball is back – and tickets are selling fast!

As our major fundraiser for the year, we’re pulling out all the stops to bring you the best show in town – and here’s just a sample of the fun we’ve lined up for the evening.

Aussie pop royalty The Chantoozies will be helping us raise the roof at Melbourne Town Hall at the ball on June 25 – and they’re excited about what will be one of their first shows back following lengthy lockdowns.

Founding members of the band, Ally Fowler and Eve von Bibra will front a six-piece outfit on the night and are set to amp up the volume on classic noughties numbers including Wanna Be Up, Witch Queen of New Orleans, Kiss n Tell and Love the One You’re With.

“It’s like a breath of fresh air – being back and able to do what you truly love,’’ says Ally.

“We’re really looking forward to it. We are more than ready and it’s going to be a lot of fun.’’

Tickets for the black-tie event are priced at $175. Melbourne identity Denis Walter will compere the evening, and acoustic duo Matt and Taylor will also be special musical guests. In a special chat with the foundation, Ally and Eve spoke about how performing for such a worthwhile cause has added an extra dimension to the evening for them.

‘Thrilled to be involved’

For an act originally formed for a one-off show, The Chantoozies more than made an impression on the Australian music scene in the 1980s and ’90s.

They’ve shared the stage with many top home-grown talents including John Farnham, Ross Wilson, Leo Sayer, James Reyne, Daryl Braithwaite, Hoodoo Gurus and completed a 38-show Australian tour with Billy Joel.

“For me there’s nothing else like the thrill of being on stage,” says Ally. “And in this case, with the Pat Cronin Foundation, it’s for such a good cause.

“Unfortunately, due to a long lockdown, we’ve had to reschedule the show numerous times. It’s like we’ve been at the skipping rope for so long and trying to jump in. Now that we’ve got the date, we’re extra excited to be able to do it.”

Eve said that as Melburnians, they’d already been familiar with Pat’s story and the formation of the Foundation.

“It’s such a tragic story, and what Pat’s parents have done in setting up the foundation and creating awareness around the consequences of violence is a real testament.

“We’re thrilled to be involved.”

The pair, who still live just five minutes from each other in Melbourne, said that while they had diversified their skill sets over the years, music remained their priority.

Although the line-up and the nature of the music industry has changed dramatically over the years, they’re still relishing the opportunity to create fresh material and connect with new and younger audiences.

“We’ve become masters of reinvention,” says songwriter Eve, who is currently collaborating on new material with Tim Henwood, of Rogue Traders fame.

”The music industry has changed so much since we started out,” says Ally. “Certainly we don’t release whole albums anymore and everything we do has to be a lot more strategic than what it was in the eighties.”

Book your tickets

Tickets to the Be Wise Ball are $175 each and include a three-course meal, beer, wine and refreshments. Click here to reserve your seat. Tables will seat 10, so please let us know who you want to sit with.

You can also follow us on Facebook. Be wise. Think carefully. Act kindly.