Odoardo Di Santo

The daily reported chronicles are an indication of the parable of Italy and Canada and the prefiguration of their different destinies.

From the Toronto Star we summarize the report of two recent immigrants in Canada.

"Rashi Kotwal and Ilia Beliakov come from different backgrounds from the other side of the world. Both came to work in the Toronto-Waterloo corridor, Canada's largest technology cluster.

They left England because her husband's old parents could not visit them for more than six months due to visa restrictions put in place by the British government after Brexit.

Kotal, who comes from India with a background in computer science, immediately found a job with the company Communitech. Her husband Beliakov works for Amazon in New York.

“In Canada, Kotwal says, it's easier. It is such a welcoming country. Parents can visit us and stay for seven years. We're really happy."

Canada's immigration policies are one of the reasons why the tech sector between Waterloo and Toronto will soon have more employed workers than San Francisco Bay.

"We are in a tear" says Chris Albinsom, CEO of Communitech.

Canada has admitted 400 000 new immigrants in the last 12 months, half of whom are STEM, (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and related curriculum.

During 2021, the Toronto Waterloo corridor created 88,000 new jobs, increasing the total technical employment by 313,700, 350 percent faster than Silicon Valley.

Italy’s news agency ANSA reported a few days ago:

" Twelve graduates in Naples will work as scavengers after winning the competition announced by Asia, the company for the collection of urban waste in Naples.

Today their entry into the world of work was sanctioned by the signing of the contract in the presence of Naple’s mayor, Gaetano Manfredi.

A total of 200 new hires, including 169 have a diploma and 19 are in possession of the middle school license alone.

The youngest new hire is just 18 years old and the first classified was Francesco Pio Letterese graduated in Business Information Systems."

The newspaper Fanpage under the headline” Why it is easier to insult a graduate than to find him the job for which he studied “reports:

The Right (government) dismantles the basic income program and humiliates earners on a daily basis. In the government sight now there are graduates, who must "accept to be waiters" without blinking an eye. But there are no jobs with more or less dignity. It is the State responsibility to enhance skills, but since it is incapable , it shoots at those in difficulty.

"Don't be choosy", "you have to accept menial jobs". And it is the word choosy that echoes like a warning, to download the problem on those who already suffer the problem and have no solution in hand and to blame and sharpen their frustration.

The Meloni government has begun its more than announced war on the “citizenship income”recepients. In addition to destroying the aid system piece by piece – the last step was the elimination of the “fair” work offer – the members of the government vent daily against the earners.

Last, in order, came Undersecretary Durigon: "The appropriate offer we have in mind provides that if any person, even graduated, gets a job offer even as a waiter anywhere close to home it is right that he accepts it, because if one takes public money I do not think he can be choosy".

Yesterday Minister Lollobrigida had a thought about it: "For generations our grandparents and our fathers taught us that you can go to work, even accepting menial jobs".

The point, however, is neither to be picky nor without humility.

This narrative put forward by the center-right is doubly discriminatory: first of all for workers who perform "humble" tasks, because there is nothing humbling about them.

On the contrary the point is much simpler, but unacceptable to admit by those who govern: qualifications are different, and in a functioning society the State creates the conditions so that everyone can be useful according to their skills.

This requires a long and complex process, which it is the govern has the responsibility to set up.

Of course it is easier to humiliate those who can't make it and accuse them. That’s how it works in Italy. But in a normal country it would be very easy to understand that developing human capital, at the expense of the individuals and the community, and then employing them in jobs for which they have no competence it is a waste. And this has nothing to do with humility.

Italy is a country that trains young people who regularly insult, both if they go abroad to find a suitable job, and if they stay and refuse to perform a different task. Because in the end picky is the Italianized version – as the Italian Right likes so much – of thr expression “ choosy”,often repeated years ago. In the meantime, however, nothing has been done to enhance those skills. And they don't realize that a country that trains graduates and then insults them because they don't want to be waiters is a country destined to die."