FOR almost a quarter of a century, Kate Samperi was a household name as "Dear Kate". She was Australia's first real agony aunt, although she preferred the term "problems adviser". The wise, compassionate advice that helped thousands of troubled readers of Woman's Day magazine was drawn from her own rich experiences: growing up as an Italian immigrant in the 1930s and '40s, forging a career and raising a large family.

Born Caterina Maria Augimeri in Delianuova, Italy, she was known from birth as Rina but later chose "Kate" as her professional name. In 1928 her father, Domenico, left to establish a family home and a shoe-making business in Sydney. Kate and her mother Antonia joined him a year later.

Australia was sliding into depression. However, Kate showed signs of the resilience that was to be her trademark and, learning to speak English, discovered a passion for the richness of her new language.

Educated at Catholic schools in Mosman and then Monte St Angelo, North Sydney, she graduated from the University of Sydney in social work. Soon after she met a handsome young Sicilian, Leonardo Samperi, who had met her father when both were interned during World War II in Long Bay jail. Kate and Leo would remember their meeting as "love at first sight". When he visited, she would play the piano and sing operatic arias. They married in 1948 and had seven children in 22 years.

Kate took a position as a social worker in Parramatta in 1969. When her seventh child arrived in 1970, she determined to raise him at home while still working. Feeling that some answers to letters in the Dorothy Dix column of Woman's Day lacked understanding, she asked the editor for the job - discovering later that previously whichever journalist was free for an afternoon would compile the page.

Joan Reeder, then editor, took Samperi on as Dear Kate. Three years later Samperi also began answering problems for Dolly magazine, under the name Catherine Thomas.

Samperi struggled to balance her professional and personal lives. She loved her family but was driven to help others. She knew how it felt to be marginalised and distressed, and she enjoyed helping people find solutions to problems. She built a network of professionals to help.

Of the hundreds of letters received every week only a few were published, but all were answered personally. She wrote several books based on Dear Kate, and has been widely quoted: "Before becoming a mother, I had a hundred theories on how to bring up children. Now I have seven children and one theory. Love them, especially when they least deserve to be loved."

She was to write in her memoir, Silken Cords, that she was no longer Dear Kate in the nursing home, being dependent on others, but that her self-esteem was stronger than ever. "At last, I could see myself as a woman of much love and courage who had overcome what could have been a mortal disaster."

She is survived by her children: Angela, Alf, Dom, Anthony, Leonard, John and Michael, 12 grandchildren, two great-granddaughters and her siblings, Enzo, Paul, Tina and Gioconda.

Angela Rossmanith