Article content

A by-election in Ward 9 is up in the air after a judge granted a hearing date next week for Councillor Maria Augimeri to contest a court ruling invalidating last year’s election results.

The decision came following a joint submission by lawyers from Ms. Augimeri, Gus Cusimano, the runner up who contested the results, the City of Toronto and a resident of Ward 9 who also wants to be a party to the proceedings.

Article content

The city clerk announced last week that voters in the North York ward

would go to the polls on July 25

, after Justice Alexandra Hoy ruled that “irregularities” on voting day rendered the results invalid and ordered a by-election. Ms. Augimeri beat Mr. Cusimano by 89 votes.

Justice Duncan Grace ordered a stay of Justice Hoy’s ruling pending the outcome next Thursday’s hearing, which means that Ms. Augimeri will be able to remain in office until at least then. The city had earlier said Ms. Augimeri would have to vacate her office this Friday.

Lorne Honickman, who represents Mr. Cusimano, said he’s assuming the by-election “will have to be put on hold from a practical point of view until the issues are dealt with.”

Similarly, Julian Heller, Ms. Augimeri’s counsel, said freezing the matter strips the city of the legal authority to call an election.

Mr. Heller will be arguing on Thursday that Justice Hoy’s judgement be set aside because Ms. Augimeri was never named a party in the original application. Mr. Honickman said he will be seeking to cross examine Ms. Augimeri, perhaps during Thursday’s hearing, about why she waited until the “11th hour” to join in a proceeding she has known about for months. “I’m not going to comment about what my friend may have said,” said Mr. Heller. “I can tell you that Ms. Augimeri was not named as a respondent… and therefore she was not given an invitation to the party, and she did not have an opportunity to defend her position.”

A Ward 9 resident has also asked to be added to the proceedings so she can appeal the ruling. Caroline Jones represents Gloria Saccon, who has lived in Ward 9 for about a decade. Ms. Jones said Ms. Saccon’s vote was among those deemed invalid by Justice Hoy.

“She believes she has a right to demonstrate that she takes voting really serious, and she believes her participation in the election has been effectively invalidated by the judge’s decision,” said Ms. Jones.