The full text on this page is automatically extracted from the file linked above and may contain errors and inconsistencies.

firtartrieut lirtintrie Volume 135 New York, Saturday, September 17 1932. Number 3508 The Financial Situation HE overshadowing event of the week has been least does not believe his cause to be hopeless, and the Maine election on Monday and the portents urging his adherents to renewed efforts to enlighten which it is supposed to carry. On the Stock Ex- the public as to the issues at stake in the Presidential change the outcome has been viewed with no little election. In a message to Chairman Sanders of the concern, and both stock and bond prices have suf- Republican National Committee, he expressed himfered serious declines as the result, though there self to the following effect: have been other contributing causes for the weak"The result of the election in Maine imposes need ness. The Maine contest eventuated in a complete for renewed and stronger effort that the people may political overthrow, with the Democratic candidates fully understand the issues at stake. We have known successful beyond all expectations. For the first all along that, owing to the ravages of the world but we have a time in 18 years the Democratic party has succeeded depression, our fight is a hard one; task is to Our a right cause. and case strong in electing its candidate for Governor, Louis J. with country the in woman man and every acquaint Braun, the Democratic contestant, receiving a plu- the facts and issues which confront the nation. rality of about 2,500 votes over Burleigh Martin, his "In periods of emergency and stress, steadfast Republican opponent. In addition, the Democrats adherence to sound principles of government is indiscarried two out of the three Congressional districts pensible to national security and a prerequisite to in the State, whereas two year ago there was a solid recovery in business, agriculture and employment. phalanx of Republicans to represent the State in Adherence to these principles has saved the country the last 12 months from all manner of deCongress. It is well enough to note, too, that at the during panaceas. This adherence and the measstructive last Congressional election Maine had four Congressures and policies we have adopted have preserved men to represent the State, all Republicans, while these principles and laid the foundation for recovery. under the recent reapportionment the number has "My chief concern now is that the work of reconbeen reduced to only three, of which, as stated, the struction shall go forward steadily and that the forces we have mobilized to that end, and which are Republicans have now gained only one. This Quite naturally the decisive defeat of the Republi- beginning to prove effective, shall continue. considerapartisan and personal all transcends can party in such a rock-ribbed Republican State tions." as Maine is interpreted asforeshadowing the election Granting, however, that the Maine election has of Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt at the Presidennew doubts as to whether Mr. Hoover will created the of and defeat President tial election in November to remain in the Presidential chair for allowed Such for be re-election. Hoover Herbert conclusions may be hasty, though Mr. Hoover labors under the another term of four years,is there any sound reason handicap that the country is suffering from the worst for anxiety on the part of the business community industrial collapse and business depression that has even if he should fail in his efforts and Mr. Roosevelt ever afflicted the United States, and that he has and the Democratic party should succeed to control? been at the helm as Chief Executive during this There is at least a possibility that this may happen, period of unparalleled suffering and distress. In such and it is not unlikely that Mr. Roosevelt and the circumstances, the average voter will be inclined to Democratic party may sweep the country from one hold him responsible and to visit his displeasure upon end to the other and come into power by overwhelmhim by voting for the opposition candidate, even ing majorities. Supposing this to be the outcome, though he may have had no part in bringing the would that be cause for genuine anxiety? Are disaster about,and may have acted with consummate Democratic policies any more likely to be harmful skill in handling it. than Republican policies? The break in the stock is this there from apart a always Entirely dispo- market indicates that there is a belief in financial sition in bad times to vote against the party in circles that they would, but is there any real ground power on the theory that a change cannot make for such belief? Is it not a fact that on all the leadthings worse and may make them better. At all ing questions of the day the two parties are in essenevents,the Maine election has put the Republicans on tial agreement, at least as far as can be judged by the anxious seat, and well it may, since it plainly their political platforms, and that the ordinary man shows that the chances are not in favor of Mr. has difficulty in choosing between the two. Where Hoover, and that he can regain lost ground only by there is individual preference as between Mr.Hoover most strenuous efforts, and may even then fail. Mr. and Mr. Roosevelt the choice is easy. But where the Hoover has been quick to recognize this, and ordinary voter wants to rest his decision on matters promptly issued one of the manifestos for which he of principle what essential difference does he find bas become so famous, making it plain that he at between the two parties except in the matter of the T 1860 Financial Chronicle tariff, and in that single particular we make free to say that the best interests of the country would be promoted if tariff duties were reduced in drastic fashion,and in that particular, therefore, a change of political control from the Republicans to the Democrats would not be harmful to the business community, but rather the reverse. Yet, judging from this week's speeches of Governor Roosevelt, urging that the agricultural classes be' accorded the same measure of protection as the industrial classes, it is not certain that the Democrats can claim even that advantage. The view that the two parties are in essential agreement on the leading questions of the day was well expressed by Colonel Leonard P. Ayres, VicePresident of the Cleveland Trust Co.,in the monthly business bulletin of the company, dated July 15, extensive extracts from which appeared in our issue of July 16. Mr. Ayres expressed himself to the following effect: "Economic problems were discussesd hardly at all by the delegates to the two great political conventions that met in Chicago. It is an astonishing fact that the thousands of men and women meeting there to nominate candidates and adopt party platforms evinced almost no interest in the depression, and adopted with little discussion those parts of their campaign programs that have to do with agriculture, business, banking and money. They appeared to adhere to the old doctrine that depressions cause themselves, and cure themselves, and that nothing can be done about them. They seemed clearly to have little faith in political remedies for economic difficulties. "Both platforms pledged support to our present monetary system, both of them promised economy in governmental expenditures, and neither one suggested important changes in tariff policies. Both promise unemployment relief and aid to agriculture. Either party could without embarrassment accept the economic program of the other. Apparently business has little to hope for or to fear in the coming political campaign. In this respect this Presidential year differs from those of previous periods of great depression in our earlier history." We quite agree with Colonel Ayres when he says that "apparently business has little to hope for or to fear in the coming political campaign." And this being so, no real basis for anxiety in the business world will exist whether at the end of the Presidential campaign the Republican party is continued in control or the Democratic party makes its advent to power. We notice, too, that Walter Lippmann, in his article in the New York "Herald Tribune" for Sept. 15, points out that Democrats are already exercising a large measure of control in the numerous bodies and agencies which are functioning so largely and widely in the Government activities of the day. Mr. Lippmann expresses himself as follows on that point: "There is the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which is presided over by a Democrat, Mr. Pomprene. There are the committees from the Federal Reserve districts set up recently to stimulate business. The leading figure is Mr. Owen D. Young, a Democrat. There is the organization to mobilize relief.. It is presided over by a Democrat, Mr. Newton D. Baker. There is perhaps the most important of all, the Federal Reserve System, with its very promising open market policy. This is a non-partisan organization which is not in theory or, it may be assumed. in practice, a part of the Administration. Sept. 17 1932 Finally, there is the effort to reduce armaments and to obtain a better international equilibrium, and the principal American negotiator in this whole effort at collaboration has been a Democrat, Mr. Norman H.Davis." He adds: "Thus it appears that the machinery of relief and reconstruction is already rather thoroughly pervaded by Democrats. Mr. Hoover is• entitled to great credit for having dealt with it in so non-partisan a fashion. But it is impossible for any Republican to pretend that only Republicans can operate the machinery"—from all of which it inevitably follows that the country may with perfect confidence rest in security and peace no matter what the outcome of the November elections. IN THE meantime Mr. Hoover is not relaxing his efforts in the slightest to push new construction work on the part of the United States Government in the hope that this may pave the way for a return of business activity in the ordinary course. On Sept. 9 he announced that as a further move to aid employment he had directed the speeding up of the Federal construction program to the extent of slightly less than $200,000,000 as provided in the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932. The President made public at the same time a letter from Ogden L. Mills, Secretary of the Treasury, informing Mr. Hoover that the funds necessary to carry out this construction program are available for the purpose— this being a requirement of the Act which provides that the sums needful shall not be expended "if the Secretary of the Treasury certifies to the President that the amount necessary for such expenditures is not available and cannot be obtained upon reasonable terms." The President also pointed out that with this additional $200,000,000 the total Federal construction work during the present fiscal year of all kinds will exceed $750,000,000. The only occasion for fear is that the good work which the Administration is aiming to do through these extraneous measures, all of emergency type, may be largely undone by the arbitrary action of the Inter-State Commerce Commission in dealing with applications for loans by the railroads. The Commission is getting more and more arbitrary and autocratic in its course with reference to such loan applications. It is imposing all sorts of conditions as a precedent to the granting of such loans and is paring them down through most unusual methods and proceedings. Moreover, it is engaged in an assumption of authority for which not the slightest warrant exists in the law itself. Previous instances of the kind have been discussed from time to time in these columns, but an entirely new one has come to notice the present week, and it has been attended by serious consequences in this instance. On Oct. 1 1932 the New York Chicago & St. Louis RR. Co. has $20,000,000 of three-year 6% gold notes maturing, and is without available funds to meet the.same. In an advertisement explaining the situation to these noteholders the President of the company, W. L. Ross, points out that when these notes were originally issued it was expected that they would be refunded through the customary channels, but because of the decline in the market values of railroad securities and the present low earnings such refunding is not possible at the present time, and probably will not 'be possible until conditions materially improve. The company, hence, finds itself without available funds to meet this maturity, and also without available Volume 135 Financial Chronicle 1861 funds to meet interest payments of $600,000 due on agreement on the part of the road to reduce its the notes on Oct. 1, as also some other interest pay- fixed charges and to file a plan to that end by the first of July, a period of less than 60 days. As the ments due at the same date. In this dilemma the company applied to the Recon- alternative was a receivership for the property, the struction Finance Corporation for the sums needful plan was submitted in due time,but the St. Louis-San for the purpose, and the Finance Corporation re- Francisco Railway management has-been struggling ferred the application in the ordinary course to the hard to get the consent of the security dealers to the Inter-State Commerce Commission. The Commis- plan and at the latest dates had succeeded in getting sion, however, would approve only 25% of the loan the assent of only a little more than half the volume (besides $1,800,000 for interest and taxes), and it of securities outstanding, instead of nearly the full imposed the condition that before any advance upon amount as imperatively required. The action in that case was arrogant, dictatorial the loan is made the company must deposit with the Reconstruction Finance Corporation satisfac- and without warrant of law: And the action in the tory evidence that the holders of substantially all of present case of the New York Chicago & St. Louis the three-year 6% gold notes will extend 75% of the is subject to condemnation for the same reason. It principal thereof for a term of not less than three was never intended that the Commerce Commission years. It has happened on occasions in the past should be charged with the exercise of any such funcwhere notes have been held by the banking interests tions as are here under discussion. As we pointed through whom the money was originally obtained, out in our issue of May 14, the Act establishing the the Commission has made it a condition that these Reconstruction Finance Corporation, in speaking bankers agree to extending 50% of the loan if the of the Commerce Commission, uses language plainly Reconstruction Finance Corporation advanced the implying that the part of the Commission was meant money to pay the other 50%, and ready consent has to be merely advisory. The words "upon the apusually been given by the banking interests con- proval of the Inter-State Commerce Commission" cerned to such arrangements,so no real hardship has appear only once in the Act, though the name of the Commission is mentioned frequently, and these resulted. In the present instance, however, the Commission words are so qualified and modified as to make it arbitrarily cuts the loan down to only 25% and plainly apparent that it was intended that the Commakes it an imperative requirement that the note- mission should act merely to relieve the Commission holders agree to an extension for three years of the of routine work and nowhere can any authority be remaining 75% of the principal of the loan. These found for the assumption by the Commission of notes, too, are widely distributed and not concen- power to prescribe conditions. Indeed, it was trated in the hands of a few individuals or interests. plainly the intention to have the Commission merely The first result of the news of the action of the Com- pass upon the bona fide character of the application mission was to precipitate a decline of 161/ 4 points and to see to it that the contract for the loan fulin the price of the notes on the Stock Exchange, while filled all the legal requirements. This work was the stock of the road also sharply declined. The delegated to the Commerce Commission by reason of notes have further declined since then, and the close its wide knowledge of railroad affairs and because it yesterday was at 381/ 2 against 583 4 on Friday of last is especially competent for passing upon matters week. Thus the effect has been to destroy values, of that kind. Moreover, if any conditions were to be whereas the purpose of the Reconstruction Finance imposed upon the granting of loans it was for the Corporation, in its application to the railroads, was Reconstruction Finance Corporation to prescribe to strengthen the roads and to provide them with the same and not the Commerce Commission. Above all, it was the purpose of the law to avoid means to tide them over the present difficult situation in the railroad world which has come about railroad receiverships. The course of the Commisthrough no fault of the railroads themselves, but sion, on the other hand, is calculated to bring about is due entirely to the great depression in trade as a receiverships, and if these receiverships are once result of which railroad traffic has dwindled away allowed to occur, one after another, because the to the vanishing point. In short, because of the securityholders rebel against the conditions imposed arbitrary action of the Commerce Commission, the for which no warrant of law exists, the country will object in view through the loaning facilities of the be facing disaster greater than any yet experienced. • Reconstruction Finance Corporation has been aliso- The Commission is acting the -part of a bull in a lutely defeated and the Finance Corporation made china shop, and it ought to be restrained in its an instrument of destruction instead of an upbuilder activities if the calamity referred to is to be avoided. of railroad credit, as intended. It should be added that this week's big break in the stock market was HE soldier bonus proposition, involving another precipitated by this action of the Commorce Comdraft on the United States Treasury in the mission and that the Maine election as a further dis- sum of over $2,000,000,009,has again become a threatturbing influence did not come until the following ening feature in the situation. At the annual conday, Tuesday. How the noteholders will view the vention of the American Legion, at Portland, Oregon, terms laid down by the Commerce Commission re- the Legislative Committee of the Legion on Sept. 14 mains to be seen, but the big depreciation in the mar- ended a long battle at night on the bonus question ket value of the notes shows plainly enough how the and wrote its report embodying a demand for immeinvesting and financial community regard the diate and unqualified payment. The vote was 21 to 9, matter. and the text of the resolution was simple and direct, On the present occasion the Commerce Commis- merely saying, "Be is resolved, That the American sion has repeated the course pursued by it in the Legion endorses and urges the full and immediate case of the application last May of the St. Louis-San payment of the adjusted compensation certificates." Francisco Railway for financial assistance. In that At the convention itself this resolution was adopted case the granting of the loan was conditioned upon on Thursday, Sept. 15, by the overwhelming vote of T 1862 Financial Chronicle 1,167 to 109. The proposal to censure President Hoover for eviction of the bonus marchers from Washington was overwhelmingly defeated in the Resolutions Committee and was not allowed to come up on the floor of the convention. The War Department, however, was condemned at the convention in a viva voce Vote because envelopes containing a speech by Secretary of War Patrick J. Hurley on the bonus marchers at Washington was placed in the chairs of the delegates enclosed in envelopes bearing the frank of the War Department. Harry M. Arthur, department commander of South Carolina, had lodged a complaint against the use of the franking privilege in that way and thereupon the convention by acclamation declared its opposition to such action by the War Department "or any other governmental department." The proposal for the payment of the bonus, and which will involve the payment of $2,300,000,000, was adopted notwithstanding the vigorous opposition and determined stand against the proposal by President Hoover and notwithstanding also the opposition of many prominent public men. One of these latter was former Governor Alfred E. Smith, who in a very statesman-like article in this week's "Saturday Evening Post," under the caption "Veterans and Taxpayers,throws a flood Of light upon the methods used in the agitation and propaganda for the payment of the bonus, both political parties playing for the support of the soldier vote. Governor Smith incidentally referred to the similar experience attending pension payments to the veterans of the Civil War and pointed out that the gradual increase every decade ,in appropriations for pensions revealed the activity of a group organized to exact as much as possible from the Government. Appropriations for Civil War pensioners between 1880 and 1920 jumped from $55,000,000 to $203,000,000, and in 1930, after the passage of 65 years, the total cost of Civil War pensioners remained at the figure of $125,000,000. As to the American Expeditionary Force, study of the Federal budget for 1933 shows that the largest single item in it is for veterans' relief. It amounts to $928,387,795, or approximately one-fourth of the total Federal appropriations for the conduct of the National Governmentin every detail. From the close of the war in 1918 to June 1931 Governor Smith tells his readers more than $6,000,000,000 has been spent by the Federal Government in various forms of relief to veterans of the World War, their dependents and beneficiaries. State governments, acting by themselves, either for hospitalization, special acts for relief of veterans or direct bonus, have spent more than $580,000,000 additional. Mr. Smith says, moreover, that statisticians have figured out that by 1945, only 13 years from date, the Government will have spent $23,500,000,000 even under existing relief commitments. At the conclusion of his article Mr.Smith makes comment to the effect that the American people have a right to know where the candidates for President stand on the question. President Hoover, whose stand on the bonus question was really well-known, was prompt to respond to this invitation. He declared his position anew and in clarion tones, too. In a statement on the matter, issued Wednesday night, Mr. Hoover stated that he had consistently opposed the payment of the face value of the adjusted service certificates prior to maturity and that in the public interest he must Sept. 17 1932 continue to oppose it. Cash payment of the face value of the certificates to-day would require an appropriation from the Treasury of about $2,300,000,000. If insisted on, the President says, "it will indefinitely set hack any hope of recovery for employment, agriculture or business, and will impose infinite distress upon the whole country." The amount required, as already stated, would be $2,300,000,000. The President says: "No such sum is available. It cannot be raised by adding to the crushing burden of taxes which drain every family budget in our country to-day and weigh heavily on business struggling in the midst of depression. It cannot be borrowed without impairment of the credit of the National Government and thus destroy that confidence Upon which our whole system depends. It is unthinkable that the Government of the United States should resort to the printing press and the issuance of fiat currency as provided in the bill which passed the House at the last session of Congress under the leadership of the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate. Such an act of moral bankruptcy would depreciate and might ultimately destroy the value of every dollar in the United States. It would cause the collapse of all confidence in our Government and would bring widespread ruin to the entire country and to every one of our citizens." The President makes one point further, which is often overlooked. He says: "Let us not forget that while we have lost much in this depression, we'still have much more to lose. And our whole future may be said to depend upon early recovery." He then winds up with the following frank declaration: "For many months the right-thinking men of both parties have been engaged in organizing and mobilizing the resources of the nation to promote the economic recovery which is the one sure and effective means of restoring the standard of living of all of our people and rescuing millions of them from suffering and misery. The proposal to levy over two billions of dollars and to pay it to a particular group constitutes a fatal threat to the entire program 'of recovery, to the success of which all must look for their well-being,security and happiness. In my judgment the enactment of any such proposal into legislation would be a deadly blow at the welfare of the nation. I was elected to protect and promote the interests of all of the people. As long as I am President I shall continue to do so and to oppose with all of the strength and influence at my command any demand that runs counter to the common welfare." But all this, as already stated, proved of no avail. The Legion convention declared for the bonus the next day by the overwhelming vote of 1,167 against 109, paying no consideration whatever to the consequences. The time has arrived for stopping being squeamish in characterizing the actions of these legionnaires, as they congregate in one city after another and vociferously proclaim their demands. There was a convention a few weeks ago in Brooklyn of the New York State Department of the Legion, and whoever witnessed the scenes on that .occasion at the hotels where the delegates were lodged was forced to turn away in abject disgust. In the night-time numbers of these legionnaires were lying around in the corridors and in their rooms, with whiskey bottles in their hands, in a state of beastly intoxication. Brooklyn has some of the finest hotels in the city, and in at least one of these hotels, and a very large one, the place was an almost complete wreck after one night's stay of this group of legionnaires—so much so that the management Volume 135 Financial Chronicle found itself obliged to distribute a printed circular apologizing for the condition of things. This New York Department of the Legion came out strong for the payment of the adjusted service certificates, and they howled down Assistant Secretary of War F. Trubee Davison. Large numbers of them showed by their conduct that their main concern was to get money with which to pay for the bootleggers' concoctions. The bonus marchers in Washington seemed to have had a large element of the same class in their ranks, and the President certainly cannot be blamed for having in the end ejected them when their conduct became unbearable. If he is to be criticized at all it is because he tolerated them too long. The importance to be attached to the action of gatherings so largely dominated by this type of individuals, who always flock together, while the solid and substantial members make it a practice to stay at home, instead of engaging in junketing expeditions, may well be questioned. At all events, it is time that these Legion gatherings, to which both the great political parties appear so anxious to cater, should be estimated at their proper worth. We say this without any intention of speaking in derogation of the presumably big body of legionnaires, who lead a sober life and do not engage in attempts to gain special advantages for themselves. And it is to be hoped that Governor Smith is correct when at one point in his article he says that "the real fact of the matter is That those in a position to know have made in unchallenged statement that 75% of the country's veterans are not members of the American Legion and they may or may not agree with its views." At any rate, the fact should not be overlooked that these noisy bodies of legionnaires are insignificant in number. The vote at Portland was less than 1,300. But at the time of the signing of the Armistice in 1918 the 'United States had 2,000,000 men in France and 2,000,000 more in the training camps in the United States, making 4,000,000 together. What a contrast between 4,000,000 and 1,300! explanation is found in the fact that the deposits of the member banks, representing their Reserve account, increased in amount of over $102,000,000 during the week, raising such member bank deposits from $2,141,655,000 Sept.7 to $2,243,816,000 Sept.14. However, the Reserve ratio of the 12 Reserve institutions did increase during the week,even if only from 59.2% to 59.6%. The amount of United States Government securities held as collateral for Federal Reserve notes was reduced during the week from $589,800,000 to $533,300,000. The amount of acceptances held for account of foreign central banks continues its downward course. The present week the amount was reduced from $44,973,000 to $42,437,000; a year ago, on Sept. 16 1931, the bill holdings for foreign central banks stood at $233,102,000. Foreign bank deposits with the Reserve institutions are also a little smaller this week at $10,556,000 Sept. 14 as against $11,079,000 Sept. 7; on Sept. 16 last year the foreign bank deposits aggregated $197,297,000. --•-changes this week include dividend ORPORATE a reduction from 75c. a share to 50c. a share on the common and preferred stocks of the Electric Storage Battery Co. The National Steel Corp. reduced the quarterly dividend on its common stock from 25c. a share to 12Y2c. a share. The Air Reduction Co., Inc., omitted the extra dividend usually paid at this time of the year, though declaring the regular quarterly dividend of 75c. a share on the common stock. The United Shoe Machinery Corp. also omitted the extra dividend usually paid at this time of the year on the common stock, though declar2c. a share on 1 ing the usual quarterly dividend of 62/ on the 6% share a 2c. / 371 and the common stock stock. cumul. pref. E Federal Reserve statements this week show a contraction of $42,626,000 in the volume of Federal Reserve notes in circulation (the total of which has fallen from $2,831,749,000 Sept. 7 to $2,789,123,000 Sept. 14), which is as it should be, seeing that National bank circulation is being steadily increased, though we observe that money in circulation is reported as showing a decrease for the week of $57,000,000. The amount of Federal Reserve credit outstanding, as measured by the total of the bill and security holdings, also is smaller by $18,638,000, this coming after a decrease the previous week, too, of $13,834,000. This week's decrease in the amount of Reserve credit outstanding, like that of last week,follows mainly as a result of the diminished holdings of discounted bills, the total of which has dropped during the week from $420,428,000 to $401,933,000. The holdings of acceptances remained virtually unchanged, as did the holdings of United States Government securities, the total of these latter being reported at $1,850,927,000 Sept. 14 and at 11,850,923,000 Sept. 7. Gold reserves were increased • during the week in the large sum of $38,054,000, but this did not have the effect of raising the ratio of total reserves to deposit and Federal Reserve note • liabilities, combined as much as might be expected, especially seeing that the amount of Reserve notes in circulation was heavily reduced,as noted above. The T 1863 C NY improvementithat appears in the foreign trade statement of the United States for the A month of August, which was published yesterday, was due wholly to the larger exports of cotton, and the higher price recently secured for that important staple. The preliminary figures of merchandise exports for that month are $109,000,000, with the imports $91,000,000. In July the value of exports was $104,210,000 and the imports $79,422,000. These amounts are all very light as'compared with similar returns for a great many years back. In August last year, exports were valued at $164,808,000 and imports at $166,679,000. The decrease in exports last month from a year ago was $55,500,000 or 33.9%,and in imports $75,679,000 or 46.0%. For the eight months of 1932, merchandise exports are valued at $1,056,769,000 and imports at 8918,105,000. For the same period of the preceding year exports amounted to $1,661,547,000 and imports to $1,448,250,000. Merchandise exports for the past eight months were 36.4% less than for the same time a year ago and imports were 36.7% smaller. Relatively the decline in imports for the past two months has been considerably larger than that for the year to date,and while the loss in exports has also been heavy, the showing has been somewhat better for August than for the eight months' period. The balance of trade in August continued on the export side, amounting to $18,000,000; for August a year ago there was a small import trade balance of $1,871,000, the first for some time. For the past eight months, exports have exceeded imports by $138,664,000; whilelfor.the 1864 Financial Chronicle same period of 1931, the excess of exports over imports was $213,259,000. • With the decline shown in exports,the cotton movement out of the United States last month was larger in quantity and in value than for either the preceding month or for August of last year. The increase in both quantity and value in August over a year ago was very heavy. Cotton exports last month amounted to 462,760 bales, against 458,645 bales in July and only 216,274 bales in August 1931. The difference in value covering these same periods was even more marked than the above figures indicate. The value of cotton exports last month was $18,112,600 against $15,853,900 in July, and $9,898,000 in August 1931. Exports other than cotton for the month just closed were reduced to $90,900,000, compared with $154,910,000 for August of last year, the loss being $64,010,000, or 41.3%. Gold exports in August declined further to $18,067,000, while imports increased to $24,170,000. For the eight months of 1932 gold exports have been 09,379,000 and imports $191,856,000, an excess of exports of $617,523,000. For the same period of 1931 gold exports amounted to only $1,837,000 and imports to $317,992,000, the latter exceeding exports by $316,155,000. The silver movement in August was again considerably reduced, exports amounting to only $433,000 and imports to $1,554,000. ik AERCANTILEinsolvencies in the United States in 1 VI August continued at the high level of the earlier months of the year. Commercial defaults for the month just closed, according to the records of R. G. Dun dr Co., numbered 2,798 compared with 2,597 in July and 1,944 in August 1931. Such an increase for August over July is very unusual, the tendency generally being in the other direction. Compared with a year ago the increase for August was 44.9%. Liabilities last month were also very heavy, due mainly to an unusual number of large failures. The amount for August this year was $77,031,212, against $55,025,132 a year ago. For the eight months of 1932, 22,825 business failures have been recorded, compared with 19,034 for the same period of the preceding year; the increase this year being 19.9%. Liabilities for 1932 to the end of August have amounted to $701,505,139; in the corresponding eight months of last year the liabilities were $484,520,354. These figures cover only commercial failures and do not include banks or individual bankruptcies. All three classes into which the report for August is separated show a considerable increase in the number of defaults and in the liabilities, but relatively the increase is larger in the manufacturing division than for the other two sections. In manufacturing lines there were 649 failures last month, involving $27,461,210 of indebtedness. In the trading section 1,972 defaults occurred for $36,903,639; while for agents and brokers the number was 177 owing $12,666,363. In August 1931, 427 manufacturing insolvencies were recorded involving $16,967,317; 1,381 trading failures for $25,847,665, and 136 for the third division, owing $10,210,150. Manufacturing defaults in practically all of the different classifications were much heavier last month, but were especially large in the clothing line, in the lumber and building divisions, baking, printing, machinery and tools, iron foundry, etc., leather and shoes, stove and glass, textiles and chemicals. For the trading division failures were very numerous in the grocery class, Sept. 17 1932 general stores, clothing and furnishings, dry goods, drugs, shoes and leather goods, furniture, jewelry, books and papers, and hotels and restaurants. Liabilities were particularly heavy for the divisions embracing machinery and tools, groceries, hotels and restaurants, clothing and in furniture lines. The large failures in August,those where the liabilities in each instance amounted to $100,000 or more, numbered 128, and involved in the aggregate $36,682,281; a year ago, the corresponding figures were 95 defaults for $32,416,072 of indebtedness. HE stock market suffered a number of severe blows this week and as a consequence has experienced large and general declines in prices. The first of these blows was received on Monday when news came that the Inter-State Commerce Commission had refused to recommend a loan from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to the New York, Chicago (Sr St. Louis RR.of the full $20,000,000 required. to take up the $20,000,000 of three-year notes falling due on Oct. 1, but instead approved advances to the extent of only 25% of the $20,000,000 and had made this conditional on the deposit with • the Reconstruction Finance Corporation of evidence that the holders of substantially all of the three-year notes would agree to an extension of the other 75% for a term of not less than three years. The market price of the notes as a result dropped 161 4 points or from 58 on Saturday to 413 4 on Monday. At the same time nearly all other low-priced railroad issues, where the roads are dependent upon the Reconstruction Finance Corporation for aid, also sharply declined and stock prices tumbled all around. On Tuesday, the market received its second bad blow in the news regarding the Maine election, showing that the Republican Party had sustained a severe defeat, losing the Governorship for the first time in 18 years and losing also two of the three Congressional seats to which Maine is entitled under the reapportionment of Congressional seats; two years ago the State had a representation of four Congressmen, all of them Republicans. This was construed to mean that the Democratic Party was likely to succeed to control in the National election in November and the stock market fraternity seemed to be apprehensive of the ill results to follow from such change. As a consequence, stock prices plunged further downward in no uncertain fashion and matters were made still worse by a further break in the low-priced bond issues, though the values of the high-grade bond issues were impaired in only a minor degree. As a further depressing feature, there has been all through the week the agitation ofthe soldier bonus proposition which would make a draft on the U. S. Treasury in the amount of $2,300,000,000 and the action of the American Legion in national convention at Portland, Ore.,in voting in favor of the proposition, notwithstanding President Hoover's opposition, and his broad and unqualified statement that in his judgment,"the enactment of any such proposal into legislation would be a deadly blow at the welfare of the Nation." As a result of all this, the market has remained in a shaky condition all the remainder of the week. There was a sharp rally on Wednesday, and again on Thursday, but followed by some reaction again. On Friday the tone steadied, and prices recovered somewhat. Throughout the week continued weakness in the bond market has been an adverse feature,which has not been T Volume 135 Financial Chronicle „ 1865 lightly regarded. Aside from the events noted, there %; Westinghouse Elec. & Mfg. at 283/2, against 39; have been no new developments of consequence. Drug, Inc. at 433/2, against 4734; Columbian Carbon The steel mills of the country have slightly increased at 29, against 363/2; Reynolds Tobacco, class B, at their rate of production, being engaged now to 153/2% 343 ex-div., against 353/2; Liggett & Myers, class B 2%, which was the rate at 613/2, against 65; Lorillard at 15, against 17; Ameriof capacity instead of 143/ 4, and Yellow Truck last week, but otherwise there is little indication of can Tobacco at 73, against 797 63. against 5, at Coach & business revival. As has happened too, wheat and The steel shares have moved sharply lower. cotton prices have moved toward lower levels, the States Steel closed yesterday at 393/2 against United to dropping September option for wheat at Chicago Friday of last week; Bethlehem Steel at 213 on 47% York New the on cotton 49% cents a bushel and spot and Vanadium at 143/2 against 203/2. In 25 against against as to cents down 7.05 being Cotton Exchange Auburn Auto closed yesterday at 503( group auto the reAug. 29, on cents 9.20 and 7, Sept. 9 cents on 4 against 173/ 8; Motors at 157 General 65; against prices commodity rising which stimulus the moving Nash ; 4 183 % 145 Motors at against at Chrysler 40 Only 163/2 market. stock the gave time at one 5 % 4; stocks established new high prices for the year against 173/2; Packard Motors at 3 against 43 and against 93/2 4 73 at Hupp Car Motor during the week, while 1 stock touched a new low Hudson 35% against 43/2. In the rubber group level. The call loan rate on the Stock Exchange has Motors at & Rubber closed yesterday at 203/2 Tire Goodyear again remained unaltered all through the week at 2%. Friday of last week; B. F. Goodrich on 243/2 against Trading has again been heavy, though tapering 93; United States Rubber at 63/2 against 7% at off after Tuesday. At the half-day session on at 12 against 16. the and preferred against 83/2 Saturday last, the sales on the New York Stock Exshares conspicuously weak. have been railroad The were they change were 1,498,220 shares; on Monday at 18, against closed yesterday RR. Pennsylvania on shares; 5,102,090 on Tuesday 4,049,671 shares; last of week; Atchison Friday Topeka & on 2 on 3,142,470 Thursday shares; 13/2 3,248,290 Wednesday ; 4 583 Coast Atlantic 513, against Line at Fe Sante the On shares. 1,914,280 Friday on and shares & Island Chicago Rock Pacific 38; against at 27, at the sales last Exchange Saturday Curb York New 4,against 11%; New York Central at 24%,against were 199,151 shares; on Monday 592,125 shares; on 73 %; Baltimore & Ohio at 17, against 183; New Tuesday 738,683 shares; on Wednesday 425,808 295 4, 2; Union Pacific at 727 at 193, against 233/ Haven shares; on Thursday 433,849 shares and on Friday 532, at 73; Pacific against Missouri 77; against 220,001 shares. As compared with Friday of last week, prices show Southern Pacific at 27, against 313/2; Missourilarge and general declines. General Electric closed Kansas-Texas at 73/2, against 73/2; Southern Railway 4, against 163; Chesapeake & Ohio at 223/2, yesterday at 17, against 203 on Friday of last week; at 113 %,against 223/ s; 263/2; Northern Pacific at 183 against Gas 323(, at against Standard 393 4; North American at 153', against 19X: Northern Great and of Gas against 203/2, Consolidated 253.j; & Elec. at The oil shares are also lower. Standard Oil of 4, against 62%; Pacific Gas & Elec. at N. Y. at 563 J., closed yesterday at 313, against 353/2 on N. at 15 Elec. & Gag 32; Columbia against 3 , 2 293/ 4; against 193'; Brooklyn Union Gas at 78, against Friday of last week; Standard Oil of Calif. at 273j, 8,against 20%; 81%; Electric Power & Light at 9%, against 133/8; against 293/2; Atlantic Refining at 163/ , 4 133 against at 16%. The copper Corp. Public Service of N. J. at 47%, against 53; Inter- and Texas the like rest. depressed Copbeen Anaconda national Harvester at 22%, against 29 8; J. I. Case group has on 153/2 113 at against , % yesterday Friday of closed Threshing Machine at 43%, against 593; Sears, per , % 123 at ; 4 Copper against 163 Kennecott week; last Roebuck & Co. at 193', against 233'; Montgomery 16%, at ; 2 against Refining 233/ & Smelting American 4, against 133/ 2; Woolworth at Ward & Co. at 107 Cerro de ; 4 93 Paco 73', at against Dodge Phelps at 49%, against 36%, against 39; Safeway Stores 3 ; Copper at 9, against 133/2; and Calumet & Heels at 503/2; Western Union Telegraph at 34%,against 42% 4. American Tel. & Tel. at 108%, against 1153; Int. 5, against 67 Tel. & Tel. at 9%, against 14; American Can at 51, against 59; United States Industrial Alcohol at 28, IRREGULAR downward movements prevailed this week on stock exchanges in the leading European 4; Commercial Solvents at 10, against against 313 8; and Corn financial centers, owing in large part to the dis/ 4;Shattuck & Co. at 932, against 117 123 couraging reports of the trend at New York. The Products at 46, against 4932. Allied Chemical & Dye closed yesterday at 73, reaction here, while not unexpected, caused a sympaagainst 83 on Friday of last week; Associated Dry thetic decline at London,Paris and Berlin. LiquidaGoods at 73/2 bid, against 93/2; E. I. du Pont de tion was extensive at times on the European markets, Nemours at 363/2, against 42; National Cash Register but it was offset in some sessions by good buying 4; International Nickel at which kept the decline within reasonable bounds. "A" at 11%, against 163 10%; Roller Bearing at 164 Timken 9, against 3 , While the decline was in progress, some improvement was reflected in reports of European trade and against 19%; Johns-Manville at 26, against 30 s; National industry, but such indications did not appear to / Gillette Safety Razor at 173/2, against 215 2, against 23%; Texas Gulf affect the trend to any appreciable degree. The Dairy Products at 203/ 8; Freeport-Texas at 23, most noteworthy factor' is a general advance in 2, against 243/ Sulphur at 203/ 2; American & Foreign Power at 8%, wholesale price indices in Britain, France and Geragainst 243/ against 13; United Gas Improvement at 189, against many. The British gain was substantial, but a 21; National Biscuit at 383/2 ex-div., against 42/ 7 3; counter-acting influence was a further increase in Coca-Cola at 973/2, against 106; Continental Can at the unemployment total. Owing, it is assumed, to 4; Eastman Kodak at 523/2, against the continuing dispute in the Lancashire cotton in30, against 333 583/2; Gold Dust Corp. at 16%, against 193; Stand- dustry, the total of British unemployed on Aug. 22 4,against 163; Paramount-Publix was reported early this week as 2,859,928, an increase ard prands at 143 3 Kreuger & Toll at 3(, 7%; against C04. at 4, . against of 48,045 over the July aggregate. French unem- 1866 Financial Chronicle ployed are gradually being absorbed in a slow expansion of trade, Paris reports indicate, the decrease amounting to more than 7,000 in the three weeks to Sept. 10. German industrial reports reflect improvement here and there, and the spasmodic gains are viewed as forerunners of wider and more substantial advances. The London Stock Exchange was dull and easier at the opening, Monday, with British industrial issues showing the largest losses. Textile stocks were an exception, these issues advancing on hopes of an early settlement of the strike of 220,000 weavers. British funds were fairly steady in a small turnover. International stocks turned quite weak toward the close, when advices of a poor opening were received from New York. The entire market was soft in a further quiet session, Tuesday. British funds showed small recessions, while industrial stocks dropped more decidedly. Anglo-American trading favorites were especially weak, owing to the overnight reports from New York. A better tone prevailed Wednesday, but dealings were not large. Oil shares moved forward briskly on news of higher gasoline prices in Britain, and other groups also advanced after some early hesitation. British funds were firm, but inactive. International stocks were substantially higher, with improvement marked toward the close. Unsettlement reappeared in the dealings Thursday, speculative issues of all kinds sagging sharply. British funds were better, however, as investment interest centered in these sound securities. International stocks declined more heavily than British industrial issues. Modest advances occurred yesterday, in all sections of the London market. The Paris Bourse was weak in the initial session of the week, stocks receding materially under the persistent selling. The decline was attributed to the similar movement in other markets, but French securities were affected equally with international issues listed on the Bourse. Mining stocks and Suez Canal shares resisted the trend better than others. Prices again fell sharply on the Bourse in Tuesday's • session. The disturbing political situation in Germany was cited as one factor in the decline, while unfavorable reports of the trend at New York also exerted some influence. The decline was the largest on the French market in six weeks. A vigorous recovery followed Wednesday, about half the losses of' the preceding session being regained in the course of the day. The start was uncertain, but substantial buying orders appeared as the session progressed and virtually all issues shared in the improvement. Oil stocks showed the largest gains. With reports from other centers again unfavorable Thursday, prices resumed their decline in that session. The downward movement was slow but steady, and at the end the figures were at or close to the lows of Tuesday. The trend at Paris was favorable in early dealings yesterday, and a late reaction wiped out only part of the gains. After an uncertain opening, Monday, prices on the Berlin Boerse rallied smartly. Buying was stimulated by the belief that dissolution of the Reichstag had been avoided. Early rumors that the AlIgemeine Electrizitats Gesellschaft would reduce its joint stock capital were denied and the shares regained their initial loss. Buying spread quickly to other prominent issues, and the upward movement became general. The trend was reversed Tuesday, Sept. 17 1932 mainly as a result of the unexpectedly rapid dissolution of the Reichstag late the previous day. Declines were not large, however, and there were also some good features. An irregular tendency prevailed at Berlin Wednesday. After early weakness prices recovered and most stocks showed small net advances at the end. The uncertain tone was continued Thursday, but on this occasion most issues lost a little ground. Trading was of small proportions, as reports indicated aloofness on the part of the general public. After a firm opening,prices declined slightly on the Bourse yesterday. POSTPONEMENT of a portion, at least, of the payments due the United States Treasury from foreign governments on Dec. 15, next, is indicated by formal notifications presented Wednesday by representatives of Estonia, Latvia and Poland. Although none of the larger debtors has made similar application, reports from several European capitals indicate expectations of other similar events. Postponable principal payments due next December from the three countries that have taken formal advantage of the options in the debt funding agreements for a two-year delay in payments amount to $1,252,000. The respective sums are:Poland,$1,125,000; Estonia, $90,060; Latvia, $37,000. In accordance with the terms of the agreements, Secretary Mills announced, the sums postponed will bear interest at the rate of 3/ 1 2%, payable semi-annually. Only payments of principal are postponable, and the three nations are expected to meet the larger interest payments. Any delay in payment must be preceded by a 90-day notification, unless this requirement is waived by the Secretary of the Treasury. No request was made by the British Government for a partial postponement of the debt instalment due in three months. London could request delay in the payment of £8,000,000, but complete silence was maintained on the subject in the British capital. In a dispatch of Thursday to the New York "Times" it was remarked that since there has been no request for postponement, the natural assumption would be that the British intend to pay in December. "But the truth of the matter is not so simple," the report adds. "The British are placing vague but unmistakable reliance upon a general war debts moratorium, which they somehow expectfrom Washington after the election. Its basis, they hope, will be the general economic situation, which is so vastly different from that of 1923, when the agreement was signed. If some 'accident' occurs and payment is demanded by Washington, the British will be prepared to pay next December's installment by borrowing." There is no question regarding the December payment due from France, as only interest is to be paid at that time and no postponement of the sum can be requested under the debt funding agreement. There were negotiations late last week in Washington between Dr. Rudolph Leitner, the German Charge d'Affaires, and Secretary Mills, looking toward postponement of the German payment of 33,050,000 marks due on Sept. 30, but no conclusions were announced. Secretary Mills merely indicated, a dispatch to the New York "Herald Tribune" said, that no formal request had been made by Germany to waive the 90-day notification clause. It is considered unlikely in Washington, the report added, that Germany will pay the sum due, as she is beset by internal Volume 135 Financial Chronicle financial difficulties and has made arrangements to delay the claims of other creditors. HERE will be no direct and confidential negotiations between the French and German Governments on the question of armaments or the German demand for equality with other world Powers in armament status. So much has been made plain by the French reply to the German memorandum of Aug. 29, in which private conversations were suggested. The French rejoinder was handed to the Berlin Government last Sunday and made available in full text the following day. It challenges the German contentions that the methods and results of the General Disarmament Conference are inadequate,and holds that only the Council of the League of Nations can deal with the German request. The Paris Government, accordingly, declines the application for private discussions. Beyond a sharper and clearer definition of this issue between France. and Germany, little has apparently been gained by this diplomatic exchange. The British Government, fully informed of the course of the exchange, attempted last Saturday to mediate. Prime Minister .MacDonald suggested to France, it is understood, that the British, French, Italian and Polish Governments should consult and decide upon a joint policy toward the German request. This suggestion likewise was rejected by the French Government. With the issue now raised more sharply than ever, it is clear that international discussions of armaments will be more prominent in the future than they have been in the past, and possibly less amicable. The French reply to the German memorandum was viewed widely as a notification to Berlin that any modification by Germany of her armaments status would not only violate the Versailles treaty, but also make it impossible to bring about eventual general disarmament. Emphatic denial was made of the German contention that the General Disarmament Conference results will prove insufficient. "It is scarcely necessary to remark," the French note said, "that this opinion is anticipatory and is not authorized by a just appreciation of the efforts already made." In order to justify this statement, the French note recalls that when it appeared in June that the efforts of all but one of the conference commissions "had produced very insufficient results," the French negotiators tried to augment them by means of negotiations engaged in under the authority of the bureau of the conference. In future studies, the note adds, "France intends to associate herself in sincerity and in a liberal spirit" in negotiations designed to permit the establis hment of the German armaments status. The French Government again proclaimed, in its note, its ardent desire to lighten the burden of armaments now resting on all peoples, and expressed a determination to proceed along the path of disarmament to the fullest extent made possibl e by the development of "guarantees in the general organization of peace." Going beyond the text of the German note, the French rejoinder referred to speeches and interviews on German armame nts given by the Reich Defense Minister, General Kurt von Schleicher. "There is no doubt that here we are dealing with re-armament," the note states. Such re-armament would inevitably extend to all the States defeated in the world war, it was re- T 1867 marked, and "it is on that large basis that the armaments race would recommence." Since Germany extended her claims to naval armaments, the whole status of the naval Powers would be affected, the note points out. The negotiations suggested by Germany could not be undertaken without consultation among European powers in accordance with the terms of the recently concluded pact of consultation, it is contended, and they would in any event be dominated by the Versailles treaty provisions. "Thus, the League of Nations is the only judge," the note continues. "France cannot fail in the engagements which she has taken toward the League of Nations, and it is before it that she will expound, if necessary, the reasons which prevent her agreeing to the re-armament of Germany. Finally, since the German Government expresses a desire for peace, in which we associate ourselves, the French Government calls attention to the danger resulting from measures which might provoke sooner or later a return of the armaments race or the re-awakening of militarism. At Lausanne, France consented in the general interest to sacrifices which impartial observers have recognized. She thinks that within the existing engagements it is possible for her to work with Germany in a search for a new status which will not be a return to the ancient procedure of preparation for war, but will mark progress in the organization of peace." With this French statement in hand, the German Government quickly made good the threat in its note of August 29 to withdraw from the General Disarmament Conference unless the demand for equality in arms treatment is granted. An official notice was sent by the German authorities Thursday, to Arthur Henderson, chairman of the conference, that Germany would be unable to attend further sessions in such circumstances. This German reaction to the French communication was foreshadowed last Monday when Chancellor Franz von Papen discussed the problem in a radio address to the German people. The French reply, the Chancellor then said, "is not calculated to bring nearer the solution of this serious problem." The Reich demands nothing, he contended, that is not an obvious requirement for a people surrounded by a ring of highly armed nations. Nobody would welcome disarmament more than Germany, if all States would reduce their armaments in accordance with the provisions of the Versailles treaty, he declared. But Geneva decided against disarmament, he added, and it became clear that other States do not wish to apply to themselves the regulations for disarmament applicable to Germany. "It is unbearable for us to be treated any longer as a second-class nation and to continue to stand unprotected amidst nations of the European Continent bristling with arms," the Chancellor asserted. Before the French reply was dispatched to Berlin the contents were communicated to the British Government through M. de Fleuriau, the French Ambassador in London. In order to prevent any unfortunate conjectures on this prelimi nary consultation, a statement was issued by the Foreign Office in London on Sept. 9, in which it was remarked that it was purely for purposes of informa tion. The importance attached to the matter in London was indicated in a dispatch of Sept. 9 to the New York"Times." "Government and diplomatic 1868 Financial Chronicle circles are convinced," this account stated, "that the German demand Jhas raised an issue which unavoidably confronts Western European democracies with the need of deciding whether the principles of peace and good-will expressed in the League Covenant and consolidated by the Briand-Kellogg anti-war pact shall continue to govern international relationships or whether Europe shall become the prey of competitive arming, inevitably leading to a catastrophe similar to that of 1914." It was indicated last Saturday in a further dispatch to the same journal that Prime Minister MacDonald tad; suggested to Premier Herriot of France a consultation on the German demand by the Governments of Britain, France, Italy and Poland. By this method, it was said, Mr. MacDonald hoped to avert the threatened German withdrawal from the General Disarmament Conference. London reports indicated on the following day that Premier Herriot did not view such consultations favorably, as they would have meant deferring the French reply to Germany. Further efforts to insure a successful conclusion of the Disarmament Conference probably will be made by the British Government, it is reported,and constructive proposals may be announced early next week. In Paris also, there were indications this week that a more decided move toward "general and controlled disarmament" may prove acceptable to the French Government. IN FITTING expression of Franco-American amity a huge monument, erected at Meaux to commemorate the battle of the Marne, was presented to France last Saturday as the gift of the American people. Funds for the massive granite statue, 130 feet high, were contributed by 4,000,000 Americans, mostly school children. The American National Committee, of which Thomas W. Lamont is chairman,sponsored the gift, which represents America's acknowledgment of France's gift of the Statue of Liberty. The statue, designed by Frederick MacMonnies and executed by Edmondo Quattrochi, depicts France as a conventional feminine figure, supporting a wounded soldier and calling upon all the nation to face the invader. It was presented by United States Ambassador Walter E. Edge, and accepted in behalf of the French people by Premier Edouard Herriot. Those present at the ceremony included also President Albert Lebrun, Marshal Henri Petain and General John J. Pershing. Ambassador Edge mentioned, in his presentation address, Secretary Stimson's reliance upon public opinion as a definite force in international affairs. "Before us here in this monument is visible evidence that mass opinion will invariably align itself behind a course that is just and a principle that is right, thereby commanding the course of governments," he remarked. Mr.Edge asserted,further, that when the American people see territory overrun "they are aroused,and as this monument testifies, instinctively resolve to throw their moral and, if need be, their material weight on the side of the invaded. Premier Herriot paid graceful tribute to the United States in accepting the gift, and urged unremitting efforts to prevent war. He questioned whether appeals to the highest principles are sufficient to maintain peace. Although "certain dangerous manifestations" are found perturbing in France, Premier Herriot added that his country is sufficiently serene to "address an Sept. 17 1932 appeal of conciliation even to those with whom we have engaged in desperate combat." FFORTS to preserve a semblance of parliamentary government in Germany proved unavailing last Monday, when the newly-elected Reichstag assembled for its first ordinary session. The Reichstag was dissolved with unexpected swiftness by a Presidential decree, presented by Chancellor Franz von Papen, while the Parliament was registering its disapproval of the Junker Cabinet by the overwhelming vote of 513 to 32. The dissolution itself was in accordance with general expectations, as the von Papen Cabinet had been unable to secure the support of the National-Socialist followers of Adolph Hitler in the protracted negotiations preceding the assembling of the Reichstag. Application of the Presidential decree of dissolution was found necessary, however,even before Chancellor von Papen was able to expound his policies, and the sixth Reichstag of the German Republic thus passed into history with breath-taking and unanticipated rapidity. In accordance with the requirements of the Weimar Constitution, a further general election will be held within sixty days, and in many German circles it is believed that the process of election and dissolution will be repeated late this year. President von Hindenburg is said to repose full confidence in the von Papen regime, and the Chancellor and his associates are apparently determined to remain in power either with or without Parliamentary sanction. Officials of the Reichstag called on President von Hindenburg late last week, in accordance with custom. The delegation was informed very briefly by the President, dispatches indicate,that the Reichstag would have to go if it did not yield and accept the present regime. This uncompromising attitude produced a noticeable cooling over the week-end in the ardor of the Nazis for parliamentary battle with the von Papen Cabinet, but no new arrangements resulted. The Reichstag assembled Monday, and was promptly faced by a demand on the part of a Communist leader for a vote on a motion to set aside the recent emergency decrees of the Government and on a resolution of non-confidence. The objections of a single Deputy would have sufficed to prevent this hasty procedure, but there were no objections and a division was ordered by Captain Hermann Goering, the National-Socialist President of the Reichstag. Before the vote could be taken, Chancellor von Papen placed on the table before the Reichstag a decree dissolving the body. Government representatives must be heard at any time, under the Constitution, but Captain Goering preferred to ignore the paper placed before him by the Chancellor, and a division disclosed that 513 Deputies had voted against the Chancellor and his colleagues, while only 32 upheld the regime. The decree of dissolution, previously prepared, stated simply that President von Hindenburg terminated the Parliament "because danger exists that the Reichstag will demand revocation of my emergency decree of Sept. 4." There was some dispute, subsequently, regarding the validity of the respective actions by the Reichstag and the Cabinet. The Government took the view that the adverse vote had no validity as it occurred after the decree of dissolution was presented. Reichstag leaders, on the other hand, maintained that the decree was invalid, owing to the adverse. vote which E Volume 135 Financial Chronicle automatically necessitated resignation of the Cabinet. Reference to the Constitutional provisions quickly showed that the Cabinet view was the correct one, and early plans to proceed with the parliamentary session were promptly abandoned. Captain Goering carried the matter, Tuesday, to the point of addressing a letter to the Reichs President, in which Chancellor von Papen was accused of ignoring the Constitution. President von Hindenburg replied with a stern reminder of the relevant provisions and an admonition to the Reichstag leaders to adhere more closely to legal requirements. It was thus established that the adverse vote had no legal significance and did not necessitate resignation of the Cabinet. Its political significance was never contested. The next general elections in Germany probably will be held early in November, and the new Reichstag will assemble within thirty days thereafter. In the meantime, the Reich will remain under the rule of the Junker Cabinet, backed by Field Marshal von Hindenburg. The regime of Presidential decrees was continued, Wednesday, through the issuance of a proclamation placing all youth organizations in the Reich under the control of the Ministry of the Interior. Physical training is to be given free to such organizations, and the Government appropriated 1,500,000 marks for the purpose. 1869 puted Gran Chaco area, notwithstanding the lack of any formal declarations of war. Conflicting statements by the two Governments have occasioned some doubts regarding the outcome of the battle, which is raging around Fort Boqueron. This key position on the Chaco front was held by Paraguayan troops until July 31, when the Bolivians took it in a surprise attack. Paraguayan forces launched a determined attack on the fort late last week, and both sides have continually augmented their effectives. Recent reports indicate that between 4,000 and 5,000 men are engaged on either side. Reserves are being called to the colors by both nations, Bolivia calling out 18,000 men of the 1927 to 1929 classes, while Paraguay is said to have called 15,000 men to arms. Although the course of the Boqueron battle is in doubt, dispatches from neutral points suggest that Bolivian troops remain in possession of the disputed fort. Urgent efforts were again made by the Committee of Neutral Nations in Washington to prevent a formal and protracted conflict. Immediate cessation of hostilities was suggested in identical notes dispatched to the two Governments Wednesday, this end to be achieved by the withdrawal of troops to ten kilometers behind the lines then occupied. The result of this appeal remains to be determined, but there is hope in Washington that it will prove effective, as earlier communications from both contestants indicated that they were disposed to•a peaceful settlement. Political unsettlement continues to prevail, meantime,in a number of other South American countries. An unexpected overturn occurred in Chile, Tuesday, when the Socialist regime of Provisional President Carlos G. Davila was forced to resign under pressure from military groups. Airplanes were again used effectively in this revolt, the threat of an aerial bombardment proving sufficient to force the resignation of the Government heads. Col. Arturo Merino Beni- • tez, chief of the Chilean air force, organized the movement,it is said,and when it succeeded,he placed General Bartolome Blanche in the office of Chief Magistrate. Dissension promptly broke out within the revolutionary group, and Col. Merino Benitez attempted a further aviation mutiny against the new regime. In this he was frustrated, as ground forces at the numerous Chilean airports remained loyal to General Blanche and the rebellious air corps was finally captured and imprisoned Thursday. The revolution in the Brazilian State of Sao Paulo is occasioning severe fighting between loyal forces and. the rebel troops, and both sides claimed gains this week. There were reports of Constitutionalist uprisings in three other Brazilian States, but they remained unconfirmed. The revolt in Ecuador which developed two weeks ago around the Presidential post has been terminated and arrangements made for Presidential elections, to be held Oct.30 and 3L OUR months of debate on the agrarian reform bill were concluded by the Cortes at Madrid, Sept. 9, when a measure was passed expropriating the vast land holdings of the Spanish nobility and handing them over to those who till the soil. This reform was one of the cardinal aims of the revolutionary movement, which resulted in the overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of the Spanish Republic. In a Madrid dispatch to the New York Times it is described as "perhaps the most far-reaching measure of social reform enacted outside of Russia since the war." Indemnities are to be paid the Spanish grandees and other owners of latifundia only on the improvements on which the investm ent has not been realized. The reforms are to become effective at the end of this month. It is remarke d in the "Times" report that Minister of Agriculture Marcelino Domingo expects within two months to create administrative offices in the form of an Institut e of Agrarian Reform. "Lands expropriated with indemnity will be paid for partly in cash and partly in agrarian bonds amortizable in 50 years and bearing 5% interest," the dispatch continues. "Owners of agrarian bonds will be permitted to sell not more than one-tenth of their holdings. Cash payment s are to range from 1 to 20%, according to the holder's annual income,and the Government will set aside not less than 50,000,000 pesetas annually to meet them. Persons eligible to receive expropriated lands include farm laborers who have nolands of their own and land owners paying less than 50 pesetas tax annuall y and who cultivate less than 10 acres of non ELATIONS between Japan and her vassal Man-irrigated land or less than one acre of irrigated land." churian State of Manchukuo were raised to a This measure was passed with only 19 dissenting votes, formal plane,Thursday,through signature of a treaty and the Cortes adjourned immediately thereaft er. at Changchun, the Manchukuo capital, which carIn addition to dealing a crushing blow against the ried with it Japanese recognition of the new country. nobility, the Government hopes by this redistribution This action was expected, as Japanese statesmen of land to benefit the peasants and increase agricul- have declared publicly on several occasions that rectural production. ognition would be extended the Changchun regime headed by the Regent, Pu Yi, and Premier Cheng IGHTING on a large scale has developed between Hsiao-hsu. The treaty was signed in elaborate cereBolivian and Paraguayan troops in the dismonies by the Premier and General Nobuyoshi Muto, F R F • 1870 Financial Chronicle representing the Emperor of Japan. Japan and her subjects receive all the treaty rights which the Nanking Government long disputed with Tokio. The document also provides for co-operation in the maintenance of joint national security, and Japan receives the right to station all troops she desires in Manchukuo. In an address at the ceremony, General Muto remarked that Japan and Manchukuo are interdependent and are bound to stand or fall together. "Manchukuo is willing to respect international good faith and observe the open door and equal opportunity," he continued. "Regarding the abolition of extraterritoriality and the revision of treaties opening the interior to foreigners, Manchukuo is making preparations by appointing committees and is manifesting her intention to solve her international problems in a spirit of conciliation, instead of resorting to one-sided abolition." There were no comments in Washington on the Japanese recognition of the new State. The Chinese Nationalist Government protested the recognition and defensive treaty in a series of notes sent to world capitals, Thursday.Japan was accused in these notes of violating resolutions of the League Assembly and the spirit of the League Covenant,as well as the NinePower treaty. The League of Nations was urged by Nanking to place in force immediately an international economic blockade against Japan. The Tokio Government communicated with the League of Nations late last week, requesting that body to delay formal consideration of the report submitted by the Manchurian investigating commission of the League, headed by the Earl of Lytton. Delay in publication of the report for a period of four to six weeks, until Japan has had time to draft a statement of her own, also was requested. It was indicated in Geneva, Sept. 9, that these requests probably will be granted. The situation in Manchuria itself shows no improvement, as Chinese guerilla forces are waging continual and ever bolder warfare against all foreigners and especially the Japanese. Four train wrecks were caused by these irregulars last Sunday alone, and in one of the wrecks more than 100 persons were reported killed or injured, while about 600 were robbed. HERE have been no changes this week in the discount rate of any of the foreign central banks. Rates are 10% in Greece; 83/2% in Bulgaria; 7% in Rumania, Portugal and Lithuania; 63/2% in Spain and in Finland;6% in Colombia and in Austria; 53/2% in Estonia; 5% in Germany, Italy, Hungary and Czechoslovakia; 432% in Chile; 4.38% in Japan; 4% in Norway, Denmark, Danzig and India; 33/2% in Sweden, Belgium and in Ireland; 23/2% in France and in Holland, and 2% in England and in Switzerland. In the London open market discounts for short bills on Friday were Y3 as against %@11-16 on Friday of last week, and 4@11-16% for three months' bills as against 11-16@%% on Friday of last week. Money on call in London on Friday was %%. At Paris the open market rate continues at 1% and in Switzerland at 13/2%. T Sept. 17 1932 increased £5,315,000 while other deposits fell off £1,819,737. Of the latter amount £1,679,292 was from bankers' accounts and £140,445 was from other accounts. The proportion of reserve to liability is at 38.94% in comparison with 37.63% a week ago and 48.02% last year. Loans on Government securities increased £930,000 and those on other securities decreased £531,854. The latter consists of discounts and advances and securities which fell off £221,530 and £310,324 respectively. The discount rate did not change from 2%. Below we furnish a comparison of the different items for five years: BANK OF ENGLAND'S COMPARATIVE STATEMENT. 1931 1932 1930 1929 1928 Sept. 14 Sept. 16 Sept. 17 Sept. 18 Sept. 19 Circulation a 362.283,000 351,617.567 357,767,920 361855,509 Public deposits 12,933,000 16,573,649 8,933,51718,588,618 Other deposits 122,983,846 108,895,725 99,093,531 99,442,701 Bankers'accounts 89,827.311 58.437,169 65,307,729 63,344,434 Other accounts 33.156,535 50,458,556 33,785,802 36,097,767 Gov't securities 70,862,000 49,390.906 38,766,247 73,781,855 Other securities._ 30,353,061 34,108,625 27,785.787 27,481,309 Disc.& advances.. 12,052,097 8,320,794 5.376.536 3,298,964 Securities 18,300,964 25,787.831 22,409,251 24,182,345 Reserve notes & coin 52,936,000 60,262,685 59.742,841 35,065,491 Coln and bullion 140,221,715 136,880,252 157,510,761 136,921,000 Propor.of res. to lia. 38.94% 48.02% 55.30% 29.70% Bank rate 3% 2% 44% % 133,772,950 15,887,713 100,801,540 28,064,800 44,898,746 62,057,292 176,080.242 53j.% 454% a On Nov.29 1928 the fiduciary currency was amalgamated with Bank of England note issues, adding at that time £234,199,000 to the amount of Bank of England notes outstanding. HE Bank of France statement for the week ended Sept. 9 records an increase in gold holdings of 169,309,837 francs. The total of gold now stands at 82,400,237,395 francs, in comparison with 58,576,796,780 francs last year and 47,542,834,197 francs the previous year. A decrease is shown in credit balances abroad of 345,000,000 francs and in bills bought abroad of 2,000,000 francs. Notes in circulation contracted 703,000,000 francs, reducing the total of notes outstanding to 80,681,398,105 francs, as compared with 78,198,303,760 francs a year ago and 72,875,317,725 francs two years ago. French commercial bills discounted and creditor current accounts register large gains, namely, 1,213,000,000 francs and 1,723,000,000 francs, while advances against securities declined 39,000,000 francs. The proportion of gold on hand to sight liabilities stands this week at 76.46%, in comparison with 55.49% a year ago and 52.69% the year before. Below we furnish a comparison of the various items for three years: T BANK OF FRANCE'S COMPARATIVE STATEMENT. Status as of Changes Sept. 9 1932. Sept. 111931. Sept. 12 1930. for Week. Francs. Francs. Francs. Francs. Gold holdings—am 169,309,837 82,400.237,395 58,576,796.780 47,542,834,197 Credit bale. abr'd-Dee. 345.000,000 2,980,657,792 15,803,143,945 6,839,305,471 a French commer'l bills discounted-Inc.1213,000,000 3.946.731,424 4,496,120,547 4,001,486,574 bBills bo't abroad_Dec. 2,000,000 2.079.798,887 12,981,336,362 18,767,579,560 Adv. agt. securs__Deo. 39.000.000 2,806,646,423 2,790,727,849 2,803,691,035 Note circulatlon__Dec. 703,000,000 80,681,398,105 78,198,303,760 72,875.317,725 Cred. curr. acc'ts_Inc.1723,000.000 27,093,981,856 27,361,002.170 17,363,996,788 Proportion of gold on hand to sight 7548% 55.49% 52.69% liabilities 0.57% Dec. a Includes bills purchased In France. b Includes bills discounted abroad. New York money market retained its easy HE tone this week, even the heavy mid-month turnover failing to produce any perceptible tightening. Funds were in over-supply at all times, while the demand was relatively small. Call loans on the New York Stock Exchange were 2% for all transactions, whether renewals or new loans. There were slight HE Bank of England statement for the week variations in the unofficial "street" market, where 4% from Monday ended Sept. 14 shows a gain of £264,000 in call loans were arranged at 1M@13 1 @1% Thursday bullion and as this was attended by a contraction of to Wednesday, incl., and at 13, £2,838,000 in circulation, reserves rose £3,102,000. and yesterday. Time loans were unchanged throughThe Bank now holds £140,221,715 of gold in com- out. Brokers'loans against stock and bond collateral parison with £136,880,252 last year. Public deposits increased $62,000,000 in the week to Wednesday T T Volume 135 Financial Chronicle 1871 has been from 3.499' down to 3.4714, compared 5 a week with a range of between 3.473/ and 3.49% ago. Considerable buying of sterling was reported in Paris both for French account and for that of other Continental countries, particularly Switzerland. Sterling is reported in demand in Amsterdam and in the Scandinavian markets. The chief interest in the foreign exchange market now centers EALING in detail with call loan rates on the about the steady advance in the dollar as against Stock Exchange from day to day, 2% was the all other currencies. The gold currencies show ruling quotation all through the week both for new especial weakness with respect to the dollar, and loans and renewals. The time money market has French francs, Swiss francs, Holland guilders, been at an absolute standstill, no sales having been and the Belgian unit all give signs of dipping below reported during the week. Rates are quoted nomi- gold parity and rather strong indications that before nally at 1@,13/2% for all dates. The demand for prime long there will be a gold flow from Europe to New commercial paper has been very light this week. York. This week the Federal Reserve Bank of New There have been few inquiries and a dearth of high York reports gold arriving in New York from India, class paper. Quotations for choice names of four to Canada, England, Mexico, Switzerland, and Latin six months maturity are 2@231,%. Names less well America, besides a rather heavy decrease in gold known are 23/2%. On some very high class 90-day earmarked for foreign account which, it is believed, paper occasional transactions at 2% are noted. represented for the most part French and Swiss earmarked stock in New York. It is reported in reliable DRIME bankers' acceptances have been in fairly quarters that there is a steady flow of funds to the good demand this week, though the supply of New York investment markets. As regards the gold bills is still very small and insufficient to meet the flow to this side, two features are of especial imrequirements. Rates are unchanged. The quota- portance. Shortly after September a year ago a tions of the American Acceptance Council for bills great deal of American gold coin began to move to 3 % Europe for hoarding purposes. In the last few weeks up to and including three months are Y% bid, 4 asked; for four months, 1% bid, and Y% asked; these gold coins have been coming back, and this for five and six months, 13i% bid and 13/8% asked. week the movement was greatly accentuated by the The bill buying rate of the New York Reserve Bank receipt on Wednesday of approximately $32,500 of is 1% for 1-90 days; 13/% for 91-120 days and 13/2% American gold coin from Switzerland, which is the for maturities from 121-180 days. The Federal first shipment of gold to be received from Switzerland Reserve banks show a trifling increase in their in recent years. American gold coin has been reholdings of acceptances, the total Sept. 14 being ceived in the last few weeks from England, France, $33,726,000, as compared with $33,585,000 a week and Holland also. On Tuesday of this week more ago. Their holdings of acceptances for foreign than $100,000 gold coin came from Holland. correspondents decreased further, dropping from Another notable feature of the return of confi$44,973,000 to $42,437,000. Open market rates for dence in the dollar is the rather heavy direct imporacceptances are as follows: tation of gold from Bombay to New York. In recent SPOT DELIVERY. weeks several shipments of Indian gold have been —180 .•••-151:1 Days— —120 Dails Bid. Asked. Bkl. received in New York. The present item consists Asked. Bid. Asked. 134 Prime eligible bills 114 114 1 134 % of $1,576,000. More than $3,000,000 more left —90Days— —60Days— —30Days— Bid. Asked Bid. Asked. Bid. Bombay on Saturday for New York, and the moveAsked. Prime eligible bills 34 34 34 Si 74 44 ment is expected to reach large proportions. It is FOR DELIVERY WITHIN THIRTY DAYS. Eligible member banks 134% bid of course well known that gold has been moving Eligible non-member banks 134% bid out of India with great regularity since Great Britain Sept. 21 of last year, HERE have been no changes this week in the abandoned the gold standard on weakness in dollar persistent rediscount rates of the Federal Reserve Banks. but because of the of June, this metal middle the about The following is the schedule of rates now in effect exchange until for Continental London in sold part most for the various classes of paper at the different was for the quarters that reliable in estimated is. It account. Reserve Banks: gold standard the abandoned Britain Great since DISCOUNT RATES OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS ON ALL CLASSES has found gold AND MATURITIES OF ELIGIBLE PAPER. Indian of $300,000,000 than more for all pracwhere hoards, Asiatic its from way Rate in its Date Effect on Federal Reserve Bank. Previous Established. Sept. 16. tical purposes it was lost for ages, so far as its value Rate. 334 Oct. 17 1931 Boston 234 as a basis of currency and credit was concerned. June 24 1932 New York 234 3 334 Oct. 22 1931 Philadelphia 3 There is no way of knowing how much gold may 334 Oct. 24 1931 Cleveland _ 3 314 Jan. 25 1932 Richmond 4 be released from the Indian hoards so long as London Nov. 1.'^31 334 3 Atlanta June 25 190234 Chicago 314 is off the gold standard and the metal can be sold Oct. 22 1931 334 214 Bt. Louis 12 314 Sept. 1930 1 Minneapolis at a profit by the natives of India. It must be 314 Oct. 23 1931 s Kansas City 314 Jan. 28 1932 4 Dallas remembered that the rupee is fixed to the pound Oct. 21193! 314 234 San Francisco on the basis of is. 6d. per rupee. The purchasing TERLING exchange in all its main aspects has price of gold by the Bank of England, when sterling displayed no new features since last week. is on the gold basis is 84s. 6d. At present gold is The market has been quiet in New York but in other selling in London at from 118s. to 119s. per ounce. centers sterling is in greater demand. The range This represents a handsome profit in silver to the has been from 3.493 down to 3.473' for bankers' Indian native. Some authorities believe that before 3 sterling is again anchored to gold, it is possible that sight bills, compared with a range of between 3.47% $1,000,000,000 may find its way into the gold backcable range for The week. transfers last and 3.493/ night, according to the report of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. This is the largest increase reported in a similar period in more than a year. Gold movements reported for the same weekly period consisted of imports of $4,958,000 and a net decrease of $17,429,000 in the stock of gold held earmarked for foreign account. There were no exports. D T S 1872 Financial Chronicle Sept. 17 1932 ing of the occidental world from this source. It is During the week approximately $542,000 of gold generally believed, now that the dollar is firmer, was received at San Francisco from China. that American bankers will draw heavily upon BomCanadian exchange continues at a severe discount, bay and whenever possible will disregard the open and while not so much in favor of Montreal this market gold in London. wgek as last, is stronger than the market was inclined Despite the fact that confidence in the dollar is to expect at this season. In some quarters it is universally restored and that there is a consistent believed that Canadian funds might be stronger flow of funds from other centers to this side, it must than they are, as Canadian wheat shipments are not be imagined that there is any lessening of confi- extremely heavy, but for the fact that Canadian dence in the position of London as a world financial investors in the New York security markets were center. Funds are steadily flowing into London for under the necessity of sending funds here. On investment and the position of the British Treasury Saturday last Montreal funds were at a discount of and of the Bank of England is very much stronger 9 5-16%, on Monday at 9 5-16%, on Tuesday at than at any time since the abandonment of the gold 9 11-16%, on Wednesday at 9 %,on Thursday at 8 standard. The flow of funds to London and the 98%,and on Friday at 93%. abundance of money there is clearly indicated by Referring to day-to-day rates, sterling exchange open market money rates. Both the British Treasury on Saturday last was firm in a quiet market. Bankand the Bank of England continue to buy gold in the ers' sight was 3.49 @ 3.49/ 1 1,; cable transfers, 3.4934 open market, working through the Exchange Stabili- @ 3.4954. On Monday the market was quiet and zation Account, the operations of which are seldom sterling easier. The range was 3.484 @ 3.48k fully revealed. Call money against bills in London for bankers' sight and 3.48 3-16 @ 3.48% for cable was in abundant supply during the week at M% down transfers. On Tuesday exchange on London was to 34%. Two months bills are quoted 4% to 11-16%, steady. Bankers' sight was 3.47% © 3.483/2; cable three-months bills at 4% to 11-16%, four-months transfers 3.47 15-16 © 3.485 %. On Wednesday the bills Yi% to 1%, six-months bills 1 1-16%. These pound was under pressure. The range was 3.479 rates are all fractionally lower than a week ago. © 3.483/ for bankers' sight and 3.47% © 3.485 4 Despite the fact that money is easy in London and for cable transfers. On Thursday the market was that open market rates are far below the Bank rate dull with sterling easier. The range was 3.473 @ the consensus of opinion in banking circles seems 3.47% for bankers' sight and @ 3.47% for. 3.4754 to be that there will be no further reduction in the cable transfers. On Friday there was further ease; Bank of England rate of discount, which continues the range was 3.474 for bankers' sight at 23/2%. This week gold seems to have sold in and 3.4731 @ 3.474 for 3.4754 cable transfers. Closing London at from 118s. to 118s. 6d. per ounce. On quotations on Friday were for demand and Thursday the Bank of England bought £128,376 3.4732 for cable transfers 3.4754 . Commercial sight bills in gold bars. This week the Bank of England shows finished at 3.47; 60-day bills at 3.464; 90 day bills an increase in gold holdings of 064,040, the total at 3.4538; documents for payment (60 days) at standing on Sept. 14 at £140,221,715, which compares 3.464, and seven-day grain bills at 3.469. Cotton with £136,880,252 a year ago. and grain for payment closed at 3.47. At the Port of New York the gold movement for the week ended Sept. 14, as reported by the Federal XCHANGE on the Continental countries is in all Reserve Bank of New York, consisted of imports of important respects unchanged from last week. $4,958,000, of which 81,576,000 came from India, The gold units show a tendency to weakness. Ger$1,513,000 from Canada, $685,000 from England, man marks are of course largely nominal, as foreign $490,000 from Mexico, $245,000 from Holland, exchange and all German fiscal matters are under the $100,000 from Switzerland, $349,000 chiefly from drastic control of the Reichsbank working through Latin American countries. There were no gold government decrees. The reichsma rk is prominent exports. The Reserve Bank reported a decrease of this week because of a stateme nt carried in recent $17,429,000 in gold earmarked for foreign account. Berlin dispatches that in reliable German quarters In tabular form the gold movement at the Port of bankers received information that the majority of the New York for the week ended Sept. 14, as reported directors of the Bank for Internat ional Settlements by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was had agreed to an immediate reductio n in the Reichsas follows: bank rate of discount. It is expected that the bank's GOLD MOVEMENT AT NEW YORK, SEPT. 8-SEPT. 14, INCL. decision will be announced early in the coming week Imports. and that the Reichsbank rate will in all probability Exports. $1,576,000 from India be reduced from the present extremely high level of 1,513,000 from Canada 685,000 from England 5% to 4%. This matter has been under considera490,000from Mexico 245,000from Holland tion for months, as the Reichsbank rate and interest None 100,000from Switzerland rates in Berlin have been clearly out of line with 349,000 chiefly from Latin American countries interest rates in all other important centers. In a $4,958,000 total recent statement the Deutsche Bank und DiscontoNet Change in Gold Earmarked for Foreign Account. Gesellschaft pointed out that a lasting improvement Decrease $17,429,000. in prices would not directly ease the situation for The above figures are for the week ended Wednes- Germany. The bank said:"It is certain that the high day evening. On Thursday $389,800 of gold was surpluses of the German balance of trade during the received from England. There were no exports of past two years were due in large measure to the fact the metal on that day. Gold earmarked for foreign that our imports of foreign raw material s and foodaccount decreased $16,393,200, yesterday $278,100 of stuffs were enormously cheapened by the decline of gold was received from Mexico. There were no their prices, while at the same time the prices of our exports of the metal yesterday but gold held ear- manufactured goods fell at a much slower rate. marked for foreign account decreased $3,307,300. Assuming that the rise in prices so essential for the E Volume 135 Financial Chronicle 1873 not to the same extent, in Paris. improvement of world trade actually takes place and sometimes, though rather than seasonal pressure, t, movemen affects all raw materials as well as finished goods, it It is this of weakness to both these tone the gives would not only improve the returns from German in- which that much of the French believed is It es. currenci dustrial exports but at the same time and to an even disposed of in recent been had here ed earmark gold greater extent make our imports from abroad dearer. and that it has Holland and and Switzerl to weeks material The recovery of the countries producing raw franc, but the the not only would, of course, benefit Germany's foreign trade as thus helped to support currencies vian rates. The Scandina a whole, but undoubtedly the fact that German in- Swiss and Dutch y these generall but firmness y to dustry is largely a finishing one would delay the are showing a tendenc which with sterling, in changes effects of the international improvement in this units fluctuate with the pesetas Spanish allied. closely currency they are country. to show the steadiness which has been in prescontinue or under less more been have francs French past. The Bank of Spain sure during the past few weeks, and it is reported evidence for several months es of gold to its reserves quantiti small add in reliable quarters that the Bank of France has been seems to the same time has manat and week, to week from frequently called upon to support the franc. At so that the market is on, circulati down hold to normally aged this time, it must be recalled, exchange prospect of inflation goes against Europe and in favor of the United convinced that there is little or no had been enterStates. At present this seasonal pressure against in Spain, though fears in this regard the franc and other European currencies is ac- tained until about a year ago. Bankers' sight on Amsterdam finished on Friday centuated by the flow of foreign funds to the New of last week; York investment market. The heavy decrease in at 40.133/2, against 40.14 on Friday 2, and com40.143/ against 40.14, earmarked gold at the Federal Reserve Bank is gen- cable transfers at Swiss 40.09. against 40.11, at bills erally believed to be due to sales of earmarked stock mercial sight 19.303/i at and checks for 4 19.303 at largely for the purpose of supporting the franc in francs closed and 19.29. Copthis and various other foreign exchange markets. for cable transfers, against 19.289 and cable transat finished 18.033/ checks Paris bankers expect that as confidence revives in enhagen 18.08. Checks and 18.073" against 18.04, London and New York considerable foreign funds fers at transfers at cable and 17.813/ at closed Sweden which have sought refuge in France during the past on while checks on 17.903/2; and 17.90 against emfor 17.82, few years will seek more profitable outlets at transfers cable ployment away from France, as money rates there Norway finished at 17.49 and pesetas Spanish 17.50. continue excessively easy and the opportunities for 17.493/2, against 17.493/ and bills and at 8.103/i sight bankers' for 8.10 at in Paris deposit closed on funds of profitable employment 2. 8.043/ and 8.04 are neither numerous nor attractive. This week for cable transfers, against the Bank of France shows an increase in gold holdXCHANGE on the South American countries is ings of fr. 169,309,837, the total standing on Sept.9 only nominally quoted as these currencies are at fr. 82,400,237,395, which compares with fr. official exchange control, from mora58,576,796,780 on Sept. 11 1931, and with fr. 28,935,- suffering from a combination of both causes together 000,000 when the unit was stabilized in June, 1928. toria or from disturbances in some of the The London check rate on Paris closed at 88.65 on with serious political is considerable agitation in ArgenFriday of this week, against 89.06 on Friday of last republics. There moratorium on external and internal week. In New York sight bills on the French centre tina for a general in the circulation. The 4 against 3.91 9-16 on debts, and for an increase finished on Friday at 3.913 Hueyo, insists that the Friday of last week; cable transfers at 3.91%, against Finance Minister, Alberto continue to be disshall debt 3.91 11-16, and commercial sight bills at 3.914, service on the foreign exchange wh