Best time to go to Yekaterinburg Average weather of Yekaterinburg, Russia

When is the best time to go to Yekaterinburg?

When is the best time to go to Yekaterinburg? Here's some information to help you in your decision:

The best months for good weather in Yekaterinburg are May, June, July and August

On average, the warmest months are June, July and August

The coldest months are January and February

The rainiest months are April, June, July and August

Annual weather in Yekaterinburg

To get all the information about the climate and weather in Yekaterinburg for a specific month, scroll down below the table and choose a month from the tabs.

Month Our opinion January -16°C/-11°C 30mm very bad weather February -14°C/-9°C 27mm very bad weather March -8°C/-2°C 48mm very bad weather April 2°C/8°C 76mm very bad weather May 11°C/18°C 63mm good weather June 16°C/23°C 85mm good weather July 17°C/25°C 85mm good weather August 15°C/23°C 89mm good weather September 8°C/15°C 64mm tolerable weather October 1°C/6°C 61mm very bad weather November -6°C/-2°C 44mm very bad weather December -12°C/-9°C 32mm very bad weather

Weather detail month by month in Yekaterinburg

Weather and climate in Yekaterinburg

Yekaterinburg enjoys a warm-summer humid continental climate (without dry season) in accordance with the Köppen-Geiger classification. The yearly average maximum temperature in Yekaterinburg is 7°C (ranging from -11°C in january to 25°C in july). Annual rainfall is 698mm, with a minimum of 27mm in february and a maximum of 89mm in august.

Between january and april the climate is very unfavorable. the thermometer goes up to 8°C°C and it rains in april about 76mm.

Between may and august the climate is favorable. In average, on the morning it is 15°C and you can expect to have 89mm of rainfall/month during this period.

In the month of september the climate is okay. The record temperature this month is 28°C.

Between the months of october and december the climate is very bad. the thermometer goes up to -9°C°C and it rains in december about 32mm.

Charts: temperature and rainfall in Yekaterinburg

In the charts below, you can see the following seasonal norms for the city of Yekaterinburg: the minimum and maximum outdoor temperature, the risk and amount of monthly rainfall, daily average sunshine, and relative humidity for each month of the year.

Outside temperature

Precipitation (rainfall)

Daily sunshine hours

Humidity

Peak visitor numbers and tourist seasons in Yekaterinburg

Find out when Yekaterinburg has its high tourist season (the period when the influx of tourists is highest) and off-peak tourist season using our data and figures.

Tourist seasons in Yekaterinburg

Very low season in Yekaterinburg

The months with the lowest number of tourists are: January and February.

Low season in Yekaterinburg

The months with low numbers of tourists are: March, April, October, November and December.

High season in Yekaterinburg

The number of visitors to Yekaterinburg is high in: May, June and September.

Peak season in Yekaterinburg

The largest number of tourists visiting Yekaterinburg is during: July and August.

Figure: Visitor index for Yekaterinburg month by month

Best time for low prices in Yekaterinburg

Average prices of hotels in Yekaterinburg month by month

Generally, December is the month with the lowest hotel prices in Yekaterinburg. So this is a great time to save on your holiday! In contrast, July is statistically the most expensive month of the year for hotels.

Find the best price for your hotel room

Other cities and places near Yekaterinburg

Best time to go to Russia

Chargement en cours