¶ Atlantis Sports - Underwater Hockey Wiki

What is Underwater Hockey??

Underwater hockey is a sport played in a pool that ranges from two to three meters (six to nine feet) deep. The puck is a similar size as an ice hockey puck, but weighs about 1.3kg (~2.8lbs) so it stays at the bottom of the pool. Players wear mask, fins and a snorkel and have to dive down to the bottom to advance the puck. Their sticks are short and one-handed and are the only thing that can legally move the puck. The goal is a three meter long trough that sits on the bottom of the pool at either end of the playing area.

¶ This Wiki:

is the beginning of a comprehensive guide to coaching, organizing, and playing UWH.

is intended to take a “deep dive” into each of the various aspects of playing UWH and what coaches can do to help players develop the skills.

provides reference materials for players and coaches, but is not intended to be a direct pool-side resource.

The information contained here is a source to obtain a deeper understanding of different aspects of UWH.

A supplemental lesson plan will be developed to help with the actual coaching.

The main sections are:

Players

Individual Fundamentals (Moving in the Water, Puck Handling)

Evasive Maneuvers (curling, deep-v, figure 6)

Tackling Maneuvers (tackles, back-picks, redirecting opponents)

Individual Drills (to aid in developing these individual skills)

Teams

Teamwork (pinches, back-picks, 2 on 1’s)

Formations (2-3-1, 3-3, 2-2-2)

Teamwork Drills (to aid in developing these teamwork skills)

The Game (How the game is played, how to tell your teammates vs opponents, what is a foul and what happens after a foul)

Gear/Setup (gloves, sticks, pucks, goals, walls)

Protocols (advantage pucks, equal pucks, penalty shots)

Understanding Fouls (explaining the different fouls with examples, used as a guide for referees and for players)

Fitness & Training (workout dos and don’ts, example training programs)

Workout types and Cross-Training

Water Workouts (Swim Endurance Conditioning, Kicking Power Conditioning, Breath Hold)

Club Organization

Practices (best days/times for practices, creating a social environment, “house rules”)

Recruitment (how to get and keep new players)