What? Really underwater hockey?

Underwater Hockey is a fast-paced, fun-filled sport for athletes of all ages. Unlike its on-ice counterpart, underwater hockey is a non-contact sport. While some jostling and bumping may occur, especially in competitive play, contact is generally not allowed, and focus is on fitness, teamwork and finesse.

Underwater hockey is played in a swimming pool by two teams of up to 10 players each (6 active and 4 substitutes). The puck is made of lead, with a brightly-colored plastic coating. Players use a short stick to push, pull and pass the puck in an attempt to get it into the opposing teams' goal located at the end of the pool. Players wear fins, masks and snorkels (but no SCUBA tanks) and make repeated dives to the bottom of the pool where the play occurs. The intensity of the pace generally makes long dives impractical, so the most effective strategies generally involve short, explosive efforts, precision teamwork and timing, and rapid cycling of all 10 players through the 6 active positions. There are no goal-keepers or off-sides rules, and goals are often scored on exciting, break-away plays or well-timed 2-against-1 or 3-against-2 attacks.

Join the Portland Underwater Hockey Club !

WHERE? The practices are held at the Aquatic Center of the Mt Hood Community College in Gresham (26000 SE Stark st). The pool is located close to NE Kane Dr and NE 17th St (Directions from I-84 below).

(http://www.mhcc.edu/aquatics.aspx)

The pool is less than 30 minutes car drive from downtown Portland. The 20 bus and the MAX (with some walking or biking) will also get you there. Carpooling is definitely an option. Contact us!

WHEN? For the summer months : Tuesdays at 8:00 PM and until 9:45 PM. During the winter months: Tuesdays at 7:00 PM and until 8:45 PM. For the actual dates and times and cancellations Please double check our calendar and RSVP if you are coming.

WHO? Practices are open to men and women of all ages. We have a core of experienced players that will be guiding the practices and instructing how to play. This core group of regular players is, sometimes, too lazy to RSVP so the meetup.com event numbers does not reflect the actual number of people at practices.

HOW MUCH DOES IT COST? FREE your first time, $10/session after that, and it is cheaper if you commit to coming frequently.

WHAT DO I BRING? Please bring snorkeling gear (fins, snorkel, mask) if you have them. We will try to secure some gear for you to borrow during the practice. We might implement a small gear rental fee after a few practices to cover the costs of buying and replacing the gear.

MORE INFORMATION:

USA UWH

Youtube search: underwater hockey

Colorado UWH club webpage (with lots of info and videos)

DIRECTIONS: The Mt. Hood Community College Aquatic Center is located on the Gresham Campus of Mt. Hood Community College between Division and Stark Streets. From I-84 take exit 17. Follow the Frontage Road to 257th Street and turn right. Follow 257th south, past Stark, to 17th Street and turn left. Take the first left after the soccer field and then left again into the MHCC Aquatic Center parking lot.