Dalvin Cook had only been on campus in Tallahassee, Fla., a couple of days when Devonta Freeman called and told Cook he’d be picking him up soon. Cook was still getting settled into Florida State, a school he had chosen in part because of what Freeman meant to him growing up in the same neighborhood of Miami, and so he was ecstatic to get the call.

It was January 2014. Cook hadn’t even taken his first college course yet. Freeman was only a few days removed from scoring a touchdown that helped Florida State win the last BCS national championship.

Cook figured it would be a great chance to get to hang out and talk shop with Freeman, someone he’d looked up to since eighth grade. They’d had the same coaches growing up and Cook was always told to follow in Freeman’s footsteps. Cook figured they’d grab a bite to eat. Maybe he’d meet a few other teammates, too.

Cook rode shotgun in Freeman’s Dodge Charger. Before they pulled out of the parking lot, Freeman told Cook that he wanted Cook to hear something. Freeman called then-Florida State coach Jimbo Fisher. He put it on speakerphone while it rang.

“I was shocked,” Cook said. “I didn’t know what to do. It was kind of weird a little bit.”

So Cook stayed silent as Freeman started talking. Freeman told Fisher that he’d hired an agent. He was going to declare for the NFL draft.

After the call ended, Freeman turned toward Cook.

“I was like, ‘This is going to be your team next year,’” Freeman said. “He was kind of nervous because he came there to be with me. He always wanted to play with me. But I was just like everything is going to be alright.”

Even though they were separated by only three years, Cook and Freeman never played on the same team together, not at Miami Central High School, which they both attended, and not at Florida State. But while growing up in a neighborhood surrounded by gang violence and few role models, Cook found a mentor in Freeman who helped show Cook a way out of what he calls “the Miami life.”

Now, as each look to begin bounceback seasons, Cook and Freeman will play on the same field for the first time, opening the NFL schedule as opponents Week 1 when the Vikings host the Falcons. But for Cook, it may not have been possible without Freeman.

“He was the blueprint for me,” Cook said.

Freeman was a sophomore in high school when his youth football coach pulled him to the side. The coach wanted to introduce Freeman to Cook. He thought the two running backs ran similar and he wanted Cook to see what was possible.

“He was a small little puppy,” Freeman said. “But one thing about Dalvin was he always listened. He was humble and hard-working and just listened. Every time I told him something he listened. That really drew me to him. Dalvin just kept listening and following the right footsteps. Now he’s a superstar.”

Cook didn’t play high school football his freshman year because Freeman was the established starter and “he was getting all the carries,” Cook said.

Around that time, Cook was just beginning to realize what was possible. Those around him had only ever turned to “the streets,” he said. But Cook that year watched as scholarship offers poured into Freeman before he chose Florida State. Perhaps football could be a way out for him too, Cook thought.

“To see him do that showed that I could do it,” Cook said. “Devonta was really one of the first people I seen accomplish going to college. Once I saw him do it, I was like, ‘Yeah, this can be done. There is hope that we can make it.’ That was pretty much what I got from him going to college and getting drafted.”

Cook followed Freeman as the starting running back at Miami Central, and Freeman followed Cook’s high school career from afar. As Cook climbed recruiting rankings and eventually committed to Florida State, Freeman started talking with Cook more about their shared backgrounds and the footsteps Cook could follow.

“I was looking for people to look up to too because it’s hard when you grow up in a tough area,” Freeman said. “We didn’t really have that growing up in Miami because there was so much gun violence and gangs going on. It’s easy to get sidetracked and follow the Miami life — the gangs and the street life — just because you don’t even know no better.”

When Cook took his official visit to Florida State, Freeman was his host. They talked about the school and how Cook could compete for the starting job as soon as Freeman left. But they also talked about the work that it takes to reach the NFL.

“He just laid it all on the line for me, and I pretty much just ran with it from there,” Cook said.

Freeman was drafted in the fourth round in 2014 and reached two Pro Bowls by the time Cook was drafted in the second round in 2017. But they share an eagerness this season to bounce back from injuries.

Last season, Freeman missed 14 games because of a groin injury that left him on injured reserve. Cook returned last season from a 2017 ACL tear that caused him to miss 12 games — including a Week 13 Vikings-Falcons showdown that otherwise would’ve been his first game against Freeman — then dealt with a lingering hamstring injury that sidelined him for five games. Now both are healthy for Week 1 and Sunday’s opener in Minneapolis.

They’ve been trash-talking on Facetime this week, both excited and amazed that it’ll be their first time sharing a field.

“We’re both eager to get back out there,” Freeman said. “Both of us went to the same high school, same college, we really had the same life coming up. Now to play each other? It’s going to be great.”

Occasionally, Freeman still thinks back to how things had to break just right for him to get where he is. He didn’t have a mentor familiar with the world of college football recruiting or know how to handle the NFL draft process. Certainly didn’t know how to deal with the millions of dollars that follow. So he wants to provide some of that insight to Cook.

“It’s definitely hard,” Freeman said. “You’re a young kid with all these responsibilities and you’ve got this superstar image by the time you’re 19 years old in college. You go through stuff, you’re a target. You got a million people that’s back at home that you want to look out for. People calling you. And you don’t really have a bunch of guidance, at least I didn’t have a bunch of guidance coming up.”

Of course, Cook was one of the top-ranked players out of Florida because of his talent and work ethic, not just because of advice he was given. Still, he remembers that first meeting with Freeman in eighth grade. Back then, he didn’t know how football scholarships worked and didn’t think much about actually playing in the NFL. But he watched closely as Freeman went through it, realizing then that it could be possible for him, too.

“I know the kind of work I put in, know the type of player I am,” Cook said. “But there’s something about seeing a person from where you come from do it and show you that it can be done.”

(Top photo of Dalvin Cook: Hannah Foslien / Getty Images)