Dalvin Cook joined the football team at Miami Central High School in his sophomore season, as he had to wait for fellow professional running back Devonta Freeman to graduate to earn any playing time. By the time he got on the field in his prep career, it was clear that Cook was a top-level prospect. As a senior, Cook rushed for 34 touchdowns and averaged 11 yards per carry.

Cook helped his school win a state class 6A championship with four rushing touchdowns in the title game against the Seffner Armwood Rockets. Rivals had Cook rated as a five-star recruit, which resulted in top-tier college programs all vying for his services. After he had originally selected to go to Clemson to play his college football, Cook changed his mind to Florida, and then again to play for the Florida State Seminoles in January of 2014.

Dalvin Cook was with Florida State University from 2014 to 2016, starting his freshman year in a backfield with Karlos Williams who also went to the NFL. He started his collegiate career with FSU in a game against The Citadel, but made a much bigger impact later in his freshman season. Cook was named the MVP of the ACC Championship Game in 2014, racking up a career-high 177 yards on the ground against Georgia Tech.

In the two years that followed, Cook only provided more of a pop in the running game for the Seminoles. He rushed for 1,691 yards and had 20 total touchdowns in the 2015 season. And 2016 saw Cook earn another 1,765 yards on the ground and 20 total touchdowns. Cook broke Warrick Dunn’s school record for career rushing yardage that year, and Cook was a finalist for that year’s Doak Walker award. Cook opted to skip his senior season and enter the NFL Draft following the team’s Orange Bowl victory over the Michigan Wolverines.

Dalvin Cook was drafted by the Minnesota Vikings with the 41st overall pick in the 2017 NFL Draft. With coach Mike Zimmer prioritizing the running game and defense on the team, Cook found a good fit and was set to be the team’s RB1 from the start. His first game as a pro came on Monday, September 11 of 2017. Cook set the franchise rookie record for rushing in that game with 127 yards.

On Sunday, October 1, 2017, Cook suffered a knee injury against the Detroit Lions. Cook’s MRI revealed that he had suffered a torn ACL and would miss the rest of the season. Cook’s comeback from injury was impressive, as he was ready to play in the first week of the 2018 season. However, Cook dealt with a hamstring injury that season and barely eclipsed 600 rushing yards for the 2018 campaign.

Before the 2019 season, the Vikings drafted Alexander Mattison as an insurance policy for Cook in the backfield. But Cook has been healthy since then. He started the 2019 season with a two touchdown game against the Atlanta Falcons. He broke 1,000 yards in 2019 for the first time in his career. In 2020, Cook has picked up right where he left off, setting a career high with 181 rushing yards in a Week 3 game against the Tennessee Titans. Even with teams like the Arizona Cardinals trading running backs for receiving weapons, Cook has made his value clear at his position.