1. CONCEPT OF ROME2rio AND COUCH SURFING

3. ROME2rio –discover how to get anywhere • Rome2rio is a multimodal transport search engine that launched in April 2011. • Rome2rio based in Melbourne, Australia. • Founders:-Michael Cameron, Bernhard Tschirren • It is organising the world's transport information. • It offer a multi-modal, door-to-door travel search engine that returns itineraries for air, train, coach, ferry, mass transit and driving options to and from any location. • Website:-rome2rio.com

5. Rome2rio Includes:

6. TRANSPORT COVERAGE OVERVIEW • Rome2rio has developed an extensive, purpose built, unique repository of train, bus and ferry routes. • Browse coverage in Europe, North America, South America and Asia Pacific, plus Airlines. • Rome2rio also searches flight schedules for over 670 airlines licensed from OAG Aviation. • Data from Open Street Map is used to provide driving and walking directions for most countries worldwide.

8. Fully fared: Rome2rio announces new point-to-point pricing feature • A trip that starts with a shuttle to the airport, then a flight, a train from the airport to a regional city and finally a taxi to the hotel will be priced down to the final component.

9. Rome2rio grants free access to its API:- Bring multi- modal, visual search to travel sites everywhere • The idea here is to boost adoption of the service, encouraging sites to offer multi-modal travel search. • CEO Rod Cuthbert believes that “any site that’s serious about selling travel in Europe and Asia has to offer multi-modal search sooner or later.”

12. I. ROME2rio Global Connectivity Ranking London,25 May 2016 II. Rome2rio launches onsite bookings for UK rail journeys,9 May 2016 III. Rome2rio's Latest App Launch Reflects Strong DemandFrom Android Users,10 March 2016

13. COUCH SURFING-STAY WITH LOCALS AND MAKE TRAVEL FRIENDS •Hospitality exchange and social networking website offering place to stay for the travellers and backpackers. • Information on if the host is hosting an event and the travellers join in. •Founded in 2003 as a non-profit organization, assets sold to Couch Surfing International in 2011 •Membership is free of charge, with an annual subscription members can have access to special services

14. COUCHSURFING EXPLAINED Cost: Completely free! Hosts should not charge their surfers for anything. Hosts: Backbone of the community, offer spare room, air mattress or couch for travellers to stay, often take guests out for tours, cook them meals, and introduce them to other local people.

15. Surfers: people who travel and look to make a connection Ambassadors: People that Couchsurfing.org members that have both a great love for the Couchsurfing project and a deep desire to promote the wonderful experiences that CS has to offer perform unpaid, voluntary administrative work on the website, as well as reaching out to new members

16. Groups: Groups formed by members with a general theme such as music, sports, politics, etc Events: Created by group members and focus on a theme

17. Create your profile Connect Start the Couch Search Set your itinerary on CS Keep Track of Your Hosts and Requests Surf! Follow Up How to Travel with CS

18. EVENTS

19. Advertisements Brands can use Ad Space on the CS website to display ads Likely brands – Those with target customers : young, global, urban lifestyle.