About the Program

Ludwig van Beethoven: String Trio in G Major, Op.9 No.1 I. Adagio - Allegro con brio

Ludwig Van Beethoven was born in December of 1770 in Bonn, Germany. Whether one realizes or not, there is rarely someone who hasn’t heard the famous theme of Beethoven’s Symphony No. 5. Beethoven’s music has been performed countless times by musicians around the world for more than two centuries! Most recently his music has been used in numerous movie soundtracks and referenced in pop music.

Beethoven was only 27 years old when he began to compose his string trios from Op. 9. Between the years of 1797 and 1798 he completed three trios, consisting of four movements each, for violin, viola, and cello. On this program, the first movement of his very first string trio will be performed. It is interesting to know that during this time Beethoven still had the use of his hearing. It wasn’t until 1802 that he began struggling with early symptoms of deafness.

Heinrich Herzogenberg: Trio for Piano, Oboe, and Horn Op.61

Heinrich Herzogenberg was born in June of 1843 in Graz, Austria. As a young man he studied law, philosophy, and political science during his university years in Vienna. By 1864, however, he had taken an interest in music and was studying composition and attending classes of Felix Otto Dessoff. He had a keen interest in and respect for the music of J.S. Bach and Johannes Brahms, who was his contemporary. Herzogenberg even married one of Brahms’ piano students, Elisabeth von Stockhausen!

In 1874, while living in Leipzig, Herzogenberg founded the Leipzig Bach-Verein, an association dedicated to reviving Bach’s cantatas. Near the end of his life, which came far too soon at the age of 57, Herzogenberg moved to Berlin and was the Professor of Composition at the Hochschule für Musik in Berlin.

It is rumored that because of Brahms’ jealousy over Herzogenberg’s relationship with Elsibet, he was reluctant to give Herzogenberg credit as a composer. It wasn’t until the end of Brahms’ life that he supposedly claimed that Herzogenberg was able to do more than other composers of their time.

Herzogenberg’s Trio for Piano, Oboe, and Horn Op.61 is written for quite a rare instrumentation and is a wonderful example of Herzogenberg unique compositional style. Although Herzogenberg is often overlooked as a composer and overshadowed by Brahms, he wrote a large and varied collection of works that deserve to be performed!

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart: Oboe Quartet in F Major K,370/368b

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born in Salzburg in January of 1756. Although he lived a short life of only 35 years he composed a huge library of over 800 works! He rivals Beethoven as one of the most famous and important composers of all time. In 1780, Mozart traveled to Munich at the invitation of government official Karl Theodore who had commissioned Mozart’s opera Idomeneo. While in Munich working on his opera, Mozart renewed his friendship with Friedrich Ramm, principal oboist of the orchestra in Munich. Ramm was an accomplished, well respected oboist and inspired Mozart to compose the oboe Quartet in F major k.370 in early 1781. Not only does the quartet show off the virtuosity of the oboist, demanding higher pitches than was normally played by oboists of the period, but it also stands as an example of Mozart’s amazing ability to write fluidly and idiomatically for a variety of instruments.