The follow up to 2006’s Silent Hill had a lot of publicity and a lot to live up to from film fans and gamers alike. The first film, directed by Christophe Gans, whilst by no means exceptional, was a respectable effort, creating a disturbing, eerie, sinister mood, whilst staying faithful enough to the video game series that it was based on and getting solid, if not spectacular, performances from it’s leads. It’s follow up is directed by Michael J. Bassett and incorporates the often lamented gimmick of 3D.

The film seems to follow parts of the Silent Hill 3 video game. For those not familiar with the Silent Hill game franchise, they’re basically some of the most atmospheric and tense games ever made, telling the story of a creepy town, Silent Hill, and the seemingly constant amount of people that go missing in said town, with the game having monsters and abominations around every corner, just waiting to jump out and cause the player to have an hysterical fit much akin to Tommy Doyle in Halloween when he sees the boogeyman. Gans’ 2006 film did well in creating the spooky atmosphere, yet the film seemed to fall a bit flat for the most part. The original film focused on Rose (Radha Mitchell) and Christopher (Sean Bean), as they looked to find their missing adopted daughter, Sharon, in the chilling, mysterious town known as Silent Hill. It turns out that an evil cult have taken Sharon and have plans of their own for her.

Silent Hill: Revelation is set years later, with Christopher and Sharon moving from town to town, trying to keep themselves out of the grasp of the aforementioned cult and now going by different names; at present known as Harry and Heather, respectively. Heather’s 18th birthday looms on the horizon, and Rose is now the one that is missing. Sean Bean returns in the role of Christopher/Harry, Radha Mitchell as Rose and Adelaide Clemens stars as the now older Sharon/Heather. The film establishes that Rose and Sharon were stuck in the fictional town of Silent Hill at the end of the first film, with Rose distracting the cult long enough for Sharon to return to her ‘normal’ life with her adopted father, Christopher. The name issue is going to be a pain to write about, so from here on in it’s Harry and Heather rather than Christopher and Sharon. Just to keep you up to speed, Heather has no idea that she was formerly known as Sharon or of the events that took place in Silent Hill. Dun, dun, dun – cue the ominous music.

So, Harry and Heather end up having to go back to Silent Hill, mainly for Harry to find his wife and for Heather to find out who she really is. Along the way, there’s a few twists, a few scares, a fair amount of monsters and slightly too much 3D. The film itself just seems stagnant, sluggish and unresponsive. All of the way through, bar the 3D, it felt as if this should have been a straight to DVD sequel, much like the straight to DVD sequel for the excellent 30 Days of Night. It turns out that the reason that the cult of Silent Hill are drawing Heather back is because they need to complete a ritual that will set them free from the town; a horror cliche as often replicated as the ‘I’ll be right back‘ line. The film as a whole tends to offer very little. The scares, at times, are jumpy, yet tonally wrong. The Silent Hill game franchise made it’s name on slow, atmospheric tension, with the 2006 film doing it’s best, albeit not always well executed, to try and stick to this formula and tone. This film goes for more shock scares, looking for instant gratification rather than the slow burning, hard earned scares. With the subject matter in question, the premise was always going to be hard to pull off, yet Barrett’s effort is a perfect example of why horror films and video game adaptations are so often derided by the casual fan. His limp vision for Silent Hill: Redemption seems to get itself muddled up in it’s own plot, at times seemingly cramming too much into the film’s 95 minute running time.

The look of the film is one of the saving graces, with the grim, morbid town and the grotesque monsters looking great. Even though I’ve earlier bashed the overuse of 3D, the 3D here is, at times, very good. My problem with the 3D in this movie is it’s used too much for my liking and in cringe worthy sequences reminiscent of Friday 13th: Part 3D and Jaws 3D. The thing was, at the time, those films were very much on the edge of technology. I expected much better here. Maybe the problem lies with me and my expectation, but I just expected a lot more from this film. With the source material available to Bassett, not to mention the ability to look back and learn from 2006’s Silent Hill, I honestly expected a sequel to at least rival the quality of the original. As for the cast, they were there, that’s likely the best that I can say about most of them. Adelaide Clemens was good in the lead role, with blink-and-you’ll-miss-them appearances from the likes of Malcolm McDowell, Deborah Kara Unger and Carrie-Anne Moss.

I’m not sure if I’m being overly harsh on the film due to my affinity for the game series, maybe those not familiar with the material and the original film will find the film a rollercoaster ride of scares and twists, but I just left the cinema feeling a tad deflated. Even though I do my best to find the good points in films, I’m going to have to give Silent Hill: Revelation a massively disappointing 1 1/2 stars out of 5.