6 November 1991. Stadio Olimpico.

Roma face Ilves Tampere in the second leg of the last-16 of the UEFA Cup Winners’ Cup.

The Finish visitors were, if not a ragtag bunch, then at least a group for whom football was not all their primary way of earning a living.

Nevertheless, the tie returned to Italy still in the balance – after a 1-1 draw at a packed-out, if not particularly prepossessing, Tampere Stadium.

The second leg was a different matter, however. Of course it had to be – even just by looking at the make-up of the two starting line-ups. In 1984 Roma had been in the final of the European Cup. A few months earlier they had made it to the final of the UEFA Cup, after also winning the seventh Coppa Italia in the club’s history. They had pedigree.

That Coppa Italia victory, of course, is what had earned them entrance into the Cup Winners’ Cup, had put them on this collision course with Finnish opposition. Except after 15 minutes Ottavio Bianchi’s side were already 3-0 up – something the club had never managed before in its history in Europe.

A first minute own goal certainly helped in that regard, before Rizzitelli and Di Mauro added to the early onslaught. In the end it finished 5-2, however, with the two players who scored in the first leg, Carnevale and Czakon, adding braces of their own.

The Giallorossi breezed into the next round, as everyone expected they would, in front of 24,910 paying fans. For a section of them, this was the first time they had ever watched their team live – with the match being classified among the ‘partite tranquille’ with fans (broadly speaking, ‘no problems expected’), meaning parents could take their young kids to the stadium without fear or concern.

The only setback that night really was the persistent rain – although the roofing added to the Olimpico for the 1990 World Cup meant even that was not a huge setback.

The game still has its place in history, however – it remains, and will almost certainly remain forever, the club’s last victory in the now deceased Cup Winners’ Cup. The club managed 12 wins in 29 appearances in the competition since 1969; the first European competition Roma ever played in.

In the next round Bianchi’s side faltered, going out to AS Monaco after a draw and a defeat. A story for another time.

Here's how Roma lined up that night:

Giovanni Cervone: The goalkeeper, born in Campagnia, was the chosen heir to Hall of Fame member Franco Tancredi, although their legacies would not be quite the same. He had the tools - physically imposing, good reactions, brave when required - but was guilty of a few too many lapses in concentration. Nevertheless, he ended up making 246 appearances for the club.

Marco De Marchi: This was his only season at the club, arriving from Juventus - and then returning very soon after. Twenty years later he returned to Trigoria, this time as the agent of Fabio Borini - another player who spent just a season at the club. Nineteen appearances for De Marchi in Giallorosso.

Amedeo Carboni: tClub captain for the 1996-97 season, Carboni made 230 appearances for the club from his left-back station.

Walter Bonacina: Along with Piacentini, another midfielder of the era, Bonacina is often held up as an example of the central midfielder with the technical quality to excel but lacking something ineffable to really impose himself on games. He always gave his all, however, and finished with 114 appearances for the club.

Aldair: One of the greats in both club and world football history. What more needs to be added?

Sebino Nela: lThe only Roma player to have represented the club in two European finals - the 1984 European Cup final and the 1991 UEFA Cup final. 397 appearances, 19 goals, and a confirmed place in the club's Hall of Fame.

Thomas Haessler: An unlikely box-to-box midfielder, with his lack of stature more than made up for in his determined nature and relish for the physical side of the game. He wasn't the quickest but he was technically good enough to overcome that deficit - while his threat from free-kicks was consistent. A World Cup winner in Rome in 1990, he made 118 appearances for the club.

Fabrizio Di Mauro: A midfielder of evident talent, with the No. 8 usually on his back and white tape around his ankles making him easy to spot. Another to come through the Roma academy, at the time of Giannini and Desideri. Nine goals in 132 appearances was his eventual return.

Roberto Muzzi: l83 games and 12 goals for the forward, who had his moments at the club - including the Coppa Italia goal against Milan - but will perhaps remain best known for being the man withdrawn as Francesco Totti made his debut against Brescia during the 1992-93 season.

Giuseppe Giannini: A Roma icon - the captain and No. 10 before Totti (who idolised him) did the same thing. The poster boy of the 90s for all Giallorossi fans, he was an attacking midfielder with vision, technical ability and an eye for goal. 437 appearances and 75 goals was some haul.