James Donald (Don) Greene II, passed away on December 31, 2019 after an extended illness. He is survived by his daughter Heather Greene and her husband Harvey Carreathers, son Shawn Greene, and grandchildren Cameron, Charlie, Lorrick, Cooper, and Jessica. He will also be missed by brother Michael Greene and wife Terri Greene, sister Patti Williams and family friend Jim Beasley; as well as his nieces and nephews, Marianne, Sam, Melissa, Michael and Alexis. He was preceded in death by his wife Doreen Greene, and parents James D. I and Kathleen Greene.

After service as a Marine in Vietnam and Morocco, Don worked in Bernalillo County’s early IT department. He helped evolve the department from computers the size of walls with dot matrix to personal computers and wireless.

One Don’s lesser known passions, was his commitment of service to others. He started as a soccer coach for youth soccer that ended when he was a JV coach for Manzano high school in the early 90s. After retirement, he was active in local chapters of the Young Marines and Marine Corp League. There have been so many others impacted by Don that it is impossible to list.

His true love was his wife Doreen who passed away in 2002. They were introduced by a mutual friend and were pen pals between Canada and Vietnam for several years before getting married. Two children, Heather and Shawn, rounded out the family. With five grandkids in three years, he was given a new life and became the grandpa no one knew he had in him.

His family would like to extend appreciation to several groups. Weck’s staff on Juan Tabo became a big part of his life by providing food and lasting friendship. Genesis Uptown provided amazing care during the last six months of Don’s life. He developed a fan club with the committed professionals that had a tremendous impact on his well-being. Desert Hills Hospice provided support that the family received through chaplain services, nursing, med management, communication and counseling. Finally, Don’s Marine brothers, who have circled the family, provided guidance, and offered lasting support.

In lieu of flowers, please help us support Don’s love of animals and veterans with donations for Paws and Stripes. www.pawsandstripes.org 617 Truman St NE, Albuquerque, NM 87110.

Friends may visit Tuesday, January 7, 2020, 4:00 p.m. – 6:00 p.m. at FRENCH – Lomas. A Funeral Service will be held Wednesday, January 8, 2020, 10:00 a.m. at FRENCH – Lomas. Interment will follow the service in Santa Fe National Cemetery.