Top Gun: Maverick is an American military action drama film directed by Joseph Kosinski. It is the sequel to the 1986 film, Top Gun. The film stars Tom Cruise, Val Kilmer, and Miles Teller. It was released on May 27, 2022 by Paramount Pictures.

Premise[]

After more than thirty years of service as one of the Navy’s top aviators, Pete "Maverick" Mitchell (Tom Cruise) is where he belongs, pushing the envelope as a courageous test pilot and dodging the advancement in rank that would ground him. When he finds himself training a detachment of Top Gun graduates for a specialized mission the likes of which no living pilot has ever seen, Maverick encounters LT Bradley "Rooster" Bradshaw (Miles Teller), the son of Maverick’s late friend and Radar Intercept Officer LTJG Nick "Goose" Bradshaw. Facing an uncertain future and confronting the ghosts of his past, Maverick is drawn into a confrontation with his own deepest fears, culminating in a mission that demands the ultimate sacrifice from those who will be chosen to fly it.[1]

Cast[]

Reprising characters[]

Role Description

Tom Cruise as Captain Pete "Maverick" Mitchell

A Darkstar test pilot, then special mission flight instructor at TOPGUN.

Miles Teller as Lieutenant Bradley "Rooster" Bradshaw

A pilot in the mission training group, and the son of Maverick's late RIO] and best friend, Nick "Goose" Bradshaw. Bradley was played by both Aaron Weis (uncredited) and Adam Weis (uncredited) in Top Gun.

Jennifer Connelly as Penny Benjamin

Maverick's recurrent love interest; who is a single mother, a bar owner, and the daughter of a former admiral. Penny is a returning mentioned-only character from Top Gun.

Val Kilmer as Admiral Tom "Iceman" Kazansky

A TOPGUN graduate and friend/former rival of Maverick, and the commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.

New characters[]

Role Description

Bashir Salahuddin as Chief Warrant Officer 4 Bernie "Hondo" Coleman.

Maverick's aid / sidekick, who follows him from the Darkstar project to TOPGUN; helping in operations at the training base and with emergency flightdeck recovery ops on the carrier during the special mission.

Jon Hamm as Vice Admiral Beau "Cyclone" Simpson

Air Boss.

Charles Parnell as Rear Admiral Solomon "Warlock" Bates

NAWDC commander.

Monica Barbaro as Lieutenant Natasha "Phoenix" Trace

Mission pilot trainee.

Lewis Pullman as Lieutenant Robert "Bob" Floyd

Phoenix's WSO.

Jay Ellis as Lieutenant Reuben "Payback" Fitch

Mission pilot trainee.

Danny Ramirez as Lieutenant Mickey "Fanboy" Garcia

Payback's WSO.

Glen Powell as Lieutenant Jake "Hangman" Seresin

Mission pilot trainee.

Greg Tarzan Davis as Lieutenant Javy "Coyote" Machado

Mission pilot trainee.

Ed Harris as Rear Admiral Chester "Hammer" Cain

Maverick's superior.

Jean Louisa Kelly as Sarah Kazansky

Iceman's wife.

Lyliana Wray as Amelia Benjamin

Penny's daughter.

Manny Jacinto as Lieutenant Billy "Fritz" Avalone

Mission pilot trainee.

Kara Wang as Lieutenant Callie "Halo" Bassett

Omaha's WSO.

Raymond Lee as Lieutenant Logan "Yale" Lee

Mission pilot trainee.

Jake Picking as Lieutenant Brigham "Harvard" Lennox

Yale's WSO.

Jack Schumacher as Lieutenant Neil "Omaha" Vikander

Mission pilot trainee.

Plot[]

The film begins over 30 years after the original Top Gun. Captain Pete "Maverick" Mitchell is serving as a U.S. Navy test pilot and has dodged promotion to continue flying after 33 years of service.

As Rear Admiral Chester "Hammer" Cain plans to shut down the hypersonic "Darkstar" scramjet program and redirect the funds to UAV drone programs, Maverick decides to take the prototype to its Mach 10 speed objective before Cain can arrive. Maverick reaches Mach 10 but decides to exceed limits and push further into high-hypersonic speed, resulting in the prototype's destruction. Cain wants to ground Maverick but cannot, as the latter has been ordered to NAS North Island by his friend and former rival, Admiral Tom "Iceman" Kazansky, the Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.

Maverick is to train an elite group of F/A-18E/F Super Hornet aviators—all TOPGUN graduates—assembled by Air Boss Vice Admiral Beau "Cyclone" Simpson and Rear Admiral Solomon "Warlock" Bates for an urgent mission: destroy a uranium enrichment facility of a rogue nation. The facility is located within a steep depression at the end of a mountainous canyon and defended by surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries and an airbase with Su-57 fifth-generation fighters; this requires a risky high-speed nap-of-earth approach in the canyon beneath hostile radar coverage to reach the facility and pushing the F/A-18E/F beyond its NATOPS limits. With the new F-35C Lightning II unavailable, Maverick recommends a strike package of four F/A-18E/Fs in two pairs to destroy the facility's entrance and then the facility itself.

Maverick is initially rebuffed by the trainees, particularly by the self-confident Lieutenant Jake "Hangman" Seresin and by Lieutenant Bradley "Rooster" Bradshaw, the son of Maverick's late best friend and RIO Lieutenant (junior grade) Nick "Goose" Bradshaw. Rooster believes that Maverick blocked his application to the Naval Academy and resents him for setting back his career.

The training prepares the trainees in all mission aspects, including basic fighter maneuvers, precision-guided munitions employment, nap-of-earth flying, as well as the importance of teamwork. The trainees also become aware of the relationship between Rooster's father (Nick Bradshaw) and Maverick, leading to animosity between Hangman and Rooster due to the former's cavalier attitude towards his wingmen and the latter's cautious flying, which Hangman attributes to his father's death. As the trainees observe Maverick's skill, they begin to reassess him and their team coheres.

During the training, Maverick reunites with Penny Benjamin, who provides him guidance and support particularly with his protective attitude towards Rooster. Maverick also meets with Iceman, whose throat cancer requires him to converse by typing his words out on a computer, but who manages to verbally underscore the importance of the mission. Iceman dies days later. Maverick and the mission trainees attend his funeral, where he is honored with a missing man formation.

Cyclone opposes Maverick's risky methods and tactics, but once Maverick demonstrates that the mission plan can be executed, Cyclone appoints him as strike team lead. Maverick then chooses the mission selectees and is paired with Lieutenant Natasha "Phoenix" Trace and her WSO Lieutenant Robert "Bob" Floyd, while Rooster is paired with Lieutenant Reuben "Payback" Fitch and his WSO Lieutenant Mickey "Fanboy" Garcia. The remaining trainees become a reserve group on standby alert. The aircraft are launched from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN-71), while the cruiser USS Leyte Gulf (CG-55) fires a salvo of Tomahawk cruise missiles to destroy the facility's nearby airbase to preempt the scrambling of enemy fighters. As the fighters try to avoid detection, an E-2 Hawkeye detects two Su-57s heading into their range. The four F/A-18E/Fs reach the facility and destroy it, but are attacked upon climb out from the depression by SAMs, leading to an intense battle. As the aviators run out of countermeasures, Maverick sacrifices his jet to prevent Rooster from being shot down and ejects over hostile territory. As the remaining aircraft return to the carrier, Rooster turns back and saves Maverick from an Mi-24 Hind gunship pursuing him, but is shot down by a SAM and ejects nearby.

The two reunite and come across the destroyed airbase, where they steal from a hangar an F-14A Tomcat - Maverick's signature aircraft. As they take off from a short runway and head back to the carrier, the Su-57s form up alongside and attempt to identify them. Maverick and Rooster decide to engage, surprising the Su-57s and shooting them down. When Maverick and Rooster again try to return to the carrier, a third Su-57 intercepts them. Out of ordnance and countermeasures and without functional ejection seats, they are saved just in time by Hangman, who launched from the carrier after Maverick and Rooster did not return with the strike group. They form up and head back to the carrier, where the mission team members and flight deck crew celebrate their return.

Maverick and Rooster reconcile and work together on his F-6K, a photo reconnaissance variant of the P-51 Mustang, at Maverick's hangar. Maverick and Penny then fly off in his F-6K.

Production[]

Development of the movie began in 2010 when Paramount Pictures[2] made offers to Jerry Bruckheimer and Tony Scott to make a sequel to Top Gun. Christopher McQuarrie had also received an offer to write the sequel's screenplay, which was rumored to have Cruise's character Maverick in a smaller role. Ultimately, Peter Craig, Justin Marks, who described the movie as a dream project, Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz would be credited as screenwriters on the project. When asked about his idea for a new Top Gun film, Scott replied, "This world fascinated me, because it's so different from what it was originally. But I don't want to do a remake. I don't want to do a reinvention. I want to do a new movie". The movie will reportedly focus on the end of the dog fighting era and the role of drones in modern aerial warfare and that Cruise's character, Maverick, will fly a F-35 Lightning II.

After Scott's suicide, the sequel's future remained in question. However, producer Jerry Bruckheimer remained committed to the project, especially given Cruise's and Kilmer's interest.

In June 2017, Cruise revealed that the title would be Top Gun: Maverick, with Harold Faltermeyer returning as composer for the sequel. Cruise further stated that, “Aviators are back, the need for speed. We’re going to have big, fast machines. It’s going to be a competition film, like the first one…but a progression for Maverick”. Later the same month, it was confirmed that the film would be directed by Joseph Kosinski, while no title was officially confirmed. Kilmer had posted on his Facebook page that he would be returning as Iceman.

Production on the film officially started on May 30, 2018 in San Diego, California.

At San Diego Comic Con (SDCC) 2019, Tom Cruise said that "everything you see in this movie is real", when referring to the flight sequences and stunts seen in the movie.[3]

Release[]

Top Gun: Maverick was originally scheduled to be released on June 26, 2020 by Paramount Pictures. However, it was then initially pushed to July 2, 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Unfortunately, due to more delays, it was pushed a second time to November 19, 2021 and then again a third and final time to officially release worldwide on May 27, 2022 (almost two full years after the original release date).

May 27, 2022 was originally scheduled as the debut release date of another Tom Cruise movie, "Mission Impossible 7" now officially titled as "Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning Part One", and as such, has now been bumped to release on September 20, 2022 instead.[4]

Advance screenings[]

The first full screening was held at CinemaCon 2022 [5] on April 28, 2022 from 9:15 AM - 12:15 PM at The Colosseum on the casino level of Caesars Palace.[6] [7]

On May 3, 2022 advance tickets went on sale at AMC Theatres.[8]

On May 4, 2022 Tom Cruise attended a special screening for Navy sailors that was held in the afternoon at Naval Air Station North Island on Coronado, California.[9]

On May 18, 2022 the cast screened the film during the 75th annual Cannes film festival at Palais des Festivals. The film received a 5-minute standing ovation.[10]

Also on May 18, 2022 US Naval Academy Midshipmen in Annapolis, MD. were treated to an advanced screening alongside two alumni pilots who flew in the movie.[11]

On May 21, 2022 sailors at Naval Air Station (NAS) Oceana located at Virginia Beach, Va. were treated to an advance screening at the base theater. This was one screening out of 31 screenings shown at bases across the country on either May 21 or May 22. [12] [13] [14]

Also on May 21, 2022, the Ohio State Marching Band received a private screening.[15] This was in response to Tom Cruise seeing a replay of the band performing a tribute medley from the original "Top Gun" movie during the 2021 Purdue football game. Cruise was thrilled by the performance, sending a note to the band as well as T-shirts from the new film.[16]

May 24th, 2022 was "Top Gun Tuesday" at AMC Theatres which held an early access event at 7pm. With each purchase, guest received (while supplies lasted) a limited edition poster, an enamel pin, and an NFT (by email) upon arriving at the theater.[17] [18] [19]

On May 25th, 2022 AMC Theatres had an AMC Investor Connect special advanced screening for AMC Shareholders.[20]

Thursday May 26th, 2022 were the final advance ticket theater screenings before worldwide opening day on Friday May 27th, 2022.

Theater tie-ins[]

AMC Theatres[]

At concessions (during time around release), both the large options of a drink and popcorn are "Top Gun: Maverick" themed paper cups and buckets featuring an artistic depiction of Maverick performing a flyby over the deck of an aircraft carrier.

Exclusive to AMC Theatres is a new Coca-Cola Freestyle mix by Seagram called "Danger Zone" that is offered in both regular and in diet versions. It is a ginger crème flavor that offers a velvety, delicious kick that is truly refreshing.[21]

Purchase of tickets before June 5, 2022 will enter participants into a sweepstakes where they could win: a fleet of flight simulator and racing video games, a gaming console, and an 86” Smart TV.[22]

Starting May 19, 2022 online only, AMC Theatres Merchandise is selling a limited amount of exclusive fan gear.[23]

Starting May 26, 2022 AMC Theatres is selling at concessions (while supplies last) a collectible "Fighter Town" themed popcorn tin for $7.99 (unfilled) and $15.99 (filled).[24]

On May 27, 2022 a "Top Gun: Maverick" themed prize pack contest took place via AMC Theatres' Twitter or Facebook.[25]

Reception[]

to be added

Notes[]

Aircraft type Air flight officer Service assignment Strike fighter squadron F/A-18E Super Hornet LT Bradley "Rooster" Bradshaw Naval aviator VFA-87 Golden Warriors F/A-18E Super Hornet LT Jake "Hangman" Seresin Naval aviator VFA-151 Vigilantes F/A-18E Super Hornet LT Javy "Coyote" Machado Naval aviator VFA-86 Sidewinders F/A-18E Super Hornet LT Neil "Omaha" Vikander Naval aviator VFA-136 Knighthawks F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Natasha "Phoenix" Trace Naval aviator VFA-41 Black Aces F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Robert "Bob" Floyd Weapon systems officer VFA-51 Screaming Eagles F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Reuben "Payback" Fitch Naval aviator VFA-125 Rough Raiders F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Mickey "Fanboy" Garcia Weapon systems officer VFA-143 Pukin Dogs F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Billy "Fritz" Avalone Naval aviator VFA-2 Bounty Hunters F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Callie "Halo" Bassett Weapon systems officer VFA-22 Fighting Redcocks F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Logan "Yale" Lee Naval aviator VFA-11 Red Rippers F/A-18F Super Hornet LT Brigham "Harvard" Lennox Weapon systems officer VFA-11 Red Rippers

Gallery[]

Posters[]

Promotional images[]

Videos[]

References[]

[]