PLEASE CLICK HERE TO GO TO OUR NEW LOCATION

Born July 5th, 1954, Debra McGrath began her professional career in 1983 when she joined the Second City improv group in Toronto. She performed in 5 mainstage productions with them. She was briefly married to another cast member in the show, Dana Anderson, but eventually married "Whose Line Is It Anyway?" star Colin Mochrie in 1989. In 1991, they had one son, Luke, and they have been happily married ever since. McGrath is also a writer, working on shows like "Go Girl" and "My Talk Show" with her writing partner Linda Kash. And despite an unsuccessful 3 year period in L.A. where McGrath's show "My Talk Show" went through the Hollywood mill and her husband, Mochrie, couldn't work for legal reasons (after moving to L.A. from Canada) the two moved back to Canada and have been successful ever since. She has had roles in feature films, including The Real Blonde, Termini Station, and One Magic Christmas. The two lent their voices to numerous animated shows, like "George and Martha" and "Seven Little Monsters," and guest starred on many T.V. shows, including "Paradise Falls", "Robocop," "Wind At My Back," both in Canada and in the U.S., as Mochrie continues his success with "Whose Line Is It Anyway?."

March of Dames site autobiography:

"Deb has just finished shooting "Eloise at Christmastime" which will hold a special place in her heart, not so much for the role, but because she got to shoot at the Plaza in New York. She had the time of her life doing a pilot for the Comedy Network called "The Joe Blow Show" created by fellow Dame Linda Kash and Paul O'Sullivan who is a Dame wanna be! Another project she is very proud of is "Expecting" an independent film that opened in theatres across Canada on March 7th. It was a wonderful ensemble cast who improvised all their dialogue. If you haven't seen "Expecting" for God's sake go...tomorrow...we invested in it. Or buy the DVD. Come on...it's for a Dame! Four Dames actually and four guys...okay, one of them is my husband Colin Mochrie. But still, it's for Canadian films for heavens sake. Okay I just really like the attention."

Expecting site autobiography:

"Debra McGrath has been in the business since they were looking for Mariette Hartley-James Garner duos in commercials. Since that time, she has worked in all facets of the business from film and television to theatre. Recently, Deb played a recurring role in a new series for Showtime called Paradise Falls and recently did guest spots on the March of Dames comedy special for The Comedy Network and a CBC pilot with Jonathan Torrens. Deb has several animated series on the go, to which she lends her character voices, in guest and regular roles capacity. Deb is also a writer and worked on WTN series Go Girl for two seasons, also doubling as a performer. She also created her own series, which she wrote and starred in called My Talk Show for which Ron Howard company Imagine Television produced sixty-five episodes. Deb is currently writing scripts and performing and loving every minute of it."