Colin Mochrie and Debra McGrath will be in Weyburn on Saturday, January 27, to present their acclaimed “The One Couple Show” at the Cugnet Centre, starting at 7:30 p.m. The show is based on their 27 years of marriage, 60 years of performing around the world and one year on Istagram. Mochrie is best known for his appearances in “Whose Line Is It Anyway?” and McGrath for her appearance in “Little Mosque on the Prairie”.

Both Mochrie and McGrath have had successful independent careers in Canadian comedy but have also worked together throughout their relationship. “The One Couple Show” will combine heart-warming and hilarious stories from their life, improv with the audience and surprise video guests. Colin and Deb will entertain you with their charm, wit and promise of cash prizes.

“We all have some stories about our lives, so that is why we do the improv as part of our show,” said Mochrie. “We bring some people from the audience on the stage, and share their stories in a humorous manner. It keeps the show fresh.”

Colin also joked about how “The One Couple Show” was an excellent time for the married couple to get together, especially since they both have other commitments and shows. “It’s just us having fun, but with the rapport of our marriage and sort of off-the-cuff kind of stuff with improv games.”

Advance tickets to “The One Couple Show” cost $30 for adults and $15 for a child or student, and they are available at the Weyburn Review, Music Craft and Old Fasshion Foods. Tickets will also be available at the door, $35 for adults and $20 for a child or student. The Weyburn Concert Series, as a member of the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils (OSAC), will present “The One Couple Show”. The performance is part of the 2017/2018 Stars for Saskatchewan Concert series. OSAC presents over 300 live community and school performances annually, attended by a total audience of approximately 75,000. This is possible thanks to a dedicated network of volunteers committed to making culture an integral part of Saskatchewan community life, and vital funding from Saskatchewan Lotteries administered by SaskCulture, Canadian Heritage, and the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Proceeds from Saskatchewan Lotteries benefit more than 12,000 non-profit sport, culture and recreation groups around the province.