Reporting on Traffic Fatalities for each calendar year provides the public, elected officials, and City staff with a current snapshot of the progress of San Francisco’s Vision Zero Initiative. The data that is collected and reported allows City departments to analyze trends and focus their efforts on the most impactful projects that will help reduce fatalities.

The interactive charts below present the City’s annual Traffic Fatality count.

Traffic fatalities are reported by mode (people walking, biking, driving, motorcycling, and riding in a vehicle) and are compared to the same month in the previous year to provide a concise snapshot of the mortality burden in San Francisco. These modes are summarized as vehicle or motorcycle (auto or motorcycle fatalities), walking (pedestrian fatalities), and biking (bicycle fatalities).

Fatalities included are:

Anyone killed in or outside of a vehicle (bus, truck, car, motorcycle, bike, moped, light rail vehicle (LRV), etc.) involved in a crash

Anyone killed within the public roadway due to impact with a vehicle or road structure

Anyone who dies within 30 days of the public roadway incident as a result of the injury sustained within the City or County of San Francisco

In the event where a case dies within 30 days of the collision/incident date, but their death date occurs in the following calendar month or year, the case will be classified based on the collision date. This is consistent with the definition used by the California Highway Patrol’s Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System (SWITRS), the primary data source utilized by the City for fatalities tracking prior 2013 – with the exception of the inclusion of LRV. LRV traffic deaths involving motor vehicles are included and captured in the SWITRS database. However, fatality cases involving pedestrian/cyclist versus LRV are not captured in SWITRS, but will be included in the appropriate category for traffic fatality counts and will be noted with an asterisk below the table. This reporting approach facilitates long-term trend analysis of comparable datasets with previous years of SWITRS data.

The number displayed on the scorecard page represents the annual total of the values in the chart above.

*Note: Data do not reflect freeway deaths occurring on grade-separated freeways/roadways under Caltrans jurisdiction in the City and County of San Francisco, which are tracked and mapped separately.

Primary data source: Click here to view the source data on DataSF.

Data lag: 1 month. Representatives from the San Francisco Department of Public Health (SFDPH), San Francisco Police Department (SFPD), and the San Francisco Municipal Transit Agency (SFMTA) meet monthly to reconcile the previous month’s traffic deaths using Office of the Medical Examiner’s and SFPD data. Due to this data quality step, Traffic Fatalities are reported with a one-month lag. For example, May’s data will be available at the end of June.

View Traffic Fatalities data in the Scorecards dataset on DataSF.

View all Traffic Crashes Resulting in Injury on DataSF.