Synopsis

I've discovered that if you wear a big enough hat, no one worries much about what's going on inside your head, says Cary. And no one, not even her boyfriend, Danny, knows about the things inside Cary's head. Especially the feelings she has for Wendy, a girl with bright green hair and hard-candy sadness in her eyes. An ALA Quick PickAn ALA Recommended Book for Reluctant Young ReadersA New York Public Library Best Books for the Teenaged 1998

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

Review

Author Shelley Stoehr, who never seems to flinch at the grit of teenage angst, succeeds again with Tomorrow Wendy, the story of an unforgettable teen named Cary who finds herself obsessed with her boyfriend's sister. As the obsession propels Cary to steal odd bits and pieces from Wendy's room, Cary begins to wonder if, perhaps, she might have a "thing" for Wendy. What's really going on inside Cary's mind? Does she love Danny or his sister? And what would it mean to be gay? Unfortunately, drugs and manic dancing in underage nightclubs cloud Cary's mind even further. The only person who seems to know what she may be feeling is her best friend Rad, who is invisible to everyone else and who talks only in song lyrics. This frank tale of one teen's dangerous spiral through apathy, obsession, and drug-fueled hysteria will certainly be too disturbing for readers under age 14. For older readers, though, Stoehr's novel will completely deglamorize the use of drugs to mask confusion and self-doubt. By the end, even Cary takes fragile first steps toward a cleaner, more realistic way of living.

From the Inside Flap

I've discovered that if you wear a big enough hat, no one worries much about what's going on inside your head.

Cary should know. Her head is a mess behind the floppy Audrey Hepburn hat she wears. Her best friend is a boy who speaks to her in song lyrics--a boy that only she can see. And no one, not even Cary's boyfriend Danny, knows about the things inside Cary's head. Especially the feelings she has for Wendy, a girl with bright green hair and hard-candy sadness in her eyes. Wendy is sexy and dangerous. Cary thinks that Wendy could love her the way Danny does. There's just one problem. Wendy is Danny's sister.