Information about «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת» (Yedioth Ahronoth) media

Newspaper Name: יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת Newspaper name in English: The Last News Owner: Yedioth Ahronoth Group Country / Region: Israel (Tel Aviv) Language: Hebrew Format type: Newspaper Category: General Political alignment: Centrism Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1939 — now (84 years) Publication Years (digital version): 1996 — now (27 years) Circulation: 300,000 (2015) Official Pages: Official Apps: Website: yediot.co.il [read with translation]

«יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת», «Yedioth Ahronoth» is one of the most widely circulated and popular daily newspapers in Israel. Translated from Hebrew, the newspaper's name means «Latest News». Founded in 1939 by a local investor, the newspaper was published in the afternoon and thus became the first evening newspaper in the region. For the first 10 years, the newspaper was published irregularly due to financial problems, it was something like a local diary, it was published if «there was something to tell and something to print».

A new stage of development awaited the newspaper in 1948, when due to a conflict of interests, part of its editorial staff split off to publish its own newspaper, «Yedioth Maariv». A real competition for leadership has developed between these two publications for many years to come. For the first 10 years, it was significantly inferior to its competitor in popularity, but then it was able to become a leader. «Yedioth Ahronoth» remained the second-largest daily newspaper in Israel until 1995. Today, she is known as a major critic of Netanyahu. Another editorial project is the financial newspaper «כלכליסט‎» (The Economist).

Translate the latest edition of the Israeli newspaper «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת» (Yedioth Ahronoth)

Latest issue of the «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת» (The Last News) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת / Yedioth Ahronoth / The Last News / yediot.co.il» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת / Yedioth Ahronoth / The Last News / yediot.co.il» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת / Yedioth Ahronoth / The Last News / yediot.co.il» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת / Yedioth Ahronoth / The Last News / yediot.co.il», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «יְדִיעוֹת אַחֲרוֹנוֹת / Yedioth Ahronoth / The Last News / yediot.co.il», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x