Hint: Akbar built numerous landmarks in Delhi and Agra. Some were worked for security, similar to Agra Fort, and some were worked because of his adoration for engineering like Fatehpur Sikri, Buland Darwaza, Humayun's Tomb, Jodhabai Palace, and Akbar's Tomb. Akbar built his burial place during his lifetime.

Complete answer:

Humayun's burial chamber (Hindustani: Maqbara-I Humayun) is the burial chamber of the Mughal Emperor Humayun in Delhi, India. The burial chamber was dispatched by Humayun's first spouse and boss partner, Empress Bega Begum (otherwise called Haji Begum), in 1558, and planned by Mirak Mirza Ghiyas and his child, Sayyid Muhammad, Persian engineers picked by her. It was the main nursery burial chamber on the Indian subcontinent,[11] and is situated in Nizamuddin East, Delhi, India, near the Dina-panah Citadel, otherwise called Purana Qila (Old Fort), that Humayun found in 1533.

Agra Fort is a recorded fortress in the city of Agra in India. It was the primary home of the heads of the Mughal Dynasty until 1638, when the capital was moved from Agra to Delhi. Before being caught by the British, the last Indian rulers to have involved it were the Marathas.

Quite possibly the loveliest construction of the palatial Fatehpur Sikri complex is Khwabgah or the Dream Palace. Fabricated utilizing red sandstone, the noteworthy building was built for the incomparable Mughal King Akbar and was connected to the Daftar Khana (office) of the regal complex.

Akbar's burial chamber is the burial place of the Mughal head Akbar. This burial place is a significant Mughal engineering magnum opus. It was underlying 1605–1613 by his child Jahangir and is arranged in 119 sections of land in Sikandra, a sub of Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Hence, the correct answer is option (D).

Note: Akbar arranged the burial chamber and chose an appropriate site for it. After his demise, Akbar's child Jahangir finished the development in 1605–1613. It cost 1,500,000 rupees to fabricate and required 3 or 4 years to finish.