The tomb of Akbar the Great is a good case of mixing Hindu and Muslim building styles. The tomb of Akbar the Great is held in Sikandra, about 10 km from Agra. Akbar started development, but his son Jahangir ended it in 1605.

History of Akbar's Tomb

The tomb was completed by his son, Samprada Salim, which was also called Jahangir. Akbar arranged a tomb and chose a suitable place for him. After his death, Akbar's son Jahangir completed development in 1605-1613. During the time of Islamic Ruler Aurangzeb, under the administration of King Ram Jat, the insulted Jats took control of Agra forts as a result of the crushing of Mughal forces. The Mughal rule gave another blow when the Jats visited Akbar's grave, destroying different things and looting all sparkling gold, gems, silver and decks. Even to take revenge for the death of his father Gokula, he looted Akbar's grave, looted him, opened his tomb and removed the bones. Aurangzeb was angry at the capture of King and killing him brutally.

As Viceroy of India, George Curzon coordinated the general arrangement and reconstruction of Akbar's tomb, which was completed in 1905. Curzon examined the recovery of the tombs and other structures described in Agra regarding the entry of Monument Protection Act. Old in 1904, when he described the enterprise as "offering a dedication to the past and a gift of grandeur that is about to come back". This work of security has weakened the worship of the graves by travelers and people living nearby.

Architecture of Akbar's Tomb

Southern entrance is the largest, which has four towers, in which there is white marble with umbrellas which is like the Taj Mahal (and before the date), and it is the general purpose of going to the tomb. This Tomb is surrounded by a wall in the area of 105 square meters. The tomb building is a four-level pyramid, in which there is a structure of marble, in which there is a false tomb. The actual grave, as it is in various catacombs, is in the basement. The structures have been developed primarily with a deep red sandstone, which is advanced with reflections in white marble. These materials expose the cut out table and a dark slate grave and the original entrance door. Board plans are geometrical, floral and calligraphy, and prefabline most of the most shocking and thoughtful structures which later merge into the tomb of Soamad-ud-Daula.

The tomb is built in red sandstone and marble, in which there is a mixture of elements of Hindu and Muslim planning. This can be seen as a progression between the elemental component with marble and the more experienced design style with the best jeweler and carving in the wake of red and new sandstone stones.

The illusion complex is composed of two structures, one is a tomb and the other is a huge entrance, which is connected to each other through a wide open path.

The door, known as Buland Darwaja (portal of pride) itself, is comprised of a large entrance door and four marble towers. This is more surprising than the cataclysm itself, which is much widespread, but not so heavy. The tomb design is exceptionally attractive because it is a real case of combining sandstone use with marble. In this case that you live in the courtyard for a very long time, you can feel irritated with many monkeys, which can be very blunt. Inside the Holocaust, you search for Sainautief in a small quiet room.