At a distance of 9.5 km from Agra Cantonment Railway Station, Akbar's Tomb is located at Sikandra in the suburbs of Agra, on the Mathura road. It is among the top places to visit in Agra.

The Tomb of Akbar is an important Mughal architectural masterpiece built in 1605-1613 in Sikandra. It houses the mortal remains of the greatest Mughal Emperor Akbar. The construction of this tomb was started in 1600 by Emperor Akbar himself. After the death of Akbar in 1605, the tomb was completed by his son Jahangir in 1613. However, during the reign of Aurangzeb Alamgir, Rebellious Jats under Raja Ram Jat, ransacked the intricate tomb, plundered and looted all the beautiful gold, jewels, silver and carpets. Extensive repairs were carried out by the British under Lord Curzon.

The tomb of Akbar can be entered through an elegant southern gateway similar to Buland Darwaza in Fatehpur Sikri. The gateway leads into a huge garden, which is arranged in a Charbagh style. The glorious gateway is beautifully decorated with floral and geometrical patterns inlaid on white and colored marbles. The garden leads to the emperor's tomb.

The shape of tomb is pyramidal and consists of five storeys. The cenotaph is at a level below the ground level. The entire tomb is constructed of red sandstone but the top storey is constructed in white marble. The ground floor is surrounded by cloisters except at the centre on the southern side. These cloisters are divided by massive arches and piers divisible into many bays. The next three levels have an arcaded verandah, with arcades and cluster of kiosks on each side. Some of the kiosks in second storey have marble pyramidal roofs.

The top most storey is entirely made up of white marble. It has a square court, which is open to sky. The central courtyard is enclosed in all the sides by beautiful arches and piers and divided into bays. At the centre of the courtyard lies a square platform, over which a white marble cenotaph is laid out. This cenotaph is profusely carved with floral patterns.

Entry Fee: Rs. 15 for Indians and Rs. 110 for Foreigners. Foreign visitors, who purchase Agra Development Authority's Toll tax ticket of Rs.500 for Taj Mahal, need not to purchase any other toll tax ticket, if he/she visits the monuments like Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Akbar's Tomb, Itimad-ud-Daulah's tomb on the same day.

Timings: 6 AM to 6 PM.