May 22nd 1859 saw the birth of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in Edinburgh.

Arthur’s parents, Mary Foley Doyle and Charles Altamont Doyle, had moved to Scotland from London, hoping that Charles could advance his career in architecture. Having inherited some measure of his family’s artistic talent, Charles began with every hope of success, but never realized his dreams. Plagued by depression and alcoholism, Charles was a distant father and husband, becoming so detached from reality that he ended life in an asylum. With considerable charity, his son Arthur later said of him, “My father’s life was full of the tragedy of unfulfilled powers and of underdeveloped gifts.”

The Doyles sent Arthur to an austere Jesuit school for his early education. Despite the Spartan fare and harsh discipline, Arthur excelled. When Arthur left the Jesuits, Mary Doyle persuaded him to pursue a medical degree at the University of Edinburgh. Arthur agreed, more out of a practical desire for a reliable profession than out of passion for the subject.

Arthur worked as a surgeon on a whaling boat then as a medical officer on a steamer travelling between Liverpool and West Africa. He then settled in Portsmouth on the English south coast and divided his time between medicine and writing.

Sherlock Holmes made his first appearance in ‘A Study of Scarlet’, published in 'Beeton’s Christmas Annual’ in 1887. Its success encouraged Conan Doyle to write more stories involving Holmes but, in 1893, Conan Doyle killed off Holmes, hoping to concentrate on more serious writing. A public outcry later made him resurrect Holmes.

In addition, Conan Doyle wrote a number of other novels, including 'The Lost World’ and various non-fictional works. These included a pamphlet justifying Britain’s involvement in the Boer War, for which he was knighted and histories of the Boer War and World War One, in which his son, brother and two of his nephews were killed. Conan Doyle also twice ran unsuccessfully for parliament. In later life he became very interested in spiritualism, going so far that in 1916 he announced that he would dedicate the rest of his life to that and launched a campaign to convince the world that the dead actually communicated with the living.

Arthur Conan Doyle came to know many prominent people, including George Bernard Shaw, Theodore Roosevelt, Noel Coward and Rudyard Kipling. Late in his life he was described as “the most prominent living Englishman.”- ha!

The third pic is a statue of Sherlock Holmes at Picardty Place that I took in March.