Carl Weathers, the actor who starred as boxer Apollo Creed in the Rocky series in addition to memorable roles in Predator, Happy Gilmore, and The Mandalorian, died at the age of 76.

Weathers’ family confirmed the actor’s death in a statement to Deadline, noting he died “peacefully in his sleep” Thursday.

“We are deeply saddened to announce the passing of Carl Weathers,” his family said in a statement. “Carl was an exceptional human being who lived an extraordinary life. Through his contributions to film, television, the arts and sports, he has left an indelible mark and is recognized worldwide and across generations. He was a beloved brother, father, grandfather, partner, and friend.”

A professional football player — Weathers played eight games with the then-Oakland Raiders in 1970 and 1971 — before turning to acting, Weathers made his start in blaxploitation films and television crime dramas in the early Seventies before landing what would be his breakout role: Rocky Balboa’s dreaded rival-turned-close friend in the Rocky series, beginning with the 1976 Oscar-winning classic and continuing through 1979’s Rocky II, 1982’s Rocky III, and 1985’s Rocky IV.

Sylvester Stallone, who co-starred as Rocky Balboa opposite Weathers’ Creed, took to Instagram Friday evening to pay tribute to their decades-long friendship.

“Today is an incredibly sad day for me. I’m so torn up, I can’t even tell you. I’m just trying to hold it in because Carl Weathers was such an integral part of my life, my success — everything about it. I give him incredible credit and kudos,” said the actor while standing in front of a painting of their characters depicting their last moment in the ring together. “Because when he walked into that room and I saw him for the first time, I saw greatness. But I didn’t realize how great. I never could’ve accomplished what we did with ‘Rocky’ without him. He was absolutely brilliant.”

Following the in-ring death of his character in the latter film — the repercussions of which spawned its own boxing series Creed, with Michael B. Jordan playing Apollo’s son — Weathers went on to star alongside Arnold Schwarzenegger in the 1987 sci-fi classic Predator before taking the lead in the titular role in the 1988 action comedy Action Jackson.

Editor’s picks

Schwarzenegger also remembered Weathers in a social media post Friday. “Every minute with him — on set and off — was pure joy,” he wrote on X/Twitter. “He was the type of friend who pushes you to be your best just to keep up with him. I’ll miss him, and my thoughts are with his family.”

After spending the early half of the Nineties on television on shows like Street Justice and In the Heat of the Night, Weathers showed off his comedic chops on the big screen in Adam Sandler’s 1996 golf comedy Happy Gilmore, where Weathers played one-handed golf pro “Chubbs” who takes Sandler’s hockey player under his wing.

“A true great man. Great dad. Great actor. Great athlete,” Sandler wrote on social media following news of Weathers’ death. “So much fun to be around always. Smart as hell. Loyal as hell. Funny as hell. Loved his sons more than anything. What a guy!! Everyone loved him. My wife and I had the best times with him every time we saw him. Love to his entire family and Carl will always be known as a true legend.”

Weathers also played the role of himself (albeit stew-obsessed) in an arc on the comedy Arrested Development, as well as bounty hunter-turned-magistrate Greef Karga across 10 episodes of The Mandalorian, with Weathers also serving as director on a pair of the Star Wars series’ episodes, including the beloved Season 2 episode “The Siege.” Weathers was nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor for his portrayal.

Trending