NEW YORK

Carl Weathers, the U.S. actor who played boxer Apollo Creed in the "Rocky" franchise, going toe-to-toe with Sylvester Stallone in some of cinema's most memorable - and bloody - boxing moments, has died. He was 76.

Weathers, who also starred in the 1987 film "Predator," opposite Arnold Schwarzenegger, was recently seen on the small screen in "Star Wars" spin-off series "The Mandalorian," a role for which he won an Emmy.

"We are deeply saddened to announce the passing of Carl Weathers," his family said, according to Deadline.

"Carl was an exceptional human being who lived an extraordinary life. Through his contributions to film, television, the arts and sports, he has left an indelible mark and is recognized worldwide and across generations."

The statement gave no cause of death, but added that he had died peacefully in his sleep on Feb. 1

Weathers' career spanned five decades and included over 75 appearances in movies and TV, beginning with the Blaxploitation films of the mid-1970s.

Younger audiences have thrilled to his role in the Disney+ hit "The Mandalorian" in which he played Greef Karga, the head of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, who grows close to lead Pedro Pascal over the course of nine episodes.

Weathers also had a voice acting role in another beloved franchise when he played Combat Carl in 2019's "Toy Story 4."

He received plaudits for his turn as a golf coach in "Happy Gilmore," where his character took to tutoring Adam Sandler after leaving the pro tour when he lost his hand to an alligator.

But it was as the jingoistic heavyweight champion Apollo Creed, who stood in the way of Stallone's rough-and-ready Rocky Balboa, that he will be best remembered.

The 1976 film "Rocky," which spawned a number of sequels (and which has been rebooted through its ‘Creed’ spin-off franchise), gave the world a brutally choreographed close-up look at championship boxing.

The film's underdog-against-the-odds archetype combined formidably with cinematic violence to create an instant classic that still resonates almost half a century later.

The climactic scene, which features blood, broken bones and slow motion punches, set the standard for fight films. It also set Stallone on the path to movie mega-stardom.

The film won 1977's best picture Oscar, as well a statue for director John Avildsen, and scored a host of other nominations.

Weathers reprised his role as Apollo Creed in "Rocky II" in 1979, which saw a rematch against Balboa.

He was back again for 1982's "Rocky III," and again for a final outing in 1985's "Rocky IV," in which Creed was killed in the ring by a Russian heavyweight played by Dolph Lundgren.