Non classé

« La Carencia »: Screamo in Latin America special post. Part 4: Argentina

« Yo no sé de pájaros. No conozco la historia del fuego. Pero creo que mi soledad debería tener alas ».

La Carencia, Alejandra Pizarnik.

1) A brief introduction to this chapter

Coucou, les chaton.ne.s! We’re back with the fourth part of our current special post, La Carencia, which tries to compile the historical evolution of the screamo subgenre in Latin America. As I’ve stated in previous entries, Argentina is one of the countries that has had a more « solid » screamo scene over the last two decades. Indeed, when the short yet ephemeral latin american screamo « boom » arose in the mid-00s, many influential groups were from this beautiful austral part of the world.

Now, concerning the evolution of screamo in Argentina, here are some remarks. Firstly, the argentinian hardcore punk spectrum did have a very few emo-related musical groups back in the late-90s/early-00s, which were a complete exception to the late 80s/early 90s NYHC-influenced hardcore rule throughout the country. These bands won’t be featured here but I’ll keep them in mind for another purposes in the near future…Secondly, by the mid-00s, the first local hardcore punk bands kinda experimenting with this « extreme » emo offshoot, magically appeared from outta nowhere and did surprisingly have some praise within more traditional hardcore spaces in the country for almost the whole decade as well. However, note that these musical outfits were more into post-hardcore (or melodic hardcore) with some slight (and even questionable) screamo influences, pretty much like other bands in Chile and Brazil did back at the time. Some of these bands will be featured here for « scientific » and/or historical purposes, though. And, last but not least, from mid-2010s to today, Argentina has spawned some of the best modern screamo bands in the region, either post-rock-influenced or emoviolence-driven ones. Yes, it’s true that there aren’t that many compared to prior years but I’m pretty sure if you’re into this kind of hardcore subgenre you’ll notice some of these. I certainly hope so…

Finally, for this entry, I’ll feature some of the most relevant screamo bands in Argentina in the last 15 years. Well, almost. In other news, I did also add in the previous entry Adelfa, MxDxA (Colombia) and Nvblado (Brazil) because I completely forgot about them. Sorry for that. Shit happens. The full Caotic (Peru), Disaster Surf Attack and Bigote Harrison 3-way split was added in as well. Anyways, with all that written, let’s begin.

IDC

IDC (acronym for Iniciativa De Cambio) from Mendoza was formed back in 2002 and are, apparently, active since then. Unlike other local hardcore punk bands, IDC started to tease with other musical styles such as screamo, crust, metalcore and post-hardcore for creating something really unique and personal of their own. Not many bands sounded like IDC back then. I even dare to say that this is the first band in the country teasing with the screamy side of emo. The lyrics have both political and personal stances, pretty much like their chilean counterparts Asamblea Internacional del Fuego, with strong ties to DIY mindset as well. As a curious fact, their track entitled Cáncer off their Agosto EP (2003) is one of my favorite ones since many, many years ago. The lyrics are just really touching, les chaton.ne.s! Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material from 2015 to today. If you’d like to listen to their early material (from 2002 to 2008) otherwise, you can go to Discarga Directa’s blog by clicking here. The credits go to the person behind the site (Thank you so much, pal!) Their first EPs (including the already aforementioned Agosto) probably are their best material ever. Well, it’s just personal preference. Give it a try. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Arde Hollywood

Arde Hollywood was a band from Buenos Aires active from 2006 to 2009 and only released En Los Pasillos De La Extinción EP (2006) and self-titled EP (2008). Percha Ediciones (Argentina) compiled these records and released one discography tape in 2016. Regarding the sound, Arde Hollywood played straightforward screamo-influenced post-hardcore, pretty much like an argentinian edition of the At The Drive-In but a little bit less experimental and technical. Well, kinda. The lyrics are in spanish with very personal and abstract stances. Arde Hollywood really was a superb band overall and their sound was the staple reference of how emo was meant to be played in the choripan nation during years. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. You can also visit Percha Ediciones’ official bandcamp account and listen to Arde Hollywood’s full discography instead by clicking here. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

La Última Canción Del Mundo

La Última Canción Del Mundo (from now on LUCDM) was a band from Rosario, active from 2007 to 2012, and only released two self-titled LPs (2007 and 2011, respectively) and one self-titled EP (2012). Regarding their sound, LUCDM played screamo-inspired post-hardcore with a womyn/man vocal duet (clean and screamed, respectively) and very deep and abstract lyrics. For whatever reason, this band really was very popular back then. As you may know, the clean/screamed vocal styles mix isn’t my cup of tea at all but I do like some of their songs, though. Pretty interesting. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. If I’m not mistaken, there are some unassorted missing tracks. Just wondering…Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Ostende

If you can recall previous entries, each latin american country has had at least one more emoviolence-driven trump card that changed the game forever i.e. Arse Moreira (Mexico) and Angkor Wat (Peru). Well, this is the case of Ostende from Buenos Aires (notably their early recordings). They started in 2010 and disbanded in 2017. They have released so far: demo (2010), El Trayecto Del Mapache EP (2010), Ciudades de Mimbre LP (2011), Juventud Psicoactiva single EP (2012), Japón EP (2014), Las Pasiones No Están Muriendo LP (2016), No Olvidar Los Faros En La Niebla LP (2017) and El Camino De Las Flores LP (2019) (the latter contains some previously unreleased recordings from 2013). Regarding their sound, Ostende started playing emoviolence, pretty much like spanish counterparts such as Enoch Ardon and El Ejë del Mäl. However, since their third EP, they started experimenting and teasing with other genres (post-hardcore and mathcore mainly) with a much more mature and complex sound. But, don’t worry, their violently emotive past still is there. Also, their lyrics are pretty abstract and clever. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

No Me Olvides

No Me Olvides (« Don’t forget me » in spanish; best name for an emo band, right? was a pretty short-lived musical project from ??? and only self-released one demo in 2010. I’m not sure what happened next thereafter. Regarding their sound, alongside Ostende, No Me Olvides was one of the first emoviolence experiments in Argentina, pretty much in the same vein as other latin american bands at the time such as Vlado Petrik (Chile) or Zarathustra Has Been Killed In The 70’s (Mexico). Indeed, their tracks were really short and fast as fuck with a pretty lo-fi and minimalistic approach, unpredictable tempo changes and stuff. This is one of those long lost forgotten jewels from the « MySpace era ». Don’t worry, I haven’t forgotten you so easily my sweet alfajorcitx de chocolate…Ehem, ok…. Finally, click on the image above for downloading the file (courtesy of our friend Enzo). Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Cuando Ardió París

Cuando Ardió París (from now on CAP) was active somewhere between 2010 and 2012 and only released A Todos Los Árboles Los Deshoja El Viento b/w Otra Muerte Anunciada single (2012). The tracks were recorded back in 2010, though. Just like the previous musical outfit, CAP is another short-lived lost but not forgotten jewel from the « MySpace era ». Their sound is a mix of screamo, post-hardcore, mathcore and other stuff for creating something really interesting to listen to. Finally, click on the image above for downloading the file (once again, courtesy of our friend Enzo). Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Árboles En Llamas

Árboles En Llamas was a screamo band from Córdoba, active from 2010 to 2015, that only released Horas Muertas LP (2010), Las Aves Que Cantan De Noche LP, Salsipuedes EP (2012) and San Expedito LP (2015). Regarding the sound, Árboles En Llamas mixed screamo with post-hardcore mostly with very complex musical instrumentation and fast-paced musical execution. There are traces of other musical styles such as post-rock and spoken word as well. If you dig other bands featured in the special post so far like Aves, Joliette (México) and Vientre (Colombia), this definitely is for you. Such an amazing band. Oh, I almost forgot. I also have been told that Árboles En Llamas will release very soon their more recent LP on their digital platforms so, we’ll review it when the right time comes. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Mvrallas

Mvrallas did self-release a demo back in 2011 (or 2012 (?)) and that was it. Nothing more, nothing less. I do not have more information about this really cryptic act from Buenos Aires either. Regarding their sound, Mvrallas basically mixed screamo with emoviolence, post-hardcore, metalcore, math rock and post-rock with a pretty avant-garde and experimental approach. You know, it’s one of those bands that could fit in different things (or not) at the very same time. There’s even one song that could remind you of John Zorn but playing a flute while falling down in pieces because he realised Maradona is right now a meme. Cool. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Federico Luppi

Our friend Enzo states that this band was a some sort of « failed powerviolence experiment« . Well, such statement isn’t that far from reality though. This short-lived musical outfit appeared sometime in 2012 and only self-released that year one demo, Ao Vivo En Coghlan live EP and Trigger EP. Regarding their sound, Federico Luppi played frantic emoviolence in the same vein as more grindcore and powerviolence-oriented screamo acts in the 90s such as Reversal Of Man, Combat Wounded Veteran, In/Humaity, Jenny Piccolo (early recordings) and more. There’s also a huge emphasis on noise, distortion and weird sound samplers. Cool. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Mer Montreal

Mer Montreal was a short-lived screamo band from Buenos Aires. During their lifespan, they only released Contemplación demo (2012) and a split EP with local screamo counterparts Beatrice Kaleth (Marnegro Records (Argentina), 2013). They also contributed one track to different compilations such as Todas Las Fronteras Son Imaginarias Vol. II (2014). Regarding the sound, Mer Montreal started mixing different styles such as screamo, post-hardcore, mathcore and post-rock for creating something very unique and of their own with both chaotic and melodic traits. Think of Suis La Lune (Sweden) and Sed Non Satiata (France) but a little bit raw. However, with the release of the aforementioned split EP, the band opted for a more emoviolence-driven musical execution paying homage thus to early-00s european acts such as Kobra Kai and Tristan Tzara (Germany) while still retaining their « experimental » touch. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. You can also visit Percha Ediciones’ official bandcamp account and listen to Mer Montreal’s full discography by clicking here instead. You should check this record out since it contains some unassorted and previously unreleased tracks that could have make it onto an EP or else. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Beatrice Kaleth

We’ve been told that the best bands don’t last long and this probably was the case of Beatrice Kaleth, a short-lived screamo band from Buenos Aires. Indeed, this powerful trio only released a self-titled EP (Marnegro Records, 2013), a split EP with local fellows Mer Montreal (Marnegro Records, 2013) and the Subsidiando el Ocaso single (2014). There also is an unreleased live split EP with Revolte (Chile), which was recorded during their Argentina/Chile tour, but, unfortunately, never saw the light and, according to Beatrice Kaleth, it won’t ever happen…Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to Marnegro’s official bandcamp account and listen to Beatrice Kaleth’s material released through this enigmatic record label. You can listen to their single by clicking here. FFO: Gone With The Pain and Silencio, Ahora, Silencio! ((S)pain). This great lost but not forgotten outfit from El Cono Sur will definitely catch your attention. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Bahía

Bahía was a short-lived screamo/emoviolence from Bernal that only released one demo (Marnegro Records (Argentina), 2013) and split EP with Gauth (Indonesia) (Marnegro Records, 2014). Their track entitled Se Imaginan A Los Pibes Ganando La Copa?, originally released on their demo,was re-recorded and contributed to Todas Las Fronteras Son Imaginarias Vol. II compilation (2014) as well. This version still remains today exclusive to that collection, though. Regarding the sound, well, if you’ve listened to some featured bands in this humble post thus far such as Mer Montreal, Beatrice Kaleth and Ostende, you will know of what Bahía is capable of. Or was. Great musical outfit. Just listen to it. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Para Establecer Un Río

Para Establecer Un Río (from now on PEUR) was another screamo band from Buenos Aires that existed sometime between 2013 and 2018 approximately and only released El Cauce single (2013), which is, in fact, their most well-known track above all, self-titled LP (2014), Los Mapas Del Fuego LP (2017) and Todos Nos Han Abandonado single (2018). Regarding the sound, PEUR started as a post-rock-influenced screamo band, mostly instrumental-only, with some eventual screamed and clean vocals duet. In general terms, both their musical instrumentation and execution were very complex since they added in to their repertory different ambient and drone elements as well. From their second LP, the band became instrumental-only and more post-rock-oriented than anything else. I think everyone recalls this band thanks to their aforementioned « hit » since it’s been featured in different compilations and podcasts out there. Interesting. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Escaleras

Escaleras was born from the ashes of Cuando Ardió París and only released one demo (Marnegro, 2013), split with Löri Berensön (La Flor Records (Peru), 2014), Sobre Mares y Volcanes LP (Not On Label; Escaleras self-released, 2016) and Escaleras En Vivo (live) LP (Not On Label; Escaleras self-released, 2016). Regarding the sound, Escaleras mixed both screamo and post-hardcore with a very superb musical execution and instrumentation. I think we could argue that their style mixes the fuzz of much more emoviolence-driven acts with the savoir faire of more post-rock-influenced screamo bands out there for creating something really unique and personal of their own. This is a very good example of showing off that screamo isn’t just hardcore punk with screamed vocals. Nice. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Dasiden

Dasiden existed sometime between 2014 and 2017 and only released 2014 EP(2014), Eterno Retorno LP (2015) and Sexta Etapa LP (2017) Regarding their sound, the band played straghtforward emoviolence mixed with sludge, post-hardcore and even black metal. This musical characteristic really was something unique since not many screamo bands out there tease with that (in)famous extreme metal subgenre. However, on their first LP, the band also incorporated some post-rock elements for creating thus a more ambient-oriented sound but their frantic execution still was retained. And, their second and last LP ever would come back to their original blackened screamo roots but some tracks even have a strange noise and grindcore feel on them. It is such a shame that they didn’t last longer enough for creating more aggressive music like this one. FFO: Celeste (France) and Portrayal of Guilt (USA). Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Archipiélagos

Archipiélagos is a band from Buenos Aires that has been in the game since 2014 and have released a pretty decent amount of records including a fantastic 3-way split with Hungría and Dislexia Free (Argentina) (2015) and their more recent self-titled LP released last year, among others. Regarding their sound, Archipiélagos started like a some sort of math rock-influenced midwest emo revival band that will surely remind you of bands like Owen, Algernon Cadwallader and Snowing (USA) mostly. And, yes, there are some cues from post-rock, post-hardcore and twee pop as well (Saxophone included). However, there are only a few tracks on their whole discography with a more screamo-oriented execution (you know, with the screamed vocals and stuff), i.e. Parte II (from Guermantes EP (2018)) and Nunavut (from 2019 LP) tracks. I think Archipiélagos shouldn’t be considered as part of that intriguing modern movement of fusing screamo with midwest emo at all due to their sporadical teasings with such mélange but it is a pretty good band you shouldn’t miss out either so easily. It’s awesome. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Cursi No Muere

Cursi No Muere is a band from Buenos Aires that has in the game since 2015 approximately. They have released so far Robar Flores Del Cementerio EP (2015), Perdidos En Traslación EP (2017) and Valientes Quienes Corren LP (2019). Regarding their sound, they’re more into modern melodic hardcore and post-hardcore than anything else but the screamo influences are there. Somewhat. Neither that aggressive nor that slow and introspective as you may think but Cursi No Muere really has heart touching lyrics and well executed music. I really dig their style despite the fact of being more suitable for modern hardcore kids that don’t know anything about Orchid at all. Some tunes really reminded of Lifetime and that’s an A+. I’m such a romantic, I know. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

WRRN

WRRN was formed back in 2016 and are active since then. They have released so far: La Llegada De Todo and El Lugar De Siempre singles (2016), Quiebre EP (2018) and Peste A Derrota EP (2019). Regarding the sound, WRRN play post-rock-influenced screamo with some post-hardcore elements like other interesting latin american featured in this humble special thus far such as Vientre (Colombia) and Escaleras (Argentina). And, yes, there’s some slight teasing with post-black metal as well. Pretty intense music and heartbreaking lyrics. I really dig their music and can’t wait for an upcoming LP. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Antiklesis

This impressive band from Buenos Aires describe themselves as « spastic, chaotic, angst-ridden hardcore by 30+ years old teenagers » (ha ha ha awesome!) and have been active since 2017. Featuring ex members of Ostende, Psicosfera and Hogvera, they have released so far: self-titled LP (2017) and Panóptico LP (2020). Regarding their sound, just like Dasiden, Antiklesis also mixes screamo with black metal. Imagine a mix of Deathspell Omega (France) and Republic of Dreams (Germany). There are some elements of crust punk, post-rock, mathcore and grindcore as well. In general terms, they have a really complex and precise musical instrumentation with a pretty immersive and technical execution with both slow and fast-paced moments. The lyrics have abstract stances and filled with different metaphysical and political content. Just read the band name or the idea of the panopticon as a silent measure of life control on their most recent LP. Nice. I will consider their latest work as a potential candidate for our best picks of this year. I really liked it. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Moldavia

Moldavia is a relatively new duo from Neuquén that have released so far one demo (2018) and more recently 43 Músculos Faciales LP (2020). Regarding their sound, Moldavia plays low-fi and raw emoviolence with a very complex and unorthodox slow/fast-paced overlaps and tempo changes. Pretty much like now all-time classics such as Usurp Synapse, Eurich and The End Of Century Party (USA). Compared to their demo, their more recent material sound is a little bit more elaborated with a slight change on the vocal style. In fact, the demo tracks were re-recorded and remasterized for this LP. There are also some weird samplers extracted from an unknown spanish dubbed movie that I’ve tried to identify without any success yet…A sad curious fact, their name comes from one of the poorest countries in Europe. I still do not know why argentinian screamo bands have been obsessed with cities and countries from around the world…Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Ginestá

Ginestá are from Bahía Blanca and only have released one LP entitled De La Agonía En Las Ciudades (2018) so far. It features members of other argentinian bands like Las Mañanas and Todos Los Inviernos. I’m not sure if they still are active as a band or not. Regarding their sound, Ginestá has screamo, post-hardcore and even slight indie emo influences. Indeed, it is very clean, sharp and polished with both well-elaborated musical execution and instrumentation alike. Not the most rabid emoviolent band out there but still very touching. Let’s wait and see if the future brings more material coming from this band. Time will tell. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

sierraleona

This is a recently formed band from Buenos Aires that released last year their debut EP entitled Singularidad. I do not know much about this musical outfit but someone who plays with Cursi No Muere was briefly involved in the project. Regarding the sound, sierraleona has both screamo and post-hardcore influences alike. Their sound is pretty outstanding since it gives you the impression that they’re into either post-rock or ambient with an interesting mid-tempo-paced musical execution. The lyrics are personal with abstract stances as well. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. Highly recommended. Enjoy!

Mis Sueños Son De Tu Adiós

We finally conclude this humble post with Mis Sueños Son De Tu Adiós (from now on mssdta), the most recent musical project of our friend Enzo AKA the biggest latin american skram nerd. This started as a sideproject to the now defunct 2 person band known as La Plus Belle Des Raisons from Viedma (You can click here if you’d like to listen to it. Highly recommended). Just like that short-lived musical outfit, mssdta has a strange fascination with Jerome’s Dream but with a more lo-fi and raw minimalistic approach. And, just when we reviewed the páginas_muertas EP (Larry Records (USA), 2020), there are eventual teasings with other musical styles and genres such as power electronics and harsh noise. Cool. We also have recently reviewed the split EP with Sano Ex Machina (Japan) (You can click here if you’d like to refresh your memory). and the experimental touch is there too. Finally, click on the image above for getting redirected to their official bandcamp and listen to their available material. There’s even one EP with covers of I Wrote Haikus About Cannibalism In Your Notebook. What else could you ask for? I’m waiting more material coming from this one-person musical project. Highly recommended. Enjoy and until next time. Kisses and hugs!

Partager :

J’aime chargement…

Articles similaires