Flying into Glasgow International Airport

Experience the beauty and magic of Scotland with daily flights from the United States, such as New York and from Florida’s Orlando International Airport direct to Glasgow. Fly directly from New York with Delta and United Airlines which has an average journey time of only 7 hours and 10 minutes to Glasgow Airport.

Visit https://www.glasgowairport.com/destinations/new-york/

Alternatively, fly directly from Orlando into Glasgow International Airport in approximately 8 hours & 30 minutes with Thomas Cook Airlines, TUI and Virgin Atlantic during the summer season. Therefore with so many direct routes on offer you can get to and from Glasgow quicker and more conveniently than ever before.

Find out more at https://www.glasgowairport.com/destinations/orlando/

Experience the beauty of Scotland

Scotland has so much to offer from stunning rural scenic landscapes, authentic architecture, cultural experiences, relaxing hotels, distillery and visitor tours tailored to tourists, summer festivals and a large selection of bustling bars and restaurants to give you a feel of Glasgow’s exciting nightlife. Whatever takes your fancy Glasgow has plenty to offer everyone!

To book tickets to some of Scotland's top attractions and tourist activities visit https://www.getyourguide.com/s/?q=Glasgow&customerSearch=|true|true&p=|1https://www.getyourguide.com/s/?q=Glasgow|1

A taste of Glaswegian Life

There are wonderful exhibits and cultural activities you should visit to make the most of your time in Glasgow such as the Glasgow Science Centre, The Huntarian Museum, Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum & the University of Glasgow. While House for an Art Lover, Mackintosh at the Willow and Glasgow School of Art are just a few of the sites where you can uncover the unique history and architecture of Glasgow, as well as the legacy of Glasgow born Charles Rennie Mackintosh, a world famous Scottish designer, architect and artist who is an integral part of Glasgow's style and culture.

Discover the great outdoors

However if you are looking for a rural escape outside of the hustle and bustle of the vibrant city centre then Loch Lomond, The Kelpies, Aviemore, Glencoe, the Cairngorms National Park, the Fairy Pools in Skye or Loch Ness are among just some of the stunning locations to witness breath-taking views and experience the beauty of a variety of vast Scottish landscapes. If you are wanting to experience the great outdoors then Scotland has plenty of outdoor activities to keep you occupied. With a variation of outdoor activities from hiking challenging munroes, nature trails to take in the fresh Scottish air, kayaking, canoeing and mountain biking to absorb the picturesque surroundings, and a range of wildlife tours there is plenty to keep you busy.

Find attractions and tours available to you during your trip at https://www.getyourguide.com/glasgow-l438/oban-and-west-highland-lochs-and-castles-day-tour-t12741/

Uncover the home of whisky

If you are a fan of whisky then you have come to the right place! With a selection of whisky tours at Glengoyne Distillery and Clydeside Distillery you will have the opportunity to learn about the fascinating history of Scottish whisky and manufacturing, take part in exciting masterclasses, discover whisky blending and even sample some for yourself.

While Glasgow is home to Scotland’s oldest brewery Tennent’s Wellpark Brewery where you can take a Brewery Tour and tasting session where you can learn about its captivating history and accomplishments over the years.

Sightsee in the Scottish capital

Just over an hour drive from Glasgow you can easily reach Edinburgh, Scotland’s capital city, by bus, car or train. Take the train directly from Glasgow Central or Glasgow Queen Street stations and you can spend the day roaming the city, exploring local coffee shops, restaurants and bars, shopping in a variety of Edinburgh’s high-street, luxurious designer and boutique stores. While of course it is a must to marvel at the beauty and history of Edinburgh Castle during your visit. Take a tour inside the castle where you can experience beautiful panoramic views across the city with a guided tour or an audio guide there is a lot of history to uncover.