JustSystems Corp. engages in the planning, development, and provision of software and related services. Its products include ATOK a Japanese input system developed for writing text in Japanese, SMILE ZEMI an e-learning systems for elementary school students for study using a dedicated tablet device, and Actionista! a suite of business intelligence (BI) tools that perform analysis. The company was founded on July 7, 1979 and is headquartered in Tokushima, Japan.

Toppan Printing Co., Ltd. provides commercial printing and related services worldwide. It operates in three segments: Information & Networks, Living Environment, and Electronics. The Information & Networks segment provides commercial printing services for posters, catalogs, pamphlets, flyers, calendars, pop materials, and gifts, as well as offers design and event services, sales promotion planning, multimedia related activities, and database and network system design and operation services; and publications printing services magazines and books, as well as CDROMs, DVDs, and other electronic publications. It also offers securities, such as stocks, bonds, gift certificates, and product coupons; cards comprising magnetic cards and prepaid cards; and develops and designs IC card systems, IC tag systems, and security management systems. This segment supplies various business form services, including direct mail, integrated slips, data print services, cards, envelopes, catalogs, and sales and maintenance of equipment. The Living Environment segment offers a range of packaging services, such as packaging planning, development, and production; development and production of packaging materials; design and production of packaging related system equipment; filling services; and packaging consulting. It also provides decorative paper/film, wallpaper, flooring materials, interior materials, and exterior materials. The Electronics segment offers display products that include color filters for LCDs, shadowmasks, screens for micro-display rear projection TVs, and functional films; and semiconductor products comprising photomasks, leadframes, printed wiring boards, substrates for semiconductor packages, design of printed wiring boards, LSI circuits, printed wiring, and performance assessment software. The company has a strategic alliance with AU Optronics Corp. Toppan Printing was founded in 1900 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

NEC Corp. engages in the provision of systems, components, services, and integrated solutions for computing and communications applications. It operates through the following segments: Public Business, Enterprise Business, Telecom Carrier Business, System Platform Business, and Others. The Public Business segment provides system integration (system architecture and consulting), support (maintenance), outsourcing and cloud services, and system equipment for public, medical and financial institutions. The Enterprise Business segment offers information technology solutions for manufacturing, retail, and services. The Telecom Carrier Business segment supplies equipment to telecom carriers for network implementation, along with network control platform systems and operating services. The System Platform Business deals with products from business such as from terminals to network and computer equipment, software products, and service platforms. The Others segment includes smart energy solutions, mobile phones, and lighting equipment businesses. The company was founded by Kunihiko Iwadare on July 17, 1899 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Fujitsu Ltd. engages in the provision of information technology (IT) services. It operates through the following segments: Technology Solutions, Ubiquitous Solutions, and Device Solutions. The Technology Solutions segment provides system integration, consulting, outsourcing, cloud, network, and system support services. It also offers system and network products such as servers, storage systems, software, network management systems, and mobile base stations. The Ubiquitous Solutions segment covers personal computers (PCs). The Device Solutions segment includes electronic components such as semiconductor packages and batteries. The company was founded on June 20, 1935 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. operates as a holding company which engages in the provision of telecommunication services. It operates through the following business divisions: Regional Communications, Long-Distance and International Communications, Mobile Communications, Data Communications, and Others. The Regional Communications division offers domestic intra-prefectural communication services such as fixed voice-related, Internet protocol (IP), and packet communications services; and sells telecommunications equipment. The Long Distance and International Communications division deals with the domestic intra-prefectural and international communications, and system integration services. The Mobile Communications division provides the mobile voice-related, IP, and packet communications services. The Data Communications division covers the system integration and network system services. The Other division engages in the real estate, finance, engineering, system integration and data processing services, and development of technologies and shared operations. The company was founded on August 1, 1952 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd. engages in the provision of publishing and commercial printing services. It operates through the following segments: Information Communication, Lifestyle and Industrial Supplies, Electronics, and Beverages. The Information Communication segment involves in the manufacture and sale of publications, commercial printing materials, business forms, and educational and publications distribution. The Lifestyle and Industrial Supplies segment offers packaging materials, interior and exterior construction materials, photographic materials, and industrial supplies. The Electronics segment handles precision electronic components and other products. The Beverages segment produces and sells carbonated and non-carbonated beverages. The company was founded on October 9, 1876 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Casio Computer Co., Ltd. engages in the manufacture and sale of watches and personal electronic equipment. It operates through the following segments: Consumer, Systems Equipment, and Others. The Consumer segment provides watches, clocks, electronic dictionaries, calculators, label printers, and electronic musical instruments. The Systems Equipment segment offers handy terminals, electronic cash registers, data projectors, and management support systems. The Others segment includes molds and molded parts. The company was founded by Tadao Kashio in April 1946 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Sharp Corp. engages in the manufacture and sale of electronic components and consumer electronic products. It operates through the following segments: Smart Homes, Smart Business Solutions, Internet of Things (IoT) Electronics Devices and Advance Display Systems. The Smart Homes segment includes mobile phones, tablets, electronic dictionaries, calculators, facsimiles, telephones, and network control unit. The Smart Business Solutions segment covers the POS systems, electronic cash registers, commercial projectors, information displays, digital MFPs (multi-function printers), options and consumables, software, FA equipment, and ultrasonic cleaners. The IoT Electronics Devices segment handles the camera modules, camera module production facilities, sensor modules, proximity sensors, dust sensors, CCD/CMOS sensors, laser diodes, and automotive cameras. The Advance Display Systems segment comprises of LCD color televisions, Blu-ray Disc recorders, indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) LCD modules, continuous grain (CG) Silicon LCD modules, and amorphous silicon LCD modules. The company was founded by Tokuji Hayakawa on September 15, 1912 and is headquartered in Osaka, Japan.

Ricoh Co., Ltd. engages in the development, production, sale, and provision of services for imaging systems, industrial printers, and network equipment. It operates through the following segments: Office Printing, Office Services, Commercial Printing, Industrial Printing, Thermal, and Others. The Office Printing segment provides multifunction devices, printers, and copiers for offices. The Office Services segment deals with infrastructure construction, network communication support, and visual communication products. The Commercial Printing segment provides digital printing products and maintenance services. The Industrial Printing segment manufactures and sells industrial inkjet heads, inkjet inks, and industrial printers. The Thermal segment produces thermal paper and thermal transfer ribbons. The Others segment includes industrial products, Smart Vision, and new businesses. The company was founded by Kiyoshi Ichimura on February 6, 1936 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan.

Kirtas Technologies, Inc. provides digital scanning solutions. It offers APT BookScan 1200, an automatic book scanning system, which scans bound documents. The company also provides BookScan Editor, a software for individual and batch processing of page capture, enhancement, optical character recognition conversion, and indexing. In addition, it offers digitization services. The company serves libraries, government, corporate, graphic arts, and religious markets. Kirtas Technologies, Inc. was founded in 2001 and is based in Victor, New York.