JustSystems, the largest independent software vendor in Japan and a worldwide leader in XML and information management technologies, recently announced the availability of XMetaL Author Enterprise 6.0 and XMetaL Reviewer 6.0, the latest versions of the company's collaborative XML structured authoring and document reviewing software tools. New in this release is an integration between the two products that unifies the XML authoring process with real-time, distributed web-based reviewing, and thus, accelerates documentation cycles.

"With the release of XMetaL Author Enterprise 6.0 and XMetaL Reviewer 6.0, JustSystems is providing customers and partners with a whole new set of capabilities that enterprises demand to manage large volumes of content," said Aaron Deitcher, vice president of North America and EMEA for JustSystems. "The integration between the two products provides a solid foundation for a truly collaborative authoring and reviewing experience that benefits both the authors and reviewers involved as well as the customer IT departments that are looking to streamline structured content configuration processes."

Inside the XMetaL Author Enterprise 6.0 and XMetaL Reviewer 6.0 Integration

The XMetaL Author Enterprise 6.0 and XMetaL Reviewer 6.0 integration arms the enterprise with unified authoring and reviewing — giving authors 1) the tools they need to initiate and manage reviews and 2) a set of specialized editing commands that help authors directly act upon suggestions. This integration works seamlessly with the well-known Darwin Information Typing Architecture (DITA) standard as well as other universal industry standards.

Also, the new release allows greater flexibility with multi-document projects that have:

Unlimited Number of Documents – Any number of documents can now be managed within the realm of a single project.

Navigational PDF – A rendition can be associated with the project and used for direct navigation from the place in the final document's layout to the originating topic that is under review.

Arbitrary Attachments – Arbitrary attachments can be associated in any number with projects, project cycles and drafts.

Deitcher continued, "Documents are the collective front line that determines an organization's success in dealing with customers, investors and employees. With the delivery of XMetaL Author Enterprise 6.0 and XMetaL Reviewer 6.0, we are carrying on our tradition of helping the enterprise get to market faster with information products by finding innovative ways to simplify authoring and reviewing processes."

About JustSystems

JustSystems is a leading global software provider with three decades of successful innovation in office productivity, information management, and consumer and enterprise software. With over 2,500 customers worldwide, the company is continuing a global expansion strategy based on its xfy enterprise software, XMetaL content lifecycle solutions, and its pioneering work in enabling XBRL financial reporting technologies. JustSystems is one of the 2008 KMWorld 100 Companies that Matter in Knowledge Management, a 2008 EContent 100 member, and was recognized on the 2008 KMWorld Trend-Setting Product list for XMetaL. Major strategic partnerships include IBM, Oracle and EMC. For more information, visit http://www.justsystems.com.