During the initial stage of our wedding planning, we know that we needed to secure two items first: Church and the Reception Venue. The only requirement we had in mind at the time was that it shall be within Metro Manila only and those churches we personally attending masses to. No destination wedding to cater most of our guests.

After months of deferring our decisions, we were down to two choices – Sta. Clara de Montefalco Church and San Andres Apostol Parish Church. Learning that Sta. Clara does not accept booking on our wedding date, we went ahead with San Andres Apostol Parish, a parish church in the Greenwoods Village.

September 2017 when we went for the pre-cana seminar and orientation at the church. Tita Pachi, the church coordinator, asked us some details like the location of our preps venue, the couple’s color motif, etc. She also informed us of the church rules that we needed to observe during the day. At this time, she shared that they had some incidents whereby the bride got stuck in a traffic and was late. Consequently, the priest had to go back and cancelled on her. I listened to her stories but was not really paying attention to them because I thought that it is far from happening to me as my hotel is within 30-mins drive only. And I thought that the story may be a bit exaggerated. Another point noted was that they would only allow you to choose your song for your bridal march. The entire procession will just be Canon D.

The thing that I got worried about is when she told us that they do not, i repeat, they DO NOT allow closing the door during the bridal walk. She stressed that it will be futile even if we cry and beg her for it. Oh well yea fine, rules are rules. With that, I saw Clieo’s Wedding Flower and asked if they can provide a flower arch with the curtain reveal. I told her my church and learned that they had deliver there before. So plus point, at least I don’t need to explain to her and show her the directions.

December 2017, one of our seatmate-bride during the orientation shared that she managed to get the parish priest to accede to her request of closing the door. Oh great, now this after I stashed a money for a flower arch, so I thought. Haha.

Come wedding day, I was 40 minutes late!!! Then the story of the priest cancelling on the bride runs in my head. I was outside waiting inside the car when I saw that the procession had started so breathe, yeah they were not cancelling on me. So yeah, my 100 points on you!

Kidding aside, i know what happened is not in any way right and it could cost us our year-long preparation and moreso waste everybody’s time. Because of that I am humbled by this realization and overwhelmed by God’s grace to us and the warmth and love we felt from our guests on the day. During the course of our preparation, I would quarrel with Joey whenever I get stressed from work or whenever I felt that he doesn’t care about the wedding. Weeks before the wedding, I was so stressed by my female entourage dressmaker that I was only able to settle it down 4 days before the wedding day. Few days after arriving in Manila, I fell ill but i never stop overthinking and continued on my DiY’s and other errands. I never get sick but I took it that maybe God wanted me to take a break and rest.

I realized that even how long you prepared for the day, even how OC you may had been; even how many bulk of hair you had lost for all the stress you have been into, all of those will not matter because the most important thing is the blessing you are asking God for your union.

Church: San Andres Apostol Parish

Inclusion: Use of Church, Rent of Red Carpet, Choir, Flower Arrangement for Aisle and Altar

Mode of Communication: Personal Visit/ Phone Calls

Value for Money: Worth it. Non-air conditioned but they provide huge industrial fans around. The flower arrangement were okay. We didn’t really expect because it just cost us Php 3,500.00 but it looks neat and decent. The choir was good. I only noticed them singing when the euphoria has sit into me and we started with the photo ops. We receive good feed back as well from the guests that they thought we hired them elsewhere.

Flower Arch: Clieo’s Wedding Flower

Inclusion: Rent of Flower arch with Curtain Reveal, Delivery and Set up on Church

Mode of Communication: thru FB Messenger

Value for Money: Satisfied. I actually rented the flower arch in replacement of the “door closing” but when Father Bong had permitted us to close the door for the bridal entrance, I was almost tempted to cancel it. But I am glad I did not as it added accent to the church. It was also an efficient transaction with them. I just sent then my peg and color motif, and they delivered without any hassle.

Got questions? Leave me a note.

Cheers,

Mrs. U