American Romanticism was the first literary movement in the US acknowledged as such, whose authors published between 1820 and 1860 inspired by the thousands of miles of untamed natural landscapes and American historical events; thus, ideas on freedom, democracy, and frontiers are recurrent in American Romantic works. Even though American Romantic writers were influenced by European authors, whose works emphasized powerful emotions, a worship of nature, and imagination, they inherited and adapted a long tradition in fact rooted as far as in Neoplatonic philosophy. This paper discusses the philosophical roots of American Romanticism and analyses how these theories influenced Ralph Waldo Emerson and Edgar Allan Poe in their considerations of the process of writing poetry. First, the paper provides a brief account on the relevant aesthetic theories by Neoplatonic philosophers, Immanuel Kant, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Then, the discussion moves to analyze how these ideas reverberate in Ralph Waldo Emerson's "The Poet" and Edgar Allan Poe's "The Philosophy of Composition", the main argument being that their conclusions stem from different interpretations of a long philosophical tradition.

Though Poe has commonly been remembered for his contributions to the detective, horror, and science-fiction genres, we should consider how his innovation extended into other areas. This includes his critical works, such as his essay “The Philosophy of Composition.” Despite Poe’s classicaltraining and the trends in composition instruction before and during his educational career, the theory of composition argued for in his critical essays is more analogos to the Process Theory established by compositionsts over 100 years later than the teaching methods of his time, suggesting that Poe’s concept of composition was very progressive. To truly understand Poe’s environment, we must examine the tradition that informed early nineteenth-century educational systems as well as Poe’s own academic experience. In order to discover the connections between Poe’s critical methodologies and those of later composition theorists, we must compare the preexisting notions in the field to the developments ...

Christopher Norris is Emeritus professor at Cardiff University. Recently, he began to address philosophical questions through poetry. In his paper, he explains why. Rather than expressing definite ideas in an elegant way, poetry can be intended as a process from which new ideas (also philosophical ones) can emerge. The result are a number of poems which cover a variety of issues, ranging from philosophy to politics, arts, history of ideas and science. Itinera has already begun to publish a few of these poems in previous issues and is now presenting three of them on painters (Turner, Matisse, Magritte).

A new study of modern Chinese poetry has been published that deserves the attention of linguists working in both the applied and theoretical fields. The focus of the book is experimental and avant-garde literature, and as such it raises questions that are different than the ones we are accustomed to consider in the field of poetics. This review essay considers proposals for understanding poetic ability and sensibility from the point of view of applications of cognitive science. Key words: Poetics, experimental literature, Chinese character, music, poetry, Russian Formalists

This paper aims at bridging two literary corpora establishing a theme close to the heart of a number of poets who engaged with Romantic leitmotifs: the eternising function of poetry. In order to define this poetic stance, evocative examples of two key writers are adopted for close examination: select sonnets of modern Chinese poet Feng Zhi and select verses from the poems of Italian neo- Classicist writer Ugo Foscolo. Both Feng Zhi and Ugo Foscolo make reference to the corruptibility of man’s body. The ultimate purpose of poetry, as seen in the lyrical excerpts, is to immortalise what is generally conceived as ephemeral, be it the mortal beauty of a friend, the historical achievements of a nation, the quests of heroes or even the transient moments of human life. Poetry, unlike material tokens, becomes a unique product of human sensitivity and génie as it provides unequivocal fame and permanence in a world that is affected by time and its relentless corrosive power. The lyrical verses of Feng Zhi and Ugo Foscolo, therefore, become ever-lasting testimonials or symbols of historical memory for future generations, which can produce heroic sentiments in the case of the Italian carme or nostalgia and endurance on the Chinese side.