Portugal is a Tier III nation located in Europe. It borders Spain to the east and north, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west.

Background[]

Portugal, officially the Portuguese Republic, is a country located on the Iberian Peninsula, in southwestern Europe. It is the westernmost sovereign state of mainland Europe, being bordered to the west and south by the Atlantic Ocean and to the north and east by Spain. Its territory also includes the Atlantic archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira, both autonomous regions with their own regional governments. The official and national language is Portuguese.

Portugal is the oldest nation state on the Iberian Peninsula and one of the oldest in Europe, its territory having been continuously settled, invaded and fought over since prehistoric times. It was inhabited by pre-Celtic and Celtic peoples, visited by Phoenicians-Carthaginians, Ancient Greeks and ruled by the Romans, who were followed by the invasions of the Suebi and Visigothic Germanic peoples. After the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, most of its territory was part of places like Al-Andalus and other Islamic empires. Portugal as a country was established during the early Christian Reconquista. Founded in 868, the County of Portugal gained prominence after the Battle of São Mamede (1128). The Kingdom of Portugal was later proclaimed following the Battle of Ourique (1139), and independence from León was recognized by the Treaty of Zamora (1143).

Portugal has left a profound cultural, architectural and linguistic influence across the globe, with a legacy of around 250 million Portuguese speakers, and many Portuguese-based creoles. It is a developed country with an advanced economy and high living standards. Additionally, it is highly placed in rankings of moral freedom (2nd), peacefulness (3rd), democracy (7th), press freedom (10th), stability (15th), social progress (18th), and prosperity (26th). A member of the United Nations, the European Union, the Schengen Area and the Council of Europe (CoE), Portugal was also one of the founding members of NATO, the eurozone, the OECD, and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.

Base Statistics[]

Economy[]

Portugal starts with a modest economy of $417,407. $415,337 from tax and $2,070 from resources.

Resources[]

Resources of Portugal Copper +1.1 Tungsten +1.1

Military[]

Portugal has a starting manpower of 120,165. The manpower gain is 703.

Base Manpower Capacity of Portugal per Conscription Law Disarmed

[1% RP] Volunteer

[2% RP] Limited

[5% RP] Extensive

[10% RP] Required

[25% RP] 60,074 120,147 300,368 600,735 1,501,837

Geography[]

Cities[]

Portugal has 20 cities. The most populous is the capital of Lisbon, which has a population of 2,812,000. The only other major city is Porto, which has a population of 1,337,000.

Formables[]

Portugal can form the Iberian Union. (Difficulty: Easy)

The Iberian Union can only be formed by Portugal and Spain, although it isn't a very common formable with Portugal. Even though Spain would have a better chance of forming it, it's still very possible for Portugal to form it. It does give a good stab boost for Portugal, which helps if you're trying to form the Portuguese Empire.

Portugal can form the Portuguese Empire. (Difficulty: Extreme)

The Portuguese Empire is a formable of solely Portugal. It is a difficult formable, although not as hard compared to other colonial empires such as the Spanish Empire. It needs a variety of countries, which includes Portugal itself, Brazil, French Guiana, Uruguay, Angola, Mozambique, Cabo Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, Guinea-Bissau, Maldives, Sri Lanka, Macau, and Timor-Leste.

Portugal can form the European Union. (Difficulty: Hard)

Portugal, just like any other country in Europe, can form EU. It can be formed by taking every country in Europe except for UK and Slovenia. (A less brief description is on the actual page.)

Strategy[]

Since Portugal is further from most of Europe, it is harder for it to form European Union, although it is possible.

It is smart to ally Spain first thing, because if Spain doesn't attack you, you will be safe for usually the whole game. However you won't be completely safe because the USA suprisingly expands into Europe early game from Portugal. If Spain rejects your request to ally, or ignores it, put a line of troops around your border if you can, and also try to make destroyers to get ahead in the naval battle. Keep your original stack on your capital and train them as much as you can. Fortify your capital as well. If you do this, it should penetrate Spain's troops. The line of troops should be able to hold off them for at least enough time to do some more preparing. If they troop spam, wait for their troops to get weak, and then wipe them out. Don't use all of your MP, as your military will be crippled if you use it all at a single time. After this, you should be able to sweep their cities with your own troops. By now, you should be able to annex the rest of Spain and form Iberian Union. Congrats! If you want, you could go for the Portuguese Empire but it can be very difficult. If you are up for the challenge, take your African possessions first (You may have to attack South Africa since they normally go for Angola and Mozambique.) You could negotiate for the Asian territories since they are not large or that useful. If they country's refuse you could try invading but unlikely to win. Then go for Brazil when it turns into AI.

If Spain is an AI[]

If Spain is an AI you should be fine just refer to the start of the first paragraph about the United States. You should first make electronic factories with 2 Gold and 2 Copper for each factory. Then get factory output 2 and sell electronics to AI's. After this you take Spain if it remains an AI this should be simple. After this you might want to go for your formable, The Portuguese Empire. It's recommended to take your army to Angola and Mozambique if South Africa doesn't disturb because it's in an easy place to get to. You should leave Brazil for last because of the difficulty that it takes to annex it. To make it easier, get jungle specialization, train your units and research your desired unit's mobility. One you've annexed all of the required countries for the Portuguese Empire, good job you have successfully formed a colonial empire.

Threats[]

Obviously, the main threat is Spain trying to form the Iberian Union. However below are a list of smaller threats.

United States trying to enter into Europe and using Iberia as a base due it being the most western point in Europe.

Morocco trying to take Iberia.

Brazil trying to enter Europe. Or as revenge for the Portuguese colonization of Brazil.

France being insanely expansionist

Any European nation trying to from the European Union.