The Geneva School is a Christian classical, private, coeducational day school, founded in 1993. The Geneva School offers Pre-K through 12th grade on two campuses. The main 5-acre (20,000 m2) campus (1st through 12th grade) and the Early Childhood Campus are situated in Winter Park, Florida, near Orlando, Florida. Geneva is accredited by the Florida Council of Independent Schools and the Florida Kindergarten Council and is a member of the Association of Classical and Christian Schools. Though the school claims to be unaffiliated and non-denominational, the majority of the families, teachers, and staff are Protestant. Though most of the families at The Geneva School are Christian, the school does not require that its students or their parents provide any statement of faith or attendance at a local church. All staff are required to sign a statement of faith in keeping with Reformed Christian theology. The total enrollment for 2012–13 is about 450 students, Pre-K–12. This includes around 280 students in PK–6 and 170 in grades 7–12.

Contents

The geneva school community

Academics

Athletics

A Legacy Worth Building

References

Academics

Geneva employs the trivium model of education in an attempt to return to the classical methods of education used by the ancients and medievals, but largely abandoned in the modern world. This distinctive classical approach to education is the basis for the school's entire academic program. Under this model, students are ideally given training in facts (grammar), logical thinking ability (dialectic), and communication skills (rhetoric) that will allow excellence in any higher discipline or vocation. While the trivium is nothing new, the idea of focusing upon each of these three liberal arts roughly during the grammar, middle-school, and high school periods, respectively, applied by many classical preparatory schools today, can be traced to Dorothy Sayers' influential essay, The Lost Tools of Learning. A Geneva education is designed to recover the disciplines and provide the benefits of this proven historical approach in the context of modern, Reformed Christianity.

Athletics

The Geneva School athletic teams are known as the Knights. Dan Harger has served as athletic director since 1999. The Knights are full members of FHSAA and compete at the 2A level in most sports. The Geneva School teams have won district championships in nearly all sports. Numerous individual district and regional championships have been achieved as well as many appearances at state level competition. In 2011, a Geneva girls' cross country runner was the state runner-up. In 2013, the boys' tennis line one doubles team finished as state runners-up.

The Geneva School expects to continue its athletic success in a number of sports including girls' volleyball and boys' cross country (currently ranked 3rd are soccer, basketball, softball, tennis, and track and field teams in Florida). Also expecting success are soccer, basketball, softball, tennis, and track and field.

"A Legacy Worth Building"

The Geneva School has recently begun a capital campaign called "A Legacy Worth Building" in which it hopes to raise the funds needed to build facilities on newly-purchased land. The 52-acre (210,000 m2) parcel on Seminola Boulevard in Legacy Park, Casselberry, Florida, will house academic, sports, recreational, and performing arts spaces. Upon the completion of this ambitious master plan, The Geneva School would boast the largest private school campus in the Orlando Metropolitan Area.