Mascots & Nicknames

Furman University’s official athletic mascot is a knight on a horse and the school’s intercollegiate athletic teams are nicknamed “Paladins.” Prior to 1961 the baseball team was known as the “Hornets,” the football team “Hurricane,” and the basketball team “Paladins.” First used by a Greenville sportswriter in the 1930s to describe Furman’s basketball team, “Paladins” became the official nickname of all the school’s intercollegiate athletic teams following a vote of the student body on Sept. 15, 1961.

A “Paladin” is defined by the American Heritage College Dictionary as a “paragon of chivalry; a heroic champion; a strong supporter or defender of a cause; and any of the 12 peers of French emporer Charlemagne’s court.” While the same dictionary does not specifically describe a knight as a Paladin or vice-versa, the knight’s definition — “a defender, champion, or zealous upholder of a cause or principle” — closely resembles that of Paladin.

While history reveals that knights and Paladins were not always mounted men-at-arms, the modern image of a knight has no doubt played a role in the development of Furman’s mascot as knight on a horse.

Colors

The origin of Furman's school colors can be traced to the early 1890s when, at an alumni meeting headed up by James Andrews Tate of York, S.C., it was officially decided that royal purple and white would serve as school colors. Since then, Furman football teams have been known by nicknames Purple Fighters, Purple Hurricane and, most recently, Paladins -- all of which have proudly boasted the school's most recognizable color.

Logo

Furman's athletics program are represented by the Diamond "F" logo, which first appeared in 1973 on the school's football helmets. Designed by then-Furman junior art major Dennis Zeiger (pictured with helmet) for $25 at the request of new head football coach Art Baker, the Diamond F has been copied (and letters changed) by numerous high school football teams in the Southeast over the last several decades, oftentimes by former Furman players now in the coaching ranks.

Paladin Plaza

Dedicated in 2003, Paladin Plaza is the welcome area at Paladin Stadium. The centerpiece for Paladin Plaza is a 17-foot-high bronze patina statue of a horse-and-knight, which symbolizes the school's athletic mascot. The lighted, 12,000-square-foot area also includes brick walkways with granite set edging, a replica of the Diamond "F" and custom landscaping. Sonny and Keeter Horton of Greenville and Melvin and Dollie Younts of Fountain Inn were the primary donors for Paladin Plaza. The horse-and-knight statue was donated by Irwin Belk of Charlotte, N.C. The granite for the statue was donated by the family of L.D. Stewart in honor of Paladin football. Chris Stewart and Marty Priore, 2002 Furman graduates and former Paladin All-American offensive linemen now in the granite business in Odessa, Fla., installed the material for the statue's pedestal. The horse-and-knight was designed by artist John Hair of Cornelius, N.C.