You don’t have to walk far in London before a plaque, usually blue, will catch your eye. These plaques mark a building or place that has played a prominent role in British history, but where are the good ones?

From the home in which wartime prime minister Winston Churchill died on Hyde Park Gate, Kensington, (which is reputedly worth almost three times as much as its neighbouring properties, due to its blue plaque status), to the only surviving London home of Charles Dickens in Doughty street, Holburn (now home to the Charles Dickens Museum), and the property where Sir Christopher Wren lived on Blackfriars Road during the building of St Paul’s Cathedral, the capital has no shortage of such places.

History

The original blue plaques scheme began in London in 1866 and the scheme now includes 880 plaques.

The initial scheme was run by the Society of Arts (it is now run by English Heritage) and the first names considered included Benjamin Franklin and Lord Nelson and although the first plaque to be erected was to Lord Byron in 1867, the earliest blue plaque to survive, (also erected that year), commemorates Napoleon III in King Street, St James's.

Few of these original 35 plaques remain, but should you venture to Wentworth Place in Hampstead you can still see John Keats’ ornate plaque, erected on the house where he lived from 1818 to 1820 which is now open to the public.

Plaques around the capital include the family home of both Sigmund Freud and his daughter Anna Freud in Finchley (now home to the Freud Museum), and the home of English actress Vivien Leigh in Chelsea, star of Gone With the Wind.

Off-shoots

Other schemes across London complement the English heritage work. Several boroughs have their own projects, too: in Lewisham you can see a maroon plaque in honour of the aircraft pioneer Sir Barnes Wallis; the man who brought us the bouncing bomb.

In and around London’s Carnaby Street you’ll find a series of blue plaques celebrating the area’s cool musical heritage as part of its Carnaby Echoes tour (carnabyechoes.com) – our favourite of which is on the Bag O’Nails Club where the Jimi Hendrix Experience played one of their first British gigs on 25 November 1966.

English Heritage doesn’t erect plaques outside London but there are local schemes.

Some people naturally have several plaques dedicated to them: William Shakespeare has no fewer than nine scattered across London, Stratford upon Avon and even Birmingham.