Thelma Alice Todd was born in Lawrence Massachusetts on July 29, 1906 and appeared in 136 pictures between 1926 and 1935, but is perhaps best remembered for her comedic roles in films such as Marx Brothers and, of course, Laurel and Hardy films. The first with the boys was their first ‘proper’ sound short, Unaccustomed as We Are (1929) which was also the first ‘talkie’ from the Hal Roach Studios.

Her final appearance on film was with Stan and Ollie in The Bohemian Girl which was released in 1936, and featured her in a part that was largely deleted due to her suspicious death on December 16th 1935 at the age of just 29.

An intelligent child, she had aspirations of becoming a schoolteacher, but her mother encouraged her to enter several beauty contests, eventually getting to the ‘Miss America’ pageant. She didn’t win, but several scouts who were looking for fresh faces had seen her, and she started making shorts with Hal Roach and was then signed by Paramount.

During the silent film era, Todd appeared in numerous supporting roles that made full use of her beauty but gave her little chance to act. With the advent of the talkies, Todd was given opportunity to expand her roles when producer Hal Roach signed her to appear with such comedy stars as Harry Langdon, Charley Chase, and Stan and Ollie.

In 1931, Roach cast Todd in her own series of slapstick comedy shorts, running 17 to 27 minutes each. In an attempt to create a female version of Laurel and Hardy, Roach teamed Todd firstly with ZaSu Pitts and then with Patsy Kelly.

She was also a shrewd businesswoman and opened ‘Thelma Todd’s Sidewalk Cafe,’ a nightclub/restaurant that catered for show-business people. It also attracted some questionable underworld types, and rumour has it that they were trying to take over her club and use it as a gambling establishment in order to fleece the wealthy Hollywood crowd.

She wouldn’t sell or facilitate any wrongdoing, therefore earning the acrimony of the type of person you really don’t want to fall out with…

Todd continued her short-subject series and then featured in The Bohemian Girl (released in 1936). This was her last film; she died mysteriously in her car garage on December 16, 1935 of carbon monoxide poisoning after completing all of her scenes, but most of them were re-shot.

Producer Roach deleted all of Todd’s dialogue and limited her appearance to one musical number.

Her death was given a cursory investigation by the then notoriously corrupt Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office and the case was quickly and unceremoniously closed as a suicide. Her death has remained controversial even to this day.

Appearing in only five Laurel and Hardys (plus her vehicle with Zasu-Pitts: On The Loose in 1931 in which the boys had a cameo), Thelma Todd was always memorable for her beauty, and inevitably stole virtually every scene she appeared in. She is credited with 136 appearance in total of which The Bohemian Girl in 1936 was her last. Click on any of the below film titles to be taken to the relevant page on the website.

Another Fine Mess Lady Plumtree

The Bohemian Girl Gypsy Queen’s daughter

Chickens Come Home Ollie’s wife

Fra Diavolo (The Devils Brother) Lady Pamela Roeburg

Unaccustomed As We Are Officer Kennedy’s wife