Ahmed Hassan Zewail, known as the father of femtochemisty, was a 1999 Nobel Prize winning Egyptian chemist. He earned numerous prestigeous awards and positions at top universities throughout his lifetime. Although primarily known for his pioneering work in this specific area of chemistry, Zewail also made an impact at the universities he served at, and in the political realm, promoting access to education for students all around the world.

In 1976, Zewail moved to California to complete postdoctoral research at the University of California. Berkley. Only two years after completing his PhD, Zewail was taken on as staff at the California Institute of Technology, being selected as the school’s first Linus Pauling Professor of Chemical Physics in 1990 (2) In addition to this, Zewail was a visiting professor at many universities, including the American University at Cairo, Texas A&M, and University of Iowa. (2) In 2011, he founded the Zewail City of Science and Technology, a unique and foremost institute of technology in Cairo, Egypt.

Zewail was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1999, becoming the first Egyptian and Arab to do so. His primary work, for which he was bestowed with this great honor for the development of femtochemistry, which utilizes a laser which flashes across intervals measured in femtoseconds, (a millionth of a billionth of a second, or 10^-15 s). (2) This revolutionary work allows for barriers of reactions to be viewed in “slow motion,” providing new insight into the exact transition states of specific chemical reactions. With a time scale this small, technology now allows scientists to literally watch individual chemical bonds being formed, broken, and formed again. (2) The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said this about his work, “Professor Zewail’s contributions have brought about a revolution in chemistry and adjacent sciences, since this type of investigation allows us to understand and predict important reactions.” (1)

In one of his first Nobel Prize-winning experiments Zewail studied the disintegration of iodocyanide, which can be written chemically as ICN –>I + CN. He and his team observed a transition state at the exact moment when the I-C bond was about to break, calculating that the entire reaction takes place in a mere 200 femtoseconds.

In addition to his research endeavors, Zewail also made a lasting impact during his political endeavors in the 2000s. In 2009, US president Barak Obama appointed him to the Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Within the same year, Zewail was made the United State’s first science envoy to the Middle East. With this role, he took a tour of many prominent countries, including Egypt, Turkey and Qatar. (4) As he traveled, Zewail met with leaders of politics, education, science, media and technology. He learned that many Muslim nations were rapidly falling behind world standards when it came to education and technology, and that these causes, coupled with increasing poverty had led to much despair amongst the younger population.(3) Zewail had a deep concern for the “have-nots” of society, especially the millions of children in the world who cannot receive a proper education. (3) He felt this particularly for his home country of Egypt, which led to the creation of the Zewail City of Science and Technology, which was inaugurated in 2011. In addition to his role as a US envoy, Zewail was invited to join the UN Scientific Advisory Board in 2013 by the Secretary General at the time, Ban Ki-moon.

The soft power of science has the potential to reshape global diplomacy.

– Ahmed Zewail, LA Times, 2010, on his role as US Science envoy

Ahmed Zewail was also a well-published author, with over 600 papers and 14 books in his name. His autobiography, Voyage Through Time: Walks of Life to the Nobel Prize, was published in 2004. Well-received in all parts of the world and within science, being bestowed with countless awards throughout his lifetime. While the Nobel is by far the most prestigious, Zewail was also awarded Egypt’s highest state honor, the Grand Collar of the Nile, in the same year. (3) He was given the Albert Einstein World Award for Science in 2006, along with almost a dozen other international awards in chemistry between 2001-2011. Ahmed was also made a foreign member of many distinguished societies, such as the Royal Society (2001) and the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences (2003).(5) Zewail was granted numerous other awards as well as honorary degrees from universities all around the globe.

Ahmed Hassan Zewail died on August 2nd, 2016, at the age of 70. Although he is dearly missed by his surviving family members and others who his life impacted for the better, his legacy will shine on for a long time to come. Zewail was not only as a brilliant chemist, he was a man who took what he was given, and share that gift with others.

The video below is a full lecture given by Ahmed Zewail concerning his work, which is worth a watch. He is a powerful speaker and a passionate scientist.

References:

1) Weil, Martin. (August 3, 2016). Ahmed Zewail, Nobel laureate who sparked a ‘revolution in chemistry,’ dies at 70. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/ahmed-zewail-nobel-laureate-who-sparked-a-revolution-in-chemistry-dies-at-70/2016/08/03/73d05068-592b-11e6-9767-f6c947fd0cb8_story.html

2) Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia (2021, July 29). Ahmed H. Zewail. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Ahmed-Zewail

3) Thomas, John Meurig. (August 22, 2016). Ahmed Zewail Obituary. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/22/ahmed-zewail-obituary

4) Zewail, Ahmed. (June 27th, 2010). Science as a Shaper of Global Democracy. LA Times. https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2010-jun-27-la-oe-zewail-science-20100627-story.html