1. School for Grown Ups Educating Rita

2. Summary • Educating Rita - by Playwright Willy Russell • 1980 - Stage play Educating Rita performed by the Royal Shakespeare Company • 1983 - Film Educating Rita - dir Lewis Gilbert

3. Outline • Rita (Susan) is a 26 year old hairdresser, married to Denny who wants a child, though she doesn’t, yet. She sets out to discover herself and enrols onto an Open University course. Her tutor, Dr. Frank Bryant is drunk, scruffy, and cynical. He has one failed marriage behind him and is living through the last days of another failed relationship. Reluctant to tutor Rita the two embark on a fraught journey of discovery and transformation.

4. Educating Rita as (part) Biographical • Willy Russell, left school aged 15 with no qualiﬁcations • Spent 6 years working as a ladies hairdresser • Career change at 20, eventually choosing to return to education

5. Observing Mise-en-scène • The University • Frank’s House • Rita’s house and neighbourhood • Costume • Indicators of social class and gender

6. Rita

7. Frank

8. The Representation of Higher Education “Students sit contemplatively under shady trees. The male protagonist, lecturer Dr Frank Bryant, works in his ofﬁce, a room larger, one suspects, than the entire ground ﬂoor of most academics’ houses and entirely unrepresentative of the facilities accorded to most university staff. Its furniture suggests upper- middle-class taste and wealth: it has huge leather sofas, an antique desk and space for all the bookcases one could desire.” (Fisher et al, 2008: p. 148)

9. Social Class & Higher Education • The working class as deﬁcient though evidence of consciousness (Rita’s mother?) • Higher Education is a means of escape - to higher culture, to a different class • Humour is drawn from highlighting the working class lack of culture (Fisher et al, 2008) • FRANK: Do you know Yeats? • RITA: The Wine Lodge? • But, the middle class is problematised

10. Gender & Higher Education • A double disadvantage? (working class & female) • Gendered expectations • DENNY: It’s that easy Susan. Ya stop goin’ to that university and you stop takin’ the pill, or you’re out. • “the working-class woman as a victim and a joke” (Fisher et al, 2008: 151)

11. 'It's that stupid bleeding handle on the door'

12. Educating Rita as Socialisation • “‘stories that chronicle a character’s attempt to enter a new social (and discursive) arena’.” • Eldred and Mortensen (1992: 513)

13. Pygmalion Movie • Educating Rita shares features of the ﬁlm My Fair Lady , in turn based on Pygmalion • “student–teacher versions of Pygmalion” (Keroes 1999: 106) • Theme of transformation & Frank’s reference to Mary Shelley

14. The Student-Teacher Pygmalion • Informal Education, an interaction between two characters • Verdoodt et al 2010

15. Teaching as Intimate • Emotionally & physically close • “…the teacher may also come to view the learner as a continuous source of emotional comfort and familiarity” • (Markgraf and Pavlik, 1998: 280)

16. Binary Oppositions • “…the deep structure of these movies usually consists to a certain degree in the same binary oppositions in which ‘high’ culture (of any kind) is set against ‘low’ culture (of any kind)…” • Verdoodt et al 2010: 527

17. Transformation &Independence • Theme of Pygmalion continues in Trier (2009) • Intimacy gives way to greater independence - grown apart from Frank • Immersion in academia - signiﬁed by scenes of bike rides, change of clothes, hair, use of language

18. Have you come all this way for so very little?