(1914–97). U.S. author and icon of popular culture William S. Burroughs was associated with the beat generation. His controversial and often satirical writings described a modern underworld of drugs and disillusionment.

William Seward Burroughs was born on February 5, 1914, in St. Louis, Missouri. His grandfather founded the Burroughs Adding Machine company, which later merged with Sperry Univac to form Unisys. He dreamed of becoming a writer as a young boy. His first literary endeavor was called The Autobiography of a Wolf, which he wrote after reading The Biography of a Grizzly Bear.

From there, Burroughs’ interests and writing experiments ranged from gangster stories to tales of English high society. When he was 15 years old he was sent to the Los Alamos Ranch School, an activity-based camp and school, which he did not enjoy. Burroughs found Harvard University to be more to his liking, and while doing graduate work there in anthropology he wrote several unconventional short stories with his friends. He was married for the first time in 1937, to Ilse Herzfeld Klapper. They divorced in 1946.

In his early 30s Burroughs decided to join the gangster underground of New York City, where he became addicted to heroin and was befriended by Herbert Huncke. In 1943 Burroughs met Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, who were then students at Columbia University. Huncke, Kerouac, and Ginsberg were leading figures of the beat generation—the name for a group of young literary nonconformists who experimented with alternative lifestyles and drugs in the 1950s. Although Burroughs was older than they, he was greatly influenced by their ideas, as they were by his. Burroughs and Kerouac collaborated on a novel that they chose not to publish.

From New York Burroughs moved to eastern Texas, where he lived with Huncke and Joan Vollmer Adams, who became his wife. Together with two children, one from Adams’ first marriage and one the child of Adams and Burroughs, they lived on a farm where they fed their drug habits and grew oranges, cotton, and marijuana. Kerouac visited the farm and described his outlandish experiences there in On the Road. Burroughs himself did not produce any writing during this period.

From 1948 to 1951 Burroughs attended Mexico City College. During this time he wrote a hard-edged look at his life as a drug addict, Junkie (subtitled Confessions of an Unredeemed Drug Addict). Ginsberg arranged for the publication of Junkie as a pulp paperback in 1953 under Burroughs’ pseudonym of William Lee; in 1964 it was reissued as Junky under Burroughs’ name. He also wrote Queer, an autobiographical study of his homosexuality. Queer was not published until 1985.

Burroughs was fascinated with guns. He once shot a mouse in a bar with a pistol. At a drunken party in Mexico City in 1951, Burroughs proclaimed to his wife that it was time for their “William Tell” act. He pulled out a gun and attempted to shoot a cocktail glass off the top of Adams’ head. He missed and shot her in the head from 6 feet (1.8 meters) away, killing her. The authorities punished him with a fine and a few weeks in jail.

This killing propelled Burroughs into a writing career; in his later years he said that he might never have become an author if he had not killed his wife. In 1959, two years after leaving a drug rehabilitation program, he published what many considered to be his masterpiece, Naked Lunch. The book was assembled in two weeks using what Burroughs called the “cut-up” technique. Similar to the montage method in painting, it consisted of him cutting random paragraphs and pages from his writings and gluing them together on a separate page. The result was a book without traditional form or structure, linked by images and recurring general themes.

Naked Lunch was nontraditional in content as well. Burroughs wrote about everything from bodily functions to political oppression to media manipulation. His topics were so controversial, in fact, that in 1965 the state of Massachusetts attempted to ban Naked Lunch on charges of obscenity. Authors Norman Mailer and Allen Ginsberg testified on behalf of the book, and the state lost its case. Naked Lunch was one of the last books of the period to lead to an obscenity trial.

Burroughs spent much of the 1960s traveling the world, living and writing in Morocco, South America, and other locations. Books published during that decade included The Soft Machine (1961), The Ticket That Exploded (1962), and Nova Express (1964). In much of his fiction, Burroughs used his addiction to drugs as a metaphor for other addictions he believed plagued society at that time, such as addictions to sex, money, and power.

Along with writing fiction, Burroughs recorded audio tapes of himself reading his work, often in combination with music. In Call Me Burroughs (1965), You’re the Man I Want to Share My Money With (1981), and The “Priest” They Called Him (1992, with Kurt Cobain) and other recordings, Burroughs blurred the lines between poetry and narrative fiction. The rhythm and tone in which the words were spoken, as well as the words themselves, conveyed meaning.

Another novel, The Wild Boys, was published in 1971. Burroughs returned to the United States in 1974 and wrote his first straight narrative, Cities of the Red Night (1981). Along with it, two other books, The Place of Dead Roads (1984) and The Western Lands (1987), complete a thematic trilogy. In these books Burroughs examined humanity’s ability to adapt to its future, which he believed inevitably included space and time travel. A volume of his correspondence, Letters 1945–59, was published in 1993, and a memoir called My Education: A Book of Dreams followed in 1994.

In 1991 David Cronenberg directed a film entitled Naked Lunch, which depicted Burroughs’ real life and also incorporated aspects of the book. The film, extensive Internet exposure, and Burroughs’ own life and work all contributed to his status as a cultural icon. Burroughs was appealing to many people looking for an alternative to the political and cultural status quo. He was an antihero and an underground curiosity, all the more interesting for his incongruous grandfatherly appearance and bizarre life experiences.

Burroughs struggled with drug addiction his entire adult life, repeatedly going through cures only to relapse months or years later. He died on August 2, 1997, in Lawrence, Kansas, at the age of 83.