A

Back to top

Abbott and Costello:

The Christmas ShowStarring: Bud Abbott and Lou Costello, with Margaret Whiting, The Nicholas Brothers, Buster Shaver & Olive, and Tom & Jerry.

Bonus Features: Includes the original black and white broadcast as well as a colorized version.

The Adventures of Ozzie & Harriet: Ultimate Christmas CollectionDescription: 2-disc set contains 14 full and fun-filled holiday-themed episodes from throughout the series plus Rick's performance of "The Christmas Song," The Ozzie & Harriet Christmas Special reunion from the 1980s and other seasonal treats.

Al Walser:

The 2020 Christmas SpecialDescription: Experience GRAMMY-WINNER Al Walser in this timeless epic Christmas-Holiday TV Special as his truly electrifying performance transports his audience and viewers worldwide to a place set in heaven. This concert TV Special, recorded in front of a diverse live audience in the heart of Hollywood, additionally delivers newly inspired original Christmas songs written by Al Walser.

Bonus Features: (none)

America's Test Kitchen:

Home for the Holidays (2019)Description: This special hour-long holiday episode features hosts Bridget Lancaster and Julia Collin Davison and the rest of the America s Test Kitchen cast, revealing their all-time favorite holiday recipes from the Test Kitchen archives.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

Andre Rieu:

Christmas Down Under (2019)Description: Featuring his world-class sopranos, The Platin Tenors and plenty of surprises, recorded live in Sydney's iconic Town Hall, including 28 festive tracks such as The Holy City, Sleighride, O' holy Night, and romantic classics like Plaisir d’Amour, Auld Lang Syne, and much more.

Other Andre Rieu Holiday DVDs:

Christmas in London (2015)

Home For The Holidays (2012)

The Christmas I Love (2011)

Christmas Around the World (2006)

Christmas with Andre Rieu (2004)

2-Pack of Christmas Around the World and The Christmas I Love

The Andy Griffith Show:

Christmas SpecialStarring: Andy Griffith, Don Knotts, Ronnie Howard, Frances Bavier, and Elinor Donahue.

Bonus Features: Includes two episodes: "The Christmas Story" (1960) and "The Pickle Story" (1961)

Andy Williams: Best of ChristmasBonus Features: Features 24 of the greatest songs of the holiday season, including The Most Wonderful Time of the Year, White Christmas, It's A Holiday Season, Silver Bells, I'll Be Home for Christmas, Jingle Bells, Christmas Song, Ave Maria, Mary's Boy Child, Silent Night, and O Holy Night. Andy is joined by the entire Williams clan and the Osmond Brothers.

The Andy Williams Christmas Show (Live from Branson)Starring: Andy Williams, with special guests Lorrie Morgan and the Osmond Brothers.

Bonus Features: Songs: It's the Most Wonderful Time of the Year, Christmas Needs Love to be Christmas, Sleigh Ride, I'll Be Home for Christmas, Blue Christmas, I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus, Jingle Bells, Let It Snow, The Christmas Song, My Favorite Things, Little Snow Girl, White Christmas, Santa Claus Is Coming To Town, Silver Bells, The Little Drummer Boy, Do You Hear What I Hear?, Mommy Here We Come A-Caroling, Happy Holidays, Angels We Have Heard on High, Joy to the World, O Come All Ye Faithful, The Bells of St. Mary's, Silent Night, O Holy Night, and May Each Day. Also includes Andy Williams' Biography, Discography, and Awards/accolades/appearances.

Anne Murray's Classic Christmas (1995)(Out of print)

Bonus Features: Taped at the famous Toronto landmark, The Old Mill, Anne's guests include international sensation Roch Voisine, World Figure Skating Champion and Olympic Silver Medallist Elvis Stojko, and pop rock group Barenaked Ladies. Anne performs a selection of yuletide favorites including: White Christmas, Winter Wonderland and This Season Will Never Grow Old and many more.

Annie Oakley:

Santa Claus Wears a Gun (1956)Starring: Gail Davis, Jimmy Hawkins, Brad Johnson, and Stanley Andrews.

Are You Being Served? ChristmasStarring: Taryn Kay, Belinda Lee, and Eileen Winterton.

Bonus Features: Who's Who (Cast bios) and Never before seen "On Set Interview" with the cast.

B

Back to top

Barry Manilow: Happy Holiday! (2003)Bonus Features: Join Barry and his special guests - Jose Feliciano and Cyndi Lauper - on the "A&E Live by Request" special, as he takes telephone requests from home viewers for their favorite Christmas songs, including 'Jingle Bells,' 'White Christmas,' 'Rudolph The Red-Nosed Reindeer,' 'It's Just Another New Year's Eve,' and more. Originally broadcast from New York City on a snowy December night in 2003.

BBC Holiday Gift SetBonus Features: This two-pack includes the two BBC Holiday DVDs:

BBC Holiday Comedy (which includes eight Christmas specials from Are You Being Served, Good Neighbors, To the Manor Born, Allo Allo, Last of the Summer Wine, Keeping Up Appearances, Blackadder, and The Vicar of Dibley) and

BBC Holiday Drama (which includes episodes from All Creatures Great and Small, Ballykissangel, Monarch of the Glen, Lovejoy, and Lark Rise to Candleford).

The Beverly Hillbillies & Petticoat Junction Christmas Collection (1963)Starring: Dennis Fimple, Kay E. Kuter, Byron Foulger, Paul De Rolf, and William Mims.

Bonus Features: Includes two christmas episodes from The Beverly Hillbillies and one from Petticoat Junction.

The Big Bang Theory:

The Holiday Collection (2022)Description: Includes nine holiday-themed episodes.

Bonus Features: (none)

Bing Crosby: The Television Specials, Vol. Two:

The Christmas SpecialsDescription: Includes Bing's first holiday special, produced in England in 1961; his first color special from 1962 with Mary Martin; "Bing Crosby and the Sounds of Christmas" with Robert Goulet and Mary Costa from 1971; and Bing's final special, "Bing Crosby's Merrie Olde Christmas," which includes the iconic duet of "The Little Drummer Boy / Peace on Earth" with David Bowie.

Bonus Features include "Happy Holidays With Bing and Frank," the 1957 color Christmas episode of the Frank Sinatra Show, outtakes from the 1962 Bing Crosby Christmas special, a rare Toys For Tots public service announcement and the 1976 tourism film, "Bing's Britain."

Other Bing Crosby Christmas DVDs and Specials:

Christmas with Bing Crosby and Kate Smith (1966)

Happy Holidays With Bing and Frank

NEW! A Hollywood Christmas With Bing Crosby (1968)

The Hollywood Palace: Bing Crosby Christmas Show (1962)

BJ Thomas: ChristmasBonus Features: One of America's most successful vocalists performs all of your Christmas favorites along with some of his hits, including Hooked On A Feeling, Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head, and Another Somebody Done Somebody Wrong Song.

Bob Hope:

Hope for the Holidays (1993)

(aka Bob Hope's Bag Full of Christmas Memories)Starring: Bob Hope, with Lucille Ball, Bing Crosby, Red Skelton, Barbara Eden, Brooke Shields, Joey Lawrence, The Judds, Jack Benny, John Wayne and many others.

Description: Bob and Dolores Hope welcome family and friends into their home for a fond look back at Bob Hope's holiday TV specials and USO tours from the past.

Bonus Features: Bloopers from his various Holiday specials and a collection of clips of Bob Hope singing his classic Christmas carol, "Silver Bells," with Gale Storm, Marie Osmond, Olivia Newton-John, Shirley Jones, and Reba McEntire.

NOTE: 2016 release now available from TimeLife (with different bonus features).

Other Bob Hope Holiday DVDs:

Bob Hope Christmas In New York (1950) / Bob Hope Christmas In Alaska (1956)

Bob Hope Christmas Special (1967)

Bob Hope Christmas Special Vol. 2 (1960 and 1970)

Thanks for the Memories: The Bob Hope Specials box set (includes "The Bob Hope Christmas Special" (1968) and "The Bob Hope All-Star Christmas Comedy Special" (1977)

Bob Hope Ultimate Collection box set (includes "The Bob Hope Christmas Special" (1970) and "Bob Hope's Bag Full Of Christmas Memories" (1993)

A Bocelli Family Christmas (2022)Description: A Bocelli Family Christmas captures the wonder and music of the holidays with a mix of classic carols and original songs from the Bocelli family's brand new multi-generational album.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

or

The Brady Bunch:

A Very Brady Christmas (1988)Starring: Robert Reed, Florence Henderson, Ann B. Davis, Barry Williams, Maureen McCormick, Christopher Knight, Eve Plumb, Mike Lookinland, and Jennifer Runyon.

Also available:

The Brady Bunch Complete Series: "A Very Brady Christmas" is included in the set as a bonus feature.

TV Sets: Holiday 2-Pack: Includes the Brady Bunch Christmas episode "The Voice of Christmas" (Season 1); also includes holiday episodes from several other classic TV shows.

The Brian Setzer Orchestra Live: Christmas Extravaganza!Description: Filmed December 18, 2004 at L.A.'s sold-out Universal Amphitheatre, this 1-hour-and-40-minute concert includes over 20 Christmas classics and original tunes, including Dig that Crazy Santa Claus, This Cat's On A Hot Tin Roof, Boogie Woogie Christmas, and many more.

Bonus Features: A behind-the-scenes look at Brian writing an entire big-band arrangement from scratch, exclusive interviews with bandmates and fans, and backstage scenes.

The Brokenwood Mysteries:

A Merry Bloody Christmas (2016)Starring: Neill Rea, Fern Sutherland, and Nic Sampson.

Bonus Features: Comes with a collectible pop-up holiday card.

C

Back to top

Captain & Tennille: The Christmas Show (1976)Starring: Daryl Dragon and Toni Tennille, with Tom Bosley, Don Knotts, and The Pointer Sisters.

Bonus Features: Songs include Little Saint Nick, Jingle Bells, Wedding Song (There Is Love,) Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas, How Can I Be Sure, O Holy Night and others.

The Carol Burnett Show:

Carol's Lost ChristmasStarring: Carol Burnett.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

Also available:

Christmas with Carol

Gary Moore Show Presents: A Carol Burnett Christmas

The Catherine Tate Christmas ShowBonus Features: Packed with laughter and hilarious sketches in this collection of comic creations, featuring a special guest appearance by singer Charlotte Church.

Celtic Angels at Christmas (2007)Bonus Features: Features six uniquely-talented Celtic Angels Gillian Boucher, Stephanie Hardy, Kendra MacGillivray, Sabra MacGillivray, Maggie MacInnes and Patricia Murray performing Christmas music with Celtic style.

Celtic Woman:

Home For Christmas:

Live From Dublin (2013)Bonus Features: A companion to Celtic Woman's highly-successful "Home for Christmas" album released in Fall 2012, Celtic Woman are pleased to present a live concert experience, HOME FOR CHRISTMAS- LIVE FROM DUBLIN features timeless holiday favorites (Silent Night , I'll Be Home for Christmas, It Came Upon a Midnight Clear, Joy To The World) with the group's signature Celtic Woman flair under the distinct musical direction of Emmy-nominated Music Director, David Downes.

Chris Isaak ChristmasBonus Features: Chris Isaak leads his longtime band through yuletide favorites, with special guests Michael Buble, Brian McKnight and Stevie Nicks.

Christmas around the World with Perry ComoBonus Features: Featuring guests John Wayne, Angie Dickenson, Richard Chamerlain, Toni Tenile, Debbie Boone, and Dorothy Hamill.

Christmas Card

from Branson (1998)Bonus Features: Enjoy the holiday spirit with your host, Jim Stafford, and all of his country music friends as they perform 15 holiday favorites in and around Branson, Missouri. Performers include Boxcar Willie, John Davidson, Tony Orlando, Jim Stafford, Mickey Gilley, Conne Tillis, Buck Trent, Pump Boys & Dinettes, Presleys Jubilee, The Haygoods, and Norris & Norris.

Christmas Eve (2022)Description: An opera in four acts. Composed using his own libretto, Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov created this magical opera based on the short story by Nikolay Gogol 'The Night before Christmas' in which Vakula the handsome blacksmith wants to marry the rich farmer's daughter Oksana, who in turn demands that he must first bring her the Tsarina's shoes.

Bonus Features: (none)

Christmas on Highway 101 (2023)Description: A fun musical experience with country music band Highway 101. Features a guest appearance by Wynonna Judd.

Bonus Features: (none)

Christmas with Crosby & KateBonus Features: In this rare episode of The Hollywood Palace, first telecast in 1966, Bing Crosby is joined by dancer Cyd Charisse, comedian Bob Newhart, the Crosby family, and Kate "God Bless America" Smith... Bonus Feature: Includes the rare, 1954 live-television version of Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol, starring Fredric March and Basil Rathbone (which is also available separately).

Christmas with Danny KayeBonus Features: This collection brings together 2 memorable Christmas episodes of the Emmy winning, top-rated CBS variety show , The Danny Kaye Show. Featuring Nat King Cole's iconic performance The Christmas Song (aka Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire) , duets with Danny and Peggy Lee and Jingle Bell Rock by a young Wayne Newton.

Christmas with J.S. Bach (2013)Bonus Features: The Knabenchor Hannover, the Barockorchester L'Arco, and Joerg Breiding - all acclaimed experts for Early Music - perform Julian Sebastian Bach's cantatas Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (BWV 61), Christen, aetzet diesen Tag (BWV 63) and Jauchzet, frohlocket, auf, preiset die Tage (BWV 248 I). As Breiding explains, the musicians present an 'alternative Christmas Oratorio' with these works. The ensembles are joined by the internationally renowned soloists Antonia Bourve (soprano), Claudia Erdmann (alto), Markus Schaefer (tenor), and Michael Jaeckel (bass).

Christmas with Lee Greenwood (2021)Description: Showcases Greenwood's warm interpretations of Christmas favorites as well as a rousing rendition of his signature hit "God Bless America"

Christmas with SCTVStarring: John Candy, Joe Flaherty, Eugene Levy, Andrea Martin, Catherine O'Hara, Martin Short, Rick Moranis and Dave Thomas.

Bonus Features: Includes the two Christmas episodes "SCTV Staff Christmas Party" and "Chirstmas." Also includes cast commentaries and The Juul Haalmeyer Dancers featurette: Juul explains the origins and all the backstage secrets of the not-so-famous dance group that bears his name.

Christmas with the King FamilyBonus Features: Featuring Grammy-nominated, big band era greats The King Sisters; guitar virtuoso Alvino Rey; film favorite Robert Clarke; the King Cousins featuring '60s sweetheart Tina Cole (of My Three Sons fame); the King Kiddies; and all the aunts, uncles, brothers and sisters that make up "America s First Family of Song." As a bonus, the 1967 Christmas Show is included in its entirety, featuring a surprise reunion between King Sister Alyce and her son, home from U.S. Army service.

A Classic Christmas: The Ed Sullivan Show(Out of print)

Bonus Features: One hour special featuring Bing Crosby, Johnny Mathis, Connie Francis, Alvin & The Chipmunks, Rick Little, The Muppets, George Carlin, and Brook Benton.

Classic TV

Christmas Collection (2010)Bonus Features: Includes a Christmas episode from 10 different TV shows of the past: Dr. Kildare, The Courtship of Eddie's Father, CHiPs, Eight is Enough, Welcome Back Kotter, Alice, Perfect Strangers, Mama's Family, Veronica's Closet, and Suddenly Susan.

Classic TV Comedy ChristmasBonus Features: Includes a holiday-themed episode from six classic TV shows: The Honemooners: "Christmas Party" (1953); The Donna Reed Show: "A Very Merry Christmas" (1958); Family Affair: "Christmas Came A Little Early" (1968); Petticoat Junction: "Cannonball Christmas" (1963); The Beverly Hillbillies: "Home For Christmas" (1962); The Doris Day Show: "It's Christmas Time In The City" (1970).

NOTE: This is also available with an episode of Love That Bob ("Grandpa's Christmas Visit" (1955)) replacing The Honeymooners episode.

A Clay Aiken Christmas (2004)Bonus Features: Clay Aiken performs several classic Christmas carols with the help of Barry Manilow, Yolanda Adams, and Quiana Parler. Also includes behind-the-scenes footage.

A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of AllBonus Features: Three mock-alternate endings (the best echoes the classic Twilight Zone episode, "Time Enough at Last"), a bonus Christmas song (a country-style weeper, "Cold Cold Christmas"), an onscreen live-action advent calendar (a daily Colbert greeting), and even a books-roasting-on-an-open-fire Yule log.

The Collingsworth Family:

A True Family ChristmasDescription: Filmed as a partnership between Liberty University's School of Music and P&KC MUSIC LLC, A TRUE FAMILY CHRISTMAS was an evening of exhilarating celebration, focusing on the gift that God sent to Earth. The CFAM's Nashville band and a full orchestra join in on the songs "Angels We Have Heard on High", "We Do Christmas Like We Mean It", "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas", "Mary, Did You Know?", and more.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

The Cost of Christmas (2019)Description: Have you ever thought about the cost of Christmas? Beyond buying presents and decorations, a real price was paid for the joy of Christmas. Three encouraging stories show the true cost of Christmas and Franklin Graham shares how to respond.

Bonus Features: (none)

D

Back to top

The Dame Edna Experience: The Christmas SpecialsStarring: Barry Humphries, with guests Roger Moore, Lulu and Australian Cultural Attache Sir Les Patterson, Gina Lollobrigida, Charlton Heston, Julio Iglesias, and Mel Gibson.

Bonus Features: Includes two episodes, "The Dame Edna Christmas Experience" and "A Night on Mount Edna," featuring a chat with Mel Gibson in Dame Edna's sauna. Plus Dame Edna's Christmas Message to the Commonwealth.

The Dean Martin Christmas ShowBonus Features: (TBA)

Dick Van Dyke Show:

Classic Christmas EpisodesStarring: Dick Van Dyke, Mary Tyler Moore, Morey Amsterdam, and Rose Marie.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

Disney Channel HolidayBonus Features: Includes holiday episodes from the Disney Channel shows Even Stevens, The Suite Life of Zack and Cody, That's So Raven, Lizzie McGuire, Kim Possible, and Phil of the Future.

Doc Martin:

Last Christmas in Portwenn (2022)Starring: Martin Clunes, Caroline Catz, and Ian McNeice.

Bonus Features: Farewell Doc Martin

Doctor Who:

Twice Upon a Time (2017)Starring: Peter Capaldi, Pearl Mackie, Mark Gatiss, and David Bradley.

Other Doctor Who Holiday DVDs:

Christmas Specials Gift Set (2015)

Last Christmas (2014)

The Snowmen (2012)

The Doctor, The Widow and the Wardrobe (2011)

A Christmas Carol (2010)

The Next Doctor (2008)

Dolly:

The Ultimate Collection

6 DVD set (2021)Description: This six-disc collection includes some of the most engaging performances from her days on The Porter Wagoner Show, 14 star-studded episodes from Dolly’s two variety series featuring Emmylou Harris, Linda Ronstadt, Willie Nelson, Kenny Rogers, and many more, "Dolly Parton: Live from London (2009)", "Dolly & Friends: The Making of a Soundtrack - Dumplin'", and ten music videos from 2001 to 2020.

Most notably, it includes a disc dedicated to Christmas: "A Down Home Country Christmas with Mac Davis and Burl Ives" (1987) and "Bob Hope’s Jolly Christmas Show with The All-American Champs" (1988).

Dolly Parton's

Mountain Magic Christmas (2022)Description: A modern-day movie musical, featuring Tom Everett Scott, Jimmy Fallon, Angel Parker, Jimmie Allen, Mary Lane Haskell, Ana Gasteyer, Willie Nelson, Miley Cyrus, and Billy Ray Cyrus.

Bonus Features: Making-of Featurette.

The Donny and Marie 1978 Christmas ShowStarring: Donny and Marie Osmond, the Osmond Brothers.

Bonus Features: Performances and skits with the entire Osmond family.

Doris Day: Christmas MemoriesBonus Features: Includes three holiday shows from The Doris Day Show: A Two Family Christmas, It's Christmas Time In The City, and Whodunnit, Doris?

Duck Dynasty:

Duck the Halls (2014)Bonus Features: Includes the episode "O Little Town of West Monroe", which aired on December 11, 2013. In this episode, the Duck Commander staff gets ready to peform in a nativity play, Phil takes Miss Kay and Jessica on a hog hunt, and Willie and Jase argue over whose idea it was to give their wives a family portrait.

Also available: I'm Dreaming of a Redneck Christmas (2013) - includes the 2012 Christmas special which aired on December 5, 2012.

E

Back to top F

Back to top

Frasier:

Christmas EpisodesStarring: Kelsey Grammer, Jane Leeves, David Hyde Pierce, Peri Gilpin, and John Mahoney.

Description: Includes all eight Christmas episodes from the show's 11 seasons: "Miracle On Third Or Fourth Street" (Season 1), "Frasier Grinch" (Season 3), "Perspectives On Christmas" (Season 5), "Merry Christmas, Mrs Moskowitz" (Season 6), "The Fight Before Christmas" (Season 7), "Mary Christmas" (Season 8), "We Two Kings" (Season 10), and "High Holidays" (Season 11).

Also available:

Frasier Complete Series

TV Sets: Holiday 2-Pack: Includes the Frasier Christmas episode "Miracle On Third Or Fourth Street" (Season 1); also includes holiday episodes from several other classic TV shows.

Friends:

The One With All the Holidays CollectionStarring: Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry, and David Schwimmer, with guest stars Brad Pitt, Sean Penn, Christina Applegate, and Selma Blair.

Description: Includes these 15 holiday-themed episodes (sorted here by holiday). NOTE: All Christmas episodes from the series are included, except for one ("The One with the Girl from Poughkeepsie" from Season 4)

Christmas:

The One With Phoebe's Dad (Season 2 - Dec 14, 1995)

The One Where Rachel Quits (Season 3 - Dec 12, 1996)

The One With the Inappropriate Sister (Season 5 - Dec 17, 1998)

The One With the Routine (Season 6 - Dec 16, 1999)

The One With the Holiday Armadillo (Season 7 - Dec 14, 2000)

The One With Ross's Step Forward (Season 8 - Dec 13, 2001)

The One With Christmas In Tulsa (Season 9 - Dec 12, 2002)

Thanksgiving:

The One With the Football (Season 3 - Nov 21, 1996)

The One With the Thanksgiving Flashbacks (Season 5 - Nov 19, 1998)

The One Where Chandler Doesn't Like Dogs (Season 7 - Nov 23, 1998)

The One With the Rumor (Season 8 - Nov 22, 2001)

The One With Rachel's Other Sister (Season 9 - Nov 21, 2002)

The One With the Late Thanksgiving (Season 10 - Nov 20, 2003)

Others:

The One With the Candy Hearts (Season 1 - Feb 9, 1995)

The One With the Halloween Party (Season 8 - Nov 1, 2001)

Bonus Features: Audio commentary on select episodes.

Also available: Friends Complete Series

G

Back to top

Gaither Vocal Band:

All Heaven & Nature SingDescription: Gospel Music Hall of Fame members the Gaither Vocal Band ring in the holidays with joyful harmonies and signature style performing Christmas classics "Away in a Manger," "Silver Bells" and "White Christmas," as well as new seasonal songs.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

G.E. Theatre Christmas Show

Hosted By Ronald Reagan, "A Child Is Born" (2019)Starring: Ronald Reagan, Nancy Reagan, and Patti Davis.

Bonus Features: (none)

Glad Christmas Tidings Featuring David Archuleta (2011)Bonus Features: Annual Christmas concert presented by the Mormon Tabernacle Choir and Orchestra at Temple Square, featuring American Idol runner-up David Archuleta, with special guest Michael York.

Glee: A Very Glee Christmas (2010)Starring: Cory Monteith, Lea Michele, Jane Lynch, Kevin McHale, Heather Morris, Dianna Agron, Chris Colfer, and Matthew Morrison.

Bonus Features: Glee Music Jukebox.

The Glen Campbell Goodtime Hour: Christmas Specials (2015)Bonus Features: Includes specially-selected episodes from Glen's classic variety series, featuring guest appearances from George Gobel, Jerry Reed, Anne Murray and Shecky Greene.

The Good Witch's Gift (2010)Starring: Catherine Bell, Chris Potter, Catherine Disher, Peter MacNeill, and Graham Abbey.

Bonus Features: (none)

The Great Christmas Light FightDescription: Michael Moloney & Sabrina Soto and Taniya Nayak & Carter Oosterhouse judge several families across America who decorate their homes to the extreme for Christmas.

Season 1 (2013)

Season 2 (2014)

Season 3 (2015)

Season 4 (2016)

Season 5 (2017)

Season 6 (2018)

Season 7 (2019)

Season 8 (2020)

Season 9 (2021)

Season 10 (2022)

H

Back to top

Hallmark Channel's Christmas Concert (2019)Description: In honor of the 10th anniversary of Hallmark's Countdown to Christmas, this music special brings together the stars of those Hallmark movies. The cast gathers at the house of Lacey Chabert to sing their favorite Christmas Carols, including some new twists on your favorite classics. Set in a warm, festive, cozy home, the cast will share music, holiday traditions, and more in this one hour "family" gathering. Stars Lacey Chabert, Jen Lilley, Nikki DeLoach, Paul Greene, Jessica Lowndes, Jack Wagner, and Larissa Wohl.

Bonus Features: (none)

Happy Holidays with Bing and Frank (1950s)Starring: Bing Crosby and Frank Sinatra.

Bonus Features: (none)

Harry Connick, Jr:

Harry for the Holidays (2004)Description: Features live versions of songs from crooner Harry Connick, Jr's bestselling 2003 Christmas album. Harry and his big band deliver jazzy standards (Silver Bells, Frosty The Snowman) plus the original The Happy Elf.

Bonus Features: (none)

Heart & Friends: Home For The Holidays (2014)

[Blu-ray]Bonus Features: Heart's Ann and Nancy Wilson returned to their hometown of Seattle to stage a celebration of the Christmas season, with special guests Shawn Colvin, Sammy Hagar, Richard Marx and Pat Monahan from Train.

Here Comes Honey Boo Boo: A Very Boo Christmas (2014)Bonus Features: (TBD)

Holiday Favorites: 20 Classic EpisodesStarring: Red Skelton, Ozzie & Harriet, Jack Benny, and The Beverly Hillbillies.

Bonus Features: 20 classic Christmas specials on 2 discs.

Holiday TV Comedy CollectionBonus Features: Includes a holiday episode from the following recent TV shows: The Office, 30 Rock, House, Monk, and Psych.

A Hollywood Christmas (1996)Bonus Features: Jane Seymour hosts this TV special that takes you through the history of Christmas movies with clips from silent films to modern-day classics like Home Alone and Edward Scissorhands.

The Honeymooners Specials: A Christmas Carol (1977)Starring: Jackie Gleason, Audrey Meadows, Art Carney, and Jane Kean.

Description: In 1977, Jackie Gleason, Audrey Meadows, Art Carney and Jane Kean reunited for the second of four hour-long specials representing the final performances of their classic Honeymooners characters. Ralph enlists Alice, Ed and Trixie to perform with him on stage after he agrees to supervise and star in the annual office holiday fund-raiser for a charity chosen by his boss’ wife.  Ralph ends up rewriting and reimagining Charles Dickens' dramatic classic A Christmas Carol with comedic results when Ed serves as the inexperienced director.

Bonus Features: "Trixie’s Honeymooners Memories" featurette with Jane Kean, The Honeymooners' Women’s Lib skit from 1973.

The Honeymooners:

Christmas LaughterStarring: Jackie Gleason, Art Carney, Audrey Meadows, and Joyce Randolph.

Bonus Features: Includes the holiday classic "Twas the Night Before Christmas" and five bonus episodes.

I

Back to top

I Love Lucy:

Colorized ChristmasBonus Features: Includes colorized and original black and white versions of three I Love Lucy episodes: "Lucy Christmas Special," "Lucy Goes to Scotland" and "Lucy's Italian Movie."

Inside Lyndey's Kitchen:

Celebrating Christmas (2014)Description: Lyndey Milan explores traditional Christmas fare while putting a contemporary spin on the feast.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

An Irish Christmas:

A Musical Celebration (1988)Description: Includes two Christmas performances from St. Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin and the Collegiate Church of St. Nicholas in Galway.

The Irish Rovers Christmas (2011)Description: Filmed on location in the pubs and ski hills of Banff National Park, Alberta in Canada, on stage at Chatham Ontario's historic Capitol Theatre. Features several musical guests from Ireland: Morris Crum, Patrick Davey, Gerry O'Connor, Canadian/Irish Tenor John McDermott, and guitarist Jason Fowler.

Bonus Features: Extra songs: Have You Heard?, Maybe this is Christmas (John McDermott), The Unicorn, What Would Have Happened?, and also band interviews and outtakes.

It's A Wonderful Red Green Christmas (2004)Starring: Bob Bainborough, Stephanie Beard, George Buza, Lawrence Dane, Laurie Elliott.

Bonus Features: "A Merry Red Green Christmas" (a second Red Green holiday special), hilarious character bios, and new program introductions by star Steve Smith.

It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia: Its A Very Sunny Christmas (2009)Bonus Features: Deleted Scenes, Making-Of Featurette, and Sunny Sing-A-Long. J

Back to top

Jacques Pepin's Christmas Celebration (2001)Description: Here is the Christmas Feast of your dreams, starting with Oysters on the Half-shell, smoked salmon, and cucumber salad. Topping it off with a classic enchantingly decorated Yule log dessert and English Christmas pudding!

Bonus Features: Features six-minute previews of five other DVDs in the Jacques Pepin's Celebrations Collection: Thanksgiving, Chanukah, Easter, Graduation, and Summertime.

Jane McDonald:

A Live Christmas Concert Special (2019)Description: Jane sings several Christmas favorites, such as "I Wish it Could be Christmas Every Day," "Fairytale of New York" and much more.

Jeff Dunham's Completely Unrehearsed Last-Minute Pandemic Holiday Special (2020)Description: America's favorite ventriloquist Jeff Dunham checks in with some of his closest friends, including Walter, Bubba J and Peanut, to see how they're holding up during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Jeff Dunham's Very Special Christmas Special (2008)Bonus Features: Additional Footage, Behind the Scenes, Holiday Tips, Ask Santa Walter, Music Video: Roadkill Christmas, and Outtakes.

John Denver: Montana Christmas Skies (1991)Starring: John Denver, with guests Clint Black, Katy Mattea, and Patty Loveless.

Bonus Features: Songs include: Christmas For Cowboys, 'Til Santa's Gone (I Just Can't Wait), Someday Soon, Christ Child's Lullaby Wild Montana Skies, Potter's Wheel, Grandma's Feather Bed, Rudolph The Red-Nosed Reindeer, Away In A Manger, Jingle Bells, I Want To Live, Feelings Of Love, and A Change In The Air.

Johnny Carson Celebrates ChristmasBonus Features: Includes three classic holiday shows from The Tonight Show starring Johnny Carson. Featuring comedians Garry Shandling and Robin Williams, singer Tony Bennett and the Tonight Show band performing yuletide classics, hilarious holiday skits, a unique medley of traditional carols, timeless monologues from Johnny and a special holiday visit from Bob Hope!

The Johnny Cash Christmas Special 1976-1979Bonus Features: Box set includes four DVDs of The Johnny Cash Christmas Specials (that can also be purchased seperately, by year: 1976, 1977, 1978, and 1979).

Jordan Smith: 'Tis The Season Holiday Special (2016)Description: In August 2016, Jordan Smith decided to bring together his friends and family into the recording studio for an intimate listening session of the music from his new holiday album 'Tis The Season. The event aired as a PBS concert special during the holiday season that year. Join Jordan along with David Foster and a cast of brilliant session musicians on this fantastic journey through some of his favorite carols and holiday classics.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

Joy: An Irish Christmas, LiveDescription: Join modern hymn writers Keith and Kristyn Getty for this one-night, live recording from their tour, Joy An Irish Christmas! Building on the success of their 2011 studio album by the same name, this live concert event (featured on Public Television) showcases fresh, extended arrangements plus eight new soon-to-be-classic Christmas carols to tell the Christmas story like no other!

Bonus Features: (none)

Judy Collins: Christmas At The Biltmore Estate (2004)Bonus Features: Join legendary folk singer Judy Collins for this very special Christmas event recorded with multiple cameras at one of the largest private estates in the U.S. complete with a children's choir. Includes a host of holiday favorites performed as only Judy Collins can perform them including Silent Night, Away In A Manger, Amazing Grace, Let It Snow and many, many more!

The Judy Garland Show: The Christmas Show (1963)Starring: Judy Garland, with Liza Minnelli, Lorna Luft, Joey Luft, Mel Torme, Jack Jones and Tracy Everitt.

Bonus Features: Songs include: Over the Rainbow, Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas, Consider Yourself, Where is Love, Santa Claus is Coming to Town, Jingle Bells, and two Christmas medleys.

NOTE: Also available from Pioneer Entertainment and Mri Associated.

K

Back to top

The Kacey Musgraves Christmas Show (2019)Description: Join Kacey Musgraves for a holiday variety show featuring new songs and time-honored classics. Special guests include Camila Cabello, Kendall Jenner, James Corden, Lana Del Rey, the Radio City Rockettes, and many more.

Bonus Features: (none)

Katherine Jenkins:

Christmas Spectacular from the Royal Albert HallDescription: With unprecedented and exclusive access to the historic venue, the Welsh singing sensation performs seasonal favourites and is joined by friends including beloved actors Vanessa Redgrave and Bill Nighy, Operatic icon Sir Bryn Terfyl, Italian Tenor Alberto Urso, American Broadway star Marisha Wallace, and many more.

Bonus Features: (none)

Kenny Rogers Christmas Special:

Keep Christmas With You (1995)Starring: Kenny Rogers, Garth Brooks, Trisha Yearwood, and Boyz II Men.

Also available: Previous release

A King Family Christmas:

Classic Television Specials

Collection, Volume 2 (2014)Bonus Features: Includes four holiday TV specials, including their classic Thanksgiving TV special and two bonus Christmas episodes of The King Family Show. Guests include Alvino Rey, The Four King Cousins featuring Tina Cole (My Three Sons), actor Robert Clarke, trombonist and vocalist Kent Larsen. Songs include "White Christmas," "I'll Be Home for Christmas," "Silent Night," "My Favorite Things," and "The Christmas Waltz." L

Back to top

Lassie's Christmas StoriesBonus Features: Includes three Christmas episodes: "A Christmas Story 1958," "A Christmas Story 1960," and "A Christmas Story 1961."

Lassie's Gift of LoveBonus Features: Includes three episodes, "Lassie's Gift of Love" part 1 and part 2 and "The Greatest Gift."

Last of the Summer Wine: Holiday Specials 1986-89 (2011)Bonus Features:Includes four Christmas specials from the BBC show, between 1986 and 1989.

Also available: Christmas Specials 1978-1982

Last Tango in Halifax

Holiday Special (2017)Starring: Anne Reid, Derek Jacobi, Sarah Lancashire, Nicola Walker, Tony Gardner, and Josh Bolt.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

Other Last Tango in Halifax Holiday DVDs:

Christmas Special (2016)

Lavell Crawford: Home for the Holidays (2017)Description: Comedian Lavell Crawford discusses every holiday from what Christmas was like when he was a kid and the guilt everyone feels on Mother's Day, Thanksgiving, and his family trips to Disneyland.

Lawrence Welk Christmas ShowsBonus Features: Contains 3 holiday episodes: 1958 Christmas Party, 1959 Chrstmas Show, and 1966 Winter Special.

Also available: A Lawrence Welk Family Christmas - Recorded live at the Champagne Theatre in Branson, Missouri, in 1995.

Let the Season In (2014)Bonus Features: Joined by world-renowned vocalist Deborah Voigt and charismatic voice actor John Rhys-Davies, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir ushers in the holiday season with music that celebrates the work of Charles Dickens, the story behind The Night Before Christmas, and many other classic Christmas tales.

Libera:

Angels Sing:

Christmas in Ireland (2013)Bonus Features: This inspiring concert features favorites such as 'Carol of the Bells,' 'Joy to the World,' 'Silent Night,' 'Danny Boy' and more, and also contains behind-the-scenes documentary extras. Six of the tracks are previously unreleased, and the remaining songs all feature brand-new arrangements made especially for this recording.

Liberace's Christmas SpecialBonus Features: Includes his Mother's Day Special as well.

Linda Eder:

Christmas Stays the Same (2001)Description: Performing Christmas classics old and new, Broadway superstar Linda Eder put on a spectacular show in her Bravo TV special from 2001, singing popular holiday favorites such as "I'll Be Home For Christmas" and "Do You Hear What I Hear," along with her version of Barbra Streisand's "Don't Rain On My Parade."

Bonus Features: (none)

Little House On the Prairie: A Merry Ingalls Christmas (2014)Starring: Michael Landon, Melissa Gilbert, Melissa Sue Anderson, Alison Arngrim, Richard Bull, Victor French, Jonathan Gilbert.

Bonus Features: Includes two holiday specials from the TV series (Full-length broadcast episodes seen for the first time since airing on TV, with newly restored and remastered image): "Christmas at Plum Creek" and "A Christmas They Never Forget."

Lorne Greene's Holiday Special:

A Bonanza Of Christmas Cheer

(1966)Starring: Lorne Greene and UNICEF Children's Choir.

Bonus Features: (none)

The Love Boat

The Christmas Cruise (1986)Starring: Gavin MacLeod, Jill Whelan, Bernie Kopell, Ted Lange, Ted McGinley, Lauren Tewes, and Marion Ross.

Bonus Features: (none)

Lovejoy:

Christmas Specials (2008)Starring: Ian McShane

Bonus Features: Includes the episodes "The Prague Sun" (1992) and "The Lost Colony" (1993).

Lucy Worsley's 12 Days of Tudor Christmas (2019)Description: On each of the traditional 12 days of Christmas, Lucy Worsley reveals a different aspect of the festivities--uncovering fresh insights into the Tudor mind and casting a captivating new light on Christmas itself. M

Back to top

Mahalia Jackson

Sings the Songs of ChristmasDescription: Originally intended as musical vignettes for CBS's 1960-61 television season, this beautiful footage has been digitally remastered for optimum sound and picture quality form the original 16mm Kinescopes.

The Manhattan Transfer: The Christmas Concert (2013)Description: The legendary vocal group from New York with an incredible Christmas performance that will bring Holiday cheer like no other. Each member of the group solos on one song and then together they create their magic harmonies in concert.

Mariah Carey:

Merry Christmas To All! (2022)Description: Mariah Carey performs a repertoire of her festive holiday hits, including the chart-topping perennial favorite "All I Want for Christmas Is You."

Bonus Features: (none)

Marie Osmond's

Merry Christmas (1989)Starring: Marie Osmond, with Kirk Cameron, Candace Cameron, Sally Struthers, Lee Greenwood, Judy Blumberg and Michael Siebert, and the Osmond Boys.

Also available: Previous release

Mary Berry's

Ultimate Christmas (2022)Description: Mary Berry shares her ultimate Christmas feast with all the trimmings, packed with tips to plan and get ahead for the big day. Chefs Angela Hartnett and Monica Galetti join her to share favorite festive recipes from their heritage and Mary and TV host Rylan try and convert some kids to Brussels sprouts.

Bonus Features: (none)

Matt Rogers:

Have You Heard of Christmas? (2022)Description: The yuletide comedy musical extravaganza you've been waiting for. Matt Rogers shares stories tailor-made to get you in the spirit and performs an original set of soon-to-be-classic songs. It's a holiday tradition with ho, ho, ho for everyone.

Bonus Features: (none)

Merry Sitcom! Christmas Classics from TV's Golden AgeBonus Features: Includes a holiday episode from the following classic TV shows: Bewitched, That Girl, Father Knows Best, The Flying Nunn, McHale's Navy, and The Donna Reed Show.

Midsomer Murders:

The Christmas Haunting (2013)Starring: Neil Dudgeon, Gwilym Lee, and Fiona Dolman.

Bonus Features: Comes with a collectible pop-up holiday card.

Miss Fisher's Murder Mysteries:

Murder Under the Mistletoe (2013)Starring: Essie Davis, Nathan Page, and Hugo Johnstone-Burt.

Bonus Features: Comes with a collectible pop-up holiday card.

Mr. Bill's Christmas Special (1996)Description: Mr. Bill from Saturday Night Live invites you to join him and his family for Christmas Eve. Father Guido Sarducci stops by, too!

Bonus Features: (none)

Murdoch Mysteries:

The Christmas Cases

(Limited Edition) (2018)Starring: Yannick Bisson.

Includes these three Christmas specials:

Home for the Holidays (2017)

Once Upon a Murdoch Christmas (2016)

A Merry Murdoch Christmas (2015)

N

Back to top

A Nashville Christmas (2017)Description: Legendary country singers Emmylou Harris, Wynonna Judd, Pam Tillis, and Lorrie Morgan sing classic Christmas songs in this hour-long music special taped in Nashville, Tennessee. O

Back to top

The Office:

Complete Christmas Collection (2023)Description: Includes all seven Christmas-themed episodes: "Christmas Party", "A Benihana Christmas", "Moroccan Christmas", "Secret Santa", "Classy Christmas", "Christmas Wishes" and "Dwight Christmas".

Bonus Features: Deleted Scenes, Producers' Extended Cut of "Secret Santa", and Audio Commentaries for the episodes "Christmas Party," "Moroccan Christmas" and "Secret Santa."

Also available: The Office: Secret Santa Pack which includes four Christmas-themed episodes: "Christmas Party", "A Benihana Christmas", "Moroccan Christmas", and "Secret Santa"

An Old Fashioned Christmas:

Bell Telephone Hour Telecasts 1959-1966Starring: Florence Henderson, Sherrill Milnes, Lisa Della Casa, Phyllis Curtin, and Giorgio Tozzi.

Bonus Features: Includes: CHRISTMAS THROUGH THE AGES (December 18, 1966), AN OLD-FASHIONED CHRISTMAS (December 23, 1962), A CLASSICAL CHRISTMAS (various telecasts from 1959-1964).

One Foot in the Grave: The Christmas SpecialsBonus Features: (TBA) P

Back to top

Pat Boone and Family:

Christmas & Thanksgiving SpecialsDescription: Includes the Pat Boone & Family Christmas Special (1979) and the Pat Boone Thanksgiving Special (1978), with guest stars Bob Hope, The Hudson Brothers, Norman Fell, Tom Bosley, Rosemary Clooney, Dinah Shore, and the Boone family.

Pawn Stars:

A Very Vegas

Christmas Special (2013)Bonus Features: (TBD)

Pee Wee's Playhouse Christmas Special (1988)Bonus Features: First Commentary Featuring Paul Reubens, John Paragon (co-writer), Prudence Fenton (Animation Producer) and Lynne Marie Stewart (Miss Yvonne), Interactive Menus, Original Commercial Bumbers, Photo Gallery, and a Second Commentary Featuring The Voices Behind The Characters.

Perry Como's

Christmas Show (1974)This is the original CBS broadcast of Perry Como's Christmas special on December 17, 1974, which featured guests The Carpenters, Peggy Flemming and Rich Little.

Bonus Features: "Mr. C On TV" - a new featurette hosted by Richard Carpenter, chronicling Como's decades of television popularity. Additional songs: Perry sings Ave Maria and Christmas Carol Medley. Perry TV commercial and newsreel footage.

Perry Como's Olde English Christmas (1977)Starring: Perry Como, with Petula Clark, Gemma Craven, John Curry, and Leo Sayer.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

Peter, Paul and Mary: The Holiday Concert (2011)Bonus Features: Includes the PBS special of the trio's performance at the benefit for the New York Choral Society.

Power Rangers Megaforce:

Robo Knight Before Christmas (2013)Bonus Features: (TBD)

Power Rangers Super Samurai: Christmas Together, Friends ForeverBonus Features: Includes the 2011 special, "Christmas Together, Friends Forever" as the main feature and two bonus Christmas-themed episodes "I'm Dreaming of a White Ranger" from the third season of Mighty Morphin Power Rangers and the final Power Rangers Zeo episode, "A Season to Remember." Q

Back to top R

Back to top

Radio City Christmas Spectacular starring The Rockettes (2007)Bonus Features: This 75th Anniversary celebration of the Radio City Christmas show features all the best-loved performances including: The Dance of the Nutcracker, Parade of the Wooden Soldiers, Santa's Toy Headquarters, the Living Nativity, and the arrival of Santa Claus.

Randy Travis: Christmas on the PecosBonus Features: (TBA)

Ray Charles Celebrates A Gospel Christmas with The Voices of Jubilation!Description: In an exciting move that marked music history, legendary superstar Ray Charles was joined by the world famous 120-member Voices of Jubilation Gospel Choir of Newark New Jersey for his first ever Christmas Music Special. The show includes such favorites as The Christmas Song, Little Drummer Boy, Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas, Silent Night, Hark the Herald Angels Sing, and many more!

The Red Skelton Holiday CollectionStarring: Red Skelton, with Greer Garson, Freddie and the Yuletide Doll, and Leslie Nielsen.

Bonus Features: Three discs, with three episodes: "The Plight Before Christmas," "The Red Skelton Hour Christmas Show," and "The Red Skelton Color Christmas Show." All with loads of extras.

Renee Fleming:

Christmas In New York (2015)Bonus Features: American soprano Renee Fleming's first-ever holiday album celebrates the beloved and iconic Christmas season in New York City (originally broadcasted on PBS in 2014). Pop, Broadway and jazz greats Chris Botti, Kurt Elling, Wynton Marsalis, Brad Mehldau, Kelli O Hara, Gregory Porter and Rufus Wainwright join Renee to sing Christmas classics.

Reno 911!:

It's a Wonderful Heist (2022)Starring: Carlos Alazraqui, Mary Birdsong, Kerri Kenney, Thomas Lennon, Joe Lo Truglio, Niecy Nash, Ian Roberts, Nick Swardson, Cedric Yarbrough,and Wendi McLendon-Covey.

Rifftrax, Live!

Christmas Shorts-Stravaganza! (2010)Bonus Features: The stars of Mystery Science Theater 3000 have a sack-full of delightful and demented shorts to riff live onstage. Some of the forgotten gems of Christmases past prove to be the perfect targets for the rapid-fire riffs of Mike Nelson, Kevin Murphy and Bill Corbett and featuring special guest 'Weird Al' Yankovic.

Other Riff Trax Christmas DVDs: Santa and the Ice Cream Bunny, Magic Christmas Tree

Royal Carols: Together at Christmas (2022)Description: A televised festive concert in Westminster Abbey hosted by the Duchess of Cambridge and supported by The Royal Foundation.

Bonus Features: (none)

S

Back to top

Sabrina, the Teenage Witch:

Christmas EpisodesStarring: Melissa Joan Hart, Caroline Rhea, and Beth Broderick.

Bonus Features: Includes all six Christmas episodes from the TV series and also includes the "Sabrina Goes to Rome" TV movie. Christmas episodes: "A Girl and Her Cat" (Season 1), "Sabrina Claus" (Season 2), "Christmas Amnesia" (Season 3), "Sabrina, Nipping at Your Nose" (Season 4), "Sabrina's Perfect Christmas" (Season 5), and "It's a Hot, Hot, Hot, Hot Christmas" (Season 7).

Also available: Sabrina Complete Series

Saturday Night Live ChristmasStarring: Dan Aykroyd, John Belushi, Dana Carvey, Chevy Chase, Jane Curtin, Phil Hartman, Jon Lovitz, Eddie Murphy, Bill Murray, Mike Myers, Adam Sandler and many others.

Bonus Features: Many memorable holiday skits from the show's first 25 years, including The Lost Ending to "It's a Wonderful Life," John Belushi as drunk mall Santa, Alec Baldwin's "Schweaty Balls," Adam Sandler's Hannukah song, Steve Martin's "Christmas Wish List," and others.

Also available: Mr. Bill's Christmas Special

Saturday Night Live Presents A Very Gilly Christmas (2009)Bonus Features: Includes a variety of recent and classic skits from SNL.

Sherlock Holmes:

"The Case of The Christmas Pudding" (1955)Starring: Ronald Howard, Howard Marion-Crawford, Eugene Deckers

Description: When a serial killer is sentenced to death, he issues a threat that he will kill Sherlock Holmes before he himself is executed.

The Singing Contractors:

Building A Christmas To Remember (2019)Starring: Aaron Gray and Josh Arnett.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

The Sonny & Cher Christmas CollectionStarring: Sonny Bono and Cher.

Bonus Features: Includes their three Christmas Specials from 1972, 1973, and 1976.

A Southern Celtic Christmas (2013)Bonus Features: A Southern Celtic Christmas celebrates in music, dance, poetry, song, and story the high spirits and mystical beauty of the Celtic and Appalachian Christmas traditions. Featured artists include three GRAMMY Award winners: Moya Brennan; Celtic and bluegrass banjo virtuoso Alison Brown; and Riverdance composer Bill Whelan.

Star Wars Holiday Special (1978)Starring: Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, James Earl Jones, Bea Arthur, Art Carney, and Diahann Carroll.

NOTE: Not available to purchase, but you can watch it online.

Also available: The 2023 documentary, A Disturbance in the Force, about the making of the infamous Star Wars spinoff.

A Statlers Christmas Present (1985)Description: Sit back and enjoy the music and merriment of A Statlers Christmas Present. This special DVD release is a delightful mixture of Christmas classics and original songs, with the Statler Brothers singing and telling heartwarming stories from earlier holidays. Winner of four Grammy Awards and one of the most successful vocal harmony groups in the history of country music, the Statlers are sure to add a melodic touch of nostalgia to your holidays.

Straight No Chaser:

Live In New York,

Holiday Edition (2010)Description: An intimate evening with the acappella phenomenon Straight No Chaser! The perfect mix of 10 incredible vocalists in harmony mixed with the perfect amount of humor provide for both a captivating and entertaining evening for all. T

Back to top

Season of Light

Christmas with the Tabernacle Choir (2023)Description: The Tabernacle Choir and Orchestra at Temple Square are joined by special guests, famed actress and singer Lea Salonga and renowned star of television and film Sir David Suchet, as they share their own personal traditions of Christmas.

Other Tabernacle Choir Holiday DVDs: (formerly known as the Mormon Tabernacle Choir)

O Holy Night (2022) - featuring Megan Hilty and Neal McDonough

20 Years of Christmas with the Tabernacle Choir (2021)

Christmas Day in the Morning (2020) - featuring Kelli O'Hara and Richard Thomas

Angels Among Us (2019) - featuring Kristin Chenoweth

A Merry Little Christmas (2018) - featuring Sutton Foster and Hugh Bonneville

O Come, Little Children (2017) - featuring Rolando Villazon

Hallelujah! (2016) - featuring Laura Osnes and Martin Jarvis

Keep Christmas With You (2015) - featuring Santino Fontana and Sesame Street characters

Let the Season In (2014) - featuring Deborah Voigt and John Rhys-Davies

Home for the Holidays (2013) - featuring Alfie Boe and Tom Brokaw

Once Upon a Christmas (2012) - featuring Nathan Gunn and Jane Seymour

Glad Christmas Tidings (2011) - featuring David Archuleta and Michael York

Most Wonderful Time of the Year (2010) - featuring Natalie Cole and David McCullough

Ring Christmas Bells (2009) - featuring Brian Stokes Mitchell and Edward K. Herrmann

Rejoice and Be Merry! (2008) - featuring The King's Singers

The Joy of Christmas (2003) - featuring Angela Lansbury

Silent Night, Holy Night (2003) - featuring Walter Cronkite

Christmas, Vol. 4 - featuring Sissel

Christmas, Vol. 3 - featuring Renee Fleming and Claire Bloom

Christmas, Vol. 2 - featuring Audra McDonald and Peter Graves

Christmas - featuring Frederica von Stade adn Bryn Terfel

Christmas with the Mormon Tabernacle Choir

The Songs of Christmas

Touched by an Angel:

Inspiration Collection - HolidayBonus Features: (TBA)

Trailer Park Boys:

Xmas Special (2004)Starring: John Paul Tremblay, Mike Smith, and Robb Wells.

Bonus Features: Gag reel, Alternate takes, Extended takes, Deleted Scenes, and Audio Commentary track.

TV Guide Spotlight:

TV's Merriest Holiday Episodes (2014)Bonus Features: Includes 12 holiday-themed episodes from the following sitcoms: 3rd Rock from the Sun, Bewitched, The Cosby Show, The Ellen Show, The Flying Nun, Just Shoot Me, Married with Children, The Nanny, Newsradio, The Patridge Family, Roseanne, and That '70s Show.

TV Sets:

Christmas TreatsBonus Features: Includes a Christmas episode from eight different classic TV shows from Paramount: Cheers, Happy Days, Laverne & Shirley, The Odd Couple, Mork & Mindy, The Lucy Show, The Beverly Hillbillies, and Petticoat Junction.

TV Sets:

Holiday TreatsBonus Features: Includes a Christmas episode from eight different classic TV shows from Paramount: Taxi, The Brady Bunch, Family Ties, I Love Lucy, The Andy Griffith Show, The Honeymooners, Frasier, and Wings.

TV's Lost

Christmas Shows, Vol. 1 (2011)Bonus Features: Includes classic holiday episodes from shows produced during the 1950s and 1960s, such as The Beverly Hillbillies, Ozzie and Harriet, Love That Bob, and many more. Bonus features include Biographies, Photo gallery, and Facts and trivia.

Also available: Volume 2

Twilight Zone:

Classic Christmas EpisodesStarring: Art Carney, Rod Serling, Susan Harrison, and Val Avery.

Bonus Features: Includes at least two holiday-themed episodes, "The Night of the Meek" and "Five Characters in Search of an Exit."

Twisted Sister: A Twisted Christmas - Live in Las VegasBonus Features: Following the release of their A Twisted Christmas album in 2006, Twisted Sister performed a festive show in Las Vegas. Combining Christmas favorites with classic songs from the band's catalogue. Songs include Have Yourself A Merry Christmas, White Christmas, Shoot Em Down, O Come All Ye Faithfull, I Wanna Rock, 12 Days Of Christmas, We're Not Gonna Take It, and more. U

Back to top V

Back to top

The Vandals:

25th Annual Christmas FormalDescription: The Vandals holiday concert has been an annual tradition for a quarter of a century, and the boys certainly weren't going to let a little global pandemic get in their way, so they filmed their entire performance in HD video and crystal clear audio! Not only does the band perform all of their most beloved holiday songs, including the now classic "Oi To The World," but they also filmed interviews and additional footage at the newly renovated Santa's Village adventure park in Lake Arrowhead, CA.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

A Very Soul Train Christmas (2016)Description: Hosted by Bill Bellamy and LaTonya Luckett, celebrating the holiday season with some of the most memorable performances in Soul Train history.

Bonus Features: (none)

Also available: Gospel Edition

The Vicar of Dibley:

Merry Christmas (2004)Starring: Dawn French, Gary Waldhorn, and Emma Chambers.

Vintage Christmas ClassicsStarring: Red Skelton, Ozzie & Harriet, Jack Benny, and The Beverly Hillbillies.

Vintage Christmas Classics, Vol. 2Starring: Liberace, Ozzie & Harriet, and Ray Bolger.

Voices of Christmas (2015)Bonus Features: Voices of Christmas is a sparkling holiday experience for all ages, a fresh, cinematic adaptation of the live theatre production that played on the Living Waters stage at Sight & Sounds Theatres. W

Back to top

A Western TV Christmas with Lorne Green and Annie OakleyDescription: Includes three Christmas TV Specials from the Golden Age of Television: "Christmas with Lorne Greene," a lost holiday TV Classic! Annie Oakley in "Santa Claus Wears a Gun," and GE Theatre Christmas Show hosted by Ronald Reagan, "A Child is Born."

When Calls the Heart:

Holiday Double Feature (2021)

Includes the two episodes, also available separately (below): Home for Christmas and The Greatest Christmas Wish.

Other When Calls the Heart Holiday DVDs:

Finding Home (2019) (aka Home for Christmas)

The Greatest Blessing (2018) (aka The Greatest Christmas Wish)

The Christmas Wishing Tree (2017)

When Calls the Heart Christmas (2016) (re-released as The Heart of Faith).

It Begins With Heart (2015) (aka "A New Year's Wish")

Also available: When Calls the Heart Christmas 3-Pack (includes the Christmas specials from 2016, 2017, and 2018)

When Hope Calls Christmas (2021)

(aka A Country Christmas)Starring: Morgan Kohan, Ryan-James Hatanaka, Marshall Williams, and Lori Loughlin.

Bonus Features: (none)

The Wonder Years:

The Holiday EpisodesStarring: Fred Savage, Daniel Stern, Jason Hervey, Dan Lauria, and Alley Mills.

Description: Includes two Christmas-themed episodes from season one and season four.

WWE: Ring in the HolidayStarring: Mick Foley, John Cena, Trish Stratus, Kofi Kingston, and Tyson Kidd.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

X

Back to top Y

Back to top

Your Hit Parade

Christmas and New Years ShowsStarring: Snooky Lanson, Dorothy Collins, Gisele MacKenzie, Russell Arms, and Tad Tadlock.

Bonus Features: Includes four classic episodes: The Christmas Show of December 24, 1955, featuring a blend of 1950s hits as well as classic Christmas songs, with skating in Rockefeller Plaza. Other three episodes are The New Years Eve show of December 31, 1955 and two Spring episodes from April 16, 1955 and May 2, 1953, featuring Dorothy Collins performing "Singin in the Rain".

Z

Back to top Documentaries

Back to top

Advent & Christmas

in old Germany (2010)Description: Elmar Gunsch and Greg Marston take us on a magical journey through glittering Christmas markets, fairy tale winter landscapes and alpine bars with popular Christmas music, as well as investigating a selection of the most beautiful cribs in Germany.

The American St. Nick (2015)Description: Tells the true story of a handful of GI's who brought Christmas back to a freshly-liberated small Luxembourg town caught up in WWII.

or

Becoming Santa (2011)Description: Documentary about the sidewalk and mall Santas who dedicated their life to the Holiday season, mostly focusing on Jack Sanderson and his journey as a first-time Santa.

or

Christmas in Yellowstone (2007)Description: "Christmas in Yellowstone" is a one-hour documentary showcasing various wildlife and scenary in the winter time at Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming.

Newer Release: PBS Studios DVD

Christmas Through

the Decades (2015)Description: From popular music to TV specials, movies, toys and more, Christmas Through the Decades explores the traditions, fads, and gifts of Christmases past, beginning with the 1960s. Each episode includes interviews from pop-culture experts and celebrities.

Craft in America:

Holidays (2013)Description: Holiday embraces familiar and new winter celebrations as part of our American experience with the handmade. Celebrate some of our most important cultural and religious customs and get inspired to discover your own creativity.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

Dear Santa (2020)Description: As thousands of letters to Santa Claus flood post offices during the holiday season, it's up to the US Postal Service's 107-year-old "Operation Santa" to deliver them to Kris Kringle himself.

Bonus Features: (none)

A Disturbance in the Force (2023)Description: In 1978, CBS aired the "Star Wars Holiday Special" the week before Thanksgiving to an audience of 13 million people. Considered one of the worst shows in television history, it aired only once. George Lucas tried to bury it and an infamous camp legend was born. This documentary unravels the mysteries behind the most bizarre Star Wars spin-offs of all time.

Starring: Seth Green, Kevin Smith, Bruce Vilanch, Donny Osmond, 'Weird Al' Yankovic, Paul Scheer, and Gilbert Gottfried.

Bonus Features: (none)

or

Gingerbread Journeys (2015)Description: From honey, flour, sugar, nuts and expensive spices such as cinnamon, pepper and cloves arises a miracle of confectionery art: gingerbread.

Bonus Features: (none)

Healthy Holidays: Fun Tips For Christmas WellbeingDescription: This Holiday season, join us for some unique ideas that may be the tips you need to change your life!

Bonus Features: (none)

The History of the Holidays: Christmas (2011)Description: This DVD includes seven documentaries from the History Channel and A&E on 4 DVDs, two of which are also available separately: "Christmas Unwrapped" (general history about the holiday), "Biography: Santa Claus," "It's a Wonderful Time to be Weird" (from the TV series "Werid U.S.") and "Christmas Tech" (a Modern Marvels special).

Older version: 2008 Release includes four of the seven.

I Am Santa Claus (2014)Description: Follows the lives of five real-bearded professional Santa Clauses as they anticipate and prepare the coming holiday season while showing them for who they actually are: flawed, flesh and blood men who feel an overbearing responsibility to protect the integrity of the spotless, untarnished reputation of the 'Red Suit.'

Bonus Features: (TBD)

It's a Miracle:

Christmas Miracles (2001)Description: Richard Thomas and Nia Peoples host this collection of the finest Holiday stories from the heartwarming series, "Its a Miracle". See ordinary people share stories of miraculous rescues, life-altering healings, and diving interventions that made their holidays truly memorable.

Bonus Features: (TBA)

Jingle Bell Rocks! (2013)Description: Mitchell Kezin delves into the minds of some of the world s most legendary Christmas music fanatics and hits the road to hang with his holiday heroes including hip hop legend Joseph "Rev Run" Simmons of RUN-D.M.C., The Flaming Lips frontman Wayne Coyne, filmmaker John Waters, bebopper Bob Dorough, L.A. DJ and musicologist Dr. Demento, and Calypso legend The Mighty Sparrow.

Bonus Features: (TBD)

Legends of Santa (2008)Description: This festive documentary shows how today's Santa is a fusion of cultures and traditions around the world. You'll never look at a mall Santa in quite the same way.

National Geographic: Animal Holiday (1997)

(Special Edition)Bonus Features: Guess Who? Game; Interactive Quiz; Sound Off Game; Sing-Along Songs.

Road Trip for Ralphie: A Christmas Story Documentary (2013)Description: Tyler and Jordie Schwartz grew up loving the movie A Christmas Story. Although they didn t know each other as kids, the couple always shared the same annual anticipation of waiting for the movie to air on television. Once they finally met, they were delighted to discover their mutual admiration for the classic Christmas movie.

Visit their official site for more info.

Santa Camp (2022)Description: This heartwarming and provocative documentary shines a light on the New England Santa Society and their efforts to bring more diversity to one of the most beloved figures in history – Santa Claus.

Bonus Features: (none)

Santa's Wild Home (2020)Description: Take a holiday trip to this northernmost region of mainland Europe where reindeer, wolverines, eagles, wolves, musk oxen and brown bears brave the elements in the tundra and forest.

Bonus Features: (none)

The Story of Silent Night (2011)Description: Documentary about the history of one of the most popular Christmas Carols, Silent Night. Narrated By Ed Ragozzino and featuring the Vienna Boys Choir.

Bonus Features: Holiday Fest in Austria and Silent Night in World War II 1944

Surviving the Holidays with Lewis Black (2010)Description: "Surviving the Holidays with Lewis Black" features the Curmudgeon of Comedy Lewis Black as he returns to HISTORY (The History Channel) to make sense of the 36-day marathon of stress that consumes us all. Armed with history, humor and his trademark ranting, the ever-acerbic Lewis takes a comedic look at how to survive the month-long festival of consumption without losing your mind...

'Tis the Season!

A Holiday Documentary (2017)Description: Go behind the scenes of Hollywood's premiere caroling group, The Voices of Christmas, and learn what it takes to spread holiday cheer in Los Angeles.

Bonus Features: (none)

A Very Royal Christmas:

Secrets of Sandringham (2021)Description: A sumptuous look at how the royal family enjoys the festive period at their Sandringham estate, from historical traditions to somewhat surprising gifts and culinary extravaganzas.

Bonus Features: (none)

Winter and Christmas in America's National Parks (2012)Description: Winter and Christmas in America's National Parks will transport your spirit to the mysterious and magical charm of Christmas in the wonders of America's national parks - too awe-inspiring to be missed! Bonus Program: Wonders of America's National Parks - 11 one-of-a-kind parks, including: Hawaii Volcanoes, Yellowstone, Death Valley, Everglades, Canyonlands, Bryce Canyon, Yosemite, Katmai, and more.

Bonus Features: (none)

Also available: Christmas in Yellowstone

Xmas Without China (2013)Description: Focusing on two families, the Xias and Joneses: The Xias struggle with what it means to be Chinese-American - challenging their Suburb neighbors to celebrate Christmas without any Chinese-made products, while the Joneses are glad to accept the challenge after a wave of Chinese toy recalls forces them to have their son tested for lead poisoning. Yule Log and Other Ambience DVDs

Back to top

Almost Home For The Holidays (1996)Description: "Almost Home for the Holidays" creates the ambience of the holiday spirit for those who live in perpetual sunshine or just a reminder for all of just how beautiful winter can be. It is a beautifully filmed winter wonderland by award winning video photographers featuring peaceful traditional instrumental carols such as Jingle Bells, Silent Night and Joy to the World...

Christmas in New York (2004)Description: "Christmas in New York" is a continuously playing music and light show designed as a visual and musical backdrop for all your home holiday activities. The traditional and contemporary Christmas music selections on this DVD include full orchestral, a capella, small group, and solo instrumentals... capturing the atmsophere and warmth of this special season...

Christmas Lights DVD (2010)Description: More than an hour of dazzling and amazing Christmas light displays in crystal clear quality. Full views of houses, lawns and buildings covered in lights, with a soundtrack of classic Christmas songs in various styles during the program.

Christmas Lights DVD 2:

Bigger Dazzling Displays (2011)Description: Full hour of light displays with various music styles to pick from.

A Christmas Snowfall (2007)Description: "A Christmas Snowfall" features nearly an hour of falling snow shot in high definition video and set to 16 classic Christmas carols. You will enjoy well over 30 scenes that include snow falling over a pine forest and a scenic river...

Christmastime in New Orleans (2016)Description: A musical, culinary, yuletide celebration from the birthplace of Jazz, wrapped in 300 years of tradition. Hosted by New York Times best selling author, award-winning broadcaster and native New Orleanian, Raymond Arroyo, this broadcast extravaganza offers viewers new insight into the culture, people, and traditions that have given us a food and sound revered around the globe.

Bonus Features: Special expanded cut version.

Daniel O'Donnell Christmas Wishes (2012)Bonus Features: Celebrate the holiday season with Daniel O'Donnell's music in his first ever Yule Log DVD. Reminisce Christmas pasts and listen to 15 popular holiday favorites as you sit along side the virtual fireplace.

Disney's Magical Fireplace (2010)Description: 60 minutes of a fireplace with holiday music in the background, including: "12 Days of Christmas" and "Deck the Halls," both performed by Disney Characters, as well as "Joy to the World" instrumental, "Jingle Bells" instrumental, "Good King Wenceslas" and many more.

The Happy Holiday Hearth (2002)Description: "The Happy Holiday Hearth" provides an instant, portable fireplace...complemented by a choice of realistic crackling fire sounds, a holiday music track, or a combination of the two. The music track features traditional choral arrangements of classic Christmas songs like "White Christmas" and "Silver Bells" with full instrumental accompaniment...

NOTE: This DVD is the best-reviewed "Yule Log" DVD on Amazon. Here are some other Yule Log DVDs also available, for your reference: The Original Christmas Yule Log Fireplace, The Merry Yule Log, The Yule Log DVD Gift Set, and Fireplace and Melodies for the Holidays (2011).

An Old-Fashioned Christmas (2004)Description: An hour and a half of your favorite Christmas songs come alive in a beautiful program that captures the joyous images of the season.

or

Thomas Kinkade:

Christmas Treasures (2004)Description: "Thomas Kinkade: Christmas Treasures" features some of Thomas Kinkade's most beloved holiday images set to a collection of 14 songs by Bing Crosby, Harry Simeone Chorale, Nat King Cole, 101 Strings & Choral, and The London Philharmonic.

Toy Trains & Christmas

Parts 1, 2, 3 (2003)Description: Featured are three dazzling Christmas-themed electric toy train layouts with Dept. 56 Villages, Lionel, LGB, and MTH trains, and original music of Jim Coffey.

Other toy train Christmas DVDs: Toy Train Christmas Magic 4-DVD Set (2013), Christmas Toy Train Stories (2013), Christmas Train Spectacular (2011), A Lionel Christmas (1995), A Lionel Christmas 2 (2010), I Love Christmas (2007), and Toy Train Christmas Memories.

The Yule Log DVD:

Barry Manilow - A Christmas Gift of LoveDescription: Provides a fireplace and other holiday scenes featuring Barry Manilow's entire album "A Christmas Gift of Love."

Similar artists/Yule Log DVDs: Celine Dion - These Are Special Times, , Carreras/Domingo/Pavarotti - The Three Tenors Christmas, Kenny G - The Greatest Holiday Classics, Mariah Carey - Merry Christmas, Whitney Houston - One Wish: The Holiday Album and Il Divo - The Christmas Collection.

The Yule Log DVD:

Elvis Presley - Elvis' Christmas AlbumDescription: Provides a fireplace and other holiday scenes, featuring Elvis Presley's entire album "Elvis' Christmas Album."

Similar artists/Yule Log DVDs: Johnny Cash - Christmas with Johnny Cash, A Christmas Gift for You from Phil Spector, Various Artists - A Traditional Christmas, Johnny Mathis - 50th Anniversary Christmas Celebration, Andy Williams - The Andy Williams Christmas Album, and Jose Feliciano - Feliz Navidad.