Like gifts themselves, Christmas albums shouldn’t be obligations, though they all too often are. And also like gifts, the ones worth receiving and embracing are those that in spite of the familiar structure, find new ways to deliver old thrills. Or even, sometimes, new thrills. Or even more rarely, something not thrilling, but bracing; not all holiday experiences are cheerful. Here, the pop and jazz critics of The New York Times look for meaning, and hidden presents, in this year’s crop of holiday releases.

ANONYMOUS 4: ‘THE CHERRY TREE: SONGS, CAROLS & BALLADS FOR CHRISTMAS’ (Harmonia Mundi, $19.98).

Intelligently and responsibly, the American a cappella group Anonymous 4 has built an album around one 15th-century English song, “The Cherry Tree Carol,” on the subject of Joseph, Mary and the miracle pregnancy. Anonymous 4 has gone about it in wide focus: It includes medieval English and Irish precedents to the carol, and related American songs rooted in British caroling. The record presents triadic harmonies and the group’s immaculate handling of art-song polyphony, and then the song itself, sung by only one of the singers — Marsha Genensky — in Kentucky Appalachian style. (The group will perform a Christmas-related concert at 6:30 and 8:30 p.m. Dec. 14 at the Metropolitan Museum’s Medieval Sculpture Hall; information: metmuseum.org.)

DAVID BAZAN: ‘WISH MY KIDS WERE HERE’ (Suicide Squeeze, $5.99).

Christmas is a day to celebrate closeness and also a day to wrestle with consequences. “Wish My Kids Were Here” is the A side of this seven-inch single, the seventh in an annual holiday series for David Bazan, who has spoken openly of his struggles with Christianity. It’s a skeleton, and a broken, incomplete one at that — less song than confessional. “I long to hand out presents/And watch their faces glow,” he says of the children who live with their mother, hundreds of miles away. “The judge says if I call them, then I’ll go straight to jail/But I can send them presents through the mail.” The song ends abruptly with a ringing phone and an innocent voice: “Merry Christmas, Daddy.” The B side is “I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day,” a carol based on Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s poem “Christmas Bells,” about a skeptic shaken free of his doubt. Again, the arrangement is spare, but here, faintly, in the back, bells jingle.

SUSAN BOYLE: ‘THE GIFT’ (Syco/Columbia, $11.98).

For the holidays, try forgiveness, inspired by the rapprochement between Susan Boyle, the multiplatinum-selling operatically inclined British reality-show contestant, and Lou Reed, the bah-humbug Grinch who reportedly denied Boyle the rights to perform “Perfect Day” on American television a couple of months ago. The hurdle has been cleared, and “Perfect Day” — spooky, ambitious, elegant — opens and sets the tone for “The Gift,” Boyle’s holiday collection. Mostly, she and the producer Steve Mac render traditionals — “Auld Lang Syne,” “O Come All Ye Faithful” and more — in unerringly gorgeous, if wrenchingly polite, arrangements, performances that smooth flat the many creases in Boyle’s sometimes erratic public persona. “Perfect Day” is the highlight, but Boyle is also impressive on Crowded House’s “Don’t Dream It’s Over,” turning it into a proper devotional.

JAMES BROWN: ‘THE COMPLETE JAMES BROWN CHRISTMAS’ (Hip-O Select/Universal, $39.98).

If anyone could shout at Christmastime, it was James Brown, who released Christmas albums in 1966, 1968 and 1970 that are reissued here, along with a handful of other tracks, on two CDs. “I’ll be groovin’ at Christmastime,” Brown promised in the stream-of-consciousness “Soulful Christmas.” And he was: singing seasonal chestnuts with raspy syncopations, adding Christmas tidings to other messages in songs like “Hey America,” and playing R&B instrumentals (occasionally quoting seasonal songs) with titles like “Believers Shall Enjoy (Non-Believers Shall Suffer).” His “Sweet Little Baby Boy (Parts 1 and 2)” and “A Lonely Little Boy Around One Little Christmas Toy,” with strings and shrieks, are wholehearted preaching and unmistakably James Brown.

MARIAH CAREY: ‘MERRY CHRISTMAS II YOU’ (Island Def Jam, $13.98).

“Oh Santa!” doesn’t sound like anyone’s idea of a Christmas standard, but maybe it should. From Mariah Carey’s new holiday album, “Merry Christmas II You,” it’s peppy and buoyant, moving along at reindeer-quick speed, a hybrid of girl-group harmony and lightweight Atlanta bass music. Carey’s vocals are slippery, and she’s naughty in a nice way: “I saw him shopping last week/And his new girl was so weak.” Santa as home wrecker? Why not? The rest of this album intersperses originals (a surprisingly modest neo-soul “When Christmas Comes” ) with classics — a respectful “First Noel,” an aptly baby-making take on “O Little Town of Bethlehem,” and “Here Comes Santa Claus (Right Down Santa Claus Lane)” as routed through a strip club. Nothing beats “All I Want for Christmas Is You,” from her 1994 album “Merry Christmas,” one of the great modern holiday albums. So she updates it, ever so slightly, in a version dubbed “Extra Festive,” giving herself the gift of resting on laurels.

‘THE CHRISTMAS GIG’ (free download at target.com, starting Nov. 28)

Musicians with low to medium fame have holiday dreams, too, and different ways of expressing them, as this compilation demonstrates. “10,000 Watts,” by Crystal Antlers, is a shaky, rollicking ode to bright lights, and “Toy Jackpot” is told from the perspective of a child on Christmas morning by Blackalicious, the indie-rap duo typically given to more abstract pleasures. This collection is most notable, though, for the winningly jangly “Got Something for You,” the first recorded collaboration of Best Coast and Wavves, whose principals, Bethany Cosentino and Nathan Williams, are the Lucy and Desi of Twitter-friendly indie-rock stoners. “Hey baby/I’ve got something for you and I want to tell you/But you’ll have to wait,” Cosentino teases, though she herself isn’t so patient. “You think you’re smart/Searching for your gifts in the dark,” Williams replies. “Think that I can’t see/You looking under the Christmas tree.”

‘GIFT WRAPPED II: SNOWED IN’ (Warner Brothers, $9.99 preorder on iTunes).

Last year around this time, Warner Bros. released “Gift Wrapped: 20 Songs That Keep On Giving,” selling it exclusively through iTunes. This sequel includes one more song, and it’s more widely available, which qualifies as progress. Among the new tunes are “December,” a rumination by Regina Spektor; “Baby Come Find Me at Christmas,” a tremulous waltz by Rachael Yamagata; and “New York in Wintertime,” a sentimental journey by Kara DioGuardi and Jason Reeves. There are covers: Everest grapples with Marvin Gaye’s “Christmas in the City,” and Tegan and Sara butcher “The Chipmunk Song (Christmas Don’t Be Late).” There’s a version of “Le Trois Cloches” by the steel guitarist Ben Keith, who died this summer; lending vocal support are his confreres Neil and Pegi Young. It’s all a jumble, a heap of boxes under the tree. In the words of Devo, which has a half-baked original here: “Merry Something to You.”

‘GLEE: THE MUSIC, THE CHRISTMAS ALBUM’ (Columbia, $11.98).

Is not every episode of “Glee,” in essence, a Christmas episode? Filled with good cheer and generosity, the show merely transposes the holiday spirit onto other times of the year and other moods. Therefore the tone of the first “Glee” Christmas collection is no different than, say, its Madonna episode, or the one where the glee club is worried about making it to regionals, or the other one where the glee club is worried about making it to regionals. Which is to say: Lea Michele is the star, her blend of R&B and Broadway inflections well suited to the task of wide-eyed holiday desire, as on “O Holy Night” and “We Need a Little Christmas.” Other selections are clever, including Wham!’s “Last Christmas,” and “You’re a Mean One, Mr. Grinch,” from “How the Grinch Stole Christmas!” But given the show’s commitment to inclusion, it’s surprising there’s no effort here to celebrate the holidays of other cultures. Hanukkah’s feeling left out, as is Kwanzaa. And nothing for Eid al-Fitr?

DAN HICKS AND THE HOT LICKS: ‘CRAZY FOR CHRISTMAS’ (Surfdog, $15.98).

Dan Hicks, the old-timey shaggy-dog singer-songwriter-guitarist from the Bay Area, goes about his career as if it’s a long extension of his living room. “Crazy for Christmas” — 12 songs, mostly original — is exemplary, a Christmas record that sounds antic and deadpan, engaged and tossed off, almost magically laid-back. (Gonzalo Bergara’s Django Reinhardt-like solos ensure the professionalism.) Hicks will perform some of these songs in a holiday show at City Winery in the South Village on Tuesday, citywinery.com; if you’re inclined to such concerts, you’ll want to be in his company.

INDIGO GIRLS: ‘HOLLY HAPPY DAYS’ (Vanguard, $18.98).

Of course there’s a chipper version of Woody Guthrie’s “Happy Joyous Hanukkah” on “Holly Happy Days,” the first, um, seasonal album by the Indigo Girls, who in their commitment to equality of all forms, were strenuous in their inclusion of all sorts of winter styles. There’s an intricate bluegrass number, “I Feel the Christmas Spirit,” which features the excellent banjoist Alison Brown. And there’s a nod to the sirens of the 1980s — why not? — naturally, with an aching take on Melissa Manchester’s “There’s Still My Joy.” The voices of this duo — Amy Ray and Emily Saliers — can be sinewy, and they sound awkward wrapped around traditional songs like “O Holy Night” and “Angels We Have Heard on High.” But the originals here play to their strength, especially “The Wonder Song,” by Ray, which isn’t far from the mystically minded folk songs the duo made early in their career.

LADY ANTEBELLUM: ‘A MERRY LITTLE CHRISTMAS’ (Capitol Nashville, $6.99, available only at Target).

Most artists see the holiday album as a chance to let loose, to try on a new style, to live life as if under permanent sunshine. The ascendant country group Lady Antebellum has a different strategy, taking the idea of a Christmas album very, very seriously, like an extra-credit homework assignment, done without humor. Apart from a cutesy “Let It Snow, Let It Snow, Let It Snow,” “A Merry Little Christmas” is the most dour of Lady Antebellum’s albums, which is saying something. There’s a shockingly sober reading of “All I Want for Christmas Is You,” the exuberant Mariah Carey original from 1994 that’s become a new holiday standard. “Silver Bells” sounds like an outtake from Don Henley’s desert-dry “End of the Innocence,” and “On This Winter’s Night,” the lone original here, has all the holiday exuberance of a dirge.

ANNIE LENNOX: ‘A CHRISTMAS CORNUCOPIA’ (Decca, $18.99).

Annie Lennox is robustly reverent on “A Christmas Cornucopia,” putting the full and frequently rough power of her voice behind some of the sternest old carols, with devout verses that are often omitted. (The album also includes her own new “Universal Child,” a non-Christmas song about nurturing and protection.) As Lennox raises her voice, arrangements balloon around her: hymn-chorded piano, symphonic strings, Baroque flutes and her own voice overdubbed into choirs. There’s Middle Eastern drumming when she mentions Bethlehem in “God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen,” while “As Joseph Went a Walking” suddenly sprouts a children’s choir and plinking thumb pianos. Like a full Christmas banquet, it’s lavish and heartily over the top.

SHELBY LYNNE: ‘MERRY CHRISTMAS’ (Everso, $12.98).

There are 11 songs on “Merry Christmas,” Shelby Lynne’s first holiday album, and almost as many styles: a bluegrass “Christmastime’s a-Coming,” new age flutes on “White Christmas,” and a Bakersfield, Calif.-style “Winter Wonderland.” “Ain’t Nothin’ Like Christmas,” one of Lynne’s two originals, wouldn’t have sounded out of place on an Elvis Christmas album, and her takes on “Santa Claus Is Coming to Town” and “Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer” are smiling. But Lynne, who flirts with the outskirts of the country mainstream, isn’t a genial singer. She brings bruised, anguished colors to “Silent Night” and “Christmas Time Is Here.” And “Xmas,” her other original, is pure lament. “Christmas makes me sad/And I’m being bad,” Lynne sings, over a questionable smooth-jazz saxophone. “Holiday cocktails make me forget/The gifts that Daddy never opened.”

WYNTON MARSALIS: ‘CHRISTMAS JAZZ JAM’ (Somerset, $9.99).

Originally released as a Target exclusive last year, “Christmas Jazz Jam” warrants a second look for its boisterous poise and for the sharpest “Jingle Bells” in recent memory. Wynton Marsalis, trumpet in hand, finesses a dozen holiday standards in all, leading a midsize cohort of trusted sidemen. Wycliffe Gordon is here (on trombone and tuba), and so are Wessell Anderson (alto saxophone), Reginald Veal (on bass) and Herlin Riley (drums). And as he did on “Crescent City Christmas Card,” from 1989, Marsalis briefly features a classical soprano, presenting her as a welcome peer. (It was Kathleen Battle then; it’s Roberta Gumbel now.) The arrangements are slangy but tight, usually riffing on New Orleans polyphony but occasionally evoking midcentury modern jazz: on “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas,” Marsalis puts a mute in his horn and nods toward the Miles Davis of 1950s vintage, to fine effect.

KATHARINE McPHEE: ‘CHRISTMAS IS THE TIME TO SAY I LOVE YOU’ (Verve Forecast, $10).

Before the vocals kick in on the Katharine McPhee Christmas album, you hear a swelling of strings and then Chris Botti’s softly burnished trumpet: signifiers of taste and expense. McPhee, who came to us four years ago as an “American Idol” finalist, has the sort of unblemished, featureless voice you might expect to hear in a commercial jingle, or an animated Disney movie. She’s better with a slow sob — as on “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas,” the track featuring Botti, and “It’s Not Christmas Without You,” a Celine Dion-esque ballad she had a hand in writing — than she is on brighter fare. Still, this album’s title track, by Billy Squier, puts a blues-rock shuffle to good use. “Times are hard but no one seems to care,” McPhee belts in passing, and you almost want to believe her.

‘NOW THAT’S WHAT I CALL CHRISTMAS! 4’ (EMI, $19.98).

Songs to please, amuse, annoy and appall just about everyone (except hip-hop fans — there is none) are packed into this two-CD miscellany: one concentrating on the 21st century, the other reaching back to the 20th. It’s one-stop shopping for Bing Crosby’s “White Christmas,” Band Aid’s “Do They Know It’s Christmas?,” Bobby Helms’ “Jingle Bell Rock” and Lady Gaga’s risque 2008 “Christmas Tree.” From 2010, it includes a reggae version of “A Child Is Born” by Rihanna and an electro remake of Paul McCartney’s “Wonderful Christmastime” by Kelly Rowland (from Destiny’s Child, now harmonizing with herself). As for appalling, there’s Maroon 5’s version of John Lennon’s “Merry Christmas (War Is Over),” a song that just should not simper.

THE O’JAYS: ‘CHRISTMAS WITH THE O’JAYS’ (Saguaro Road, $13.98).

Eddie Levert coughs up the words as if they were burdening him, and he needs to purge: “Joy-oy.” “To.” “The worrrrrrld.” Holidays are a time for reflection, but maybe not for considering the decaying instrument brought to “Christmas With the O’Jays” by Levert. On “Silent Night” and “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing,” his partner Walter Williams sounds more limber, more joyous. But unexpectedly over the course of this album, full of denuded but not unpleasant synth soul, it’s Levert’s unsteadiness that hits harder. His “Jingle Bells” is saucy, and his original, “I’m What You Want This Christmas,” is the highlight. “Let me supply your needs,” he urges, in what’s meant to be a seductive command, but comes off as more of a plea. Holiday bonus: bass on this album is played by Malcolm-Jamal Warner, aka Theo Huxtable of “The Cosby Show.”

PINK MARTINI: ‘JOY TO THE WORLD’ (Heinz, $15.99).

Like a glitter-flecked bauble on a snow-flocked bough, this album plays up the holidays’ sparkling side. Which is about what you’d expect from Pink Martini, a retro-swank lounge orchestra led by the rococo pianist Thomas Lauderdale and the coquettish singer China Forbes. Hailing from Oregon, home to many a Douglas-fir wholesaler, the group seems right at home in this season of gaudy cheer. And yet “Joy to the World” strives hard to earn its title, with songs sung in Slavic, Semitic, Romance and East Asian languages. “Little Drummer Boy” adopts a Cuban rumba beat; “Auld Lang Syne” rides a samba churn. But the emblematic tune is an original, “A Snowglobe Christmas,” in which Forbes, backed by steel guitar, croons this fantasy:

‘We’re living in the perfect world of trees

And harmonies

I’m there with you

You’re here with me’

THE PUPPINI SISTERS: ‘CHRISTMAS WITH THE PUPPINI SISTERS (Verve, $10.99).

Swinging big bands, close harmonies and the occasional ukulele deliver the Christmas tidings on the proudly retro “Christmas With the Puppini Sisters.” The Puppini Sisters — Marcella Puppini, Stephanie O’Brien and Kate Mullins — are British and not siblings. They write their own horn and string arrangements when they’re not emulating (and crediting) Bing Crosby and the Andrews Sisters. The group backdates songs like George Michael’s “Last Christmas” and Mariah Carey’s “All I Want for Christmas Is You” alongside chestnuts like “White Christmas” and “Santa Baby” ; it’s clever, slick and ultimately lighthearted.

BRIAN SETZER ORCHESTRA: ‘CHRISTMAS COMES ALIVE!’ (Surfdog, $13.98).

Two years ago, the Brian Setzer Orchestra released a compilation whose title — “The Best of Collection: Christmas Rocks!” — would seem to imply some kind of finality. But this music is a lucrative franchise for Setzer, the former Stray Cat and full-time rock ‘n’ roll revivalist, so why stop there? “Christmas Comes Alive!” was recorded during last year’s seventh annual Christmas Extravaganza tour. (I did say “franchise.” ) Setzer and his band, which holds to a high-polish standard, do just what you’d expect of them: “Jingle Bell Rock,” Leiber and Stoller’s “Santa Claus Is Back in Town,” a segue from “Stray Cat Strut” into “You’re a Mean One, Grinch.”

JESSICA SIMPSON: ‘HAPPY CHRISTMAS’ (Primary Wave, $12.98).

A Western-swing-influenced medley of “Here Comes Santa Claus” and “Santa Claus Is Coming to Town,” sung by Jessica Simpson, and produced by Tricky Stewart and The-Dream? Someone’s been paying attention to one critic’s holiday wish list. Simpson, who began her career several lifetimes ago as a Christian singer, hasn’t sounded as focused in years as she does on the feverishly pleasing “Happy Christmas,” which is produced largely by Stewart and The-Dream, the synth-bliss R&B tastemakers, employing full restraint here. The bland bigness of holiday music suits Simpson’s overpowering voice well, but even when she’s testing it, she sounds sharp, whether on the multitracked delirium of “Carol of the Bells” or on an electric-blues version of “Merry Christmas Baby,” where she energetically over-emotes against a more laconic holiday messenger, Willie Nelson.

SEAN SMITH: ‘CHRISTMAS’ (Tompkins Square, $13.98).

Glancing over his shoulder at the guitarist John Fahey’s Christmas album, “The New Possibility,” Sean Smith offers spare solo-guitar versions of public-domain carols, often playing slowly and using just one or two strings at a time for melody and drone while his six-string guitar resonates. Two improvisations of his own are equally centered on folky tunes, with “Christmas Eve (Improvisation II)” moving into some Fahey-like picking. The music is homespun and sure, serenely reverent and humbly concise: 16 songs in 39 minutes.

‘RONNIE SPECTOR’S BEST CHRISTMAS EVER’ (Bad Girl Sounds/The Orchard, $5.98).

Ronnie Spector, one of the memorable voices on the very best Christmas pop record ever — that would be “A Christmas Gift for You From Phil Spector” — gives us a new five-song seasonal EP. At 67, her voice heaving, her vibrato swinging like a heavy saloon door on a hinge, she sounds way intense, someone who has traveled many miles to lay an offering at your feet. This present comes with some strings attached, including ersatz ’50s rock sounds and sickly sweet soprano-saxophone solos. But it’s full of her generosity, and it feels good to accept that from her.

THE SUPERIONS: ‘DESTINATION: CHRISTMAS!’ (Fanatic, $11.98).

Fred Schneider, the quickly recognizable vocalist of the B-52s — he doesn’t sing so much as declare — has a new band: a disco trio called the Superions. They were born to make a Christmas album. This could be the first of many. It’s a light holiday critique: campy, absurd, unlikely to upset your apple cart. It conjures a world where Santa runs a disco, sweethearts stay up late toasting marshmallows on electric stoves and a barren but sentient Christmas tree finds nirvana when thrown in the fire. You keep expecting them to push the subversion a foot further, and they do, twice: “Christmas Tears,” a catalog of resentment, and “Teddy and Betty Yeti,” a tale of two Abominable Snowmen who get drunk and eat the elves, the reindeer and the Clauses.

TAKE 6: ‘THE MOST WONDERFUL TIME OF THE YEAR’ (Take 6/Heads Up, $18.98).

On its third Christmas album, Take 6 stays faithful to its creamy vocal blends and gleaming gospel harmonies, offering little in the way of surprises. That’s good news and glad tidings for fans of this gold-standard a cappella group, which has always sounded best without outside gimmicks (instruments, sound effects, guest singers). The album was produced by Mark Kibble, who also wrote most of the airtight arrangements, including a slinky take on “Dance of the Sugarplum Fairy.” There’s nothing here quite as striking as the “Silent Night” that appeared on Take 6’s first Christmas release, “He Is Christmas,” in 1991. But there’s nary a false step, either. And while the group still travels in Christian-music circles, there are only two overtly religious songs ( “I Saw Three Ships” and “It Came Upon a Midnight Clear” ), subtle in their piety.

MATT WILSON: ‘MATT WILSON’S CHRISTMAS TREE-O’ (Palmetto, $16.98).

Giddy splendor on a lean budget: that’s one way of looking at “Matt Wilson’s Christmas Tree-O,” which was recorded live in a single room with three musicians and no obvious enhancements. Another way of looking at it: Wilson, a jazz drummer of year-round merriness, has made the definitive Christmas saxophone-trio album, raising the question of why we don’t see more of this group. Together with the tenor saxophonist Jeff Lederer and the bassist Paul Sikivie, he pushes an elfin but uncloying agenda, doing for “Winter Wonderland” what Sonny Rollins once did for “I’m an Old Cowhand.” Monotony never sets in, partly because Lederer diversifies, playing chirpy soprano saxophone on “The Chipmunk Song (Christmas Don’t Be Late),” antic B-flat clarinet on “Mele Kalikimaka” and brackish bass clarinet on “You’re a Mean One, Mr. Grinch.”

WILSON PHILLIPS: ‘CHRISTMAS IN HARMONY’ (Sony Masterworks, $11.98).

Witness the holiday album as swaddling clothes, wrapped tightly, constricting movement, obsessed with structure. “Christmas in Harmony” is the first Wilson Phillips album in six years, though it could have been released in 1991. It’s produced by Glen Ballard, who also produced the group’s two hit-thick early-1990s albums, and he understands the power of the trio’s wall of harmony. Their standards are almost oppressively bright, even “Silent Night.” On “Winter Wonderland,” it translates as something like nervous panting; perhaps there is such a thing as an overabundance of joy.