Sunday, July 14, 2024

Sunday made up for Saturday’s open schedule. By 8:45, choir members were slipping into the choir loft at St. John’s United Church of Christ (where we rehearsed and ate our meals) for some warm-up and practice prior to singing three songs during the morning worship service. This was a fine way to end our time with the welcoming people at St. John’s. We’re very grateful for this new connection in Dover and for the opportunity of singing in their fine building.

We bustled out of there at 10:00 and buzzed over to Crosspointe Mennonite Church where we sang a few more songs. This was a special opportunity since members of this congregation played a big role in feeding and lodging us over our long stay in Ohio. It was also special since we got to sing a song with a group from their church that has sung under Wendell at a recent mobile music camp. They fed us lunch (not quite the last meal yet) and then we wound our way over to nearby Walnut Creek Mennonite Church for the final concert of our tour. That church provided a rewarding acoustic for us all as well as sufficient seating for the audience. After singing in Dover’s large concert hall, it felt good to wrap up in a church where the choir could fill the building with stirring sound.

People lingered long in conversation. This is a significant portion of the goodness of tour. As things wound down, the choir along with a few added friends straggled back to Crosspointe where these kind people spread one final meal for us and gave us a wonderful place to have our farewell party. Rice and chicken bowls with grilled peaches and ice cream afterwards made a happy and comforting combination. Indoors and out, people talked, children played, and eventually said their goodbyes.

It’s been a rich two weeks. Many of us are headed back to our jobs, others to the rest of summer vacation before school begins, some to Poland for Hope Singers, and still others to summer college work. We wish you all the best in the remainder of your summer. May the Lord who gives and guides our song continue the seeking and healing and transforming of which this tour has been a part.

Kyler Martin

PR Manager

Saturday, July 13, 2024

Saturday morning was scheduled for retakes of whatever we needed better recordings of, but Friday evening Wendell gave us glad tidings of great joy: no retakes needed! Huzzah! Therefore, the only thing scheduled for the day was our evening concert at Dover High School. Call time, accordingly, was bumped to 2:30 (though it was recommended that we show up for lunch at 12:30, since kind-hearted cooks were already prepared to feed us).

The morning stretched before us like a blank canvas. And we filled it with beautiful things, like sleep, coffee, shopping and breakfast and what-have-you. Esther Strickler, Rosalie, and I left our lodgings at an appropriately late hour and headed to Berlin. There we shopped. My favorite find was sea turtle fabric. Then we went to Ginger House Coffee, lured by the menu’s vague promise of bubble tea.🧋 Sadly, they turned out to only have popping boba and we wanted tapioca. But we consoled ourselves with other drinks (mine was a mango matcha with dragonfruit cold foam and it did not disappoint). We also crashed a Miller Munny Meeting at the same coffee shop, oops.

At 12:30 most of us gathered in the basement of St John’s for lunch. Then at 2:30 we met at Dover High for rehearsing and a (warm) photo shoot. Kyler got us into formation and then said “okay, close your eyes . . . 1,2,3 . . . open!” Click click click. The theory was that closing your eyes before made for a relaxed face on the picture. The only problem was when some people forgot to open their eyes, thinking that “close your eyes” meant the same as “go to sleep” and was a cue for a standing-up Power Nap.

Later in the afternoon the LCS ensemble joined us to rehearse Indodana and also ate supper with us. We were excited for the concert after our days of recording, and it was great to collaborate with LCS. They are talented young musicians. Overall the concert went quite well, though we struggled a bit to hear each other. Afterwards we enjoyed, as always, mingling with the audience. Later that evening there was a party for Oasis people of yore (there were lots of Oasis alumni in the audience) and there was a Dairy Queen run for this human. It was a lovely day.

Abigail Heatwole

Soprano 1

Thursday & Friday, July 11 & 12, 2024

We spend Thursday and Friday on the stage at Dover High School laying down takes for a new choral album. Things went pretty well despite the colds, weariness, and noises. Here and there on tour and during breaks in recording while the bells rang and lawn mowers roared, a number of singers shared their answers to an assortment of questions.

Twila Diefenbacher

Alto 1

Wednesday, July 10, 2024

Shout-out to Wallhouse Coffee Company for having two Oasis Chorale posters in their entryway! And for the great food!

Our much-needed day of travel and rest dawned warm. After bidding good-bye to my alma mater, Faith Builders, I loaded the bus with my other comrades, and we motored back to Holmes County, Ohio. On the bus, conversations murmured, Miller Munny made their chocolate distributions, and a brief game of “Poetry for Neanderthals” popped up. It was reported to me that Johnny Miller described “milk” as “cow juice.”

We arrived back at Legacy Christian School in Ohio around 12:45, and the rest of the day was up to each person’s discretion. One of the most pressing needs for many people was washing their clothes. Laundry is actually an important logistical issue on choir tours. Yet, laundry does not define us, as a local church sign reminds us with its upcoming sermon title: “We Are Not Laundry.”

Sleeping, eating, chats with friends, and volleyball were some of the other prime activities of the day. I, along with others of the choir, enjoyed a very informative tour of the Behalt led by Karita Keim. My day was topped off with goldfinch sightings and absolutely scrumptious dining at the Mexican Grill.

Cari Hochstetler

Soprano 1

Tuesday, July 9, 2024

After bidding farewell to our generous Ontario hosts, we departed for our American homeland. Today’s journey included some beautiful lakeside views and plenty of opportunities for typical bus time activities such as naps, reading, and lively conversations. Conscientious musicians reviewed their music; and Spot-It, knitting, and watercolors even made an appearance.

As we neared our destination, many choir members experienced warm feelings of nostalgia. Fourteen out of thirty-nine of the current choir members are Faith Builders alumni, and a number of others have been there for short terms or other events. For many of us, this place is dear to our hearts. So as we entered Guys Mills and arrived at Faith Builders, it was a bit like coming home.

We had the privilege of meeting with Wendell Glick, the composer of one of the songs on our repertoire. “Te Deum” was commissioned for us, and we are premiering it on this tour. We were able to chat with Wendell about the composition process and to ask questions about the piece. I am not a music theory major, so I will admit that many of the technicalities that Wendell discussed went over my head. But I am grateful for people who have studied music in depth and are able to gift the rest of us with beautiful music to sing.

I don’t think that gym concerts are a favorite with anyone, but sometimes a gym is the only space available that is large enough to accommodate the crowd. This was the case with tonight’s concert. The space was not very singer-friendly, so it was a difficult concert in that sense. Yet our connection to the community, and the fact that many of us had friends and family in the audience made this a special concert.

We are grateful to Brandon and Marie Mullet, who helped to host this concert. Marie graced us with her fine culinary talents for our evening meal. Brandon is a longtime friend of the choir and the former music instructor of all of us Faith Builders graduates. Many of us owe him a huge debt of gratitude for the significant part he has played in the development of our musical abilities.

I’ll leave you with a quote from N.T. Wright’s essay entitled “Apocalypse and the Beauty of God,” since I think it fits well with the philosophy and goals of Oasis:

“The artist is thus to be like the Israelite spies in the desert, bringing back fruit from the promised land to be tasted in advance . . .”

Here is the challenge, I believe, for the Christian artist, in whatever sphere: to tell the story of the new world so that people can taste it and want it, even while acknowledging the reality of the desert in which we presently live.”

Rosalie Beiler

Alto 2

Monday, July 8, 2024

The first Monday morning of Oasis Chorale 2024 started with a comfortable call time of 8:45 at the venue of our previous afternoon’s concert, St. Jacobs Mennonite Church. No, Jacob is not a saint, but St. Jacobs is a quaint Ontario village. According to one local with whom I chatted, the village was originally named “Jacob’s Village” and the “St.” was added simply to sound cooler (I mean, why not?).

Choir members arrived at St. Jacobs with measured energy and excitement for the day. First time choir member and alto two, Aleah Good, remarked that her previous night’s rest had been “relaxing.” However, another choir member who commented on the basis of anonymity said they felt “overwhelmed” upon arrival.

After a brief warmup, we dove straight into a workshop with Brandon Leis, a vocal lecturer, performer, conductor and church musician. We found his humour and energy infectious and his focus on the techniques of healthy singing to be quite insightful for our own singing. He urged us to find “spontaneity in every sound” and encouraged tenor section leader Joseph Miller to “be more vague” when responding to questions.

Following our workshop, we dined sumptuously on pulled pork sandwiches (nothing does it like Sweet Baby Rays). Alisa Nolt, soprano 1, commented that the lunch “did the job,” while Esther Swartzentruber, alto 1, remarked that the ketchup-flavoured potato chips were “tart.” Furthermore, conductor Wendell Nisly said the lunch was “sustaining” while, Levi Swanson, bass 2 remarked that the meal was “delightfully filling.”

After a forty-minute drive to the town of Listowel, we descended upon Impressions Café and Bakery, which served us fry pies and coffees on the house, despite the fact that they generally are closed on Mondays. Thanks, Impressions. After revitalizing the tissues, we started our rehearsal for our evening fundraiser concert in the Village Table, a former church turned events venue/homeless shelter. Our afternoon’s work also included recording the video and audio for Oasis Chorale’s first ever music video (wild applause).

Our evening fundraiser concert was a dream concert. Golden evening light streamed through the stained-glass windows of the church as we sang to a very attentive and supportive audience. Multiple choir members expressed that this felt like their strongest concert yet. Mary Swanson, soprano 2, remarked that the concert was “touching” while Jordan Drudge, bass 1, said that it was “life giving and invigorating.” However, Steven Byler, tenor 1, when asked for comment during the intermission said “Um, man, I’m blank right now. I guess that’s it.”

Thus ended the only Monday of Oasis Chorale 2024. While it was a full day of varied activities that stretched us in many different directions and dimensions, it was a day of rewarding learning experiences, absolutely delectable food and solid connections with people and music.

Cheerio,

Jonathan Miller

Tenor 2

Sunday, July 7, 2024

Today we were on our own for the morning. My family and I decided to attend our hosts’ church, which, ironically, is named Oasis. We contributed to the service by singing a few songs; the four Miller brothers sang a number from their barbershop repertoire, and the four Nolt sisters also sang an hymn. It was necessary to leave part way through the service in order to get to St. Jacob’s for lunch prior to our 3:30 concert.

About 400 people packed into the non-airconditioned sanctuary and foyer of St. Jacob’s Mennonite for the concert. Though it was hot, the moist air felt soothing to our vocal folds, and the audience received our music with warm spirit. That was encouraging, especially since the acoustic was not particularly friendly to us hearing across the choir. A small trusty fan added its hum to the background of (less welcome) outdoor noises entering through the open windows (birds and revving trucks).

Many of us had friends to greet after the concert, but before long, we were driving the five minutes to Steve and Rose Martin’s for an evening social. Steve and Rose have served as Oasis board members for the past 12 years. They kindly hosted us for a delicious supper of grilled sausages and sides, in their lovely backyard and patio. I think we all enjoyed the chance to relax outdoors and catch the evening light amid good conversations.

I was particularly grateful for my sister-in-law who arrived today. She is joining us for a few days to help care for my son Edmund. It has been challenging to juggle parenting with rehearsal and concerts; the constant schedule variations are difficult for a small child who loves routine. My husband Kyler has been a pro Dad, juggling babysitting with his PR work for Oasis, but these days with Auntie Lucia have given him a needed reprieve. Kudos to her and all the other folks providing childcare on tour!

Abigail Martin

Soprano 2

Saturday, July 6, 2024

July 6 dawned as a lovely Saturday morning in Leamington, Ontario. The choir gathered from our places of slumber. Sadly, few of us had the privilege of enjoying nearby Lake Erie. Some fortunate singers had rooms on the lake while a few others were chauffeured along the shore in a 1967 blue convertible.

Back on the bus, we journeyed the three hours to our second venue, Woodlawn Mennonite Church. We arrived in time to eat lunch at the church and then had an entire afternoon for rehearsal and refreshment. One concert’s worth of experience provided ample material for things to improve.

As the PR manager and as one of the parents on tour, I’m noticing new things. When I walk through the door with a mule’s load of gear, I’m thinking not only about my posting goals and the photo/video potentials of the place, but I’m looking for toys, and nurseries, and hazards like stairs and fragile items. So far, the toy situation has been wonderful. My son, Edmund, is just finding his feet and is enjoying the fresh prospects for adventure. There are several other little people along on the tour and it’s been very helpful for me to have their parents’ help in supervising the play area while I work.

This two-week tour affords me the privilege of soaking up an abundance of music. I have the chance of hearing all the layers from rehearsal to performance. This lends profound depth to the choir’s sound. I get to hear it grow and mature. Every day I experience the generosity of the singers as they reach deep inside of themselves to supply the resources that they then craft and refine as choral art. Every rendition of a song in live performance is a new and costly thing.

We’re grateful for everyone who has come to give their time and attention in concert and we hope that they have received treasure. Perhaps our tour will enable us and our audiences to know more fully the goodness and generosity of the kingdom of God. We sing because the gospel is both true and beautiful, and it stirs and satisfies our deepest longings.

Kyler Martin

PR Manager

Friday, July 5, 2024

The 2024 tour begins!

When arrived at Legacy Christian School at 7:30, Miller Munny Laundering and Lugeege* met us at the bus. They took our lugeege. And some of our money with the subscreeption packeege. The subscreeption packeege costs $5 and in return those who subscribe get a treat every day. There is a wide variety of options to choose from, including Chick-fil-A sauce, Kit Kat, and chocolate. Loading the bus went smoothly and we were on the road by eight o’clock.

We stopped at Hobby Lobby and scattered for lunch. Some of us slipped into Walmart to pick up last minute things. Later, while leaving the Hobby Lobby parking lot, we witnessed a multi car accident. Not good. We hope and pray everyone was okay. At the border, we exited the bus to meet with a customs agent who asked us multiple questions:

Do you have any drugs or alcohol?

Any cannabis?

How about guns?

No we do not have those things.

The agent let us into the country but not until he had purged the bus of essential oils.

We arrived at Leamington Mennonite church in the afternoon. A few of us walked to a boba tea shop. After rehearsal and relaxation, we gave our first concert at 7:00. The Leamington community was very warm and hospitable and we loved our stay with them.

Steven Byler

Tenor 1

* Miller Munny is owned and operated by David, Joshua, Joseph, and Johnny Miller. They want your money in their pockitz.

Tuesday – Thursday, July 2-4, 2024

We were graciously hosted at St. Johns United Church of Christ in Dover, OH for our three-day pre-rehearsal tour. Each morning the sun shone brilliantly through stained glass windows, and we were serenaded by church bells on the hour.

These three 8-hour rehearsals included full-body warm-ups, voice-building, tuning, and breathing exercises. We workshopped rep, and we continually explored, under Wendell’s direction, how the singer’s first job is to listen. The rehearsal days are so exciting; after having learned most of the music on our own, we are ready to make music in community! The days also include a lot of focused, intense work, but we are rewarded with shimmers of beauty in momentary chords.

In rehearsal, Wendell occasionally collaborates with Oasis’s vocal coach, Rosemary Eberly-Lebold. Group vocal coaching sessions take place several times a day and allow singers of all levels to elevate their breathing and vocal techniques.

Amber Zimmerman, a first-year soprano, commented that the time built into the day to connect physically with the music through voice coaching was helpful (and new!) for her. She also enjoyed Wendell’s deep dive into a text study of the hymn “Holy God We Praise Thy Name.” This emphasis on text meaning was also new for her compared to singing in other choirs.

This is my eleventh season singing with Oasis Chorale, and I am always struck by the hospitality that we encounter on tour. Whether it is the local community providing home-cooked meals for rehearsal days, or strangers hosting us in their homes, I am always amazed and aware of the generosity of the hosting communities. (Thank you to our Holmes County base cooks and hosts!) We are looking forward to our first concert!

Esther Swartzentruber

Alto 1

Recording – July 17 & 18, 2023

Recording Day 1

A crimson sun peeked over the windswept plain and cast furtive, fragile rays across the upturned face of the prone human. The face had the serene, contorted look of an Oasis Chorale member reliving the previous Sunday afternoon’s final concert and the ensuing after-party. It was into this hangover that the day broke forth. It was another Monday.

With rapidity, surprising agility, and various levels of senility, the choir congregated at Neffsville Mennonite Church at 9:30 to begin recordingour next album—a children’s album. After the standard warmups and introduction to our sound engineers from Arts Laureate, we got down to business. With mics rolling continuously, the business consisted of us rehearsing pieces from our rep and then laying down several takes. Besides the planned breaks and sundry details, we followed this routine for the next 8.5 hours. Of course, listening intently to cadence points, balancing chords, polishing rhythms, and working vowels are all part of the package. We discovered new life in “For Balmy Sunshine” and basked in the simplicity and profundity of “Children of the Heavenly Father.” Aaron Houston with Arts Laureate gave helpful comments and perspective on various aspects of our work.

All in all, even though the day was strenuous and recording is hard work, it was a relatively great start to our recording session.

Recording Day 2

Throughout our time together, in all of the luscious musical moments, we’ve been reminded that all this beauty points beyond us. C. S. Lewis says it best: “For they (art and music) are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never yet visited.”

David Miller

Tenor 1

P. S. We did miss the missing OC members that were otherwise occupied or sick. And we had a full-blown Sunday lunch meal for supper—roast beef, mashed potatoes, and green beans to boot.

Sunday, July 16, 2023

On this day of rest the choir spent the morning worshiping at various locations throughout Lancaster County before gathering for lunch once more at Neffsville Mennonite Church which is beginning to feel like home, complete with amazing meals and (Oasis) family.

Approximately 550 appreciative fans, family and friends began arriving early in hopes of finding a good seat for our final 3:00 p.m. concert. It was a bittersweet presentation for the choir. Several choir members voiced disappointment at having just sung “Hark 10,000 Harps and Voices” for the final time, and that sentiment extends to other songs.

An audience member nearing 5 years of age expressed consternation as to why the choir exited the sanctuary so rapidly at intermission. Hopefully our solemn and measured return while singing “Veni Sancte Spiritus” was a consolation. When questioned at intermission by their choir member aunts, several other young attendees admitted they liked all the songs they had heard sung so far.

For our “after party” we were graciously hosted by charter members of Oasis, Dwight and Brenda Stoltzfoos. Dwight reminisced about the first Oasis Season 20 years ago.

We recognized our fearless and uber organized leader, Hilary Martin, who is wrapping up her final hours as Oasis manager. We appreciate her attention to detail and willingness to make coffee runs during rehearsals.

It seemed a bit odd to be having an after party when most of us plan to reconvene tomorrow to record but some traditions should not be discarded.

Thanks for reading our blog posts, listening to our music, giving generously, caring for us as people, and attending our concerts. We couldn’t do it without you!

Laura Conley

Alto 2

Saturday, July 15, 2023

Hello, folks. The trouble with being a perfectionist is that you carry around this burden to always do your absolute best. In fact, the burden is so large and heavy that most perfectionists are hunchbacked. Take Christian from Pilgrim’s Progress, for example. He had a tremendous burden on his back and while Pilgrim’s Progress doesn’t explicitly state his hunchbacked lot, all the illustrations of Christian that I’ve seen show him nearly bent double. This explains why OC is populated by so many hunchbacks.*

Saturday dawned warm and muggy. However, by the time I finally roused myself, the sun had been in the sky nearly three hours already. Was I going to be late for rehearsal? No, I was not. We had a late call time of 12:30 at Neffsville Mennonite. After some deliberating with section leaders on Friday, Wendell announced that we would skip the Children’s Album rehearsal scheduled for Saturday morning due to the disease and exhaustion among the ranks. An alarming number of people were fighting colds and low fevers.

So, we took the morning off and met at St. Thomas Episcopal Church for lunch. As a cool addition, Mark and Judy Barker joined us for lunch. Mark and Judy are long-time friends of OC ever since OC sang at their church back in 2012. After lunch, we went into rehearsal. After a rousing warmup regimen (including a song about stopping a train), we invited Mr. Barker to sing “Who is on the Lord’s Side” with us. It’s a favorite of his, and as he turned eighty this year, we thought singing with him could be something of a birthday present. After this, we went right into rehearsal.

At 5:00 pm, we had a stress-free photo-shoot, thanks to Kyler. It’s such a blessing to have him as a brother-in-law. Following this was an incredible supper. Grilled chicken, lettuce, tomatoes, pickled onions, cheese, and tzatziki, and pita or naan stuffed us to the proverbial gills.

When 7:00 came, we were ready for it. Summary of the concert: most pieces felt very settled—many of the ones that we consistently sharped stayed in key. It was also very quiet—there were very few disturbances and it was easy to focus and listen well. The space was quite nice to sing in as well. According to my brother David, “It was fun.” Overall, it was probably our best concert yet this year.

Afterward, the audience members and the choir headed to the ominous Parrish Hall for some hors d’oeuvres. We had a lovely time with the audience over watermelon and cantaloupe (cut by Hilary and her parents), seasoned pretzels, and donuts. I was privileged to meet fellow bass Jordan Drudge’s parents and younger brother, Justus. I also talked briefly with a man from North Carolina who drove up for the concert. I was left somewhat speechless when he told me that. According to another audience member, the concert was “achingly beautiful.” As a new member of OC, I find it very rewarding to share beautiful music with others in a way that moves them and inspires them. At the very least, this music shows us something greater, more beautiful, and more compelling than ourselves or the world around us.

Ta-Ta for now!

Joshua Miller

Bass 2

Friday, July 14, 2023

Friday dawned bright and shining on our first day post bus life. Most of the choir arrived at Neffsville Mennonite Church at the gloriously late hour of 10:15 am. A few stragglers were seen sliding in at 10:28 after needing to turn around to find missing sheet music. The offenders then NASCARed wildly to said destination and were blessed with the disapproving gazes of our fearless leaders. The morning was spent rehearsing the repertoire for the upcoming recording of children’s music. The writer of this post is excited to be singing music from her childhood, especially the prayer song, We Thank Thee Lord and For Balmy Sunshine, which were mealtime prayer songs of her family.

After a delicious lunch of sandwiches, we reconvened for rehearsal of concert repertoire. The music rehearsal process is such a delight. There is always more to do in personal work, as well as ensemble work as we seek consistency and ground the music more fully into our bodies and souls. The rehearsal time is very engaging under our skilled director and because of this, the afternoon flew by. We worked on the newer repertoire, memorization, movement for standing arrangements, processional, and “choralographey”.

That evening we presented a concert at Neffsville Mennonite Church to a full audience. One of my personal favorite moments of the concert is standing in the audience sharing our final piece, God Be With You Till We Meet Again. The concert process is beautiful. It is a balance of trusting individual preparation, trusting the ensemble, relaxing into the body, and singing the thoughts, ideas, and prayers from the soul. After the concert exhaustion sets in, but despite the tiredness, it is always wonderful to meet our audiences. Thank you for being there.

Sarah Sommers

Alto

Travel Day – Tuesday, July 13, 2023

Oasis tour bus life is a journey all of its own. Choir members enjoy engaging in various activities to occupy their time. While some members are content with an innocent book or uplifting conversation, others require the somewhat more riotous procedure of repeated bludgeoning with a giant inflatable Neanderthal club to keep them busy (not to worry; it is estimated minimal permanent brain damage was inflicted). If bus games don’t sound enjoyable, there’s always sleep to be caught up on, food to be eaten, and Wendell’s recap of the previous day to be listened to.

But when Thursday came around, all that came to an end. The last traveling concert was finished, and the bus was pointed back toward Lancaster County where the choir would reconvene to complete the 2023 season. Choir members expressed mixed reactions upon disembarking at Neffsville Mennonite Church, where the Lancaster section of the tour was centered. Some were relieved to be finished with cramped bus space and the endless late nights and early mornings of tour life. Others were surprised to find that it felt like tour was over, despite the three concerts and two days of recording remaining, because they would no longer be traveling. Most seemed grateful to find that evening’s schedule completely empty, with no rehearsal or concert to occupy the time. This gave everyone a chance to recuperate after the days of travel.

The extensive time spent in close quarters on the bus also provided an excellent opportunity to answer some of the burning demographic questions relating to Oasis Chorale. For instance, it has long been suspected that an inordinately high percentage of Oasis members were teachers (speculation as to the cause of this phenomenon remains largely unanswered, with the possible exception of tour’s convenient situation within summer vacation months), but no hard data was available to back up the speculation. But now, thanks to an independent 2023 study conducted by the newly established Mullet Research Group, it is known that despite only 45% of Oasis members being currently employed as a teacher, a whopping 83% have at one point in time been employed thusly for a combined 245 years of teaching experience!

Other Oasis member statistics researched:

Average age: 32

Average number of years singing on Oasis: 6

Percentage of current or one-time music teachers: 68%

Average number of years taught: 7

Number of countries taught in: 11

Perhaps more impressive, though, than the teaching statistics are the practical teaching tips accumulated by all these teachers over their many years of experience. Sarah Sommers, an alto from Ohio, advises that “You don’t know what has happened to your student before they walk into the classroom; you have to meet students where they are at.” David Miller, a tenor from Virginia, believes that humor is a great way to dissipate conflict and build trust.

In the end, while the correlation between singer and teacher seems straightforward, members of Oasis are highly valued regardless of their occupations, because the goal of spreading beauty for the glory of God is the uniting factor that holds the group together.

Jeron Mullet

Tenor 2

Wednesday, July 12, 2023

Good morning folks, it’s me again tuning in here on Wednesday!

Once again a huge shout out and thank you to Old Market Coffee for letting us overflow your coffee shop at 8:00. There was coffee, tea, yogurt parfaits, and crepes for everyone.

We left the lovely town of Potsdam and started our journey south. Once again we scattered over several local restaurants near Syracuse for a quick bite of lunch. Chick-fil-A was well populated and we were served graciously. Several of us dodged into Burlington in search of some deals and sure enough, it did not disappoint!

Upon arriving at Keuka Lake, we were ahead of schedule! Wendell so nicely gave us some time to chill and gather our thoughts as we lounged by the lake. Choir members with books, sketch pads, and blankets basked in the cool breeze and took in the sound of the waves breaking in the shore.

The chapel was glorious. A big stage for once, a high wood ceiling, and beautiful arches. It felt good to have space, comfortable standing arrangements, and incorporate all of our choreography. As the pews began to fill, we joined together for prep time outside.

There was some debate afterwards whether this was our second hottest concert. But the first half went very well! Everyone was settled and very few pitches were raised. The second half also went smoothly and we dispersed outside to chat with various friends, family, and acquaintances. Tomorrow is travel day and I think everyone is excited for that!

Thanks for following along!

Jaron Witmer

Tenor 2

Tuesday, July 11, 2023

Monday night we went to bed with a little bit of uncertainty of what was happening the next day. But thanks to Hillary and Kyler, new concert and lodging plans awaited us on Tuesday.

We left the lovely motel in New Hampshire and began our trek to northern New York. Forests and flooding covered the countryside of Vermont, and we even peered into Canada on our drive by! For lunch we dispersed to various restaurants with some of us deciding on a Thai kitchen. We received the food with varying levels of contentment. Mary noted the little plates of food for Buddha setting in the corner!

That afternoon we arrived on a little island in the middle of town with a lovely stone episcopal church. A huge shout out to Old Market Coffee from down the street who supplied us with coffee and refreshers to give us energy for our rehearsal! Staging area was a little tight with some folks in between pews and some on boxes. Personally, my box situation was a little unsettling with my box resting on the ramp so I would have been on my toes all night, but we got things leveled out. Supper, changing and prep time and we were on! It was not quite as warm as some previous concerts but we all were troopers and had a great concert!

Ok that’s enough for today! Bye!

Oh and our hosts were awesome!

Jaron Witmer

Tenor 2

Monday, July 10, 2023

Day Four of tour dawned dark and gloomy. First, the weather. Clouds glowered at us from the sky and spat contemptuous raindrops our way. And then the bad news. Our concert in Vermont on Tuesday had been cancelled due to flooding in the area. But the choir responded with fortitude and calm to both of these hurdles. In answer to challenge one, the choir gave thanks for the delicious coolness that had settled over Maine. It was a welcome reprieve from the swelter of the past few days. In answer to challenge two, the choir sat back and decided not to worry about the schedule disruption, meeting the hurdle with unflinching flexibility, exuberant maturity, and boisterous resolve (not to mention immense humility). It may have helped that we knew we were in the hands of our highly capable tour manager, Miss Hilary Martin. She is truly a force of nature.

Anyway, we roared on down the road to see the sights of Maine. Why the roaring? Because this was a day off—no concert in the evening. We drove to the coast, where some of us scrambled about on the rocks and others feasted on seafood at a nearby lobster house and still others met a 92-year-old gospel singer who yelled at them from her deck to come and visit her home. I asked a number of choir members for three-word descriptions of our time at the coast. Here are some of them:

I need wipers (spoken by a choir member struggling to keep the ol’ condensation off his glasses)

Magical, moody, lovely

Rocky, riveting, romantic

Dreamy, poetic, misty

Refreshing, beautiful, salty

Moist, wild, beautiful

Misty morning in Maine

After our coastal excursion, we hightailed it to the city of Manchester, New Hampshire, where we planned, as Hilary declared ominously, to “kill time,” until our check-in at the La Quinta hotel (The phrase “kill time” did put some of us on edge. I mean, what might she want to kill next once she’s finished time off?). To our relief, we soon learned that killing time meant eating lunch at a mall food court. Again, some three-word phrases from the choir might help describe our lunch:

Delicious, soothing, sanguine

Shmootzich, consumeristic, teriyaki

Substantial and sincere

Delicious, filling, ricey

Underwhelming, colorful, plenty

Post-check in, we disbanded and wandered around the city of Manchester. Some ended up at the Bookery, where love of books and coffee is combined into a bookstore with an attached café. Various choir members described the Bookery experience as “entertaining, relaxing, chill, restful, stimulating, ambient, humorous, orienting, jolly, focused, and caffeinated.”

After supper, we gathered in the hotel lobby to watch Babette’s Feast, a film about grace, beauty and service—ideas core to the mission of Oasis Chorale. Bedtime came, and with it, sighs of deep repose as we drifted off into dreamland.

Joseph Miller

Tenor 2

P.S. In the evening, we got the news that a new concert venue for Tuesday had been found in North Lawrence, New York. Were we surprised? Nah. We knew we were in the grasp of Hilary’s capable hands.

Tour Sentiments – July 9, 2023

Melded comments from choir members

Q. What are you enjoying about this OC tour?

A. People, Music, and Travel

People

Looking within the choir, members are enjoying developing relationships with each other. As one new member stated, we “discover our humanity. This unmeshed group of individuals gets on the bus, begins to talk and discovers just how normal we are.” As we enjoy each other, our “perspective of others changes by interacting with them.” Both one-on-one chats and group conversations are intellectually stimulating.

It has been a pleasure to meet people in a variety of church and cultural contexts either at concerts or along the way. Kind hosts welcome us into their churches, homes, and lives. We truly enjoy having a window into others’ lives and communities.

Music

Warm venues have met us each day. “Oddly enough,” says one long-term singer, “I enjoy how much the unairconditioned venues help us sing better.” Another member who loves outdoor activities noted that the open windows let in the natural world and create a less sterile environment.

Evenings have included a vocal warm-up alongside the literal warm-up. One spouse says, “Being new to the music world, the warm-up routines are interesting, weird, and humorous.” (Yes, we choral singers do have a few nerdy tendencies mixed with our normal humanity!) Regarding the indoor temperature, we have been literally working up a sweat which is “exhilarating” and “feels like we accomplishing something.” Not surprisingly, one singer is wired to comment that he enjoys “the electrifying feeling among the choir while we are singing together, particularly when the sweat is rolling.”

Travel

New England Scenery. Cooler outdoor temperatures, miles of evergreen trees, stone walls, architecture.

Warmly representing the choir,

Regina Brubaker

Alto 1

Saturday, July 8, 2023

With minimal travel time today, we enjoyed the luxury of a slow-paced morning. Having a good first concert under our belts also boosted our energy levels and feelings of well-being.

We kept the employees at Coronation Cafe in Amherst quite busy as we crowded their small place for lunch. They did a great job of preparing food and specialty drinks for us.

Church of Christ in Granby, Massachusetts, was our destination for our afternoon rehearsal and evening concert. The only downside to singing in this classic, white-spired New England church building was its lack of air conditioning. A lovely thunderstorm accompanied part of our rehearsal time and brought some welcome respite from the heat.

A challenge in tonight’s concert was to add the sign language and movement that Deana taught us to “Ukholo Lwami.” This resulted in varying degrees of enjoyment, panic, and mental scampering among the choir members. Overall, it was a delightful concert. Our desire as we sing is to give our listeners a glimpse of the coming new heavens and new earth. Judging by comments I heard after tonight’s concert, I believe that goal was accomplished.

While some choir members disbursed with hosts from Disciples Fellowship, the rest of us rode the bus to a hotel. Some of us had a hilarious time figuring out how to run the hotel laundry and how to get everyone’s choir uniforms washed efficiently. Little things like this are all part of the choir tour experience, and it’s best if you learn to navigate them with a gracious sense of humor.

Rosalie Beiler

Alto

First Concert, July 6 & 7, 2023

The first concert is in the books! After a 5-hour bus ride, we were warmly greeted at South United Methodist Church in Manchester, CT, co-hosted by Believers’ Mennonite Church of Hampton, CT.

After an afternoon rehearsal in the beautiful space, we prepared for our first concert. At intermission, the organist played “Praise to the Lord, the Almighty” on the massive pipe organ. We also enjoyed the organist’s performance of a Bach Prelude and Fugue at the close of the concert.

Post-concert, we retired to our hosts. In the morning, one group of singers was serenaded by their hosts, who are classical guitarists. Two other singers rode a backyard zipline across a Connecticut river! Refreshed from the night, we are on the bus, headed to Massachusetts!

Esther Swartzentruber

Alto 1

Rehearsal, July 4 & 5, 2023

If you had found yourself at Neffsville Mennonite Church at 8:30 on Tuesday, July 4th, you would have encountered a crowd of people milling about, enjoying a mixture of “it’s been so long” hugs and “what’s your name” introductions. So began Oasis Chorale Tour 2023. By 9:30 am, your ears would have been flooded by the warbling notes of our opening song – music rehearsal had begun!

Skipping forward through time, if you had peeked in the double doors at 1:30 that afternoon, you would have seen 40 bodies contorted into various alarming or amusing positions. Our first vocal coaching was underway, and Rosemary Lebold had us deconstructing our ideas of good posture and finding new ways to feel our breath in our bodies.

The rest of the afternoon found us working hard at various pieces, continuing to lean into our sound and learning to be CCCMs (Conscientious, Compassionate Choral Musicians). Our fearless leader, Wendell, offered various helpful instructions such as “It’s not going to be bright and smiley, third-grade snotty, and all that.”

By 10:30 am on Wednesday morning, you could have enjoyed many confused looks and stress-relieving chuckles as Deana Swanson taught us movement for various pieces, adding visual art to aural art.

If you had peeked into the dining room shortly before 6:00 pm, you might have noticed rapid preparations happening in hushed tones. Several minutes later, you would have heard the familiar strains of “Happy Birthday” as the entire choir celebrated our favourite Regina Brubaker.

By 11:59 pm, you most likely would have found each choir member tucked in a bed. Some would have arrived there just minutes before, while others were already deep in their REM cycles. (This seems to be somewhat dependent on age, especially as a significant number of the choir members are enjoying their middle-aged years.)

Thursday morning, you would have encountered the choir together again, comparing hours of sleep and the definition of “early to bed.” The rest of the morning involved continuing the process of settling the music in our bodies as the first program was rapidly approaching!

If you had wandered through the Neffsville building at 3:00 pm, you would have found many members flat on their backs in various classrooms and scattered around the sanctuary. This was part of Wendell’s generous but constricting 25-minute “phone-free” break.

Finally, during the last hour of the day, you would have experienced a full run-through of the music in preparation for our first concert tomorrow evening!

See you down the road,

Twyla Diefenbacher

Alto 1

Final Concert, July 17, 2022

July 17 was our official last day together as a choir. After spending the previous several days working hard on our recording project, it was time for the last performance of 2022. The day dawned warm and humid. We had the morning off to worship at a venue of our choice. At noon, the choir assembled at Park View Mennonite Church, something of a home away from home for the past 12 days. All pre-tour rehearsal and post-tour recording took place in this excellent venue. We had grown accustomed to the generous and lively acoustic space and were pleased to be delivering our last concert there.

We devoured a quick lunch to provide strength for the afternoon’s activities and changed into our concert garb in preparation for a photo shoot. We gathered in the sanctuary and did our best to look attractive and agreeable, as Kyler Martin, our public relations manager, and photographer/friend of the choir Jotham Yoder arranged us in various configurations. We went straight into vocal warmups after the photography session concluded. Having spent several days recording, we were feeling secure with the repertoire, but were also four days removed from our last live performance. Wendell’s warm up session helped to prepare our voices and bodies, but also focus our minds on the upcoming performance. Our preparation time concluded with some appropriate devotional thoughts on the unchanging goodness of God, delivered by Ivan Godoy’s smooth bass voice.

We are grateful for a large audience that filled Park View’s sanctuary completely. Singing to a full room of engaged listeners is always an invigorating experience. The first several songs were supported by a pleasant ambient white noise in the form of a substantial downpour. As pleasant as it was, we were all grateful when it subsided, and the music could be more easily heard. The concert was a delightful and satisfying end to our time together. We enjoyed staying afterward and chatting with friends, family members, and strangers who had come to listen.

After the concert, the choir gathered for our traditional after party. Stephen and Rosalind Byler and Shandon and Katherine Mullet hosted us. The party featured an absolutely stunning spread of Mexican food, lively conversation, raucous laughter, coffee, and expressively-read children’s stories. Tour is a wonderful but intense experience, and the after party is always a nice time to unwind and relax after our singing duties have officially ended. Those choir members who remained in the vicinity gathered for a hearty breakfast at the local Cracker Barrel on Monday morning, before saying our final goodbyes.

Thank you for your kind support, and for following along on our choral escapades. Until next year!

Jared Shetler, Tenor 2

Recording Day 3, July 16, 2022

Saturday was our third and final day of recording. The two previous days had gone surprisingly well. Basically, we were able to record more songs than we expected to in that time. By Saturday, we had only one more song to record, in addition to a few reruns. The outlined schedule for the day was far more relaxing than previous days had been.

By early afternoon, we had concluded our musical activities for the day. People spent the rest of the afternoon doing a variety of things: the less ambitious among us went out for coffee, the medium ambitious played disc golf, and the stupid ambitious played a hard-core game of ultimate frisbee in sauna-like conditions.

We ate supper together back at Park View church, where we had done our recording. In the evening, most of the group did a Taize worship service, following the traditions from a unique French community. To conclude the evening, several music majors in the group shared some of the pieces that they had learned.

For Oasis Chorale,

Jacob Zimmerman, Tenor 1

Recording Day 2, July 15, 2022

This choir has displayed wonderful cooperation, focus, and energy in the recording process. Since we made good progress yesterday, Wendell moved the call time this morning from 8:30 to 9:00. None of us minded at all. We mostly arrived on time and began with a short period of time spent turning our focus heavenward with short songs, scripture reading, and prayer. It usually takes us a bit of time to “find our sound” for the day. Warm-ups and various exercises help us loosen up, engage the breath, shape vowels, maintain support, etc. All those things that conductors and vocal coaches are forever harping on.

Recording with this group is intense, but very enjoyable. Our fine conductor Wendell is particular, but never far beneath the surface is that quick wit, ready to make some snide or hilarious comment that sends the whole choir into an uproarious fit of laughter. I might mention that he is not the only one in this incredible group of people that is capable of such behavior. It really helps us stay relaxed as we endeavor to record flawless takes on each and every piece. Unfortunately, flawless takes are elusive, and today was no exception. However, we are able to pull off “lovely” or “solid” takes. Brandon Mullet is our recording coach and he along with our recording engineer Robert, give us lots of helpful feedback.

Lunchtime, long longed for, finally arrived and we enjoyed another scrumptious meal provided by our dedicated and amazing cooks. This lunch included naan bread, which is a particular favorite of mine. After lunch some choir members had naps before work resumed.

The afternoon was spent much the same as the morning. It involved lots of singing. We did our best to stay focused instead of sitting down and crying when we consistently ended a certain piece a half step higher than when we started. A wonderful diversion happened halfway through the afternoon when a birthday hat and balloon were presented to Brandon and we treated him with a flawless rendition of the timeless “Happy Birthday”. Various caffeinated beverages from Merge Coffee arrived at the same time to give us an extra boost for the rest of the afternoon. We fittingly finished today’s recording session with several takes of Wendell Glick’s “We’ve Come a Long Way.” Following that, we consumed another delicious meal.

After dinner, a number of choir members who are current or recent voice students, gave a recital for the rest of us to enjoy, with alto Regina Brubaker providing piano accompaniment. How delightful it was to watch fellow choir members perform pieces that they have worked hard to perfect. It was a long but very rewarding and fun day. I’m so happy that we still have two days left to make music.

Jordan Drudge, Bass 1

Recording Day 1, July 14, 2022

It is not often that the entire choir is still together to see the first hour of the new day, but July 14th was the exception. Thursday morning found us traversing the final leg of our tour, heading to Harrisonburg, VA. We arrived at Park View Church in Harrisonburg around 1:15 a.m. and, after unloading the bus for the final time, parted ways for our sundry sleeping spots.

Sleep was lovely after such a late night. The choir was to reconvene at Park View to start recording at 12 noon on Thursday, and the morning off was kind to most. The average rising time of the choir was approximately 9:36 a.m., with the outliers arising at 7:20 and 11:00.

We arrived at Park View and were welcomed by Brandon Mullet, Kyler Martin, and our recording engineer, Robert. Each fills a specific role in the days of recording and we are blessed to have their skills.

In the 5½ hours of recording between 12:30 and 6 p.m. we recorded a total of six songs, surpassing the planned schedule by one song. Throughout the day the serious side of recording was balanced by periods of laughter, the work balanced by periods of relaxation. Our tour coordinator, Hilary Martin, kindly offered to make a coffee run for the choir members who were so inclined and so, in the middle of the afternoon, we were blessed with a pick-me-up to finish out the day.

At our snack break, I posed this question to my fellow snackers, Sarah Sommers, Jeanene Nisly, and Jacob Zimmerman: “What kind of mental space do you bring to a first day of recording?” Sarah brings an open attitude, striving for her best delivery and having a good time. Jacob mentioned feeling more free in concert because mistakes are not recorded. In recording he still strives for a sense of freedom, seeking to feel the life in the music even while working for precision. Jeanene explained that there is a different kind of alertness for her in recording than in a concert, due to the lack of audience. The focus turns more internal than external and is good for accuracy, though it does tend to become more academic as well.

Over supper, I had the chance to discuss the day with Kristin Nolt and Dan Yutzy, our alto and bass section leaders. Both felt good about the day overall, but recognized the hard work that went into the afternoon. Dan summarized his feeling with these words, “I just want to like veg out, eat junk food for a while and not focus on too much.” That’s relatable content.

Another good day of good work is finished.

Drew Roth, Bass 1

South Boston Concert, July 13, 2022

Tuned chords, Boris Johnson, sweet bologna sandwiches—Oasis is a threefold chord of beautiful music-making, satisfying conversation, and delectable food. Today featured all three. After a morning of bus time, we arrived at the Windmill Bake Shop in South Boston, VA, for lunch. They fed all 50 of us in short order in the middle of their lunch rush.

We got to First Baptist Church (there are a lot of those) earlier than normal, giving us a good chunk of movement and music rehearsing time. A half-brownie and ice-cream dish at lunch time had sent our director into a unique mood; the rehearsal was seasoned with Wendellisms.

Before every concert, we spend time as a group in spiritual refreshment and preparation. Rosemary led us in a meditation/relaxation exercise on the theme of God’s lovingkindness. She encouraged us to let go of the shame we often carry and allow ourselves to feel the compassion of the Lord.

One of the gifts I have been enjoying this year is singing the song, “Be Still My Soul,” an arrangement by C. Rand Matheson. Tonight was no different. The luminous chords coupled with a timeless text is moving. “Be still my soul, the hour is hastening on, when we shall be forever with the Lord, When disappointment, grief, and fear are gone; Sorrow forgot, love’s purest joys restored.”

In his closing comments, Josh Good spoke of the fear all around us and within us. He reminded us that we don’t have to fear because Jesus Himself is our leader. My desire for the audience at First Baptist is that this music renewed their hope in Jesus and the peace that He brings.

We trekked the 3.5 hours back to Harrisonburg after the concert and arrived safely. Thanks be to God and to our faithful bus driver for the smooth travels we’ve had on our tour.

Cari Nolt, Soprano 1

Williamsburg and Concert, July 12, 2022

After breakfast at our Country Inn and Suites the choir embarked on various expeditions. About 25 of us meandered slowly from shade tree to covered porch to garden to air-conditioned building (it was 92*+ and sunny) in downtown Williamsburg. We tried out the lovely harpsichord in the cabinet maker’s shop and learned through song and show how a sheep, a rooster, and a duck assisted with hot air balloon experimentation. While touring the ballroom of the palace Matt and Jeron learned that, “Without money love falls apart.”

While dining at La Piazza I was startled into loud exclamations of wonder when I beheld one of my favorite families passing by on the street. (Upon hearing my outburst while looking through the window behind him, Jacob, whose name’s final phoneme shall never be pronounced /p/, thought perhaps I was viewing an accident or fight. Apparently I have not been surprised often enough to perfect my exclamatory skills.) It was special to have my sister and her family at our evening concert as part of their family vacation.

Untold numbers of choristers visited various coffee shops, an art museum and the Mellow Mushroom with its reportedly delectable bill of fare. A foursome explored a place which included “water and a bunch of boats”. More exact details of this venture remain unclear to this correspondent as the reporter seemed a bit uncertain himself.

Our candle light concert at the historic Bruton Parish church in Williamsburg, VA was abbreviated slightly to fit into a 1 hour time slot. Nonetheless, our time under the flickering wax candle chandelier was delightful as we shared our joy over God’s faithfulness to us with the audience of tourists, friends and family. One man remarked that it seems like all the choir members really love Jesus. We must be doing something right!

Can you tell the difference between Coke, Pepsi and Dr. Pepper? Over pizza back at our hotel this burning question arose. Dan and Jeron tracked some down and an intense soda pop tasting event ensued. Conclusion: Dr. Pepper is easy to identify and many beverage connoisseurs were able to correctly name Pepsi and Coke, but a few were mistaken. Kudos to them!

Laura Conley, Alto 2

A Day Off, July 11, 2022

A day off. Space to breath. Space to sleep. An unhurried evening. Everything about it was really quite wonderful especially after a week of satisfying but intense work. The day was spent in Winston-Salem, NC. You might think that we stick together and all do the same thing on a day off, but actually we typically disintegrate into small groups and scatter throughout a city. I’m going to give you a small summary of things we did that I think you should consider if you ever visit this city.

My first stop for the day was Anchor Coffee Co. It was a five out of five star rating from me for atmosphere, good coffee, and plenty of space to sit and chill. Some OC groups found it to be an ideal spot to park for the forenoon and didn’t go much farther. Bettina, one of my fellow coffee mates, suggested renting scooters to see what else Winston-Salem might have to offer, so after consuming our beverages, we did just that. It was a little pricy but also exhilarating to go spinning around town, and it was great for covering a larger area in a short amount of time. Other small groups found different coffee shops, and some found a disc golf course called The Crossing to occupy their time. I was told that these were all great experiences. I ended up at Courtside Cafe for lunch and ordered a gyro that ended up being about as perfect as a gyro can be and paid under $10 for a complete meal. I was impressed. After lunch, my group scootered back to the bus and enjoyed a leisurely ride to our next concert destination.

Bus rides are the best environment for conversations to ebb and flow and sometimes ripple through the choir. The question that took off today was “Are you the same person on Oasis as you are at home?” A strong percentage of the members admitted that Oasis allows their weird and quirky side to shine just a bit more brightly than it does at home. I like that; I like being part of that environment, and I like that I still have a week left to enjoy it.

Wendi Martin – Soprano 1

Travel and Concert, July 10, 2022

Greetings from your new potential favourite OC extrovert!

As a rather extreme extrovert, during the beginning of this tour I felt quite outnumbered by what seemed like a large crowd of introverts.

Several days into tour, I estimated the choir to be 80% introvert. Today, for the sake of personal interest and (hopefully) some great blog content, I decided to take a poll of the introvert/extrovert ratio of the OC members. During the process, I learned several things about my fellow choir members. Resident alto Laura Conley declined to answer, claiming she “doesn’t fit the labels”. Fortunately (or unfortunately?) for her, Kari Nolt informed Laura that she is indeed an extrovert. In jest, Sarah (sa-RAH) Miller described our beloved Wendell as an “introverted snob”. Jeron Mullet, a first year tenor, described himself as an “introvert with a healthy dose of FOMO”.

Most of my data collection happened during bus time, which is what much of our day consisted of. Other highlights from our time on the road included an encouraging conversation regarding fitting into the OC social atmosphere, observing a biker gang of dudes with long sleeved T-shirts and preppy shoes on Harleys, and hearing Sarah’s hide and seek on the bus story for the second time.

After arriving at Hebron Baptist Church, we had our usual rehearsal, supper, prep time, and concert. A highlight of the concert for me was having Steve and Rose Martin in the audience. Steve is an OC board member and a fellow Canadian who told me multiple times that I really should sing in Oasis. I guess his encouragement worked, because here I am!

In closing, I present to you the poll results you all have been waiting for with hopeful hearts and bated breath.

Oasis Chorale is 63% introvert, 37% extrovert! An unusually high percentage of introverts, although not as high as this extrovert once thought.

Twyla Diefenbacher, Alto 1

Travel and Concert, July 9, 2022

Today again involved some “real” bus time time, loading up at 7 am for a long day. We spent the better part of the morning and afternoon in the bus traveling from Roanoke VA to Etowah TN. I didn’t know how important bus time was to me until we didn’t have it for two years. Bus activities can include personal music practice, rook games, reading a book, sleeping, and also trying to concentrate on making it to the next rest stop. But the most important bus activity is good conversations with people who think well. These interactions are a invaluable part of the fabric of Oasis Chorale.

Another important routine for Oasis is eating. The bus often stops at an area of high restaurant concentration for lunch. Today was Chick-fil-A, Subway and Hardee’s. For supper, sponsoring churches make food for us to eat right before concert and they never disappoint!

Oasis’s bus transportation

Seems sometimes too long in duration,

But nothing is stronger

To make it seem longer

Than generous over-hydration.

The food that we get is the height

Of culinary delight;

Salads are spiffy,

Dessert never iffy,

And coffee goes well with each bite.

John Strickler, Baritone

First Concert – July 8, 2022

Oasis Chorale is on the road again! After a complete hiatus in 2020 and a modified tour that did not involve any bus time last year, we are especially grateful to be able to be on tour. At 8:30 Friday morning we met at Parkview Mennonite Church where we had spent the last three days rehearsing. There we loaded the bus and were soon on our way to Roanoke, Virginia.

We enjoyed the luxury of an unhurried schedule, since we did not have far to travel. Following a nice lunch stop in the town of Roanoke, we arrived at Bonsack Baptist Church in good time. Every venue has a different sound and different logistical challenges for risers and standing arrangements, so it is ideal to have several hours to prepare and rehearse. We worked through our repertoire, tuned our “instruments,” and did our best to be well-prepared for the evening. A half hour of quiet solitude after rehearsal was a refreshing way to recharge and to be mentally prepared.

The kind folks of Fincastle Mennonite Church provided supper for us, and before long we found ourselves standing in front of an audience for our first concert. After the many hours of personal preparation and the days of rehearsal right before tour, it is always delightful to have our work come together at last into a real live concert. Beyond the jittery nerves and stray notes that tend to be part of a first concert, shafts of glorious light shone through. Our audience was warm and effusive in their appreciation.

A choir tour is a place where we experience keenly both the wonders and the limits of our human physicality. While reveling in the beauty of this world, we long for a far better one. As Wendell reminded us on one of our rehearsal days, our pursuit of excellence in the art of music-making is “a work of imagination and resistance.” Even as we acknowledge the brokenness of the world, we push back against the shadows and become heralds of the new creation.

Rosalie Beiler, Alto 2

Pre-tour Rehearsal, July 7, 2022

The day began with warm ups and meaningful words from Wendell. He talked about how people’s lives and choices shouldn’t affect our love for them. It’s been an intense few days of rehearsing for me. I’ve enjoyed it immensely and I’m excited about the concerts in the next week.

Here are a few things that I’ve learned about my fellow choir members.

If Wendi Martin was an animal, she’d be a tiger because they look really chill on the outside but on the inside they’re kind of wild.

Daniel Yutzy left his last job because he wanted to do other things. It was a great job. The pay was decent and he got to work with fun people. He chose a different life path because he didn’t want to be breaking his back at 60 still doing construction, and he enjoys music.

Cari Nolt is a moose! Who knew? I didn’t. Here is the short explanation. Her eye sight was failing and she needed contacts. While sitting in the optometrist’s office, she glanced over at herself in the mirror. “That’s a moose!” She exclaimed. So have a look in the mirror the next time you’re getting your eyes checked. You never know what you’ll see.

After missing an exceptionally low note, Jordan Drudge says, “We can’t all and some of us don’t”. (In his Winnie the Pooh voice)

Chad Beery’s not sure why, but he’d be a lion if he was an animal.

QOTD “I don’t want to do it because I’m lazy, but I can if you want me to.” – Ivan Godoy

That’s all for now . . . we hope to see you at one of our concerts.

Steven Byler, Tenor 1

Pre-Tour Rehearsal – July 5-6, 2022

It’s the end of Day 2 of rehearsal. Our singers are from across the U.S. and Canada, and we convene in a central location for several days of in-person rehearsal before our annual tour. Oasis Chorale is a unique non-profit in that it only exists “in-person” two weeks out of the year. It makes these days of music-making extra special for returning singers (who have sung with Oasis Chorale for years) and new singers alike. This year, our rehearsal days are in Harrisonburg, VA, and our singers are lodging with local choir members, or local Mennonite hosts. I am staying at fellow alto Gina’s house with several other singers. Last night several of the vocalists were collaboratively planning choreography for our South African piece. It was fun to watch the artists’ planning in progress.

Today I remembered that I started singing with Oasis Chorale in 2012, and that this is my ninth season with the choir! (I found an old picture: me, a fresh-faced college student, eating ice cream with Kristin Nolt at a mall during a lunch stop in Chicago.) I’m reflecting on the relationships I’ve built through choir over the years, how I’ve grown as a singer, and how choir has formed my spiritual imagination. I think, too, of the many churches and church communities we’ve collaborated with over the years. Singing with Oasis has been a gift.

For rehearsal, it’s suggested that we arrive to our 8:45 a.m. call time having done personal warm-up, and if possible, some light physical exercise. I chose the latter and ran two miles at 6:00 a.m.

In rehearsal, Wendell Nisly works several pieces with us individually, and then we run several songs together as a set, completely memorized. After lunch, we have vocal coaching with vocal coach Rosemary Eberly-Lebold, followed by sectional rehearsal. Kristin Nolt is our new alto section leader, and today she worked with us on our resonance in the Latin piece, “O Salutaris Hostia.” Mid-afternoon, we pick up where we left off in the morning.

One change we have made recently is adding an extra day of rehearsal before tour. In the past, we have had two eight-hour days of rehearsal, but this year we have an extra day of rehearsal on the front end of tour. How luxurious! It is especially helpful to give us extra runs on our memorized pieces, not to mention cleaning up rhythms, solidifying intonation, finding our sound, and exploring color.

Tonight after dinner, a small ensemble rehearsed their portion of Mendelssohn’s “Psalm 100,” while other choir members headed to a gym for some exercise to loosen up that “folder shoulder” tension.

Esther Swartzentruber, Alto 1

Hymns Recording, Day One, 7/12/2021

We were sad to see a few members leave for this project, but this morning the rest of us gathered at Cornerstone Mennonite Church to record Christmas songs! Perhaps multiple people suffered from a short night of sleep after some after-concert lounging at McDonalds the night before. Wendell led out in bringing us to the present – to be present. Someone said they felt encouraged. Someone said contented. Someone said exhausted – yet satisfied. Speaking for myself, I had a lot of fun today. After our concerts last week, singing Christmas hymns – which were already familiar or easy to learn – was relaxing. We practiced songs, cleaning up diction and tuning needs, and then took recordings of a number of them. Brad Zabelski joined us with his recording equipment, as well as his didgeridoo instrument, which he played for us. (I had never heard such a thing before – quite interesting!) Faith and Fonda Showalter also joined us to shoot videos of the choir. I tried to remember not to raise my hand when I made a mistake. 🙂 Near the end of our day, a downpour of rain delayed further recording. Stanley Sensnig and his family from Lehman’s Street laid out a delicious and visually appealing lunch for us! At suppertime, many of us headed to a local high school to eat a savory supper from Velma Brubaker, mother of alto Regina, and some of her family. Meaningful conversations and volleyball followed. Lots of singing and figuring out beautiful sounds and chords awaits us tomorrow…

Maria Byler, Soprano I

Final Concerts Sunday, 7/11/2021

Sunday morning July 11th we assembled the troops for worship at 9 am with the Calvary Mennonite congregation. We have suffered a few vocal casualties and a couple directionally challenged casualties as well. Calvary welcomed us with open arms and we participated as best we could while wiping the weariness from our eyes. Those that could muster the energy then proceeded to sing a couple songs from our repertoire for the congregation. After the service the congregation was kind enough to have an amazing meal prepared for us.

Due to a time crunch we had to hurriedly eat and then race to Blue Ball Mennonite Church for our first of two engagements for the afternoon. We arrived at 12:30 pm and went straight into logistics and rehearsal. We were now once again at full strength and ready to forge ahead. Concert was scheduled to begin at 3:00 and the church was nearly full by 2:30, so by start time, they had people in the basement watching on a screen!

Another successful concert had concluded and we are able to interact with the audience for a few moments before we hurriedly moved out for our next and final concert which was scheduled for 7:30 pm at Cornerstone Mennonite Church. We arrived at Cornerstone at 5:00 and ate a quick supper before gathering for as much rehearsal as possible. The doors are opened to the long line formed outside, and the church fills rapidly. Another packed and rather warm concert is now in the books and I am left here thinking where has this week gone?

I am always so grateful for this awesome group of friends that can get together and pick up right where we left off while making music together. Such an incredible opportunity and blessing to be a part of such a unique group of friends. Until we meet again!

Johnny Miller, Tenor I

Wilmington, DE, 7/10/2021

LOST IN SHADY MAPLE SMORGASBORD

One theme Wendell has shared with us this week is “Trust the Story.” It has been encouraging to remember that God is writing a unique story through each of us, and that each of us is part of a story that’s much bigger than us.

Today began with the Oasis Chorale eating breakfast together at Shady Maple Smorgasbord. This was a place I had never been. I gathered some reactions from other choir members. “It is big,” said Chad Beery, a man of few words who had been to the restaurant two other times. It couldn’t have been said better as I was amazed at the enormous dining rooms and wide variety of food. “It’s the sheer magnitude that is so impressive,” said Jared Shetler, a tenor from Kansas.

Shetler also shared an experience that he described as “a little terrifying.” Apparently, he got lost after paying for the buffet. “All around me there were people that were very much on a mission. They seemed like they knew what they were doing. They were sitting at tables. They were going after food, and I didn’t know where I belonged.” Though he was unsettled for a moment, he soon found friends who pointed him in the right direction, and I think he and the choir very much enjoyed their visit.

Next, we were off to the Greenbank Church of Christ in northern Delaware to rehearse and give our third program. Our hosts and audience members helped make our time here extra enjoyable by their kindness and enthusiasm. I am full of gratitude and praise as I write this and reflect on the day. Remember—God is the author. In Him we are never lost or alone!

Evan Byler, Tenor I

7/9/2021 Chambersburg

One of the healthy qualities of Oasis Chorale is the focus on development and the search to find new ways to improve. In music, as in life, there are always new things to find. Even after a solid first concert Thursday night, we could still find new things on Friday.

A couple of us guys found a local disc golf course Friday morning. Unfortunately, the local water hazards had a healthy appetite for discs! It was good for the soul to shoot a round while shooting the breeze, even though I shot myself in the foot with my drive on hole 16. I miss the informal interactions with other choir members that come with a bus tour, so this was a welcome exploit.

After finding our way to my hometown of Chambersburg for our second concert, we had a review of last night’s concert. Many things obviously went well but some not so well, whether obvious or not. Wendell continued his pursuit of finding new things. “Find the alveolar ridge,” “Find your default arrangement. No, I mean your default ZIP arrangement,” “Basses can you find the C flat on measure 21?” “Ok now find your windows,” “Find your sound!”

After a delicious supper and a thoughtful and relevant prep time, we sang. We found the space quite toasty and the acoustic a bit spacious, but the audience was gracious and the fellowship warm. It can be fun singing to the home crowd but I found my focus was lacking; it was not a solid concert for me. There’s always tomorrow, and room for improvement. Who knows what we’ll find on Saturday?

There once was a choir named Oasis.

That found pitches off in some places.

But who caused the drops,

Altos, tenors or sops?

It’s never the fault of the basses.

-John Strickler, baritone

First Concert, Thursday 7/8/2021

Thursday (July 8) was concert day! Choir members had a few hours in the morning to brunch and relax before carpooling two hours to Wilkes-Barre. My carload discussed our high school music preferences. What an enlightening topic! Along the way, it was reported that Jared discovered Istanbul Grill where the chicken donor kebab dish stole his heart and moved him to rate the dish 4.5/5 stars. John showed impressive efficiency in finishing his plate in time to reach rehearsal. Rosalie Beiler, the only alto in this particular group of tenor and bass diners, recommends the falafel.

Wilkes-Barre Mennonite Church welcomed us into their church which had beautiful stained glass windows and glorious acoustics. After rehearsing we dined on a refreshing salad bar with grilled chicken and a plethora of delectable desserts. What an exciting day for many of us who have not had the opportunity to sing a concert in many months. Despite a few missteps and mistakes typical to a first concert, we had a delightful time worshiping with the generous congregation of Wilkes-Barre. As we prepared to depart, the drivers of our caravan found final warnings for towing on their windshields. We had a rainy drive back to Terre Hill fraught with adventure but Wendi Martin our fearless driver navigated our scenic route safely home. And now, I bid you gracious readers farewell.

Sarah Sommers, Alto II

Rehearsal Day 3, 7/7/2021

This is my first year singing with Oasis and it has already been an incredible experience. The veterans have been very welcoming, but one still has to find his place. Linda Stoltzfus has prepared several toothsome meals one of which has been a first for me (meatball subs). Thank you, Linda!

Yesterday was very mentally taxing for myself, this was also echoed by a few others. On the other hand, we have made huge progress on the rep and I find myself incapable of formulating how excited I am to be able to finally be singing to with real people with struggles, emotions, intelligence, and souls; which excepting my family the last while, has just been in the walls of my room or my car.

We spent the evening unwinding by playing several exerting games of volleyball and basketball. We all left Terre Hill Mennonite School exhausted with hopes to find some rest before our first program in Wilkes-Barre.

Arlan Delagrange

Baritone

Rehearsal Day 2, Tuesday

One of the refreshing things about participating with Oasis Chorale is the level of professionalism that singers show by being prompt. If rehearsal begins at 8:45 a.m., all singers arrive by 8:30 a.m., having already warmed up their “instrument,” and having engaged in some light physical exercise. In the 15 minutes before downbeat, singers greet their neighbors, hydrate, continue personal warmup (loudly), stretch, and quietly peruse music. This is a special part of Oasis culture; “meet and greet” is one of the best parts of the day!

On Tuesday we covered the rest of our repertoire in “start and stop mode,” where we work individual sections, fine-tuning dynamics, vowel, and consonant. Special attention was given to the rhythms in the three spirituals we are singing; the metronome was our constant companion! It’s understood that singers arrive at rehearsal with pitches and rhythms learned (and memorized!), and the first day or two of rehearsal is spent catching stray notes and solidifying rhythms, as we further explore text mechanics and musical interpretation.

In the afternoon, Rosemary Eberly-Lebold did a vocal coaching workshop where we played with vocal fry and discovered some really great finds with consonants (not to mention learning about how to relieve body tension!) We ended the day on stage, running rep from memory, and staging our standing arrangement for several pieces.

After dinner, singers relaxed with some exercise in the gym (we are rehearsing at a high school), while others remained in deep conversation, lingering over a meal.

We are immensely grateful for these two days of music-making, and we look forward to the week to come!

Esther Swartzentruber

Alto II

Day 1, Rehearsal 7/5/2021

With great expectations and anticipation the 39 singers who comprise Oasis Chorale, along with Wendell their fearless leader, descended on Terre Hill Mennonite High School in eastern Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. After a chattery half hour of meet and greet time and some warm-ups our souls (and bodies) began rehearsing the “exalted lays” we have been practicing for a year and a half.

After a delicious lunch that was so graciously provided for us by Linda Stoltzfus and crew, we began our afternoon routine which bore a marked resemblance to our morning activities.

For supper we headed south to Gap to the farm of Oasis charter members Dwight and Brenda Stoltzfoos where we were fed another scrumptious meal.

After supper a dozen of our multi-talented singers played a game of Ultimate Frisbee while a multi-tasking audience cheered them on and enjoyed the farm dog’s puppies. It’s been a wonderful start to an amazing week!

Laura Conley

Alto 2

Rosemary Eberly-Lebold’s Blog 7/20/2020

“You have turned for me my mourning into dancing;

You have put off my sackcloth and clothed me with gladness,

To the end that my glory may sing praise to You

and not be silent.

O Lord, my God,

I will give thanks to You forever.”

Psalm 30: 11, 12 NKJV

Grief.

Joy.

This year promised to be full of joy and hope. I planned to celebrate surviving a year

of twin + toddler mom life and return to singing with Oasis Chorale. I anticipated

connecting with my colleagues and friends throughout tour. I anticipated being

stretched musically, intellectually, emotionally, and spiritually. I anticipated

returning home musically.

Then COVID-19. Lockdown. Nothing was certain other than that I needed to do the

next thing. Change another diaper. Make another meal. Do more dishes. Fold more

laundry. All without the normal social reprieves that helped to keep me afloat

emotionally. I felt overwhelmed by grief from plans cancelled, music unsung,

friends unseen.

That is where God met me. He reminded me of His faithfulness. I found

companionship in the Psalms, connection through the gift of technology, and

comfort at my keyboard, singing songs of lament, hope, and joy. I found an outlet in

sharing these worship times online with a group of close friends. I learned new

things about my personality and what I need most in life. I rediscovered the gift of

solitude. I remembered that I have much to be grateful for. So I sang. Some days,

all that I could muster was lament and grief with a shimmer of hope. “Come, Ye

Disconsolate.” “Be Still My Soul.” “Be Still and Know.” Other days I sang with defiant

joy. “J-O-Y.” (With Aria!) “The Joy of the Lord is my Strength.” “Joy Is Like the Rain.”

And some days, the mourning was truly turned to dancing.

I celebrated a year of twin + toddler mom life in June. Now I soak in the beauty of

Lake Huron when I get the chance. I celebrate playgrounds being opened to the

public. I appreciate anew the chance to eat food that I didn’t have to prepare. I revel

in the gift of spending time face to face with friends. I hope for the Canada/US

border to open to non-essential travel so I can see family and friends again. I

continue to sing when and where I can, and I dream of the day when we will again

be able to gather and make music as a group.

I leave you with an old hymn that has been my friend these past months:

“Great is Thy faithfulness,” O God my Father;

There is no shadow of turning with Thee,

Thou changest not, Thy compassions they fail not,

As Thou hast been, Thou forever wilt be.

“Great is Thy faithfulness!

Great is Thy faithfulness!”

Morning by morning new mercies I see

All I have needed Thy hand hath provided

“Great is Thy faithfulness,” Lord unto me!

Summer and winter and springtime and harvest,

Sun, moon, and stars in their courses above;

Join with all nature in manifold witness,

To Thy great faithfulness, mercy, and love.

Pardon for sin and a peace that endureth,

Thine own dear presence to cheer and to guide;

Strength for today, and bright hope for tomorrow Blessings all mine, with ten thousand besides

Wendi Martin’s Blog 7/18/2020

I am a music educator located in Ephrata PA, so my life was significantly altered when the country went into a state of emergency back in March. (Gracious! It’s hard to believe we have been living with this new and hopefully temporary normal for that long.) I headed south to be with my family as soon as the schools shut down and have been with them ever since.

I taught from home until school let out for the summer. My schedule was a little bit lighter than normal while teaching online, but for the most part, it kept me busy. Once summer hit, my schedule was very wide open. I am a goal setter so when I noticed some extra time in my schedule, I set out to fill it with some things I normally struggle to find time for. This included but was not limited to sifting through websites for classroom music resources, practicing my instruments, spending time outside, reading, sewing a few dresses, and – one of the more fun ones – taking percussion lessons. If you think percussion is as simple as striking a drum or shaking a bottle filled with rice, you would be correct. But, it is also as complex as making each of your four limbs play a different rhythm simultaneously while keeping a consistent pulse. Remember that exercise where you pat your head and rub your belly at the same time? It’s like that only you add a seperate motion for each of your feet as well.

Instead of the big trips I had planned for this summer, I’m doing small ones here and there to see friends and family. South Carolina has seen a sudden spike in Covid cases this month, giving me reason to be a bit more thoughtful about my travel plans, however, most of my trips have been able to proceed without too many changes as long as my trusty mask goes with me :).

I feel more ready to get back to my school routine than I have in past years. I think the fact that I’ve been back in the South since March combined with Oasis being canceled has made the summer feel extra long. I didn’t realize how much structure and routine Oasis brought to my summer! Having extra time is certainly not anything to complain about, but suddenly having a lot of it provided an extra awareness of what has been feeding my life with purpose and motivation and how I flounder when those sources are cut off. Here’s to 2020, the year of awareness. I hope it results in my developing a more consistent posture of empathy in the years ahead whatever they may hold.

Jared Shetler’s Blog 7/16/2020

2020 was already a strange year for me. I finished my late-onset undergraduate degree in December of 2019 and jumped right into a brand new teaching job in January. It was a time of many adjustments and a lot of learning on the fly. On March 12, I finished entering my third-quarter grades and went home for Spring Break, unsure what the rest of the semester would look like. In the next several days, I received word of the cancellation of in-person classes for the remainder of the semester. Shortly after that, Oasis spring rehearsal was canceled.

Having my daily schedule suddenly disrupted was rather disorienting at first, but I eventually became accustomed (perhaps too accustomed) to the forcibly-decelerated pace of quarantine life. Incidentally, much like my comrade in section leadership, Dan Yutzy (see July 2 blog post), I took up disc golf and developed a mild addiction. It’s been a nice way to get outside and avoid wasting away entirely. I’m still awaiting word from my district about what the return to school will look like this fall. I am excited to get back to teaching, but a bit apprehensive about the potential challenges of restarting school during a pandemic.

Along with the keen disappointment of all performance opportunities being canceled (Oasis and others), I’ve also had more time to simply enjoy music, free from any pressure to learn and perfect. One especially meaningful piece has been Jake Runestad’s setting of Wendell Berry’s poem “The Peace of Wild Things.” I hope it blesses you, too.

Regina Brubaker’s Quarantine Blog 7/14/2020

This summer of cancelled events has become a summer of rest and recreation for me. It has been an opportunity to live differently with more creative ventures, focused work on a long-term project, quietness, and lengthy times of reading the Word. It’s been a time to more frequently sit close with friends, to meditate, to hike in the nearby mountains; a time to see, to create, to be, to listen. Paul Mealor’s setting of “The Beatitudes” has brought beauty both in its quietness and its exuberant rejoicing – a reminder that “all that will be” is not yet.

It’s an unusual season. The words of Ecclesiastes 3:1-8 (KJV) come to mind and beg for a stream of consciousness response for our current context, so here goes…

3 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:

This COVID thing…is a just for a season? When will things be normal? Since when is “what I perceive as normal” the ultimate reality? This poet is wiser than I…

2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

Life has gone on. People have been born and died. Some have planted garden and already harvested a fruitful abundance; some have planted seeds and there is no fruit yet. “What is the purpose of my life?” ask the philosophers among us.

3 A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;

If this virus could be captured once and for all, it would be killed. Instead, it runs unpredictably about touching some with death and others with a mere cough. Physical healing is not guaranteed, but healing balm comes to all who are poor in spirit and encounter the King.

4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;

Sorrow because we cannot be with friends, yet laughter shared with those in the same house. Weeping changed to joy, so writes the psalmist (Psalm 30:5). But then, James says: “Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness” (James 4:9).

What is what? Does this make sense? Who is right? (Where does the virus live? Is it only in the air?)

5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;

Well, social distance, everyone! (but don’t neglect relationships)

6 A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;

Gain a summer vacation. Lose a wonderful time of singing with Oasis Chorale.

Gain extra time to be still before the Lord (if we turn off the news updates).

So, open our hands to give and receive, O Lord.

Pandemic Blog 7/2/2020: Daniel Yutzy

These difficult times have actually not been that difficult for me in many ways, as I hailed from the great state of Arkansas (and a very rural part of it at that) until the last part of June. At that point we (my wife, Sheri; two children, and I) moved close to Canton, Ohio.

Just enough of my engagements were cancelled to allow me to slow down slightly. Throughout the spring and summer I was able to keep right on working at my job in construction. I was honestly a little disappointed that we didn’t have to shut down for a week or so, but won’t complain too loudly!

One of the worst things about the pandemic for me personally has been the music making opportunities that were lost, such as singing with Oasis Chorale. Also I am planning to attend Malone University in the fall pursuing a music degree, so I’m really hoping that I will be able to attend classes on campus.

I did pick up one new skill during quarantine-disc golf. It’s maddeningly hard to master and also strangely addictive.

Here’s to hoping that by next year thoughts of quarantine and distancing will be but distant memories. Wishing you all a healthy and God-blessed second half of 2020.

Daniel Yutzy

Baritone and Bass section leader

Wendell’s Reflections 6/3/2020

Such and Such a City

That King James turn of phrase from my childhood, “such and such a city,” has often rung in my mind’s ear in the past few months.

Come now, ye that say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into such and such a city and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain”; whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow.

The Apostle James is chiding his readers against improper certainty. Like those early readers, we too make plans for worthwhile and profitable ventures. Those plans depend on circumstances that are relatively predictable. And up until recently, all the societal cogs hummed along – with wobbles, to be sure, but yet with astonishing reliability.

But now, in a COVID-19 world, “whereas ye know not” has become us. We realize with new clarity what we often forget: we’re not as in control as we tend to think.

That’s where we are as a choir. Our plans for “such and such a city” included Lancaster and Leamington and Walnut Creek. Tour is cancelled, and we are disappointed.

What now?

It seems the Apostle James would encourage us not to shout invectives, nor even to posit yet again how this all really should have been handled, but rather to recognize that uncertainty and lack of control are a normal human experience. Perhaps he would encourage us less to fix the external problems (of which there are many), and to acknowledge and work on the internal problems (of which there are many). Specifically, he calls us to deep humility and to recognizing that there are other players in this game besides the obvious ones.

Instead ye ought to say, “If the Lord will, we shall live and do this or that.”

“If the Lord will” is more than a pious phrase. It acknowledges a larger Presence in the world. We are not the only ones with plans. Random forces and chance might in some inexplicable way be the glove worn by a mighty hand. The unpredictability of our time may not be something merely to be solved, but something to be noted; not something merely to live through but to live in. If we let it, our discomfort with this present uncertainty can point us to where we can find a true and proper certainty that cannot finally be rattled by the events that make the headlines.

July 14, Last Concert

On Sunday we all, with at least one eye open, joined the morning worship service at Bethel Mennonite. The service included OC singing 3 songs, Wendell’s talk on how singing is for every follower of Christ, and a talk by OC board member, Steve Martin. Steve inspired us to learn from those followers of Jesus who have suffered and been martyred for their faith. After an extravagant potluck, we headed for Sandy Ridge to rest and prepare for our last concert.

At Sandy Ridge the house was filled to hear us. God enabled us to express the music and the beauty of His glory better than ever on many of the pieces, thanks largely to Wendell’s commitment to continue growing our musicianship to the very end. God touched many souls with His goodness and glory!

The farewell party at the Millers was a perfect way to bring closure to the tour. Thanks to the Miller family for the comfortable, Christ-like atmosphere your lives create. With public formalities over, we were able to drink in the friendships, the laughter(thanks Chuck), the reminiscing, the goodness of God in each other’s lives, and talk about the possibilities of the next year.

I praise God for the “oasis” this was in my life, this extremely rich experience provided by His infinite grace!

Leonard Mast

Baritone

July 13, Sauder Concert Hall

Saturday morning was reserved for retakes from our recording the last two days. However, we only had a few pieces to redo, so our call time was bumped back to 10:00. A group of us went out for a sit-down breakfast, while others opted for extra sleep. We convened at Sauder Hall at 10 and did retakes of “All Hail the Power of Jesus’ Name”, and “Bless the Lord, my Soul”. After another delicious lunch supplied by Kendra Miller, we ran through standing and movement for the concert.

The opportunity to sing in this lovely hall was exciting for all of us, and especially so as we saw familiar faces filling the auditorium. This was the first concert we performed in our zipped arrangement (alternating SA and TB), so we experienced new sounds within the choir, in addition to the phenomenal acoustics of the space. After mingling with friends and relatives, we said goodbye to Sauder Hall and headed to our Sandy Ridge hosts for the night.

Lisa Martin

Soprano 2

Recording, July 11 & 12

We spent the last two days recording our new album, The Glory of His Grace! What goes into recording an album? A lot! Over 2000 hours of singer practice, 38 voices, 16 composers and 16 songs, 4 section leaders and 4 section managers, several cooks (mainly Kendra), 1 choir manager, 1 recording engineer, 1 recording producer, and last but not certainly not least 1 conductor. Also many gallons of water and many bathroom visits, gotta stay hydrated!

We arrived at 8:30 and worked until 5:30 both days with an hour off for lunch and breaks between every song. All the singers arrived at least partially warmed up. Most of the singers will spend around 30 minutes warming up before we try to sing together. The talented Brad Zabelski of Traveling Tracks already had his recording equipment in place when we arrived, and remained unobtrusive throughout the recording process, other than to offer a suggestion once in a while. Brandon Mullet was also on hand to offer valuable insight as our producer.

Typically we will have three or four takes (recorded performances that we can use) on each song. Depending on how well we know a song, we may do the first take without working on anything, or we may work on a problem spot or two. Once we have a decent take, our conductor, Wendell, will listen to it.

Recording will always be exhausting work, with lots of do-overs. Many, many water bottles fall on the hardwood floor. People can try to hold in a cough or sneeze until they are red in the face, but won’t always succeed. Sometimes we get tired and are subject to uncontrollable giggle fits. If one person hits a noticeable wrong note, we have to start again. We have to learn to purify pitch and emotion in order to convey our message to people we aren’t present. Singing passionately to an empty hall takes incredible mental focus and energy.

It sounds intense, and it is; but at the end of the day, we all love each other and are so grateful that we get a chance to be a part of this process. Music like this is achingly beautiful and we catch glimpses of heaven by singing it as a well-tuned body. Each person works hard every day to become not only a better musician, but also a better person. One who reflects the Glory of His Grace. I hope you will enjoy listening to us as much as we enjoy singing for you. May God’s Glory shine!

Daniel Yutzy

Baritone

July 10: Day Off

The day dawned bright and early in the suburbs of Chicago for some of us. Our awesome host got us up to go to her friends place to have breakfast. We were even offered a pre-breakfast of coffee and pastries before heading out.

After an adventurous ride and lots of laughter, as we enjoyed our host, we arrived back to meet the bus. From there we headed to downtown Chicago for several hours.

I went with a group to the Art Institute of Chicago. Even though I don’t feel super artistic myself, I throughly enjoyed the experience. My favorite spot was the gallery with all the Monet pieces.

We wandered to a coffee shop, making a stop at “The Bean” to take a quick selfie, then on to lunch and back to the bus. It was a rather warm day and I think a lot of us felt the effects of the heat as we traveled back to Sandy Ridge Church.

We said goodbye to our bus driver and bus, and headed different ways for supper. I enjoyed relaxing at Main Street Roasters before heading to Goshen College for the evening. Some people responsibly went to bed and others spent some time outside playing games or just relaxing before calling it a night.

Trenda Clugston

Alto 1

July 9: An Hour-by-Hour Report

7:45 a.m. Choir eats Sparta congregation’s stellar food

8:32 a.m. Choir leaves monastery where they were staying–Evan Byler, OC member from MN, tunes into conversation on the bus about child education

9:14 a.m. Byler stops socializing and takes a nap

10:40 a.m. Byler takes another nap after short rest stop

12:53 p.m. Byler looks over music after lunch stop at toll-road oasis

1:13 p.m. BREAKING NEWS Tour bus blows a tire and pulls into crash investigation site

1:23 p.m. Bus limps on

1:55 p.m. Byler takes another nap (it’s hard work taking three naps on three different bus rides–really!)

3:27 