I have been thinking about all the traveling we do as people. Especially now, post-pandemic, so many of us are out visiting family or fulfilling missed vacations. I think we need a postcard board in Kaseman Hall to document where all of us have been! But, when pondering all these journeys, I also have to compare those physical journeys to our spiritual ones.

My most recent journey has been to Minnesota. I have travelled here to preside at the wedding of one of my cousins. As I drove, I had plenty of time to think about many things. One of those was: how do we mark the distance travelled? How do we comprehend it? When we lived in Oklahoma, Anthony and the boys and I would drive down to Alabama to see Anthony’s family. It was a drive that took us through Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, then from top to bottom in Alabama. We watched for familiar landmarks, including places with funny names like Toad Suck, Arkansas, or the bat painted on the water tower in Transylvania, Louisiana. We would also count the little missionary Baptist church that dotted the landscape, close to the road, as we passed by. So many small communities marked by the presence of God! On the way to Minnesota, it was grain elevators, not churches. Many, many, grain elevators push up to the sky across Kansas, Iowa and Minnesota.

What are the landmarks of our spiritual journey? Those landmarks are not always as visible as a grain elevator or water tower. Sometimes we journey to brand new places in our spiritual life and forget to look for familiar markers!. Maybe we grow deeper in love with God. Maybe we grow in understanding or find a new way to pray. Even so, on our spiritual journey there are steady and consistent markers. One of those markers for me is an abiding sense of peace. It seems that no matter how I start, what mood I am in or whatever the outside circumstances, if I pause and take time to intentionally journey with God, there is peace. That deep gentle peace holds me from getting lost on the road.

Another marker on the road of faith for me, has been hope. It seems that hope shows up more frequently, like those missionary Baptist churches, when I intentionally walk with God. I am reminded by the Spirit that God is with me and that gives me hope. I am reminded of the times that God has been there for me when things were hard. I am nudged into thinking hopeful thoughts about present circumstances and I feel more hopeful about the future. It is not that God’s hope for us ever disappears. But, if we forget to pause, pray and reflect, we might forget that it is there.

A third landmark of our spiritual journey is joy. On most of my travels growing up or with my kids, we have gone to see family. There is always joy at the end of the road. Even when we gathered for sad occasions, there was joy. Joy in reconnecting. Joy in gathering with people who know and love you. Joy in returning to familiar places filled with memories. And this is true also of our journey with God. Through Jesus we are connected to each other and to God through an intangible web of love that transcends what our eyes can see. This fills my heart with joy. We are promised that God is with us when we gather and that God will never leave us. This brings me joy. And sometimes, when I am not even thinking about it, I am surprised by a gift of joy that seems to come out of nowhere, surrounding my heart, lifting me up, and assuring me that God is near.

Perhaps, these landmarks are good to pay attention to. If the road we are on daily is one that is marked by peace, hope and joy, it is a good one. If there is no peace, no hope or no joy for you, you may need to choose a new road! Maybe anger, or fear, or circumstances have taken you far away from those landmarks. If so, find a friend or draw near to others in the community who carry these markers. God will be with you regardless. As a very insightful 11 year old pondered during Vacation Bible School, maybe we are the Living Water for each other. I think we are when we share strength for the journey so that we all reach our destination together.

Reflections on General Convention, part 1

The 81st Convention of the Episcopal Church was held in June in Louisville, KY. I had the privilege of being a deputy for this gathering of the church. General Convention happens every 3 years and this one was the first “normal” convention since Covid. Convention is an intense mosaic of legislative decisions, elections, committee works, worship, debate and diversity. There are special interest groups and people with passion for mission, for inclusion, for taking a stand on any number of things. This gathering including the every 9 year election of a new Presiding Bishop. I am still thinking about the many things that were discussed and accomplished. The over arching theme of Convention for me was things are changing but we shall meet these challenges with love, grace and eyes wide open.

That theme certainly played out in the election of the Rt. Rev. Sean Rowe as the next Presiding Bishop. He was elected by the House of Bishops on the first ballot. I had the opportunity to hear each of the five PB candidates speak and hear their vision for the church. Bishop Rowe spoke directly to the changes he feels are necessary for the Episcopal Church to navigate the future. He pointed to the need to shift away from a top heavy infrastructure in order to revitalize churches who are doing the work of ministry. I will say that all the Bishops on the slate are wonderful people of God, representing the diversity of the church. And, it was so refreshing to see the love and respect that the bishops have for each other. It was very apparent that they were doing their best to follow the Spirit in this process.

It was an absolute joy to hear the current PB, the Most Rev. Michael Curry preach at the Revival at Convention. Of course, he preached on love. But he always does more than preach, he embodies the love of God with every word and action, genuine, self-effacing, transformative love. It would take a hard heart indeed to withstand the pull of the Spirit that breathes through the words of Bishop Curry. We have been blessed to have him as Presiding Bishop. He retires as PB on October 31st of this year. Bishop Rowe takes office on November 1st.

Continuing on the theme of hopefulness and optimism: Navajoland had a change of status. The Episcopal Church created the area mission known as Navajoland in 1978 to serve Episcopalians in regions of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah where the Navajo Nation reservation is located. Elevating The Episcopal Church in Navajoland to a missionary diocese would allow church members there to elect their own bishop while continuing to receive financial and other support from the wider church. And, they can use a process of calling a bishop that is authentic to them as a people. Members of the Navajoland deputation spoke on this designation as it affected them on a personal level. There were many tears throughout the House of Deputies as they spoke. It was wonderful to be witness to this restoration of dignity and recognition of autonomy for the people of Navajoland.

For me, General Convention was a series of connecting moments that were personally deeply gratifying. I served on a legislative committee that met in person for the first time at Convention. All prior meetings had been on Zoom. It was in that in person gathering that I realized a rather remarkable thing: in that group of 20, there were people who represented all the places I have served in the Episcopal Church. There was a woman who was with me at Seminary. There was another woman who served in the Diocese of Central Florida. She started off in the process for ordination just as I was leaving for the Diocese of Indianapolis. The Rt. Rev. Jennifer Baskerville-Burrows of the Diocese of Indianapolis was on the committee, as well as the Rt. Rev. Poulson Reed who is the current Bishop of Oklahoma, where I served for 13 years. There were people on that committee from the Diocese of Texas where I had been involved in campus ministry as a graduate student in the early 90s. I was reminded of all those I had met along the way and how we all matter.

Our Diocese of the Rio Grande was well represented by our Bishop Michael Hunn, who spoke on the church’s “culture of fruitless meetings and wasteful spending, the disconnect between national church initiatives and the experience of local churches, and the failure to measure the effectiveness of its programs in a sweeping critique during the House of Bishops’ Monday legislative session.” (The Living Church) You can find the Living Church article on what he was speaking to here: https://livingchurch.org/news/news-episcopal-church/bishop-hunn-calls-for-church-culture-change/. Bishop Michael met with our deputation on several occasions to keep us updated on things coming to us from the House of Bishops. He also called on us to let him know what we felt were pressing issues from the House of Deputies. Our Canon to the Ordinary, Lee Curtis, and our Borderland Bridge Chaplain, Ana Reza, were there at convention representing the work the diocese does on our border with Mexico. And, our own Cathedral member Eli Crowley was at Convention as part of the Official Youth Presence. Eli spoke to the House of Deputies on several issues that came up in session with great poise and confidence.

I have more that I want to share with you, but will save it for next week. Know that the church is doing good work both here and around the world. Also know that there is a very positive vibe that we are heading the the right direction, no matter what challenges may be ahead of us.

Blessing to all of you!

Wonderful things happening at the Cathedral this week!

All churches, but particularly Cathedrals, are intended to be community gathering places. Our Cathedral is a place that hosts AA and NA meetings, offers a Food Pantry and has gallery space for local artists. On top of that, this week we have had several wonderful groups land at our church. I wanted to share about two of them.

Tuesday night we hosted the Fort Bend Boys Choir of Texas. They were on tour, stopping at Santa Fe, Las Cruces and Albuquerque. This group was founded in 1982 by William Adams, who is also their artistic director. They began with 45 boys. They have now grown into five performing ensembles with 200 choristers. The kids are selected through an audition process and join either the Training, Town or Tour choir. The choir is open to all boys whose voice has not yet changed. These boys have the opportunity to perform more challenging choral music than would be normally available to them. It was a joy to see the diversity in the choir and to hear them sing. Their director emphasized that part of the goal of the tour was to counter the negative press of “kids these days” and to bring hope through music. For the final piece the kids formed a circle around the audience so we were surrounded by their sweet voices.

A very special shout out to Maxine Thevenot and Edmund Connolly for the work they put into these opportunities. Many hours of behind the scenes work made this concert possible. We are very blessed by the wide range of gorgeous music that our Music Department brings to the Cathedral.

This week, we have been the host site for the YES Mission group from Colorado. YES stands for Young Episcopalians in Service. This year’s group is made up of 30 Episcopal youth and 10 adults from all over Colorado. They sleep at the Cathedral and have breakfast and dinner here as well. Each day this week they have sent 3 teams of 10 youth out to local not for profits to help with projects. We have benefited from 2 of those teams working with Lori Van Note at the Thrift Shop. And, today, another team worked out in the triple degree heat to upgrade our garden space off of the parking lot. The model that the Diocese of Colorado has adopted is to do these mission trips every year with a 3 year cycle of emphasis. This year is a service to community year. Next year it will be a dwell in community year. They are heading to Tacoma, Washington to reside within the L’Arche community. This is an intentional community whose mission is to make known the gifts of people with intellectual disabilities, revealed through mutually transforming relationships. The third year emphasis is leadership, which coincides with the Episcopal Youth Event. Many thanks to Kimberly Hubbs, the Colorado diocesan YES Trips Coordinator for bringing this great group of kids to Albuquerque!

One of the beautiful things for me about Scripture are the innumerable honest and vulnerable portrayals of human emotion and experience. This is seen most clearly in the Psalms. For those of you who are into Bible study, you may have encountered the many types of Psalms: those of thanksgiving, of praise to God, Royal psalms and laments. I wanted to explore today the latter. Let’s talk about laments. A lament is an honest reckoning of our difficulties. Those difficulties run the gamut of life-family troubles, enemies, money woes, insomnia, injustice. In the Bible there are 150 Psalms, of those 54 are either individual laments or community laments. 30%. That is a lot of lamenting!

What would be the benefit of a formal lament? Let us take a look a Psalm 3. It is a short one and helpful as a structure if we want to write our own.

Psalm 3:1-2 O Lord, how many are my foes! How many rise up against me! Many are saying of me, God, will not deliver him.

First off, the Psalmist, in this case David, gives voice to his very specific fears. As backstory, this is when he was fleeing from his son Absalom. He speaks of the people who are against him. He names that fact that people have lost faith that he will survive this. He also speaks to the feeling that others think God will desert him. He is naturally afraid and worried. But the next section of the Psalm is a reminder to himself, to God and anyone who reads it, that God is the one in whom he trusts, regardless of the present circumstances.

Psalm 3:3-4. But you are a shield around me, O Lord; you bestow glory on me and lift up my head. To the Lord I cry aloud, and he answers me from his holy hill.

Here is David speaking of his faith in God, in detail. God is a shield of protection. God is the one who gives glory and encouragement. David assures himself that when he cries out to God, God answers him. How powerful a reminder of how God has been for us in the past when things are bleak for us in the present! For me, that also includes God giving me peace when I am troubled or strength when I am worn out. When has God been a source of protection for you? When has God’s spirit encouraged you? As the Psalm unfolds, David continues to outline his reaction to his predicament in light of his faith in God.

Psalm 3:5-6 I lie down and sleep; I wake again, because the Lord sustains me. I will not fear the tens of thousands drawn up against me on every side.

Because of his trust in God, David is able to sleep. God is the one who wakes him up everyday. God is the one who calms his fears. When have you felt able to overcome life’s difficulties because you relied on God’s presence?

Psalm 3:7 Arise, O Lord! Deliver me, O my God! Strike all my enemies on the jaw; break the teeth of the wicked.

This verse is a direct call for God to intercede. There is a raw expression here of a desire for revenge and judgement. That particular sentiment is difficult in our understanding that we are asked to pray for our enemies and seek peace. But, here David is baring his heart. It is a specific request for deliverance from a bad situation. Maybe violence in return for violence was the only way that David could see the way forward. I think God has many ways of rescuing and delivering that have nothing to do with violence! But, it is absolutely fine to voice these things to God, with enough openness to know that God’s Spirit hears you and will intercede on your behalf.

Psalm 3:8 From the Lord comes deliverance. May your blessing be on you people.

The final verse again is a statement of trust and a request for a blessing.

If you are facing difficulty of any kind or worried or suffering, either personally or on behalf of others, think about the spiritual practice of writing a lament. Describe your pain. Write down your emotions. Consider what God has done for you in the past. Elaborate on your understanding of God’s faithfulness to you. Call on God to help. And, ask for God’s blessing. Laments help us to lift up our concerns to God, but remind us as well of God’s love and promise to us. And I pray that the God of Peace would surround you in all your days of joy and in those days of trouble.

Folks from the Cathedral of St. John have now gone up into the Sandia Mountains three times in 2024 to share Eucharist, have a meal and spend time together in God’s creation. And, as it is in the church, once you have done it three times it is now tradition. We have had 10 to 20 people participate at each of these mountain top experiences. I wanted to encourage you all to come at some point because each one has been unique and beautiful.

The first one was in March and the air was very crisp. We had a lot of snow and ice on the ground. The wind was blowing hard during Eucharist, so to hold things down we had a container of dip anchoring the chalice. But the sky was that amazing New Mexico blue and the sounds of the city were very far away. Pine trees covered the sides of the road, surrounded the pavilion and filtered the welcome sunshine. Maybe we did not linger too long in the chilly air. But, the connection between us and God and creation made me want to come back.

The second one became a cook out and Communion. It was a bit warmer in April. In fact, it was one of those days when the temperature in Albuquerque had hit just above 80. It was so delicious to go up to Capulin Springs where the air was 15 degrees cooler. There was still quite a bit of snow on the ground! Communion went off without a hitch-the wind wasn’t blowing us around. However, when the team (Anthony Maulden) went to grill the hamburgers, we discovered that I had forgotten a couple things. Like we brought the charcoal and the food, but left at home grilling utensils. Fortunately, as people arrived, we had a wooden spoon, an axe and a shovel that did the job. It wasn’t pretty, but it worked. These mishaps and how we overcome them as a group add to the narrative of our journey together. The one kid who was with us thought the best part of the event was figuring out creative ways to overcome those obstacles to flipping burgers. He insisted that we “forget” utensils in the future. Again, It was a blessing to be back to this lovely place and the feel the presence of God in Communion and in community.

The third journey up the mountain was on a rainy day. It was magical for me driving up literally through the clouds. The trees were alternately shrouded in mist and then backlit with sunshine. I felt that we had traveled to another world. During communion, we had mist, a bit of rain, and then the breaking through of warmth and light. I kept thinking that there must be a gorgeous rainbow around here somewhere. I will say, a blanket on the metal bench of the picnic table would have been a good thing! This time, we had grilling utensils! And people brought lovely salads and fruit and desserts. Again, we would have lingered longer but it was as chilly as the first time! But I left with my spirit refreshed and my mind at peace.

We will meet in June on the 15th at 5pm-but at a different site. Capulin Springs has already been reserved by another group. This time we will meet at the Oak Flats Group picnic area which is off of Highway 337 heading towards Chilili. It is where the Cibola forest and grasslands converge. This site is particularly accessible for those with mobility issues. Please come if you can! We are becoming more organized in our approach to food. To help with that, I am creating a mountaintop Eucharist email group. If you plan on coming, please email me at deankristi@stjohnsabq.org and I will add you to the list. This next experience will include some games for any kids who come, including our Force Fellowship Boofers. I also would love to have some music for communion-if you play a guitar please come and share your gift of music with us!

These gatherings are very informal. Please feel free to invite friends and family!

I was thinking about how stories shape us. What were your favorite stories from childhood? Were these stories read to you from a book? Were they stories of family history? Who told you those stories? I love reading stories that develop characters who live beyond the page. We all tell stories to each other everyday. We tell stories to ourselves. Humans have that unique ability to create stories that persuade and unite others behind a common goal. Jesus told stories, parables, to his followers. These stories shaped their understanding of who they were called to be. Those stories continue to shape our concept of the reign of God and how we are to live.

We know that not all stories are helpful, though. There are those narratives in our own heads that tell us hurtful things. Maybe what we tell ourselves include a list of what we are lacking in terms of outward appearance or success in school or popularity at work. In the extreme, these types of stories may persuade us to harm others or to fall into self destructive behaviors. There are also the stories that tell us to distrust other people because of who they are or what they stand for. Family stories may be filled with love and acceptance, but may also contain elements of shame or hopeless expectations. Even worse, there are also stories fueled by deception, jealousy, hatred and manipulation.

How do we push into the power of story in a healthy way? The stories we tell of our faith and of a loving God can transform lives. Changing our inner story from self-condemnation, to self encouragement is a life changer as well. I think we need to be particular in the stories that we allow ourselves to hear or to read or speak. Of course, this is mostly up for individual discernment. I know, for example, many people who watch horror movies for fun. I don’t like horror movies. Images creep into my dreams and make me anxious. The stories that fuel our fears and distrust are ones we should be careful of embracing. What disturbs your spirit? What stories do we hunger for in a good way? What narratives should we turn away from? And, what stories should we be telling? Every church community has a history full of story. Do we know our own church stories?

It has been said that the ability to create stories out of our imagination is our super power. Jesus knew how to use that power to build connections between the human and the divine. He knew how to break down barriers through his words as well. He left people curious about God and thirsting for more. I wonder if we can learn from Jesus how to share words of life and love. I wonder how this could impact the stories we tell ourselves and each other. Maybe the story of how love casts out darkness has an untapped power source that we need to release into the world as a counter to all the other stories that rely on fear and shock. Maybe this love is a story we tell with our words and with our actions.

I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you; I will remove from you your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. -Ezekiel 36:26

Good Friday. What is so good about it? I have heard people saying that my whole life. It does seem ironic to call the darkest day of all eternity, “Good”.

There are many theories about why we call the Friday of Holy Week Good Friday. One thought is referenced in the Old English translation, where good may have been synonymous with holy. The Oxford English Dictionary makes reference to Holy Wednesday having historically been titled Good Wednesday. So good may have been used interchangeably with holy for all the days of Holy Week. Other alternative names for Good Friday include Passion Friday in Russia and Sacred Friday in other places around the world. In the Greek Church, it is known as the Holy and Great Friday. It is called Sorrowful Friday in German.

Another theory is that the “Good” refers to the connection between Good Friday and Easter Sunday. This day is a precursor to the great action of God to resurrect Jesus from the dead. It is a foreshadowing of Christ’s victory over death. In that sense, it could also be called God’s Friday. God brings Jesus’ passion, death and resurrection brought full circle from the dark day of crucifixion to the dawn of Easter morning.

I have been thinking about this cycle of passion, death and resurrection. It is a pattern seen in life over and over. It is in the seed, sprout, flourishing and death of plants and trees. It is in the movement of water as river and ocean, land eroded, coastland and riverbed reshaped. It is in the daily life of all of us. We are in continual movement through this cycle. This is not just about our mortal bodies dying and our resurrection with Jesus. We also find places in our lives that die and new things are born. Relationships are like this. Sometimes we find ourselves in toxic relationships that need to end or change. Maybe you have lost touch with a good friend and found new life in reconnecting with them. Or, the loss of someone dear to you has opened the door for a different relationship. Whenever something or someone is lost and there is eventual restoration, we see this pattern. It is unending.

God speaks through Ezekiel to the people who are in exile, promising to remove their hearts of stone and restoring them with a heart of flesh. Stony hearts need to die as well. A heart of stone carries bitterness, disbelief, arrogance and regret. It is not a heart that is open to love, trust or connection. Stones are apathetic to the world around them. Sure, they can be worn down by outward forces, but they remain impassive. I believe God is still offering the change from stone to flesh for all people at all times. I imagine God is speaking to our hearts this Holy Week, asking us to consider what beats inside of us, stone or flesh? Are we open to God’s push to change us? To new growth? To Love? To belief? What needs to die in you for you to experience new life?

This would make Good Friday truly good for me: that my heart would listen to the holy promise of resurrection of body, mind and spirit and have the courage to let go of anything that stands in the way.

This Sunday we begin Holy Week. Palm Sunday services compress the last days of Jesus into one. In some ways this is helpful, as it sets the stage for what is to come. And, it makes possible for those who cannot come to Holy Week services to get the whole story. But, I would argue, it is good to come and dwell together each day as it happens. There is a richness here that I don’t want you to miss.

On Palm Sunday, between the 9am and 11am, you can take a palm and transform it into a cross with me in Kaseman Hall. This transformation of palm to cross symbolizes to me the journey of Holy Week. We begin by blessing the palms and singing Hosanna to Jesus as he enters in to Jerusalem. Pause and think of the emotions of that moment! Jesus is entering Jerusalem in such a way as to provide a contrast to the Pontius Pilates’ entrance through the main gate of the same town. New Testament scholars, Marcus Borg and John Dominic Crossan give a detailed picture of these two processions in their book, “The Last Week.”

The context of the other procession: this was the time of the Festival of Passover. The Israelites are celebrating their liberation from slavery in Egypt. They are remembering God’s promise of a land given to them. They are thinking about freedom. The Romans, on the other hand, wanted to make sure that the emotional high of the people gathered for Passover didn’t move them to rebellion or revolt. The tension was very high. The Roman Emperor sends the Governor to Jerusalem with a show of force and much fanfare. This was a political move with military backing to show the people who was ultimately in charge. And then on the opposite side of the city, here comes Jesus.

Jesus, on a donkey, is hailed as an anointed king of Israel. Perhaps the crowd by his gate was smaller and poorer than the one welcoming the Governor. But their investment in their hopes for him would have been very intense. The people who welcome Jesus with palm branches and praise were looking for a leader to drive out the Governor, push back the Roman forces and free them from oppression. But this Jesus was not an insurgent. His revolution was of an entirely different nature. His was ushering in a revolution of forgiveness, non-violence and of love. He places himself in the midst of their deepest troubles, in the context of oppression, in response to a violent occupation. Yet, he did not do what the people had hoped. He did not raise up an army. Instead, he allowed himself to be raised up on a cross.

How we get from “hosanna to the King” to “crucify him” is the work of Holy Week. Day by day we will meet people whose lives were impacted by Jesus. We will encounter amazing love, the innocent and the arrogant, cowardice and bravery, betrayals and denials, sorrow, injustice, a call to serve, examples of forgiveness, shared meals, and desperate prayers. We will see the darkest moments of any life that is marked by violence, through the lens of Jesus on the cross. And, we will wait in hope and prepare our hearts through word, liturgy, music and prayer for the day that is marked with joy and hope.

We are about midway through our season of Lent, already. For me, the time seems to be racing by this year. I hope that the time so far has been fulfilling for you. I wanted to share with you a little reflection at this midway point, on a very loaded word: apocalypse.

What do you think of when you hear that word, Apocalypse? Does it conjure up images of mass destruction, of the end of times, of the Left Behind series? Do you worry that the tragic wars around the world are a sign of the end times? Do you worry that we are heading for an apocalyptic climate disaster? Does the word carry political implications for you? If any of these are true, you might agree that the idea of apocalypse is a heavy one. The Bible has many passages that are considered apocalyptic, including an entire book-Revelations. These passages are often used to induce fear in contemporary faith communities. The message usually revolves around signs of the end times, the need to turn from our sins before the coming wrath, or the blaming of one group or another for ushering in universal destruction.

But the word itself is from the Greek: apokaluptein. The meaning of this word used in Scripture simply means to uncover or reveal. It was not meant as a prediction of things to come, as it is so often interpreted today. Apocalyptic passages in Scripture pointed to the reality of the world as it was. It was the work of a prophet to do the work of revealing.

Prophets are an awkward group. They called out political oppression, the corruption of the powerful, the lack of faith, sinfulness and unfaithfulness of the people of God. This made them universally unpopular. But, it is important to recognize the fact that they were calling out their own current events. For example, the Book of Revelation was a coded and symbolic revealing of the the political oppression of the people of the time. It was not a prediction of the end of the world for our day. The writer of John was uncovering the corruption of an oppressive government. The Beast in the story is the power of all that is unholy. That powerful, greedy Beast that so many political regimes have loved to use to their advantage is so well described in the pages of Revelations. A book, by the way, that was the last to be added to the Canon of the Bible, for a variety of reasons. It was a book likely written to encourage Christians during a continued time of imperial persecution.

So why think on apocalypse at all, if it isn't aimed at future events? I think the reason it is important to remember the original meaning of the word, is to embolden us as prophets for our age. We are called on as the people of God to do the work of revealing or uncovering the Beast that prowls our world today. It may be the evils of leadership in government or the corruption in the church that needs revealing. It might be the plight of the homeless, the immigrant, the poor, in the hands of a callous society. Prophets today call out injustices and discrimination towards people of color, LGBTQ+ people and the unequal treatment of women. It might be the call of the prophets today for people of God to return back and be renewed in Spirit and in truth. Prophets point out uncomfortable truths. They are not universally embraced. Sometimes they live in exile. Yet, if we are to conquer the beasts that roam the world today, those beasts need to be named to be defeated.

This Lent, our spiritual journey should include some uncovering in our own lives. Where does the unholy live in our own homes? In our own church? In our own community? May we be the ones who look into the eyes of these beasts and make our own pledge to cast out and deny the unholy any power.

Almighty and everlasting God, you hate nothing you have made and forgive the sins of all who are penitent: Create and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we, worthily lamenting our sins and acknowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of you, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness; through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, one God, for ever and ever. Amen. BCP pg 264

What we do on Ash Wednesday is peculiar to many people outside of the Christian faith. It is also strange to some of those within. Even stranger: this year Ash Wednesday fell on Valentine’s Day! In our tradition, we come to church and are reminded of our mortality with ashes on our forehead, offer prayers of penitence and are reminded of the many ways we fall short of the glory of God. But that reminder is not for us to be concerned about our dying. It points to the reality that we have a calling on earth that has very much to do with living.

We are reminded that our lives here on this planet should not be all about us as individuals. Lent is a time to think more intentionally about bringing the love of God to our neighbors by practices of self-denial, becoming partners with those who work for justice, and by letting go of the harsh places in our own hearts.

In other words, we give up our indulgent ways so that others may have more. We look to those who are most vulnerable in our communities and work to restore them to wholeness. We become those who lift up the burdens on those who are outcasts or shunned. We release the treasure trove of kindness and generosity that we store in our own selves and have been reluctant to share. And, we can share our most precious treasure: our story of love from our God.

Even as we are marked at the start of Lent by ashes that are temporary, remember that you are sealed permanently by the Holy Spirit and are anchored by Jesus to heaven. God has you covered! Let us all make it our goal to become more and more like Jesus so that others may know this as well.

-The Very Rev. Kristina Maulden, Dean

Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, the new creation has come: The old has gone, the new is here! -2 Corinthian 5:17

When you became a follower of Christ, what changed? This may be hard to answer if you grew up going to church and believing in Jesus. It may be that you have a deep and profound answer to this. I think it is not a once in a lifetime thing. I think the journey of faith involves constant change. Old ways of thinking or behaving need altering or changing over time. Maybe we have picked up bad habits or are holding on to grievances or have negative attitudes towards certain people. Life does that to us. Our experiences and interactions with others can change bright and cheery spirits into pessimistic and bitter souls. But, God offers this transformation into a new creation all the time-giving us opportunity to let go of our anger and disillusionment.

However. this is what is unique about our Christian expression: God loves us even when we don’t change or forgive or grow. God loves us in the hope that we will continue to seek out living water and spiritual growth. We are given this understanding of God through the life of Jesus who even on the cross prays that God forgives his all those who deserted him, betrayed him, accused him and crucified him. Jesus reveals to us the true nature of God. How wonderful it is when we turn back to God and are healed, renewed, restored and transformed by a love that is stronger than darkness and death.

There is also a uniqueness to our particular brand of Christianity: the Episcopal Church. We are a church made up of people who come from so many different backgrounds and traditions. But the tent of the Episcopal Church is big enough for everyone. We gather to worship using prayers that are common to everyone. We confess in unison. We offer connection to God through a sacramental understanding of the connection between the common and the holy. We leave plenty of room for mystery. We will not tell you how to vote, but will encourage you to exercise your right to vote. We have become a safe haven for those who are excluded from other Christian traditions. Our liturgy is rich with ancient practices, generous portions of Scripture, monastic understandings and gorgeous music.

The world around us in constantly changing. We are witnesses as well to the changes in life of the church. The question before us-how will the church need to change to continue to be a light in this present world. How do we remain relevant? I ask you to ponder these questions as well: What is it about the Episcopal Church that has drawn you in? What are the things you would miss if the church itself became a new creation? What, in your mind, could pass away? Are there parts of the liturgy you feel particularly attached to? What is it about our Cathedral that you love?

I do not know what lies ahead for church in the future. I do know that we need to be about paying attention to the shifts in culture and intentionally reaching out to those who are looking for a God who loves them unconditionally. We can do this in a uniquely Episcopalian way.

The hand of the Lord came upon me, and he brought me out by the spirit of the Lord and set me down in the middle of a valley; it was full of bones. He led me all round them; there were very many lying in the valley, and they were very dry. He said to me, ‘Mortal, can these bones live?’ I answered, ‘O Lord God, you know.’ Then he said to me, ‘Prophesy to these bones, and say to them: O dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God to these bones: I will cause breath to enter you, and you shall live. I will lay sinews on you, and will cause flesh to come upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and you shall live; and you shall know that I am the Lord.’ -Ezekiel 37:1-10

This passage from Ezekiel has been on my mind for most of the last year. God gives Ezekiel a graphic vision of the power of God to restore and bring new life. I believe this same God is moving in our world today doing exactly that: restoring and bringing new life.

We need our God to breathe new life into these bones.

We are hearing a lot about membership decline in the church. We know that church life changed dramatically during the recent pandemic. We feel it in the financial struggles in our church and in many churches across the country. There is a lot of depressing news. And we need to recognize these trends and move on them. This state of the church is hard to process. We used to think that if we create a vibrant, loving, friendly church, people would just come. Now, all that we do takes more effort, patience and intention.

We need our God to breathe new life into these bones.

I see the movement in God in the lives of the people who do find their way to the Cathedral. I have heard stories of individuals who felt the pull of the Spirit to walk through our doors. I hear it in the journey of adults seeking baptism, connection to God, a community of faith, a place to belong, a way to share with others. God is out there in our city, in all cities, moving and transforming hearts and lives. How ready are we when God directs them to our doors? How ready are we to point the way to God? God is not only working in the lives and hearts of those outside our doors. God is working as diligently with us within the walls as well.

We need our God to breathe new life into these bones.

It is so good to see people new to the congregation stepping up and volunteering with Christian formation, youth and young families, with Food Pantry and Church Unbound. We have good energy around small groups, Daily Prayer and Adult formation. I am continually blessed and lifted up by the music and worship in our Cathedral. The choir gives so much to us by opening up the way to God’s heart through voice and instrument. I know God is drawing all of us to go deeper into this walk with Jesus and our walk with each other. There is always more to do! Yet. Some of those who have volunteered for many years are tired and weary. Some of those who come to church are worn down by the world and have nothing more to give. Some have weathered conflict and change and hurt and are not sure they want to be here.

We need our God to breathe new life into these bones.

Please pray with me during the season after the Epiphany, as we get ready for Lent and Holy Week. Pray with me that God breathes new life into all of us: into our thinking and the prayers of our hearts, into our congregation here at St. John’s, into the Diocese of the Rio Grande, into the lives of our neighbors and friends. This God of ours never ceases to bring life out of death. We need only to join in.

Merry Christmas and Happy New Year! We are nearing the very end of our Christmas season. Tomorrow is the Feast of the Epiphany, which marks the end of Christmas and Sunday is the Baptism of our Lord. Christmas at the Cathedral was marvelous! I have many thank you to share with you. The church was gorgeous thanks to the work of the hands of our Altar Guild and Sacristans. The music for Advent, for both services of Lessons and Carols and Christmas Eve was sublime thanks to Canon Dr. Maxine Thevenot, Edmund Connolly, the Cathedral Choirs and the guest musicians. A very special thank you to harpist Emily Levin who joined us for Christmas Lessons and Carols and the Christmas Eve services. Thank you to our Ushers, Lectors and Acolytes. Thank you to Mary Jewell and all those who helped with or participated in the Children’s Pageant. We had a great turn out for all the services. And, I am so glad we have so many little ones growing up at the Cathedral.

December started off with Advent Lessons and Carols. It was a blessed way to begin Advent. We had a packed church for the Children’s Messiah and then for Christmas Lessons and Carols. Many people from the community joined us for these special services. Our community Christmas event, Breakfast with Santa, was also very well attended. Thank you to all who made these connections to our community come together. Lori Van Note and Sara Nerbetski headed up the Angel Tree team. This congregation made Christmas happier for 85 children. Thank you to all who bought presents, helped to organize the gifts and then distribute them. I am very grateful as well for the Cathedral staff who worked behind the scenes to make all of this possible. And, thank you to our regular volunteers who kept the Thrift Shop and the Food Pantry continue to support the most vulnerable. I am also thankful for those who support the ministry to the homeless and for those who volunteer with Deacon Greg at Church Unbound.

Also in December, we celebrated Our Lady of Guadalupe with a Mariachi Band and flowers for our Lady. Around 40 people came to worship and stayed for tamales afterward. We are planning to host several events this coming year that celebrate our Hispanic community. Our next one is a celebration of Cinco de Mayo in May. Other times of worship unique to December included a Blue Christmas communion service. Blue Christmas is a time dedicated for those struggling with grief during the holiday season. We were also very glad to host the Albuquerque Academy’s Concert Choir in December, directed by Edmund Connolly. They offered a wonderful mid-day concert prior to our monthly Requiem service.

We hosted the Diocese of the Rio Grande’s annual service for our local saint, The Rev Ted Howden, on Dec. 10th. Thank you to our choir volunteers who participated in lifting up this important feast day. There were many people from the community who knew the Howden family in attendance as well as members of his family. Army Chaplain, The Rev. Bruce Newland, preached about sacrifice and following Rev. Howden’s example. We had a couple of additional guest preachers, the Rev. Debra Asis and the Rev. Meg Hunn, on Sunday mornings during Advent. It was so good to hear their perspectives on preparing for Christmas. The Rev. Meg Hunn will be leading a special intergenerational forum this coming Sunday on Epiphany at 10am.

Cathedral Small Group Ministry’s all read the same book: former Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan William’s book, “Where God Happens.” Cindy Davis’s group organized a Prayer Vigil for Peace in December as well. They are planning on offering this time of prayer once a month on a Wednesday night. Keep an eye out for information regarding what is coming in the New Year with our Small Groups! The two groups I am leading will begin again on January 17th. I am leading a book study on Wednesdays at 2:30pm, either in person or on Zoom. We are starting off the year with Rachel Held Evans book, “Inspired: Slaying Giants, Walking on Water, and Loving the Bible Again.” Please see Martha Ernest in the Gift Shop if you would like a copy of any of the books studied in the Small Groups. The Bible survey class continues with our journey through Genesis. We will also begin on Wednesday, January 17th at 4:30 pm, also with the hybrid option. Everyone is invited to join.

I am looking forward to this New Year! We have some great events happening in January, beginning with an Epiphany Brunch this Sunday, hosted by our own Maryb Erwin. The Lotus Sound Bath will be on Monday, January 8th at 6:30pm. Annual Parish Meeting will be on Sunday, January 28th, following the 11am service. Please come and bring a dish to share for the potluck lunch. We will be thanking those who are going off Vestry, electing new members, hearing from our Treasurer about the budget and sharing plans for new things for 2024.

Thank you to all who make this congregation a place of sharing God’s love, making lasting connections and growing in our Christian faith.

Walking into our Third Week of Advent

The third Sunday of Advent is December 17th. We will light a candle for joy. Joy is something that is deeper than happiness. It seems that happiness is fleeting and dependent on our circumstances. Joy is a gift that can reside in our hearts regardless of our highs or lows. Guard your joy! The world will try to diminish the gladness that comes from God. Yet, it is that same joy that shines in the darkness and brings hope.

Our journey with #Adventword continues as we drawer nearer to Christmas. Today, Friday, December 15th, our word is “Hasten.” We know that God’s time is not our time. Yet, we call on God to hasten God’s coming into our world. We hope that God will hasten that kingdom of peace on earth. We wait and long for God to come quickly. In the meantime, we are the ones who should hasten to work for peace, feed the hungry and care for the sick. The words of comfort from our God, we should continue to spread.

Tomorrow, Saturday, December 16th, the word is “Begin.” So many things are ending so that new things may begin. Fall is ending and Winter is beginning. School semesters are finishing, so the new semester may begin. Wherever there is an ending, there must be a beginning. I think Advent invites us to consider ending those things which are not fruitful in our lives, in order that there is space for something new to grow. And, if you are feeling far from your faith, now is the time to begin again.

Sunday, December 17th, the word is “Spirit.” If we look carefully, the work of the Spirit is everywhere. The Spirit is present between the giver and receiver of love, existing in that liminal space, entering our souls, refreshing our hearts. The Spirit moves through the generosity of our words and actions. It is in our intentional work to bring God’s grace to this world. The Spirit illumines our hearts in prayer and deepens our wisdom. I pray for the Spirit to be present whenever I read from the Bible, as the Spirit brings out words and phrases I had missed before. Pause today and allow the Spirit to guide you somewhere new or deeper in your life today.

Monday, December 18th, the word is “Repair.” I often think of repairs in connection to buildings, roads, houses. Seems like there is something in the physical world that always needs to be repaired. Unfortunately, things that have broken down will not fix themselves. This is also true for broken pieces in relationships that need repairing. For just about everybody, there are lapses in communication, harsh words spoken in anger, judgmental attitudes, prejudices and betrayals. God is in the balm we need to heal those broken places. God is ever eager for us to repair our connections to each other. Are there relationships in your life that need your attention to repair and reconciliation?

Tuesday, December 19th, the word is “Give.” You may have found in your life that among its other benefits, giving expands and transforms the soul of the giver. I have heard this many times from those who go out to bring communion to people unable to come to church. We might start out thinking that the person to whom we go will receive the benefit of our visit. But, often, the giver comes out the most blessed. It is an honor to give of our selves, our lives, our treasure to others. Giving creates new pathways in our thinking and in our hearts. Consider-when have you been blessed by the giving of a gift?

Wednesday, December 20th, the word is “Dream” There is a lovely children’s Bible written by Archbishop Desmond Tutu. All throughout the stories of scripture, rewritten for children, he weaves a message of God’s dream. God’s dream is for all people to be treated with love and kindness. God’s dream is for all humanity to live in peace and to seek after God’s heart. These dreams of God echo throughout the Bible. They should also resound in our lives and actions. What do you dream for yourself? What do you dream for the world?

Thursday, December 21st, the word is “Laughter.” Martin Luther King Jr. uttered these words: “It is cheerful to God when you rejoice or laugh from the bottom of your heart.” Laughter changes our outlook on the day. It releases tension and stress. Laughter helps us to connect to those around us. I imagine God’s joyful laughter joining ours when we are struck by something funny or silly. I wonder if God laughed with creation as the animals began to walk on the earth. Rejoice and laugh on this day with the knowledge that God rejoices and laughs with you.

Friday, December 22nd, the word is “Quench.” The woman at the well spoke with Jesus about water. Jesus told her that he could give her living water and her thirst would be quenched. Of course, the woman was intrigued and wanted that water. She did not understand at first that Jesus was referring to the deep waters of the Holy Spirit that quench our deep thirst for God. Are you thirsty for God? Are you trying to quench that thirst in other ways? Will you seek after and find this living water?

Saturday, December 23rd, the word is “Ponder.” It says in the Gospels that after hearing the words of prophecy regarding her son, Jesus, Mary pondered these things in her heart. At the time, the heart was considered to be the innermost center of our being. Ponder the coming of Jesus in your own heart. Ponder this amazing love come down to earth. This love came down even though we had not earned it. Our loving God breaks through the darkness and despair and offers unconditional love. Ponder this love in your innermost part of your being. Ponder and make ready for the Prince of Peace, the Son of Righteousness, Emmanuel, God with Us.

Blessings,

Dean Kristi

Walking into our Second Week of Advent

The second Sunday of Advent is December 8th. We will light a candle for peace. This year, in particular, I am hoping for a world that embraces peace. We pray continually for an end to war and conflict, in particular for the Ukraine and for the Holy Land. Sometimes peace in our own lives is elusive. Our families or extended families may be in conflict with each other. We may be battling with people at work or fighting health concerns or feeling far from God. I hope that through prayer and reflection we all may find a deeper peace that is not dependent upon our outward circumstances.

Our journey with #Adventword continues. Tomorrow, Saturday, December 9th, the word is “Awake.” I picture several things when I ponder this word. I think of being awakened by my boys when they were small on Christmas morning. I also remember feeling very unawake. I think of new leaves and sprouts awakening in the springtime. But most, I hear God’s voice calling us again to open our eyes and our hearts to all the good things that are happening around us. Awake and participate in the life of Christ in a new way, perhaps by brushing off the cobwebs and dust of our practice of faith.

Sunday, December 10th, the word is “Glory.” The phrase that always jumps to mind for me is from a hymn we sing at Easter, “All Glory, Laud and Honor to thee Redeemer King.” Things on this earth can be glorious: sunsets and vistas, the birth of babies, finding the perfect person to marry, feasts with friends, music and worship at church. The list is endless. Scripture also refers to humans as moving from glory to glory when we die and join God in heaven. We too are glorious! We have the ability to perceive, remember, manipulate, create, design, organize and lead. We can sense things that are unseen. We carry hope. These are no small skills. But all of these glorious things are nothing compared to the One who created us. To God be all the glory.

Monday, December 11th, the word is “Herald.” Who has brought you tidings of joy and comfort? Who has brought you things that are difficult to hear? Where were you when you heard of a momentous or calamitous event? Heralds of any kind of important news bring out an emotional response in us. We may be glad or joyous or frightened or angry or heartbroken, depending on the message. God’s heralds brought messages of God’s desire for us to return to God. A herald brought the news to Sarah, Elizabeth and Mary that they were to have babies marked by God in a special way. They brought messages of joy in the birth of Jesus to shepherds on a hill. What message is God giving you this season?

Tuesday, December 12th, the word is “Valley.” It seems in reading Scripture, mountains and high places are considered better places to meet God. Those mountaintop experiences tend to stay with us long past our time on the mountain. But we have many more moments in the valleys. Some valleys are lovely and peaceful. Other valleys in our lives make us feel that we are far away from God and we are trudging through life. But, even though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, God is with us. In all our highs and lows, God is with us.

Wednesday, December 13th, the word is “Truth.” The most straightforward definition of truth: the quality of being true, genuine, actual or factual. Our current world often makes it difficult to discern what is true and what is false because so much is clouded by people’s prejudices, opinions and motivations. We sometimes are led to believe certain “truths” because we get to hear only part of the story. And some people present a facade that hides their true self. I think discernment needs to accompany most of what we hear and read today. What I believe is true is that God loves us completely and forever. That truth resounds in my heart without a doubt. What are the truths that are most important to you?

Thursday, December 14th, the word is “Patience.” Remember when you had to wait for something that you were really excited about? Was it a party or experience or your first car or to hear an offer for a job, a house, a date? Did those life experiences teach you patience? I don’t think many of us are born with an innate ability to be patient. Not many people are comfortable with delayed gratification. Yet, God’s movement among us is slow. Prayers are not answered as quickly as we would like. Church growth takes time. Spiritual growth takes time. We need to practice waiting, not with an anxious heart, but with patience.

Friday, December 15th, the word is “Hasten.” Yes! Right after patience, we get hasten. We want God to hasten the answer to prayers and quickly transform the brokenness of the world. I think God would have us hasten instead. We are to move quickly to answer the needs of those around us. We are to be quick to pray and seek after God. May we learn that balance!

Next Friday I will offer to you the words for the next week. Take some time each day of Advent to ponder these words. I would love to hear what speaks to you. You can follow what I post each day on Facebook or Instagram (1967Kristina).

Blessings,

Dean Kristi

Getting ready for Advent….

The first Sunday of Advent is December 3rd. We will light a candle for Hope. This year, in particular, I am hoping for a world that embraces peace. We pray continually for an end to war and conflict, in particular for the Ukraine and for the Holy Land. I hope you will have a moment to slow down and spend some time pondering this time of expectancy. Part of my discipline for Advent is to reflect on a word of scripture everyday and write a brief reflection. I will be sharing these again on social media on the words provided by #AdventWord. Adventword was begun by the Society of St. John the Evangelist 10 years ago and is now maintained by Forward Movement. Since not everyone is a social media follower, I thought I would let you know of the words for the coming week.

Our journey through Advent begins on Sunday, December 3rd with the word “Wind.” This word connects me to the wind that breathed life into the dry bones in the valley of the prophet Ezekiel. Where in your life do you need the wind of the Spirit to come and renew things dead or dying in your heart? Where in this world are you hoping for the breath of God? We watch the wind carry away the leaves that have fallen to the ground. Where are our leaves?

Monday, December 4th, the word is “Hidden.” We keep many secrets hidden away in our hearts. We hide disappointment and bitterness. We hide our weaknesses and worries. Now is the time to open our hearts to God’s grace-to the One for whom nothing is hidden anyway. And, perhaps now is the time to speak our often hidden faith out into the world.

Tuesday, December 5th, the word is “Presence.” Consider all that surrounds you. How are you present in the moment to the people in your life? How present is God to you in your daily routine? Advent is the perfect time to begin practicing the intention of inviting God’s presence in to every moment of our day. It is also a wonderful time to pay attention to where God is working in your heart and in the lives of those around you.

Wednesday, December 6th, the word is “Peace.” Peace. How we long for peace! It is so frustrating and heart breaking to be living in a world that seems determined to be the opposite of peaceful. I think of the beginnings of Genesis when the world is depicted as being a peaceable kingdom and of how short that vision lasts, even in Scripture. Bringing peace to our own hearts is a place to begin. Are there battles within you that need to be calmed? Are there conflicts in your family or at work? What can you do to be a bringer of peace? Where do you find peace?

Thursday, December 7th, the word is “Grace.” One definition of grace is the free and unmerited favor of God. God’s love manifests itself as grace. It is by grace that we are forgiven. It is by grace that we are able to forgive. Grace is what draws our hearts to God and what holds together the broken pieces of our hearts. Grace fills us with wonder at the beauty of the world. Grace leads us home.

Friday, December 8th, the word is “Watch.” This word reminds me of the ancient city gates where the guards for the city would stand watch. The people inside would have a layer of protection from invading armies because those who watch would sound the alarm. And, they would keep the gate shut. Also, the watchers would be on hand to open the gates to those approaching with good intentions, heralds of news from afar, gifts brought as tribute, merchants with things to sell. Many times we are reminded in Scripture to watch for the coming of God-to keep the gates of our hearts open to the good that God brings.

Next Friday I will offer to you the words for the next week. Take some time each day of Advent to ponder these words. I would love to hear what speaks to you. You can follow what I post each day on Facebook or Instagram (1967Kristina).

Blessings,

Dean Kristi

October and November have been very busy months at the Cathedral. The last Sunday in October, Bishop Michael Hunn was at the Cathedral for his official visitation. He baptized, confirmed and received 5 people. He preached and presided at all services and came with the Dean to Church Unbound. We also met in the afternoon for a Cathedral Chapter meeting with the members of the Vestry and with those serving on the Chapter from around the Diocese. We had a conversation regarding the composition of the Chapter and its possible role for both the Diocese and the Cathedral. This is an on-going discussion-no decisions have been made.

In November, the delegates, wardens and Dean travelled to El Paso for Diocesan Convention which was held at St. Alban’s in El Paso. Discussions at Convention included the future of the church and the potential sharing of resources. The Bishop had shared several possible models for ministry that had been used in the past. He spoke of Preacher Lewis, who was an itinerant preacher in the early 1900’s. Convention passed a resolution to promote the dignity of all immigrants and a proposed mandatory retirement age change from 72 to 75. Both of those resolutions will be sent for consideration to the General Convention of the Episcopal Church that will be held this summer in Louisville, KY.

We had an excellent opening of the Gallery Show in November. We inaugurated the new pay kiosk - which was very helpful. Thanks to Collette for getting the software up and running. The Gallery sold over $3000 worth of artwork on that Sunday. About $550 comes back to the church for Gallery expenses. The current show includes works from the New Mexico Watercolor Society.

We have also said farewell to Canon Spencer and his husband Lucas. There was a lovely turn out for their reception following the 11am service on November 12th. The Altar Guild presented Spencer with a beautiful stole made in New Mexico. Thank you to Sandra Stevens for organizing this! He also received gifts from the Cathedral, the Godly Play, Rite 13, the Choirs and from many individuals. Thank you to everyone who brought desserts and food for the reception. We wish them the best at the National Cathedral. Many thanks to Helen Wertheim for hosting the party at her house for Spencer and Lucas on Monday the 13th.

The Cathedral Pastoral Care Team met this week to provide updates on our homebound parishioners. We also made care bags to be delivered in December. We are looking for a few more people who would like to serve as Lay Eucharistic Visitors or as folks who can make phone calls to our homebound. I also met with Julia Kinkel to discuss Small Groups during Advent. There will be an opportunity to sign up for a special Advent series this coming Sunday in the Gallery. The groups will be reading the same book: Also coming this Sunday-the names for the Angel Tree will be available as well in the Gallery.

A few changes: the Bilingual Service will no longer be offered every Saturday. The current plan is to offer 3 major feast day Eucharists throughout the year: Our Lady of Guadalupe in December, Cinco de Mayo in the spring, and Dia de los Muertos in November.

February 23rd, 2024: We will be hosting a screening of the documentary on the Philadelphia 11. This movie tells the story of the first women ordained irregularly in the Episcopal church in 1974. We will have the screening followed by a Eucharist co-celebrated by women priests of the DRG.

The Dean’s Book Group is reading Bishop Charleston’s book, The Four Vision Quests of Jesus. In this book, he takes us on his journey to reconcile his Native American traditional beliefs and his Christian faith. This book is often challenging. We hear about the struggles, desperation and grief of the indigenous people during the time of expansion. We also learn of the similarities and differences between his traditional approach to God and our Christian approach. One of the most intriguing thoughts that he presents is on the nature of sacraments.

Particularly in the Roman Catholic and Episcopal traditions, we look on sacraments as being the outward sign of an inward and spiritual grace. We recognize 2 major sacraments in which all people should partake: Baptism and Holy Communion. These two were directed by Jesus to those early disciples as being of primary importance. Jesus said to go forth and baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. He gave them the example of the Holy Communion at the last supper and instructed them to do this in remembrance of him.

We also recognize 5 other sacraments: Holy Unction (blessing of the sick), Ordination, Marriage, Reconciliation and Confirmation. All of these have an outward sign. In Baptism, it is the water that is poured over the head and the oil that marks the sealing of the Holy Spirit. In Communion we receive the signs of Christ’s body and blood in the consecrated bread and wine. For unction, ordination and confirmation, we also use oil to anoint. For reconciliation, the outward sign is the pronouncement of the forgiveness of sins by the priest or bishop. A marriage service has many signs that point to the joining of two people: the vows, the giving of rings, the tying of the knot with the stole and the final blessing. All these sacraments are done within the context of community, although reconciliation and unction might be between as few as two people, the priest is the sacramental agent of the congregation.

I have written before about the importance of the community gathered for communion. We, the people, offer our prayers before God and cause the bread and wine to be mysterious transformed into the body and blood of Christ. In baptism, we mark the official beginning of a spiritual journey with Jesus. But the persons who are baptized continue to grow in their knowledge and love of Jesus through the congregation. Since the revisions of our Book of Common Prayer in 1979, the liturgy of baptism went from a private, family event to one that is celebrated in community. To nurture and grow in Christ, we need the prayers, encouragement and wisdom of other Christians!

Bishop Charleston recognized that the communal dances of Native people were also a sacrament. He writes, “Dance is the embodiment of the people’s faith in God. It is how God is worshipped and glorified. It is the outward and visible sign of the inward and invisible grace that the Creator shows to every tribe and nation.” P 63 Episcopalians are not about to partake in a liturgical dance, I don’t think. That is not our expression, normally, of our praise and worship of God. But, what I find helpful to ponder, is the recognition that God’s grace is working through the liturgical expression of all those communities who truly seek after a connection and relationship with God. We do offer in our sacraments something truly unique to those who follow Jesus: we offer the tangible presence of God in the form of consecrated bread and wine. Jesus not only gave us this sacrament: he became the sacrament. For this I give thanks.

The Lord is close to the brokenhearted and saves those who are crushed in spirit.

Psalm 34:18

Watching the news the last week has been heart breaking for me. It seems wars and conflicts are happening more and more. I am worried about the war between Israel and Palestine. The war between the Ukraine and Russia has continued for over a year and a half. These are the two conflicts that are mostly in our news. But, more than 45 armed conflicts are currently taking place throughout the Middle East and North Africa in Cyprus, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Libya, Morocco, Palestine, Syria, Turkey, Yemen and Western Sahara. Afghanistan, Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Libya, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Syria are all currently experiencing civil wars, resulting in significant casualties and displacement. This list does not include the countries torn apart by drug cartels, terrorist groups and other forms of violence. I hear many people asking, “Where is God?” For all those who are displaced or wounded or grieving or hungry, it is easy to imagine that they wonder the same thing.

I believe that in times of conflict or pain or crisis, for individuals, for groups, for countries, God is very close. God is in the strength to survive. God is in the hope that still remains in our hearts for a better future. God is present in the relief of those bringing aid to those who are hungry and hurting. God is action in the hands that lift others up and in the feet of those who bring comfort. God is in the surgeon’s skill and the healer’s hands. God resides in our prayers. God is the light in the eyes of those who talk peace and redemption and reconciliation. God is where enemies are forgiven and new friendships are formed. God walks with all of us who journey through the trauma of death and violence, living among the prisoners, the desperation of the exiles, the exhaustion of the soldiers, the loneliness of grief. God gives sustenance to the soul and purpose to those who want to give up.

If you are looking for a way to pray for the Middle East, I found this prayer to be helpful.

God of mercy and compassion,

of grace and reconciliation,

pour your power upon all your children in the Middle East:

Jews, Muslims and Christians,

Palestinians and Israelis.

Let hatred be turned into love, fear to trust, despair to hope,

oppression to freedom, occupation to liberation,

that violent encounters may be replaced by loving embraces,

and peace and justice could be experienced by all.

- Reverend Said

In your own life, I pray that you would know the closeness of God.

Dear Cathedral Family,

2023 inaugurated our 100th year as the Cathedral of the Diocese of the Rio Grande. St. John’s was founded in 1882. In 1920 we became the provisional Cathedral of the diocese and in 1923 this designation was made official. St. John’s has been an integral part of downtown Albuquerque as it has grown and changed. The congregation made it a priority to stay where they were planted, not moving to the more prosperous areas outside of the city. I think this is a powerful legacy that informs who we are today and why we remain an essential spiritual lifeline to this neighborhood and to the larger diocese.

Why are you at the Cathedral? The why’s for me are many. I am spiritually uplifted by the worship that happens every Sunday, at Evensong, through Morning Prayer on Facebook, or whenever we gather to praise God. I am challenged by events like the Voiceless Mass that push us to think how we have fallen short of the glory of God historically, particularly toward indigenous people. I appreciate that we are a diverse community, having a table big enough for those of all races, all genders, all political backgrounds and economic status. (Our Vestry developed a lovely phrase that sums this up: we shun none.) I am thrilled that we reach out into the community through the Food Pantry, the Thrift Shop and Church Unbound. I am also very proud of how the Cathedral offers a continuation of the great Anglican tradition of choral music and hymnody, while also being a place to try new musical expressions. It is a place where my heart is at home among the good people of this congregation, as we worship, learn and care for each other.

All the ways we reach out to our members and those in the community happen because of your generosity. I give thanks for all of you every day. Thank you for being faithful to God and to this extension of God’s kingdom on earth. Thank you for caring for others through your financial resources. Thank you to those of you who give of your time to serve others and share your talents to our benefit. Thank you also for your prayers. There are times that I am certain that this community has endured and grown because of the constant prayers of behalf of individuals and for St. John’s. Thank you for your care of each other. We can be generous because God has been so generous in giving to us.

Yes, this is a letter about stewardship. It is not just about money. I recognize the many ways people give to the church, through time, talent and treasure. Please prayerfully consider what you can offer to God through the ministry of the Cathedral. Enclosed with this letter is a worksheet for you to use to consider all the ways that you give back to God. Pledge cards will be mailed out later this month. November 29th is our ingathering of all our commitments for 2024.

In Christ,

The Very Reverend Kristina Maulden, Dean

As we leave summer behind, I am already looking ahead to the many events of fall, winter and the New Year. I have found a new season here in New Mexico-Balloon Fiesta season. I love the cooler air, the brilliant sky and the sight of balloons going up all around me. It lifts my heart, always. I have been pondering other things that lift my heart, because it seems there is so much that weighs me down. Everyday there are more acts of violence, more political chaos, another storm, another disaster. My soul needs time to recharge focussing on things that are life giving.

Maybe this is true for you as well? What gives you spirit joy? For me, this includes sky watching, gardening, reading a good book, being a part of beautiful worship, spending time in prayer and being around people who do my heart good. One of those groups of people who are a source of life to me are those who come and share their thoughts and stories at my book group on Thursdays. (Small group gatherings are so important!) We are currently reading Bishop Steven Charleston’s book, The Four Vision Quests of Jesus. In it Bishop Charleston explores the connections between his two identities: that of being a Navajo and also a Christian. Within this book, he lays out for us the Navajo tradition of a vision quest and how this connects to the Christian life.

Early in the book, we encounter his examples of what a vision may be like. He says that visions are really meant to be shared, but our culture does not take these spiritual realities seriously. Mostly, we keep our spiritual encounters to ourselves. But, he insists, the sharing of our visions and dreams and deep moments of connection are really the life blood of community. He asks us to talk about our visions, God moments, Holy Spirit pushes, etc. He asks us these questions: What did one of our earliest visions look like? When did it come to you? How did it appear? Where were you? What were you doing? Did you recognize it as a vision right away or did you have to grow into it? What images helped you? What words did you hear in a holy voice? What colors were there? What living creatures shared your experience? How did you carry the vision with you? In our group this past week, we all shared one story, answering these questions. People shared of defining moments, significant dreams, being enfolded in God’s presence, moments of invitation and things that have remained perplexing or visions whose meanings continue to unfold.

These stories lifted my spirit. It is so good to hear how God breaks through in the lives of us ordinary people. I shared with the group a vision I had regarding the Cathedral. I had intentionally asked God to give me a glimpse of what we should be about. God showed me a mango. During that time of thinking and visioning, I was reminded of the best way to consume a mango. Cutting a mango: make sure the stem in on top and cut vertically all the way down about 1/4” off the midline. Make another cut 1/4” on the other side. Open the two halves, and score the flesh of the fruit into cubes being careful not to cut through the skin. After you score the fruit, you can push the fruit out, basically turning the mango inside out. This was the image I had for us-pushing all the good things, our ministry, our liturgy, our music-out for those on the outside of our congregation to consume. For me, this was the inspiration behind Church Unbound, our street ministry that brings some of our goodness, out into the world where many people live without a faith community. But this is not the only way to move on this vision.

The thing about visions and sharing is that we can all help interpret each other’s visions and dreams. We find deeper meaning in conversation with other people than we may find on our own. Someone in our group mentioned a fact about mangos that I didn’t know: they are the sweetest fruit on our planet. No wonder God showed me a mango with regards to the Cathedral! I hope that we all might learn how to share our dreams and visions with each other on a regular basis. And may God lead you into places of joy and refreshment as we head into the busy season of fall.

As many of you may have heard, I have been out of the office and missing on Sunday due to unplanned gall bladder surgery. I am recovering well and am glad that surgery is in the past. I wanted to say a huge thank you to all of you! I felt up-lifted in prayer the entire time. Thank you for your prayers, cards, well-wishes, offers of food and support. I am blessed to serve within such a caring family of faith. Thank you as well to our Cathedral staff, for Father Spencer and for our Vestry who carried on with all the good things that were planned for the beginning of September. In particular, thank you for all who helped with the Ministry Fair on September 10th! I was so sorry to miss the return of the choir and the Altar Guild big clean day. I know it all carries on without me-but I wanted to be here among you all.

On the subject of communal prayer, I wanted to share with you some thoughts on the importance of gathering together. In our Anglican tradition, we have an understanding of Eucharist that may be different from what you may have learned in other denominations. First, we believe that the bread and the wine have been altered-infused with the real presence of Jesus. After the prayer of consecration, we refer to the bread and wine as the body and blood of Christ or “elements.” Because we believe that these elements contain the real presence of Christ, we treat them we extra care.

Back to the reason why communal prayer is so vital. Some people may have the idea that it is the magic hands of the priest that create these elements. It is not. The bread and wine are consecrated through the prayers and faith of all the people gathered. We all lift up our hearts, praise God, offer our lives to Christ and join in the Great Amen every time we celebrate communion together. Partaking of the consecrated elements joins us all together in communion with God. This is not done by an individual-it is done through a gathering of people. You are a vital part of the Eucharistic prayer. In a sense, we are the Eucharistic prayer! We are there with vulnerable hearts, remembering all God has done for us, desiring forgiveness and belonging, thirsting after a deep, abiding connection to the Holy. We carry each other in prayer to this Table set for all of us. I think this is why we have the admonition in Scripture to forgive each other before we come to communion.

This Sunday, I am so glad that I will be with you in person. I look forward to seeing your faces and hearing your voices. I give thanks to God for the advances of modern medicine! I am looking forward to offering prayers with all of you, changing that which is ordinary into the extra-ordinary. We are one Body in Christ-in prayer, in thought and in communion. I hope that if you are able, you will come and join us!

Blessings and Peace

So many ministries are essential for making church work. I am looking forward to celebrating all the many ways our Cathedral shares in the call of Jesus to care for each other at the ministry fair on Sept. 10th. Last Sunday, we highlighted an essential ministry-our ushers. The ministry of ushering is a crucial part of worship because it is one of the most visible ministries in the church. Ushers set the tone for parishioners and visitors as they enter the building. They are the first point of contact for many people who are new to the church. In Christ, you have received God’s unconditional love, and, in Christ, you are called to extend that same unconditional love to others. Although an usher’s love is no stronger than the love found in the whole congregation of the body of Christ, nevertheless the usher performs a major role in ensuring that people see and experience that love.

Usher duties are pivotal in making people welcome at church, assisting with seating, collecting the offering and maintaining a safe environment. Ushers can be male or female, older or younger. It is wonderful to see the children of ushers helping out with their parents at the 9:15 service! As an added benefit, ushers form a community within the church. Last Sunday we recognized those who have served at the Cathedral over the years. A special thanks to Jeff Albright who has been the organizer of the ushers for many years. Jeff and his wife, Beth, are in the process of moving to the east coast. They will be greatly missed! Thank you as well to Sandy Veltkamp, in particular, who wrapped up the usher gifts and wrote the thank you notes.

Thank you to our ushers: Doug Adkins, Ashby Albright, Jeffrey Albright, Kathy Andrews, Elizabeth Bayne, Larry Bennett, Madeline Black, Roger Black, Clay Campbell, Ken Davis, Martha Ernest, Mary Erwin, Paul Garson, Joanne Gray, Jeff Greathouse, Mark Hallemeier, Rossanna Hays, Meg Hunn, Dosie Hunn, David Kauffman, John Lovejoy, Dawn Madden, David Martinez, Zack McCormick, Carol Miller, Stephen Montoya, Kay Moses, Andy Murray, Sara Nerbetski, Ben Pathekis, Bruno Pathekis, John Pathekis, Lisa Shibata, William Sly, Allan Stevens, David Stinchcomb, Sandy Veltkamp, Karen Wallace and Janet Wilson. Flowers at the Altar were given in memory of ushers: Alan Andrews, Bill Bayne, Tom Bowling, Robert Brooks, Elaine Dickson, Marilyn Fifield, Dick Forbes, Murl Moore, Denise Phillips, Ann Stinchcomb, Don Tallman, Carol Trelease. The flowers are also given in honor of Gary Barragato and Bill Hays and others who are unable to be with us but we carry on our hearts.

Please let me know if you would like to be part of this important ministry.

I am still pondering all the moments from the recent journey to England. This time I wanted to share with you a bit about Rochester Cathedral. It was consecrated in 604 AD and founded by St. Justus. The weight of the years of faithful prayer and worship hang in the air. At one time, colorful mosaics and murals covered the walls and ceilings of the Cathedral. It would have been a stark contrast to the lives of those who worshipped or made pilgrimage there. However, almost all of the wall art was white washed during the Reformation. Reformers felt that religious art led to idolatry. Some rejected the idea that people learned about the Christian life through paintings, stained glass windows and sculpture. Many reformers felt the people needed to be taught only through sermons and by receiving the sacraments. Today, if you look closely, you can see the faint traces of what used to be.

On one wall at Rochester, half of one mural was spared, as it was blocked by furniture. This mural is a depiction of the christianized Greek goddess Tyche or the Roman goddess of good luck and Fortune, Queen Fortuna. The early Cathedrals often gave nods to the rituals and practices of the local people, giving them an invitation into the church without the necessity to immediately leave their old practices behind.

Queen Fortuna is an example of this. The idea of luck and fortune in life have given rise to questions for every generation. There are the questions about why bad things happen to good people. Or, why are some people more lucky in life than others? Why are some people wealthy and other people poor? Why does life make dramatic turns to the better or for the worse? The Greeks and Romans thought these changes to fortune to be under the direction of a goddess. She is often depicted next to a wheel. (This is the inspiration behind the gameshow, Wheel of Fortune.) At the bottom of the wheel are the least fortunate and at the top are the most fortunate. But, that wheel can turn at any time. Those on the bottom may make their way to the top. And, those at the top could move to the bottom. In Christian contexts, this image was used to remind those at the top to use their positions responsibly, as life is capricious.

Often Queen Fortuna is pictured with her eyes blindfolded. Luck comes and goes randomly, without preference to position or rank or ability. This is different from the contemporaries of Jesus who felt all bad luck or ill health or poverty was the result of someone who had sinned. Jesus was adamant in stating that God did not work that way. Like humans in every age, we can often get caught up in an entrenched way of thinking, sometimes to our detriment. Therefore, it is very helpful to intentionally draw on different strands of thought to help us wrestle with topics like fate and luck, but also God, humanity, purpose and so much more. This is why I think it is important to listen to the wisdom of traditions that are outside our own. The early church understood this. Maybe we can reclaim it.

July 27 marked the beginning of a wonderful journey to England with the Cathedral Choir. There were castles, cathedrals, churches and crypts. It was delightful to be immersed in so much beauty and history. And…to hear our choir sing and lead worship at Hampton Court Palace, Rochester Cathedral and Canterbury Cathedral was fantastic. On more than one occasion, I was told that our choir was one of the very best. Many words of thanks to our Canon Precentor, Canon Dr. Maxine Thevenot and the members of the choir for representing us so well and exceeding all expectations.

There are many moments that I would like to share with all of you that were significant to me. I had hoped to find those thin places, where God’s presence seems more tangible and the heavens press in. One of those places was actually in a church, St. Mary in Castro or St. Mary in the Castle. St. Mary’s is a church on the grounds of Dover Castle, in Kent, south-east England. It is a much restored Saxon structure, built right up to a Roman lighthouse which became the church bell-tower. St Mary serves the local population and the army, and is the church of the Dover Garrison. The present church was originally built around 1000 AD, likely on the site of another church that was in existence since 600 AD.

Walking into that church, I was immediately struck by it’s beauty and a most powerful presence of prayer. It felt to me as if the prayers of hundreds of years had formed a permanent and tangible atmosphere of God’s loving care. I remained in that space for a longish time, feeling called to add my own prayers to those conversations between God and untold numbers of others. St. Mary’s was and is the church for members of the Dover Garrison. I was struck by the altars given over to prayers for soldiers, past and present. So many fervent prayers must have been said in that space, prayers for deliverance, protection, healing, forgiveness, restoration. Maybe it is hope that clings to the walls and hangs in the air.

In a side chapel, a prayer was provided for anyone to use while lighting a candle. It follows the shape of the Our Father. It is called: Praying with Christ.

Eternal Spirit, Life-Giver, Pain-Bearer, Love-Maker, Source of all that is and that shall be, Father and Mother of us all, Loving God, in whom is heaven.

The Hallowing of your Name echo through the universe!

The Way of your Justice be followed by the peoples of the world!

Your Heavenly Will be done by all created beings!

Your Commonwealth of Peace and Freedom sustain our hope and come on earth!

With the bread we need for today, feed us.

In the hurts we absorb from one another, forgive us.

In times of temptation and test, strengthen us.

From trials too great to endure, spare us.

From the grip of all that is evil, free us.

For you reign in the glory of the power that is love, now and forever. Amen.

I hope that this prayer resonates with all of us as we join our voices with all those who have gone before us, calling on Jesus who intercedes continually on our behalf. May the power of God’s presence be known to you this day.

Blessings,

Dean Kristi

Next week, July 28th, the Cathedral Choir begins a choir tour to England. I have the honor and privilege to accompany them on this deep dive into our tradition and connection to places sacred to our tradition. Our Canon Precentor, Dr. Maxine Thévenot, has been working to make this choir tour possible for 5 years. It was postponed twice due to Covid. Many choirs travel oversees to sing in residency at cathedrals in England. But, it is a particular honor to have been invited to sing at Canterbury Cathedral, one of the oldest and most famous Christian holy places in England. It is a member of the World Heritage Sites and is the cathedral of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Our choir has also been invited to lead services at Rochester Cathedral as well. Canterbury was founded in 597 AD and Rochester in 604 AD. These invitations are a direct reflection of the superb quality of our Cathedral choir and of its talented and dedicated director.

These sacred sites have witnessed turbulent times in the world and in the church. They have been filled with prayer and worship, day after day, for centuries. Canterbury is a particular pilgrimage destination, as it is the location of the martyrdom of Thomas Becket, who was Archbishop of Canterbury from 1162 until his death in 1170. He engaged in conflict with Henry II, King of England, over the rights and privileges of the Church and was murdered by soldiers of the king within the walls of Canterbury Cathedral.

While there will be some opportunity for sight-seeing, the choir will be in rehearsal a good part of most days. They will be singing Saturday evening Evensong and Sunday morning Eucharist at Rochester Cathedral on July 29th and 30th. At Canterbury, they will be singing evensong on July 31st, August 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th and 6th. And will sing the Choral Eucharist on August 6th, which is the Feast of the Transfiguration. The Choir has also been invited to sing a concert at Hampton Court Palace on the first day of the tour, July 28th. If you would like to find these services online, here are the links to those websites: Rochester: https://www.rochestercathedral.org/worship-online Canterbury: https://www.canterbury-cathedral.org/worship/our-services/online-worship/#clergy-videos

Anthony, Richard and I will be leaving for England on Wednesday, July 26th and returning on August 7th. While I am gone, please contact Canon Spencer Brown for any pastoral needs. Our Junior Warden, Sara Nerbetski, will be the contact person for any issues regarding the regular running of the Cathedral. Deacon Greg Bussey will be preaching on July 30th and Canon Michael Perko will be our guest preacher on August 6th. I am looking forward to this time of connection to our history as Anglicans and to spend time in these holy places. Please pray for the choir and those accompanying them over the next couple of weeks. Blessings and peace to all of you!

“Prophesy to these bones and say to them, ‘Dry bones, hear the word of the Lord!’ ” -Ezekiel 37:4

We hear the story of the Valley of Dry Bones from the Old Testament prophet Ezekiel every year during Holy Week. Ezekiel stands with God looking at the place where an army lies long dead, only the dust of their bones remaining. This scene’s intensity lies not only in God’s promise in the resurrecting of those dry bones, but in the symbolism behind this collection of dryness and death. These bones represent the lost hope of Israelites who have been living in exile. They have been torn from their land, their people and their God. The impact on their spirit’s was devastating. They believed themselves to be chosen, protected, children of covenant and promise. Instead they are lost.

God never forgets a promise. Nor is anything or anyone beyond God’s redeeming love. In the face of brittle hope and the emptiness of an absent seeming God, Ezekiel is brought as witness to restoration and a restored vision. God says to him, “prophesy.” It is God’s Spirit who comes and restores those dry bones, but it is through the agency of Ezekiel’s voice, calling them back to life. God’s work embraces humanity not only as an object of action, but as those who are subject to God’s power working through them. Could God have raised up those bones without Ezekiel? Absolutely. But God’s grace often comes because an ordinary human has the courage to call new life into being. Often, or maybe always, the human agent is also transformed in the process.

I cannot imagine that Ezekiel was left unchanged by the power of speaking life into a place where there was only death. We too have that power to speak life and call on God’s power to transform all the dry places in our lives. I would call this time in history a perfect time for us to intentionally do so. As you pray, think about the places of dry bones that need God’s Spirit. We may think first about our own souls that need that refreshment! But there is so much more out there. I think of the heat that is blanketing parts of our country, heat that is drying out and consuming life. I think of fires devastating our neighbors in Canada, the smoke destroying lungs, the loss of property and vegetation. The earth itself needs our prayers. We call out what we see, we call on God’s power to heal and we participate in that healing.

I see power in this manner of prayer for all the hopeless places in our lives. We pray for those whose lives are lost through violence. We pray that those who are so angry or lost or vengeful will have those desperate feelings transformed by the power of life and love. We speak truth. We prophesy. We pray. And, I believe, we hope for the hopeless, giving bread to souls who are starving. In this we are never alone. In exile, God spoke and breathed a way forward for the Israelites. God has never stopped loving, reconciling, renewing and resurrecting all those who inhabit this earth. Nor has God finished with God’s call to Ezekiel. It is our vocation now to tell the dry bone: hear the word of the Lord.

This past spring I had an opportunity to visit with one of our parishioners and her mother, both of whom are Diné. I came by their home to say prayers for healing and to do a house blessing. I brought with me Anglican rosaries as gifts. We had made them in the most recent Adult Confirmation Class. During my visit, I asked if they would like to pray using those rosaries. Before we began, we talked about the difference between the Roman Catholic Rosary and the Anglican one.

If you have ever prayed the Roman Catholic rosary, you likely prayed the same prayers that have been used for centuries. The forms for using a Roman Catholic rosary are very well defined. The journey around the beads includes the Apostle’s Creed, the Our Father, Hail Mary and Glory Be. As you meditate in prayer, you may focus on one of the 4 mysteries: the Joyful, the Sorrowful, the Luminous or the Glorious. These mysteries bring to mind various moments in Scripture and the prayers have a calming rhythm. I remember my Grandmother offering up a decade of prayers from her well worn rosary anytime we went anywhere. She prayed the rosary for God’s protection over us, for safety and good health.

Unlike Roman Catholic rosaries, Anglican rosary practice encompasses a wide range of approaches. The use of Anglican prayer beads is intended to be simple and very flexible. The one using the beads may design the pattern of prayer as they like. It may be that you pray a verse of a Psalm at each bead. It may be a repetitive prayer, such as a breath prayer, like “Jesus, remember me, when you come into your kingdom” or “Father, forgive me, a sinner.” You can change up the prayers and petitions as you like. There are also lovely patterns of prayer already prepared for anyone to use, in book form or in pamphlets or on the internet.

I love using prayer beads. The feel of each bead in my hand or the outline of the cross helps connect me to God in prayer in a very focussed way. The repetition of prayers comforts me when I am anxious or too stuck inside my own head. I like the flexibility of choosing my own way. There is one thing about following the directions (or suggestions) for an Anglican rosary, is that it is typical for the prayers to move to the right around the rosary. You begin at the cross, move to the larger cruciform beads, and then start praying the cluster of 7 beads, called “weeks” moving to the right.

When I began to pray with those Diné women, one of them stopped me as we moved to the right around the bead string. She said, “Do we have to pray to the right?” I never really payed that much attention to the importance of direction. So, I asked if there was a reason we should pray to the left. She said in her tradition, people enter the place of prayer in single file, coming in clockwise, or to the left. We then restarted our Anglican rosaries and moved to the left-acknowledging wisdom that comes from outside of our Anglican tradition. As we prayed, I had a vision of people entering that place of prayer. Each bead became for me a voice lifted, a life lived, a prayer offered. At each larger bead, the older woman added a prayer in Diné. This quiet time of prayer and sharing deepened my soul. The prayers of each of us mingled together and brought our hearts close, like the beads on a string.

I share this story as a reminder of being open to hear wisdom from those different than ourselves. It is a gift to learn and to grow across language, religious practice and culture. I pray that these opportunities would be frequent!

In Kay’s 