yea, noticed that, its a cute series i enjoy watching it. according to bracefacevideo.com it is still on until december but it is very outdated they still haven't even announced the turning 13 set and its the official video site...

and bracefacetv.com only shows airings for canada, but that could be because its the canadian website. At least they are giving us better dvd sets with 13 episodes instead of 3... that way the entire show will be done in 5 volumes, i hope they include the "banned" episodes.

not very high on my priority list though, but i would like to have them.

Honestly the US can be pretty picky in what they show you. In Canada I'm pretty sure Braceface has a solid "G" rating. They can get away with a lot on 6TEEN (Original Canadian show). That show probably won't go to the US like Braceface because they would be a lot of editing.

kimpossible1fan said:

They can get away with a lot on 6TEEN (Original Canadian show). That show probably won't go to the US like Braceface because they would be a lot oediting.

why would it need a lot of editing?

just asking because i just saw a commercial for it on Nickelodeon and that is where it will air.

Oh well. It was disappointing that they cut it off the air.

The Turning 13 2-disc set contains the first 13 episodes of the series, and it includes The Worst date ever. Period., the episode Disney refuses to air due to content. If you visit FUNimation forumsat http://communitydev.funimation.com, they have a seperate forum for Braceface. At the moment, I dont know if there will be another DVD set coming out soon, but it is definitely a huge possibility that more episodes will be released on DVD.

As for the movie, NO NO NO! Braceface was cancelled in 2003, and there was NO plan for a Braceface Movie. Although that would be neat, its not gonna happen.

So, lets hope FUNimation continues to release Braceface on 2-disc sets, and hopefully makes it to the US unseen episodes. 42 and above never aired in the US, so the only way we can see Braceface is through the DVD's. Go FUNimation!

Braceface is alright, not something I'd be a fan of, but it's pretty good. I haven't seen it in quite a while though. I suppose this is bad news that it's going off the air. It's on DVD, right?

sdp said:

why would it need a lot of editing?

just asking because i just saw a commercial for it on Nickelodeon and that is where it will air.

They've done episodes on getting PMS, drinking, and sex to an extent. It would be rated TV-PG more than likely if they kept it in its unedited form.

kimpossible1fan said:

Honestly the US can be pretty picky in what they show you. In Canada I'm pretty sure Braceface has a solid "G" rating. They can get away with a lot on 6TEEN (Original Canadian show). That show probably won't go to the US like Braceface because they would be a lot of editing.

6Teen has been on Turbonick for a month now, and just this past sunday (yesterday), 4 back to back episodes aired with no apparent editing. Many burps, farts, Your SEXY! terms, and much more. I'm suprised. Nick edits a lot on some shows, but its nice for a little change.