Braceface (2001) Season 1 is an animated television series that centers around a young girl named Sharon Spitz, who wears magical braces. However, these braces give rise to a lot of problems in her life, such as discharging electricity or operating machinery automatically. Apart from this, she also tackles adolescent problems.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Braceface (2001) Season 1 via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Braceface (2001) Season 1 available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Braceface (2001) Season 1 is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

In the series, picture day is approaching, and Sharon plans on getting her braces done. She visits the orthodontist, but a problem occurs. While getting her braces fit, a thunderstorm hits the city and the power cuts. Due to this, Sharon’s braces now have been graced with power, which is completely out of her control.

The voice cast includes Alicia Silverstone as Sharon Esther Spitz, Daniel Petronijevic as Adam Francis Spitz, Michael Cera as Josh, Tamara Bernier Evans as Helen, and others.

Watch Braceface (2001) Season 1 streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Braceface (2001) Season 1 is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

Aside from its originals, Amazon Prime Video also boasts premium content from other channels, such as HBO Max and Showtime.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

The show’s synopsis is as follows:

“The show, set in Elkford, British Columbia, is based around Sharon Spitz, who is a junior high school student with braces that get in her way of leading a normal teenage life. In the first season, she is enrolled at Mary Pickford Junior High.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.