Braceface is about the awkwardness of growing up, and no one knows that better than 14 year-old Sharon Spitz. She's a typical teenager who's going through puberty, but to make matters worse, she just got braces!

Braceface - Main Characters

Sharon Spitz - It's hard to be cool when your braces are a mouthful of trouble! While Sharon was sitting in the dentist chair, a fluke electrically charged her braces. Now, her braces get her into embarrassing situations, like attracting magnetic objects and tuning into cell phone conversations.

Maria Wong - Maria is Sharon's best gal pal. She's competitive, aggressive and loves to participate in extreme sports.

Connor MacKenzie - Connor is Sharon's other best friend. He's a science whiz and is known as "the walking sneeze" cuz he's allergic to almost everything!

Alden Jones - Alden is the coolest guy in school. He's into video games and sports and plays guitar in a band called Mangled Metal. He was Sharon's first crush and first boyfriend, but now they're just friends.

Brock Leighton - Brock is Alden's best bud. He thinks he's a ladies man, but the girls definitely don't think so!

Nina Harper - Nina is the most popular girl in school. She and Sharon used to be best friends in junior high, but now they're enemies. Nina even gave Sharon the nickname, Braceface!

Braceface - Fun Facts

Alicia Silverstone is the voice of Sharon Spitz and sings the theme song for Braceface.

Alicia Silverstone is also the executive producer of the show.

Alicia Silverstone became a vegan after watching documentaries on slaughterhouses. In Braceface, Sharon swears off meat after working a part-time job in the meat-packing business with Alden.

Unlike other cartoons, Braceface deals with realistic teen issues, such as puberty, divorce, peer pressure and shoplifting.

Braceface - DVD Set

Now, you can join Sharon and her gang on DVD with Braceface Volumes 1 to 3! Check out the first episode where Sharon gets strapped for braces and then worries what Alden will think of her new tin grin! Each DVD features character profiles, personality quizzes and other special bonuses like karaoke.

Braceface DVD Rating:

Related Stories:

W.I.T.C.H. TV Show Facts

Totally Spies TV Show Facts

Brandy & Mr. Whiskers TV Show Facts

Share It!

Like It!