Peter Yates, a British-born director whose best-known films were well-observed tales of Americana, including the car-chase cop thriller “Bullitt” and the coming-of-age, bike-race comedy “Breaking Away,” died on Sunday in London. He was 81.

The cause was heart failure, his wife, Virginia, wrote in an e-mail message forwarded by Mr. Yates’s agency, Judy Daish Associates.

Mr. Yates was nominated for two Academy Awards for directing, for “Breaking Away” (1979), an underdog-triumphs story in which four local teenagers in Bloomington, Ind., take on a privileged team of bicycle racers from Indiana University; and for “The Dresser” (1983), an adaptation of Ronald Harwood’s play about an aging theater actor and his long-serving assistant, which starred Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay. (Both films, which Mr. Yates also produced, were nominated for best picture as well.)

Still, Mr. Yates’s reputation probably rests most securely on “Bullitt” (1968), his first American film — and indeed, on one particular scene, an extended car chase that instantly became a classic. The film stars Steve McQueen as a conscience-stricken lone-wolf San Francisco detective, and the chase begins with him behind the wheel of a Ford Mustang in a slow, cat-and-mouse pursuit of killers who were in a Dodge Charger. It escalates into high-speed screeches and thuds on city streets and ends in a fiery blast on a highway.

The chase, often paired in discussion with a New York City counterpart from William Friedkin’s “French Connection”, featured McQueen doing some of his own driving: a camera placed in the car and peering out the windshield registers the violent shifts in the driver’s perspective as the car bounds in chassis-challenging fashion over San Francisco’s famous hills.

Mr. Yates’s grasp of the American landscape and American characters stretched from coast to coast. He directed Robert Mitchum as a small-time hood desperate to avoid jail time in the low-key crime drama “The Friends of Eddie Coyle” (1973), set in and around Boston; it was especially attentive to the local color and local accents of the George V. Higgins novel on which it was based. Among his New York-based films were “For Pete’s Sake” (1974) — a gag-laced farce set in Brooklyn involving the Mafia, a call-girl operation, cattle rustling and the brassy woman (Barbra Streisand) who gets mixed up in it all — and the 1983 suspense thriller “Eyewitness,” set in Manhattan, starring Sigourney Weaver as an ambitious television reporter following a murder story and William Hurt as an informant who may or may not be reliable.

“Breaking Away” and “Eyewitness” were both written by Steve Tesich, a Yugoslavian immigrant with whom Mr. Yates shared a shrewd appreciation of details that perhaps only foreigners might determine were peculiarly American. (Mr. Yates also directed an Off Broadway play by Mr. Tesich, “Passing Game,” in 1977.)

“Breaking Away” starred four actors who were unknown at the time (one was Dennis Quaid). They played local Bloomington-ites — or, as they were disparagingly known, “Cutters” — who lived in resentment of the rich college students annually invading their hometown. Mr. Yates and Mr. Tesich used them to illustrate American attitudes toward class, education, upward mobility, romance and athletic success.

The film, wrote Vincent Canby in The New York Times, “is so cheerful it almost hurts, but its cheerfulness is grounded in a true appreciation of certain so-called American values (pluck, perseverance, family ties) which, though idealized more often than honored, are a part of the way we see ourselves.”

Peter James Yates was born in England on July 24, 1929. Most sources say his birthplace was Aldershot, Hampshire, about 40 miles southwest of London, though his wife said in an email that it was the village of Ewshot, which is closer to the city. His father was in the military.

He attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, and he worked as an assistant director for, among others, Jack Cardiff, on “Sons and Lovers” (1960)and Tony Richardson on “A Taste of Honey” (1961). It was a 1967 film, “Robbery,” based on the 1963 English heist known as the Great Train Robbery, that impressed Steve McQueen and earned him the assignment to direct “Bullitt.”

Mr. Yates’s career was marked by a willingness to skip from genre to genre, and for a director with so many significant hits, he had an up-and-down career. Among his other titles, not all well-received, were “John and Mary” (1969), about an anonymous tryst that leads to love, which starred a youthful Dustin Hoffman and Mia Farrow; “Murphy’s War” (1971), a historical drama about a sailor (Peter O’Toole) bent on avenging the sinking of his ship by a German U-boat; “The Deep” (1977), an undersea thriller with Jacqueline Bisset, Robert Shaw and Nick Nolte; “Krull” (1983), a science fiction adventure, and “Eleni” (1985), an adaptation of the memoir by Nicholas Gage about his search for the Communists who executed his mother during the Greek civil war.

Mr. Yates married Virginia Sue Pope, a New Zealander, in 1960. She survives him, as do their son, Toby, of Los Angeles, daughter, Miranda Yates Brassel, of Brooklyn, and two grandchildren.