“I like a movie that has a beginning, a middle, and an end, in that order.”

Dustin Hoffman made John and Mary to try to prove he could be a romantic leading man. Peter Yates directed it to show he could make a film without cars. Why is Mia Farrow in it? The devil must have made her do it.

John and Mary is one of those films whose best scene is the first one, with the characters waking up after a night of sex and trying to make sense of where they are. Afterward, you keep hoping something interesting will happen, keep rooting for the likeable stars, but while Yates directs adequately, the script by John Mortimer, adapting a…

Starts out as a Dustin Hoffman mumblecore and I'm having a joygasm at the thought of Hoffman and Farrow the morning after meeting cute in a bar being intercut with the actual meet cute. John Mortimer's script was giving us their internal monologue as they realised that they've gone to bed with a perfect stranger who they might not like in the cold light of day, but then again they might just be the person they were looking for all along and Peter Yates directing with his usual careful observational scene construction felt like a perfect movie, despite some of the heavy handed attempts at discussing gender politics that seemed to be going on. But then the script starts to…

It’s basically a proto-mumblecore movie, so of course I like it. Sort of bizarre that a film starring Dustin Hoffman and Mia Farrow, and directed by Peter Yates, is practically unknown. It’s in full HD on YouTube, so even the studio that produced it doesn’t seem to care (or know?) about it. It’s good, kind of perfectly capturing the anxious inner ramblings of a neurotic mind, as both John and Mary overthink everything the night after they’ve met and slept together, constantly assuming every little thing by the other person is a calculated chess move designed to get the upper hand on them. Of course, this leads them to make their own calculated moves in order to get the upper…