Annie Chandler Melissa Claire Egan as Annie Chandler All My Children Portrayed by Melissa Claire Egan First appearance July 10, 2006 Created by Megan McTavish Profile Nickname(s) Psycho Annie

(by Kendall & Greenlee) Aliases Annie Novak

(maiden name)

Annie McDermott

(1st marriage)

Annie Lavery

(2nd marriage) Gender Female Born March 20 1978 Age 45 Occupation Currently Unemployed Residence Chandler Mansion

Pine Valley, Pennsylvania

Relationships Parents Walker Novak

(father)

Emma Novak

(mother; deceased) Sibling(s) Richie Novak

(brother; deceased) Spouse(s) Terry MecDermott

(2001-2006; divorced)

Ryan Lavery

(1st time; invalid)

Ryan Lavery

(2007-2009; divorced)

Adam Chandler

(11/9/09-present)

Romances Ryan Lavery

Aiden Devane

(dated)

Adam Chandler

(lovers; engaged) Children Emma Lavery

(daughter w/ Ryan)

Annie Chandler (née Novak previously; Lavery formally; McDermott) is a fictional character on the soap opera All My Children, who made her first appearance on July 10, 2006. Annie is portrayed by Melissa Claire Egan.

Character history[]

Annie Novak was born on March 20, 1978 to Walter and Emma Novak she is their first born. Not much is known of Annie's childhood all that's known is that it was hard for Annie growing up in the novak Home as a child. she divorces her ex-husband, Terry McDermott, when she learns that he has a penchant for seducing young teenage virgin girls. Fearing what Terry will do to their daughter, Emma, when she reaches puberty, Annie sues for custody, but loses thanks to Terry's impeccable record. Desperate, Annie kidnaps Emma and takes her on the run. With help from Erin Lavery and Jamal CudahyAnnie hides out from Terry and the authorities until September 2006 when Terry is killed by Jonathan Lavery. Prior to Terry's death, Annie mistook Jonathan's brother, Ryan, for Terry and shot him. Ryan survived the shooting.

Annie's ex-husband, Terry, as it turns out, is not Emma's biological father because Annie had been artificially inseminated (a DNA test had been done during her divorce from Terry and custody proceedings showed that Annie is not Emma's biological parent either). David Hayward tells Dixie Cooney that he has run a DNA test on Emma, and, lying to Dixie (in order to get her hopes up and to see him as a savior), finds out that Emma is actually Tad Martin and Dixie's lost daughter, Kate. Annie becomes angry at Dixie's belief that Emma is Kate, but refuses to take a DNA test because she already knows the results of the earlier DNA test done during her divorce from Terry, but does not tell anyone else of this. She later relents and another DNA test is done (without David's involvement, and which uses samples from Tad, Dixie, and Annie), which proves that Emma is not Kate. Relieved at the result, Annie then learns from Ryan Lavery (who has become her friend) that she may possess a DNA condition called chimera, which means that she has two sets of DNA. More DNA tests are run at various labs. Finally, one lab proves that Annie is actually the biological mother of Emma. In the process, Ryan and Annie become closer and go out on their first date. Annie confides to Kendall Hart Slater that she is falling in love with Ryan. Kendall is somewhat perturbed, because, before leaving, David tells her that Emma is actually Ryan's daughter as well. Kendall then sees Annie as a rival for Ryan's affections, even though Kendall is married to Zach Slater and has a son, Spike (conceived through artificial insemination with Ryan as well). Kendall asks her half-brother, Dr. Josh Madden, to run a DNA test to see if Ryan truly is Emma's biological father.

On December 28, 2006, Kendall learns that Ryan is indeed Emma's biological father, and faces a choice on whether or not to tell Ryan. Ryan, however, discovers that he is Emma's biological father, when he and Josh Madden drug Zach with truth serum. Ryan hesitates to tell Annie that he is the father of her daughter, but finally tells her the truth. He and Annie soon become closer.

Annie and Ryan consummate their relationship, and begin dating. She helps care for Spike while his mother, Kendall, is being stalked by the Satin Slayer, a serial killer. Ryan proposes marriage to Annie, and after some thinking, Annie gladly accepts.

On May 10, 2007, Ryan and Annie are married, but their reception is soon brought to a halt by the police, who arrest Ryan on charges of bigamy. Unknowingly, he had wed Annie when he was still technically married to his estranged wife, Greenlee Smythe. But Annie has her own secret — one that if she tells anyone, she fears that she will be as hated as Greenlee is.

On August 15, 2007, Annie visits her estranged father, Walter, for help with Spike. He sends Annie to her mother's grave. When she gets to her mother's grave, she breaks down in tears, telling her mother that she is sorry. Annie later reveals her secret to Ryan — that she had her brother, Richie Novak, sent to prison in order to protect her family. Her parents would not believe her that he was a danger, and she had to act fast. This act of having Richie imprisoned is what caused the rift between her and her father. It is not long after telling Ryan this secret, that Annie hears of her brother being in town and that he has held up Babe Carey and a new guy in town named Wes at a bar called The Comeback. When "Richie" later turns up dead, and Annie has to identify the body, she informs all in the room with her that he is not Richie; that the dead man before her is not her brother. After seeing that the man has a fresh tattoo on his neck identical to that of the signature tattoo in which Annie described her brother having, and he stayed only three cells down from the real Richie while in prison, Chief Of Police Derek Frye comes to the conclusion that the real Richie Novak had a man imitate his appearance in order to taunt Annie. Ryan decides to get Annie out of Pine Valley for her own safety, fearing that her brother is out for revenge against her. They leave Emma in Zach and Kendall's care. While away, Ryan fiddles with a computer-generated image of Richie; the image depicts Richie with long hair and a beard. Ryan slowly chips away at the hair and the beard. By the time that he is done, Annie has appeared at his side and exclaims, "Oh, my God... That's Richie. That's my brother." Once back in town, the two do all they can to battle Richie and his schemes, which one after another are targeted at Annie.

Downturn to murderer[]

Ryan and Annie's marriage becomes strained when Ryan loses his memory, exactly four years of his life and does not remember Annie or Emma, or his son Spike. He believes that he is in love with Kendall, and starts connecting with Greenlee again as well, which makes Annie jealous.

Annie seemingly becomes desperate to regain Ryan's love. After suffering a fall at home, she then lies to Ryan, claiming that someone broke into her house. She does this after realizing through past experiences with Terry, Richie and Greenlee, that Ryan is closest to her when she is going through a crisis. Recently, Ryan has started to remember part of his past with her.

Annie goes on to ask her brother, Richie, to get rid of Greenlee since she still believes that Greenlee is going after Ryan. Richie instead kidnaps Babe, with whom he has long been obsessed. With the help of Kendall and Greenlee, Babe is freed. Later that evening, tired of all the damage that her brother has inflicted, Annie murders Richie by striking him in the head with a tire iron. She tries to cover it up, and tells police chief Jesse Hubbard that Zach Slater wanted to kill Richie anyway. This puts a further strain between her and Kendall & Greenlee, whom to she is still making threats to stay away from Ryan. After becoming stressed by Zach from asking questions about Richie's death, she collapses and is taken to the hospital where Ryan finds out he never had his vasectomy, and she is pregnant. When she overhears, Colby Chandler, Cassandra Foster, Dre Woods, and Peter Cortlandt talking about running over Richie, Annie realizes that they did this after she killed him, and she begins to plot to frame them for the murder.

Soon Annie finds that Ryan is still in love with Greenlee and gets a restraining order against Ryan and begins to plot to kill Greenlee. Later Annie sneaks out the window of her bedroom and gets her gun and attempts so kill her. But before she can she gets a stomach cramp and is rushed to the hospital later to find she has miscarried her child.

If Annie confesses to Richie's murder and goes to jail, the custody of Emma will be given to Ryan. She agrees to see a psychiatrist in order to get full custody of Emma, thanks to Zach. During a meeting with him, she blurts out that she killed her brother. After realizing what she had said, she took it back. However, during the custody hearing, she asks that Ryan gets custody. Annie is angry at Greenlee for taking her husband and now her daughter. Zach knows that Annie killed Richie and sets her up in a new place.

Annie and Aidan Devane plan the kidnapping of Emma Lavery to get their husband/wife back. Annie has Di take Emma so that Ryan and Annie can "work" on their marriage. Di soon discovers that Annie has actually reported Emma missing. Figuring she was intended to take the blame, Di pulls a gun on Annie. The two struggle for the gun and it goes off, fatally wounding Di. With the help of Jesse, Ryan and Annie find Emma and save her from a burning church. When they return home, Ryan tells Annie that he knows that she was behind the whole kidnapping. Annie pulls a gun on Ryan and tells him that he will lose everything. After being talked to, Annie gives up the gun only to have it turned on her by Greenlee. She moves away from both of them and jumps from the balcony. She then appears at Wildwind where she sits at a table and imagines that Ryan, their friends, and her are all eating Thanksgiving dinner and are happy. David Hayward comes and is knocked out only to be found by Ryan and Jesse.

Her next appearance is made at ConFusion. She dresses up in a blood spotted wedding dress and walks into a room with all of the Pine Valley residents. Annie believes that she is marrying Ryan again but holds a bloody knife. Ryan asks Annie who she hurt and the camera flashes to Erica. She is committed to Oak Haven. She believes herself to be Emma and escapes from Oak Haven and returns to Ryan's home. She is still sick and picks up a weapon to attack Greenlee. Ryan intervenes and he is knocked out. She is then taken back to Oak Haven by Jesse and police officers.

As time goes on, Aidan takes notice of Annie's psychiatrist's, Dr. Sinclair, suspicious behavior. She seems determined to see Annie locked up for her crimes. Soon, Ryan realizes this and has Tad dig up information on her past. It turns out she was Richie's psychiatrist in prison for a time period and had developed a romantic relationship with him, this being the reason she was terminated. After finding out Annie murdered the love of her life, Dr. Sinclair becomes hellbent on revenge. She even tries to manipulate Annie into confessing to Richie's murder. However, once her true intentions are revealed and she realizes she has blown her cover, a desperate Dr. Sinclair attacks Annie with a syringe filled with poison. Aidan comes to Annie's rescue and Sinclair herself gets stabbed with the needle instead, and is taken into custody. Dr. Sinclair confesses to everything, exonerating Annie. Annie is grateful for Aidan's act of nobility.

Once Annie finds out that Ryan and Greenlee are getting married in Connecticut, a hurt Annie escapes Oakhaven and follows them. There, she confronts Ryan with a gun, determined to hold on to him. However, Aidan shows up and convinces Annie to put the gun down and to finally let go of Ryan. He tells her if she comes back to Oakhaven, he will continue to help her through her recovery. Annie makes some progress in her mental recovery, thanks to Aidan. As she and Aidan grow closer, it comes clear to Aidan that he has romantic feelings for Annie, but it is uncertain on how Annie feels. Annie and Aidan end up being together, despite Annie being a mental patient.

Annie now has a new doctor named Dr. Burke. Annie has been seeing a girl, named Tori come into her room, and talk to her. Aidan cannot see her, so he begins to worry about Annie. Tori talks to Annie about birthday parties, and Richie, and other things, things about Annie. Annie has been having nightmares about her 7th birthday party, and Aidan is becoming more worried. Aidan does some digging into Annie's past, and finds that a little girl, named Tori, was murdered by Richie. Annie also figures this out, and has made an amazing breakthrough.

Upon being transported to a new psychiatric facility, with the help of Aidan, Annie escapes. With a fake ID and passport, she and Aidan plan on leaving the country. However, Ryan happens upon them at a motel and manages to catch Aidan, while Annie gets away. For a certain amount of time, Annie hides in the Maldives. Unable to live without her daughter, she returns to Pine Valley, with no one, not even Aidan, knowing of her return.

On the night that everyone in town is gunning for Adam Chandler at his mansion, Annie is also there after discovering that Emma is spending the night there. With a gun in hand, she shows up at the Chandler mansion, looking for Emma, at the time that Stuart Chandler, Adam's twin, is mistakenly shot. It is soon discovered that, after finding Emma, Annie ran into Adam, who was delirious and very ill, and took him up to the attic, where she helped him get better. Then she turned herself in.

While in prison, Annie is stabbed by a fellow inmate. She is rushed to Pine Valley Hospital where Adam, having remembered bits and pieces of that night, finds her and offers to help her, in exchange for saving his life. Seeing this as an opportunity to fight all the charges against her and see her daughter again, she agrees and lets go of Aidan. She goes to court and Adam offers for her to live with him. The judge agrees and she moves in under house arrest.

After Adam and Annie get engaged, Annie learns that she is free of her house arrest. Annie and Adam are married on November 9, 2009 before Adam collaspes from seeing his brother.

Crimes/Misdeeds[]

Crime/Misdeed Detail Perjury Claimed her brother, Richie Novak was mentally insane, which at a time he was not. Witholding of personal documents Kept evidence that Ryan Lavery's vasectomy did not happen Aiding a criminal Gave her brother, who was on the run money to skip town Murder Allegedly killed her brother, Richie Novak with a lug wrench in June 2008. No real evidence was recovered of the event occurring, other than by Annie Novak's own admission under duress. Framing/Blackmail Framed Colby Chandler, Cassandra Foster, and Dre Woods for the murder of Richie Novak after striking his body in the road. All three conspired to hide the hit and run incident, prior to Novak's attempt to frame them. Breaking and entering Broke into Greenlee Smythe's apartment in May and September 2008. Exhibited clear signs of a mental breakdown at the time of the September break in. Lied to the law Had a restraining order issued on Ryan Lavery, and claimed he hit her. Attempted murder Attempted to murder Greenlee Smythe with a gun, September 10, 2008. Exhibited clear signs of a mental breakdown at the time. Faux kidnapping Planned her daughter Emma's kidnapping and her own. (October/November 2008) Manslaughter Involved in a struggle for control of a gun with Di Henry in which the gun accidentally went off on November 17, 2008. Attempted murder Stabbed Erica Kane on November 26, 2008. Exhibited clear signs of a mental breakdown at the time. Assault Choked Erica Kane on July 2, 2009

References[]

[]

Annie Lavery's Official ABC Profile

Annie Lavery at soapcentral.com

Template:All My Children