Rapper Raul Conde, an artist under Fat Joe's Terror Squad Entertainment, has died. He was 52.

Multiple news outlets reported Conde's death after countless hip-hop stars shared the shocking news through their tribute messages online.

Fat Joe, who founded the record label in 1997, and DJ Khaled joined the growing list of people who have since expressed their heartbreak over the loss.

Raul Conde Dead at 52

On Instagram, Fat Joe shared a carousel of photos featuring himself alongside the late rapper. He called Conde the most loyal person who he loved more than his own biological family.

"My Condolences to the CONDE FAMILY ty for letting us have RAUL for all these years i can tell you not a moment in my life i won't love and cherish every minute every second I've had with RAUL. i want everyone to wish my brother a safe passage to Heaven cause he loved GOD SO MUCH," he continued.

Meanwhile, DJ Khaled did the same before writing, "Love you my brother @raul.ts you are very rare you the definition of a true brother friend . U always wanted to see everyone win . RAUL I LOVE YOU BROTHER !."

Erica Mena, Timbaland, DJ Nasry and Cool & Dre's Dre Lyon soon shared their respective messages online.

They did not disclose the details regarding his cause of death; his family has also yet to share an official statement to address the loss. However, The Sun reported that Conde died from a heart attack.

READ ALSO: Rapper Canserbero's Real Cause of Death Not Suicide? Authorities Suggest He Was Probably Killed

Who Was Raul Conde?

Conde, who shared son King Javien Conde with Mena, caught himself in the middle of hot water when the reality star accused him of being physically abusive to her during their relationship. She disclosed the story at a domestic abuse rally in 2013.

Meanwhile, a video of Mena attacking Conde also surfaced.

In 2014, the pair seemingly patched things up by posting a family photo after attending a Miami Heat game.

Conde established his career in the industry after releasing hit tracks through the years, including "Lean Back" with his group Terror Squad. The song secured a spot on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 for three weeks.

Aside from being a rapper, he expanded his knowledge as a video director.

READ MORE: Tony Bennett Dead: Singer's Daughter Reflects on 1st Thanksgiving Without Her Father

© 2024 MusicTimes.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.