Hey everybody, I am pretty much a total noob at taking care of cichlids. I have had my salvini for about 6 months now. My questions are about his coloring. When I got him, he looked like all the pictures I have seen (bright yellow and red). Over the time I have had him, his yellow and red have darkened. He has also Gotten a lot of blue on him.I have seen pictures of many salvini with blue on them, but he seems to be darker than what I have been able to find. I guess my real questions are weather he looks healthy and is it possibly some hybrid. He is about 4.5"-5" Thanks in advance for any help/info you can give me.

Most Cichlids Dig and i Dont know much about salvini's. I had one like 6 months back and he had a lot of blue after about 2 months of having him. but i am not to sure someone will Chime in soon that can give you a answer

Thanks. I actually just got a small female for Christmas. I was kind of scared to do it since all the rest of the fish in the tank are so much bigger than what I could find locally. Also for some reason I was only seeing males at all of my LFS. Since putting my little 1.5" female in with my 2 male Firemouths and the male Salvini, she has been doing great. She runs roughshot over my dithers and manages to avoid the drama between the males. I hope she brings some more color out in my male, but if not I like the blue on him anyhow. Here is a pic of my new female, and one of the firemouths. I am mainly concerned with their health, and looks are secondary. Mostly I am wondering if my fish look healthy.

Sorry my pics aren't the greatest, I just have an old point and shoot camera and not much of an idea how to take good aquarium photos.

He looks good. Darker colors can be indicators of stress or being sub-dominant as mentioned. However, he appears to be in great shape and it may have more to do with your aquascape and lighting. Many cichlids color will vary with their surroundings. My salvini have always had more of a base color similar to the new one you got, with very pronounced red on their sides.