Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, the former Tunisian president, who has died in Saudi Arabia aged 83, was seen in the West as one of North Africa’s more enlightened despots; in the eyes of his own people, however, he was a ruthless and corrupt tyrant. He was deposed in 2011 in the first of the wave of popular uprisings which became known as the Arab Spring.

By comparison with its immediate neighbours, Tunisia under Ben Ali was seen in the West as an oasis of political and economic stability and a bulwark against Islamic fundamentalism.

Despite its lack of natural resources, Ben Ali managed the economy of his small nation of 11 million better than most other North African and Middle Eastern states, championing reforms that drew in foreign investment and tourism and more than trebled per capita income, from $1,201 in 1986 to $3,786 in 2008.

A report published by the Boston Consulting Group listed Tunisia as one of the African “Lions”, and the 2010-11 Global Competitiveness Report ranked Tunisia first in Africa and 32nd globally out of 139 countries.

Some of his reforms were progressive: education was improved, with a third of young Tunisians going to university; women were given more freedoms in the market place, and a special fund for the underprivileged and a new social security system helped to slash the country’s poverty rate from 7.4 per cent in 1990 to an estimated 3.8 per cent in 2005.

He also made early moves towards democratic reform. Upon taking office he scrapped the title of “president for life” created by Bourguiba and limited the number of presidential terms to three.

But the true nature of Ben Ali’s vision of Tunisian “democracy” became apparent in the 1994 parliamentary and presidential elections, when opposition parties sanctioned by the regime won 2.25 per cent of the vote and Ben Ali, as the only presidential candidate, was re-elected with a thumping 99.99 per cent of the votes cast.

In subsequent years he consolidated his rule by muzzling the opposition, keeping strong control of the media and armed forces and gradually extending the number of terms he was allowed to serve under the constitution. In the country’s first “multi-candidate” presidential election in 1999 he won with an official majority of 99.44 per cent of the vote. He was re-elected to a fifth five-year term in October 2009, albeit with a comparatively paltry 89 per cent of the vote.

Behind the scenes, however, perceptions of Ben Ali’s regime were very different. A diplomatic cable written by Robert Godec, the US ambassador to Tunisia published on the WikiLeaks website, described Tunisia as a “Mafia” state in which: “President Ben Ali’s extended family is often cited as the nexus of Tunisian corruption. Often referred to as a quasi-mafia, an oblique mention of ‘the Family’ is enough to indicate which family you mean.

“Seemingly half of the Tunisian business community can claim a Ben Ali connection through marriage, and many of these relations are reported to have made the most of their lineage. Ben Ali’s wife, Leila, and her extended family – the Trabelsis – provoke the greatest ire from Tunisians. Along with the numerous allegations of Trabelsi corruption are often barbs about their lack of education, low social status, and conspicuous consumption.”

The reality was that the apparatus of repression laid down by Bourguiba had been fine-tuned and developed by Ben Ali into a vehicle for personal enrichment. A rumour doing the rounds on the Arab “street” held that two-thirds of the entire Tunisian population worked in one way or another for the secret police.

While this was no doubt an exaggeration, it is true that for many years Ben Ali, and more particularly his hated wife Leila (a former hairdresser whose shopaholic ways won her comparisons with Imelda Marcos), were able to siphon off huge sums of public money, install family members in influential positions and win them lucrative contracts and concessions, with no one daring to raise his voice in protest. So brazen were the Trabelsis by 2002 that Ben Ali called a family meeting. “If you want money, at least be discreet about it,” he is said to have told them.

But the unrest that toppled Ben Ali was as much demographic as political. One in five Tunisians was aged between 15 and 24 (compared with around one in 10 in Britain) and youth unemployment was at least 30 per cent, with joblessness high among university graduates, leading to a huge cohort of young people with too much time and not enough money – always a potential source of unrest.

The trigger for the events that led to Ben Ali’s departure was the death in January 2011 of Mohamed Bouazizi, a street vendor living in Sidi Bouzid. The previous month Bouazizi had set fire to himself in protest after police had confiscated the unlicensed vegetable stall that was his living.

His desperate act hit a nerve, sparked copycat suicides and focused public anger against the regime into a revolt which grew ever more determined in response to attempts at suppression by the police.

None the less, few Tunisians could have imagined that it would all be over so quickly. As soon as the protests reached the capital, Tunis, the crowds chanting “We are free, get out!”, Ben Ali’s days at the top were clearly numbered. Pale and trembling, he appealed to his people on television to let him stay for a little longer, first for three years, then for six months. “Not a day longer”, “Game over!” the crowds roared in reply.

On the night of January 14 2011 Ben Ali fled the country. He was rejected by France, which had supported him until the last moment, and his plane was eventually given permission to land in Jeddah. His wife, who was thought to have fled earlier, had reportedly gone to Dubai – a destination with which she was said to be well acquainted through shopping trips – taking with her 1.5 tonnes of gold bullion from Tunisia’s central bank.

Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali was born into a modest family in the east-central town of Hammam-Sousse on September 3 1936, when Tunisia was still a French protectorate. As a teenager he joined the national resistance to French colonial rule, for which he was temporarily expelled from school and imprisoned.

After leaving school, and after Tunisia gained its independence in 1956, Ben Ali studied at military academies in France and the US. His professional military career began in 1964 as a staff officer in the Tunisian army. During his time in the service he established the country’s military security department and served briefly as military attaché to Morocco and Spain before being appointed general director of National Security in 1977. From 1980 to 1984 he served as ambassador to Poland.

After his return to Tunisia, Bourguiba appointed him minister for national security in 1985, interior minister in 1986, then prime minister in October the following year. A month later, Ben Ali assumed the presidency after physicians to the former president filed an official report declaring Bourguiba unable to fulfil the duties of the presidency.

After Ben Ali’s 2011 flight into exile, the Tunisian authorities issued an international arrest warrant for the former president, accusing him of illegally taking money out of the country and acquiring property and other assets abroad. Two days later Interpol issued an arrest warrant for Ben Ali and six family members, including Leila.

Later in the year the former president and his wife were convicted in absentia for corruption, and in a subsequent trial Ben Ali was given a life sentence for his part in the killing of protesters; but Saudi Arabia ignored extradition requests.

He is survived by his wife, by their son and two daughters, and by three daughters by a first marriage.

Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, born September 3 1936, died September 19 2019