Demonstrators run as police throw tear gas during a demonstration in Tunis, Jan. 14, 2011. The stunning collapse of Tunisia's long-ruling president brought cheers from the streets and a wave of support from Arab communities and reformists around the world.

Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali (seen in a Nov. 7, 2011 file photo). The 74-year-old leader came to power in a bloodless coup in 1987. He took over from a man formally called President-for-Life, Habib Bourguiba, the founder of modern-day Tunisia who set the Muslim country on a pro-Western course after independence from France in 1956. Ben Ali removed Bourguiba from office for "incompetence," saying he had become too old, senile and sick to rule, and promised that his leadership would "open the horizons to a truly democratic and evolved political life." But after a brief period of reforms early on, Tunisia's political evolution stopped.

Thousands of angry demonstrators marched through Tunisia's capital Jan. 14, 2011, demanding the resignation of the country's autocratic leader. The violence in Tunisia flared after weeks of protests that initially focused on unemployment, sparked by the suicide of a young graduate who set himself alight on December 17, 2010. U.S. diplomatic cables recently released by WikiLeaks called Tunisia a "police state," and described the corruption there, saying Ben Ali had lost touch with his people. Social networks like Facebook helped spread the comments - to the delight of ordinary Tunisians who have complained about the same issues for years.

Tunisian security forces personnel clash with demonstrators in Regueb, near Sidi Bouzid on January 10, 2011. At least 35 people have been killed in rioting that erupted over the weekend, International Federation for Human Rights president Souhayr Belhassen told AFP.

The body of a Tunisian protester killed in clashes with security forces lies in the mortuary in a hospital in Tala on January 9, 2011. Eight people were killed and nine wounded this weekend in the deadliest incidents yet in a wave of protests in Tunisia sparked by food prices and unemployment, the interior ministry said.

Rioters desperate for jobs defied their autocratic president in escalating unrest. In this frame grab image taken from amateur video and acquired by APTN, protesters are seen amid a burning vehicle in Douz, Tunisia, Jan. 12, 2011, where a witness said there were two deaths at a protest there.

A woman holds a sign reading "Ben Ali assassin" as people demonstrate against the Tunisian President in Paris, Jan. 11, 2011. Under Ben Ali, most opposition parties have been illegal. Amnesty International said authorities infiltrated human rights groups and harassed dissenters. Reporters Without Borders described Ben Ali as a "press predator" who controlled the media.

At the chic Mediterranean resort of Hammamet, popular with Europeans and the country's ruling class, a police station was destroyed along with the local headquarters of Ben Ali's ruling party and several luxury villas. Here a video grab shows a fire at a residence said to be owned by a member of President Ben Ali's inner circle, January 13, 2011. The violence broke out after a peaceful protest march through the seaside town following the funeral of a receptionist from a local hotel, who was shot dead the eve when police fired on demonstrators.

A boy plays inside a bus which had been set on fire the night before, in the Cite Intilaka district, several miles from the center of Tunis, on January 13, 2011. Rioters burnt vehicles and attacked government offices late on January 12. Amid continuing unrest, the government was forced to impose a curfew.

Firemen removes debris from a burnt mall on January 13, 2011 in the Cite Ettadhamen district, several miles from the center of Tunis.

A Tunisian soldier stands guard in front of the Pasteur carrefour on January 13, 2011 in the Cite Ettadhamen district, several miles from the center of Tunis, where rioters burnt vehicles and attacked government offices late on January 12. Eight protesters were killed, a rights group said.

A man holds a poster showing a photo of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, "Down with the dictator in Tunisia," January 13, 2011, in Paris, during a demonstration against repression in Tunisia. A Paris-based rights group issued today a new death toll of at least 66 people killed in the unrest that flared in Tunisia after weeks of protests that initially focused on unemployment.

Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi (left) delivers a speech at the Chamber of Deputies in Tunis, during an extraordinary session assessing the current situation in Tunisia, January 13, 2011.

On Thursday, Jan. 13, 2011, the president went on television to promise not to run for re-election in 2014 and slashed prices on key foods such as sugar, bread and milk. The 74-year-old leader also admitted that he had mishandled a spreading wave of unrest and promised democratic reforms. Ben Ali also made clear that his forces should no longer use lethal force against demonstrators, after rights groups said at least 66 people had been killed. Yet Friday produced the largest demonstrations in generations.

People celebrate on Mohamed V avenue in Tunis after Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's address to the nation on January 13, 2011. Ben Ali said he would not seek another term in office and ordered police to stop firing on protesters as he sought to quell mounting unrest. The 74-year-old leader also admitted that he had mishandled a spreading wave of unrest and promised democratic reforms. Ben Ali also made clear that his forces should no longer use lethal force against demonstrators, after rights groups said at least 66 people had been killed. AFP PHOTO / FETHI BELAID (Photo credit should read FETHI BELAID/AFP/Getty Images)

Supporters of Tunisia's President demonstrate in Tunis, Jan. 13, 2011. President Ben Ali, in a televised speech Thursday night, also pledged to end Internet censorship and to open up the political playing field in a country where he has allowed little public criticism for the past 23 years.

General secretary of the opposition Progressive Democratic party (PDP) Maya Jeridi (center) shouts in front the Interior ministry in Tunis, after President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's address to the nation on January 14, in which he pledged not to seek another term. Thousands of Tunisians demanded the departure of President Ben Ali in marches in the capital and other towns.

A Tunisian demonstrator throws a rock during clashes with security forces on Mohamed V avenue in Tunis on January 14, 2011. Police fired massive volleys of tear gas and deployed troops in Tunis Friday to disperse thousands of demonstrators calling for President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to step down.

Tunisian demonstrators standing above the Interior ministry's main door in Tunis on January 14, 2011, wave their national country flag during a rally demanding President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's resignation.

"No to Ben Ali, the uprising continues," shouted Tunisians who took to the streets in protest.

Soldiers on an armored vehicle stand in front of demonstrators on Mohamed V avenue in Tunis on January 14, 2011. Police fired massive volleys of tear gas and deployed troops in Tunis Friday to disperse thousands of demonstrators calling for President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to step down. The police acted when reinforcements tried to join protesters gathered for several hours outside the interior ministry, sending crowds fleeing from the main Bourguiba Avenue amid choking clouds of gas, AFP reporters said.

A security force member fires tear-gas shells from a roadblock towards demonstrators on a street in Tunis on January 14, 2011.

Parisians demonstrate January 13, 2011 against repression in Tunisia. President Ben Ali attempted to hold onto power amid riots, declaring a state of emergency, dissolving the government, and promising new legislative elections within six months.

A Tunisian demonstrator holds a placard reading "Game Over" during a rally in front of the country's Interior ministry in Tunis on January 14, 2011, demanding President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's resignation.

People celebrate near the Tunisian embassy in Paris, January 14, 2011, after the announcement that Tunisian fallen President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali quit Tunisia following weeks of deadly protests. Signs read: "Tunisian people keep standing, the world is proud of you"; "Power to the people"; and "Tunisians, give the world hope again."

Smoke billows from a supermarket in La Gazella city, near Tunis, January 15, 2011. The army locked down central Tunis to prevent further protests. AFP reporters saw soldiers and plainclothes security personnel dragging dozens of suspected looters out of their cars at gunpoint and taking them away in trucks.

People take clothes from a looted store in La Gazella city, near Tunis, January 15, 2011. Some rioters appeared to be targeting businesses owned by members of Ben Ali's family, which had financial interests in a wide range of sectors, from banking to car dealerships. In Tunis, a branch of the Zeitouna bank founded by Ben Ali's son-in-law was torched, as were vehicles made by Kia, Fiat and Porsche - carmakers distributed in Tunisia by members of the ruling family.

Workers clean a train station damaged overnight in Tunis, January 15, 2011 in Tunis. There were scenes of looting overnight in the suburbs of Tunis, but the streets were mostly empty on Saturday, with shops shuttered and army patrols in the city center visibly stepped up.

A Tunisian army M60 tank stands guard on in Ban Saadoun near Tunis' center, January 15, 2011.

Parliament speaker Fouad Mebazaa waves in a car as he leaves the Tunisian National Assembly on January 15, 2011, after being declared by the country's Constitutional Council the new interim president, following the ousting of authoritarian ruler Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. All Tunisians "without exception" will be able to take part in national politics, Mebazaa said after swearing in. Saudi King Abdullah's palace confirmed Saturday that the ousted president and some family members had landed in Saudi Arabia, saying the kingdom welcomed him with a wish for "peace and security to return to the people of Tunisia."

Tunisians and supporters demonstrate in Marseille, southern France, January 15, 2011. As Tunisia's former colonial power, France has a large population of Tunisian origin and Tunisian immigrants.

Tunisians and supporters demonstrate in Lyon, France, January 15, 2011 after ousted Tunisian leader Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled the country with his family the day before. The posters show pictures of French-Tunisian Hatem Bettahar, a computer professor who was shot dead by police on January 12 in Douz, Tunisia.

Demonstrators carry mock coffins symbolizing those killed in Tunisia, in a march celebrating the end of the longtime Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, in Paris, Jan. 15, 2011. About 8,000 people marched in Paris to express support for Tunisia's people, hailing the "Jasmine Revolution" (referring to the scented flower common in Tunisia).

A man makes the V sign among groups of supporters as he demonstrates with Tunisians and Italian supporters in front of the Tunisian Embassy in central Rome, January 15, 2011.

A woman holds a banner reading "Hurray Freedom" as she demonstrates in front of the Tunisian Embassy in Rome, January 15, 2011.

Women hold up flags as they shout slogans during a demonstration in front of the Tunisian Embassy in central Rome, January 15, 2011. Western leaders called for democracy in Tunisia following the ousting of President Ben Ali, while other Arab countries were warned their turn could be next.

Demonstrators holds a placard reading, "Ben Ali assassin, France accomplice," during a demonstration of solidarity with Tunisia, in Marseille, France, Jan. 15, 2011.

Women hold banners as they demonstrate on January 15, 2011 in Paris, after ousted leader Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled the country with his family the day before.

Tunisians and supporters hold banners as they demonstrate on January 15, 2011 in Paris

A young woman demonstrates in solidarity with Tunisia, in Marseille, France, Jan. 15, 2011.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy is seen after a meeting on the Tunisia crisis with French Prime Minister Francois Fillon, January 14, 2010 in Paris. France, one of Ben Ali's closest allies, said the Tunisian people had "expressed their democratic will," in a statement from President Sarkozy's office.

Egyptians wave Tunisian and Egyptian flags outside the Tunisian embassy in Cairo, January 15, 2011.