Dolores Guinness was a German-born “Freiin”, socialite, fashion icon and jet set member of the 1950s and 1960s. She has been a member of the International Best Dressed List since 1970. Her mother was the Mexican-born socialite Gloria Guinness.

Dolores Guinness was born on July 31, 1936, in Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany. Her birth geographical coordinates are 52° 31’ 0” North latitude and 13° 16’ 60” East longitude. Dolores Guinness passed away at the age of 75 in 2012.

Astrologically, Dolores Guinness falls under the Sun sign of Leo, with Libra as her Ascendant, Capricorn as her Moon sign, and Libra as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Leo Moon Capricorn Mercury Leo Venus Leo Mars Cancer Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Pisces Uranus Taurus Neptune Virgo Pluto Cancer Ceres Scorpio Chiron Gemini Eros Virgo Hygiea Gemini Juno Leo Pallas Libra Vesta Gemini Ascendant Libra Black Moon Lilith Libra Midheaven Leo North Node Capricorn South Node Cancer Part of Fortune Pisces Vertex Taurus

Sunin Leo8° 2’ 14”

The Sun in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for assertiveness and charm. You are passionate and dynamic, using your strengths to […] Read more »

Moonin Capricorn4° 23’ 49”

The Moon in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you old-fashioned and emotional. You are compassionate and use your empathy to connect with others. You […] Read more »

Mercuryin Leo16° 1’ 13”

You are determined to make your case and can be enthusiastic and uplifting. You are sincere and can be assertive and genuine. Your intellectual gifts […] Read more »

Venusin Leo16° 54’ 22”

Leo Venus in the Natal Chart makes you bold and creative in love. You are attractive and popular, easily gaining attention. You are passionate about […] Read more »

Marsin Cancer23° 33’ 8”

Cancer Mars is an ideal placement for intense passion and nurturing. You are dramatic and focused, particularly on home and family relationships. You have a […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius14° 46’ 49”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Pisces21° 54’ 21”

Pisces Saturn in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that manifests empathy and healing. You work with others to bring fantasies […] Read more »

Uranusin Taurus9° 30’ 17”

Is Uranus in Taurus good or bad? Taurus Uranus brings generational awareness to shared values. You are part of a cohort that helps others awaken […] Read more »

Neptunein Virgo15° 7’ 9”

Neptune in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation known for bringing peace, harmony, and healing. You are gentle and can […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer27° 16’ 52”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Scorpio18° 42’ 56”

Ceres in Scorpio in the Natal Chart is an ideal generational placement for growth and perception. You are intense and can be obsessed with nurturing […] Read more »

Chironin Gemini21° 9’ 48”

Chiron in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to helping others understand their past wounds. You find healing and release when you […] Read more »

Erosin Virgo17° 34’ 6”

What is Eros in astrology? The asteroid of passion and sexual obsession can spike your libido in most cases. Yet Eros in Virgo in the […] Read more »

Hygieain Gemini26° 39’ 51”

Hygiea in Gemini in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective. You understand the importance of mental and physical health. You advocate for hygiene […] Read more »

Junoin Leo10° 0’ 53”

Juno in Leo in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about marriage and protecting your home. You are eager to pursue your love interests […] Read more »

Pallasin Libra23° 55’ 46”

Pallas in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you more aware of patterns and cycles related to fairness. You seek balance and see the beauty […] Read more »

Vestain Gemini21° 27’ 34”

Vesta in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you talkative and insightful. You are outgoing and can be playful. You find fulfillment by exercising your […] Read more »

Ascendantin Libra25° 47’ 58”

Libra Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you a peacekeeper. You lead with your ideals and see the best in others. You are optimistic and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Libra22° 52’ 35”

Libra Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you seductive and charming. You are creative and channel anger and frustration through your artistic gifts. […] Read more »

Midheavenin Leo4° 49’ 29”

Leo Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you encouraging and enthusiastic. You are determined to succeed, and your optimistic and playful nature will help you […] Read more »

North Nodein Capricorn1° 40’ 25”

Capricorn North Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to face your hardships and can bring challenges that lead you to evolve and grow. […] Read more »

South Nodein Cancer1° 40’ 25”

Cancer South Node makes you an ideal caregiver. You are maternalistic and can be empathetic and sensitive. You are attuned to your intuition and use […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Pisces22° 9’ 33”

Part of Fortune in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you spiritual and compassionate. You are most successful when sacrificing selfish ambitions to elevate others. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Third House Mercury Tenth House Venus Tenth House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Second House Saturn Fifth House Uranus Seventh House Neptune Eleventh House Pluto Ninth House Ceres First House Chiron Eighth House Eros Eleventh House Hygiea Ninth House Juno Tenth House Pallas Twelfth House Vesta Eighth House Black Moon Lilith Twelfth House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune Fifth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 16 major aspects, alongside 12 minor aspects, as well as 12 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Square Neptune Sun Square Uranus Mercury Conjunct Venus Mercury Trine Jupiter Venus Trine Jupiter Mars Trine Saturn Sun Quincunx Moon Mars Conjunct Pluto Moon Trine Uranus Venus Quincunx Saturn Saturn Trine Pluto Uranus Trine Neptune Sun Trine Jupiter Mercury Square Uranus Saturn Opposite Neptune Sun Conjunct Mercury

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Dolores Guinness’s life journey.

Sun Square Uranusorb: 1°

The Sun square Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you resistant to changes. But when you navigate unexpected changes, you find freedom and empowerment. You […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Venusorb: 1°

Mercury conjunct Venus in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive to words and ideas. You are diplomatic and think of ways to make others feel […] Read more »

Mercury Trine Jupiterorb: 1°

Mercury trine Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person has a positive view of life but is also intelligent and grounded enough not […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Moonorb: 4°

The Sun quincunx Moon pulls you in conflicting directions. In the Natal Chart, this aspect can challenge you to be true to yourself. You have […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Plutoorb: 4°

Mars conjunct Pluto in a chart typically brings an intense and powerful energy. This energy is not always healthy or easy to work with, but […] Read more »

Moon Trine Uranusorb: 5°

The Moon trine Uranus in a chart typically brings a free, innovative, and unique energy. Someone with this aspect in their Natal Chart might be […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Saturnorb: 5°

Venus quincunx Saturn in a chart typically creates difficulty expressing emotions, especially feelings of love and affection for others. There is a strong desire for […] Read more »

Sun Trine Jupiterorb: 7°

The Sun trine Jupiter in a Natal Chart makes you creative, gifted, and inspiring. You can be adventurous and love exploring new things. You push […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Neptuneorb: 7°

Saturn opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person will have issues with responsibilities, self-doubt, and confusion. They may have trouble connecting with […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 8°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Quincunx Midheaven Mars Square Pallas Saturn Square Vesta Saturn Conjunct Part of Fortune Mars Square Black Moon Lilith Mars Trine Part of Fortune Mars Sextile Vertex Saturn Square Chiron Saturn Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Uranus Square Juno Pluto Square Ascendant Sun Conjunct Juno

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Dolores Guinness’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Moon Quincunx Midheavenorb: 0°

The Moon quincunx the Midheaven in a chart typically creates tension between the emotional self and the professional one. It can be challenging to navigate […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Part of Fortuneorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct the Part of Fortune in a chart can help build potential for growth, success, and abundance through working with Saturn’s diligent, responsible, and […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Junoorb: 2°

The Sun conjunct Juno in the Natal Chart makes you warm and generous. You identify with your role in the family and derive pride from […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Conjunct Vesta Ceres Sextile Eros Chiron Square Part of Fortune Hygiea Trine Ascendant Pallas Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Pallas Quincunx Vertex Vesta Trine Black Moon Lilith Vesta Square Part of Fortune Ascendant Quincunx Vertex Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Part of Fortune Chiron Trine Black Moon Lilith Pallas Conjunct Ascendant

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Dolores Guinness’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Chiron Conjunct Vestaorb: 0°

Chiron conjunct Vesta in a chart connects Chiron’s healing energy with Vesta’s devoted one. This connection can lead to a strong commitment to someone’s healing […] Read more »

Pallas Conjunct Ascendantorb: 2°

Pallas conjunct the Ascendant in a chart connects someone’s intelligence and sense of strategy with their image and the first impression they make on others. […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.