The following was taken from en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gloria_Guinness

Gloria Guinness (born Gloria Rubio y Alatorre, August 27, 1912 - November 9, 1980) was a Mexican-born socialite and writer who was a contributing editor to Harper's Bazaar from 1963 until 1970. She also was a member of the International Best Dressed List.

Her first husband was a German-born resident of Mexico named Scholtens, from whom she was divorced.[3][4]

She married on 4 October 1935, in London, England, as her second husband, Franz-Egon, Count von Fürstenberg-Hedringen (1896-1975); she was his second wife. By him, she had one daughter, Baroness Dolores (born 31 July 1936)[5] and a son, Baron Franz-Egon (born 27 July 1939).[6] She also had a stepdaughter from her husband's first marriage, the actress Betsy von Furstenberg. According to her friend Etti Plesch, Gloria Rubio Scholtens was introduced to Fürstenberg by her mentor, newspaper heir, diplomat, and art collector Friedrich Horstmann, who reportedly "dressed her up and presented her at a dinner as a mysterious aristocrat."[7]

Her third husband was Ahmed Fakhri Bey (1921-1988), a grandson of King Fuad I of Egypt and a nephew of Princess Fawzia of Egypt (the first wife of Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, Shah of Iran) and King Farouk I of Egypt.[8] During her marriage to Fakhri, she also was a mistress of the British ambassador to France, Duff Cooper.[9] After her divorce, Gloria Fakhri became involved with both Loel Guinness and David Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty.

Her fourth husband, whom she married in 1951, was Group Capt. Thomas Loel Guinness, a Member of Parliament (1906-1988) and a member of the extended Guinness beer family, though his particular branch made its fortune in banking and real estate. Of him, she told Noel Coward, " I could never sleep with Loel. He farts too much." There is also a long-standing rumor that Gloria Guinness was employed at some point as a spy and that when she married her fourth husband, she had no valid passport and was legally a citizen of no country.

She was dressed by Cristóbal Balenciaga, Marc Bohan at Christian Dior, Chanel, Hubert de Givenchy and Yves Saint Laurent. But she also favored the Spaniard Antonio Canovas del Castillo del Rey at Lanvin (clothing). She was one of the first persons to wear the capri pants by Emilio Pucci