Warren Beatty's Reds has to be considered perhaps the most ambitious, frankly crazy, film released by mainstream Hollywood. It is, in 1981, a sympathetic, if critical, look at the 1917 Russian Revolution. The film focuses on the life and career of John Reed, the journalist and writer who wrote Ten Days That Shook the World. It mixes the personal and the political, spending a good deal of time looking at Reed's relationship with Louise Bryant (the amazing Diane Keaton, more of whom later), while also chronicling the revolution, through 'witnesses', montage, song, interviews. It is a mosiac of a period of time, earthed by Beatty's natural charm and the romance of Bryant and Reed.

Warren Beatty was a force of…

The epic story of two ethical non-monogamists who quickly discover that some things work better in theory than practice. John Reed is the patron saint of leftist content creators who are bad at organizing.

This is a rock-solid movie (I’m not gonna waste your time on that, you know why it’s good - Beatty, Storaro, Nicholson, etc etc), and obviously it’s cool and impressive that Beatty had the clout to get Paramount to spend 32 million in 1981 dollars on a 195-minute drama where the heroes are American Communists. But seeing it again, I can see more clearly why this was a movie that even first-term Reagan was able to screen at the White House and afterwards presumably greet Beatty…

three hours and 15 minutes and just silently crying through the credits I HAVE THOUGHTS:

1. hands down my absolute favorite jack nicholson performance. i cried 3 times during this movie and the scene where he gives diane keaton that envelope was the first one

2. can 100% see the influence on greta gerwig's LITTLE WOMEN—the naturalistic performances/dialogue amid a period setting, the emphasis on the labor of writing, the focus on the struggle of women having their talents recognized in a male-dominated environment, the casual/lived-in quality of the production design/costumes—could literally write an entire paper about this

3. might just also go with new favorite diane keaton performance because she made me cry the other 2 times!!!!!

4. and…

I can't believe it's taken me so long to watch this movie, since the subject matter pretty much defines my wheelhouse. Unfortunately, for most of its run time, Reds plays like a pretty stock historical romance, with the revolutionary politics as colorful backdrop. The first half is pure romance, culminating in that absurd montage of Reed and Bryant falling back in love while the Winter Palace is being stormed. The second half foregrounds the politics, but since the film isn't really interested in that, it loses the snap and drama of Beatty and Keaton's verbal jousts and passionate clinches. It's a strange paradox: the revolution is more objectively interesting than familiar romance beats, but the relationship is so well drawn,…

"You speak with the authority of feeling!" so shouts prominent Bolshevik Grigory Zinoviev to American journalist John Reed, a compliment he wields as a weapon while trying to strongarm Reed into staying in Russia. Zinoviev understands that people like Reed are essential to the revolution to translate the knotty, often joyless intellectualism of theory into something that inspires the masses. You could also say that Beatty applies a similar notion to the film itself. Though much of this 195-minute feature involves endless back-and-forth debates and intense discussion of how to enact and support revolution, this is fundamentally a romance, not merely between Reed and Louise Bryant but of radicals with their ideas. The heated exchanges are less about the content…