AUCKLAND -Auckland City’s three-year reign as New Zealand Football Champions is over after losing 4-3 to Team Wellington in the NZFC Preliminary Final at Kiwitea St on Saturday.

The win also ends Auckland’s hoodoo over the capital side, who grabbed their first win over City in 13 attempts and enter their first ever Grand Final next Sunday against Minor Premiers Waitakere United at Trusts Stadium.

“There’s been talk about history being against us but I told the lads that the only history we need to worry about is what we set,” Team Wellington coach Stu Jacobs said.

“We’re not there yet however. We have to be genuine champions and that means beating both Auckland and Waitakere.”

Golden boot winner Graham Little continued his fine scoring form with a brace of goals – the second a match-winning penalty in extra time with the scores locked at 2-2, after earlier opening the scoring in the 24th minute from some goalmouth pinball.

Little – who has now scored 46 goals in a league record 81 games for Team Wellington, looked full of running throughout the match but confirmed his 82nd game would be his last.

“The old legs are still working,” Little said.

“But it’s my last game next week, and there’d be no better way to finish [than winning the Grand Final].

Halftime substitute Peter Halstead also grabbed a pair, first sending the game into extra time with a measured left foot curling equaliser in the 86th minute, and then making sure of the victory with Wellington’s fourth from a breakaway as Auckland pushed for a extra time leveller.

Auckland– a goal down at halftime – led heading into the final ten minutes with two goals in three minutes midway through the second spell.

Keryn Jordan – the last-gasp goal-scoring hero for Auckland last weekend against Wellington – turned provider with a scything ball across the face of goal that allowed Jeff Campbell to finish at the back post in the 70th minute.

City’s Korean duo then combined to put Auckland in front three minutes later with Chan-Goo Yoon subtly directing Ki-Hyung Lee’s free kick past Phil Imray.

With Halstead sending the game into extra time, the game then turned on the penalty, as Luis Corrales – incisive and lively throughout the first half – made up for a relatively subdued second half by drawing Tamati Williams into a foul on the Costa Rican.

It was a sour note for the much-maligned Williams, who had arguably his best game in Auckland colours – twice denying Corrales in regular time and confidently sweeping behind his defence throughout.

With the clock ticking down and Auckland reduced to 10 men following Greg Uhlmann’s late red card for dissent, George Suri pulled a goal back but it proved merely consolation as Peter O’Leary called time on the Auckland City reign.

Winners of every Grand Final since the NZFC’s inaugural 2004-05 season, Auckland’s role in next Sunday’s finale will be as highly interested spectators only.

The Auckland club have one foot in the door of next year’s O-League but a Grand Final win for Wellington would bring the added bonus of New Zealand’s second spot in that competition at City’s expense.

NZFC Preliminary Final

Auckland City 3 (Jeff Campbell 70, Chan-Goo Yoon 73, George Suri 120)

Team Wellington 4 (Graham Little 24, 109; Peter Halstead 86, 116)

(A.e.t) Fulltime: 2-2, Halftime: 0-1

Auckland City:Tamati Williams (GK), Joel Matthews (Sam Campbell 90), Ben Sigmund (Captain), Ki-Hyung Lee, John Niyonsaba (Chan-Goo Yoon 43), Grant Young, Keryn Jordan, George Suri, Salesh Kumar, Greg Uhlmann, Bryan Little (Jeff Campbell 62).

Substitutes not used: Mark Fulcher (RGK), Paul Urlovic

Coach: Colin Tuaa

Cautions: Salesh Kumar

Red Cards: Greg Uhlmann

Team Wellington:Phil Imray (GK / Captain), Tim Schaeffers, Daniel Ellensohn (Peter Halstead 46), Graham Little, Luis Corrales, Raf de Gregorio (Cole Tinkler 106), Darren Cheriton, Wiremu Patrick (Sam Blackburn 81), Peter Howe, Karl Whalen, Sean Douglas

Substitutes not used: Sasha Nathu (RGK)

Coach: Stu Jacobs

Cautions: Luis Corrales, Raf de Gregorio