AUCKLAND – Reigning champions Waitakere United stormed to the top of the New Zealand Football Championship after a 2-0 victory over Team Wellington on a rainy day in Auckland.

With Hawke’s Bay toppling previous leaders Waikato, and Auckland City and YoungHeart Manawatu both notching wins on the weekend just one point separate the top five teams, with Waitakere 13 points from 5 games, giving them the lead.

Despite a one point margin at the top, unbeaten Waitakere may feel slightly more comfortable than their near rivals with two – and in some cases three – matches still in hand over the rest of the field.

Auckland City gave the table a more familiar look by keeping themselves just one point behind their neighbours after an 1-0 away win in Dunedin over Otago United who remain rooted to the bottom of the table.

Manawatu move to third on twelve points after they thumped Canterbury United 4-0 in the first game of 2009 on Saturday, while Waikato FC started off the New Year with a hangover after they were defeated by a solitary first-half Hawke’s Bay United goal and now slip to fourth place by virtue of fewer goals scored.

Despite their victory also taking them to 12 points, Hawke’s Bay drop out of the play-off places on goal difference but a deserved three points will be pleasing for the travelling Bay faithful, while Canterbury and Wellington are now four points adrift of what is quickly shaping as a five team race for March’s semi-finals.

The NZFC’s five day transfer windows opens on Monday morning, adding extra spice to the play-off race this week.

With four wins on the trot the Christmas break came at a bad time for Waikato, as Suele Soromon’s fifth minute strike was enough to give Hawke’s Bay the points against the Christmas table-toppers.

Despite going in all square at the break at home to Wellington, Waitakere took advantage of Waikato’s slip up with second half goals to Benjamin Totori and Daniel Koprivcic.

Totori jigged past three defenders before grabbing the opener five minutes after the break while Koprivcic added the second on 63 minutes when his shot was parried into his own net by the Wellington keeper.

In Dunedin, Auckland will be happy they kicked off the New Year with a win after a smart move and cross down the left flank saw Keryn Jordan head home what proved to be a 14th minute winner against a battling Otago outfit.

Meanwhile on Saturday, Canterbury’s impressive unbeaten run leading into Christmas was brought to a sudden halt by YoungHeart Manawatu whose 4-0 romp back into playoff contention began with a first half brace to Matt Kennedy and a Park Sung-Bae penalty that put the game beyond the Dragons. Golden boot leader Jason Hayne added the fourth shortly after the break to end any hopes Canterbury had of a fight-back.

Next week, Auckland entertain Waikato and Waitakere welcome Hawke’s Bay in two crunch matches between top five teams while Wellington take on Manawatu, and Otago visit Canterbury in two mouth-watering derby clashes.

New Zealand Football Championship (NZFC)

Waikato FC 0, Hawkes Bay United 1

Waitakere United 2, Team Wellington 0

Otago United 0, Auckland City FC 1

Youngheart Manawatu 4, Canterbury 0

Story and photograph courtesy New Zealand Football Media