For the National Security Strategy, cite the president as the author.

For other official documents, the author is the organization immediately responsible for creating the document. In the example below, the author is the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the publisher is the Department of the Navy.

In the example above, the author is NOT an umbrella organization, signatory, or any of the following:

Chief of Naval Operations

Deputy Chief of Naval Operations

W. F. Moran

Department of Defense

Navy Pentagon

R. P. Burke

United States of America​

Do not include acronyms for organizations listed as authors in the List of References or footnotes:

YES: Office of the Chief of Naval Operations.

NO: Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO or OCNO).

NO: CNO or OCNO.

A citation is required if you did not wholly create the figure—i.e., if you used someone else's image or data. A citation is not needed when all elements of the figure are your own creation.

If you use the figure exactly as it appears in the source, use

“Source: ___.”

If you alter the original figure or use someone else's image or data to create the figure, use “Adapted from ___.”

Figure 1. A Figure with a Citation in Chicago Notes and Bibliography Style1

Footnote Examples

1 Source: Ged Griffin, “Managing Peacekeeping Communications,” Journal of Business Continuity & Emergency Planning 3, no. 4 (2009): 325.

or

1 Adapted from Ged Griffin, “Managing Peacekeeping Communications,” Journal of Business Continuity & Emergency Planning 3, no. 4 (2009): 325.

Footnotes for figures follow the same rule for ibid. and shortened citations.

For more details, see the Thesis Template.

Where in the sentence does my footnote go?

Single footnotes go at the end of a sentence, after the punctuation, like this.1

“If the sentence ends with a quotation, the quotation marks go outside the punctuation, then the footnote is placed after the quotation marks, like this.”2

Please do not insert any spaces before a footnote; please do put a space between a footnote and the beginning of the next sentence.

Multiple Citations in a Single Sentence

When citing more than one source in a single sentence, there are two options:

Place a single footnote at the end of the sentence, outside the punctuation, and include all citations in this one footnote, separated by semicolons. CMOS 14.57

Place each footnote at the end of the clause containing the information it cites. CMOS 14.26

Never place more than one footnote at the end of a sentence. CMOS 14.28

In the paragraph below, the reference numbers are highlighted in yellow and the signal phrases are highlighted in blue. Note that the second sentence is common knowledge, whereas the final sentence does not need a citation because it is the opinion of the author. (See "How Often to Cite?")

In a Journal of Restaurant Marketing article, restaurateur Shawna Jackson contends that a restaurant’s color scheme influences how hungry its patrons are.1 Consider popular fast-food restaurants, which often use red and yellow in their advertising and décor. According to a study by Roberta Chen and David Lopez, restaurant customers feel energized in red and yellow environments, which encourages them to order more food.2 The same study indicates that patrons felt relaxed in blue and purple environments, which causes them to “spend more time considering the menu options and eat at a slower pace.”3 Although blue décor can give a restaurant a casual, laid-back feel, industry experts believe this color can negatively affect profit.4 Accordingly, it is difficult to identify a popular restaurant chain that decorates with calmer hues.

* Note: no page number is necessary in footnote 1 because the sentence describes the source’s general argument rather than data or analysis from a specific location in the source.

1 Shawna Jackson, “Color’s Effect on Restaurant Patrons,” Journal of Restaurant Marketing 13, no. 4 (April 1999).

2 Roberta Chen and David Lopez, Color Me Hungry: How to Decorate Your Restaurant to Increase Profit and Patronage (New York: Routledge, 2009), 3.

3 Chen and Lopez, 29.

4 Jackson, “Color’s Effect on Restaurant Patrons,” 18; Chen and Lopez, Color Me Hungry, 74–76.

The Chicago Manual of Style advises that “footnotes should be placed where you need them. . . . Whenever you can imagine the reader asking ‘Says who’ you should add a note.” Clarity is your goal as a writer, and what constitutes clear attribution in any given context will depend to some extent on the particulars of your text. Nevertheless, the following are some reliable rules of thumb:

Use a footnote (even if you also use a signal phrase) the first time you quote, paraphrase, or otherwise use material from a source in your paragraph.

Always use footnotes for direct quotes.

Use footnotes, signal phrases, or sentence flow to indicate ongoing use of this same material.

Be sure to use a footnote again when drawing upon information from a different location in the source (see rules for including page numbers).

When citing an online document (for example, a thesis, report, or journal article) in a full note or listing it in the references, if possible, provide a DOI. If the source does not have a DOI, link to the document itself (PDF, etc.) or to the landing page that directs the reader to the full text.

Do not insert a hard or soft return within the URL string: doing so breaks the link.

In footnotes, the page number(s) is needed when

Quoting – Always include

Paraphrasing – Always include

Summarizing – Include if summarizing a single continuous passage in a work

Example

N: Michael Pollan and Daisy Potatohead, The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals (New York: Penguin, 2006), 99–100.

S: Pollan and Potatohead, The Omnivore’s Dilemma, 100.

If unsure, include the page number(s).

No page number is needed in a footnote when you are referring to the source as a whole. For example: “George W. Bush’s Decision Points recounts pivotal moments during his time in office.”

If the source does not contain page numbers, often with electronic formats, include as much information as needed for the reader to locate the material. In citations especially of shorter electronic works presented as a single, searchable document, such locators may be unnecessary.

Locator Options Examples chapter number chap. 2 paragraph number para. 3 section heading

sec. 24

descriptive phrase under "The Battleground" location numbers loc. 444 of 3023, Kindle page numbers check against—and cite to—the printed version if possible table, figure, or slide number table 1.4

fig. 3

slide 5

See CMOS 14.22: Page numbers and other locators.

See also 14.160: Page or location numbers in electronic formats.

In the list of references/bibliography

For portions of larger documents, such as journal articles and book chapters, include the page range.

Example

B: Haynes, Peter. “Al-Qaeda, Oil Dependence, and U.S. Foreign Policy.” In Energy Security and Global Politics: The Militarization of Resource Management, edited by Daniel Moran and James A. Russell, 62–74. New York: Routledge, 2009.

When citing a source retrieved online, use the "online" format even when you or someone else printed out the material. For example, if you print out a thesis or your advisor provides you with a printed thesis, it is still categorized as an online document.

Only cite as a print source when the material has been produced by a publisher in hard copy. For example, if you obtain a print journal or book from the library stacks, it is categorized as a printed source.

An indirect source is a source that cites some other work that you discuss in your text.

Whenever possible, consult primary sources and your sources’ sources yourself. Upon investigation of the primary source, you may find you disagree with the indirect source author’s analysis or methods.

How to Incorporate Indirect Sources

The following passage incorporates a properly credited indirect source. The indirect source information is highlighted in yellow; the primary source information is highlighted in blue.

Walker describes Miguel Roig’s 1999 experiment, which correlates inadequate paraphrasing in student writing with poor reading comprehension.1 Citing Roig’s data, Walker explains that “students do in fact possess skills necessary for paraphrasing but … may be impeded from applying those skills when dealing with rigorous text.”2

Note: Footnotes for indirect sources must cite both the primary and the indirect source; in the references list, include only the indirect source (the source you consulted—see example).

For more information

See the TPO's "Citing Your Sources’ Sources" handout.

A citation is required if you did not wholly create the table—i.e., if you used someone else's data. A citation is not needed when all elements of the table are your own creation.

If you use the table exactly as it appears in the source, use

“Source: ___.”

If you alter the original table or if you use someone else's data to create the table, use “Adapted from ___.”

Table 1. A Table with a Citation in Chicago Notes and Bibliography Style1

Footnote Examples

1 Source: Roberto Suro, “Changing Channels and Crisscrossing Culture: A Survey of Latinos on News Media,” Pew Research Center, April 19, 2004, https://www.pewhispanic.org/2004/04/19/changing-channels-and-crisscrossing-cultures/.

or

1 Adapted from Roberto Suro, “Changing Channels and Crisscrossing Culture: A Survey of Latinos on News Media,” Pew Research Center, April 19, 2004, https://www.pewhispanic.org/2004/04/19/changing-channels-and-crisscrossing-cultures/.

Footnotes for figures follow the same rule for ibid. and shortened citations.

For more details, see the Thesis Template.

For works with a translator, follow the format for edited books but substitute "trans." for "ed." in the notes and "translated" for "edited" in the references:

N: Maxence Manqué, Old and Rejected Poems, trans. Pemily Hickinson (Scituate, MA: Narrow Fellow Press, 1989), 472.

S: Manqué, Old and Rejected Poems, 889.

B: Manqué, Maxence. Old and Rejected Poems. Translated by Pemily Hickinson. Scituate, MA: Narrow Fellow Press, 1989.

If you provide the translation to a non-English work, format the original title in sentence case, then give your translated title, also in sentence case, in square brackets immediately following. Note that the other formatting rules for titles—italics and quotation marks—remain the same:

N: Maxence Manqué, "L'esthétique de l'échec" [The aesthetics of failure], in É viter les clichés et des autres clichés [Avoiding clichés and other clichés], ed. Hamish Sweeney (New Brunswick: Stew & Offspring, 1992), 5.

S: Manqué, "L'esthétique de l'échec," 11.

B: Manqué, Maxence. "L'esthétique de l'échec" [The aesthetics of failure]. In Éviter les clichés et des autres clichés [Avoiding clichés and other clichés], edited by Hamish Sweeney, 3–44. New Brunswick: Stew & Offspring, 1992.