Laurence Côte’s career started in 1987 when she played a small part in the skin-classic Der Kuß des Tigers opposite Stéphane Ferrara and Beate Jensen. Although Laurence subsequently worked together with such famous French directors as Jean-Luc Godard (Nouvelle vague), Jacques Doillon (La Vengeance d'une femme) and Jacques Rivette (Gang of Four) it wasn’t until André Téchiné’s Les Voleurs in 1996 that she actually won critical recognition. However, thanks to a terrific performance opposite screen-legend Catherine Deneuve this crime-drama finally earned Mademoiselle Côte a César as best newcomer. Laurence could also be seen in such acclaimed productions as Le Monde à l'enverste, Je règle mon pas sur le pas de mon père and most recently Comme un avion which also stars the beautiful Bérenice Bejo(A Knight’s Tale). Due to the fact that this brunette stunner is French, it’s no big surprise that she appeared very naked quite often. Laurence had her nude debut in the 1988 flick Gang of Four where she showed her small hooters as well as her nice butt crack. Other skinful puttings include Transatlantique, Le Goût des fraises and Je règle mon pas sur le pas de mon père. The latter featured la Francaise lying buck naked on a couch chatting with some lucky fella. Despite all those great efforts, we at Skin Central Germany prefer her brief skin-scenes from Les Voleurs. There Laurence has some seriously hot sex with co-star Daniel Auteuil while she is still wearing a dress. When they change positions her skirt is hiked up and her thick, never-been-trimmed French bush is clearly visible. After being done from behind, she puts on her panties revealing once again, what a great curvaceous butt she has. It may not be the most revealing sex-scene ever but it easily ranks among the hottest and most realistic! Last but not least: Les Voleurs even includes a pseudo-lesbian bathtub scene with Laurence and Catherine Deneuve but both sadly stop inches from revealing any further Skinful truths…