Trinity Wharf, Kingston Upon Hull

Offers in Region of

£125,000Knowing the purchase price means you can work out the total cost of buying the property.Read more about property price in our glossary page.

Reduced on 31/05/2024

PROPERTY TYPE

Apartment

BEDROOMS

2

BATHROOMS

2

SIZE

Ask agent

Describes how you own a property. There are different types of tenure - freehold, leasehold, and commonhold.Read more about tenure in our glossary page.

Key features

Top floor apartment

Two bedrooms

En-suite to master bedroom

Open plan living

Modern kitchen

Well presented throughout

Sought after city centre location

Covered parking provided

Ideal for first time buyers/ investors

NO CHAIN!

Description

Welcome to this charming apartment located in the heart of Hull's old town on High Street. This purpose-built property boasts a unique position as one of only two top-floor apartments in the block, offering a sense of exclusivity and privacy. Offered for sale with NO ONWARD CHAIN!

With secure communal entry to the ground floor with stairs & lift to all levels.

Upon entering the apartment, you are greeted by a welcoming hallway leading to a bright open plan lounge/ kitchen, perfect for relaxing or entertaining guests. The apartment features two well-appointed bedrooms, providing ample space for an individual or couple, guests, or even a home office.

With two bathrooms, mornings will be a breeze in this apartment, ensuring convenience and comfort for all residents. The covered parking, providing a space for your vehicle in this bustling area.

Situated in the historic old town of Hull, you'll be surrounded by a vibrant community, local shops, and a range of bars and restaurants. The location offers easy access to all the amenities you could need, from local markets to cultural attractions.

Don't miss this opportunity to own this delightful apartment within the city centre. Contact us today to arrange a viewing and make this property your new home!

Communal Entrance - Secure entry to the ground floor with video intercom system and staircase and lift to all floors.

Private Hallway - An inviting entrance into this bright and airy apartment, with storage cupboard, laminate flooring and intercom handset with screen.

Lounge Area - 4.99m x 3.53m (16'4" x 11'6") - A light space with double glazed windows to two sides, with carpet flooring and electric heating. Opening into:

Kitchen Area - 4.32m x 1.70m (14'2" x 5'6") - With double glazed window. Modern kitchen fitted with a range of base and wall mounted units, laminated worksurfaces, tiling to the splashback areas, inset stainless steel sink unit, inset electric hob with extractor over and built in oven, integrated fridge and freezer.

Bedroom One - 5.08m x 2.91m (16'7" x 9'6") - A generous double bedroom with double glazed window, carpet flooring and electric heater.

En-Suite - 1.95m x 1.50m (6'4" x 4'11") - Fitted with a three-piece suite, comprising shower cubicle, pedestal sink unit and low level WC with concealed cistern.

Bedroom Two - 2.99m x 2.07m (9'9" x 6'9") - Second bedroom with double glazed window, carpet flooring and electric heater.

Bathroom - 2.18m x 1.96m (7'1" x 6'5") - Fitted with a three-piece suite, comprising panelled bath with shower attachment over, inset sink and low flush WC with concealed cistern.

Outside - Set back from High Street. Covered parking is included with this property.

Council Tax - We have been advised the property is council tax band C, payable to Hull City Council.

Additional Information - Tenure:

Leasehold - 250 from 1st January 2004.

Service Charge: £1843.32 (invoiced quarterly at £460.83)

Ground Rent: £75 pa

Disclaimer:

Any information in relation to the length of lease, service charge, ground rent and council tax has been confirmed by our sellers. We would advise that any buyer make their own enquiries through their solicitors to verify that the information provided is accurate and not been subject to any change.

Brochures

Trinity Wharf, Kingston Upon HullBrochure

COUNCIL TAXA payment made to your local authority in order to pay for local services like schools, libraries, and refuse collection. The amount you pay depends on the value of the property.Read more about council Tax in our glossary page.

Band: C

PARKINGDetails of how and where vehicles can be parked, and any associated costs.Read more about parking in our glossary page.

Yes

GARDENA property has access to an outdoor space, which could be private or shared.

Ask agent

ACCESSIBILITYHow a property has been adapted to meet the needs of vulnerable or disabled individuals.Read more about accessibility in our glossary page.

Ask agent

NEAREST STATIONS

Distances are straight line measurements from the centre of the postcode

Hull Station0.6 miles

New Holland Station3.1 miles

Barrow Haven Station4.0 miles

Check how much you can borrow

Get a Mortgage in Principle

You'll have a personalised result in just 20 minutes and you could get viewings faster when you find the home you want, with no impact on your credit score.Powered bynationwide

Recently sold & under offer

See similar nearby properties

About the agent

Riverside, Hull

180a Kingston Road, Willerby, Hull, HU10 6LX

Under new ownership with a fresh new look and focus for 2023 with an office based in Willerby but an online presence that stretches across the city and further afield.

We’re proud to provide a completely personal experience and it’s our goal to become our region’s most recommended agent.

We combine local area and property knowledge along with the latest technology plus other tried and test methods to make your home stand out and achieve the best possible price.

Call us now f

More properties from this agent