P180 Investments exists to streamline back-office needs. Allow us to help you focus on growing your business, while we focus on the accounting, reporting, payroll, sales tax, and all of the less fun parts of running a business.

Joel’s achievements in information technology span more than three decades, including numerous leadership positions and successful company exits. As CEO and co-founder of NetQoS, a network management software firm, he delivered 31 consecutive quarters of double-digit revenue growth and a $200mm valuation. In 2010, Joel co-founded Cache IQ, a storage software company that NetApp acquired two years later. Joel is the author of The CEO Tightrope, which describes a systematic approach to the critical chief executive role.

Tanya oversees legal matters for the company and its portfolio companies. Tanya started her in-house legal career in 2003 as Corporate Counsel of NetQoS. Prior to joining P180, in addition to her work with NetQoS, Tanya spent two years as in-house counsel with CA Technologies. Tanya holds a Juris Doctor degree from the University of Texas at Austin School of Law and is a member of the State Bar of Texas. In her free time, Tanya is a film buff, gamer, and cat lady who loves adventures with her husband and son.

After beginning his career in Houston with the PwC Assurance practice, Bart joined P180 in July 2014. Since then, he has guided a handful of mid-market enterprise software companies through a broad array of operational challenges. Bart has been a CPA in the state of Texas since March 2014, and holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration and a Master’s Degree in Accountancy from Trinity University. Away from the office, Bart enjoys spending time with his wife and their two dogs, as well as playing soccer and tennis.

Since 2002, Heather has worked under Joel Trammell’s leadership at several companies, three of which were successfully sold to public companies. During her tenure, she has grown her responsibilities from Staff Accountant to Managing Director of Accounts. Heather currently performs both Executive Accounting and Executive HR roles for her clients and is passionate about operational accounting as well as balancing employee needs with client budget. She holds a BA in Business as well as an Associate’s Degree in Behavioral Sciences from Concordia University Texas. Away from the office, Heather enjoys spending time with her husband, her three dogs and one cat, and her grandchildren.

Linda has been with P180 Investments since early 2014 and is responsible for all internal accounting, finance, and HR. Her vast career experience began in public accounting before shifting into working with small businesses, management, and private accounting. Linda is intent on providing business owners with financial and management information to enable them to implement their ideas and accomplish their business goals.

P180’s services have been instrumental to the success of our business. It’s like having an on-demand pro CHRO, but for a fraction of the cost of a full-time person. And they are available whenever we need them.

The P180 team has been a competitive advantage for us. They deliver great work, all while living our values and fitting in like they’re our own employees. Bart and his team have brought tremendous value to iGrafx and I wouldn’t hesitate to use he and the entire team again.

With P180 handling the accounting side of the business, I have peace of mind that the details are being managed by world-class professionals. Heather is the most attentive business partner imaginable. P180’s service frees me up to do what I do best: protect, optimize, and grow our clients’ wealth.