Reichskommissariat Kaukasien (also spelt Kaukasus) is a colony of the Greater Germanic Reich comprised of most of the North Caucasus (formerly part of the Russian SFSR), the entirety of the former Azeri SSR and most of the Georgian SSR.

Geography

Kaukasien is bordered by Reichskommissariat Moskowien to the north, the Republic of Turkey and the Imperial State of Iran to the south. It is a largely mountainous region, with plains in the north. Kaukasien is rich in natural resources and as such is used as a mining colony by the Germans. The unrestricted industrialization and mining has caused Kaukasien to be heavily polluted and covered in smog, leading to its unflattering nickname "the Black State" (along with the lack of information leaving the country).

Government

Politics

National spirits

Memories of the Tiflis Three

[1]

Stability: -20.00%

Effect of Partisans on Us: +25.00%

The Tfilis Three were the leaders of the Transcaucasian Soviet, a partisan group who launched an organized uprising during the West Russian War. They were captured and publicly hanged in 1961, but much to the Reichskommissar's consternation, the natives have turned them into martyrs and lionized their cause.

Das Bergbaureich

Resource Gain Efficiency: +50.00%

Research Speed: -10.00%

Fuel Gain per Oil: +10.00%

Kaukasien is renowned not for its land, but for what lies beneath it. The earth offers up endless rivers of oil and tons upon tons of metals and minerals, and the German occupiers partake deeply and greedily in the bounty.

Shipments to the Reich

Fuel Gain per Oil: -25.00%

While Ukraine may be the breadbasket of the Reich, Kaukasien is its gas tank. After taking what is necessary to function, the Kaukasian administration forwards all of its resources and profits to the Reich, to the tune of millions of Reichsmarks a day.

A Stratified Society

Daily Political Power Gain: -0.25

Recruitable Population Factor: -75%

Stability: +5.00%

A hierarchy of sorts has arisen in the Reichskommissariat. At the bottom are the "three loathsome pests," Georgians, Armenians, and Circassians, all loathed by the Germans for their continued rebelliousness. Above them are the other ethnic minorities, only slightly less disdained. Then come the German skilled laborers and their families, and on top sit the bureaucracy and army, thoroughly dominated by Josias's men.

At some point, Paul Pleiger (National Socialism) can replace Josias as Reichskommissar. Then, the spirit A Stratified Society would change into:

Gameplay

Notes