CO-OWNER & TOUR GUIDE

Professional Photographer Paul Nguyen has lived and worked from coast to coast across the U.S., and has over 30 years of experience in film and digital photography. He specializes in digital photography of natural landscapes and wildlife from around the world.

In April 2017, he served in the prestigious National Park Artist in Residence program at Petrified Forest, Arizona, and continues to create programs for the National Park Service. His work also includes an exclusive assignment as a photographer for the Boston Museum of Science, and a position as a program guide and brand ambassador for Swedish outfitter Fjällräven.

His images have been licensed by organizations such as the Nature Conservancy, Tamron USA, Amazing New England Artworks, and numerous local and international publications, and his outstanding image-making and teaching have gained him equipment sponsorships from Tamron USA and Sun Surveyor.

Paul lives and works out of Flagstaff, AZ, and can be seen promoting and selling his work at art shows across the southwest. He is also a lecturer and contest judge for camera clubs and the New England Camera Club Council. The Boston Camera Club awarded him Judge of the Year honors for 2015-2016. See his work at www.paulnguyenphoto.com

CO-OWNER, WEB DESIGN & TOUR GUIDE

Allie Richards is a full-time, professional landscape photographer and year-round resident of Cape Cod, Massachusetts. She's best known for her strikingly vibrant photographic style and for showcasing her work on aluminum. She plans many of her photographs in advance; she pays attention to weather events, the phases of the moon, and uses various apps to aid her artistry.

Allie is well-traveled; through BlueHour®, she guides like minded photographers across the United States and abroad several times per year. She most enjoys teaching and sharing with others in the pursuit of art and experience.

Allie’s work has earned her several awards, including the PRC Boston Student Image Award in her college years, and an ambassadorship with f-stop Gear. She participates in local exhibitions at the Chatham Creative Arts Center and the Chatham Chamber of Commerce Art in the Park Event. Her work has been published by Cape Cod Life Magazine, The National Parks service, and other publications.

Visit her website and portfolio at www.allierichards.com

INSTRUCTOR

David has been working professionally as a landscape photographer for the last ten years and travels extensively throughout New England. Dave has published several successful e-books for photographers visiting New England in addition to his comprehensive guides and blogs on the many aspects of landscape photography.

He was recently named one of the Top 8 New England Landscape Photographers by Peerless Magazine and his work has been featured by Outdoor Photographer, The Boston Globe, Newport Life, Cape Cod Life, and Boston Voyager. He is a frequent guest speaker on national landscape photography podcasts and at New England camera clubs. His work can also be found throughout many calendars including The Light of New England, Maine Life and Vermont Living, and in advertisements by the tourism board of Massachusetts.

See his work online at www.davelongphoto.com and on Instagram.

INSTRUCTOR & TOUR GUIDE

Kris is a photographer who specializes in landscape and nature. His photography primarily focuses on New England and other areas across the United States. He seeks out and researches the best times and lighting for each location, which we find so important in making great shots. He takes pride in immersing himself in a landscape to capture the unique perspective that defines his style.Kris lives in Worcester where he has been practicing photography for the last 20+ years. He worked at a camera store and photo lab which has helped him be where he is today. He finds great satisfaction in selling his work. He says "to create images that someone appreciates enough to purchase and display in their own home is the ultimate compliment."

See his work online at www.krissimardphotography.com

INSTRUCTOR

Erik is a freelance photographer who specializes in trees and natural landscapes. He is the Director at the Menino Arts Center, home of the Hyde Park Art Association in Boston, and is a past President of the Boston Camera Club. He lives in the West Roxbury neighborhood of Boston with his wife Julie, sons Carl and William, and dog Comet. Although Erik enjoys photographing natural environments all over New England, his favorite destination is Boston’s Arnold Arboretum.

Erik’s work has appeared in Yankee Magazine, AMC’s Outdoors, Northern Woodlands, the Boston Globe, the Boston Metro, the Cape Cod Times, E the Environmental Magazine, and other publications. He has shown his fine art prints at galleries throughout Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island.

Erik also has lectured and taught workshops at the Arboretum, the Griffin Museum of Photography, the Photographic Resource Center in Cambridge, the Eliot School in Jamaica Plain, the Cambridge Art Association, the Concord Art Association, the Hyde Park Art Association, and at locations all over New England for BlueHour.

You can see his work online at www.erikgehring.com.

INSTRUCTOR & TOUR GUIDE

Hope has embraced the digital medium after shooting on film since she was a child. Her specialties are nature, landscapes, and astrophotography. She loves to photograph the world around her, but focuses on New England and its shores and abundant waterfalls.

Hope’s passion is to share her knowledge with others. A former Pro and Genius with Apple, Hope has been able to teach iPhoneography and develop techniques with the iPhone for both taking and editing photographs. She developed one of the first iPhone photography workshops, teaching her signature macro technique on an iPhone 4. As the iPhone camera developed, so too did her techniques. With the built-in capabilities of the newest iPhones and additional attachment lenses, Hope can now photograph any type of subject, under any conditions. And using a combination of the latest mobile editing apps, she is able to digitally process her images - both from her phone and from her full-sized Sony camera - while on the go.

Hope was a member of the Griffin Museum of Photography Photography Atelier and exhibited her collection ‘Boston After Dark’ in a collective exhibition. She has also been exhibited in Lafayette Place Boston, Las Laguna Art Gallery and printed in the May 2022 issue of Artistonish Magazine.

Hope lives north of Boston with her husband. You can see her work on Instagram at @seewithhope

TOUR GUIDE

From France, Thibaut is a professional landscape and nature photographer. Twenty years ago, as a teenager, he started photography in the Alps during his mountaineering adventures. Over time his passion for rock climbing took him around the world and documenting the journey allowed him to develop an eye for creating compelling images. Whether it is in the grand landscape or more intimate ones, he strives to connect and engage with nature. Carefully observing his surroundings, he focuses on creating personally meaningful, unique images with the goal of depicting the essence of a scene and conveying emotion to the viewer. Thibaut enjoys photography in all weather and lighting conditions; he believes that strong images can be captured at any time of the day. He started his fine art print business this year and sells his images across North America and Europe.

You can see his work online at www.thibautpawlasphotography.com

INSTRUCTOR

Dave is a Rhode Island based fine art photographer. He has had a love affair with making photographs for 40 years. For Dave, sunrise and sunset represent powerful forces of peace, tranquility, and rejuvenation. These forces are the common theme of Dave’s photography. Dave’s work is published in local calendars and publications, including the cover of South County Life Magazine. Dave also works on commissioned projects where the subject, mood and feel of a photograph are specially crafted for the buyer and their space. Dave is a natural teacher and mentor. He enjoys the creative process of discovery, learning and growth. Dave offers individualized photography coaching sessions through his course “Yes You Can Photography” where he teaches you how to move from taking photographs to intentionally making photographs. Sessions are held both virtually and in person.

You can see his work on his website http://www.ospreywindsphotography.com/