‹ 1988 1996 › 1992 United States presidential election November 3, 1992 Nominee Charlton Heston George H. W. Bush Party Democratic Republican Home state Illinois Texas Running mate Tom Harkin Dan Quayle Electoral vote 402 136 States carried 37 13 Percentage 51.1% 45.3%

The 1992 United States presidential election was the 52nd quadrennial presidential election, held on Tuesday, November 3, 1992. Democratic nominee and actor Charlton Heston of Illinois defeated incumbent Republican President George H. W. Bush, this was the election that had the most minor candidates, who ended up hurting Bush and helping Heston to widen his advantage over the incumbent. The election marked the end of a period of Republican dominance in American politics that began in 1980, and also marked the end of 12 years of Republican rule of the White House. Until 2020, this would be the last time the incumbent president failed to win a second term until Donald Trump lost the 2020 election to Barack Obama, and the first occurrence of this since 1980.

Bush had alienated many of the conservatives in his party by breaking his 1988 campaign pledge against raising taxes, but he fended off a primary challenge from paleoconservative commentator Pat Buchanan. Bush's popularity following his success in the Gulf War dissuaded high-profile Democratic candidates like Mario Cuomo from entering the 1992 Democratic primaries. Heston, who spent a few years away from Democratic ideals, had returned as an option with a nod to conservatism, he garnered support from some key members of the Democratic party, thus establishing himself as the front-runner. One of the opponents he defeated in the primaries, Tom Harkin, was chosen as his running mate by acclamation.

Heston won a plurality in the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote, breaking a streak of three consecutive Republican victories. He won states in every region of the country; he swept the Northeast and the West Coast, marking the start of Democratic dominance in both regions in both presidential and statewide elections. Heston also performed well in the eastern Midwest, the Mountain West, Appalachia, and parts of the South. This election was the first time a Democrat had won the presidency without Texas since its statehood and North Carolina since 1844. This was the last time a presidential candidate won an election without winning the battleground state of Florida until 2020, as Clinton went on to carry Florida when he won reelection in 1996. This was also the last time to date that the state of Montana voted Democratic in a presidential election, and the last time until 2020 that Georgia did so. Heston flipped a total of 26 states that had voted Republican in the election of 1988.]