“Although divorced for four years, Nicky Wu (吳奇隆) continued to make monthly alimony payments to ex-wife, Ma Yashu (馬雅舒)….” Many headlines carried the sensational claims in yesterday’s press, while reporting that Nicky had generously given Ma Yashu 100 million RMB and six luxury homes as part of their separation package in 2009. Tired of being vilified as a greedy gold digger, Yashu finally responded and claimed that all the rumors were false. Although surprised to learn about Nicky’s new romance with Cecilia Liu (劉詩詩), Yashu offered her blessings to the couple.

Yashu’s public relations representative issued a press statement today which denied the false claims that Nicky had given Yashu money and monthly alimony after their divorce, “During the divorce process and after their official divorce, Ms. Ma Yashu did not take any money from Mr. Nicky Wu. While they were married, they had jointly purchased a house, in which Ma Yashu has returned the money paid by Nicky during the divorce process. The news was fabricated without any factual premise and thus slandered Ma Yashu’s family and reputation.” The statement noted that Ma Yashu will retain the right to pursue legal action over the slander.

Nicky and Yashu were married for three years and filed for divorce in 2009. The couple’s marriage fell apart due to their work schedules and little time spent together. Yashu has since married Australian executive, James Robert Hayes, and is currently pregnant with his child.

In response to Nicky dating Cecilia, Yashu wrote on her Sina Weibo blog, “I only found out that Nicky is dating from the news. I am once again being painted as a wicked person. Although it has been several years, this nightmare is still not over. After breaking up, I was vilified as a bad woman. Countless netizens used vicious words to attack me. I don’t want to explain. There are many reasons why two people divorce and it’s difficult and needless to explain. For past lovers who have separated, silence and no contact offer the most respect.”

As she is an expectant mother due to give birth next month, Yashu said she cannot live with the rumors potentially affecting her new baby and family life. She emphasized that she did not take money from Nicky after the divorce. Yashu wrote, “During the most trying times, we had loved beautifully. Breaking up, we should each find our own happiness” and added, “Thanks to Bu Bu Jing Xin <步步驚心>, [Nicky’s] luck turned around! I wish that they will love each other and be happily together!”

Source: Weibo.com; 21CN.com