OAO - Oando Plc

Oando Plc is one of Africa's largest integrated energy solutions provider that sells and distributes petroleum products through retail outlets, as well as constructs pipelines. The company, through its subsidiaries, engages in the exploration, production, supply, and distribution of oil and natural gas, as well as other petroleum products. Oando comprises several companies who are leaders in their respective markets including Oando Energy Resources, Oando Trading, and OVH Energy. Oando Energy Resources is the group's main vehicle for oil exploration and production activities. Oando is listed on the Nigerian Stock Exchange and Johannesburg Stock Exchange.

Headquartered in the Nigerian commercial capital Lagos but with a global customer base, Oando engages in having strategic investments in energy companies. The company operates through two primary segments: Exploration and Production, and Supply and Trading. The Exploration and Production segment is involved in the exploration for and production of oil and gas through the acquisition of rights in oil blocks on the Nigerian continental shelf and deep offshore. The Supply and Trading segment, on the other hand, engages in trading of refined and unrefined petroleum products. Oando has representative offices in UAE and the UK.

Oando Plc is listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). Oando is traded on the JSE under the ticker symbol “OAO”. The International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) of JSE:OAO is NGOANDO00002. Oando Plc is currently the 179th most valuable stock on the JSE with a market capitalization of ZAR 2.86 billion, which is about 0.014% of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange equity market.

Monetary values are quoted in South African Rand (ZAR) unless otherwise stated

OAO Stock Market Performance

The current share price of Oando Plc (OAO) is ZAR 0.23. OAO closed its last trading day (Wednesday, August 28, 2024) at 0.23 ZAR per share on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). Oando began the year with a share price of 0.19 ZAR and has since gained 21.1% on that price valuation, ranking it 79th on the JSE in terms of year-to-date performance. Shareholders can be optimistic about OAO knowing the stock has accrued 35% over the past four-week period alone—second best on JSE.

Oando is the 280th most traded stock on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange over the past three months (Mar 20 - Aug 28, 2024). OAO has traded a total volume of 1 million shares—in 51 deals—valued at ZAR 179,608 over the period, with an average of 15,937 traded shares per session. A volume high of 310,817 was achieved on June 14th for the same period. The table below details the last 10 trading days of activity of Oando on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.

Profile of Oando Plc

Oando Plc was founded on August 25, 1969 and operates in the Oil & Gas sector, specifically, the Integrated Oil & Gas industry. Oando contracts an estimated total number of 137 employees. The company is led by Adewale J. Tinubu as its Group Chief Executive. The company's board of directors, chaired by HRM. Oba A. Gbadebo, is composed of 10 members whose names are listed below.

Gbadebo, Oba A. (HRM.)

Chairman

Tinubu, Adewale J.

Group Chief Executive

Boyo, O.

Deputy Group Chief Executive

Adeyemo, Olufemi

Group Chief Financial Officer

Osunsanya, B.

Non-Executive Director

Akpata, Oghogho

Non-Executive Director

Anthony, Sena (Chief)

Non-Executive Director

Yakubu, Tanimu

Non-Executive Director

Osakwe, Ike

Non-Executive Director

Akinrele, Ademola

Non-Executive Director

OAO Industrial Market Competitors

Oando Plc, issuers of the OAO stock on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, have three market competitors who are also engaged in the Oil & Gas sector and/or Integrated Oil & Gas industry. The table below presents an overview of their market standing.

Index of African Stock Exchanges: