OANDO

/

Open: Prev close: Range: Volume:

Bid: Bid Volume: Offer: Offer Volume:

10 Day Range:

OAO

Market cap: EPS: P/E ratio:

Dividend yield: DPS: Issued shares:

Latest SENS

Nature of Business

Company Peers

Company / Share Price / Move

Financial Information

Important Dates

Oando Plc. JSE: OAO

Background of Oando

Based in Nigeria, Oando Plc is one of the largest integrated energy solutions providers in Africa. The group’s history stems back to 1956 with the establishment of Esso West Africa Incorporated, a petroleum marketing company and subsidiary of Exxon.

Today, the group operates throughout the upstream, midstream and downstream oil and gas industry. Oando’s group structure comprises production and exploration division Oando Energy Resources, distribution and infrastructure developer Oando Gas & Power, oil rig services provider Oando Energy Services, trade division Oando Supply & Trading and terminal development arm Oando Terminalling. Downstream business is conducted by Oando Marketing, which has retail and distribution outlets for sale of products in Nigeria, Ghana and Togo.

The group holds a portfolio of oil and gas assets in Nigeria and Sao Tome & Principe, with 16 licenses for exploration, development and production of concessions. It is also the developer of Nigeria’s foremost natural gas distribution network, securing the buy in of government.

AB InBev shares are available to buy through a primary listing on the Brussels Stock Exchange, and inward-listed as a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) in 2016. More than a billion shares were listed for sale at R1 934 per share, and the company became the JSE’s largest company by value with a market cap of R 3.2 trillion.

Oando shares have a primary listing on the Nigerian Stock Exchange and a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) in South Africa. Financial data is reported in Nigerian Naira

Oando Shares Growth Driver

The live online stocks chart shows that Oando share price spiked to a high of R2.40on the JSE in mid-2014, but the company’s performance has been heavily impacted by a sharp drop in oil prices, which has destabilised the Nigerian economy. ₦116.5 million₦37 million₦4.1 million for the first six months of 2016, largely due to the sale of several discontinued operations.

Oando has responded to the market challenges by scaling back on capital spending and reducing costs. The dollar-earning upstream and trading businesses have been identified as focus areas to buy into, while reduced leverage is forecast to be achieved through balance sheet optimisation.

There continues to be an oversupply of crude oil on the market, driven by the re-entry of Iran into the export market and increased production buy in from Iraq. Oil prices are forecast to remain depressed for the foreseeable future, but Oando has said that it is protected to a certain extent, as around 45% of its oil production is secured at $65 per barrel. Meanwhile, the group is working with its joint venture partners to execute its development programme, and recapitalisation and partial divestment is taking place within the Gas & Power and downstream businesses. This is expected to result in capital injection and a platform for these businesses to grow.

Oando Group Investor Tip

Oando share price has been stuttering as a result of tough economic conditions in Nigeria. Investors are understandably loathe to buy any oil and gas stocks at present due to the deflated oil price, and Oando shares will continue to be viewed with scepticism until prices improve and the company starts turning sustainable profits.

Oando Major Shareholders

Ocean and Oil Development Partners Nigeria.

Sector

Energy

Industry

Oil, Gas & Coal

Sub industry

Refining & Marketing

How to buy Oando Group Shares

Oando : How to buy Oando Group Shares Online

We have made it simple to buy JSE listed firm shares online. The easiest way to buy Oando Group shares or stocks is to; start by submitting the ‘BUY THIS SHARE’ form. Next, one of our experienced and certified stock brokers will personally get in contact with you to discuss your custom stock request. Finally, a stock advisor will confirm the amount of shares you are looking to invest in Oando Group and assist you with the setup and management of your stock portfolio account.

Here are the steps you must follow to Buy / Purchase Oando Group shares with utmost confidence:

Start by Filling in the BUY THIS SHARE form.

Insert your name, email, telephone number and monthly remuneration.

Then, Indicate the amount you are looking to invest in Oando Group.

Click the “ INVEST NOW” button

Once we have received your info, a dedicated stock advisor will personally call you back to discuss your personal share request.

Lastly, your newly appointed personal stock advisor will handle all account setups and reporting as stipulated by the financial services board of South Africa (FSB)

Buy Shares with Confidence

Buying JSE shares has never been this convenient and easy. #myfirstshare

View more JSE shares for sale – here.

4.7/5 - (26 votes)

Table of Contents

Toggle