CALGARY, Alberta, March 28, 2014 /PRNewswire/ --

Oando Energy Resources Inc. ("Oando Energy Resources" or the "Company") (TSX: OER), a company focused on oil and gas exploration and production in Nigeria, today announced that, further to its press releases dated December 20, 2012, September 16, 2013, November 28, 2013, January 31, 2014, and March 3, 2014, the outside date for completion of the proposed acquisition of the Nigerian Upstream Oil and Gas Business of ConocoPhillips (NYSE: COP) (the "ConocoPhillips Acquisition") has been extended to April 30, 2014.

Pursuant to an amendment agreement executed on March 27 2014, Oando Energy Resources and ConocoPhillips agreed to extend the outside date for completion of the ConocoPhillips Acquisition from March 31, 2014 to April 30, 2014 to enable the companies to satisfy all closing conditions including the anticipated consent of the Honourable Minister of Petroleum Resources in Nigeria. In consideration of this extension OER has consented to increasing its deposit by $25 million on April 17, 2014, if the consent of the Honourable Minister of Petroleum Resources is not received on or before April 11, 2014.

"As we approach the final stage of creating Africa's leading indigenous independent oil and gas company, we have committed to increasing our deposit as a goodwill gesture to ConocoPhillips, whilst we continue to work together to fulfil all conditions precedent for closure of this transaction," commented OER Chairman, Wale Tinubu.

Forward Looking Statements:

This news release contains forward-looking statements and forward-looking information within the meaning of applicable securities laws. The use of any of the words "expect", "anticipate", "continue", "estimate", "objective", "ongoing", "may", "will", "project", "should", "believe", "plans", "intends" and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking information or statements. In particular, this news release contains forward-looking statements relating to intended acquisitions.

Although the Company believes that the expectations and assumptions on which such forward-looking statements and information are reasonable, undue reliance should not be placed on the forward-looking statements and information because the Company can give no assurance that such statements and information will prove to be correct. Since forward-looking statements and information address future events and conditions, by their very nature they involve inherent risks and uncertainties.

Actual results could differ materially from those currently anticipated due to a number of factors and risks. These include, but are not limited to: risks related to international operations, completion of the ConocoPhillips Acquisition on the terms described or in a timely manner, the actual results of current exploration and drilling activities, changes in project parameters as plans continue to be refined and the future price of crude oil. Accordingly, readers should not place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned that the foregoing list of factors is not exhaustive.

Additional information on these and other factors that could affect the Company's financial results are included in reports on file with applicable securities regulatory authorities and may be accessed under the Company's profile on SEDAR website (http://www.sedar.com). The forward-looking statements and information contained in this news release are made as of the date hereof and the Company undertakes no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements or information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, unless so required by applicable securities laws.

For further information:

Pade Durotoye, CEO

Oando Energy Resources Inc.

[email protected]

+1-403-561-1713

Tokunboh Akindele

Head Investor Relations

Oando Energy Resources Inc.

[email protected]

+1-403-560-7450

Jeremy Dietz/David Feick

Investor Relations

+1-403-218-2833

[email protected]

[email protected]

(OER. OER.WT. OER.WT.A.)

SOURCE Oando Energy Resources Inc.