From the Belgian head office in Vilvoorde, and from the 15 other establishments throughout the world, more than 2,500 employees serve in excess of 15,000 industrial customers. If you call on Vinçotte’s services, you have the certainty of working with an extremely reliable organisation that guarantees a flexible and impartial service.

Worldwide Vinçotte provides more than 130 specialised services:

Civil engineering and metal structures

Electricity

Laboratory activities

Lifting

Non-destructive testing

Pressure equipment, welding and coating

Products,systems &food certification

Protection of the environment

Radiation protection

Safety engineering

Training

That's what Vinçotte is all about, round the clock: the safety and reliability of what is dear to you.

We can also use our expertise to make your reputation our responsibility.

Mission

Vinçotte creates a measurable added value for its clients' risk management. This sustainable approach is based on offering professional and innovative services in the field of certification, conformity assessment, advice and training in a neutral and independent way. These services contribute to the quality, safety and livability of the society.

Vision

We exceed the quality expectations of our clients and will never compromise on the level of quality and ethics we set for ourselves in order to fully assure our social responsibilities and assure sustainability for our company and the society.

Values

Our core values help us to work as a single team and form a firmly based culture. They are rooted in our heritage, and reflect Vinçotte’s ambitions for the future.

Integrity

We act with openness and honesty. We say what we mean, and do what we say.

Passion for the customer

Passion for the customer begins with ‘active listening' in order to comprehend his situation and his needs at best. All Vinçotte employees are eager and sincerely passionate to find the most suitable solution for our customers.

(Self-)development

We focus on the development of our people and give them opportunities to grow. We set high standards, and are never satisfied in our eagerness to excel.

(Self-)respect

Vinçotte employees must respect themselves and their colleagues. This manifests itself in their work, the safety regulations they comply with and their behaviour towards colleagues, clients and suppliers.

Since 1872

You can count on almost 140 years of know-how and experience from a recognised inspection body, and a notified body with the European Union. Vinçotte combines knowledge of multinationals with experience of SMEs, irrespective of the sector.

Worldwide

You call on the services of a worldwide organisation (with 13 establishments on five continents) which has positioned itself as an internationally recognisable brand name with a well-known logo.

Flexible

Thanks to the versatile way in which our labs are organised, we are in a position to offer the most flexible support for product and materials analysis, as well as in-situ non-destructive testing.

Impartial

You always receive an unbiased, independent service.

Highly qualified

You work with highly qualified engineers and technical specialists who have specialised, sector-specific expertise, and who guarantee an up-to-date service in line with the very latest insights and techniques, thanks to their ongoing training and their contacts with the academic world.

Vinçotte was established almost 140 years ago, and since 1989 it has existed in the form of a merger of AIB and Vinçotte: the strengths of the two entities pooled as a 100% Belgian enterprise.

The name Vinçotte refers to Robert Vinçotte, who in 1872 was given the task by a small number of industrialists to make steam boilers safer. At that time steam was the main source of energy for industry.

AIB stood for “Association des Industriels de Belgique”, and was set up in 1890 by Henri Adan, with the aim of carrying out preventive research and taking measures to prevent industrial accidents.

With a market share of around 75% on its home market of Belgium, Vinçotte is today one of the foremost inspection bodies in the euro zone.