El Can Pujol restaurant, in San Antonio, is one of those establishments of which you must have heard in any conversation in which good Ibizan cuisine arises as a topic. That of fish, shellfish and rice, the one with the most genuine sea flavor. And is not for less. Its doors have been open since 1980 and his know-how in the kitchen has crossed borders. Can Pujol dishes are already known in places like France, Italy and England and, of course, by the majority of Ibizans and tourists who come to Ibiza to spend their holidays.

Do not expect a place with extravagant and luxurious decoration, here it is the quality of the food that counts. Also do not pretend to find meat dishes on your menu, since they are dedicated solely and exclusively to fish, shellfish and rice, hence his good hand when making them. The quality of the fish, mostly caught off the coast of Ibiza, is extraordinary. The freshness of the product is indisputable, therefore, they have a nursery where you can choose between lobster or lobster so that they cook it at the moment. Do not waste too much time thinking about the menu since, whatever you choose, we are sure you will like it. Ask for a good Grilled fish and seafood, a tasty lobster stew or, of course, the classic Ibizan bullit de peix and let yourself be enveloped by the most intense flavors of the Ibizan sea.

Su wine list it is perfect to accompany the delicacies that you are going to taste. Broths Spanish, French and some local references will make your food more special if possible.

If you have room for dessert, go ahead and ask for the menu. Flaó, graixonera ... an assortment of the most popular Ibiza sweets.

have a Indoor room in which you can accommodate in winter, since open all year, and for the summer a terrace with views of the sea and incredible sunsets over the bay of San Antonio, another of the aces that Can Pujol has up his sleeve.

In Can Pujol they are prepared to Host any type of event as long as it does not exceed 50 guests, so that the treatment is as perfect as possible. Contact them and inform them about your preferences, they will be delighted to assist you!

A place of all the life that has managed to win the trust of the people thanks to its great culinary work.

Recommendation

It may not be the first time you eat bullit de peix, but we challenge you to try the one from Can Pujol and decide for yourself which one you prefer. Not every day you visit a restaurant of this level, so take advantage and order a starter as well. The espardeñas and the red prawn are spectacular.

How to arrive

From San Antonio, you must head towards Cala de Bou. You will find it at the end of the bay of the portmanyí municipality, on the right side of the road. Before arriving at the Seaview hotel.