A. Who Has the Right to Inspect Public Records?

Under Oregon’s Public Records Law, “every person” has a right to inspect any nonexempt public record of a public body in Oregon.[1] This right extends to any natural person, any corporation, partnership, firm or association, and any member or committee of the Legislative Assembly.[2] However, a public body may not use the Public Records Law to obtain public records from another public body.[3] Similarly, a public official, other than a legislator, acting within an official capacity may not rely on the Public Records Law to obtain records, although the individual could do so in an individual capacity. This does not prevent a public body from sharing records with other public bodies; it merely prevents a public body from using Public Records Law as a mechanism to obtain the desired records.

Generally, the identity, motive, and need of the person requesting access to public records are irrelevant.[4] Interested persons, news media representatives, business people seeking access for personal gain, persons seeking to embarrass government agencies, and scientific researchers all stand on an equal footing.[5]

However, the identity and motive of the person seeking disclosure may be relevant in determining the weight of the public interest in disclosure, a factor that is relevant to some exemptions.[6] In addition, the identity and motive of the requester may be relevant to determining whether the public body should waive or reduce its fee in fulfilling the request.[7]

B. Who is Subject to the Public Records Law?

1. Public Bodies

The Public Records Law applies to any public body in this state.[8] A “public body” is broadly defined to include

every state officer, agency, department, division, bureau, board and commission; every county and city governing body, school district, special district, municipal corporation, and any board, department, commission, council, or agency thereof; and any other public agency of this state.[9]

This definition includes any state agency, which means “any state officer, department, board, commission or court created by the Constitution or statutes of this state.”[10]

Thus, all state and local government bodies are subject to the Public Records Law, including “public corporations” such as the Oregon State Bar,[11] the SAIF Corporation,[12] and OHSU.[13]

Generally, legislative records are public records subject to inspection. However, a person may not seek to enforce the Public Records Law with respect to legislative records during the period the legislature is in session and the 15 days immediately preceding the start of the session.[14]

Court records are also generally public records subject to inspection.[15]

2. Private Bodies

On its face, the Public Records Law does not apply to private entities such as nonprofit corporations and cooperatives. However, if the ostensibly private entity is the “functional equivalent” of a public body, the Public Records Law applies to it.[16] Determining whether a private entity is the functional equivalent of a public body depends on the entity’s character and its relationship with government and government decision-making.[17] The following factors are usually relevant in making this determination:

the entity’s origin (was it created by government or was it created independently?);

the nature of the function(s) assigned and performed by the entity (are these functions traditionally performed by government or are they commonly performed by a private entity?);

the scope of the authority granted to and exercised by the entity (does it have the authority to make binding decisions or only to make recommendations to a public body?);

the nature and level of any governmental financial and nonfinancial support;

the scope of governmental control over the entity;

the status of the entity’s officers and employees (are they public employees?).[18]

Evaluating these factors generally depends on whether the policies underlying the Public Records Law require that the private entity’s records be available for inspection. For example, in concluding that a team charged by a school board with investigating a school’s operations was not a public body, the Oregon Supreme Court emphasized that the team could affect matters of public concern only through its report to the board; because that report would be available from the board under Public Records Law, the public would still have access to any information used in the board’s decisions.[19]

Analyzing the above factors, the following entities have been determined not to be the functional equivalent of a public body or of a state agency: the Citizens’ Utility Board;[20] Oregon Public Broadcasting;[21] and the Oregon Historical Society.[22]

Some entities might be the functional equivalent of a public body only with respect to functions that are governmental in nature; in such cases, only the records related to those functions will be subject to inspection.[23] For example, contracting with a large company to manage a significant government program might mean that the company’s records pertaining to the managed program are public records. But it does not mean that all of the company’s records are public records.[24]

As government “privatizes” various governmental functions, as the Legislative Assembly exempts state agencies from the application of various statutes, and as government is directed to perform various functions through contracts with private entities, numerous quasi-public entities are being created. The factors discussed above would be used to determine if a quasi-public entity is a public body with respect to its governmental functions.

Even if a private entity is not the functional equivalent of a public body, but contracts with a public body, its records may be obtained from the public body if the public body has custody of copies of the records.[25] In addition, a public body by rule or contract may require private entities with which it deals to make pertinent records available for public inspection. Records in a private entity’s possession may also be subject to disclosure where a public body actually owns the records.[26]

C. What Records Are Covered by the Law?

A “public record” is broadly defined to include

any writing that contains information relating to the conduct of the public’s business, including but not limited to court records, mortgages, and deed records, prepared, owned, used or retained by a public body regardless of physical form or characteristics.[27]

Despite this broad definition, not all public records are available for inspection through Public Records Law. As discussed later, many state and federal laws either prohibit public bodies from disclosing certain records, or give public bodies the discretion not to disclose. If a writing qualifies as a public record, the public body must either disclose it in response to a records request or assert an exemption from disclosure.[28]

1. Writing

A “writing” is also broadly defined to mean

handwriting, typewriting, printing, photographing and every means of recording, including letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combination thereof, and all papers, maps, files, facsimiles or electronic recordings.[29]

This encompasses information stored on virtually any medium, including information maintained in “machine readable or electronic form.”[30] Examples of writings include paper documents, e-mails, electronic documents (e.g., Word, Excel, and PDF formats), photographs, and audio or video recordings.

Telephone voicemail messages are also writings, but public bodies are not required to retain these types of records.[31] However, if a records request for a voicemail message is received while the message is still available, the message should be retained until the records request is completed.[32]

The Public Records Law does not require public bodies to create new public records.[33] Nor does it require public bodies to disclose the reasoning behind their actions; answer questions about their records; analyze their records;[34] or perform legal research in order to identify records that are responsive to a request.[35]

However, a public body is required to retrieve pre-existing information, which includes electronic data stored in databases.[36] This obligation exists regardless of whether the public body has actually generated a report for its own use that contains the requested data. Information is not exempt from disclosure simply because it is stored electronically or because retrieving the data would require a public body to query its information systems in ways it otherwise might not.

The format the information is produced in may depend on what formats are available to the public body or software vendor through the specific information system at issue.[37] Electronic data must be provided “in the form requested, if available”; if the requested format is not available, then the data should be provided in the form it is maintained.[38] We note that the common SQL databases in use today readily allow the retrieval and export of specific information in the Excel compatible format that requesters often prefer.

Oregon law imposes specific requirements with respect to state agency’s information systems that are intended to ensure nonexempt information is readily accessible to public records requesters. For example, state agencies must use “machine-readable and open formats” and adhere to “data standards approved by the Chief Data Officer * * * to promote data interoperability and openness.”[39] And “[a] state agency’s use of proprietary software may not diminish the ability of the public to inspect and copy a public record.”[40]

2. Prepared, Owned, Used, or Retained

Records need not have been prepared originally by the public body to qualify as public records. If records prepared outside the government contain “information relating to the conduct of the public’s business,” and are “owned, used or retained” by the public body, the records are within the scope of the Public Records Law. For example, records obtained by a public body from private parties in the course of fulfilling its statutory duties are public records if owned, used, or retained by the public body.[41] And records created by and in the possession of a private contractor are public records if the public body owns the records by contract.[42]

However, a document prepared by a private entity does not become a public record merely because a public official reviews the document in the course of official business so long as the official neither uses nor retains the document. Moreover, documents in the possession of a public officer or employee in a personal capacity are not public records.[43]

D. How Can a Person Inspect or Obtain Public Records?

1. Making a Request

A public body’s legal obligation to respond to a public records request is triggered by receipt of a written request.[44] Once a written request is received, the public body must provide copies of any records that are not exempt from disclosure, or a reasonable opportunity to inspect or copy those nonexempt records.[45]In order to facilitate this process, public bodies are required to make available to the public a written procedure for submitting records requests that identifies who the request should be sent to.[46] The written procedure must also provide information on how the public body calculates the fees it charges to fulfill records requests.[47] Once a public employee named in the procedure receives a written records request, certain deadlines to acknowledge and fulfill the request are triggered.[48]

When a public body receives an oral request for records, it is best practice to have the requester submit a written request so as to avoid future disputes over the scope of the request. And while public bodies should have an internal procedure in place to forward misdirected records requests to the employee(s) named in the posted records request procedure, requesters are encouraged to follow the posted procedure rather than include records requests within other correspondence with the public body.

Records requests sometimes reference the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) even though the statutory authority to request records from Oregon public bodies comes from the Oregon Public Records Law. Oregon public bodies are not bound by FOIA timeframes or any other provisions of that federal act.[49]Nevertheless, public bodies should not deny a request for their records merely because the requester references FOIA.

When the requester is a party to litigation involving a public body or has filed a tort claim notice, and the requested records relate to that litigation or notice, the requester must also send a copy of the request to the public body’s attorney.[50] While an attorney requesting records does not need the consent of the public body’s legal counsel before submitting the request, the attorney could violate Section 4.2 of the Oregon State Bar’s Rules of Professional Conduct by asking questions about the meaning of records or attempting to elicit admissions when the attorney knows that the public body is represented by legal counsel on a matter to which the records are relevant.[51]

In addition to the right to inspect records provided under Public Records Law, other state statutes may provide an independent right to inspect records from a particular public body.[52] For example, certain relatives of a deceased person are entitled to inspect and obtain copies of the autopsy report ordered by a medical examiner.[53]

2. Records Custodian

A public body is obligated to disclose only those records it is the custodian of,[54] that is, any records that it is directly or indirectly mandated to create, maintain, care for, or control.[55] In general, any public body that possesses or owns a public record for purposes related to one or more of its particular functions is a custodian of that record. This means that more than one public body can be the custodian of a given public record. This typically occurs when each public body has a copy of the same record for its own purposes. In such cases, each custodian is responsible for responding to public record requests directed to it. However, a public body is not the custodian of a record that it possesses as an agent for another public body, unless the record is not otherwise available.[56]When a public body receives a request for records it had received from another public body, it is permitted to consult with the originating body to determine whether the records may be exempt from disclosure.[57]

3. Acknowledging a Request

Once a public records request is received by a public employee identified in a public body’s publicly posted procedure, the public body must acknowledge receipt within five business days, unless the request is fulfilled before then.[58] The acknowledgment must also notify the requester whether or not the public body is the custodian of the requested records, or that the public body is uncertain if it is the custodian.[59]

In certain circumstances discussed in more detail below, a public body is excused from this five business-day deadline.[60] However, even then the public body is required to acknowledge the request as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay.[61]

A public body’s failure to acknowledge a records request cannot be the grounds for a petition to the Attorney General or the district attorney. However, failing to provide timely updates to a requester increases the chances of a petition on other grounds. And an unexplained failure to comply with this deadline may be seen as evidence that the public body did not process the records request in good faith. Therefore, we recommend that even if a public body is unable to provide a substantive update within five business days, it at least notify the requester of the delay and of when the requester should expect a substantive update.

In some cases, federal or state law may prohibit a public body from acknowledging whether responsive records exist; or acknowledging that records exist may result in the loss of federal benefits or some other sanction. For example, any public body that is subject to an expunction judgment for a juvenile’s records must respond to a request “by indicating that no record * * * exists.”[62] In such cases, the public body should provide a written statement to that effect and cite the relevant state or federal law, unless even citing the law would be a violation.[63]

4. Completing the Response to a Request

Once a public employee identified in a public body’s publicly posted procedure receives a records request, the public body must complete its response as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay.[64] How quickly a public body should be able to complete a request under this standard depends on various factors, including the specificity of the request, the volume of records requested, the amount of exempt material, and the ease in determining whether any of the records are exempt from disclosure. In most cases it should be possible to complete the response within ten business days. However, in some cases more time—even significantly more time—may be required.

a. The 15 Business-Day Deadline

The law establishes a baseline expectation that public bodies will complete their responses no later than 15 business days after receiving the request.[65] However, a public body must still complete its response as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay. That is, requesters who have made particularly straightforward requests can appeal a public body’s inaction even before 15 business days have elapsed.[66] A public body unable to meet the 15 business-day deadline must notify the requester in writing that the request is still being processed and provide the requester with a reasonable estimated date of completion.[67]

A public body completes its response to a records request when it has done all of the following:[68]

Provided the requester with access to or copies of all the requested records that are not exempt from disclosure, or explained where the records are already publicly available.

Cited any exemptions used to withhold records, including the specific state or federal statute for any exemption appearing outside of ORS 192.345 or 192.355.[69]

Provided any nonexempt material from a public record that also contains exempt material.[70]

If the public body is not the custodian of any of the records, provided a written statement to that effect.

Cited in writing to any federal or state law that prohibits the public body from acknowledging whether the requested records exist (or to a law that would impose a loss of federal benefits or other sanction), unless providing that citation would violate the federal or state law.

If the public body has redacted any information or withheld any information from disclosure, included a statement that the requester may seek review of this withholding pursuant to ORS 192.401, 192.411, 192.415, 192.418, 192.422, 192.427 and 192.431.[71]

The 15 business-day deadline is suspended when the public body provides the requester with a fee estimate to fulfill the request (until the fee has been paid or waived)[72] or when the public body, in good faith, requests clarification from the requester (until the requester provides that clarification or declines to).[73] These provisions are intended to facilitate efficient business, not to justify delay. As a result, public bodies should promptly consider requests for fee waiver. And requesters who wish to keep their request on track will respond to inquiries from the public body as quickly as possible. If no response is received to the fee estimate or clarifying question within 60 days, the public body can close the request.[74]

b. Exceptions to the Deadlines

A public body is excused from the 5 business-day and 15 business-day deadlines if compliance would be impracticable for any of the following reasons:

The staff or volunteers necessary to complete a response are unavailable (which includes when staff or volunteers are on leave or are not scheduled to work).

Compliance would demonstrably impede the public body’s ability to perform other necessary services.

The public body is simultaneously processing a high volume of other requests.[75]

The public body carries the burden to demonstrate that one of these exceptions applies,[76] and the exceptions are intended to apply narrowly—either to very small public bodies or in unusual circumstances. Public bodies with the resources to adequately staff its public records requests are expected to do so, and to provide other staff to cover for any absences.[77]

The exception for the unavailability of staff applies when the staff necessary to fulfill a records request are literally unavailable; the necessary staff may be the keepers of the requested records, or in a small public body, the staff responsible for processing records requests.

The exception for impeding services could apply to an extremely large records request, but is more likely to apply where a public body is so small that its staff would be unable to attend to other necessary work in order to comply with the deadlines.

And the exception for a high volume of requests recognizes that even a reasonably staffed system may occasionally become overwhelmed. This does not mean that a public body is free to put off work on a new request until all of the prior requests are complete. It may be unreasonable to delay responding to a straightforward request even if a very complex request is in process.

c. Failing to Complete a Timely Response

If a public body fails to comply with the 15 business-day deadline or complete its response as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay, the requester can petition the Attorney General (for state agencies) or the appropriate district attorney (for other public bodies) to order the disclosure of any nonexempt records; or file suit against the public body in circuit court (for elected officials).[78]

A requester can also submit a petition or file suit if the estimated date of completion provided by the public body is unreasonably long and will result in undue delay of disclosure.[79] However, merely failing to comply with a timeframe set by the requester does not constitute a denial entitling the requester to petition for release of the records.[80]

If a petition is granted for failing to timely respond, the public body can be ordered to disclose any nonexempt material within seven days, or within any other appropriate period.[81] This allows the reviewing authority to determine a reasonable amount of time for completing a response to a particular records request. House Bill 2353 » (2019) also permits the order, in certain circumstances, to assess a $200 penalty against the public body or reduce or waive the public body’s fee to fulfill the request.

5. Inspecting Records versus Obtaining Copies

A requester is entitled to choose between a copy of a public record (if the record is of a nature permitting copying) or a reasonable opportunity to inspect or copy the record.[82]

a. Inspecting Records

A public body must provide “proper and reasonable opportunities for inspection and examination of [its] records” at its offices during usual business hours.[83] This duty applies also to records “maintained in machine readable or electronic form.”[84] In addition, requesters must be provided with reasonable facilities to take notes of the records.[85] In short, the law directs public bodies to take reasonable steps to accommodate members of the public while they inspect public records.

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) prohibits discrimination against persons with disabilities in governmental activities and requires public bodies to ensure that their communications with individuals with disabilities are as effective as communications with others.[86] Providing nonexempt public records under the Oregon Public Records Law is a governmental activity covered by the ADA. Thus, when making public records available, a public body must provide an opportunity for individuals with disabilities to request an alternative form (large print, Braille, audio tape, etc.).[87] The public body must give primary consideration to the choice expressed by the individual, but is not required to provide personal devices such as prescription glasses or readers for personal use or study.[88] The public body is entitled to consider the resources available for the program from which the records are sought in responding to a request for alternative format, and may conclude that compliance with the request would create undue burdens.[89] Before refusing a request for accommodation under the ADA, a public body that is unsure of its obligations should consult with its legal counsel.

Note that a public body may not charge a person with a disability to cover any additional costs of providing records in an alternative form, although the public body may charge a fee for all other “actual costs” that may be recovered under the Public Records Law just as it would for any other requester.

b. Copying Records

A public body is required to provide a copy of a nonexempt record if the record is susceptible to copying.[90] Requesters are also permitted to use their own equipment to make copies, subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by the public body to protect the integrity of the records and to prevent interference with the regular duties of the public body.[91]

Some records may not be copied. For example, an individual’s signature on a voter registration card is subject to inspection but not subject to copying.[92] And federal copyright law generally prohibits the copying, but not the inspecting, of protected materials.[93]

Public bodies must provide electronic records in the form requested, if available. If the requested form is not available, the public body must make the record available in the form it is kept.[94]

6. Protective Rules

A public body is authorized to “adopt reasonable rules necessary for the protection of [its] records and to prevent interference with the regular discharge of [its] duties.”[95]

When public bodies establish such rules, they should provide notice and opportunity for public comment so as to avoid the appearance of arbitrary action. Public bodies subject to the state Administrative Procedures Act must adopt such rules in conformity with that Act.[96] A rule designed solely to make public access to records more difficult is not valid, while a rule carefully designed to prevent destruction of public records or to expedite staff identification of requested records is lawful.

The statutory right to inspect public records encompasses a right to examine original records, and inspection of originals ordinarily should be allowed if requested. But the right to inspect does not include a right to browse through file cabinets, file folders, or electronic files,[97] and a public body may adopt administrative measures to supervise original document review. Furthermore, the right to examine original records does not require a public body to allow inspection of an original record that contains some information that is exempt from disclosure.[98] In such a case, a public body acts reasonably if it furnishes a copy of the original, with the exempt material redacted.

7. Fees

A public body is authorized to establish fees “reasonably calculated to reimburse [it for the] actual cost of making public records available.”[99] This includes the “costs for summarizing, compiling or tailoring the public records, either in organization or media, to meet the person’s request.”[100]

State agencies in the executive branch should be aware of a DAS policy on public records fees.[101] The policy provides guidance on all aspects of fees, including how much to charge for particular tasks and when to reduce or waive fees.

If the fee estimate for a request exceeds $25, the public body must first provide a written estimate to the requester and receive confirmation that the requester is willing to pay.[102] A public body may require prepayment of its estimated charges before taking further action on a request.[103] Of course, if the actual charges are less than the prepayment, any overpayment should be refunded promptly.[104]

“Actual cost” may include a charge for the time spent by the public body’s staff in locating the requested records; reviewing the records in order to redact exempt material; supervising a person’s inspection of original documents in order to protect the records; copying records; certifying documents as true copies; or sending records by special methods such as express mail. “Actual cost” also may include the cost of time spent by the public body’s attorney reviewing and redacting, although the cost of the attorney’s time spent determining the application of the Public Records Law is not recoverable.[105]

Public bodies may charge for search time even if they fail to locate any records responsive to the request or even if the records located are subsequently determined to be exempt from disclosure.[106] However, it is best practice, where possible, to advise a requester beforehand if significant portions of the records are likely to be exempt from disclosure.

Public bodies are permitted to negotiate with requesters to reduce the cost of fulfilling requests. This can be accomplished in many ways, including using narrower search terms or a narrower date range, limiting the search to only the most relevant employees of the public body, or excluding the records most likely to contain exempt information. The public employees most knowledgeable about the subject matter of a particular request are a useful resource for the public body in determining what alternatives can be offered to the requester. While requesters are under no obligation to refine their request in order to reduce cost, many appreciate the opportunity to work with the public body to obtain the most substantive records for a lower cost.

As noted above, public bodies may not include charges for any additional costs incurred to provide records in an alternative format to individuals with vision or hearing impairments when required by the Americans with Disabilities Act.[107]

a. Fee Schedules

Public bodies must make available to the public the amounts of and the manner of calculating fees for responding to public records requests.[108] This typically includes such information as the hourly charge for different categories of staff work, and the charge to copy records. We recommend that public bodies establish their fee schedules with notice and opportunity for public comment so that the public is aware of the justification for the fees. State agencies should adopt their fee schedules in compliance with the state Administrative Procedures Act.[109]

Public bodies must be prepared to demonstrate that their fee schedules are based upon their actual costs in making public records available for inspection or copying.[110] While there is no provision in the Public Records Law that authorizes a person to petition the Attorney General to review the reasonableness of an agency’s fees, state courts do possess this authority.[111] And the Attorney General’s authority to enforce the inspection provisions of the Public Records Law may require evaluation of an agency’s fees where the amount of the fee in comparison to the nature of the request suggests that the true purpose of the fee is to constructively deny the request, rather than to recoup the agency’s actual costs.[112] This evaluation typically requires the public body to explain how it calculated its fee.[113]

b. Waiving or Reducing Fees

A public body may waive or reduce its fee for a particular request if doing so “is in the public interest because making the record available primarily benefits the general public.”[114] If disclosure is in the public interest, the public body’s decision to deny a request for a fee waiver or reduction must be reasonable under the totality of the circumstances.[115] A requester can contest a public body’s decision not to waive or reduce fees by submitting a petition to the Attorney General (for state agencies) or the local district attorney (for local public bodies), or by filing suit in circuit court (for elected officials).[116] And a requester can appeal even after paying the fee to the public body.[117]

It is possible that there may be narrow circumstances in which certain public bodies are prohibited from waiving or reducing fees.[118] Public bodies that believe they are so prohibited should consult with legal counsel.

(1) Public Interest Test

Waiving or reducing fees is in the public interest “when the furnishing of the record has utility—indeed, its greatest utility—to the community or society as a whole.”[119] This is distinct from situations where disclosure would primarily affect “a concern or interest of a private individual or entity.”[120]

If a requester seeks records relating to the requester, a mere allegation that the public body has treated the individual oppressively, absent a broader public interest, does not satisfy the public interest standard.[121] On the other hand, investigative reporters with established credentials, who sought records concerning military aviation safety with the intent of reporting on those records, were able to satisfy the public interest standard by demonstrating that fee requirements inhibited their ability to obtain government records.[122] And a requester who intended to use records in connection with lectures and articles on the history of the labor movement, without personal financial benefit, demonstrated sufficient public interest.[123]

Regardless of how interested the public may be in the matter the requested records relate to, if the requester fails to demonstrate the ability to meaningfully disseminate the information, disclosure will not primarily benefit the public.[124]

Public bodies may seek additional information from a requester to help clarify the basis for seeking a fee waiver. In determining whether the requester has established a sufficient public interest, relevant factors include the requester’s identity, the purpose for which the requester intends to use the information, the character of the information, whether the requested information is already in the public domain, and whether the requester can demonstrate the ability to disseminate the information to the public. The requester’s inability to pay is also a factor, but is not, on its own, a sufficient basis for a fee waiver. Without such information, it may be difficult or even impossible to assess whether the requested disclosure is in the public interest.

(2) Decision on Fee Waiver or Reduction

Even if waiving or reducing the fee is in the public interest, a public body has the discretion whether to do so.[125] However, the public body’s decision, on a case-by-case basis, must be reasonable under the totality of the circumstances.[126]

A public body’s fee-waiver decision should consider (1) the character of the public interest in the particular disclosure, (2) the extent to which the fee impedes that public interest, and (3) the extent to which a waiver would burden the public body.[127] Of course, other considerations may be appropriate in any given case.

Facts typically relevant to a fee-waiver decision include how narrowly tailored the request is to a matter of public interest; the time and expense needed to fulfill the request; the volume of the records requested; the need to segregate exempt from nonexempt materials; whether the fee was avoidable; and the ability of the requester to pay the fee. A public body may consider the aggregate effect of numerous public records requests from the same requester in assessing its burden.[128]

In reviewing petitions for fee waiver, we have determined that

a 50% fee reduction was reasonable for a major news outlet with the resources to pay where the request sought records from over 200 files, rather than from a specific type of file tied to the public interest;[129]

a 20% fee reduction for a media requester was reasonable where 56 hours of staff time was needed to fulfill a broad request not tailored to specific files;[130]

no fee reduction was reasonable where the responsive records totaled 14,266 pages;[131]

no fee reduction for a media requester was reasonable where disclosure would not inform the public about the operation of a state or local governmental body and where the requester had already paid the fee (which indicated that the fee did not deter access);[132] and

a public body had to waive its fee for retrieving records from a private storage facility where the state-run storage facility offered no-cost retrieval.[133]

When assessing a request for a fee waiver of 100%, public bodies should also determine whether a more modest fee reduction is appropriate. There may be circumstances in which denying a total fee waiver is reasonable, but where refusing a 25% or 50% reduction is unreasonable.

8. Consulting with Legal Counsel

Public bodies often must consult with legal counsel regarding public record requests. Briefly postponing the disclosure of records for that purpose does not violate the Public Records Law. It is reasonable for a public body to obtain legal advice on an extensive public records request when compliance will seriously disrupt the public body’s operations. Similarly, it is reasonable for a public body to consult counsel about disclosure of documents that appear to be exempt, in whole or in part, from disclosure. When a public body receives a request for records that the public body believes may be pertinent to a legal claim or litigation against the public body, it is also reasonable to consult counsel.

We advise state agencies to consult with counsel when presented with physically extensive or legally complex requests for disclosure of public records. We have concluded that “when a public body does so, it does not thereby actually or constructively deny the request.”[134] However, it is unreasonable to use consultation with counsel merely as a tactic to delay or frustrate the inspection process. In addition, consulting with counsel does not relieve the public body of its obligation to comply with the five business-day and 15 business-day deadlines. If the need for legal advice would push the public body’s final response past the 15 business-day deadline, the public body will need to provide the requester in writing with a reasonable estimated date of completion.

9. Retaining and Destroying Public Records

The Public Records Law discussed in this Manual does not govern the retention and destruction of public records. Instead, these activities are regulated by ORS 192.001 to 192.170. The Secretary of State is the public records administrator of the state,[135] and the State Archivist possesses rulemaking authority on the retention and destruction of public records.[136] Separate provisions apply for the legislature and the state courts:[137] the State Court Administrator sets retention schedules for the state courts and their administrative offices,[138] while the Legislative Administration Committee in conjunction with the Archivist sets retention schedules for legislative records.[139]

State agencies and political subdivisions must follow the general records retention schedules found in the Archivist’s rules,[140] as well as any special retention schedules that are specific to the public body.[141] Even public records that are exempt from disclosure are subject to these schedules. For more information about document retention schedules and preservation of public records, contact the State Archivist, 800 Summer Street N.E., Salem, Oregon 97310.

It is important to understand that the retention and destruction statutes define a “public record” differently than the Public Records Law. In order to trigger the law’s retention requirement, a record must, among other things, be “necessary to satisfy the fiscal, legal, administrative, or historical policies, requirements, or needs of the state agency or political subdivision.”[142] This element is absent from the definition of “public record” in the Public Records Law. But records that would not be necessary for any of those purposes—and that therefore would not be subject to retention requirements—may still be subject to public disclosure if they are requested while they still exist.[143]

It is a crime to knowingly destroy, conceal, remove, or falsely alter a public record without lawful authority.[144] Lawful authority to destroy public records derives from the statutes governing record retention and from the rules implementing those statutes.

10. Oregon Transparency Website

The Oregon Transparency Website makes certain basic information about government readily available to the public.[145] Its creation marks a turn toward government that is proactively transparent, rather than simply open to inspection on request. The website’s focus is primarily fiscal, with information on budgets, incoming revenues, tax expenditures, direct expenditures, and public employee compensation. State agencies’ public meetings notices are also posted to the website, as required by law.[146]

The Transparency Oregon Advisory Commission advises DAS with respect to the website. DAS welcomes comments about the site, including suggestions for additional content, at oregon.transparency@oregon.gov.

Agencies may want to consider a similarly proactive approach with respect to high-profile matters. Anticipating inevitable public records requests can make them far more manageable.

E. How Does a Public Body Determine if Records Are Exempt from Disclosure?

1. The Nature of the Exemptions

The Public Records Law is primarily a disclosure law, not a confidentiality law.[147] Every public record of a public body is subject to inspection, except as expressly provided by the exemptions contained in ORS 192.345 and 192.355.[148] Those two statutes also incorporate federal statutes or regulations that prohibit disclosure of records, and Oregon laws that prohibit disclosure or otherwise make records confidential.

Oregon courts interpret exemptions narrowly,[149] as does the Attorney General. In addition, a public body that denies a records request has the burden of proving that the information is exempt from disclosure.[150]

A public body is ordinarily free to disclose a record or information that is exempt from disclosure.[151] And a public body that, acting in good faith, discloses an exempt record is not liable for any loss or damages based on that disclosure.[152]

However, there are some categories of records and information that public bodies are legally prohibited from disclosing or that may be disclosed only to specific entities or in specific circumstances.[153] Statutes that use terms like “shall not,” “may not,” “it is unlawful,” or “it is prohibited” typically prohibit disclosure, without leaving any discretion to the public body.[154] Public bodies can potentially incur liability for disclosing these types of records.

Therefore, a public body receiving a public records request should first determine whether disclosure is prohibited by state or federal law, or by court order. If disclosure is not prohibited, and the public body sees no reason to withhold a requested record, the public body may disclose the record without further analysis.

Even if the public body perceives reasons to withhold the record, it must disclose the record unless an express statutory exemption applies. Naturally, the type of information appearing in a record will always be relevant to determining whether an exemption applies. In addition, some exemptions require a public body to weigh public or private interests favoring nondisclosure against public interests favoring disclosure.

Whenever a public body withholds a record or portions of a record from disclosure, it must notify the requester and cite the applicable exemption(s).[155] The public body should also consider briefly explaining the nature of the records withheld or redacted for each exemption asserted. This will provide the requester with the information necessary to decide whether to seek review of the denial.

If a public body asserts an exemption that is ultimately rejected by the courts, the public body may be required to pay the requester’s litigation costs and attorney fees, as well as its own costs.[156]

2. Conditional and Unconditional Exemptions from Disclosure.

All of the exemptions described in ORS 192.345 are conditional: they exempt certain types of information from disclosure “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance.” In other words, the public body must balance the public interest in disclosure against the competing interest in confidentiality. The law presumes that the public interest favors disclosure.[157]

In contrast, many of the exemptions in ORS 192.355 are unconditional, in that the protected information is exempt without regard to the public interest. In effect, the legislature has determined that the confidentiality interests outweigh disclosure interests as a matter of law. Several of the exemptions in ORS 192.355 are conditioned on the extent to which confidentiality interests outweigh the public interest in disclosure; however, they are worded differently than the balancing test used in ORS 192.345, and vary by exemption.[158]

Similarly, most of the Oregon laws found outside of ORS 192.345 or 192.355 that prohibit disclosure or otherwise make records confidential are unconditional. However, there are a significant number that apply the same public interest balancing test found in ORS 192.345 or otherwise condition disclosure on a balancing of interests.

In determining whether an exemption applies, the identity of the requester and the circumstances surrounding the request are irrelevant to whether the information fits within the category of the exemption.[159] The surrounding circumstances become relevant only if the requested information comes under an exemption that requires a balancing of interests. In that context, the requester’s purpose in seeking disclosure may be relevant to determining whether the public interest requires disclosure: for example, the Court of Appeals held that the public interest did not require disclosure of the names of OHSU employees involved in animal testing where the requester’s stated purpose of ensuring the proper treatment of animals did not depend on receiving these names.[160]

3. The Public Interest in Disclosure

“The public’s interest in disclosure encompasses the public’s interest in information about the manner in which public business is conducted and the right of the public to monitor what * * * officials are doing on the job.”[161]

Determining whether the public interest requires disclosure of a particular record is a two-step process. First, the public body should determine what the competing interests are in disclosure and nondisclosure, as well as the significance of those interests.[162] This involves looking to the exemption at issue and any case-specific facts, including the records themselves.[163] Second, the public body should weigh those interests and determine which one predominates, with the presumption in favor of disclosure.[164]

Analyzing the case-specific facts typically involves considering the importance of the particular governmental activity at issue;[165] how high-profile the matter is;[166] whether disclosure would impede government functions;[167] whether disclosure would help the public better monitor public business;[168] and the effect of disclosure on any privacy interests.[169] The public interest typically does not depend on the requester’s private interests,[170] or on protecting public bodies from embarrassment or scrutiny.[171]

For example, in a decision involving an exemption for internal personnel investigations of police officers that do not result in discipline, the Supreme Court identified the relevant confidentiality interests as protecting the officers’ privacy and the police department’s ability to effectively discipline, evaluate, and train its officers; the relevant disclosure interest was transparency of police department operations, as well as of the operations of the civilian review board charged with independent oversight of the personnel investigation at issue.[172]

In determining that the public interest required disclosure, the court emphasized the importance of public oversight of police officer use of force; that this was the first high-profile matter reviewed by the relatively new civilian review board; that the privacy interests of the officers were “substantially diminished” because their identities and alleged misconduct were already public; and that no evidence had been introduced to support the assertion that disclosure would impede the police department’s ability to effectively discipline, evaluate, and train its officers.[173]

4. Separating Exempt and Nonexempt Material

When a record contains both exempt information and nonexempt information, the public body must produce the nonexempt information.[174] Public bodies are excused from this obligation only where separating out the exempt information from the nonexempt is not reasonably possible or where disclosing the nonexempt information would not genuinely preserve the confidentiality of the exempt information.[175]

Similarly, the analysis of whether the public interest requires disclosure of a record is not necessarily all or none. The public interest might be served by disclosing some, but not all, of a particular record.[176]

The obligation to separate exempt and nonexempt information applies regardless of whether the requester expressly invokes it. However, a specific request for the public body to do so—even after a refusal to disclose—can be helpful.

5. Waiving an Exemption

A public body risks waiving its discretion to assert an exemption if it publicly discloses the exempt information. For example, the Court of Appeals has held that a school district waived an exemption over a personnel investigation report when its investigator disclosed “substantially all of the information” in that report through testimony at an unemployment hearing (where the transcript of that hearing was publicly available).[177]

However, this does not necessarily mean that a public body waives an exemption by selectively disclosing a record in the course of fulfilling its statutory duties. For example, we concluded that a state university did not waive the exemption over preliminary research data and reports through disclosure to other members of its research cooperative.[178] We explained that “where limited disclosure of a public record does not thwart the policy supporting the exemption, the public body does not thereby waive its prerogative not to disclose the record to others.”[179]

And certain exemptions are not waived by disclosure in response to a written records request, namely the attorney-client privilege and the other evidentiary privileges contained in ORS 40.225 to 40.295 ».[180]

Because the Court of Appeals has observed that “there is no blanket principle that applies to waiver” under the Public Records Law,[181] a public body that wishes to selectively disclose an exempt public record without waiving the exemption should consult with counsel.

6. Records More than 25 Years Old

Generally, the Public Records Law does not exempt from disclosure records that are more than 25 years old.[182] For example, we have determined that the psychotherapist-patient and physician-patient privileges did not apply to records that were more than 25 years old.[183]

However, there are several exceptions to this rule that either mirror or are subsets of other exemptions:[184]

(1) “Records less than 75 years old which contain information about the physical or mental health or psychiatric care or treatment of a living individual, if the public disclosure thereof would constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy.”[185]

(2) “Records less than 75 years old which were sealed in compliance with statute or by court order.”

(3) “Records of a person who is or has been in the custody or under the lawful supervision of a state agency, a court or a unit of local government, * * * to the extent that disclosure thereof would interfere with the rehabilitation of the person if the public interest in confidentiality clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure, [but only] for a period of 25 years after termination of such custody or supervision.”[186]

(4) “Student records exempt from disclosure under state or federal law.”

Based on their context, it does not appear that these four exceptions are meant to create separate exemptions from disclosure. They merely describe categories of records that do not lose their exempt status after 25 years. This conclusion is supported by statutory context showing that the exceptions were enacted as a companion to the 25-year rule,[187] the fact that they were not enacted as part of the single exemption statute that existed at the time, and the fact that they generally mirror or are a subset of previously existing exemptions.

7. The Federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)

Because Oregon’s Public Records Law was modeled after FOIA and comparable state laws, it is appropriate to look to federal and state court decisions on those laws in interpreting Oregon’s exemptions.[188] However, it is important to keep in mind that the decisions of these other courts are not dispositive in Oregon courts, particularly if the text of the applicable Oregon exemption differs from its federal or state counterpart, or if Oregon case law has already interpreted the Oregon exemption differently.

8. Finding Exemptions

The Attorney General maintains a publicly available catalog of public records exemptions found in Oregon law at https://justice.oregon.gov/PublicRecordsExemptions/ ».[189] For each exemption, the catalog provides a brief description, the full statutory text, the affected public bodies, the text of the balancing test (if applicable), and the significant appellate cases and public records orders analyzing the exemption.

While the catalog does not have legal effect, it serves as a useful guide for both public bodies and records requesters in locating and understanding the exemptions relevant to a particular records request.[190]

9. Sunshine Committee

In 2015, the Attorney General formed a Public Records Task Force consisting of legislators, representatives of media and local government, and other stakeholders.[191] The task force’s work resulted in the passage of Senate Bill 481 during the 2017 legislative session. This bill established for the first time clear time frames for responding to public records requests, and directed the creation of the publicly available catalog of exemptions discussed above.

Another bill enacted in the 2017 session established the Oregon Sunshine Committee as a successor to the task force. The Sunshine Committee is tasked with reviewing and reporting on exemptions from disclosure found in Oregon law and on other ways to modify laws to encourage the transparent and efficient handling of records requests.[192] These reports will be reviewed by the Legislative Counsel Committee and its newly established public records subcommittee.[193] More information on the Sunshine Committee can be found at https://www.doj.state.or.us/oregon-department-of-justice/public-records/public-records-reform/.

F. Where and How Does a Person Proceed if Access Is Refused?

If a public body denies a requester the right to inspect a public record, the recourse available to the requester generally depends on the identity of the public body. The same procedures apply for denials of a request for fee waiver or reduction,[194] or for a public body’s failure to comply with timing obligations;[195] however, for brevity’s sake, we will refer throughout this section to denials of the right to access records.

If the request was denied by a state agency or official, but not an elected official, the requester may petition the Attorney General for an order compelling disclosure of the records.[196]

If the request was denied by a local public body, but not an elected official, the requester may petition the district attorney in the county where the public body is located for an order compelling disclosure of the records.[197]

If the request was denied by a state elected official, the requester may seek review in Marion County Circuit Court;[198] and if the request was denied by a local elected official, the requester may seek review in the circuit court in the county where the official is located.[199]

The requester can also seek court review in Marion County Circuit Court if the Attorney General has denied any part of a petition.[200] If the appropriate district attorney has denied any part of a petition, the requester can seek review in the circuit court in that same county.[201]

Before seeking formal review of a denial, it may be worthwhile for a disappointed requester to seek a decision at a higher level within the public body. This increases the probability of a favorable decision without the need to seek review, and may encourage the agency to obtain legal advice concerning disclosure of the records at issue.

In addition, the newly created office of Public Records Advocate can help resolve public records disputes. The Advocate offers formal assistance with requests for records from state agencies and cities,[202] and informal assistance in other cases. Either the records requester or agency can request the Advocate’s assistance.[203]

1. Petitions to the Attorney General

a. Role of the Attorney General

A public records requester contesting a state agency’s denial of a records request, other than by an elected official, must first seek review from the Attorney General,[204] who acts in a quasi-judicial role. The Attorney General will consider the petition and issue an order denying or granting it, or denying it in part and granting it in part. That is, the Attorney General will either order the state agency to disclose the records at issue (or parts of them) or conclude that the records are exempt from disclosure.[205]

While the petition is pending, an agency may continue to seek legal advice and assistance from its assigned attorney at the Oregon Department of Justice. (A separate attorney is assigned to oversee the review process and recommend a disposition to the Attorney General.)

Even if the agency has denied a records request after discussing the request for disclosure with the Department of Justice, petitioning for the Attorney General’s formal review may not be futile. Advice given to the agency in such circumstances, sometimes by assigned counsel without further review in the Attorney General’s office, often is expressly preliminary. The advice may be based on a description of the requested record, rather than on inspection of the record. And sometimes agencies do not follow the advice of assigned counsel. The petition process also gives the requester the opportunity to provide the Attorney General with additional information. For example, the requester may be able to articulate ways in which the disclosure would serve the public interest. Such information could lead to the conclusion that a conditional exemption claimed by the agency is not available under the circumstances.

b. General Procedures

The general procedures for seeking review by the Attorney General are described in this section. With respect to certain records of health professional regulatory boards or the Health Licensing Office, the procedures are somewhat different and are discussed below.

There is no filing fee for seeking review by the Attorney General. The statutory form of petition is set out at Appendix B-9, and an electronic form is available at https://www.doj.state.or.us/oregon-department-of-justice/public-records/petition-for-public-records-order/. However, it is not necessary to use any particular form, so long as the petition includes the information required by ORS 192.422(1):

The identity of the requester,

The state agency that has the records being sought,

A description of the records that are sought,[206]

A statement that a public records request was submitted, and

A statement that the request was denied, including the person denying the request and the date of the denial, if known.

It is helpful if the petition also explains why the requester believes that the state agency’s asserted exemptions do not apply, and attaches any relevant correspondence with the agency.

Upon receipt of a petition, the Attorney General must promptly notify the agency.[207] The agency must then send the Attorney General the requested records for review, together with a statement of its reasons for believing the records should not be disclosed.[208] The Attorney General may permit the agency to disclose the nature or substance of the records rather than the actual records if that is appropriate under the circumstances.[209]

The burden is on the state agency to sustain its denial of the records request.[210] Consequently, if the Attorney General is unable to affirmatively conclude that records are exempt, the Attorney General must order them to be disclosed.[211] Agencies must be able to explain why the withheld records are covered by the asserted exemption, and—for conditional exemptions—why the public interest does not require disclosure.[212]

For conditional exemptions, neither the requester not the public body is required to introduce facts to explain the significance of the disclosure and confidentiality interests at issue.[213] For example, a requester can choose to rely only on the Public Records Law’s “strong and enduring policy that public records and governmental activities be open to the public.”[214] However, determinations on review by the Attorney General or a court frequently depend on looking at facts specific to the records at issue.[215] For a requester, this typically means explaining how disclosure will better help monitor public business and why the relevant public business is so significant. For a public body, this typically means explaining how disclosure will cause harm to the relevant interests, such as the public body’s operations.

The Attorney General has seven days in which to grant or deny the petition in whole or in part.[216] If the Attorney General does not rule on the petition within the statutory time period, the petition is considered denied.[217] The order granting or denying the petition is sent to the requester and to the state agency, and is also publicly posted at http://cdm17027.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/landingpage/collection/p17027coll2 ».

If either the state agency or requester disagrees with the Attorney General’s order, court proceedings can be instituted after the petition process is concluded.

c. Health Professional Regulatory Boards and Health Licensing Office

Special procedures for seeking review by the Attorney General apply to certain records of health professional regulatory boards[218] and of certain boards under the administration of the Health Licensing Office (HLO).[219]

If the public record being sought “contains information concerning a licensee or applicant,” the requester must send a copy of the petition by first-class mail to the affected regulatory board or HLO.[220] This must be done on or before the date of filing the petition with the Attorney General.[221] And if the requested records are of the type that can be withheld based on ORS 676.165, 676.175, or 676.595 », the requester’s petition must include clear and convincing evidence that the public interest in disclosure outweighs the interests in nondisclosure.[222]

The board or HLO then has 48 hours to forward the petition via first-class mail to any affected licensees or applicants; and to notify these licensees or applicants of the right to file a written response to the petition with the Attorney General within seven days.[223] Any response submitted by a licensee or applicant is then forwarded to the requester by the Attorney General.[224]

Because of the opportunity given to the licensee or applicant to submit a response, the Attorney General has 15 days to consider these petitions, instead of the usual seven.[225]

If the Attorney General orders disclosure of the records, the order must be sent by first-class mail to the requester, the affected board or HLO, and affected licensees or applicants.[226] The board or HLO may not disclose records under such an order until seven days after service of the Attorney General’s order on affected licensees and applicants.[227] Following the Attorney General’s order, the board, the requester, or an affected licensee or applicant may institute court proceedings.[228] Jurisdiction rests with the circuit court for the county where the records are held.[229]

2. Petitions to the District Attorney

The Attorney General generally does not have authority to consider petitions for the records of a local public body or of any public body that is not a state agency.[230] Examples of such bodies are cities,[231] counties,[232] school districts,[233] special districts,[234] OHSU,[235] and public universities.[236] Instead, a petition for disclosure of those records should be filed with the district attorney in the county where the relevant public body is located.[237] The petition must include the same information that is required in a petition to the Attorney General, and the procedure is identical to the procedure for petitions to the Attorney General. The procedures for court review following the district attorney’s order are also largely the same.

3. Elected Officials

Neither the Attorney General nor district attorney may review an elected official’s decision to withhold a record from inspection under the Public Records Law.[238] This rule applies regardless of whether the record in question is in the custody of the elected official or in the custody of any other public body, so long as the elected official claims the right to withhold the record.[239] And an elected official can claim the right to withhold a record even while a public records petition is pending.[240] These same rules apply to officials who have been appointed to fill a vacancy in an elective office.[241]

A person whose public records request has been denied by an elected official may initiate court proceedings to challenge the denial.[242] For state elected officials, such proceedings can be instituted in Marion County Circuit Court;[243] for local elected officials, they can be instituted in the county where the official is located.[244]

If the Attorney General or district attorney serves as legal counsel for an elected official, then upon request they may serve or decline to serve as the official’s counsel in such a suit.[245]

4. Court Proceedings

A records requester or public body that disagrees with an order of the Attorney General or district attorney, or a requester who disagrees with a denial by an elected official, may seek court review. The procedure depends on whether the disputed order granted or denied the petition.

If the Attorney General or district attorney orders a public body to disclose a public record, the public body must comply with the order in full within seven days,[246] or else give notice that the public body intends to institute proceedings for injunctive or declaratory relief against the requester in circuit court. Copies of this notice must be sent to the Attorney General or district attorney, and by certified mail to the requester.[247] If a public body gives such notice, it then has seven days to institute proceedings.[248] However, the public body cannot be represented in the proceedings by the Attorney General or district attorney.[249] If the public body fails to comply with either of these seven-day deadlines, the requester may file suit,[250] in which case the public body will be liable for the requester’s costs and reasonable attorney fees regardless of who prevails at circuit court.[251]

If the Attorney General or district attorney instead issues an order denying the petition, then the requester may contest that order by instituting proceedings against the public body in circuit court.[252] However, the requester does not need to comply with either of the seven-day deadlines that apply to a public body filing suit. And in such cases, the Attorney General will represent a state agency in defense of the agency’s action.[253] A district attorney, however, will not represent a public body unless the district attorney generally serves as the attorney for that body.[254]

If the petition is granted in part and denied in part, the public body, the requester, or both may institute court proceedings.[255] The Attorney General cannot represent a state agency if the Attorney General ordered disclosure of any records and the agency did not fully comply.[256] The same rule applies to an order issued by a district attorney.[257]

Any action for injunctive or declaratory relief following an order of the Attorney General must be filed in the Marion County Circuit Court.[258] Court actions following an order of the district attorney must be filed in the circuit court of the county in which the district attorney exercises jurisdiction.[259] And court proceedings following a denial by an elected official can be instituted in Marion County Circuit Court (for state officials) or in the county where the elected official is located (for local officials).[260]

Regardless of whether court proceedings follow a petition to the Attorney General, a petition to a district attorney, or a denial by an elected official, the powers of the court are the same. Specifically, the court has jurisdiction to enjoin the public body from withholding records and to order production of any records improperly withheld.[261] The public body carries the burden to sustain its denial of a records request,[262] but is not limited to the arguments or exemptions it raised in the course of review by the Attorney General or a district attorney.[263]

If a requester prevails in full in the court proceedings, the public body will be required to compensate the requester for the cost of the litigation at trial and on appeal, including reasonable attorney fees.[264] However, if the requester prevails only in part, the award of costs and attorney fees is discretionary.[265] If a public body that has been ordered by the Attorney General or district attorney to disclose records fails to do so and either fails to notify the requester within seven days of its intent to institute court proceedings or fails to actually institute those proceedings within seven days of giving notice, the public body will have to pay the requester’s litigation costs regardless of which side prevails.[266] If the public body has disclosed all requested records before trial, the case is generally moot, and no attorney fees will be available.[267] However, the public body may be required to pay these costs if it provides the requested records but does not concede that the records are subject to public disclosure.[268]

5. Public Records Advocate

In addition to seeking review from the Attorney General or district attorney, a requester can ask the Public Records Advocate to help resolve disputes with a state agency or city.[269] The Advocate’s services can be requested by a state agency, city,[270] or requester when any portion of the records request has been denied; when a request for fee waiver or reduction has been denied; or when a fee estimate has been provided to the requester.[271] These services will be most effective when requested prior to review by the Attorney General or district attorney. The Advocate may also be able to informally resolve disputes that involve public bodies other than a state agency or city.

Once a written request for assistance has been received, the Advocate has 21 days to help the public body and requester reach an agreement on the disputed issue(s).[272] Both the requester and state agency must engage in the resolution process in good faith;[273] however, when a state agency requests the Advocate’s services, the records requester has five days to opt out by written notice.[274] If an agreement is reached, the Advocate will prepare a formal written agreement that will be executed by the public body and requester; that agreement will then control how the records request is resolved.[275] If an agreement is not reached, the requester can still seek review from the Attorney General (for state agencies), district attorney (for cities), or the circuit court (for elected officials).

In addition to providing these dispute resolution services, the Advocate will train public bodies on processing and responding to public records requests.[276] At a public body’s written request, the Advocate may also provide advice on processing public records requests and applying public records exemptions.[277]

More information on the Advocate can be found at http://sos.oregon.gov/public-records/Pages/default.aspx ».

G. What Public Records Are Exempt from Disclosure?

This section provides information on public records exemptions found in the Public Records Law, ORS 192.311 to 192.478, including the conditional exemptions found in ORS 192.345, the exemptions found in ORS 192.355, and the other miscellaneous exemptions. It does not, however, provide analysis of the hundreds of exemptions found elsewhere in Oregon law, or found in federal law.

a. The Conditional Exemptions of ORS 192.345

Each of the conditional exemptions listed in ORS 192.345 exempts a specific type of record or information “unless the public interest requires disclosure in the particular instance.” Thus, for each of these exemptions, public bodies must always apply a balancing test on a case-by-case basis.

(1) Public Records Pertaining to Litigation

ORS 192.345(1) conditionally exempts:

Records of a public body pertaining to litigation to which the public body is a party if the complaint has been filed, or if the complaint has not been filed, if the public body shows that such litigation is reasonably likely to occur. This exemption does not apply to litigation which has been concluded, and nothing in this subsection shall limit any right or opportunity granted by discovery or deposition statutes to a party to litigation or potential litigation.

The purpose of this exemption is to place governmental bodies, as parties or potential parties to litigation, on an even footing with private parties. Therefore, we recommend that public bodies invoke this exemption only on the advice of legal counsel.

The exemption applies only to records “compiled or acquired by the public body for use in the litigation,” as distinguished from records compiled or acquired in the ordinary course of business that subsequently become relevant to litigation.[278] The Oregon Court of Appeals has suggested that this exemption is analogous to the attorney-client privilege and the work product protection.[279]

Because public bodies need to investigate and prepare in advance for expected litigation, we think it appropriate to interpret the phrase “reasonably likely” to mean “more likely than not,” rather than “imminent.” One indication that litigation is reasonably likely to occur is the filing of a notice of tort claim against the public body. Notes or reports prepared in response to such a notice would fall within the exemption.[280]

The legislative history makes clear that the litigation exemption does not apply to administrative proceedings, such as contested case hearings. The fact that any administrative proceeding may lead to litigation does not justify claiming this exemption. If, however, the public body objectively can show that court litigation is “reasonably likely to occur,” the exemption may be claimed for information gathered for that litigation, regardless of whether an administrative proceeding also may be involved.

In assessing whether the public interest requires disclosure of records covered by this exemption, an interest in private litigation does not justify disclosure.[281] The availability of ordinary tools of discovery would generally negate any need for an individual to use the Public Records Law to gain access to records for purposes of pursuing private litigation.[282]

This exemption no longer applies once the litigation has concluded, which does not occur until there is a final judgment and all appeal rights have been exhausted.

Public bodies that are defendants in tort litigation[283] cannot enter into a confidential settlement or compromise, unless federal law requires the specific terms and conditions to remain confidential; or the court orders that the identity of a victim of sexual abuse or a minor remain confidential, after balancing the privacy interests against the public’s interest in the relevant terms and conditions.[284]

Even when settling other types of cases, public bodies may not “exempt public records from disclosure simply by promising * * * confidentiality. Absent statutory authority, such action would violate the ‘strong and enduring policy that public records and governmental activities be open to the public.’”[285]

Lastly, we note that when a party to civil litigation involving a public body uses the Public Records Law to request information relating to the litigation, the party must send the request to the public body, with a copy to the public body’s attorney.[286] This requirement also applies when the requester has filed a notice of tort claim, if the requested records relate to the notice.[287]

(2) Trade Secrets

ORS 192.345(2) conditionally exempts:

Trade secrets. “Trade secrets,” as used in this section, may include, but are not limited to, any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of information which is not patented, which is known only to certain individuals within an organization and which is used in a business it conducts, having actual or potential commercial value, and which gives its user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it.

Records withheld from disclosure under this provision must meet all four of the following criteria:

the information must not be patented;

it must be known only to certain individuals within an organization and used in a business the organization conducts;

it must be information that has actual or potential commercial value; and,

it must give its users an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it.

This definition is not exclusive, and thus “trade secret” may also include information described in the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA).[288] Judicial opinions construing the UTSA can therefore be useful in interpreting the scope of a “trade secret” under Public Records Law.

The trade secret exemption is most frequently relevant to information a public body has obtained from third parties, such as contractors or regulated entities. Determining whether information from a particular entity qualifies as a trade secret is fact specific.[289] And a public body cannot rely merely on the entity’s assurance that the information is a trade secret.[290] This often places a public body in the difficult position of carrying the burden to prove that information is exempt as a trade secret, without possessing the facts necessary to meet this burden.

We therefore recommend that public bodies require any entities submitting sensitive business information to clearly label any asserted trade secrets.[291] Submitting entities should be told that this information will be disclosed if it does not qualify as a trade secret or if the public interest requires disclosure.

Once a records request is received for any information that has been labeled as trade secret, the public body should notify the entity and request factual information, and legal argument where appropriate, that supports the assertion of the trade secret exemption. Once the necessary information is obtained, the public body will then be in a position to properly determine whether to assert the exemption.

Relevant facts to obtain from the entity asserting a trade secret often include internal steps the entity takes to keep the information secret; to the extent the information is by necessity shared with or known by outside parties, the steps taken to ensure that these parties keep the information secret; how the information would be economically valuable to a competitor or could be used to economically harm the entity; and the time, effort, and expense needed to compile the information.[292]

We have concluded that fee schedules and price lists provided in response to a request for proposal can meet the criteria for exemption as trade secrets.[293] We have also concluded that lightning strike data made available to the Oregon Department of Forestry under a license with a private corporation met the criteria.[294] More recently, we have concluded that an insurer’s projections of trend, target loss ratios, and accidental death rates, submitted to the Insurance Division as part of the insurer’s rate filing, were exempt as trade secrets.[295]

Determining whether information is exempt as a trade secret depends on the public interest in disclosure.[296] In adopting the UTSA, the Oregon legislature included a provision immunizing public bodies from misappropriation claims.[297] To qualify for this immunity, the disclosure must be made pursuant to an order issued under the Public Records Law or on the advice of an attorney authorized to advise the public body.[298] This provision indicates that the legislature expected that disclosures under the Public Records Law might include information otherwise protected as a trade secret. The legislature chose to address that possibility by giving public bodies immunity against any resulting misappropriation claims. In addition, in adopting the UTSA, the legislature did not amend the existing conditional exemption for trade secrets, despite clearly being aware of the UTSA’s interplay with Public Records Law. And finally, at the time the UTSA was adopted, the Public Records Law did not contain the “catchall” exemption contained in ORS 192.355(9). Instead, the Public Records Law included an enumerated list of specific statutes providing for some type of confidentiality. The legislature did not add any of the newly passed UTSA to that list.[299]

However, because the UTSA evinces a legislative policy in favor of protecting legitimate trade secrets, it is appropriate to give heightened scrutiny to contentions that the public interest requires the disclosure of a trade secret. That is, the balancing test will be less likely to favor disclosure.

In assessing whether the public interest requires the disclosure of trade secrets, we typically look to how much harm the entity asserting a trade secret would suffer by disclosure; the benefits enjoyed by that entity in connection with submitting the information at issue; and the nature of the governmental activity connected to the information. For example, we concluded that the public interest required disclosure of salary information of private companies that had received sizable property tax abatements: even assuming the information qualified as trade secret, we found that disclosure would help the public monitor the effectiveness of this investment of public funds tied to job creation.[300] We also noted that the information was not specific enough to identify wages paid to each individual or occupational class; that is, there was “only an attenuated possibility that disclosure could actually harm the [relevant] commercial interests.”[301]

Absent an order compelling disclosure under the Public Records Law, a public body should not release any trade secret information without determining that the public interest requires disclosure and consulting with an attorney authorized to give it legal advice.[302]

(3) Criminal Investigations

ORS 192.345(3) conditionally exempts:

Investigatory information compiled for criminal law purposes. The record of an arrest or the report of a crime shall be disclosed unless and only for so long as there is a clear need to delay disclosure in the course of a specific investigation, including the need to protect the complaining party or the victim. Nothing in this subsection shall limit any right constitutionally guaranteed, or granted by statute, to disclosure or discovery in criminal cases. For purposes of this subsection, the record of an arrest or the report of a crime includes, but is not limited to:

(a) The arrested person’s name, age, residence, employment, marital status and similar biographical information;

(b) The offense with which the arrested person is charged;

(c) The conditions of release pursuant to ORS 135.230 to 135.290 »;

(d) The identity of and biographical information concerning both complaining party and victim;

(e) The identity of the investigating and arresting agency and the length of the investigation;

(f) The circumstances of arrest, including time, place, resistance, pursuit and weapons used; and

(g) Such information as may be necessary to enlist public assistance in apprehending fugitives from justice.

This exemption generally applies only until the law enforcement investigation or prosecution is completed or abandoned.[303] However, the public interest may not require disclosure of certain information even after the investigation or prosecution is completed:

information that would interfere with ongoing law enforcement proceedings;

information that would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial;

information that would constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy;

information that would disclose the identity of a confidential source;

information that would disclose investigative techniques and procedures; or

information that would endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement personnel.[304]

Certain information may be subject to disclosure even before the completion of an investigation: a “record of an arrest or the report of a crime” can be withheld only if there is a clear need to delay disclosure in the course of a specific investigation, or if another statute restricts or prohibits disclosure. Disclosable information includes the identity and general biographical information of the victim, complainant, and arrested person, as well as the charges and other details of the arrest.[305]

The criminal investigatory exemption applies not only to information generated during a criminal investigation, but also to information originally compiled for ordinary business purposes that is subsequently gathered in the course of an investigation. This means that even information in the custody of a non-law-enforcement agency may be exempt if it was subsequently gathered by a law enforcement agency, but only if disclosing the information would interfere with an ongoing investigation.[306]

(4) Tests and Examinations

ORS 192.345(4) conditionally exempts:

Test questions, scoring keys, and other data used to administer a licensing examination, employment, academic or other examination or testing procedure before the examination is given and if the examination is to be used again. Records establishing procedures for and instructing persons administering, grading or evaluating an examination or testing procedure are included in this exemption, to the extent that disclosure would create a risk that the result might be affected.

The obvious purpose of this exemption is to protect the integrity of examinations administered by various public bodies for licensing, employment, and other purposes. Information used to administer an exam is generally confidential until the exam has been given or if the exam will be reused.[307] This exemption also applies to an individual’s exam answers if disclosure would indirectly reveal the exam questions.[308]

Although primarily applicable to licensing or academic examinations, this exemption will apply to any “examination” for which test questions, scoring keys, or other data will be used again to grade or evaluate applicants.[309]

(5) Business Records Required to be Submitted

ORS 192.345(5) conditionally exempts:

Information consisting of production records, sale or purchase records or catch records, or similar business records of a private concern or enterprise, required by law to be submitted to or inspected by a governmental body to allow it to determine fees or assessments payable or to establish production quotas, and the amounts of such fees or assessments payable or paid, to the extent that such information is in a form that would permit identification of the individual concern or enterprise. This exemption does not include records submitted by long term care facilities as defined in ORS 442.015 » to the state for purposes of reimbursement of expenses or determining fees for patient care. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the use that can be made of such information for regulatory purposes or its admissibility in any enforcement proceeding.

This exemption applies only to business records required to be submitted to a governmental body for use in setting fees or assessments or for establishing production quotas, and to the amount of the fees or assessments, if this information would permit identification of the business. It is intended to protect information that would allow determination of a particular business’s production levels. This exemption does not cover business records that a person or business may submit in connection with an application for a license or permit, even if the information is a required part of the application, unless the amount of the license or permit fee is based on the production levels. The exemption is limited to information furnished to allow the governmental agency “to determine fees or assessments payable or to establish production quotas.”

(6) Real Estate Appraisals

ORS 192.345(6) conditionally exempts:

Information relating to the appraisal of real estate prior to its acquisition.

This exemption permits public bodies to obtain information in confidence concerning the value of real estate that the public body may purchase. A parallel provision exists under the Public Meetings Law, which exempts from open meetings requirements “deliberations with persons designated by the governing body to negotiate real property transactions.”[310] Even after the real estate is acquired, the exemption may continue to apply to the appraisal if the information and analysis in the record is relevant to later appraisals of similarly situated properties that the public body may acquire.[311]

(7) Employee Representation Cards

ORS 192.345(7) conditionally exempts:

The names and signatures of employees who sign authorization cards or petitions for the purpose of requesting representation or decertification elections.

This exemption does not extend to records showing the number of persons who have signed such cards or to checklists of eligible employees who vote in such elections that do not disclose how individual employees voted.[312]

(8) Civil Rights Investigations

ORS 192.345(8) conditionally exempts:

Investigatory information relating to any complaint filed under ORS 659A.820 or 659A.825 », until such time as the complaint is resolved under ORS 659A.835, or a final order is issued under ORS 659A.850.

This exemption applies to investigatory information related to complaints of unlawful employment practices or other civil rights violations that are filed with the Bureau of Labor and Industries. It expires once the complaint is resolved under ORS 659A.835 or 659A.850 ». This exemption does not apply to the complaint itself or information contained in the complaint.[313]

(9) Unfair Labor Practice Investigations

ORS 192.345(9) conditionally exempts:

Investigatory information relating to any complaint or charge filed under ORS 243.676 » and 663.180 ».

This exemption applies to investigatory information relating to complaints or charges of certain unfair labor practices that are filed with the Employment Relations Board. However, the complaint or charge itself would not be exempt from disclosure.[314]

(10) Debt Consolidator Investigations

ORS 192.345(10) conditionally exempts:

Records, reports and other information received or compiled by the Director of the Department of Consumer and Business Services under ORS 697.732 ».

This exemption applies to records received or compiled by the director of the Department of Consumer and Business Services in examining or investigating a debt management service provider. However, the director must disclose any order that suspends, revokes, or refuses to renew a service provider’s registration, or that imposes a civil penalty under ORS 697.832 ».[315]

(11) Archaeological Site Information

ORS 192.345(11) conditionally exempts:

Information concerning the location of archaeological sites or objects as those terms are defined in ORS 358.905 », except if the governing body of an Indian tribe requests the information and the need for the information is related to that Indian tribe’s cultural or religious activities. This exemption does not include information relating to a site that is all or part of an existing, commonly known and publicized tourist facility or attraction.

Archaeological objects refer to objects that meet all of the following conditions: are at least 75 years old; are part of the physical record of an indigenous or other culture found in the state or waters of the state; and are material remains of past human life or activity that are of archaeological significance.[316] Examples can be monuments, symbols, and facilities.[317]

Archaeological sites are Oregon sites that contain archaeological objects and the contextual associations of these objects with each other or with biotic or geological remains or deposits.[318] Examples can be shipwrecks, lithic quarries or scatters, house pit villages, camps, burials, homesteads, and townsites.[319]

(12) Personnel Discipline Actions

ORS 192.345(12) conditionally exempts:

A personnel discipline action, or materials or documents supporting that action.

This exemption applies to records of personnel discipline actions, and the personnel investigations supporting those actions. It does not apply to personnel investigations that do not result in any disciplinary action,[320] and so does not apply when an employee resigns during the investigation or in lieu of disciplinary action.[321] When a records request is received during the course of a personnel investigation, and unless the public interest requires disclosure, the records can be withheld until the investigation concludes so that the public body can determine whether this exemption applies or not.[322]

When determining whether the public interest requires disclosure, the typical interest in confidentiality is to “protect[ ] the public employee from ridicule for having been disciplined.”[323] This confidentiality interest is therefore diminished when information about the disciplinary action or the underlying conduct is already publicly available.[324]

The significance of the public interest in disclosure typically depends on the seriousness of the employee’s alleged misconduct and on the employee’s position. For example, the Oregon Court of Appeals has held that an investigation into a high-school principal and vice-principal’s alleged misuse and theft of school property was not exempt;[325] and that an investigation into a high-ranking police officer’s off-duty conduct was not exempt where the officer’s integrity and ability to enforce the law evenhandedly were implicated.[326]

The public interest in disclosure is not limited to learning about the public employer imposing the disciplinary action: for example, in concluding that an internal affairs investigation of police officers was not exempt, the Oregon Supreme Court relied on not just the public interest in oversight of the police department, but also on the interest in oversight of the independent civilian review board that had reviewed the investigation.[327]

We recommend that a public body consult with its legal counsel for advice in responding to a request for records potentially exempt under the personnel discipline exemption.

Some public bodies have stronger protections in place for disciplinary records. For example, district school boards can adopt rules limiting public access to teachers’ personnel files.[328] A public body cannot publicly disclose a personnel investigation of any of its public safety employees if no discipline results, unless the public interest requires disclosure or if the public body determines that nondisclosure would adversely affect the public’s confidence in the body.[329] And a public body may not publicly disclose audio or video records of internal investigation interviews of public safety officers.[330]

Before producing any personnel files, a public body should remember that various personal information about its employees is exempt from disclosure unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the public interest requires disclosure: this includes home addresses, home and cell phone numbers, personal e-mail addresses, driver license numbers, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, and emergency contact information.[331]

(13) Information about Threatened or Endangered Species

ORS 192.345(13) conditionally exempts:

Information developed pursuant to ORS 496.004, 496.172 and 498.026 » or ORS 496.192 and 564.100 », regarding the habitat, location or population of any threatened species or endangered species.

This exemption applies to information on endangered or threatened species related to the Department of Fish & Wildlife’s and Department of Agriculture’s roles in managing these wildlife and plant species.

The likely intent is to prevent disclosure to persons who might use the information in a manner adverse to the survival of the species. However, a requester’s benevolent intent and promise not to disclose the records to anyone else do not necessarily mean that the public body must disclose the record, as the body may have little basis to evaluate the requester’s intentions and no means to enforce the requester’s promise.[332]

(14) Faculty Research

ORS 192.345(14) conditionally exempts:

Writings prepared by or under the direction of faculty of public educational institutions, in connection with research, until publicly released, copyrighted or patented.

This exemption is designed primarily to protect public educational institutions from “‘piracy’ * * * of research ideas and data collected by faculty members.”[333] A secondary purpose is avoiding the release of incomplete and inaccurate data.[334] Even if preliminary results have been published, the exemption may continue to apply to the underlying data if further research and publication will be undertaken using the same data.[335]

(15) Computer Programs for the Use of Public Bodies

ORS 192.345(15) conditionally exempts:

Computer programs developed or purchased by or for any public body for its own use. As used in this subsection, “computer program” means a series of instructions or statements wh