Genus Author Year Status Fossil Range Geographic Range class Notes "Hadrosauravus" nomen nudum; junior synonym of Gryposaurus Hadrosaurus Leidy 1858 Late Cretaceous North America United States State dinosaur of New Jersey. ‘’Haestasaurus’’ Upchurch, Mannion, & Taylor 2015 Early Cretaceous Europe England A member of the Macronaria. Hagryphus Zanno and Sampson 2005 Late Cretaceous North America United States Lived in Utah in the Kaiparowits Formation. Hallopus actually a crocodilian ‘’Halszkaraptor’’ Cau 2017 Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia A phylogeneticanalysis revealed it was a member of the basal subfamily Halszkaraptorinae, along with Mahakala and Hulsanpes. Halticosaurus Huene 1908 Late Triassic Europe Germany Dubious. ‘’Hamititan’’ Wang 2021 Early Cretaceous Asia China A sauropod. Hanssuesia Sullivan 2003 Late Cretaceous North America United States and Canada Named for paleontologist Hans-Dieter Sues. "Hanwulosaurus" nomen nudum Haplocanthosaurus Hatcher 1903 Late Jurassic North America United States A sauropod. "Haplocanthus" preoccupied name, now known as Haplocanthosaurus. ‘’Haplocheirus’’ Choiniere 2010 Late Jurassic Asia China It is generally considered to be an alvarezsauroid. Harpymimus Barsbold and Perle 1984 Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia An ornithomimosaur. ‘’Haya’’ Makovicky 2011 Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia Named for the "Hayagriva" avatar of the Hindu god Vishnu, depicted with a horse head. This name refers to the elongate horse-like skull of Haya and the appearance of this deity in the Buddhist art of Mongolia. Hecatasaurus Late Cretaceous Europe Romania junior synonym of Telmatosaurus "Heilongjiangosaurus" Asia China nomen nudum Heishansaurus Bohlin 1953 Late Cretaceous Asia China Dubious. Likely an ankylosaur. Helioceratops Jin 2009 Early to Late Cretaceous Asia China A ceratopsian. "Helopus" preoccupied name, now known as Euhelopus Heptasteornis Harrison & Walker 1975 Late Cretaceous Europe Romania Was once thought to be a giant prehistoric owl. Herbstosaurus actually a pterosaur Herrerasaurus Reig 1963 Late Triassic South America Argentina A theropod. Hesperonychus Longrich & Currie 2009 Late Cretaceous North America Canada A theropod. ‘’Hesperonyx’’ Rotatori 2024 Late Jurassic Europe Portugal An iguanodont. ‘’Hesperornithoides’’ Hartman 2019 Late Jurassic North America United States Before it’s publication it was nicknamed “Lori”. Hesperosaurus Carpenter, Miles & Cloward 2001 Late Jurassic North America United States A stegosaur. Heterodontosaurus Crompton & Charig 1962 Early Jurassic Africa South Africa The namesake of the Heterodontosauridae. Heterosaurus possible junior synonym of Mantellisaurus. ‘’Hexing’’ Jin, Chen & Godefroit 2012 Early Cretaceous Asia China An ornithomimosaur. Hexinlusaurus Barrett 2005 Middle Jurassic Asia China A basal ornithischian. Heyuannia Lu 2003 Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia Two species are known: H. huangi, named by Lü Junchang in 2002 from the Dalangshan Formation; and H. yanshini, originally named as a separate genus Ingenia from the Barun Goyot Formation by Rinchen Barsbold in 1981, and later renamed to Ajancingenia in 2013 due to the preoccupation of Ingenia. The latter name was eventually discarded due to various ethical issues surrounding the author. Hierosaurus Wieland 1909 Late Cretaceous North America United States An ankylosaur. Hikanodon junior synonym of Iguanodon ‘’Hippodraco’’ McDonald 2010 Early Cretaceous North America United States An iguanodont. "Hironosaurus" nomen nudum "Hisanohamasaurus" nomen nudum As the name suggests it’s fossils were found in Japan. Histriasaurus Dalla Vecchia 1998 Early Cretaceous Europe Croatia The first non-avian dinosaur found in Croatia. Homalocephale Osmolska and Maryanska 1974 Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia A pachycephalosaur. "Honghesaurus" nomen nudum nomen nudum later described as Yandusaurus; name later used for a genus of marine reptile Hongshanosaurus junior synonym of Psittacosaurus. Hoplitosaurus Lucas 1902 Early Cretaceous North America United States Although there was a push to synonymize it with Polacanthus in the late 1980s-early 1990s, Hoplitosaurus has been accepted as a valid albeit poorly known genus in more recent reviews. Hoplosaurus — junior synonym of Struthiosaurus ‘’Horshamosaurus’’ Blows 2015 Early Cretaceous Europe England An ankylosaur. Hortalotarsus Seeley Early Jurassic Africa South Africa Possible junior synonym of Massospondylus Huabeisaurus Pang & Cheng 2000 Late Cretaceous Asia China A sauropod. ‘’Hualianceratops’’ Han 2015 Late Jurassic Asia China A ceratopsian. ‘’Huallasaurus’’ Rozadilla 2022 Late Cretaceous South America Argentina Originally named as a species of Kritosaurus in 1984, it was long considered a synonym of Secernosaurus before being recognized as its own distinct genus in a 2022 study, different from other members of Kritosaurini. ‘’Huanansaurus’’ Lu 2015 Late Cretaceous Asia China An oviraotorid lived in the Nanxiong Formation. Huanghetitan You 2006 Early Cretaceous Asia China Name means “yellow river giant”. ‘’Huangshanlong’’ Huang 2014 Middle Jurassic Asia China Along with Anhuilong and Wannanosaurus it is one of three dinosaurs found in Anhui province. Huaxiagnathus Hwang 2004 Early Cretaceous Asia China A compsognathid. ‘’Huaxiaosaurus’’ Junior synonym of Shantungosaurus. "Huaxiasaurus" nomen nudum; Huaxiagnathus Huayangosaurus Dong, Tang, and Zhou 1982 Middle Jurassic Asia China Found in the Lower Shaximiao Formation it shared the local Middle Jurassic landscape with the sauropods Shunosaurus, Datousaurus, Omeisaurus and Protognathosaurus, the ornithopodXiaosaurus and the carnivorous Gasosaurus. Hudiesaurus Dong 1997 Late Jurassic Asia China Name means “butterfly lizard”. ‘’Huehuecanauhtlus’’ Ramírez-Velasco 2012 Late Cretaceous North America Mexico An ornithopod. ‘’Huinculsaurus’’ Baiano, Coria, & Cau 2020 South America Argentina A theropod. Named for the Huincul Formation. Hulsanpes Osmólska Late Cretaceous Asia Mongolia The remains were found in 1970 and formally described in 1982 by Halszka Osmólska, who noted that the genus is represented by an immature individual. Hulsanpes represents the first record of the basal dromaeosaurid subfamily Halszkaraptorinae. Hungarosaurus Osi 2005 Late Cretaceous Europe Hungary It is the most completely known ankylosaur from the Cretaceous of Europe. ‘’Huxleysaurus’’ junior synonym of’’Hypselospinus’’. Hylaeosaurus Mantell 1833 Early Cretaceous Europe England It was found in the Grinstead Clay Formation. Hylosaurus junior synonym of Hylaeosaurus Hypacrosaurus Brown 1913 Late Cretaceous North America United States and Canada It was an obscure genus until the discovery in the 1990s of nests, eggs, and hatchlings belonging to H. stebingeri. Hypselorhachis subsequently found to be a ctenosauriscid "Hypselosaurus” Matheron 1869 Late Cretaceous Europe France Hypselosaurus has been found in the same formation as the dromaeosaurids Variraptor and Pyroraptor, the ornithopod Rhabdodon, and the ankylosaurian Rhodanosaurus, as well as indeterminate bones from other groups. ‘’Hypselospinus’’ Norman 2010 Early Cretaceous Europe England Includes Wadhurstia, Darwinsaurus and potentially Huxleysaurus. Hypsibema Cope 1869 Late Cretaceous North America United States Found in North Carolina. Hypsilophodon Huxley 1869 Early Cretaceous Europe England It has traditionally been considered an early member of the group Ornithopoda, but recent research has put this into question.