In pursuing a problem, the philosopher inevitably comes up against the limits of a particular philosophical framework to deal with that problem. At this juncture, she may either abandon the problem in the interests of the framework or abandon the framework in the interests of the problem. The former constitutes intellectual myopia. The latter constitutes thinking. In fearlessly and relentlessly pursuing philosophical problems, Ray Brassier not only transcends academic enclaves, he problematises the commodification of philosophy as a finished product to be marketed and exchanged. Above and beyond what he thinks, Brassier's contemporary significance consists in how-or rather, that-he thinks. This course will explore the philosophical and political implications of both. Renowned as Speculative Realism's unwitting founder, Ray Brassier is a philosopher in constant movement. Over the past twenty years, he has been synthesising New French Philosophers such as François Laruelle, Alain Badiou, and Quentin Meillassoux with the Anglo-American traditions of cognitive science (Paul Churchland) naturalism (Wilfrid Sellars) and inferentialism (Robert Brandom). While these anomalous exercises in conceptual subversion are often brilliantly disorientating, Brassier's infidelity to any particular philosophical tradition betrays a profound fidelity to particular philosophical problems. This course will take up the three major philosophical problems preoccupying Brassier: the problem of nihilism, the problem of naturalism, and the problem of normativity. Although they remain inextricable from one another, each problem becomes the focus of his work at a different point in time. Thus, it is possible to distinguish between Brassier's nihilistic phase (extending from his earliest articles up until the publication of Nihil Unbound in 2007); his naturalistic phase (consisting of a sustained engagement with Wilfrid Sellars between 2008 until 2013); and his normative phase (indexing an increasing interest, since 2014, in Anglo-American Hegelianism and Marxism).

This essay confronts Ray Brassier's vindication of nihilism with other two important but frequently underexamined philosophical attempts to overcome nihilism: Hans Jonas' and Keiji Nishitani's. By putting these different takes on nihilism into dialogue, it explores some blind spots in Brassier's position, as well as some of the practical consequences, for our current planetary situation, of undertaking a radical divorce between the normative and the natural that results from his radical nihilism. The article opts for a more moderate acceptance and eventual self-overcoming of nihilism, according to which, even if natural entities are indifferent to human reasons and meanings, this does not entail that nature is bereft of a human-independent normative dimension. In other words, the essay argues that care must be taken not to confuse criticisms of an anthropocentric conception of reasons and meanings with the belief that meaning is completely absent from the natural world. Thus, the central contention of the article is that, given our current climate and ecological catastrophe, one of the most pressing tasks of contemporary philosophy is to understand normativity in non-anthropocentric ways, so that humans are no longer considered as the only entities that respond to normativity. Such an attitude conceives humans as estranged normative creatures amidst a meaningless, indifferent natural world, toward which they would have no ethical responsibilities. The essay finishes by suggesting ways in which to develop an account that does not fall into this ethical vacuum.

I present an account of nihilism, following Foucault and Nietzsche, as a sort of colonization of our thinking by a religious form of normativity, grounded in our submission to truth as correspondence, in the idea that the facts themselves could be binding upon us. I then present Brassier's radicalization of nihilism and show how it remains subservient to this religious ideal of truth. I argue, further, that far from showing how a commitment to Enlightenment reason and science demands a cold metaphysics of death, in dismissing the irreducibly plural ways in which what is determines thought, Brassier's attempt to secure a fit between thought and disenchanted world suggests that the view is an expression of the unliveable condition of nihilism, rather than its proof. Finally, I present a form of naturalism that makes legitimate claim to the legacy of Enlightenment, drawing from French historical epistemology, and dispenses with the problems animating Brassier's nihilism by radically transforming the concept of truth and how we relate to it.