Cast / Crew / Production notes...

Cast:

Justin - Tom Marshall

Brian - TBD

Julie - TBD

Crew:

J. Anthony Gonzales - Director

Max Wilson - Camera Op

[SIZE=-1]Justin R. Durban - Music[/SIZE]

Production Notes:

Aug. 19

I've been working on some shot setups. The nice thing about having a camera is you can do a lot of pre-visualization in your own apartment.

I have a basic shot setup for the shower scene... :beer: And no, it's not a shower scene in the typical sense. It's "dark." And no, not "dark" in the typical sense either... I guess you'd have to see it to know what I'm talking about... :beer:

Aug 24

Have the basic story laid out. Had lunch with one of Hollywood's heavy hitters. We banged out the story line and I've managed to talk him into directing this thing. Things are looking good...

I was considering not entering my own project, but the more I thought about an idea, them more it started to develop. Now I have 2 main characters and the first few lines of dialog, but it's a start. I need to find a writer. I'm not that good at developing stories - I'm better with developing characters.

But you should join. I enjoyed Frozen River. You gave a very good performance in that.

I was considering not entering my own project, but the more I thought about an idea, them more it started to develop. Now I have 2 main characters and the first few lines of dialog, but it's a start. I need to find a writer. I'm not that good at developing stories - I'm better with developing characters.

But you should join. I enjoyed Frozen River. You gave a very good performance in that.

thanks, I would be happy to take a look at what you have written and give you some feedback if you feel it would be helpful.

thanks, I would be happy to take a look at what you have written and give you some feedback if you feel it would be helpful.

I've cajoled John (cinealma) into helping me with the story line... and it's gonna be a good one... I hope... :beer:

Steve_Arm said:

Will you be playing the guitar on the film?

Nah... I very well might grab my guitar and play something for the soundtrack though...

You going to enter, Steve? You should.

I've cajoled John (cinealma) into helping me with the story line... and it's gonna be a good one... I hope... :beer:

Who, what, huh? :undecided

Hey, wait a minute. What's this needle doing in my neck?