NEW YORK — Bruce Springsteen’s born in the U.S.A. and now, a new exhibition space devoted to his life and work will open in a New Jersey firehouse.

A joint project of Freehold Borough and the Bruce Springsteen Archives and Center for American Music at Monmouth University in West Long Branch was announced last Tuesday at the Freehold Fire Department building, which will house the exhibition space.

“Everything I learned of deep importance, I learned in this town,” Springsteen said during an onsite press conference. “You learn most of what makes you who you are by the time you are … by the time you’re 12, maybe…I had all the usual joy and heartbreak of growing up in a small town like this, and of course the minute the opportunity arose — I got the hell out.”

“I suppose the unusual thing is that moving around the world as I did, or I do, I always came back,” he continued.

Dubbed “My Hometown: The Bruce Springsteen Story Center,” the space will include artifacts, photographs and displays featuring concert footage and interviews, according to a press release.

The exhibit is expected to open in mid-2024; the Fire Department will be relocated as part of the town’s redevelopment plan.

©2022 New York Daily News. Visit nydailynews.com. Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Ukrainian-born Mila Kunis’ ‘heart ripped out’ in wake of Russian invasion

Mila Kunis, who was born in Soviet Ukraine, is speaking candidly about the impact the war in her homeland has had on her and the way she identifies.

The 38-year-old actress, who was born in Chernivtsi — about 170 miles southwest of Lviv — said Friday that although she’s “always considered myself very much an American,” something changed in her following Russian President Vladimir Putin’s deadly invasion of Ukraine late last month.

“This happens and I can’t express or explain what came over me, but all of a sudden … I was like, oh my God, I feel like a part of my heart just got ripped out. It was the weirdest feeling,” the star told Maria Shriver during the latter’s “Conversations Above the Noise” web series.

“I came to the United States in 1991 with my family. And we were the last of my family to migrate,” said Kunis, noting that much of her family was either in concentration camps during World War II or migrated shortly before.

Kunis and Kutcher, 44, last week launched a GoFundMe, through which they hope to raise $30 million for the eastern European country. The couple themselves even donated $3 million to “Stand with Ukraine.”

— Jami Ganz, New York Daily News ©2022 New York Daily News. Visit at nydailynews.com. Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.