Are people moving away from the Garden State because of The Boss?

Bruce Springsteen, the 67-year-old rock star born in Long Branch, New Jersey, joked that might be the case during a 90-minute Q&A with Grammy Museum Executive Director Bob Santelli at Monmouth University on Tuesday night.

RELATED STORIES

Bruce Springsteen questions Trump's competence for office

Billy Joel takes the blame for broken-down Springsteen bike

Springsteen to be awarded 'highest civilian honor' at White House ceremony

According to quotes from the event compiled by NJ.com, Springsteen referenced a recent report from United Van Lines showing that droves of people are leaving the New Jersey, as well as Pennsylvania, and moving elsewhere to live.

"I just read an article in the newspaper that says that New Jersey remains the No. 1 state that people move away from!" Springsteen reportedly said with a laugh during the Q&A. "After all my hard work ... but I made my living writing about moving away from New Jersey, so maybe that has something to do with it."

The annual study that looks at state-to-state migration patterns found 63 percent of moves in New Jersey were outbound in 2016.

The study also showed that 56 percent of moves within Pennsylvania were outbound last year.

Though it's a lighthearted suggestion, there's no denying many of Springsteen's hits are circulated around getting out of his hometown, though he always does comes back. Springsteen now resides in Colts Neck, New Jersey – the same town that just gave preliminary approval for comedian Jon Stewart's animal sanctuary.

(See: "Born to Run," Rosalita").

Springsteen also talked about his life as a bar band singer down the Shore, writing "Born To Run," faith, handling fame and more at the event.

Officials at the university also announced that it will hold the rock star's archives and a soon-to-be exhibit will show off Springsteen's photos, songs, written work and more. Tickets for the event in the 700-seat Pollak Theater sold out in minutes, according to the Asbury Park Press.