The New Jersey cottage where Bruce Springsteen wrote his seminal album 'Born to Run' is up for sale and will set rock memorabilia enthusiasts back to the tune of $349,000.

Nestled in the ocean community of Long Branch, the 1920 shotgun house boats a modest 828 square feet with two bedrooms, front porch, small yard and is only one block from the beach.

While living in the five-roomed home, The Boss wrote the music for the multi-million selling record that in addition to the title track features timeless anthems such as 'Jungleland' and 'Thunder Road'.

Springsteen rented the cottage in 1974 and '75 when he wrote the music for his seminal "Born To Run" album, which features the title song, plus "Jungleland" and "Tenth Avenue Freeze Out."

The sale is being handled by Susan McLaughlin of Keller Williams Realty and unsurprisngly has seen massive interest.

'It went on sale Friday, and I’ve had about 40 calls and another 40 contacts, mainly through emails,' said McLaughlin to the Asbury Park Press.

Currently there are three owners and are selling because one is getting married and wants to move out of the quaint home in the bohemian area.

Springsteen lived in the house in 1974 and ’75 and composed the majority of 'Born to Run' there.

'Everyone knew Bruce back then. He already had two albums out by then, and he would spend the days just working on his music or hanging out around town, because it was a really unique place to be at that time,' said McLaughlin.

Iconic: The front cover photograph of the six-million selling album shows Bruce Springsteen leaning on the shoulder of E-Street Band saxophone player Clarence Clemons

'The layout is the same inside as it was when Bruce lived there,' McLaughlin added.

'It has a sitting room, a galley kitchen, a living room with sliding-glass doors that open to a patio and very high ceilings that make it feel much bigger that it looks from the outside.'

The home was untouched by the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy and McLaughlin hopes that the city of Long Branch will buy the house and transform it into a museum.

'One gentleman even mentioned the possibility of turning it into kind of a retreat for songwriters,' said McLaughlin.

Still Going Strong: Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band performing in Atlanta, Georgia last year

In the 2005 documentary 'Wings for Wheels: The Making of Born to Run', Springsteen reminisces about the writing of his breakthrough hit.

'I was living in a small house in West Long Branch, New Jersey, up the coast from Asbury,' said Springsteen.