Bruce Springsteen is a legendary singer and songwriter from the Jersey Shore. He is considered one of the founders of the heartland rock genre of rock music. He is best known for his song “Born in the U.S.A.” which is often played at patriotic events in the US. He has won numerous awards and sold more than 150 million records. After a career spanning more than fifty years, he has earned the nickname “The Boss.”

Bruce Frederick Joseph Springsteen was born in late 1949 in Long Branch, New Jersey. He was raised in Freehold, New Jersey by his father, a bus driver, and his mother, a legal secretary. He has two younger sisters and is of Italian, Irish, and Dutch ancestry. He attended Freehold High School and spent less than a year at Ocean County College, a local community college. Most of his family relocated to California in 1969, but he remained in New Jersey.

Inspired by the Beatles, he got his first guitar in 1964 and began playing in small local venues with a band named The Rogues. He then joined The Castiles, with whom he recorded two songs. From 1969 to 1971, he performed with the band Steel Mill and Dr. Zoom & the Sonic Boom, Sundance Blues Band, and Bruce Springsteen Band. In late 1972, he formed what would go on to be known as the E Street Band. The band was formed to create Springsteen’s first album, Greetings from Asbury Park, N.J. The debut album was released in January of 1973 and his second album The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle was released in September. Although both albums were a critical success, neither achieved commercial success although they would become fan favorites later on.

It was Springsteen’s third studio album Born to Run, which was released in 1975, that would first bring him commercial success. He was kept out of the studio until 1977 because of a legal battle with his former manager. When he returned his sound was considered “leaner” and the tone of the new songs was more somber. His fourth studio album Darkness on the Edge of Town (1978) produced an epic cross-country tour that served to give Springsteen his reputation for intensity during live concerts, some of which lasted for many hours.

During the late 1970s, he wrote extensively with and collaborated with many artists. Manfred Mann’s Earth Band used his arrangement of “Blinded by the Light,” which gave them a number one hit. He wrote “Because the Night” (Patti Smith), “Fire” (The Pointer Sisters), and “Hearts of Stone” for Southside Johnny & the Asbury Jukes (as well as three other compositions and four collaborations on their album).

Springsteen released a double album, The River, in 1980, which became his first number one album, and spawned his first number-one single, “Hungry Heart”. He released Nebraska in 1982, which was an acoustic album. Born in the U.S.A. was released in 1984, and became a best-selling album. The album produced seven hit singles, sold more than 15 million copies, and became the music he is most known for. The most popular single on the album was “Dancing in the Dark.”

He released a five-record box set in 1986 called Live/1975–85 and Tunnel of Love in 1987. He released a second folk album, The Ghost of Tom Joad, and a greatest hits album in the mid-nineties, but spent much of the decade contributing to movie soundtracks.

He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1999 but has continued to make music and tour, which he still does today. Some of his notable successes since his induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, include his albums The Rising (2002), We Shall Overcome: The Seeger Sessions (2006), and Magic (2007). He also had a limited residency called Springsteen on Broadway.

Springsteen has stayed busy in music, having few outside business endeavors. He has only obtained three trademark registrations. He obtained a federal trademark registration for the name “Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band” to be used for musical recordings in 1992. He also applied for a trademark for “Bruce Springsteen” and for “E Street Band,” in 2013, for the same purposes.

Bruce Springsteen has won numerous awards for his work, including two Golden Globes and 20 Grammy Awards. He also received the Kennedy Center Honors in 2009 and President Barack Obama awarded him with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

He married Patti Scialfa in 1991, and they have three children together. He lives with his family on a horse farm in Colts Neck Township in Monmouth County, New Jersey. It is believed that Springsteen’s net worth is in excess of $500 million. He is still actively performing and recording music.