It's already celebrated but soon it could be official: Sept. 23 is a step closer to being dubbed Bruce Springsteen Day in New Jersey.

A Senate committee on Thursday advanced a resolution marking the day — Springsteen's birthday — in honor of The Boss.

The resolution was passed unanimously, because what New Jersey politician is going to risk the fallout of saying no to Bruce?

The resolution's Senate sponsor, Sen. Vin Gopal, said the effort is a way to say thanks to the rock icon.

More: Bruce Springsteen, Barack Obama Spotify podcast: Born in USA, made at the Jersey Shore

“No artist, musical or otherwise, captures the New Jersey spirit or its blue-collar identity in quite the same way as Bruce Springsteen, our homegrown rocker, blues man and poet," Gopal, D-Monmouth, said in a statement.

"This joint resolution is a modest recognition of the fact, and meant as a show of affection and appreciation for an iconic artist known worldwide but someone who has never forgotten his Jersey roots."

The four-page resolution reads like the CliffsNotes version of all the reasons New Jerseyans love Springsteen: From his birth in Long Branch, to putting Asbury Park on the music map, the rock icon has focused on giving back to his home state and charitable causes.

A spokesperson for Springsteen, 71, of Colts Neck, declined to comment.

Story continues after the gallery.

The resolution needs to pass votes in the Senate and Assembly before it can head to Gov. Phil Murphy to sign into law.

It was introduced in early 2020 and had been dormant before Thursday's committee meeting, held just more than a week after Springsteen pleaded guilty to a charge of consuming alcohol in a closed area on Sandy Hook in November.

Charges of drunk and reckless driving were dismissed by federal prosecutors who said they could not prove the allegations.

Springsteen would be the second E Street band member to have a day in New Jersey. Jan. 11 is Clarence Clemons Day in the state. It's the Big Man's birthday.

The resolution, if it passes, requests Murphy "annually issue a proclamation calling upon public officials and citizens of this State to observe 'Bruce Springsteen Day' with appropriate activities and programs."

The resolution does not explain exactly how New Jersey has gone this long without a Bruce day.

On a busy day of doling out accolades for lawmakers on the Senate state government committee, they also approved a resolution designating the week of March 18 as President Grover Cleveland Week.

Cleveland was the only New Jersey-born president, and as such, "it is altogether fitting and proper" that New Jersey honor his legacy, the resolution reads.

Staff writer Chris Jordan contributed to this story.

Stacey Barchenger is a reporter in the New Jersey Statehouse. For unlimited access to her work covering New Jersey’s policymakers and political power structure, please subscribe or activate your digital account today.

Email: sbarchenger@gannettnj.com