Founded in 1853, the Washington University in St. Louis is a non-profit private higher education institution located in the suburban setting of the medium city of St. Louis (population range of 250,000-499,999 inhabitants), Missouri. Officially accredited by the Higher Learning Commission, Washington University in St. Louis (WashU) is a large-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 15,000-19,999 students) coeducational US higher education institution. Washington University in St. Louis (WashU) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation), bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and doctorate degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 171-year-old US higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. The acceptance rate range is 10-19% making this US higher education organization an extremely selective institution. International students are welcome to apply for enrollment. WashU also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has Washington University in St. Louis a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades.

Admission Rate

Washington University in St. Louis's acceptance rate range is 10-19% making this institution an extremely selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

Washington University in St. Louis has an enrollment range of 15,000-19,999 students making it a large-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 2,000-2,499 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Washington University in St. Louis is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

Washington University in St. Louis is a non-profit higher education institution.

Campus Setting

This institution's main campus is located in a Suburban setting.

Academic Calendar

This institution adopts a Semesters type of academic calendar.

Disabled Students %

This institution has a high percentage of disabled students making it particularly disability-friendly.

Religious Affiliation

Washington University in St. Louis does not have any religious affiliation.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.

In particular, this institution offers some programs fully via distance education at the undergraduate level and at the graduate level. Source: IPDES.