The elderly father of Liz Hurley’s devastated husband, Arun Nayar, has told of his family’s hurt and shock over her affair with cricket legend Shane Warne.

But as textile magnate Vinod Nayar, 70, hit out in Mumbai, Hugh Grant yesterday braved the cold to comfort her in her Chelsea home.

The actor, who split from Hurley in 2000 after a 13-year romance, arrived at 3.15pm after Hurley had collected her son Damian from school, and left half an hour later.

Blowing apart claims that Hurley had visited India to apologise to the family, Vinod said: “We had no idea Arun’s marriage was on the rocks. I’m hoping that now Arun will get back home.

“I have messaged Arun and am waiting to hear from him. I am shocked.”

Hurley, 45, never got along with Vinod or Arun’s stepmother Joanne, 58, after they allegedly clashed over the couple’s traditional Indian wedding in Jodhpur.

After the £3million wedding where the couple were accused of breaking strict rules against alcohol, Vinod revealed that the actress had snubbed a £35,000 diamond and ruby necklace designed for her.

Later, Vinod cancelled a £30,000 party he was to host for the newlyweds, and in a 2007 interview he said: “Joanne and I were publicly humiliated for the sake of a Hello! magazine deal.

“Liz and Arun treated us very shabbily and we were pushed into the background like poor relations.

“I knew she (Liz) was very ambitious, but I never realised just how important fame and attention is to her. This has broken my heart.”

After Hurley was pictured kissing Australian cricketer Warne, she humiliated her husband on Sunday by using Twitter to announce her marriage was over.

On his return to Melbourne on Monday Warne followed suit, writing: “Sadly, Simone and I split up a while ago. We remain friends and will continue to be good parents.”

Friends insist Vinod and Joanne blame Hurley for the tension with their son in the past three years and are glad the marriage is over.

One said: “Arun has been estranged from them since the wedding. They are hopeful he will now come back into the family fold.”

The source added that society-watchers had no idea the marriage was in trouble, saying: “Even Arun didn’t realise how serious things were until he saw pictures of Liz and Shane kissing.”

Vinod and his family now plan a holiday as Hurley’s friends let it be known yesterday that she is to be granted a “quickie” divorce that will allow her to keep her £13million fortune.