Arun Nayar biography

Arun Nayar serves as Independent Director of the Company. Arun Nayar retired in 2015 as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at Tyco International PLC, a provider of security products. He also held other highly-diverse leadership positions including Chief Financial Officer of Global Operations at PepsiCo Inc. and President of ABB Financial Services Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of ABB Ltd. Since 2015, Mr. Nayar has been an independent member of the board of Bemis Company, a global supplier of flexible packaging and since 2016, Chairman of its Audit Committee. Since 2016, he has also been a Senior Advisor at BC Partners, a pan-European and North American private equity firm and at McKinsey & Company, a global management consulting firm.

What is the salary of Arun Nayar?

As the Independent Director of TFI International, the total compensation of Arun Nayar at TFI International is CAD$147,850. There are 12 executives at TFI International getting paid more, with Alain Bedard having the highest compensation of $10,830,300.

What does TFI International do?

TFI International Inc. provides transportation and logistics services in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. The company operates through Package and Courier, Less-Than-Truckload (LTL), Truckload (TL), and Logistics segments. The Package and Courier segment engages in the pickup, transport, and delivery of items. The LTL segment is involved in the pickup, consolidation, transportation, and delivery of smaller loads. The TL segment offers expedited transportation, flatbed, tank container, and dedicated services, as well as TL brokerage services. This segment carries full loads directly from the customer to the destination using a closed van or specialized equipment. The Logistics segment provides asset-light logistics services, including brokerage, freight forwarding, and transportation management, as well as small package parcel delivery. As of December 31, 2020, the company had 7,867 tractors, 25,520 trailers, and 9,926 independent contractors. The company was formerly known as TransForce Inc. and changed its name to TFI International Inc. in December 2016. TFI International Inc. is headquartered in Saint-Laurent, Canada.