Ghostbusters has been a cherished franchise since the first unlock in 1984. Starring Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Harold Ramis, and Ernie Hudson, this comedic delusion movie briefly become a fan favorite and spurred the movement of a complete franchise devoted to busting ghosts.

Related: Olivia Wilde Shares BTS Snap Of Her 'Ghostbusters: Afterlife' Villain Character

It is no surprise that with so much traction, there have been sequels to the first Ghostbusters film. The original solid returned to the display screen in 1989 for Ghostbusters II. In 2016, there was once an all-female ghostbusting workforce that stepped up when ghosts started reemerging starring Kristen Wiig, Leslie Jones, Melissa McCarthy, and Kate McKinnon.

Finally, the newest installment, Ghostbusters: Afterlife, follows the authentic film’s storyline, even though it takes place a number of years later and stars a couple of new faces. Mckenna Grace and Finn Wolfhard’s characters discover that ghostbusting is of their blood, and thus step up when the global needs it most. With such a lot of characters that brand the title “ghostbuster,” we’d like to grasp: who is the richest in the franchise?

10 Mckenna Grace (Phoebe Spengler) - $2 Million

Mckenna Grace is the youngest of our ghostbusting group. At handiest 15 years outdated, she has an excellent 60 credits on her filmography, including acting in Gifted along Chris Evans, portraying a young Tonya in I, Tonya, The Handmaid’s Tale, and several other projects hooked up to Disney. After being inducted into the Ghostbusters franchise because of Ghostbusters: Afterlife, she has a net worth of $2 million.

9 Finn Wolfhard (Trevor Spengler) - $4 Million

While he worked on movies and television displays sooner than joining Stranger Things, it is that name that in point of fact catapulted his identify into the leisure business. Not most effective does he portray one of the main characters in the Netflix hit display, but he also played portions in It and It Chapter Two earlier than becoming a member of the Ghostbusters: Afterlife forged. Between his performing occupation and the songs he has launched along with his bandmates, his net worth is currently $4 million.

Related: 'Stranger Things' Fans Want Finn Wolfhard And Millie Bobby Brown To Date After Spotting Them Together

8 Ernie Hudson (Dr. Winston Zeddemore) - $6 Million

Bringing it back to the originals, Ernie Hudson portrayed a ghostbuster in Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II, as well as a temporary cameo in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Hudson has been acting since 1976, and thus has had the alternative to be cast in 250 titles. His other well-known shows and films come with The Family Business and The Crow. As of 2021, his net worth is $6 million, which is reasonably surprising because of his involvement in so many projects.

7 Leslie Jones (Patty Tolan) - $7 Million

Leslie Jones joined the franchise in 2016 when the all-female Ghostbusters was once launched. She were performing for over a decade before joining the Saturday Night Live family, however her loud and bodily comedy received her extra reputation, springing her into a better level of fame. Also known for her roles in Coming 2 America with Eddie Murphy and Masterminds, she has a $7 million net worth.

6 Kate McKinnon (Jillian Holtzmann) - Approximately $10 Million

Saturday Night Live hired comedian Kate McKinnon back in 2012, and she is still part of their solid list. Over the years, she has been recognized in several displays and flicks, including The Magic School Bus Rides Again, Bombshell, and Rough Night. She, together with her SNL castmate Leslie Jones, joined the 2016 production of Ghostbusters and that helped raise her net worth to a current amount of about $10 million.

5 Kristen Wiig (Erin Gilbert) - $25 Million

Kristen Wiig, every other member of the female Ghostbusters group, is also an SNL veteran. She was part of the cast from 2005-2019 and has starred in several other television presentations and flicks. Some of her most well liked works come with Bridesmaids, The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, and voicing Ruffnut in the How to Train Your Dragon franchise. Her net worth sits at $25 million because of her popularity and the quantity of productions she’s been in.

Related: Kristen Wiig Hated This Part Of 'Bridesmaids'

4 Harold Ramis (Dr. Egon Spengler) - $50 Net Worth When He Died

Although he passed on to the great beyond in 2014, Harold Ramis is an essential component of the Ghostbusters franchise since starring in the first film. Not best was once Ramis a well known actor, however he had written for many popular movies, including Groundhog Day, Caddyshack, or even his very own Ghostbusters. With all this underneath his belt, it’s no shock that his net worth was $50 million when he died.

3 Melissa McCarthy (Abby Yates) - $90 Million

Melissa McCarthy is the final feminine ghostbuster of the 2016 movie. Besides that movie, she acted along Kristen Wiig in Bridesmaids, played the titular persona in Tammy, starred in Mike & Molly, and is set to portray Ursula in the are living action Disney free up of The Little Mermaid, among several other roles over the years. With a net worth of $90 million, McCarthy is the richest feminine ghostbuster of the franchise.

2 Bill Murray (Dr. Peter Venkman) - $180 Million

Bill Murray is a widely known actor, who has additionally produced and written a couple of works. Murray was an unique ghostbuster in the franchise, and has been in Ghostbusters, Ghostbusters II, and Ghostbusters: Afterlife, along with several films outside of the ghostbusting world. Because of his long record of performing credits, starting in 1973, his net worth sits at a comfortable $180 million.

1 Dan Aykroyd (Dr. Ray Stantz) - Approximately $200 Million

Of all the original ghostbusters, Dan Aykroyd is the wealthiest. Currently his net worth is at about $200 million thanks to his extensive resume as an actor, creator, and manufacturer. Aykroyd was a Saturday Night Live solid member and writer in the 1970s and he acted in over a hundred films and TV shows, together with somewhat cameo in the 2016 version of Ghostbusters.

Next: Is Scarlett Johansson The Richest Woman In The MCU?

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGiZoqScYrq2vtGasGaokaq5br7UnZtmnpmju27DzqWdoZmimXqotM6sq5uto6mys7%2BMq6CcoJWowW66xK1ksKeiqbVw