Bill Murray

Bill Murray was on the inaugural cast of Saturday Night Live and it was there that he launched to stardom, known for his dry wit and goofy characters. Ivan Reitman gave Murray his first starring role, in the film Meatballs in 1979. Following that, he had roles in Caddyshack, Stripes, and Tootsie.

After writing a film called The Razor's Edge which failed critically and commercially, Murray took some time off from acting and studied philosophy and history in France. He appeared in very few films throughout the rest of the 1980s, but returned to performing with Scrooged in 1988. When he returned to film, Murray established himself as a bona fide star, with films like What About Bob?, Groundhog Day, Ed Wood, Rushmore, Hamlet, The Royal Tenenbaums, Lost in Translation, Coffee and Cigarettes, Charlie's Angels, Broken Flowers, Moonrise Kingdom, Grand Budapest Hotel, and The Jungle Book.

Dan Aykroyd

Like Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd made his start as an original cast member on Saturday Night Live. He catapulted to stardom with the characters he co-created with fellow SNL comedian, John Belushi: The Blues Brothers. Following that, he created Ghostbusters along with the help of costar Harold Ramis. Other films include 1941, Trading Places, Spies Like Us, Dragnet, Driving Miss Daisy (for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor), Coneheads, 50 First Dates, and Tammy.

Harold Ramis

Harold Ramis was a director, actor, writer, and comedian. He co-wrote Ghostbusters with Dan Aykroyd, as well as its sequel Ghostbusters II. Originally, Ramis was the head writer on the sketch television show Second City TV before transitioning into cinema. Ramis' first writing job was the script for National Lampoon's Animal House. Next, he wrote Meatballs, directed by Ghostbusters' Ivan Reitman and starring Bill Murray. He made his directorial debut on Caddyshack, in which Bill Murray appeared. Other directing credits include Groundhog Day (which he also wrote), Analyze This, Bedazzled, and Year One.

Sigourney Weaver

Educated in acting at the Yale School of Drama, Weaver was discouraged from a career in acting by her professors, but triumphed nonetheless. Her first role was a bit part in Woody Allen's Annie Hall. She followed this up with her star-making turn as Ellen Ripley in Alien, a role for which she received an Academy Award nomination and which she would go on to reprise in the film's many sequels. Known for her patrician poise and angular beauty, Weaver became a well-respected actress following her performance as Ripley, and an iconic staple of the Science Fiction/Action genre. After Alien, she worked in films as diverse and critically acclaimed as Ghostbusters, The Ice Storm, Gorillas in the Mist, Working Girl, Galaxy Quest, The Cabin in the Woods, Avatar, WALL-E, and Finding Dory. In 1988, she won two Golden Globes for her work in Working Girl and Gorillas in the Mist.

In addition to her film work, she has often appeared onstage. Her first stage role was in Christopher Durang's Beyond Therapy, and more recently she appeared in another Durang play on Broadway, Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike, for which she received a Tony Award nomination. In 1984, she appeared on Broadway in Hurlyburly by David Rabe.

Ernie Hudson

Ernie Hudson is a successful character actor, known best his role as Winston Zeddemore in the Ghostbusters movies and his role as a warden in the television show Oz. Other films include The Hand That Rocks the Cradle, Airheads, The Crow, The Basketball Diaries, Miss Congeniality, and You're Not You.

Rick Moranis

Like Harold Ramis, Rick Moranis got his start on Second City TV. His role as the nerdy accountant, Louis Tully, in Ghostbusters was one of his first major film roles. Other films include Strange Brew, Little Shop of Horrors, Spaceballs, Honey I Shrunk the Kids, Parenthood, Honey I Blew Up the Kids, The Flintstones, and Honey We Shrunk Ourselves. Following the death of his wife, Moranis took a break from acting and has become more choosy about which roles he takes.

Annie Potts

Annie Potts is an American character actor. She currently stars on Young Sheldon. Previous films include Corvette Summer (for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe), Heartaches, Pretty in Pink, Who's Harry Crumb?, and Toy Story.