Soul Khan

Current #52k

All Time #189.5k

From the San Fernando Valley, but long ensconced in the New York rap scene, Soul Khan has become a critical favorite by making sincere music. In an industry obsessed with short‐lived trends, he has grown on his own terms, amassing a devoted following in the process.

Soul Khan&#39;s perspective and style are as multidimensional as his listeners. He fluidly navigates subjects without coming off heavy‐handed, rare for a rapper who addresses social issues. This experience comes together through his compelling voice, providing a nearly unrivaled depth and grit. This has led to work with artists like Lupe Fiasco, the J.U.S.T.I.C.E. League, and Homeboy Sandman.

You can hear and watch all of Soul Khan&#39;s work on all major streaming platforms....more

Country/Region : United States

Listen to Soul Khan’s new songs including "Not Like That ft. Akie Bermiss", "630 Am", "Alec Baldwin" and many more. Enjoy Soul Khan’s latest songs and explore the Soul Khan’s new music albums. If you want to download Soul Khan songs MP3, use the Boomplay App to download the Soul Khan songs for free. Discover Soul Khan’s latest songs, popular songs, trending songs all on Boomplay.

Soul Khan Biography

From the San Fernando Valley, but long ensconced in the New York rap scene, Soul Khan has become a critical favorite by making sincere music. In an industry obsessed with short‐lived trends, he has grown on his own terms, amassing a devoted following in the process.

Soul Khan&#39;s perspective and style are as multidimensional as his listeners. He fluidly navigates subjects without coming off heavy‐handed, rare for a rapper who addresses social issues. This experience comes together through his compelling voice, providing a nearly unrivaled depth and grit. This has led to work with artists like Lupe Fiasco, the J.U.S.T.I.C.E. League, and Homeboy Sandman.

You can hear and watch all of Soul Khan&#39;s work on all major streaming platforms.

Comments ( )

0/500

New Comments（ ）

FAQs about Soul Khan

Where is Soul Khan from?

He is from United States.

What are the latest songs of Soul Khan?

The latest songs of Soul Khan are When the Plague Starts, When the Plague Starts (Instrumental) and Speeding Bullets.

What are the best songs of Soul Khan?

The best songs of Soul Khan are Alec Baldwin, 630 Am and Fe La Soul ft. Akie Bermiss.

What are the best albums of Soul Khan?

The best albums of Soul Khan are Acknowledgement, Soul Like Khan and Hugo & Rufus.

How to download songs of Soul Khan?

You can download songs of Soul Khan from Boomplay App for free.

Firstly, install Boomplay app on your mobile phone.

Secondly, navigate to the song you would like to download.

Thirdly, Tap on More > Download.