Gazprom neftekhim Salavat has acquired a continuous personnel training model for its production purposes — starting from school and finishing with corporate training.

Personnel policy programs are designed to be long-term and result in getting well-qualified, responsible employees ready to work in a team.

The Company realizes its educational projects on the basis of Salavat Lyceum No.1. They are Specialized Physics, Chemistry and Maths Class, Specialized Humanities Class, School of the Future.

First Lyceum

Education at the Lyceum No.1, a municipal budgetary secondary educational institution of Salavat, makes the first step of personnel training.

The history of the Lyceum as an innovative training ground for the children of Salavat and the South of Bashkortostan started with such educational projects as Specialized Physics, Chemistry and Maths Class (School No.12) and School of the Future (Lyceum No.10).

In 2010, both educational institutions were combined into Lyceum No.1 and a split-level educational system, a system of specialized education and a system of additional education were created. Thus, the elementary school of the First Lyceum is a creative laboratory designed for seeking, developing and implementing new educational content and teaching methods. Here, more attention is paid to developing creative abilities of children. There is a creative complex that includes studios such as a chess studio, the Akvarelka art studio, a theater group, vocal-choral, sand art, sensory development, animation studios, Zvezdniy Plyazh project group, fitness and dancing studios, the Igry Nashego Dvora (Outdoor Games) sport studio, Tvorcheskaya Masterskaya (Creative workshop) etc.

Middle and senior students are taught at 7 subject departments and in 3 subject laboratories, the learning methods involve developing innovations and using experimental technologies.

Each year, pupils of the Lyceum go to educational trips around Russia, the most brilliant of them get acquainted with culture, customs and traditions of European countries.

The First Lyceum provides unique opportunities to go in for sports: on its basis the first regional branch of Zenit football academy was opened, a hockey class incorporating the young players of the Yurmaty hockey team was created.

Salavat Lyceum No.1 cooperates with the leading higher education institutions of Russia and Bashkortostan such as Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Ufa State Aviation Technical University, Zainab Biisheva Sterlitamak State Pedagogical Academy.

In 2012, the First Lyceum joined RUSNANO School League.

In 2013, the First Lyceum was among TOP-100 educational institutions of the Russian Federation, ensuring a high level of proficiency (performance/knowledge) of the Lyceum graduates, specializing in Physics and Maths.

In 2013, the First Lyceum won the first Electronic School republican forum.

In 2014, the First Lyceum was among TOP-30 best educational institutions of the Republic of Bashkortostan.

In 2013, 2014 and 2015, the First Lyceum became the winner of the town’s Olympiad movement.

In 2015, the First Lyceum was among TOP-100 best schools of Russia, providing high level of proficiency in Chemistry and Biology, Physics and Chemistry, Physics and Maths specializations.