The reform of Russian education is difficult; the new Minister of the Ministry of Education will have to clean out the Augean stables of education, polluted by supporters of the Bologna, and popularly called “swamp” system of schooling and training of specialists. The Finns at one time realized that the education system that existed in the USSR was really the best in the world and stole it, adapting it to their educational standards. Now the Finnish education system is the best in the world.

However, let us return to the Russian reform and pay attention to the fact that in 2013, in order to encourage applicants to enroll in colleges, that is, in order to motivate, first of all, graduates of the 9th grade to receive a specialized secondary level education, entrance exams were canceled.

Instead, certificate competitions and passing grades after 9th grade were introduced. Moreover, each, let’s call them by analogy with universities, determines the secondary educational institution for each specialty independently. Therefore, the question of what is the passing score for college after 9 years of schooling sounds ridiculous, as is the case with the question about the average temperature of hospital patients.

Passing score for technical school

College and technical school are twin educational institutions for obtaining SSE after 9 years of school. And paraphrasing Mayakovsky, which of them is more valuable for a quality education, we can say that when they say “college” in a foreign manner, they mean a technical school, when they say “technical school,” they mean a college.

The same as in college, the definition of a passing grade for a technical school is controversial; firstly, you need to clarify what the passing grade is for 9th grade, that is, with incomplete or for a graduate with complete secondary education.

Secondly, in what specialty are you interested in the passing score and, thirdly, you need to indicate a specific technical school.

Because for graduates of the 9th grade, the passing score is set according to the average score of the certificate, somewhere in the range from 3.5 to a maximum score of 5, for graduates with complete secondary education from 130 to a maximum of 200 points of the Unified State Examination result.

As for the passing rates in the specialty, here too the range of knowledge assessments is approximately the same. And if we take individual technical schools, then they can independently set the passing parameters to the lower side of the lower values.

Passing score for medical college

Without going into banal discussions about the humanity and necessity of medical professions, which are always in demand by society, it should be taken into account that secondary medical education can be obtained after the 9th grade.

The passing score for a medical college also depends on specialties such as nursing and midwifery, as well as on the average certificate, which is determined by the educational institution independently, depending on the enrollment and number of applicants per place.

As for other areas that are considered related in medical colleges, the principle for determining the average passing score is the same as for the main specialties.

Until quite recently, medical schools universally followed the requirement that for admission one had to pass exams in biology, as well as in the Russian language.

Now everything has changed and for admission it is necessary to pass a written psychological test to determine whether the applicant’s psychological and physical abilities meet the requirements for a medical specialist.

College passing scores 2017

If we take, for example, any medical college, the passing grade in 2017 is unlikely to differ from previous years. Moreover, there is a possibility that the average passing grade of the certificate and the Unified State Examination result will be lower than the threshold of previous years due to a significant reduction in the number of applicants due to the so-called “demographic hole”, which happened at the beginning of the 2000s. It’s just that in those days, as many children were not born as were born before.

Therefore, such situations are not uncommon, especially in provincial colleges, where passing grades may not be strictly fixed, for example, in cases where 30 applications for 30 places were submitted to a college, then in this case all 30 applicants are admitted. Then the passing grade will be considered the average grade of the certificate with the lowest indicators, or the lowest USE indicator. The main thing here is that the grades are, as they say, adequate to the profile of study, and also correspond to the status, or rather, the indicator that the college gives itself.

Student at this university: I studied at the Moscow State Pedagogical University at the Faculty of Foreign Languages ​​for exactly a year and that was enough for me. I write only my personal impressions of this university. Now I'm studying at another university and I have something to compare with. My acquaintance with MPGU occurred at the open day. And what should have immediately put me off was the sight of the KGF building on Vernadsky Avenue. But for some reason I wasn’t put off. Inside on the first floor everything seems to be decent, as it seemed then. Later, during the admissions campaign, I went up to the 6th floor of the Faculty of Foreign Languages. To say that there has been no renovation there for a long time is to say nothing. But by the way, the reception of documents took place in a more or less decent audience. I just didn’t see other audiences back then. I don’t know what motivated me and why I chose MSGU. I still can’t answer this question for myself. Probably its seasoned greatness and the fact that it was the first and leading pedagogical university in the country. The key word here is "was". We, future students, came to the student meeting. How many unsubstantiated words were said back then, it was such a mess. And about financial support, and about large scholarships, and about an individual approach, and even about the fact that the university will try to provide every (!) student with a laptop if necessary. Naturally, all this was a lie. And by the way, the woman whom I told us about all the wonderful prospects, I never met again at the university.

I paid little attention to the state of the university in the last paragraph, now I want to describe it in more detail. I was absolutely horrified by the state of some of the classrooms when we were cleaning. Huge holes in the linoleum, desks that were held up only by chewing gum, and chairs that looked like they had been brought from the trash heap. These are just some of the delights of auditoriums. The windows apparently have not been replaced since the building was built. It was scary to even open them; it seemed like they were about to fall on your head. And in winter there was a terrible draft blowing from them. The most remarkable thing is the toilets, or rather the lack thereof. Instead there are holes in the floor. No, of course it’s not like this everywhere, but the main toilets on the floors are like this, except for the first and second. There is no need to talk about the presence of toilet paper. KGF also has very “wonderful” elevators. They, too, seem to have not been changed since the 60-70s of the last century. It may happen that you get stuck and it won’t be long before you get out of there. A small point in favor of the KGF is the large dining room and she is no longer alone there. In general, there is somewhere to eat. It’s also very cool in physical education, especially the locker room that doesn’t lock, so you either drag your bags into the gym, or the person on duty stays and sits with the bags. But this also has a small advantage: if you are sitting with bags, you will be counted as having attended a couple of gyms.

I have already described the state of the classrooms, let’s move on to the organization and work of the dean’s office, if this can be called “work.” For the first time, I encountered a problem when I received my student's permit. Most of my classmates received their numbers on September 5-7, but I only received them half a month later. Me and the other poor souls stood in line for 4 hours, while the lady who was supposed to give them to us kept leaving for lunch. The dean's office did not expel the girl from my group until December, although she did not appear at the university for three months. Then we had an amazing schedule. Firstly, the audiences did not correspond to reality, or two different objects could be placed in one audience, and whoever comes first gets the audience. Secondly, 3-4 groups could be assigned to one seminar; in some of the rooms we could barely fit. Some had to practically sit in the corridor. Then another “entertainment” of ours was to look for half a pair of chairs for ourselves. The lectures were also fun. The entire stream was often bet on them, these are 20 groups, and in each group there are 16 people. There were times when I had to sit on the stairs or were so crowded that it was difficult to write. Accordingly, due to so many people, the teacher at the middle desks could no longer be heard.

Now the next point. How the pairs go and a few words about the teachers. I admit, not all couples were so terrible, there were some that were quite okay. The main language pairs go through one group. Such as grammar, speaking practice and phonetics. But language practice itself is incredibly little. We spoke very little English. Otherwise, you'll be lucky with the teacher. Now about the teachers. There are often tyrants. For example, my worst teacher was Anna Aleksandrovna Tirskaya. She is just a terrible teacher, she could yell, be rude, and was always 20 minutes late. Insulting students is a common thing for her. I was constantly shaking in front of her couple. One day she yelled at me for finding her the wrong audience. Yes, we had to find her an audience for a couple, then call her so that she would deign to come down. She is one of the strongest phoneticians at MPGU, but as a teacher and as a person she is simply disgusting. Because of her, many students were expelled from the university. She simply brought them down during the exam and the test and did not hesitate to insult them at the same time. She constantly went through our mental abilities, saying that we were all in the wrong university. I don't know who would like this approach to teaching. I just didn’t understand it, I had to hire a phonetics tutor because I didn’t understand anything. She failed me on the final test, but fortunately another teacher took the exam. I don’t understand why such “tactful” teachers are even allowed to work. There are a couple of other teachers that I was simply shocked by. But at MPGU there are strong and adequate teachers. The only thing is that they just “meet” and how lucky they are. There was a teacher who allowed himself to be 40 minutes late, and then generally announced that we would not conduct lectures and seminars because Moscow State Pedagogical University did not pay him for it. Of course, teachers are also in a difficult situation at this university.

I also like that now freshmen pay 195 thousand a year and this is only for English, two languages ​​are even more expensive. At MPGU, students have an unspoken question: What is the money spent on? Obviously not for renovation.

I would also like to tell a story about how I was expelled. I went through seven circles of hell. I couldn’t expel for three months (!) I swore and quarreled. It's just scary to remember.

I tried to describe everything to the maximum. These are the memories this university left about itself. My advice to applicants. Think carefully before entering MPGU. At least in foreign language. MSGU likes to recruit a lot of people; there can be 18 people in a group. Normal teaching is out of the question. Money leakage is also another unclear issue. I recommend that if you still want to go to Moscow State Pedagogical University, ask around 2-4 year students. Ask about everything you are interested in. And better than several people. Also, if you definitely decide to enroll at Moscow State Pedagogical University, make acquaintances with people from different groups. This will help you in the future, you will exchange information and homework.

I had such a bitter experience. And how glad I am that I still transferred to another university. It's just heaven and earth!

I support 88

Its distinctive feature is the rather unremarkable positions of Moscow pedagogical universities. There are only two of them included in the TOP-10, and the first of them, with an average Unified State Examination score of 63.6, occupies only seventh position. And the rating is headed by Chelyabinsk State Pedagogical University (66.4), followed by Nizhny Novgorod State Pedagogical University and Russian State Pedagogical University named after. A.I. Herzen.

A general shift in emphasis towards the regions and a slight weakening of the positions of capital and St. Petersburg universities, apparently, indicates a decrease in demand for teaching specialties in both capitals. At the same time, the general picture of admission and the fairly high density of Unified State Examination results indicate relative equality in the level of training of applicants, which naturally affects the search for alternative options.

No. The name of the university Average Unified State Examination score Min Unified State Exam score % of the total number of applicants admitted to the budget for the Unified State Examination competition 1 Chelyabinsk State Pedagogical University 66,4 64,3 5,1 2 Nizhny Novgorod State Pedagogical University 66,2 59,6 68,6 3 Russian State Pedagogical University named after. A.I. Herzen, St. Petersburg 65 59,8 73,4 4 Chuvash State Pedagogical University named after. AND I. Yakovleva 64,3 53 85,3 5 Russian State Vocational Pedagogical University, Ekaterinburg 64,3 60,2 92,7 6 Murmansk State Pedagogical University 63,6 55,5 81,5 7 Moscow Pedagogical State University 63,6 54 89,3 8 Penza State Pedagogical University named after. V.G. Belinsky 63,6 54,2 92,6 9 Tatar State Humanitarian and Pedagogical University, Kazan 63,4 54,6 81,4 10 Moscow City Pedagogical University 62,9 51,5 89,1 11 Ural State Pedagogical University, Ekaterinburg 62,6 53,4 85 12 Yaroslavl State Pedagogical University named after. K.D. Ushinsky 62,3 55,2 85,3 13 Tula State Pedagogical University named after. L.N. Tolstoy 61,7 54,7 88,2 14 Moscow Humanitarian Pedagogical Institute 61,6 54,1 78,6 15 Vologda State Pedagogical University 61,6 54,9 81,8 16 Bashkir State Pedagogical University named after. M. Akmully, Ufa 61,3 50,3 93,6 17 Nizhny Tagil State Social Pedagogical Academy 61,2 52,8 84 18 Krasnoyarsk State Pedagogical University named after. V.P. Astafieva 61,2 56,2 80,7 19 Lipetsk State Pedagogical University 61,1 45 93,3 20 Moscow State Regional University 60,8 51,8 78,7 21 Perm State Pedagogical University 60,6 50,2 85,7 22 Omsk State Pedagogical University 60,4 52,4 92,9 23 Kaluga State Pedagogical University named after. K.E.Tsiolkovsky 59,6 47,8 90,8 24 Orenburg State Pedagogical University 59,1 48,4 90,5 25 Birsk State Social and Pedagogical Academy 59 49,3 88,2 26 Ulyanovsk State Pedagogical University named after. I.N.Ulyanova 58,8 47,5 83 27 Transbaikal State Humanitarian and Pedagogical University named after. N.G. Chernyshevsky 58,4 50,4 77,5 28 Glazov State Pedagogical Institute named after. V.G. Korolenko 58,2 48,9 90,7 29 Mordovian State Pedagogical Institute named after. M.E. Evsevieva 58,1 48,8 75,3 30 Volgograd State Pedagogical University 57,8 46 74,2 31 Pskov State Pedagogical University named after. CM. Kirov 57,5 45,9 90,4 32 Tomsk State Pedagogical University 57,4 51,8 84,3 33 Altai State Pedagogical Academy, Barnaul 57,2 52,3 80,8 34 Novosibirsk State Pedagogical University 57 45,2 92,7 35 Sterlitamak State Pedagogical Academy named after. Zainab Biisheva 57 45,5 87,7 36 Karelian State Pedagogical Academy, Petrozavodsk 57 43,1 85,1 37 Biysk Pedagogical State University named after. V.M. Shukshina 56,8 47,3 83,2 38 Elabuga State Pedagogical University 56,4 43,2 90,8 39 Stavropol State Pedagogical Institute 56,2 47,9 93,6 40 Voronezh State Pedagogical University 56,2 44 81,2 41 Komi State Pedagogical Institute, Syktyvkar 56,1 44,4 86,6 42 Dagestan State Pedagogical University 56,1 42,6 98,7 43 Amur Humanitarian and Pedagogical State University, Komsomolsk-on-Amur 56 51,7 86,3 44 Shuya State Pedagogical University 56 48,5 89,3 45 Michurinsky State Pedagogical Institute 55,7 43,7 87,7 46 Naberezhnye Chelny State Pedagogical Institute 55,5 43,5 90 47 Taganrog State Pedagogical Institute 55,5 45,6 92,9 48 Arzamas State Pedagogical Institute named after. A.P. Gaidar 55,5 44,8 80,8 49 Surgut State Pedagogical University 55,3 48,5 97,1 50 Kuzbass State Pedagogical Academy, Novokuznetsk 55 40,9 94,9 51 Blagoveshchensk State Pedagogical University 53,7 42,6 83,5 52 Slavic-on-Kuban State Pedagogical Institute 52,7 40,1 93,7 53 Armavir State Pedagogical University 52,3 42 93,7 54 Shadrinsk State Pedagogical Institute 51,8 43,3 87,8 55 Borisoglebsk State Pedagogical Institute 51,8 41,9 77,9 56 Volga State Engineering and Pedagogical University, Nizhny Novgorod 49,7 40,7 95,9 57 Tobolsk State Social and Pedagogical Academy named after. D.I. Mendeleev 49,6 35,4 87,3 58 Solikamsk State Pedagogical Institute 49,3 38,8 85 59 Ussuri State Pedagogical Institute 49,2 39,4 91

The passing score is not a constant value. Its value is strongly influenced by the number of universities with similar quality of education, as well as the number of applicants.

You will need

- the university admissions committee, information about how many applicants have good Unified State Exam results;

- statistics.

Instructions

In order to have a clear idea of ​​the passing score, it is worth waiting for the closing date for accepting documents, and based on the data received, find out how many points you need to have in order to become a student. But due to the use of Unified State Exam results, this number may decrease, for example, if someone takes their documents to another university.

If you don’t have the mood and patience to wait, you can use the following scheme. First, find out the statistics of passing grades in this educational institution over the past 3-4 years. Next, study the resulting numbers. On average, the passing score fluctuates by 5-10 points annually.

Of course, graduates with ideal Unified State Exam results increase their chances of getting a passing grade. However, it is precisely this contingent that can significantly increase the passing score.

Video on the topic

Moscow State University named after M.V. Lomonosov is one of the leading educational institutions in our country. Every year people come here to enroll from different parts of Russia and from abroad. Highly professional teaching staff trains qualified specialists in various specialties. How to get to Moscow State University?

Instructions

First, you must obtain your high school diploma. Having a silver medal does not provide any benefits upon admission, but can be considered during exams if the results are equal to another applicant. Next, you can visit the “open day”, where you will find out the necessary information about further studies, talk with the rector, ask questions and see the list of documents required for admission to the university. It is advisable to communicate with former university graduates and find out information about the learning process.

Secondly, you will need to write an application addressed to the rector, which is submitted to the admissions committee. The document form can be viewed on the official website of the admissions committee of Moscow State University. Or ask the admissions office, they will also give you instructions on how to fill it out.

Orphans, disabled children, citizens under 20 years of age who have one disabled parent of group 1, citizens with a family income less than the subsistence level, persons who have served in the army under a contract for at least three years, have the right to preferential admission in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation. The winners of All-Russian Olympiads, held annually in various subjects among students of secondary educational institutions, have the same advantage.

In addition to the application in the established form, you need to prepare other documents. This may be a certificate or diploma of secondary specialized education. Copies of birth certificate and passport, 8 black and white photographs measuring 3 by 4, a copy or original certificate of results obtained at the Unified State Exam. It should be noted that copies of documents do not need to be certified by a notary. Persons entitled to benefits must also provide the necessary confirmation of their claims.

Application documents can be sent by mail to the address of Moscow State University or taken directly to the admissions office in person. After which, applicants are allowed to take additional entrance exams.

Nonresidents wishing to attend Moscow State University are provided with a dormitory for the entire period of study. MSU trains specialists in full-time, evening and correspondence courses. In addition, you can always submit an application and documents for admission to master’s and postgraduate programs at an educational institution.

A certain period of time is allotted for submitting documents for admission, which changes every year, so this issue must be clarified in advance with the admissions committee.

Sources:

what are the exams at Moscow State University?

School graduates who have applied for admission to universities in our country are tormented by guessing whether they will get in or not. They are interested in where they can get data on passing scores. Since results on a 100-point scale are used for admission to universities, the exact data is unknown to anyone.

Instructions

Wait until the first lists of applicants are posted, and you will see with what data they are applying to this university. Don't be upset if your name is not at the top of this list. This is just preliminary data. Look carefully at the column of people who submitted originals (there won’t be that many of them). Since the law allows you to apply to five educational institutions, these same names have probably already appeared on the lists of other universities.

Follow the analysis of the Unified State Exam results in your area using news reports, on the Internet (on the websites of specific universities), and in newspaper articles. Such data is in public use and is presented in the form of statistics (this can be tables, graphs, etc.). Everything will help you focus and understand how great your chances are. If your scores are satisfactory, consider whether it is worth submitting original documents to the university.

Consult with graduates of previous years who entered the. Using personal example and the example of their classmates, they will tell you what they did themselves. By comparing your scores and theirs, you will know approximately checkpoint. But remember that each educational institution has its own passing score - somewhere higher, somewhere lower. To some extent, this depends on the prestige of the university, the number of budget places and the number of beneficiaries who have submitted documents.

Be sure to include your phone number in your application. Universities that value their applicants will inform you personally about the results of admission, perhaps even offering to immediately bring all the necessary documents. It also happens that the specialty you choose requires high passing scores. In your application, also express your wishes regarding another specialty with lower scores. In this case, your chances will increase.

Education is an important aspect in a person's life. Good professional knowledge and skills strengthen self-confidence, contribute to getting a good job and achieving material wealth. “Where should I go to study?” - Most current graduates ask themselves the question.

Teaching is an art, a work no less titanic than that of a writer or composer, but more difficult and responsible.

The teacher addresses the human soul not through music, like a composer, or with the help of paints, like an artist, but directly.

He educates with his knowledge and love, his attitude towards the world.

D. Likhachev

Pedagogical universities are first on the list, as they are the BASIS of any education. They prepare teachers for all levels of the educational system - kindergartens, schools, colleges, universities. Teachers not only teach children science, but also form a worldview, “sow the rational, the good, the eternal.” Pupils and students spend most of the school period next to their teachers. Therefore, it is so important that graduates of pedagogical universities are highly educated, intelligent, and worthy. The future fate of the younger generation depends on the quality of teaching. As T. Shash said: “The teacher must have maximum authority and minimum power.” Only those who have authority among students can instill a love of knowledge and teach a lot.

Future teachers can receive a fundamental and high-quality education at state pedagogical universities. The page of each university provides its description, addresses and details, open days, forms of education, information on the availability of budget places, dormitories, and military departments.

To be a good teacher, you need to love what you teach and love those you teach.

V. Klyuchevsky

In recent years, the popularity of the teaching profession has increased significantly. The flow of applicants to Moscow State Pedagogical University last year amounted to 25 thousand people - 17 people for 1st place! The number of budget places has been increased to 1290. A similar situation is observed in other pedagogical universities. The reason for the increased demand for teacher education is the state program for modernizing the personnel training system, which led, among other things, to an increase in teachers’ salaries. The world has changed, and teachers must be different, keeping up with the times. Modern teachers are called upon not only to strengthen the shaky authority of the teaching profession, but also to raise it to new heights. So that in the future it will be considered an honorable privilege to receive a pedagogical education.

The government is preparing an additional series of measures to improve the quality of life of teachers.

People enter pedagogical universities not only to become a teacher, but also to obtain the profession of a competent municipal manager who uses modern management methods and business informatics.