Synopsis

The Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation (BMTC), which has a long-term loan of Rs 5,689 crore to build the Phase I corridor, hopes to achieve cash break-even by the end of FY19.

Bengaluru: The Namma Metro is planning to set up a new team to exclusively focus on improving first and last-mile connectivity at all Metro stations. The department — called the Connectivity and Asset Management Team — will be responsibile for ensuring better travel experience to existing users and also chalk out measures to attract new passengers.

“The first phase (of Metro) carries about 8,500 passengers per kilometre per hour but the same infrastructure is capable of carrying double the number of passengers,” Namma Metro managing director Ajay Seth told ET. “The government and citizens have given us prime space to build the project. It is our responsibility to ensure the infrastructure is best utilised.”

The dedicated team, he said, comprises six to seven officials led by an executive director. “It will also explore ways to develop our properties. That could be either renting the space for parking vehicles or leasing out for commercial purposes,” Seth said. “Our primary objective is to enhance commuter convenience.”

The Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation (BMTC), which has a long-term loan of Rs 5,689 crore to build the Phase I corridor, hopes to achieve cash break-even by the end of FY19. Last year, it achieved an operational surplus of Rs 73.11 crore, but fell short of about ?30 crore for interest payment to lenders. For the BMRCL to achieve cash breakeven, it has to either touch daily ridership of 5 lakh or generate higher revenue from commercial development.

Currently, the 42-km Namma Metro network caters to a daily ridership of about 4 lakh passengers. The Rs 13,800-crore project, however, is plagued by a number of first and last-mile connectivity issues. That includes poor access to stations (for pedestrians), lack of parking facility (for private vehicles, mainly twowheelers) and absence of dedicated space for buses, cabs and autorickshaws, etc. These issues, apparently, are costing the Metro at least one lakh daily ridership. During the launch of Metro’s first phase in July 2017, the BMRCL had announced that the project would cater to 5 lakh passengers a day, but that figure appears to be a far cry for now. Officials had expected the ridership to touch 10 lakh once all the 50 coaches are doubled.

LACK OF INTEGRATION AT METRO STATIONS

Urban mobility expert Pawan Mulukutla said all Metro stations have problems of integration, be it physical integration (parking facility for private vehicles, bicycles), information integration (displaying real-time bus timings at the station) and service integration that will ensure different services such as suburban train, cabs and autos complement each other. “Construction of Metro is being looked just as a standalone infrastructure project. The BMRCL will have to rethink and design it as a transformative and urban rejuvenation project, Mulukutla said. He also suggested the government prepare a development control regulation so that the surroundings of all the Metro stations are designed well.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

What’s India drinking? Spirits are high on apple, orange and honey flavours

India must protect doctors. They are scarce, and it takes years to train one.

The golden rule for how much you should invest in gold, and where

When earnings growth falls to 14-quarter low, you can't predict but can prepare

If market runs up too much, there could be problems later: Rajat Rajgarhia

Watch out for these 3 things if you’re holding Unicommerce stocks

1

2

3