Copa Del Rey

UD Melilla vs Real Madrid Preview

A rare event in Spanish football sees the Spanish giants travel to the continent of Africa. There they will be welcomed by Melilla, a team in a Spanish enclave of the same name.

The city’s modest population of just under 90,000 will be buzzing to see the match that will take place in the equally modest 10.000 seat Alvarez Claro Stadium.

Madrid will perhaps welcome a trip away from the Spanish mainland as a much needed distraction. Losing five of their previous seven matches, the current European champions are spiraling.

To say nothing of Sunday’s 5-1 loss to eternal rivals Barcelona and the consequent dismissal of head coach Julen Lopetegui. Additionally, Los Blanco’s injury list continues to grow.

Youth team coach and former player Santiago Solari replaces Lopetegui as interim coach and will seek to get his first victory against what will be an inspired Melillan team coached by Luis Carrión.

Although not much is known about Carrión’s team, Real will expect a tough match. Melilla are without a loss in their previous five matches and sit second in the Segunda B table.

Team News

The hosts will line up with Ruano and Igor Martinez in attack alongside top scorer Yacine Qasmi. Defender Paco Aguza will have a tough task against a superior attacking opponent.

Altogether, Madrid will be missing four players to injury. Joining Dani Carvajal on the injury list are fellow defenders Marcelo and Rafael Varane. Likewise, striker Mariano will miss about two weeks.

Prediction

Despite Real’s abysmal current state of affairs, the 19 time cup champions outmatch their hosts at every position.

While Solari’s men will play in unfamiliar surroundings, the sheer quality of the Argentinian’s squad can easily overcome Melilla’s home field advantage.

Expect this first ever meeting between the two sides and the biggest of the home side’s history; to result in a much needed victory for the visitors.

UD Melilla 1 – 3 Real Madrid

Photo credit to Real Madrid via Flickr