How to Hire PAT GREEN For Your Event!

BOOKING FEE (booking price, booking cost).

AVAILABILITY.

Roster: Country

Roster: Texas Country

Roster: Red Dirt

Roster: Alt-Country

aka: Patrick Craven Green

Hire Pat Green:

Patrick Craven Green (born April 5, 1972) is an American Texas Country artist. Active since 1995, Pat Green has recorded a total of seven studio albums, including three for Republic Records and two for BNA. Fifteen of his singles have charted on Billboard Hot Country Songs, of which the highest-peaking is “Wave on Wave” (No. 3) from his gold-certified album of the same name.

Green started his music career as an 18-year-old at Texas Tech University, playing small gigs at bars and clubs around Lubbock.

Pat Green with

Richard De La Font

After committing to music, Green drew the attention of Willie Nelson and joined a tour featuring Nelson and several other famous country musicians. Green’s appearance at the 1998 Willie Nelson July 4 Picnic was his first step towards nationwide recognition, and he was soon playing sold-out shows in Texas. Green was sponsored by Miller Lite and sold more than 250,000 albums, even without signing a major label recording contract.

In late 2004, “Lucky Ones” was Green’s 3rd and final CD release on the Universal/Republic label. The album peaked at number 6 on the U.S. Country charts. Green joined popular country music artists, including Keith Urban, Gretchen Wilson, Dave Matthews Band, and Kenny Chesney on major tours.

Hire Pat Green for your festival or concert plans.

On September 16, 2014, “Girls from Texas” was made available on iTunes.

On May 18, 2015, Green released a new single, “While I Was Away”. The video, a tribute to long-distance parents, premiered on People.com on May 22. “While I Was Away” was inducted into Taste of Country’s Showdown Hall of Fame after winning five consecutive fan-voted rounds against artists, including Blake Shelton, Dierks Bentley, Cassadee Pope, and David Nail.

Hire Pat Green for your special event!

Green’s self-released album, Home, debuted on digital media on August 14, 2015, and entered on the Top Country Albums chart at No. 5. The album includes appearances from Lyle Lovett, Sheryl Crow, and more. The twelfth single from the album, “Day One,” was released to Texas radio on May 2, 2016. Green self-released the single, “Drinkin’ Days”, on May 26, 2017.

A country music hero, three-time Grammy nominee Pat Green combines unique lyrics with “good time” music to create unforgettable hits like “Wave on Wave” and “Let Me.” This is considered a brilliant artist who has toured with Kenny Chesney and Keith Urban.

For a performance review from an actual customer,

read HERE.

How do I book Pat Green? See below.

Hire Pat Green for your party or event!

How much does it cost to book Pat Green? See below.

Pat Green may be available for your next special event!

What is the Pat Green booking fee? See below.

Book Pat Green, now!