Bill Mitchell’s other forms of transport

Gifted automotive designer, taskmaster, motorcyclist — Bill Mitchell was many things. Some people found him impossible to work with (never mind for), but those he did allow closer often found him a benevolent soul who, with all that corporate clout, would encourage those select artisans to work for him, after hours.

GM Vice President of Design by day, surrounded by Corvettes, Silver Rivieras and the like, Mitchell’s downtime was often spent astride two wheels. Motorcycle devotees should check this link for an in-depth view of some of the machines rode and figures known. Donning fancy leathers, helmet and popping out for a spin was a Mitchell given, at any given time.

Within his lengthy managerial tenure, Mitchell owned at least a dozen motorcycles, at one point being told by his accountant, “You can’t afford another divorce, get riding bikes.” But with so many motorcycles, the problem of how to transport more than one machine arose.

As Design VP, what Bill Mitchell wanted, Bill Mitchell got. He bought his own bikes, but the Surveyor project was an in-house, design staff and GMC project; this being a basic-spec GMC Vandura, converted for the purpose of transporting two bikes, along with planned storage of the accoutrements of spare leathers, helmets and tools. Best known for being the A-Team’s vehicle of choice, the Vandura, built from 1971-96, was a staple as cargo hauler, camper conversion, and occasional people carrier

Kindred spirit Alex Mair, GMC’s truck division General Manager, was only too willing to oblige. It took six months for truck studio chief, Mike Lathers and selected studio designers to wrestle out the ultimate motorcycle mover and create what became known as the S-6 Surveyor. Although known as Mitchell’s Surveyor, this refers only to being Bill’s pet project. Footing the $100,000 bill? Probably GMC.

Lathers was known within GM design circles for conjuring up many camper van conversions. Fibreglass saddlebags, accessible from outside, replaced the original quarter windows in order to store those all-important spare boots, gloves and helmets. No more awkward clambering and searching, which freed up the load area, allowing two motorcycles to be lashed down in the rear cargo hold, custom made in blue by Ancra.

The standard van’s rear bench seat came in for some particularly clever thinking. The side door required re-hanging due to the saddlebags, awarding the bench seat a double life. For biking duties, the seat became a ubiquitous tool bench with a nice flat surface for placing that torque wrench or a steaming cup of Joe. Perfect for an exhausted fellow to rest his weary head when, two-wheeled frolics over, the bench could become a double bed.

This being Mitchell, hankering to add some extra glamour to his already immensely practical and superbly designed van saw the fitting of electrical gizmos. Turning the ignition along with a button press saw the rear door change into a perfectly angled ramp, so that a sole rider could extract or replace the bike, though rarely was Mitchell totally alone.

The sliding sunroof also doubled as race-viewing platform replete with guard rails for leaning against when consuming burger and beer — William was a keen racegoer, both two and four-wheeled. Other additions include most internal finishes and brackets being chromed, rear wheel wells accommodating spare motorcycle wheels, a double battery system in order not to ‘run outta juice’, not forgetting the white and orange leather interior.

The front seats swivelled, extra driving lamps adorned the front and side, while rear doors had their own weather awnings. BF Goodrich tyres shod the Tacoma wheels. The engine however remained the stock 350 cubic inch motor with pizzazz led by Hooker headers and side exhausts. As Bill does.

The van featured by Hot Rod magazine in December 1974, its glossy denim blue paint coat wearing prominent decals. But how often the S6-Surveyor was used is moot; Bill was always looking toward the next project, whether GM’s or his own.

A short distance from the Warren, Michigan GM Technical Centre sprawl lay the suburbia of anywhere 1970’s America. Between a dry cleaner and a florist lay a nondescript shopfront, unadorned with signage. Unfrequented by paying customers, this unit was known only to a select few. It was home to Mitchell’s bike collection and one might well find parked outside all manner of future GM ideas; nascent Camaros, Buicks or Corvettes were everyday occurrences.

Detroit winters are notoriously cold. Mitchell’s warming hospitality, alongside an escape from the dulling bitter winds was an incentive to those employees seeking extra curricular activities. Looking after his bikes or servicing the trucks was seen as lucrative addition to time away from the day job, Mitchell always looked after his acolytes financially .

But with the S-6 Surveyor now complete, the mercurial Mitchell decided that he now wanted a custom pick up to haul his bikes — enter the Dragon Wagon. A white Chevrolet pickup’s sides were adorned with a colourful dragon motif along with the stylised moniker, announcing to those unaware, the arrival of someone making a presence.

The load bed was designed for two motorcycles, secured by belts and locking bars. Retrieval was a simple process: the bike sat on a metal channel, moving like a filing cabinet drawer. One simply pulled the bike towards oneself and the pickup had a hydraulic tail-lift for effortless lifting. Fuss-free in operation, the pickup offered little extra room over that of the S6 Surveyor. Mitchell obviously used both vehicles, but their whereabouts are now unknown.

Mitchell didn’t mince words when it came to vehicle and car design. Those driving Volkswagen Beetles wore dirty underwear, he stated. And he was once heard saying to an individual who contested with him over a design matter, “you have no business in design. Your suit; my wife has better looking linoleum on the kitchen floor.”

Many of Bill Mitchell’s automotive creations made us enthusiasts sit up and take notice, however absurd. But with a stressful corporate existence, the motorcycle was an escape, his balm and nourishment, the true feeling of man and machine as one.

With immense gratitude to Gary Smith for his in-depth knowledge.

Data Sources: deansgarage.com, gmcvandura.com