Kirarin Revolution (English: Sparkling Revolution) is a 14 volume manga series by An Nakahara that was also adapted into a 153 episode anime series.

The story follows a ravenous 14 year old named Kirari Tsukishima, who spends most of her time preoccupied with food and eating. She does not pay much attention to anything else but this. However, things changes when one day when she saves a turtle and ends up meeting a boy named Seiji. As a reward for saving his pet, he gives Kirari a ticket to a concert for the idol band SHIPS. When she tries to go to the concert, though, she meets another boy named Hiroto, who destroys her ticket, telling her to stay away from Seiji because they are two completely different people. When Kirari sneaks into the concert, she find out what he means by this; both Seiji and Hiroto are in the band SHIPS. Determined to win Seiji's love and become part of his world, Kirari begins her quest of becoming an Idol Singer.

Tropes used in Kirarin Revolution include:

All Girls Want Bad Boys: Kirari ends up with Hiroto.

Alpha Bitch: Erina.

Aw, Look -- They Really Do Love Each Other: Kirari and Hiroto. Well, it was pretty obvious, despite them being on bad terms earlier on in the series.

Balloon Belly: Kirari in episode 91.

Big Eater: Kirari.

Bishonen: Seiji & Hiroto.

Childhood Marriage Promise: Arashi has delluded himself into thinking he has this with Kirari.

Cloudcuckoolander: Seiji is a little... out there.

Cute Kitten: Na-san, Na-yan, Mr. Na, Mya-san, Nii-kun, Mii-tyan and Yoga.

Defictionalization: During the run of Kirarin Revolution, Koharu often performed as Kirari on the Japanese kids' morning show Oha Star.

The Ditz: Kirari and Seiji.

Ear Worm: Just about everything, considering this is a show about a girl becoming an Idol Singer.

Everything's Better with Sparkles: Kirari's debut song is Sparkling Revolution.

Female Angel, Male Demon: Invoked by Kirari and Hiroto in episode 1.

Funny Animal: The series loves them. For starters, SHIPS is managed by Nezumi who is a mouse.

Girlish Pigtails: Kirari wears these. So does Erina.

Gonk: Morita Mochun.

Hammerspace: Where the heck does Arashi keep those sea creatures?

Hey, It's That Guy!: The anime uses a lot of Celebrity Voice Actors. When this show was being produced, Kirari was voiced by then-Morning Musume member Koharu Kusumi. Other Hello! Project members voiced some of the other characters as well. It went to the point where the voice actors for SHIPS, Soichiro Hoshi and Akio Suyama, were replaced by budding actors Shikou Kanai and Takuya Ide.

Hollywood Tone Deaf: Kirari until she fixes it. Apparently it runs in the family.

House Husband: Hiroto looks after his younger brothers and can cook and sew very well.

Ho Yay: Let's just say Hiroto really doesn't want Kirari near Seiji.

Idol Singer: Seiji and Hiroto are in such a band. The main force behind in the series is Kirari becoming one.

Intellectual Animal: Na-san is awesome at math and English.

Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Hiroto

Lethal Chef: Kilari

Long-Lost Relative: Na-san, Na-yan and Mya-san are brothers.

Love At First Sight: Kirari for Seiji.

Shallow Love Interest

Love Triangle: One happens between Seiji, Kirari and Hiroto.

Massive-Numbered Siblings: Hiroto is the oldest of 5 brothers.

Medium Blending: The anime took on 3-D animation around episode 105 and until its end.

Miniature Senior Citizens: The most prominent of which is Kirari's grandmother.

Missing Mom: Kirari's. It's because she left for Hollywood when she was very young.

New Transfer Student: Kirari transfers into the school that Seiji, Hiroto and Erina attend in episode 10.

Non-Human Sidekick: Besides all the cats, there's Seiji's turtle and Erina's bulldog.

Nosebleed: Arashi when he's around Kirari.

Otaku: Seiji disguises himself as such often.

Overtook the Manga: The anime has tons of Filler due to the anime's weekly airing schedule versus the manga's monthly release. This resulted in Character Development that did not happen in the manga, as well as the introduction of band units like Kira Pika and Milky Way.

Plucky Girl: Kirari doesn't let herself get down easily.

Red Eyes, Take Warning: Hiroto, subverted.

Red Oni, Blue Oni: Hiroto and Seiji.

Running Gag: Everything Kirari attemps to create, be it drawing, cooking or sewing, turns into a mushroom, or becomes mushroom themed.

Sacred First Kiss: In episodes 11-13, Kirari is mortified at the prospect of having her first kiss taken for a movie. Her father has a similar reaction and even comes down with a fever. All Played for Laughs of course. In the end, Hiroto manages to fake the kiss when a curtain blocks the camera.

Shipper on Deck: Seiji supports Hiroto/Kirari.

Smug Snake: Kuroda, the manager of the SUPERNOVA Rival band. And HOW!

Spell My Name with an "S": Kirari/Kilari

Super-Deformed: A little too frequently.

Sweet on Polly Oliver: In an early episode, Kirari disguises herself as a boy to get into a competition for wannabe-idols. She ends up attracting the attention of resident gonk Morita.

Tall, Dark and Snarky: Hiroto. More noticeable in the earlier episodes. After that, he gets a bit less snarky.

Unknown Rival: Erina for Kirari.

Unlucky Childhood Friend: Arashi Amamiya for Kirari.