Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge

1994 • Stand-up

TV Show. Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge is a BBC Television series of six episodes, and a Christmas special in 1995. It is named after the song "Knowing Me, Knowing You" by ABBA, which was used as the show's title music. Steve Coogan played the incompetent but self-satisfied Norwich-based host, Alan Partridge. Alan was a spin-off character from the spoof radio show On the Hour. Knowing Me Knowing You was written by Coogan, Armando Iannucci and Patrick Marber, with contributions from the regular supporting cast of Doon Mackichan, Rebecca Front and David Schneider, who played Alan's weekly guests. Steve Brown provided the show's music and arrangements, and also appeared as Glen Ponder, the man in charge of the house band. The show was a parody of a chat show. It featured a live audience whose laughter meant that viewers could not mistake the show for a real chat show. Alan went on to appear in two series of the sitcom I'm Alan Partridge, following his life after both his marriage and TV career come to an end.

Where can you watch Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge?

Available on Netflix in the U.S.

Netflix USA This title is not available to stream on Netflix in the U.S. Removed from Netflix: January 10, 2021 Not available in your region? Unblock international Netflix and watch this title now »

Available on Netflix in other countries

Unavailable on Netflix in other countries

Is Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge on Netflix USA?

Unfortunately, Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge is not available on Netflix at the moment, but did you know that there are thousands of additional movies and series that you can unlock by changing your Netflix country? Check out our guide here:

Unlock International Netflix

Age Rating

'Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge' is rated suitable for children aged 12 and over. It may contain mild violence, brief sequences containing strong language, or themes that require a bit more maturity.

Learn how to unlock the global Netflix catalog and access over 15 000 movies, series and documentaries using the best Netflix VPN.

Unlock International Netflix