Harold Wilson is a recurring character in The Amazing World of Gumball, and the father of Tobias and Rachel. He first appeared as a shadow in "The Party" arriving home with his wife.

Appearance

Harold resembles a humanoid version of his son. He has exactly the same color scheme as him as well; a blue, red, and orange gradient. He has a blue mustache, and wears a white collar with a pink tie. Unlike his son, his wife, and his daughter, he does not wear shoes, a headband, or wristbands.

Personality

Despite other episodes showing more passive interactions, "The Cycle" revealed that Harold takes pleasure in tormenting Richard and has been doing so since high school, though it is not explained why he acts in such a way.

Like Tobias, Harold was portrayed in his youth as being a womanizer, attempting to pick up Nicole in "The Choices." Though he was already well-off according to Alan in "The Third," he leaves his wife for a younger, more attractive rainbow lass named Jazelle when he falsely believes he has become a billionaire in "The Cycle" (showing he values money and romantic conquest over the well-being of his wife). Otherwise, however, he claims that he is not allowed to be himself at home, as mentioned in "The Castle."

Harold's boss in "The Cycle" is a bandage person, suggesting he works in a medical profession (possibly as a psychologist, as he successfully poses as one to Richard in the same episode).

It is then confirmed in "The Silence" that his occupation is a psychotherapist, as Gumball and Darwin seek him for help.

Episode appearances

Season 1

"The Party" His debut. He gets home and sees Principal Brown and Miss Simian making out in the closet.

"The Curse": His Daisyland ticket blows away.

Season 2

"The Words" He is in the shower in Tobias’ photo.

"Christmas": He is with his wife and son at the end.

"The Castle": He takes over the the Wattersons' house and pokes people.

"The Internet": He is in the car pileup.

"The Plan": He is at the park in Gumball, Darwin, and Anais’ imagination.

"The Finale": He is in the crowd watching Richard fight Patrick.

Season 3

"The Gripes": He is in the crowd donating to the Wattersons.

"The Law": He is in the park and Felicity almost runs him over.

"The Mothers": He is at the mall.

"The Shell": He watches the play. Later, he leaves his wife in danger to save himself.

"The Pizza": He tries to eat the Wattersons.

"The Lie": He sings Sluzzle Tag carols.

"The Butterfly": He is knocked over at the bus stop. Later, he is knocked over by Siciliana and knocks over Patrick.

"The Oracle": He is at the dad bench.

"The Safety": He is part of Darwin's new police force.

"The Spoiler": He is in the cinema and chokes.

"The Countdown": He sneezes when time is stopped.

"The Nobody": He is on his lawnmower when Gumball and Darwin steal it.

Season 4

"The Return": He is in the cinema.

"The Others": He is in the crowd.

"The Signature": He is at the town hall.

"The Check": He falls off a ladder in Anais' imagination.

"The Parking": He parks his car. Later, he gets mad at the Wattersons for parking their car in the cinema.

"The Comic": Gumball thinks he is going to throw his trash in the lake.

"The Uploads": Tobias pranks him.

"The Wicked": Mrs. Robinson opens her car door on him when he is riding his bike.

"The Traitor": He is at Joyful Burger.

"The Origins: Part Two": He walks on the street.

"The Signal": He is at the mall.

"The Love": He is grossed out by Sussie's parents.

"The Awkwardness": He is at the store.

"The Nest": He is attacked by a turtle.

"The Points": He gets mad at Tobias for using his credit card without his permission.

"The Bus": His first major role. He pretends to hijack the school bus.

"The Night": He gets mad at the Moon.

"The Misunderstandings": He is at the mall.

"The Blame": He is at the PTA meeting.

"The Fury": He drives his car.

"The Compilation": He is in a clip from "The Uploads." He is also mentioned by Tobias.

"The Scam": He is in the crowd.

Season 5

"The Boredom": He rips off Miss Simian's clothes.

"The Choices": He is Nicole's slave in one of her visions. She also has another vision that she marries him and he drives her insane.

"The Slide": His car is almost stolen.

"The Loophole": He uses a hoverboard.

"The Cycle": His second major role. He bullies Richard.

"The Stars": He is on the street. Later, he is at the mall.

"The Diet": He is in the crowd.

"The Uncle": He is on a plane.

"The Heist": He is almost run over.

"The Singing": He is in the Joyful Burger drive through. Later, he is at a restaurant with his wife.

"The Best": He jogs.

"The Worst": He is on the bus.

"The Petals": He punches Leslie in the face.

"The Nuisance": He wants the mayor to deport the Wattersons.

"The Line": He runs.

"The List": He is in the crowd. Later, he watches the concert, and after that, he is in his car.

"The News": He walks on the street.

Season 6

"The Lady": Richard slaps his butt.

"The Cringe": He is in a flashback to "The Awkwardness."

"The Cage": He is in the crowd cheering for Mr. Corneille.

"The Anybody": He celebrates Tobias’ birthday and Clayton turns into him. Later, he is in the cinema.

"The Faith": He is stuck in traffic. Later, he is part of the crowd at Elmore Stadium, and joins the butterknife and several others in supporting embroidery over magic.

"The Candidate": He passes out at the Charity Ball.

"The Brain": He is at the gym.

"The Parents": He is in a flashback of Nicole punching him into the hospital.

"The Schooling": He tries to get a refund at Joyful Burger because his cup is not bottomless. Later, he is at the store during the Black Friday sales, and after that, he is in the cinema.

"The Intelligence": He elbow-drops Betty.

"The Ghouls": He sings All Hail All Hallow's Eve! and later tells a ghoul to stop dancing.

"The Awareness": He cheers for the melted cheese guy.

"The Slip: He is confused by the delivery guy's evil laughter.

"The Drama": He is at the park with his family and a demon breathes on him.

"The Silence": He performs "psychotherapy" on Gumball and Darwin.

"The Revolt": He is in Darwin's imagination. Later, he is forced to be an object.

"The Decisions": He gets into a fight with Pantsbully.

Comics

Issue 1

Gallery

Click here to view the gallery.

Trivia

In his first appearance, he was merely shown as a shadow, but "The Curse" revealed his true appearance.

His name was revealed in "The Castle."

He has a strange fascination with poking people, as seen in "The Castle."

In "The Curse," he is seen buying Daisyland tickets. This further shows that his family is rich as was first shown in the episode "The Third."

In "The Cycle," he is seen to have bullied Richard since he was young and continues through adulthood.

References