Santo Domingo is the capital of the Dominican Republic and one of the Caribbean’s oldest cities. Its walled, cobblestoned historic core, the Zona Colonial, has buildings that date to the 1500s, including the cathedral, which was the first built in the New World. On the cafe-lined Plaza de España is the Alcázar de Colón palace. It’s now one of the city’s many museums, displaying notable medieval and Renaissance art. Santo Domingo, capital of the Dominican Republic. It is situated on the southeast coast of the island of Hispaniola, at the mouth of the Ozama River, and is the oldest permanent city established by Europeans in the Western Hemisphere. The city is also the seat of the oldest Roman Catholic archbishopric in the Americas.

Historical, Cultural facts & Religion

Santo Domingo was founded in 1496 by Bartholomew Columbus, brother of Christopher Columbus, as the capital of the first Spanish colony in the New World. The original city site was located on the left (east) bank of the Ozama River and was called Nueva Isabela in honor of Queen Isabella I of Spain. The Dominican people and their customs have predominately European cultural origins consisting of basis, with both African and native Taíno influences. The Dominican Republic was the site of the first European settlement in the New World, namely Santo Domingo, founded in 1493. Over 90% of the population is nominally Roman Catholic. For most people, religious practice is limited and formalistic. Popular religious practices are far removed from Roman Catholic orthodoxy.

Brief City History

Santo Domingo, capital of the Dominican Republic. It is situated on the southeast coast of the island of Hispaniola, at the mouth of the Ozama River, and is the oldest permanent city established by Europeans in the Western Hemisphere. The city is also the seat of the oldest Roman Catholic archbishopric in the Americas. Santo Domingo was founded in 1496 by Bartholomew Columbus, brother of Christopher Columbus, as the capital of the first Spanish colony in the New World. The original city site was located on the left (east) bank of the Ozama River and was called Nueva Isabela in honor of Queen Isabella I of Spain. It was destroyed by a hurricane, however, and was rebuilt in 1502 at its present location on the right bank of the river. It became the starting point of most of the Spanish expeditions of exploration and conquest of the other islands of the West Indies and the adjacent mainland. The colony prospered as the seat of government of the Spanish possessions in the Americas until the conquest of Mexico and Peru, after which its importance declined. In 1586 Sir Francis Drake, the English buccaneer sacked the city. In 1655 its inhabitants defeated a British force that had been sent to seize the city. From 1795 to 1809 Santo Domingo was under French domination, and then, after another brief Spanish period, it was conquered by invaders from Haiti, it’s neighbor to the west on Hispaniola. Independence was proclaimed in 1844, and Santo Domingo became the capital of the new Dominican Republic until the republic’s annexation to Spain in 1861–65. The city has been the Dominican capital since the restoration of independence in 1865. The city’s name, officially changed in 1936 to Ciudad Trujillo in honor of the dictator Rafael Trujillo, was restored after his assassination in 1961. Santo Domingo is the industrial, commercial, and financial center of the country. Its industrial development has been greatly influenced by the construction of hydroelectric dams, which furnish its industries with inexpensive electrical power. The country’s most important industries—such as metallurgy; the manufacture of refrigerators, petrochemicals and plastics, cement, and textiles; and food processing—are located in Santo Domingo. The importance of services, including tourism, to the city’s economy, has grown since the late 20th century. Santo Domingo is also the chief seaport of the Dominican Republic. Its harbor at the mouth of the Ozama River was greatly improved in the 1930s to accommodate the largest vessels, and the port handles both heavy passenger and freight traffic. Roads connect the capital with the rest of the republic. There are no railway lines from the city, except those of the nearby sugar refineries. Two international airports serve the region, one about 10 miles (16 km) north-northeast and the other some 15 miles (24 km) east of the central city.

Language (s) Written & Spoken

The majority of the people (about 3 million) live in the capital, Santo Domingo. Spanish is the official language and the most spoken language in the Dominican Republic.

Important Types of Commerce in Santo Domingo

The country’s most important industries—such as metallurgy; the manufacture of refrigerators, petrochemicals and plastics, cement, and textiles; and food processing—are located in Santo Domingo. The importance of services, including tourism, to the city’s economy, has grown since the late 20th century.

Language Services US and others will provide working with Santo Domingo

Dealing with Santo Domingo authorities would require an individual or business to speak Spanish and have no other common language with the authority, you are sometimes entitled to interpreting services. To start a company in Santo Domingo regardless of your nationality. It is important that you have a right of residence in Santo Domingo, the necessary professional skills and sufficient Spanish language skills. This is where professional translation and interpretation services come into the picture. The task of the interpreter is to interpret the discussion between you and the authority. The interpreter will not handle any tasks other than interpretation.