BERKELEY — Nobel Prize winner Gerard Debreu, emeritus professor of economics and mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, died Dec. 31 in Paris of natural causes. He was 83.

Professor Debreu won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1983 for applying mathematical rigor to the fundamental theory of supply and demand in economics. The law of supply and demand dates to the 18th century, but Debreu’s mathematical models provided proof of how prices affect the supplies of goods bought and sold.

Through the work of Debreu and others, the conditions of the “invisible hand” in the marketplace were clarified.

Professor Debreu, a native of Calais, France, was an officer of the French Legion of Honor and a commander of the French National Order of Merit. He broke off his studies in mathematics as a young man to enlist in the French Army after D-Day, serving briefly in the French occupational forces in Germany until July 1945. He resumed his studies after the war, shifting his focus to economics.

He joined the UC Berkeley faculty in 1962 at a time when the economics department was pointedly building up its staff to create a powerhouse that would soon be recognized as the pre-eminent economic department in the academic world. Professor Debreu’s Nobel was the first in a string of four Nobel Memorial Prizes in economics won by UC Berkeley faculty. John Harsanyi won in 1994, Daniel McFadden in 2000 and George Akerlof in 2001. Professor Debreu remained an active researcher and teacher after his retirement in 1991.

“He really was the most important contributor to the development of formal math models within economics,” said UC Berkeley professor Robert Anderson, who holds a joint appointment in economics and mathematics. “He brought to economics a mathematical rigor that had not been seen before.”

That mathematical rigor made lasting changes to the field of economics, making it a more formal and precise science, Anderson said.

Before his almost 30-year tenure at UC Berkeley, professor Debreu worked from 1950 to 1960 at the University of Chicago and Yale University for the Cowles Commission for Research in Economics, and at Stanford University’s Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences from 1960 to 1961.

He is survived by his former wife, Francoise Debreu; daughters Chantal De Soto and Florence Tetrault; five grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren. A funeral service will be held Friday in Paris.