Kylie Minogue has confirmed reports she is moving back to Australia after more than 30 years living in Britain.

The singer, 53, known for her hits Spinning Around and Can't Get You Out of My Head, was born in Melbourne and has lived in London since 1990.

When asked on Wednesday about rumours she was returning to her home country permanently, Kylie told BBC Radio 2: 'It is true, I will be basing myself in Australia.

'I can't believe the reaction it's had. I've had friends call me.'

Scroll down for video

'I spent a lot of time with my family this year in Australia and it felt really good... I've been talking about that for a while,' she added.

Kylie reassured Brits she 'won't be a stranger' and will still visit regularly.

'Of course I've lived here for 30 years. I'm always going to be back,' she said.

While she didn't confirm where exactly she plans to live, she will most likely settle in Melbourne - the city where she was born and where her family reside.

The Mirror first reported on Kylie's move on Monday, with a source close to the star saying she made the decision after spending time in Melbourne earlier this year.

'This is something she has been thinking about for a while,' the insider said.

'This year, when she was in Australia for an extended period due to travel restrictions, it gave her time to think about where she wants to be based.'

They added that Kylie eventually decided she 'wants to see more of her family in the times when she isn't travelling, and so she will use Australia as her base'.

Kylie has already taken steps to formalise her move, having changed the service address for her four main businesses to an address in Hawthorn, an inner suburb of Melbourne.

Business documents have also been recently updated so her residence as director is now listed as Australia, not England.

Kylie told friends she wanted to live closer to her family, including her parents Carol and Ron, siblings Brendan and Dannii and nephew Ethan.

Her boyfriend, magazine executive Paul Solomons, won't be joining her in Australia, but they intend to continue a long-distance relationship, according to The Sun.

'Right now, Kylie has made the decision to move back to Australia and while Paul doesn't want to relocate, they are still very much together and in love,' a source said.

'Of course she will be back in the UK from time to time and he will visit Melbourne. They are going to make it work.'

Kylie's most recent visit Down Under was in March when she performed at the state funeral of Australian music executive Michael Gudinski in Melbourne.

She sang a duet of her early hit The Loco-Motion with Ed Sheeran.

The musician recently sold her investment property in Armadale, Melbourne, for $1.715million. She first bought the cottage in 1990 for $185,000.

She has since listed two office properties on Hawthorn's Church Street, which have been owned by the Minogue family since 2007, for a whopping $20million.

Born in Melbourne on May 28, 1968, Kylie began her career on Australian soap opera Neighbours, playing Charlene Robinson, before becoming a singer.

She has lived in Britain since 1990, and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 2008 New Year Honours for services to music.