ADVERTISEMENT

Let’s take you into the world of this Australian-British talent Kylie Minogue who has won several awards not just as a recording artist but also as an actress.

Get to know who Kylie Minogue husband is.

Kylie Minogue Biography

Kylie Minogue was born in Melbourne on 28 May 1968.

Kylie would often stay at home reading, sewing, and learning to play violin and piano. When

her family finally settled in Surrey Hills, Kylie attended Camberwell High School. Growing

up, Kylie and her sister Dannii took singing and dancing lessons.

In 1979, A 10-year-old Minogue was along with Dannii to a hearing arranged by the sisters’

aunt, Suzette, and, while producers found Dannii too young, Alan Hardy gave Kylie a minor

role in soap opera The Sullivans.

ADVERTISEMENT

In 1980, Kylie had another tiny role in the soap opera “Skyways.” A bigger role came in 1985,

when Minogue landed a leading role on “The Henderson Kids”; however, Kylie Minogue was

dropped from the second season.

In 1986, Kylie Minogue had her true breakthrough role in the soap opera “Neighbours,”

playing schoolgirl-turned-garage mechanic Charlene Mitchell. The show was hugely popular in

the UK, drawing 20 million viewers for its famous wedding episode.

Kylie Minogue Net worth is around $150 million. After receiving attention for her role on

the soap opera “Neighbours,” Kylie shot to fame in the late 80s and early 90s as a dance-pop

recording artist.

Kylie owns a number of properties in her native Australia, but the most valuable asset in her

property portfolio is an apartment in London’s ultra-exclusive One Hyde Park development.

This one apartment alone is estimated to be worth north of $25 million.

Due to this success, Kylie Minogue went to London to work with the producing

group Stock Aitken Waterman.

Ronald Charles Minogue and Carol Ann Jones are the biological parents of Kylie Minogue.

Kylie was born to Ronald Charles Minogue and Carol Ann Jones. Her father is a fifth generation Australian, and has Irish ancestry, while her mother came from Maesteg, Wales.

She was born to Carol, is a former ballet dancer and father, Ronald, is an accountant at a family-owned auto company.

Minogue is the eldest of three siblings, and is of Irish and Welsh ancestry.

The family kept moving around various suburbs in Melbourne to sustain their living expenses,

which Minogue found unsettling as a child.

Kylie Minogue Husband / Boyfriend: Is Kylie Minogue married?

Beautiful Kylie is currently not married but has been in several relationships. she dated Australian rock band (INXS) frontman Michael Hutchence from 1989 to 1991, after she broke up with Michael, she dated Lenny Kravitz briefly in 1991, then James Gooding from 1998 -2001.

She dated French actor Olivier Martinez from 2003 to 2007, Spanish model Andrés Velencoso from 2008 until 2013. In November 2015, Minogue confirmed she was in a relationship with British actor Joshua Sasse.

Three months later, they announced their engagement and a year later the pop star announced the engagement was off and that they were no longer together.

Source:Ghgossip.com

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jqSwpaGVYrqqus6grJ5lmKrAo63NnWSbp6mbv6qxzZ1koqtdoMattcRmpKKmn5zCpnnMmqmroZWZfA%3D%3D