Full Name: Kylie Ann Minogue

Kylie Minogue Age: 53 Years

Date of Birth: 28th May 1968

Place of Birth: Melbourne, Australia

Kylie Minogue Height: 5’0″ (152 cm)

Father’s Name: Ronald Charles Minogue

Mother’s Name: Carol Jones

Siblings: Brendan Minogue, Dannii Minogue

Net Worth: $120 Million

Who is Kylie Minogue?

Kylie Minogue is an Australian singer and actress who became a worldwide pop sensation in the late 1980s and has remained successful well into the 21st Century. It was one of her TV roles that led to her getting into music and making her a famous Australian female pop artist. Famous songs by Kylie Minogue include Spinning Around, Confide in Me, Can’t Get You Out of My Head amongst others.

Early Years

Kylie Minogue was born in Melbourne on 28th May 1968 to Carol Jones, a former ballet dancer and Ronald Charles Minogue, an accountant. Kylie has two other siblings, both younger than her and she has Irish and Welsh roots. As a child, Kylie’s family frequently moved around Melbourne. She attended Camberwell High School after they moved to Surrey Hills.

Kylie Minogue made her soap opera debut in 1979 with a small part in “The Sullivans.” She got another small part in “Skyways,” and got a lead role in the TV series “The Henderson Kids,” but was dropped after one season. She was cast as schoolgirl-turned-mechanic Charlene Mitchell in the soap opera “Neighbours” the following year.

Music Career

Following her departure from television, Kylie Minogue launched a singing career with the album Kylie, with which she signed to the London hit factory Stock, Aitken & Waterman, and earned her first #1 single, “I Should Be So Lucky.”

“The Loco-Motion” cover was her first hit, but she didn’t reach the top ten of the Billboard charts again for another fourteen years. In Europe, Minogue saw her career skyrocket thanks to her media savvy and strong work ethic. It wasn’t long before she became the favourite subject of tabloids due to her attractive appearance.

The edgy look and recording with rock musicians such as Nick Cave helped Kylie Minogue broaden her image after leaving Stock, Aitken & Waterman in the early 1990s. Her experiments were short-lived, however, and on her album Light Years (2000), she returned to a more traditional dance-pop sound, which included the hit “Spinning Around.” She continued in this direction with Fever (2001). The album became an international blockbuster thanks to its single “Can’t Get You Out of My Head,” which hit #1 in lots of countries. Her new album Body Language (2003) further strengthened her reputation, and her single “Come Into My World” won her first Grammy in 2004.

Minogue announced in 2005 that she was diagnosed with breast cancer. As a result of the surgery, she underwent a more than year long recovery period before she began touring again in late 2006. In her subsequent releases, such as X (2007) and Aphrodite (2010), disco and electro-pop still played a central role. Pharrell Williams and Sia wrote songs for her next album – Kiss Me Once (2014), and Golden (2018) featured a flavour of country music. With DISCO (2020), Kylie Minogue’s songs marked a reentry to disco-pop and made history by becoming the first woman to have reached No. 1 on the British album chart in each of the last five decades.

Film Career

Although she mainly focused on music, Kylie Minogue also acted from time to time. She appeared in films such as The Delinquents (1989), Moulin Rouge! (2001) and Holy Motors (2012). Kylie Minogue was in Street Fighter (1994) as well.

The Order of the British Empire (OBE) made her an Officer in 2008, and after three years, she was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame.