Shreveport, Louisiana ranks #1 in a 2015 Best Location for New Business Startups study conducted by WalletHub!

While it may be obvious that local media like The Shreveport Times and KTBS cover this story, Shreveport's success has wide reach and unbiased coverage from Inc to Time Magazine to Fortune!

Tucked away quietly in Northwest Louisiana, those of us that live and work here in Shreveport are already familiar with the local charm, great weather, warm hospitality and easy access to resources local and nation-wide. For everyone else, there's no better time than now to come join our beautiful city!

WalletHub analyzed 13 metrics to determine its rankings, including cost of office space, education of local workforce, small businesses per capita and more. At a time when more and more people are choosing to work for themselves, choosing the right location can be an important part of your startup success!

But - perhaps surprisingly - this isn't the first time Shreveport has been pinpointed as an excellent business location. In 2012, Fast Company published a detailed article on Why You Should Start Your Startup In Shreveport, with a focus on the High Tech industry and CoHabitat Foundation.

Shreveport's also been awarded the All-America City Award three times - in 1953, 1979, and 1999.

And whether you've always been here, are new to the town, or are looking for the best place to be, here's a few resources to help you start your business, and ensure its ongoing success!

Read on below the resources for even more tidbits of fun and fascinating trivia about our small town with big ambitions!

Shreveport, Louisiana Business Resources

Louisiana Secretary of State - Find a business, check for names that are already registered, and even file your business documents online inexpensively and quickly.

SCORE - SCORE of Northwest Louisiana provides free assistance with business planning and review from retired and current professional business leaders.

Greater Shreveport Leadership Program - For more than 30 years, the Greater Shreveport Chamber of Commerce has been identifying and preparing future leaders through its Greater Shreveport Leadership Program.

Louisiana Small Business Development Center - Providing Business Planning and assistance for Small Businesses looking to success in Louisiana.

Louisiana Startup Prize - Up to $75,000 in prizes for simply attending a networking event with other small business and startup leaders in Shreveport & Bossier City.

A City That Captures Your Heart

I was born in Louisville, Kentucky, went to school in Richmond, Virginia, and loved both of those places. I've traveled for business or pleasure to both coasts, and plenty of places in-between. But when I moved down to Shreveport, Louisiana in 1995 to marry my wonderful wife, I fell in love with this area and never looked back.

What makes Shreveport a truly great city transcends the analytics and statistics that lead it to the top of many lists. It's something difficult to describe with words. The way the warm spring days seem to last forever. The heat of deep summer afternoons leaving a sheen over the quaint and tree-filled neighborhoods like an Instagram filter.

The fresh air of early morning that lasts the entire day. The green and vibrant colors of nature that even stand out from satellite images. But even painted words fail to capture the spirit of a city that is unlike any other I've ever known.

Our close proximity to Dallas, lends a sophisticated approach to our resources, access to technology, and architectural style. Our Louisiana roots provide some of the best food in the world, and a playful spirit to overcome any obstacle. While our influence from the Ouachita Mountains and Arkansas to the north promotes a laid-back, friendly approach that makes helping a stranger more important than climbing a corporate ladder.

Placing value on the worthless, disregarding priceless wealth - Ray Stevens, "Mr. Businessman"

It's easy to lose sight of the important things in life, so it's no surprise to me that Shreveport, Louisiana gets the attention it does. What used to be a small, unknown gem, has gained prominence not because of its business culture, or its megacity lifestyle, but in some cases, in spite of it.

Shreveport has gained recognition because it is built on a culture of appreciation, of communication, and of understanding. Those traits have built a humble foundation that has endured, and cultured the companies and people within its boundaries, allowing them to grow far beyond superficial rockstar status.

I'm proud to not only be a Shreveport citizen, but to run a Shreveport small business. I started Hyper-VPS as a Louisiana LLC in 2013, so whether you are a Shreveport startup or small business, or want to chat about creating a Shreveport business, let me know! And if you find yourself needing Web Design or IT Consulting / Technical Support services, I'd be honored to work with you whether you're in Shreveport or Singapore!

Some Fun Shreveport, LA Trivia

From the birthplace of Jared Leto, to the resting place of John Scopes (defendant teacher from the Scopes Monkey Trial), Shreveport has plenty of famous connections.

It's found its way into songs, partially due to its hosting of the radio show "Louisiana Hayride," which has been credited with launching the careers of Johnny Cash, Elvis Presley, and Hank Williams.

Shreveport became the capital of Louisiana for a brief spell during the Civil War, after Baton Rouge and Opelousas were succeeded under Union control.

R. W. Norton Art Foundation is home to the extremely rare double elephant folio of John James Audubon's The Birds of America.

Approximately 20,000 rose bushes are on display at the American Rose Center.

Many exterior scenes in the HBO series "True Blood" were filmed on a plantation near Shreveport.

The world's first Shriner's Hospital was founded in Shreveport in 1922.

One of the largest art murals in the U.S. is located in Shreveport. The “Once In A Millennium Moon Mega Mural” covers 25,000 sq. ft. on the side of an AT&T building.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, John Carmack joined Softdisk in Shreveport, where he met John Romero, Adrian Carmack and Tom Hall and developed technology that would lead to the creation of Wolfenstein 3D and Doom. (As a side note, I actually worked at Softdisk in 1996, joining just shortly after the Id guys moved to Dallas).

On the music side, Shreveport and the close surrounding area is the birthplace of many Country artists, such as Kix Brooks, Trace Adkins, Hank Williams, Jr., Joe Stampley, Claude King, Faron Young, David Houston and Floyd Cramer. And extends to other music formats in the likes of James Burton, Kenny Wayne Shepherd and Concert Pianist, Van Cliburn.

And on the sports side, Shreveport is the birthplace of numerous NFL and Golfing legends includes Terry Bradshaw, Joe Ferguson, Hal Sutton, Stan Humphries, David Woodley, David Toms, Brock Berlin, Craig Bradshaw and Don Mullins. Even NBA Hall of Famer, Robert Parish.

There's no doubt that Shreveport leaves its mark in a number of fields and areas, whether by fate or fact, it's a great place to visit, a wonderful place to live, and apparently, an awesome place to go into business. Come on down, y'all! ;)

- Brandon