Nuggets guard J.R. Smith has approached his pending free agency with a steely-eyed level-headedness.

He knows the priority is sorting out the ongoing Carmelo Anthony trade situation, and then perhaps the situation of Nene, who has a player option next season. Through it all, Smith, 25, has been patient as he plays out the last year of his contract with the Nuggets.

Still, he wonders what the future holds.

“I’m in a tough situation,” Smith said. “They don’t really know what they want to do, as far as what direction they want to go in — if they do (trade) Melo or if they don’t. So it’s tough for me in my position because I don’t know where I stand. So, you just have to keep playing it out and see how it looks.”

Smith is one of the most athletically gifted players in the NBA, capable of fitting a season’s worth of highlight reel plays into one week of games. His ability to score in bunches has captivated fans and the Nuggets’ brass. He is in the last year of a three-year, $16.5 million contract he signed in 2008.

Asked whether he has heard any kind of clarification from Nuggets executives on where he fits into the team’s future, Smith paused.

“Everybody says they want to keep me here and all of that stuff, but I think everybody knows that if the right deal comes along, something will happen,” he said. “So it’s hard to say, when your superstar is about to be moved. For them, it’s kind of hard to worry about my situation.”

His preference is to stay put.

“I love it here,” said Smith, who has been with Denver for five seasons. “I love playing in front of this crowd.”

The other piece to Smith’s ultimate happiness is playing time. Smith has long been expected to become a bigger piece of the Nuggets’ pie, a player who would be put on the court more, possibly moving into a starring role.

But throughout Smith’s time in Denver there generally has been a disconnect between how Smith wants to play and how Nuggets coach George Karl wants Smith to play.

“I can’t really play as free as I want to play, but I try to make due with what I got when I’m out there,” Smith said. “Still, in the back of my mind, (I’m) trying to play how George wants me to play and how to play the way I know how to play. It’s tough.”

Karl has been pleased with Smith’s play more this season than any other. Smith has been a catalyst on defense and has made the effort to lean toward what Karl and the coaching staff ask him to do in a reserve role. While Smith’s minutes and points are down from a year ago, he’s averaging a career high in rebounds (4.0) and his field-goal, 3-point and free-throw percentages are up from a year ago.

“Everybody knows I can play,” Smith said. “I think it’s just a matter of me being in the right situation, for whatever team I’m playing for or wherever I am. If I’m in the situation where I’m going to play 30 to 35 minutes, you’re going to get 30- to 35-minute numbers out of me. If you play me 15 minutes, those are the type of numbers you’re going to get.”

When told speculation that his playing time would increase has gone on a long time, Smith smiled.

“Yeah. It’s been a long time,” he said. “I haven’t really seen 30 too much. So hopefully I’ll see it before I turn 30.”

Chris Dempsey: 303-954-1279 or cdempsey@denverpost.com