On July 20th, 2006, the Chicago Bulls traded guard J.R. Smith to the Denver Nuggets for guard Howard Eisley, a 2007 2nd round draft pick (JamesOn Curry) and a 2007 2nd round draft pick (Aaron Gray).

Smith appeared in 131 games with New Orleans after being drafted by them in the 2004 first round and made 81 starts as well. He averaged 9.2 PPG, 2.0 RPG, 1.5 APG and 21.7 MPG and shot 39% from the floor, including 32% from three-point range, and 74% from the free-throw line.

Smith’s relationship soured halfway through his second year and he was benched and dealt with P.J. Brown to Chicago for Tyson Chandler week prior to this trade to Denver. Chicago was clearing cap space to sign center Ben Wallace.

Smith was in his rookie contract making $1.3 million in 2006-07 and had a team option for a fourth year at $2.1 million.

Howard Eisley was acquired by the Denver Nuggets as a free agent and signed a 10-day contract. He was signed for the rest of the season and averaged 4.8 PPG and 2.3 APG in 19 games.

After the trade, Smith became instant offense off of the bench for Denver. In five seasons and 372 games with the Nuggets, he only made 48 starts and still averaged 13.7 PPG, 3.1 RPG, and 2.2 APG.

During his five year tenure with Denver, the Nuggets won 50 games four times, but only made it past the first round of the playoffs once in 2009.

Smith ended his tenure in Denver as the current all-time leader in 3-Pointers made (768), but questions about his character on and off the court clouded his exciting talent.

The Good:

All-Time leader in 3’s made, and also his penchant for game-changing dunks like this one.

Scores 43 points against the Bulls off the bench on February 22nd, 2008.

Scores 40 points against the Wizards on March 20th, 2009.

The Bad:

J.R. Smith had some fantastic mental lapses like this one.

In the first playoff series of his career, Smith shot 6-22 and had a few mental lapses that frustrated coach George Karl (via The Denver Post):

“He’s done. I have no idea what planet that (three-point attempt) came from.” Karl told the Associated Press that he had drawn up the play to give the ball to either Allen Iverson or Carmelo Anthony. Karl did not stop there and continued venting over Smith’s poor play, “And then, of course the one with eight seconds to go, from 50 feet, I just love the dignity of the game being insulted right in front of me.”

The Ugly:

Knicks-Nuggets Brawl: J.R. Smith suspended for 10 games.

On June 9, 2007, Smith and two passengers were injured in a car accident and he was charged with vehicular manslaughter and his friend Andre Bell passed away from the accident. He pled guilty to the charge. Smith was sentenced to 90 days in jail (only served 24 days) and was suspended for the first seven games for the 2009-10 season for his guilty plea.

Just based off of that, you could see Smith was a volatile player. He provided some very good moment s for Denver, but his time in Denver is hard to evaluate because of some of the incidents that occurred while he was a Nugget.

The guard left Denver after he was a free agent during the NBA lockout and went to play overseas in China. He returned soon after the lockout-shortened season began, but ended up signing with the New York Knicks.

Howard Eisley never played for Chicago. He was waived soon after the trade. JamesOn Curry was taken with the 51st pick in the ‘07 draft, but was waived by Chicago a year later after never playing in a game for Chicago and only playing in the D-League.

Aaron Gray was taken with the 49th pick of the '07 draft, and played two and a half seasons with Chicago. The center had a small role, but received some solid playing time as the backup center. He averaged 3.8 ppg and 3.2 rpg on 49% from the field.

J.R. Smith (via USA Today)::

“I’ll be one of the premier guards in the league. I’ll definitely be one of the guys who has his own sneaker. I’ve always dreamt about stuff like that when I was a kid, so why stop now?”

On what he can contribute to Denver (via USA Today):

“(The last two years) definitely humbled me and made me realize what I really have to do to get to work in this league. (This) is a very athletic team and likes to get up and down the court. They’re looking for somebody to make the outside shot when they double down on Carmelo (Anthony). Hopefully, I’m the guy they can use.”

Denver Nuggets director of player personnel Mark Warkentien (via Nuggets.com):

“J.R. is an athletic young talent who can really shoot the basketball. He still hasn’t seen his 21st birthday and his potential excites us.”

Nuggets head coach George Karl:

"He’s a young player who probably needs some control over him, and some motivation to learn the game quickly.”

On if Smith is the answer (via Rocky Mountain News):

“Don’t get me wrong. I don’t think he’s the answer. I think he’s the beginning of the answer. I’ve always said that we need to add more than one shooter.”