Kibbutz Ein Hashofet is located in northern Israel in the Menashe Heights region around 30 km from the city of Haifa, and there is a flowing spring nearby the kibbutz. It was established in 1937 and moved to its current location a year later. The kibbutz was named after Judge Louis D. Brandeis, one of the great leaders of American Jewry. "Hashofet" means in Hebrew "The judge".

Before settling in Ein Hashofet, the unification of Hashomer Hatzair group from Poland and the first group of Hashomer Hatzair from North America was formed into one kibbutz. This kibbutz was the first of the pioneering Aliyah from North America. The kibbutz's immigration to Ramat Menashe took place as part of the "wall and tower" settlement, and Ein Ha-Shofet was the pioneer of the settlements there.

Throughout the years, the kibbutz has been a leading partner in the settlement, security and absorption systems. Ein Hashofet had over 100 Ulpans (schools of Hebrew studies) from 1951. Thousands of students, including dozens of graduates of Ulpan who remained in Ein Ha-Shofet, turned the kibbutz into their home. Today, the population of the kibbutz is 800, including 160 children and about 80 ulpan students and international volunteers.

The kibbutz conducts a wide variety of cultural activities, including: a joint celebration of Jewish holidays, trips, cultural meetings, an internal weekly newspaper, video, study groups, the "Community Learning" project, and more. The internal communication is a central part of the society of Ein-Hashofet and the kibbutz dedicates great efforts to it.

Volunteers are employed at the different branches of the kibbutz, including the industrial companies, the animal farms and the services and work in the gardens.

The kibbutz owns three industrial companies through the Ein-Hashofet Industries Group. Mivrag Cold Forming Technology is a company that produces cold-formed steel components. Eltam is a company that produces electronic and electromagnetic ballasts and accessories for lighting, and MAG which produces assemblies for the automotive industry.

Ein-Hashofet is strict to maintain its agricultural branches, which are the symbol of the roots of its members and their connection to the ground. The plant branch includes the consolidation of field crops and various plantations. This branch, which produces around 4,000 dunams, presents green fields of wheat, white cotton and hay fragrant. In the orchards, the branch grows and cultivates avocado plantations, almonds, olives, citrus orchards and a development of the Moringa tree.

The animal farms in Ein-Hashofet includes the cowshed, the beef cattle and the chicken coop: The cowshed has existed since 1938. A primitive dairy farm that includes dozens of cows has developed into a sophisticated cowshed with about 300 dairy farms that produce about four million liters of milk a year. The Beef cattle was established in the mid-1950s and currently operates in partnership with Kibbutz Mishmar HaEmek, the herd counts 750 cows.