LONDON — Charles Dance, whose credits include “The Imitation Game” and “Game of Thrones,” has joined John Hurt in the cast of the movie “That Good Night,” Variety can exclusively reveal.

Dance takes the role of “The Visitor” in the film, which is produced by GSP Studios. The cast also includes Sofia Helin (“The Bridge”), Max Brown (“Agent Carter”) and Erin Richards (“Gotham”). GSP Studios Intl. is handling worldwide sales in Cannes.

The film, which is shooting for five weeks on the Algarve coast of Portugal, has been adapted from the late N.J. Crisp’s 1996 stage-play of the same name (the title is derived from Dylan Thomas’ poem). It follows Ralph (Hurt), a famed screenwriter coming to terms with his impending death. As he does so, he resolves to attempt two final missions in life: to be reconciled to his long-lost son (Brown), and to ensure he doesn’t become a burden on his wife Anna (Helin) with his slow decline by enlisting a mysterious “Visitor” to help him pass painlessly into “that good night.”

Hurt said: “I am very much looking forward to putting all the jigsaw pieces together that make up this fascinating and paradoxical character.”

The film is directed by Eric Styles (“Dreaming of Joseph Lees,” “Relative Values”), and the screenplay is by Charles Savage. The producer of the original stageplay, Alan Latham of GSP Studios, will produce the feature adaptation alongside Savage. Financing for the film has come through GSP Studios, Red Rock Entertainment and Goldfinch Entertainment.

Styles said: “I’m looking forward to bringing this bittersweet, thought-provoking drama to the big screen. Charles Savage has crafted a beautifully-nuanced script and I am very lucky to have such a brilliant cast and crew to help bring this story to life.”

The director of photography is Richard Stoddard, the costume designer is Charlotte Morris, the hair and make-up designer is Lesley Lamont Fisher, and the production designer is Humphrey Jaeger. Executive producers include Paul Ward, Julian Hicks and Gary Collins.