CHARLES Dance is commonly cast as a dangerous villain or a cold-hearted politician when you usually see him on television or even in movies.

But these roles have shaped the British actor to sustain a booming career in Hollywood. Here's all you need to know about Charles and his acting skills, which have undoubtedly made him one of the most in-demand actors of his time.

Who is Charles Dance? How old is he? What's his background?

The actor was born Walter Charles Dance in Worcestershire on 10 October 1946, which makes him 72.

He joined the Royal Shakespeare Company in the mid-1970s receiving rave reviews.

At the same time, he made his TV and film debut in a BBC mystery series called Father Brown but it wasn't until the 80s when he rose to fame playing Guy Perron in The Jewel In The Crown.

He later appeared in shows such as Murder Rooms, Randall and Hopkirk, Merlin and even won an Emmy nomination for his role in Bleak House.

Charles is also an accomplished screenwriter and director working on the 2004 film Ladies in Lavender starring Dame Judi Dench and Dame Maggie Smith.

When was Charles Dance in Games of Thrones?

Charles has had a long, glittering career but found fame with a whole new audience in the hit TV show Game of Thrones.

The actor portrayed the part of Tywin Lannister, a calculating and ruthless lord of Casterly Rock, from 2011-2015.

The character appeared in the first four series of the gripping show before he was killed off just before season five.

Who is Charles Dance's ex-wife?

In 1970, Charles married his first wife Joanna Haythorn and the pair had two children together.

They later split and in 2010 he became engaged to sculptor Eleanor Boorman, who is 26 years his junior.

The couple had a daughter together, but they too later split.

What other projects has Charles Dance taken part in?

Charles is currently taking on the role of Martin Benson in new drama The Widow.

In 2018 he starred in Channel 4 series Hang Ups, which featured a star-studded cast including David Tennant and Celia Imrie.

He has also starred in British films Me Before You and The Imitation Game.

Charles also appeared on the Big Fat Quiz end of year bonanza hosted by Jimmy Carr.