Please be advised this transcript is AI-generated and may not be word for word. Time codes refer to the approximate times in the ad-supported version of the show.

Leo Laporte (00:00:02):

Podcasts. You love from people you trust. This is TWiT. Hi, this is Leo Laporte and this is my tech eye podcast. This show originally aired on the premier networks on Sunday, May 22nd, 22. This is episode 1896. Enjoy The Tech Guy podcast is brought to you by Peloton. Right now is the perfect time to try out Peloton. The Peloton bike plus is now $500 less. That's its best price yet, including free delivery and setup. And there are more game changing prices available in the original Peloton bike and Peloton tread. Visit onepeloton.com to learn more and by Acronis. Keep your digital world safe from all threats. With the only cyber protection solution that delivers a unique integration of data protection and cyber security in one Acronis cyber protect home office, formerly Acronis true image. Go to go.acronis.com/techguy. Why? Hey, Hey, how are you today? Leo? LePort here. The tech guy. Yes. Yes. It's that time you all dread the time a geek gets his own radio show and talks about geeky things, computers, the internet, home theater, digital photography, smart phones, smart watches. I will endeavor in every moment to speak English, but I can't promise I will succeed.

Leo Laporte (00:01:33):

I'll just try. Okay. I'll do my best if I, if I get too geeky, you know, just say, Hey, you're too geeky, man. You're too geeky. Eighty eight eighty eight ask Leo is the phone number (888) 827-5536. Toll free from anywhere in the us or Canada outside that area. Well, you could still call, but you have to Skype or something like that. Some sort of voice over the internet, du Hickey, 88, 88, ask Leo after the show. The website has everything that we talk about on the show, including a transcript takes us a couple of days, but yeah, we got a full transcript, audio and video from the show transcript has what they call time code. So you can jump to that part of the show. If you see something you're interested in all of that and that's all free and no charge, no admission fee, no sign up tech guy labs.com, tech guy labs.com.

Leo Laporte (00:02:33):

Good news. <Laugh> from the department of justice. They're no longer gonna prosecute security researchers. What? Yes, apparently the computer fraud and abuse act, which is, you know, a, a very kind of strict law is often used against legit security researchers. I know a few I know one guy's gone to jail for nothing more than probing his company's system and then telling the company, Hey, you got a problem. See, that's the thing companies don't like to hear that they ought learn though, right? If you've got a flaw on your system and somebody discovers it, you ought to say, Hey, thank you. In fact, you might even wanna cut 'em a few bills and say, we appreciate it because you've been saved from a fade worse than death. Data breach of course is a very well known and beloved figure in the community who actually was prosecuted using the C F AA computer fraud and abuse act for doing nothing more than liberating academic documents that he had legitimate access to publishing them.

Leo Laporte (00:03:51):

Because you know, that's kind of a little scam that's going on. These, these academic papers, which are of great value to us as a society in many cases are often hidden behind expensive pay walls. Even though in many cases, we paid for the research through government funding Aaron Schwartz, who did many great things liberated a few of them. And the feds went after him. He ended up killing himself because he was facing a million dollar in fines. And 35 years in prison, two counts of wire fraud, 11 violations of the CFAA.

Leo Laporte (00:04:36):

He was offered a plea bargain that would've given him six months in federal prison declined it. This is back in 2013, very sad, very, very, very sad. He was arrested by MIT police, MIT police. So this is actually a big story you would think. Well, yeah, we shouldn't prosecute people who are doing legitimate security work, but it has really put a chill on security research. People are afraid of going to jail or paying millions of dollars in fines for simply finding flaws. It is very important that this happened. Deputy attorney general, Lisa Monico said in the statement computer security research is a key driver of improved cybersecurity. Well, yeah, the department has never been interested in prosecuting good faith, computer security research as a crime. Some may dispute today's announcement promotes cybersecurity, but providing clarity for good faith security researchers who root out vulnerabilities for the common.

Leo Laporte (00:05:43):

Good. We'll see. But good, good. I think a lot of a lot of what goes on in the society really comes from a fear of technology and the new is scary. And so because it's scary, we kind of maybe overreact sometimes for instance the New York state attorney general is investigating Twitch discord and other social <affirmative> and other social media because the evil, evil person who committed those atrocities in Buffalo posted tried to post a video of it as he was doing it in Twitch Twitch, shut it down as almost immediately. I think only 40 people saw it on Twitch. He had a, a discord, which is a chat kind of system. We have a discord chat for the show for all of our shows. It's very easy to, it's free. It's open. It's very easy to create a chat room. He apparently, before he did it, it created a chat room with as many as 15 people joined to to, to say, here's what I'm gonna do now. Admittedly should go after those 15 people cuz they knew ahead of time what he was about to do. Yeah, absolutely. But is it is it Twitch's fault or discourse fault because he used those platforms and if it is, if you think it is, what are you gonna do?

Leo Laporte (00:07:07):

What are you gonna do? I mean, look, this was a horrific thing, but it is not discords fault or Twitch's fault. But the New York state attorney general has launched an investigation. <Laugh> launched an investigation. Okay, fine. I think the first amendment protects, you know, the regulation of speech by the government. However, that's not gonna stop government from trying to regulate speech. The EU is proposing and probably will adopt a very strict law for very, you know, for noble reasons. This is how it always is though, right? They come up with a noble pretext. So you can't say anything about it. And then they end up using it to Snoop on us. The noble pretext is what we want to ch stop child sexual abuse material. So the EU is saying that all service providers, all service providers have to monitor all traffic, looking for both child sexual abuse, material pictures and things and grooming behavior.

Leo Laporte (00:08:16):

They, and now the problem is that a lot of providers, including Facebook messenger, WhatsApp signal messenger are end to end encrypted. They're designed intentionally to preserve the privacy of people on these messaging systems that would, if this law becomes you know, becomes a fact, if this proposed law becomes a fact in the EU, all of these companies would be responsible. And by the way, the EU specifically says, doesn't matter if it's encrypted, you still have to look into it. Well then it's not encrypted. Oh, only you might say, oh, only the company can see it. Well guess what? <Laugh> that doesn't last long. If there's a back door, if there's keys to encryption, eventually the bad guys, get it.

Leo Laporte (00:09:00):

No, nobody's gonna say, and I'm certainly not gonna say, oh, you know, we don't need to go after child sexual abuse material or, or groomers. No we do. But, but law enforcement really doesn't like it. They call it going dark. They don't like it, that they can't see every single thing that's happening everywhere all the time. And they act as if they have that, this, this new thing called encryption is gonna make it impossible for them to do their jobs. But of course, if you think about it, technology has given law enforcement far more tools than ever before. Location materials being sold about, about us all the time to law enforcement, without a warrant all the time. Law enforcement has actually a very good picture of what's going on much better than the pre technological era, you know? Yeah. Before technology, you know, you could call somebody and plan a crime.

Leo Laporte (00:09:59):

Oh guess they could do a wire trap. Well, that's fine with the warrant. Okay. But then you could go over to his house and talk about it or maybe stand out in the field and talk about, there've always been ways to communicate without the snooping of law enforcement for law enforcement to say, well, we can't allow any, any communication between people without our being able to watch it is a problem is a problem. And they're gonna use, you know, excuses like, well, we gotta stop child abuse, cuz nobody's gonna, nobody's gonna say, oh yeah, no, don't, you know, that's a, everybody's gonna applaud that motive. But as a, as Ronald Reagan used to say, watch your wallets. <Laugh> well, it's not about wallets. Watch your communications cuz really what they want is they want a perfect picture of everything the citizenry is up to at all times. And that is not, that is absolutely not the intent of the founders, the intent of the fourth amendment, the intent of any democracy and yet that's what they want and watch cuz it's gonna happen in the EU. And I predict well it's always been moose to make it happen here. Just something to be aware of. So good. I'm glad they the feds say, well we're not gonna prosecute legit security researchers. We'll see.

Leo Laporte (00:11:16):

We'll see. And I don't think, you know, investigating Twitch and discord is gonna do anything to prevent mass shootings. They're not CRI or for Chan they're not critical to this. It's that's not, that's not the direction to go to stop it. What do you think? Do, do you deserve a modicum of privacy? Eighty eight, eighty eight, ask Leo the phone number (888) 827-5536, toll free from anywhere in the us or Canada. Coming up our car guy, Sam bull, Sam photo guy, Chris Marwar space guy, rod pile. It's gonna be a great day. Stay right here, Sam. No rod today. Okay. Who messed up your car?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:00):

<Laugh> that is the Tesla that belonged to Joshua Brown, the first known fatality of autopilot. Oh God. And I wanna talk about the the new documentary that the New York times has just published. It's it's on Hulu. Oh, streaming on Hulu.

Leo Laporte (00:12:17):

They won't watch it

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:17):

Tonight called Elon Musk's crash course.

Leo Laporte (00:12:19):

Oh geez. What a name?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:21):

Yeah.

Leo Laporte (00:12:23):

Somebody called yesterday and was talking about George hot's you know open drive com.ai said he loved it. Yeah. Have you ever tried it?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:33):

I have not. He said

Leo Laporte (00:12:35):

It's really good. It's level two. It's not, it's not attempting anymore.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:38):

Yeah. It's not even really that. Yeah. I mean it's barely that. Yeah. yeah, it, it does lane centering and I don't know if it can control the brakes or not. I can't

Leo Laporte (00:12:51):

Remember. Yeah, it does adapt to cruise control, but only if the car does it really, all it's really doing is controlling this steering wheel and

Sam Abuelsamid (00:12:57):

Yeah, I I'm, I'm not inclined to recommend such a system for, to any, for anybody to install such an aftermarket system.

Leo Laporte (00:13:07):

All right. Okay.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:13:08):

All right. Hey I have got some updates on my vehicle schedule my test vehicle schedule. Yes. I'm gonna have the F150 lightning coming up in a couple of weeks.

Leo Laporte (00:13:21):

Ooh fun. And

Sam Abuelsamid (00:13:23):

I also got confirmation the other day that I'm gonna get the Rivian R one T Ooh. And I'm actually gonna have both of them overlapping for a couple of days.

Leo Laporte (00:13:32):

Nice.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:13:33):

I sent you an email the other day. I don't know if you saw it. I don't know if you're interested in, you know, doing a, a, a comparison test as a, as

Leo Laporte (00:13:42):

A, well, you be in the bay area or you just want, oh, you wanna do it yourself? Yes, of course. We're interested. Totally, totally, totally. Okay. I didn't see your email or I would've immediately responded. I'll look through my, okay. My mail. Yeah.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:13:54):

I'll I'll I'll shoot, I'll shoot video with both of the trucks and, and, you know, have him side by side and do some comparison and nice.

Leo Laporte (00:14:03):

And

Sam Abuelsamid (00:14:03):

I'll put it up and send it over to Anthony.

Leo Laporte (00:14:06):

Nice.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:14:07):

You guys can cut it together and put it on club twit.

Leo Laporte (00:14:11):

Very nice. Thank you, sir.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:14:15):

No problem.

Leo Laporte (00:14:16):

The phone song on the weekend. Introducing ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, children of all ages, the wonderful and talented Kim Shafer, our unbreakable phone angel. Kim don't take no Shafer. Hello, Kim. Hi. How are you? Good.

Kim Schaffer (00:14:32):

How was your dinner?

Leo Laporte (00:14:34):

Oh, how did you know? I went to dinner.

Kim Schaffer (00:14:36):

You told us yesterday. And I looked at the menu and I was, I am so picky, but I was salivating all over that sample menu. There's nothing on there that I wouldn't

Leo Laporte (00:14:43):

Have eaten. <Laugh> we have a new restaurant, I think because Petaluma is in the kind of, not quite, but almost in the wine country. Yeah. It's kind of like in the in the border of the wine country, just like Napa, the town of Napa is in the border of the Napa valley. We're in the border of the Sonoma valley. I'm thinking maybe this is gonna be an up and coming destination for GOME travelers. Anyway, this restaurant is better than anything we've had here forever. So

Kim Schaffer (00:15:11):

I think they're trying to be like that state bird provisions in

Leo Laporte (00:15:14):

The city. Well, that's my question. What the heck? So their name is the worst name ever. Table culture provisions. <Laugh> I can't even, I can never remember it. Yeah,

Kim Schaffer (00:15:22):

But state bird for provisions in the city, I guess there's a long waiting list for,

Leo Laporte (00:15:26):

Yeah. That's a good restaurant too, but I, you know, I think it's like the internet they've run out of good names. So like Google, like they're coming up with weird. Just doesn't have anything to do with anything names,

Kim Schaffer (00:15:38):

But as long as the food is

Leo Laporte (00:15:39):

Good, well, Lisa says you want to go to that restaurant that we never can remember the name of and I'll go, yeah, that sounds good. <Laugh>

Kim Schaffer (00:15:45):

Let's

Leo Laporte (00:15:46):

Make a plan. So let's make a plan. Who should I talk to?

Kim Schaffer (00:15:49):

Let's go to Bob and Marietta. I like his question, cuz again, it's one. I don't think I've ever heard before.

Leo Laporte (00:15:54):

That's a rarity. How many years have you been doing this with me?

Kim Schaffer (00:15:57):

Since 2013.

Leo Laporte (00:15:59):

Holy moly. Nine years.

Kim Schaffer (00:16:01):

Totally full time since 20. Seventeen's amazing. But before that it was Heather and I

Leo Laporte (00:16:07):

That's amazing. Yeah.

Kim Schaffer (00:16:08):

Switching back

Leo Laporte (00:16:08):

And forth. Well, anyway, you've heard most of the questions, so this will be good. A lot of them, this will be good. Hi Bob. Thank you, Kim. Leo Laport, the tech guy welcome.

Caller 1 (00:16:17):

You certainly are. How are you?

Leo Laporte (00:16:20):

I am great. How are you on this fine day? Memorial day weekend coming up.

Caller 1 (00:16:27):

I wanna get some expert advice. No pun intended. Actual fact. I wanna get some very good advice from you. This is regarding my doctors. They've come up with, I got an email a couple days ago. They're setting up a portal,

Leo Laporte (00:16:43):

A portal just for you.

Caller 1 (00:16:45):

Yeah. Well for, for their entire customer base.

Leo Laporte (00:16:48):

Oh, one of those Facebook portals.

Caller 1 (00:16:51):

Well, I don't wanna go Facebook. Oh,

Leo Laporte (00:16:53):

Well what is it? What are they setting up? I don't wanna put words in your mouth. I'm sorry.

Caller 1 (00:16:57):

It's kind of setting up your medical history. They want your contact information. Oh yes. Insurance and medications. Yeah. Fast history. Yeah. So this I'm I'm really, I think they're making a big mistake cuz what they said was how to do it. You enter the tva.ema.med into your search engine. Yeah. Then you enter your email address as your username. Okay. That's fine. So far now for the password, they're telling me what my password is supposed to be, which is my two initials and birth date.

Leo Laporte (00:17:39):

Well, everyone knows that. Now can you go in and change your password?

Caller 1 (00:17:44):

That's nothing about that. That's why I'm

Leo Laporte (00:17:46):

Oh, that's terrible. How hard is it to figure out what a person's initials and birth date are? That portal will be open to anybody who wants to look at it.

Caller 1 (00:17:57):

Bingo.

Leo Laporte (00:17:58):

Oh no, that's terrible. Probably also you might mention to them, there's this thing called the health insurance privacy and something act HIPAA. H I P a a that no, H I P P a health insurance, privacy and portability act that protects that medical information like Fort Knox.

Caller 1 (00:18:19):

Exactly. That's what my wife has been telling me. And I said, well, before I embarrass myself in front of somebody at the doctor's office, who's gonna tell me that. I don't know what the heck right. I'm talking

Leo Laporte (00:18:30):

About. Well, get a recording of this. <Laugh> play it for 'em. So you know, the idea of a portal is a great idea. Everybody's doing electronic medical records. My my health insurance is through a company called Kaiser insurance, Kaiser permit entity. They have a, and I use it all the time. I log into my portal. I see what inoculations I've had. I can get my blood work. I can see what the results were, that kind of thing, very convenient. But that needs to be totally secure. And your email, birthdate and initials <laugh> are pretty much, you know, discernible in a variety of ways. For me, all you have to do is go to my Wikipedia entry and you get all of that. But I mean, I, I think there are other ways for anybody to get that information. That's terrible. Now, if you go there and they say, that's your initial password? You know, cuz you know, sometimes when the, the, it, people will set up a, an account, they'll make the password, change me. And then to remind you, that's a temporary password so you can get in and now you should change it. So you might, before you put any private information in there, go log in and see if there's a change password field. I bet there is. I,

Caller 1 (00:19:39):

There is. Well, hopefully you're and, and I'll take your advice, but here it gives the tells you what to do on the, on the email here. It gave me the example of how to do it before your next appointment. Click on, click on each category in my health. Yeah,

Leo Laporte (00:19:56):

Yeah. Do all that. But, but what'll happen. Have you gone to the site yet?

Caller 1 (00:20:01):

No, my,

Leo Laporte (00:20:01):

I think the first time you go there and you'll log in with your email and your birth date and initials, before it lets you put anything in, if it's properly designed, it will say, okay, good. Now let's come up with a good secure password for you.

Caller 1 (00:20:18):

I, I agree with that, that effect.

Leo Laporte (00:20:20):

I think that's how they're gonna do it. I'm gonna guess that's how they're gonna do it because otherwise you're right. It's not safe.

Leo Laporte (00:20:26):

Yeah. But I, but that's not an unusual thing to do. You're but your instinct though, never ever use anything like that for a password because it's, it's easily discernible by a bad guy. Your password should be a long, you know, as long as they'll let you make it 12 characters, at least assorted numbers, upper and lowercase letters and punctuation of all kinds. And it should be completely random. Ideally it shouldn't be something you think you could even memorize, but that's why you have to use a password manager that has a vault where it stores that stuff so that you don't have to remember it. So, absolutely. And my, my fear is that people are gonna not change that default password and that it better not let you keep it cuz that's no good. Sam's coming up. We're gonna talk cars right after this. Yeah, that, that I I'm gonna guess if it's especially cuz of hip medical oh, he's gone. Oh, well I was talking to him, but no one's listening, but medical sites like that are very, very highly protected. I

Sam Abuelsamid (00:21:41):

Was. Yeah. And usually feel like you said, they'll, you know, they'll,

Leo Laporte (00:21:44):

You're gonna make

Sam Abuelsamid (00:21:44):

Him change password like that and it's, it's only good one time. Yeah. And then as soon as you log in, it'll exactly immediately prompt you to change it to something else.

Leo Laporte (00:21:53):

I never use. E I got the site the other day said, this is, you know, here's a suggested password, which is reasonable, I guess, for them to cuz people don't make good passwords. But in this case I ne I never even use those, even if they're clearly, you know, random, cuz I don't think anybody should know and I have a good password manager, so I let it do it. I love bit warden now will let you create a random email as well as password, which is great. Oh, so you can yeah. Now it's really good. Now it's really good. Okay. We're gonna talk about crashes. That is a, that is a horrific accident.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:22:34):

Yeah. Well, and there was another one, a couple of years ago that was almost identical. And it also happened in Florida.

Leo Laporte (00:22:42):

But I have to point out, I mean, accidents happen in all vehicles all the time. I mean

Sam Abuelsamid (00:22:46):

They, they, they do. But the, you know, the, I think the, the, the difference here that, you know, has people concerned is, you know, that Musk keeps talking about this as a system that, you know, well, first of all, they sell it as full self-driving.

Leo Laporte (00:23:02):

Yeah. That's a mistake.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:23:03):

Yeah. You know, and, and then, you know, he keeps demoing it, you know, with his hands off the wheel and yeah. You see, you know, there's all kinds of videos of him and, and he will retweet videos that other people post showing them driving with hands off the wheel and, you know, talks about when their, when their cars are suddenly gonna transform into robo taxis. And so you know what I mean, what I wanna talk about more today though, is, is this specific documentary which has some flaws, you know, it's not bad, but it, it has some flaws. And, you know, I think one of the things that it really, that they really missed an opportunity was to really look at what happened with NITSA and why NITSA hasn't done anything. Yes. particularly with the Josh brown crash.

Leo Laporte (00:23:47):

Yes.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:23:48):

And, you know, they had, they had one ex NITSA staffer that they talked to in the film. And they, but they also talked to a couple of people from the NTSB Robert Sumwalt, the, the chairman of the NTSB and, and one other member of the NTSB who's been involved in a couple of these Tesla investigations and the NTSB has made some excellent recommendations and NITSA has done nothing to push automakers to actually implement that.

Leo Laporte (00:24:21):

<Affirmative> yeah. So is it a bad documentary you think, or

Sam Abuelsamid (00:24:30):

It's not bad, it's just not as good as it could have been. I think it's a missed opportunity. You know, it does, you know, I mean, if you watch, I think it's, it's worth watching because you do get some information, you know, certainly some history of what's gone on, but I think that there, you know, there's a, there's a there's I think there's some people that they should have talked to that they didn't people like Dr. Phillip Cooman from Carnegie Mellon university. I actually talked to the to the director. I, she interviewed me back last October. And you know, that, you know, that wasn't used, but, you know, and I don't know if she, you know, even talked to some of these other people, but I think that, you know, there's people that should have been included in there, like, like Phil Cooman. I, I also pointed her at a lawyer named Jennifer Karski who is an expert in a lot of this stuff. And I think you know, that it would've been worthwhile to have some of these other people included in there to, to look at, you know, what what's gone wrong from a regulatory standpoint,

Leo Laporte (00:25:39):

Right? Yes. Our show today BR oh, I'm so excited brought to you by Peloton. I'm kind of a, you probably heard me talk about my Peloton a little bit, kind of a Peloton buff that would be understating the case. I got my Peloton bike, the original Peloton bike several years ago and I was using it all the time. It's my favorite thing ever. And it gets better all the time. We'd love <affirmative>. We love our Peloton. You know, you might not feel motivated to get up and get moving. You might not feel like you have time to fit the workout into the day. Workout classes fill up. Sometimes you don't really want to go to the gym. It's easy to get shut out. That's why you want to try Peloton. Oh, so time. So I love glasses. I really did, but the schedule didn't always fit my schedule.

Leo Laporte (00:26:37):

I wanted the idea. I really loved the idea of doing it when I felt like it on my own terms and on my own time, that's why I got the Peloton bike. It's got a nice big screen. It's got great. It's some of my, I love Cody. I can watch 'em live. Be part of a large group doing the class all at the same time. They'll even shout out they'll say hi or you can do on demand. They've added a lot of nice features. You can go on a nice ride through the countryside and they have a game now, which I play a lot. I really like it. It's kinda like rock band or light saber. You're turning the knob and trying to keep time with the music. It's it's a great way to exercise. Have fun while you're doing it. Their instructors are so great.

Leo Laporte (00:27:18):

They're there whenever you want. You wanna get up in the morning, three in the morning and, and ride, you can do it. They're highly trained fitness pros. You probably saw Cody on dancing with the stars, man. He's a, he's amazing. They're all wonderful. They motivate you through every workout, whether you're a regular at the gym or someone who's new and getting back into working out, they don't just teach. They motivate. They get you feeling good and you end every class. I love Emma Lovewell. She says live well, love. Well at the end and you, you end the class and you just going. I feel good. I feel good. And I try, I always try to remember that feeling cuz you know, sometimes you get up, you don't wanna work out. You don't wanna do anything. Peloton has treadmills. Now I, I use one at my trainers barn that he has the Peloton bike and the treadmill.

Leo Laporte (00:28:00):

And I use the treadmill all the time. Nicest treadmill ever. They have stretch classes you can do before or after you use the gear. They have, they actually all sides of strength, training yoga. Now you can try new types of movement. No one's looking down their nose at you. You're on your own. You can do it at a level in a pace that feels good for you. It gets you moving and that's the point, right? Make every workout a good time with Peloton. You can do whatever you want with the music too. That's so the other thing I like, I, I just did the game with what was it? Lady rockers of the nineties. I think it was well, I loved every song. It was so great. So great. Whether you're looking for a 10 minute upper body stretch between calls a 40 minute run before bed or just a light bike ride in the country.

Leo Laporte (00:28:53):

It's got it all. All on the same Peloton. You'll never have an awkward encounter in the locker room again. <Laugh> I just, I just, I love my Peloton. I use it all the time right now is a great time to try a Peloton. P E L O T O N. They've reduced the price. The Peloton bike plus is $500 less. That's the lowest price they've ever offered. It includes. And you definitely want to get this free delivery and setup. And by the way, like I said, I've had mine. I think I've had it for four or five years. I got it when they first started and it is perfect. Perfect. Never had a problem with it. Lots of game changing prices available. Now, if you've ever looked before and gone, well, I don't know, go back. Peloton bikes and treads. I just love 'em visit onepeloton.com to learn more.

Leo Laporte (00:29:41):

I it's funny. I'm I'm, I'm lifting weights with my trainer and he says, okay, time for a little Tabata on the Peloton I get on there, man. I tell you it's hard, but I feel so good afterwards. It really makes a difference. I am. I am. We've been trying to, ever since I bought my Peloton, I've been saying you should advertise. I would love to tell people about this Peloton. I'm telling 'em about it. Anyway, it's the greatest thing ever. One peloton.com is the address. One peloton.com. This is a revolution I think in, in in exercise, doing it on your own on your own time as you want. Anytime. I love it. Love you Peloton. He's our low riding guy, car expert, Sam AB Sam joins us every week to talk about cars. He's a principal researcher at guide house insights. Does the great will bearings podcast@wheelbearings.media. Hi Sam.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:30:40):

Hey Leo. How are you

Leo Laporte (00:30:41):

This week? I'm great. I certainly hope that that trashed car behind you is not your Miata.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:30:46):

No, thankfully mine, mine came was built with the roof removed. <Laugh> right

Leo Laporte (00:30:51):

From the, yeah. That one had its room removed. Somehow not, not voluntarily. I'm thinking.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:30:57):

Yeah, no, this, this the, the car behind me, if you're watching the stream is the car, a Tesla model S that was owned by Joshua Brown, who was the first known fatality. Oh dear. While using Tesla autopilot. Oh

Leo Laporte (00:31:11):

Dear.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:31:12):

And this was, this was in may of 2016. As it turns out, it was actually, it was about a week before, the first time I got to drive a, a model S with autopilot. And at the time when I drove it I, you know, the, this this crash had not yet become public. It, it was not published anywhere. You know, the local authorities knew about it. The national transportation safety board knew about it and, and NITSA knew about it, but, but it was not, it had not been reported anywhere. And what happened in this particular instance was that brown was using autopilot. He was driving down a, a, a highway in Florida. It was not, it was not a limited access highway, like an interstate and a truck, a tractor trailer turned left in front of him. And it had a white trailer and the system failed to recognize that this was a

Leo Laporte (00:32:08):

Truck. Oh, I remember that it was across the road. Yeah.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:32:11):

He was not paying attention. And his car basically ran under the, the track under the trailer tragic and sliced the roof off. And it was a fatal crash. And, you know, there was another very similar crash in 2019 in Florida, also on a very similar kind of road, same, almost exact same scenarios with a model three. It was a newer generation of autopilot and it still did the exact same thing. And the reason I bring this up today is there's a new documentary that just came out on Hulu on Friday. It's directed by a woman named Emma Schwartz. It was published by the New York times. It's called Elon Musk's crash course. Right. <Laugh> and that

Leo Laporte (00:32:59):

Gives you some idea of what it's gonna

Sam Abuelsamid (00:33:01):

Be about. Yeah. Wow. It, I mean, it, it, it, the overall topic of the, the film is to take a look at the, the development and problems of autopilot and, and full self-driving at Tesla. And it's, it's not a bad film, but I think that it was, you know, I watched it, I got a screener of it, and I, I thought it was kind of a missed opportunity. You know, they spent, you know, the first portion of the film, you know, looks at the, the, the origins of Tesla and the DARPA grand challenge, you know, the, the beginning of developing automated driving systems. And then it gets into Joshua Brown and it spends personally, I think, an inordinate amount of time on brown himself on who he was, you know why he was so interested in, in testing autopilot talking to some of his friends.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:33:56):

And I, I think that, you know, that was, you know, some of that background is, is fine, it's useful, but I think it, to the, to most viewers, it would've been more useful if they spent more time looking at the issues of why, you know, what, what are the problems with, what are the real problems with autopilot and, and Tesla's full self driving approach. And why have regulators not done anything about it? They did talk to one former NITSA staffer. ITT says the national highway traffic safety administration who one staffer who was involved in this investigation, he's no longer with NITSA. And they also talked to a couple of members from the NTSB, including Robert Sumwalt. Who's the chairman of the national transportation safety board and the NTSB and, and NITSA are two different agencies within the federal government that are both tasked with with trying to improve transportation safety, but from different perspectives.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:35:02):

The NTSB is an investigatory body that has no enforcement or regulatory authority. So when crashes happen, not just with vehicles, not just with cars, but with trains, aircraft shipping, any kind of transportation accident, they go in and investigate and make recommendations. And that's all they can do is make recommendations. So they'll issue report and make recommendations. And they're very well respected. And then it's up to, in the case of ground vehicles NITSA to actually look at, okay, how do, how do we take these recommendations and make pro get reg regulations to make roads SA roads safer? And given that you know, we just had, that's a just issued the preliminary findings for 2021 traffic safety. When we reached almost 43,000 fatalities last year, that's a 10.5% increase from 2020. And the highest number of fatalities we've had on our roads since 2005 you know, it's important for us to be doing more, to improve traffic safety.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:36:15):

And I think that they, you know, NITSA has really fallen down on the job when it comes to automated driving. They've started to do more in the past year with at least data gathering, but back in 2016, when they had this investigation, the NTSP put, put out a really good, really thorough report on this crash that NSA did nothing with they, in fact you know, they issued their own report that included some data that they got from from Tesla directly, which was later debunked, you know, that claimed that cars operating on autopilot got into 40%, fewer crashes than those without autopilot. And that, you know, once somebody actually you know, somebody spent a couple of years trying to do FOYA requests to get the actual data that was given to NITSA that this claim was based on. And they once they actually got it and started going through it they found that it was the claim was complete nonsense.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:37:17):

In fact, cars with autopilot were actually getting into more crashes. And I think that the, the, you know, the director of this film probably should have put more emphasis on why are reg, why have regulators not done anything to at least, you know, to do things like have more robust driver monitoring systems in, in vehicles to, you know, to mandate that if you're going to have any kind of partial automation systems like this. And actually next week, I wanna talk about driver monitoring systems. Cause I got a really good demo on Friday. I went to Magna a major auto parts supplier and got a great demo on, on what they're doing with this. But you know, Tesla among the companies that are doing these more advanced systems, they're the only ones that aren't using active driver monitoring systems. And I think, I think that, that, I think it would've been,

Leo Laporte (00:38:15):

They make you hold the wheel though. Isn't that active driving?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:38:18):

Well, they, except that they don't really have they, they tell you to hold the wheel, but they, they don't really enforce it very well. Well,

Leo Laporte (00:38:26):

They do on, they did on my Tesla man, at one point, I'm driving down the road. They said, you no more FSD for you, <laugh> you didn't, you didn't respond. And they turned it off. So I didn't have my adapted cruise

Sam Abuelsamid (00:38:38):

Control. They're they're using a torque sensor in the steering wheel. Yeah, exactly. Which is not a very reliable oh, okay. Means of measuring if your hands are actually on the wheel.

Leo Laporte (00:38:47):

My Mustang uses though. I don't have blue crews yet. Yes.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:38:49):

Yeah. Yes. Your Mustang does, your Maki does use the same system once I get, I have talked to Ford about and complained to them about that, that approach as well. Why

Leo Laporte (00:38:57):

Is that dangerous? I mean, it does show, you're interested. You're paying attention.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:39:02):

Well, not necessarily. It shows that there's torque input on the steering wheel, but it's very easy to fool that I could tires line. You can find the, yeah, you can, you can stick an orange or something in between steering wheel spokes. Why would, and that'll be enough. That's

Leo Laporte (00:39:17):

Self that's stupid.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:39:19):

Yes

Leo Laporte (00:39:20):

<Laugh> but people will do dumb things. And I guess that's

Sam Abuelsamid (00:39:22):

The point they will.

Leo Laporte (00:39:24):

And I love, I didn't ever had FSD, but I loved my you know, lane keeping and mm-hmm <affirmative> I never did want on the Tesla to use the lane changing though. It seemed to be very aggressive and not in a way I was comfortable with Samal Sam guide, house insights. Thank you as always,

Sam Abuelsamid (00:39:41):

Thank you.

Leo Laporte (00:39:49):

Still waiting for a blue cruise, but you know, I don't, I'm not in a hurry. I don't really mind not having it

Sam Abuelsamid (00:39:54):

Right away. You you're not, to be honest, you're not really missing much. Yeah. Yeah. You're better off with just the lane centering and

Leo Laporte (00:39:59):

The that's fine. And I do use that every, every time I'm on the freeway and it's very convenient and I like it. So yeah. Okay. do you wanna stick around as usual?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:40:10):

Yeah, absolutely.

Leo Laporte (00:40:11):

Okay. I'm gonna give you control of the con

Sam Abuelsamid (00:40:15):

Here. All right. So just to to elaborate a little bit on this whole torque sensor thing in the steering wheel the reason why it's not a very good system is what it's doing is it's looking for for input on the, on the steering wheel. So it's assuming that as you're driving down the road, if your hands are on the wheel, there's gonna be a little bit of motion from your hands, and you're gonna have some, some motion there. Right. and you know, when it, when the system is making steering corrections, it's also assuming that you're gonna have, there's gonna be some reaction torque, you know, so your hands are perhaps not gonna move quite as aggressively as, as the steering wheel. And so when it's seeing that reaction torque, it, it, then it assumes that your hands are on the wheel. And the reason why things like, you know, this idea of sticking a water bottle or an orange, or there was, there was a company for a while that was selling a little weight that you could clip onto one

Leo Laporte (00:41:10):

Of those

Sam Abuelsamid (00:41:11):

Unbelievable steering wheel. Why

Leo Laporte (00:41:12):

Would you do that? So stupid?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:41:14):

You know, so when, when the, when the system, you know would automatically turn the steering wheel, it would feel that weight and assume that it was your hands on the wheel, which was not. And so so there's that, and then there's the, there's also the opposite side of that, which is something that I've experienced on some Ford vehicles, which is false positives. If you actually drive down the road, and if you're driving straight down the road and you have your hands on the wheel and you hold the wheel very steady, then it assumes that if you're holding the wheel steady, that there's nobody touching the wheel there. It's, it's, it's assuming that everybody's going to have a little bit of shake on the wheel, right. And so that's, you know, that's not good either. Cuz then you end up getting a lot of false positive alerts to put your hands back on the wheel.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:42:01):

So, you know, if, if what you wanna do is actually measure is somebody, does somebody have their hands on the wheel? It's better to do that in a more direct way and the way that some auto makers, including general motors and Stant and BMW and Mercedes-Benz and Audi is they put capacitor sensors in the steering wheel, inside the steering wheel. So when you, when you are physically touching the wheel, you know, it's like, like touching your, your phone screen, you're touchscreen, when you are physically touching the wheel, it will sense that. And so you don't have to actually move the wheel, you know, just touching it, you know, having your hands on the wheel is sufficient. So that there's that. And then the other thing that you want is, you know, to look at the driver's eyes because all of these systems are designed to be you know eyes on systems, you know, where you are still watching the road.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:42:52):

And so what you wanna do is you wanna be watch looking at where is the driver looking? And so one of the things, you know, you'll, you'll see in, in your Maee Leo, even, even if you have even without the blue crews it will actually, if, if you are looking away from the wheel, I, I think on yours, if you look away from the, the road for more than about four or five seconds, it will start to alert you to put your eyes back on the road. Yeah. If you're using the adaptive cruise control and you know, that's the kind of thing that you want, you want, you know, if, if you're relying on the, the human driver to be the supervisor, then you, you want to actually look, you, you want direct, you don't want derivative signals like a torque sensor. You want direct signals look at where the driver's eyes are pointing, look at where they, their, you know, measure where their hands are actually at, you know, are they actually on the steering wheel? And then, you know, then you can have a more reliable system.

Leo Laporte (00:43:52):

Leo Laporte the tech guy, eighty eight, eighty eight, ask Leo the phone number on, we go with the show, say hello to Gary. And look two Gary in Laguna, Miguel, California. Hi Gary.

Caller 2 (00:44:04):

Oh, I'm doing pretty good. Good. Well, anyways, I, I just wanted to comment about what Sam and you were talking about. Okay boy, this autonomous driving. Oh my God. I, I can't think of anything more dangerous than autonomous driving

Leo Laporte (00:44:19):

For, you know, we've been saying for a long time, I remember the very first grand DARPA challenge many moons ago, maybe 20 years ago, the idea the grand DARPA challenge was a challenge to create self-driving vehicles. And I think in 2004, they started it. And I remember the first grand DARPA challenges. They couldn't go 10 feet with veering off the road, these robotic cars, but we've made a lot of progress. But as with many things in computers the first 80% was pretty easy. And the last 10% is almost impossible, whether it's voice recognition, handwriting recognition, or self driving, it's that last bit that gets you every time. And I feel like this may ne we may never get there about it. Go ahead.

Caller 2 (00:45:14):

But Leo, what does Sam think about it? Because Sam like me, he's a true car guy. You know, Sam has a lot more knowledge on, especially writing articles and things like that. I just have a lot of knowledge working on the cars. You know, we store in my 67 Camaro. Yeah. And trying to keep my Jeep grand Cherokee working cuz the Toyota RAV4 I bought was bought back and

Leo Laporte (00:45:36):

<Laugh>

Caller 2 (00:45:36):

And I just,

Leo Laporte (00:45:37):

That grand Cherokee's a classic. You keep that running. That's that's a, that's a plus.

Caller 2 (00:45:41):

Well, the problem is Leo it's it's a 1999. That's got 251,000 miles on now.

Leo Laporte (00:45:45):

Oh man. Put an electric motor in there. Just no self-driving

Caller 2 (00:45:49):

No, no, no, no. Well you obviously know how I feel about electric.

Leo Laporte (00:45:52):

<Laugh> see. I love electric vehicles. Oh. And unfortunately I think the idea is, well, we're innovating there. We should innovate in every respect to the point where the model three doesn't even have, you know, physical buttons for the, for the lane change indicator and stuff. Sam is actually still on the line. Let me ask, let me ask him your question. Sure. We were, we were talking to the chat rooms. Elon announced again just a couple of days ago that we're only one year away from full self-driving vehicles, vehicles that can have we suddenly gone back in time to 2016? He's well there's and then I found a super cut video of him announcing that in 20 14, 20 15, 20 16, 20 18, 20 19 every year for the last eight years, Elon has said no human drivers next year,

Caller 2 (00:46:41):

What we need is manual transmissions

Leo Laporte (00:46:43):

<Laugh> then you have to have a human I, so I wouldn't, I don't disagree with that.

Caller 2 (00:46:48):

Sam, Sam, you told me about this. Sam, you have a Miata. You obviously have a manual transmission in when you are driving that vehicle. I mean, tell me if you don't have a hundred percent donated from your thought to your right foot, to your left foot, to your right hand and went shifting, be, see, this is a problem I see with modern vehicles. Now this is just another opinion from a person like me. I'm 64 years old. I have a lot of experience with cars. Also a lot of experience photographing the wildlife, but the way I look at cars nowadays, cars are so automated cars are so dangerous the way they are. If you look at manual,

Leo Laporte (00:47:29):

But wait, but wait a minute, wait a minute, Gary. Cuz I do feel like historically cars have been killers since, you know, day one. I, I feel like there's maybe safer now. And, and we know humans, especially in the day of of smartphone are horribly inattentive regardless of the ability of the car to drive itself. So a little bit of driver assist, I don't think is a bad thing.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:47:57):

You know? I, I,

Leo Laporte (00:47:59):

What do you, what do you

Sam Abuelsamid (00:47:59):

Think? You know, and I think you know, when you actually have to be more engaged in the process you know, then you tend to be more attentive. You know? I mean, if you are shifting manually you know, one thing we never we've never, ever heard about is cases of sudden unintended acceleration with a manual transmission. <Laugh> it's only with automatic trans right? Sam, thank

Caller 2 (00:48:21):

Thank you.

Leo Laporte (00:48:22):

Oh, let's, let's go back to cranking the car. Cause if you have to go all the way around the car to crank the engine, you're gonna make sure there are no toddlers in the way let's go back. Well, in fact, let's bring back horses. Nobody ever got, well maybe mean nobody, but a lot fewer people got run over by horses. Yes. And nobody, nobody ran a stop sign with a horse.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:48:42):

<Laugh> you know, I will say

Leo Laporte (00:48:46):

Gary, you've got a real nostalgia for the good old days. I think. I think automatic transmissions are here to stay. I really do. Yeah.

Caller 2 (00:48:53):

Well here let's look at earlier today, the Spanish grand period was on. I watched the entire race. Now when you watch formula one,

Leo Laporte (00:49:00):

Don't tell me the winner cuz I haven't watched it yet. Yeah, go ahead.

Caller 2 (00:49:03):

Okay. Now here's the thing. When we watch what happens in auto racing passes over to the passenger cars. Now even with the transmissions, the way they are in formula one, you still have to let out the clutch and then you have the paddle shippers, you know, up for the right and down for lift, you have to manually shift even race

Leo Laporte (00:49:24):

Cars. And the really good news is there. Hasn't been a formula one fatality in a couple of years now. So there has yeah. Yeah. <Laugh>

Caller 2 (00:49:32):

Rojo had a really, really

Leo Laporte (00:49:33):

That was a bad one. Yeah. Don't tell me who won today. Cuz I haven't watched it yet. I'm I?

Sam Abuelsamid (00:49:38):

It was a car with four wheels and a couple of wings. Yeah.

Leo Laporte (00:49:40):

<Laugh> absolutely, absolutely. So you know, I understand what you're saying Gary, but, but time does move on. Ultimately I I, as I mean, look, we're look, nobody's gonna force everybody to have a stick shift. Do

Caller 2 (00:49:55):

You, but it's so sad. You can't even get a stick ship in most

Leo Laporte (00:49:57):

Modern. You can't buy one yeah.

Caller 2 (00:49:58):

Muscle cars.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:50:00):

Well that that's because most, most customers don't wanna buy them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think, I think the, the real issue here to what Gary's saying is, you know, that we, with some of these more advanced systems, you know, I think there there's a lot of benefit to systems like in keeping assist blind spot monitoring,

Leo Laporte (00:50:15):

You still have to drive. And that's

Sam Abuelsamid (00:50:17):

The problem. Yeah. With these more with these more advanced systems we're starting to get into an uncanny valley where, you know, as they become more capable cons the drivers are not good at supervising the automation. You know, when you actually have to drive you know, then you're better. But if you have to supervise a partially automated system, it becomes if it works most of the time. Yeah. It's very easy. Become complacent. It love, which is why you must have more robust driver monitor systems point to make sure the driver stays engaged

Leo Laporte (00:50:51):

Because people

Sam Abuelsamid (00:50:51):

Will,

Leo Laporte (00:50:53):

Will, if you give them a chance, they'll start sending Instagram photos. And so you gotta, you gotta make sure. I, I honestly, I hope we get to full self-driving sooner than later, cuz in the long run, if every car on the road had full self-driving software, I think it would be a much safer environment. Problem is we are, as you said in that uncanny in between time mm-hmm <affirmative> where drivers are still required. But imagine, imagine a future where every single car is a living room on wheels with no steering wheel, no brakes. And they're talking to one another, I think there would be few if any accidents, because now you might not get to your destination as fast because they, as we've seen in Phoenix and elsewhere, they're very patient to a fault. I think that's gonna be a safer environment. How many people die every year in the auto accident? Sam is it it's over 50,000

Sam Abuelsamid (00:51:46):

Last, last year. It was just shy of 40 3043.

Leo Laporte (00:51:49):

That's a lot of people.

Caller 2 (00:51:51):

That's a lot of people dying unnecessarily there,

Leo Laporte (00:51:53):

Guys. You mean if they all had stick shifts, they wouldn't die.

Caller 2 (00:51:56):

Well, I'm not saying,

Sam Abuelsamid (00:51:57):

Well, there'd be a lot fewer people driving <laugh> but so there probably would be fewer fatalities.

Leo Laporte (00:52:03):

No, you know what happened during COVID fewer people driving more fatalities, right? Because people SP

Sam Abuelsamid (00:52:09):

Yeah. From 2019 to 2020, the numbers went up quite a bit because there were more, more people driving too fast and driving recklessly. Yeah. And so we did have so

Leo Laporte (00:52:20):

Fewer people on the road does not necessarily mean fewer fatalities.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:52:24):

Yeah.

Leo Laporte (00:52:24):

In fact we know it doesn't cuz it didn't in 2020. Yeah, I I'm a radical on this and then Gary, you're gonna hate me when I say this, but I think personal car ownership should end as soon as possible. No,

Caller 2 (00:52:39):

No, no.

Leo Laporte (00:52:40):

I know. No. As soon as possible cars have been the single worst invention of humanity, they've polluted the airs. They've polluted the environment. They've polluted the streets. They make it impossible for people to walk and bike cities where cars are banned are much more livable, much better environments for human beings. The air cleared up in the that's one thing that did happen during COVID the air cleared up because of fewer vehicles birds and animals came back. I know you love birds, Gary. I honestly think personal car ownership is the worst thing that happened in the 20th century. Leo Laporte the tech guy. I'm sure everybody disagrees with me when I say that.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:53:20):

<Laugh>

Leo Laporte (00:53:24):

All right, Sam, your turn.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:53:26):

I, you know, I, I would say that certainly personal car ownership in urban areas.

Leo Laporte (00:53:31):

I'm not saying cars should go away. Personal car ownership.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:53:35):

Should have we need, we need, we need transportation. I mean, you know, our, we need, we need,

Leo Laporte (00:53:39):

We need trucks. I'm not saying that world.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:53:41):

Yeah. Our world has evolved, you know, in a way that we do rely on transportation to get around. But that doesn't necessarily mean that we all need to own our own

Leo Laporte (00:53:51):

Vehicle. It's made our cities inhumane, honestly. Yeah. I know. I totally agree. It's created the suburbs which were, which are a bad idea. I mean, I think it's, I think it, when we look, when people look back in history, if we ever have, if we have history at some point they will say, boy, that was a bad idea. That was a bad idea.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:54:14):

Yeah. I mean, you know, it, there, there were benefits, but there was probably on, on a net basis, there's probably more harm than good from, from vehicles, especially from internal combustion, you know? And, and the, the funny thing is if you go back to the beginning of the 20th century, there were actually more electric vehicles on the road than there were internal combustion because there was no gasoline fueling infrastructure. But you know, as soon as that gasoline fueling infrastructure started to evolve, people made the switch from electric to gas because it was so much more convenient. Because you know, the batteries of the era had so little capacity, so little range that, you know, they, they, those vehicles weren't as useful as they could be. And, and now, but now what we're starting to see is a shift back in the other direction is battery technology has evolved.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:55:09):

We're getting more and more charging stations installed that is, is changing. And I think, you know, we will, you know, we're going to see, you know, over the course of this decade, you know, a real shift and we're already starting to see a dramatic shift towards electrification. And in a lot of regions, like particularly in Europe, you know, a lot of automakers have said in Europe by 2030, they don't plan to sell internal combustion engines anymore. You know, several auto makers, especially premium auto makers, but even even mainstream like Volvo Audi Ford and, and others, you know, have said that by 2030, they will not be selling any internal combustion vehicles in Europe anymore. And so, you know, this is, this is a, a significant shift that will, will have a, will make a difference. But, you know, we also need different transportation options, especially in urban areas.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:56:04):

You know, we, we need, you know, we need to get people, more people into micro mobility, mass transit you know, and then in smaller vehicles you know, that are better suited to the use case. And, and the thing is if you don't own the vehicle then you have a it's, it's easier to make that shift to having the right vehicle for each trip. You know, when, when you have to own a vehicle, you know, you, you tend to end up buying the vehicle that you need for your worst case. <Laugh> use case. You know, so you buy an big SUV or a pickup truck, you know, because you need to tow a boat to the lake a couple of times a year. And that's, you know, that's not a, you know, and then the rest of the year you're under utilizing that vehicle.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:56:56):

So, you know, ideally what you want is to have the right vehicle for every trip. And you know, if you, if we make that shift away from personal ownership, then you know, that would be better or, you know, just get everybody to to own smaller vehicles and then just rent, you know, if you, for those occasional times, when you need a larger vehicle, then rent something that would, you know, that would also be a better solution. But let's see look at the chat here. Somebody was asking when I thought FSD would become a reality. When do you think we'll, we'll get yeah, Chevy guys said, when do you think we'll get, get to FSD cars? You know, I think it's going to be quite a while before we have vehicles that we can buy that truly have you know, true self-driving, you know, automated driving capability.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:57:49):

You know, I think what we're going to see first for consumer vehicles is vehicles that can do almost complete driving task on things like highways, where it's a more limited operating domain where you don't have intersections, you don't have pedestrians and cyclists. That's gonna be the, the first thing you see for consumer vehicles. But right now, actually we're starting to, you know, see more and more auto, true automated vehicles, you know, expansion of those kinds of deployments. Just this past week Waymo announced that they're expanding, you know, they've been running driverless, robo taxis in the suburbs of Phoenix for a couple of years now on, on certain limited, certain limited areas. They're expanding that area where those vehicles can operate into downtown Phoenix Argo AI, which is majority owned by Ford and Volkswagen announced this week that they are starting driverless testing.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:58:52):

You know, they've been doing testing in, in a number of cities for, for about five, six years now. But they're gonna, they're launching driverless testing in Miami and Austin, Texas and what they're doing first, they're following a similar pattern to what Waymo did, where they have their, they have, they, they've actually got vehicles operating as robo taxis on Lyft in Austin and Miami with safety drivers, much as motional does in Las Vegas with Lyft. And then Argo also has their own ride hailing and dispatch platform similar to Lyft or Uber. And they're using that with employees right now for full driverless tests in DC and Miami. So if you work for Argo or sorry in Austin, in Miami, if you work for Argo in either of those cities, you can use the Argo app and, and sum a ride from one of the Argo vehicles without a safety operator in there.

Sam Abuelsamid (00:59:50):

Crews and Waymo are also both running driverless vehicles in San Francisco and carrying members of the public. They're not yet allowed to charge for those rides. They're free rides cause it's still a test program, but they are carrying members of the public in driverless vehicles. So you know, they're out there today. It's expanding in China there's four or five different companies in about half a dozen cities that are doing driverless operations. And we will continue to see more and more of that. But the, the, the key to all of this is these are all vehicles, you know, systems that are designed from the ground up to be fully auto automated. They have multiple types of sensors that, you know, are very robust and much more robust computing power than what you will find in any production vehicle today.

Sam Abuelsamid (01:00:43):

So, you know, they have, you know, typically multiple types of LIDAR sensors, multiple types of radar, multiple cameras in some cases like the the crews and the Wemo vehicles, they've also got thermal imaging sensors. So they're, they're, they have a much more complete picture of the world around them in all different kinds of conditions, which is the, the, the problem with what Tesla's doing, you know, with relying on cameras, you actually can make that work in certain conditions. But it's, it's never going to have the fail operational capability that you need, you know, so if something goes wrong with one of those cameras, you need to have you need to have something else that can back it up and verify what you're seeing. And, and because machine vision systems are not perfect. They don't always recognize things exactly as they are.

Sam Abuelsamid (01:01:38):

And cameras in particular are not good. Especially the way that Tesla's using them. They're not good at measuring distance. They're using inference to, to try to measure how far away something is and how fast it's moving. And that's not a reliable approach. You know, they're, they're good for classification, but you know, you need active sensors like radar or LIDAR to get accurate distance measurements and orientation measurements, and orientation is really important because you need to measure the trajectory of all the targets around you so that you can predict what they're going to do, which is another key piece of this puzzle. So it's a lot more complicated than just vision. And

Leo Laporte (01:02:20):

I feel like if, if all car, like, if you could flip a switch, which you can't, but if inner car communication were enabled and all cars were autonomous, it'd be a lot more likely to work. Right. I mean, part of the problem is we've got humans in the mix.

Sam Abuelsamid (01:02:38):

Yes and no. You know, it's actually good that we have humans in the mix because the software that we have is still not in many ways, still not as good as the

Leo Laporte (01:02:46):

Human brain. So at some point point though, when the software we need the software be better and then we just need to pull a, but it's a long way to go. Yeah. That's the unfortunate part. Thank you, Sam. Yeah. A great one. We'll talk next week, right? You did bye. Well, Hey, Hey. Hey, how are you today? Leo Laporte here. The tech guy talking computers, the internet, home theater, digital photography, smart phones, smart watches, all that jazz. Eighty eight eighty eight. Ask Leo the phone number (888) 827-5536. Toll free from anywhere in the us or Canada. Pat on the line from Monrovia, California. Hi, pat.

Caller 3 (01:03:24):

Hi, just sort of bong there. It startled me a

Leo Laporte (01:03:26):

Little bit. Oh, sorry. The bong is the signal that you are on. <Laugh> wake up. <Laugh> sorry about that. I don't control the bong. If for me, it'd be a nice little flute tone, but I don't have any control over that

Caller 3 (01:03:37):

Long time. No, C I, I talked to pre pandemic and wow. I had the internet radio station, which we're trying to very moment.

Leo Laporte (01:03:47):

Oh, you still are still working on.

Caller 3 (01:03:49):

Yeah, it's still electrical-radio.com, but it was gone for two years.

Leo Laporte (01:03:54):

Why was that?

Caller 3 (01:03:56):

The company that handled our rights management went out of business.

Leo Laporte (01:03:59):

Oh, the and you know why they went out of business cuz the music industry does not like the idea.

Caller 3 (01:04:05):

Yeah. They got it. Dust up with ASCAP is the main

Leo Laporte (01:04:08):

Reason. Yep. ASCAP, which is the licensing. ASCAP. BMI is the licensing agent for music publishers. And they don't like the internet. We don't like the internet. It's a Deni thieves, thieves. I tell you,

Caller 3 (01:04:23):

I will try and keep it going at least for the rest of this year and, and see what good all music, no commercials at the moment. And I plan to keep it that way.

Leo Laporte (01:04:30):

Nice. Say the address again, electrical,

Caller 3 (01:04:36):

Electrical-Radio.Com,

Leo Laporte (01:04:38):

Radio.Com, electric eclectic music that, oh, that's clever. That rocks. Nice.

Caller 3 (01:04:44):

So we try and dump drop little odd oldies and obscure music in with more, a lot of new and a lot of old

Leo Laporte (01:04:53):

I and I shouldn't say this out loud, given that my I'm currently an employee of here at media and premier radio networks, but the I miss the days of radio where you had these little eclectic stations, like KFA out of Gilroy, California, that just would play stuff that you just don't hear on mainstream radio. Of course there's probably no way to make money doing that, but I sure miss it, it was a great way to hear music and to hear from people who love music. You know, they're still out there I guess and their record collections.

Caller 3 (01:05:27):

Yeah. I'll plug our, our local college station too. 88, 88, 5 fm.org from Cal state Northridge. Yeah. No commercials in all music.

Leo Laporte (01:05:37):

So where I got started college radio is a great thing. I'm glad we still do that anyway. So what can I do for you pat?

Caller 3 (01:05:44):

This is a question that cannot be answered, I guess, in an internet search. It's I guess it's a discussion, but I had an old well it's old now Toshiba 32 inch L C D TV. And you know, I had money in thanks to COVID one of the few things that did good for us. I had money in the bank, so I bought a new O L E D. Nice LG. Yeah.

Leo Laporte (01:06:08):

Buy. Yeah.

Caller 3 (01:06:09):

And I noticed that occasionally I'll, I'll be streaming something and the sound and the picture will be out of sync, which never happened with my old one. I wonder if that happens more often in bigger screen sizes?

Leo Laporte (01:06:23):

No, the problem is that is compression. Decompressing video is slower than decompressing audio cuz the video files are massive and everything's sent compressed in some form. So the TVD compresses it if it's got a slower processor, you'll notice it more. Or I guess in a way, what you said is true. If it's a bigger video picture, if it's a 4k picture with carrying a lot more information, that's gonna take more time to decompress. So almost all TVs, AV receivers, many other devices that play audio and video will have a way of slowing down the, the audio to match the video.

Caller 3 (01:07:07):

So my strategy lately is if I, if I'm gonna have friends over and want to see a movie just in case I download it first <laugh>

Leo Laporte (01:07:15):

Yeah, that will be better for sure.

Caller 3 (01:07:17):

Yeah. What happens about 10% of the time?

Leo Laporte (01:07:19):

What what device are you using that you have trouble keeping the sync

Caller 3 (01:07:24):

I'm using an apple TV connection. Apple

Leo Laporte (01:07:26):

TV.

Caller 3 (01:07:27):

Okay. L G, C, 10.

Leo Laporte (01:07:29):

See the apple TVs are pretty good in that regard. I think they have, they must have built in some sort of mechanism for keeping synchronization going. You, we first started seeing it with satellite TV, direct TV dish, because they had a heavily compressed to send it over the satellite. And as a result, the decompression, you know, sometimes took a while and, and, and of course our human brains are so well attuned to even the smallest difference. Even a few milliseconds, you start to notice it. So this,

Caller 3 (01:08:00):

Yeah, I was, I was watching, you may remember the old film. It's a John Ford film, I guess the, the quiet man.

Leo Laporte (01:08:08):

Oh, what a film? What a movie. Yeah,

Caller 3 (01:08:10):

There's a scene where the character played by John Wayne is chasing his lady friend through the Irish countryside and they, they splash their little Creek <laugh> and the, and you see them,

Leo Laporte (01:08:22):

The steps are off

Caller 3 (01:08:22):

And then three seconds later you hear it. <Laugh>

Leo Laporte (01:08:26):

See. That's funny cuz that the qu you know, that's not a 4k video you're getting there.

Caller 3 (01:08:31):

Well, there may be, well, I don't know what the

Leo Laporte (01:08:34):

Transfer is. There may be upscaling it, there may be all sorts of things going on. Yeah. So I, I'm not gonna suspect the apple TV. You should look in the settings for your LG. I don't remember offhand. Yeah,

Caller 3 (01:08:45):

But I mean, it only happens on occasion. I don't wanna change the settings for everything. I don't think

Leo Laporte (01:08:50):

How are you playing back the sound?

Caller 3 (01:08:54):

It's going through it goes through the TV and then into my stereo system, HD

Leo Laporte (01:08:58):

I case. Okay. So that's also adding some latency, obviously try your, your TV and your stereo, both have an optical connection. That's separate from the HDM. I, so H DMI carries both audio and video. And so you can have the, you know, the arc channel, the audio return channel, which will take audio created inside the TV. Let's say you're watching Netflix on LGS, smart TV platform. It will pass it out to the stereo. And in that case, you do wanna be you know, you know, you understand you want the arc, but it all these TVs now have a little optical port and most stereos, if it's an AV receiver, it will certainly have an optical in. I would try the optical in that. Believe it or not, might be more reliable

Caller 3 (01:09:47):

Maybe. Yeah. Yeah. It's too bad. Apple TV doesn't have that directly

Leo Laporte (01:09:50):

Anymore. Yeah. Yeah. I know. Yeah, cuz it is coming from the apple TV over the H D M I I'm just wondering, I, I honestly think it's the, I think it's the TV at this point. That's either that or the audio chain, there may be some latency being introduced by the audio chain. So that's why I thought maybe optical would be better.

Caller 3 (01:10:11):

One other question, if you boosted, if I had faster internet speed, you think it would be less likely to

Leo Laporte (01:10:16):

Happen? No. Okay. Cause the files coming down as a blob

Leo Laporte (01:10:22):

And yeah, the blob great. The thing, the blob it comes down as a blob and that includes the audio on the video in one blob. So you're, they're getting there at the same time. It's the decompression. Somebody's telling me, LG does have lip sync. They call it lip sync, adjust in their sound setting. So I would take a look at that. You can, you can adjust it by a frame or two and it might be that it's, you know, it's funny that it's worse and sometimes is it always does the quiet man always do that.

Caller 3 (01:10:53):

I tried it on a couple of different occasions. I, well, I, I know when I was watching and I stopped it, stopped it for a few minutes, started again, it kept doing it. I finally gave up. Yeah. But it never happens on anything I've downloaded. And most of the time it doesn't happen. It's just once in a while,

Leo Laporte (01:11:07):

I'll watch the quiet man on my apple TV mail, my LG and C it might well be that it was encoded poorly. I mean, is an old movie. It might be that when, when they, you know, it can't happen in the, in the creation thereof. And at that, at that point, the, the delay would still help, you know, you're fixing the original source material.

Caller 3 (01:11:28):

Yeah, you gotta go in there and,

Leo Laporte (01:11:28):

But you gotta go in before you play the quiet man. You gotta go in, you gotta set the adjust, the no so forth.

Caller 3 (01:11:36):

Seems a bit dangerous.

Leo Laporte (01:11:37):

Yeah. Yeah. I, so that's, it can happen all along the chain. It can happen in coding. Once it comes down from the internet more internet speed won't well, if it, if it doesn't buffer, does it

Caller 3 (01:11:53):

Oh no, not

Leo Laporte (01:11:53):

Anymore. No, no. If we're buffering, maybe that would cause some UN you know, desynchronization, but as long as you have, you know, 50 megabits down or better, I think it's not gonna be an internet speed thing. I think it's,

Caller 3 (01:12:05):

I'm gonna stick to my stick to my current strategy,

Leo Laporte (01:12:08):

I guess, but you now know, but as long as you know what what's causing it, now you can kind try different things around it. Yeah. It, it fundamentally comes down to the, the audio coming in too quickly because it's working on the video still and even a couple of, you know, a frame would be enough for you to notice it. For sure.

Caller 3 (01:12:25):

Yeah.

Leo Laporte (01:12:26):

Hey, a pleasure talking to you. I hope you keep the radio station going.

Caller 3 (01:12:30):

We will try it.

Leo Laporte (01:12:31):

Thanks a lot. Electrical-Radio.Com,

Caller 3 (01:12:35):

Eclectic music and rock music, all mixed in there. It's fun, everybody. It's fun.

Leo Laporte (01:12:39):

It's fun. And apparently some cheesy jokes too. So

Caller 3 (01:12:44):

It possible Matthew cheese. Yeah. Matt. Geez. Yeah.

Leo Laporte (01:12:47):

Pleasure talking to you, Matt. Have a great day.

Caller 3 (01:12:49):

You too. So on.

Leo Laporte (01:12:50):

Thanks. Eighty eight eighty eight. Ask Leo the phone number. Chris mark. It's getting ready for his segment in about 15 minutes. Our photo guy will continue to take your calls, continue to talk tech, Leo Laport, the Tech guy who hates cars. I would love to give up my car.

Leo Laporte (01:13:18):

I want a bicycle to work every day, but it's, I'm scared to death of all the vehicles on the road. There's no safe way to do it. Thank you, Mike B. I don't think I get any credit for it though, but I'm glad you did glad you did. They stopped advertising at the end of the year. And I don't think they have any plans to come back. It's probably a good thing though. If they see that offer code, they'll go. Well, it could go either way. It could go, oh, see, we don't really need to advertise. People will still sign up for it or it could go, oh, we should get back on that show. We really did well with that show. <Laugh> oh, I'm sure it still works. <Laugh> I I did, for a long time, I did bike to work.

Leo Laporte (01:13:59):

I love my e-bike, but after the, the bridge that I go over, which has no bike lane to speak of after a guy got creamed, there there's a ghost bike on the bridge where he was killed by an errand driver. I I said, you know, this is, I need a big, a steel thing around me to go down these roads, which is very sad. That's the problem. And you know what you buy into cars, you create a an addiction. You create a need because people move far away. You got the suburbs, people live, you know, live their lives. If is this as if transportation is cheap and easy promise it isn't really cheap. Hey, this portion of The Tech Guy show brought to you by a great company we've been using for years Acronis. You've heard me talk about Aron's true image.

Leo Laporte (01:14:54):

I've recommended on the show for many years as the best way to make a digital image of your hard drive for backup, for security, for safety. Well, Acronis has enhanced Acronis, true image. They now call it Acronis cyber protect home office. And it does two things to protect your data. First of all, of course, good backups, very important. Aron's true image. Their imaging product makes it a perfect copy of your hard drive. Not just the data, but everything. The operating system, the apps that can be instantly restored. It just takes a couple of minutes. You can even restore individual files from the backup, and now Acronis allows you to store it locally and or on the Acronis cloud. So it's full cloud backup as well. That's fantastic, but they realize there's another threat to your data. And of course, cyber attacks, ransomware, all the little BCS and malware that can come in over the internet.

Leo Laporte (01:15:51):

So they've added protection for your data, cyber security data protection, all in one with Acronis, cyber protect home office, everything you need to safeguard your device. And I love this because it's not just windows. It's windows, it's Mac, it's Android, it's iOS back up what you want, where you want locally to the cloud, restore your entire system or individual files. You can restore it to the same hardware or new hardware. It's a great way to move to a new PC and take all your applications with you. You can create cloud to cloud backups too. This is something new. I love this of your Microsoft. 365 account. Get your entire outlook mailbox backed up your OneDrive and you don't have to download and upload it. It just side loads. It cloud to cloud from Microsoft's cloud to the Acronis cloud. This is brilliant. Plus the best advanced cyber security stop.

Leo Laporte (01:16:43):

Any cyber attack from damaging your data, your applications, your system, you can block attacks in real time before malware or ransomware, crypto jackers can cause damage find any hidden infections lurking on your system. I'll tell you why. This is nice. When you make a disc image, you're, you're copying everything, right? So you wanna really scan it first to make sure you're not copying any malware, not taking that along with you. That's why you need both reduce the cost, the complexity and risk of using multiple incompatible solutions. Get both great backup and great cyber threat protection. In one program, two click setup set and forget options means you'll spend less time fussing with it. You can just rest assured your entire digital world is protected with Acronis cyber protect home office. More than just a backup, more than just an antivirus peace of mind, knowing your devices and backups are protected.

Leo Laporte (01:17:36):

Your data is safe, accessible, private, authentic, and secure. It's yours. Man. Keep your digital world safe from all threats with the only cyber protection solution that delivers a unique integration of data protection and cybersecurity in one Acronis, cyber protect home office, formerly Acronis, true image visit go.acronis.com/techguy. That's go dot Acronis, a C R O N I s.com/tech guy. Thank you, Kronos for supporting the tech guy show. And by the way, you support us when you use that address. So they know you saw it here. Aros.Com/Tech guy, Leo Laporte tech guy, 88, 88. Ask Leo photo guy, Chris mark waltz. Ready? We'll be talking to him in just a few minutes. Let's take some more calls though. Before now, before then Paul on the line from Columbus, Ohio. Hello, Paul.

Caller 4 (01:18:29):

Hey Leo. Good to talk to you again. It's been a while. Well,

Leo Laporte (01:18:33):

Welcome back.

Caller 4 (01:18:34):

Thank you. I've got a pretty high speed internet. That's fairly consistent. It's used to be from wow. Wild. Oh yeah. Way out west. And they they've sold the company and now it's breeze line or something like that, but

Leo Laporte (01:18:50):

It's wireless

Caller 4 (01:18:51):

Massachusetts. No. No. Okay. Now it's it's it's cable. Okay. any anyway, so we've had pretty good service with them before, before they change ownership. And since except that on some couple apps like sling and Hulu during the evening, middle to late evening, we started having problems where it's buffering more and actually losing connection with the app. And we didn't have it to that degree at all before. And I'm just wondering, and I'm checking my speed. I'm using arrows. And it shows that it's up at least like in the 600 range down

Leo Laporte (01:19:33):

So that you have gigabit, you have gigabit connection with Bri line. Yes.

Caller 4 (01:19:37):

What they call gigabit. Right.

Leo Laporte (01:19:38):

Okay. So that's a good speed, but I'll tell you the symptom is not unusual because that's when everybody in your neighborhood is also streaming,

Caller 4 (01:19:49):

Right?

Leo Laporte (01:19:50):

And, and it really comes down to breeze line, putting in enough infrastructure into your neighborhood, the way cable systems work, everybody in a certain area is sharing a, a pipe back to breeze line. There's a, a head end somewhere in the neighborhood. And then all of you are coming off of that head end. And so the total amount of internet to that whole area is determined by that head end. And really the quality of your internet is gonna depend very much on how much the company is putting down into that head head end. And if they don't do enough, it works fine. As long as there are only a few of you online, but the minute everybody's watching Netflix at the same time, it says, I can't, I can't keep up.

Caller 4 (01:20:35):

Yeah. Well, I would understand that. And except that, except, and, and I know what you're saying. I totally agree. It's just frustrating that in the last couple of weeks or few weeks, since they bought it, it's Dr. It yeah. Changed

Leo Laporte (01:20:48):

Matic. So that's, I'm almost certainly what happened, which is that wow knew that that had end cuz you've got 32 neighbors or whatever needed, you know, a total of five gigabits in they, maybe they even had, they probably had a fiber connection to it. And then breeze line said, well, that's so expensive. Let's <laugh>, let's not do it now. You can, even, sometimes you can even do a test and it looks like the speed is still good. That's another trick ISPs play. Sometimes they call it burst mode where the first some packets, you know, the first hundred megabits megabytes come in very quickly, but the sustained throughput is considerably lower and speed tests will often miss that. So it may and sustain is what you care about. You're continually downloading. If you're watching a streaming TV, you know, 25 to 50 megabits now a gigabit connection, you should not be buffering.

Caller 4 (01:21:43):

Yeah, I know. Well, if it doesn't get better, I'm, I'll complain to the company. A lot of other people are having the same complaint in the area.

Leo Laporte (01:21:50):

It will be your NA all of your neighbors will have the same problem. Exactly. <laugh>

Caller 4 (01:21:54):

We'll just go back to spectrum for a year and a half until they raise the price again. Yeah.

Leo Laporte (01:21:59):

The other, the other thing is, you know, it may, it would be worth a call to breeze line, cuz it may well be that in the transition something's going on, that they plan to, they, they, they know certainly that that's happening cuz they can see it. So they may be say, they may, if you call 'em they say, yeah, yeah, yeah. We know I'm so sorry, but we're, we're arranging additional fiber connection from another company. We had it from, wow. But now we're going somebody else. And in the interim it's gonna be a little slow, but I promise you it'll get better in a week or whatever. They may have something to say about that.

Caller 4 (01:22:30):

Yeah. We'll keep our fingers crossed the,

Leo Laporte (01:22:32):

But you know, now, you know, what's going on and this is, you know, all internet is shared for a while. The telephone company was using this in their ads against the cable company. You know, they were calling, talking about bandwidth hogs because they said, look, it's shared internet and that's true. But it, the phone company is shared. It's just shared farther upstream at the phone company itself. And everybody, I think now realizes that the phone company's technologies over copper are, are gonna always be slower than fiber and cable fiber be the best. If somebody offers fiber in your neighborhood, then that's the way to go. But you're getting gigabit you know, either breeze line is can't SU support gigabit <laugh> and should stop selling it or they should fix it.

Caller 4 (01:23:19):

Yep.

Leo Laporte (01:23:20):

Righto. Yep. So now you, at least, you know, and now you're, you know, you're armed with that knowledge. I'm sorry it's happening. It's just, it's a pain. It's terrible. That's annoying. Randy Huntington beach, Leo Laport, the tech guy.

Caller 6 (01:23:36):

Hey there. Hey Randy, I'm wondering if search is broken.

Leo Laporte (01:23:42):

Well, what do you mean <laugh>?

Caller 6 (01:23:45):

Well, it seems like search is no longer designed to provide results, but to provide ads that are marginally related.

Leo Laporte (01:23:53):

You're talking about Google search particularly.

Caller 6 (01:23:55):

Yes. Yes. Well Google you know, I, I use duck dot go. I use Firefox and I'll put in, you know, minus Amazon black plus men's plus a hundred percent cotton socks. The first 2, 3, 4 results, five results are Amazon.

Leo Laporte (01:24:15):

Are they ads particularly? I mean, can you tell that they're ads, They're not labeled ads. They're just, that's what comes in,

Caller 6 (01:24:23):

Right? Yeah. I do it on a different computer. The first two are ads. The third one is Amazon. Fourth. One is Amazon. The fifth one finally gives me what I was looking for. So my conclusion is that search is intentionally broken, not to provide results for search anymore, but to, you know, try to force off products. You may be marginally interested in,

Leo Laporte (01:24:43):

Well, welcome to America, my friend, what do you have against capitalism?

Caller 6 (01:24:50):

Honesty.

Leo Laporte (01:24:50):

<Laugh> I I'm with you. I, I think Google, Google went a straight long ago when they started featuring you know, YouTube videos, their own stuff ahead of other people. And they excused those well. That's what people want, by the way, if you go to them today and said what you just said, they said what that, yeah, but that's what people want. They want Amazon. We're just giving you the search results you want. So really the problem isn't Google Randy, it's you because you <laugh> are not, you know, part of the, you know, you're not, you're not playing the game, right. You know, you go to Amazon, you know, that's, that's kind of, their rationale is we're giving you their goal is to give you the search results that most, that make will make most people happy that keeps 'em in business. That, and the fact that they're an advertising business, Google has tried so many things, all of which well, most of which have failed, except yeah, they don't, they don't have to succeed because they make so much money in ads. So they are an advertising company posing as a search company. Not much of a surprise, to be honest, it's Leo Laport, the tech guy. I, I don't know what the answer is. I mean, you tried duck do go, the problem is duck dot go, and they're working on this, but they don't have a very good database of links, you know? So they use a lot of Google links. They use Bing links and, and if you're using Google and Bing, you're gonna get all that, you know, ads

Caller 6 (01:26:17):

My best to ban Google and, and Bing and as much Microsoft as I can. And I'm trying to get away from the, the big five Eagle corporation. Good for you.

Leo Laporte (01:26:26):

Good for you. You're I mean, you're a smart user you do is in the plus and the minus and all of that. It doesn't work. Yeah. It's just, you, you think minus amazon.com would work. It may be, you know, and the other thing Google has done is if greatly simplified all those, we call those bullying search terms. They've, they've eliminated a lot saying, well, people don't use them, but again, I always suspect Google when they say, you know, we're just giving people what they want. Cause it coincides amazingly well with their business model.

Caller 6 (01:26:57):

It sure does.

Leo Laporte (01:26:58):

Yeah.

Caller 6 (01:27:00):

I had, I have another question. I have, have been unable to download windows 10 version 21 H one for a Lenovo laptop. Hmm. And it it's, my computer tells me your device was missing important security and quality fix.

Leo Laporte (01:27:16):

Well, listen to them because you, you know what you don't want it is to install it. And it doesn't, it doesn't work <laugh>. Yeah. They are, they, you know, we were talking about this on windows weekly on Wednesday, Microsoft said 21 H one is designated for broad deployment, which means, in other words, it is now the widely D deployed version of 10 you know, the standard version of 10, because most people, most incompatibility issues have been solved, but not all. Yeah. And, and you may have a driver that's just, or a piece of hardware. That's just not compatible

Caller 6 (01:27:54):

For. It could be for 21 and you may have, it works great. Except for this update. I don't understand it.

Leo Laporte (01:27:59):

Well, you get, are you getting the, the critical security updates cuz that's really the most important thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Caller 6 (01:28:04):

I thinks something else downloaded and functioned except for this one. And I've tried going direct for it and it it, it says it downloads, it says it installs and then it doesn't then it says, Hey, you're missing important security and quality fixes.

Leo Laporte (01:28:18):

And it doesn't, and it's not specific as to what you're missing.

Caller 6 (01:28:23):

It gives me where is it? It gives me a, there's an error as well. Let me see if I can find the error cuz a little hex error, which I'm not sure anybody can ever translate. I mean, is, is there a, a, a rationale behind the X error?

Leo Laporte (01:28:38):

No, no, those are useless to anybody, but the developer I'm gonna put in the show notes, I just pasted it into chat, a link to a computer world article by a woman who styles herself, the Microsoft patch lady who talks about issues, the 21 H one. This is a year old, but there are, there are some specific things you may want to that you may find that you can fix. The other thing to do is I think wait, and it will eventually clear itself up usually.

Caller 6 (01:29:10):

Yeah. That's what I thought I was doing. <Laugh>

Leo Laporte (01:29:12):

Yeah. Last year. Yeah. 21 H one is last years. Yeah.

Caller 6 (01:29:15):

Yeah.

Leo Laporte (01:29:17):

You might you know, well, I mean short of, I mean you could, you could do a windows reset that and that might fix it. Sometimes the updates get blocked by a failed update. That's getting in the way, things like that. That's why if we could figure out what's blocking, you might be able to fix it. The other way to do that is do a, do a reset, which is now available to you. Yeah. And see if that fixes it.

Caller 6 (01:29:42):

I just bought another, I bought a laptop finally. And with windows 11 and I, it appears from my reading is that with windows 11, you can install Android apps. Yes. Is that real,

Leo Laporte (01:29:59):

Very limited subset of Android apps, but yes, ah, there and they come from the Amazon store, which you're gonna laugh. Yeah. I gotta run. Isn't that ironic? It all comes back to Amazon. It's time for our photo guy. My personal photo sensei, Chris mark watch@sensei.photo. He joins us every week. A great photo coach, great photographer in his own. Right. And an inspiration to all of us to get out there and take some pictures. Hello Chris,

Chris Marquardt (01:30:32):

Hey, how's it going

Leo Laporte (01:30:33):

Today? It's going very well. How are things in your neck of the woods?

Chris Marquardt (01:30:39):

It is beautiful. We had such a sunny day after a couple of days of Springs. I think, I think Germany, Germany did have a tornado of all things, which is very unusual for Germany. Yeah. Someplace spring is I was wild, but

Leo Laporte (01:30:55):

In areas where it gets icy and cold, you really appreciate the the change in the

Chris Marquardt (01:31:00):

Seasons. Yeah.

Chris Marquardt (01:31:02):

And it, and it drives me and others out to take photos. And of course of course that, that brings me to one of the basics of photography that we wanna talk about today and that is focus and bouquet because that is kind of important. I mean, but the, the simple thing about focusing and, and your camera will do that for you. It'll most cameras just do that, but if you' a bit more photography inclined, you might wanna control that because sometimes the camera gets it wrong. And the, I mean, we've all seen these photos here about, let me put one on the screen of something in focus, in something out of focus, right? There's the focus is very well. It's very helpful to separate the important from the less important in the picture. And usually the out focus stuff is the stuff that is not as important in this case, someone's holding a flower and that one isn't focus and everything behind that is out focus. The further way it is. The more out of focus it is.

Leo Laporte (01:32:06):

I always think of that as a, as a key attribute of professional photography. You know, if it's a portrait and your face is in focus and the background's all blurry, I go, oh, that's a pro

Chris Marquardt (01:32:19):

That's. What, what used to be the, the prerogative of professional cameras? They have bigger sensors, they have bigger lenses. They can do this easily. And the smaller cameras with the smaller sensors had a bit of a hard time. Now today, smartphones are simulating this with what's called the the portrait mode. So you have that now in different kind of phones that didn't really used to have that. So that focal plane, this is a, like, like a plane in, in the, in, in space, parallel to the camera. And then the further away you go from that, the, the more out of focus it goes, and that has to do with aperture. Like how big is that aperture? The, the bigger that hole in the lens is the aperture. The, the more out of focus the background goes also has to do with the focal length.

Chris Marquardt (01:33:09):

If you have a telephoto lens, that's easier to throw the background out of focus, as opposed to a wide angle lens. And then the distance, the closer you are at something think macro, right? You're really up close to something. The closer you are, the more the background goes out of focus. Now there's different. Interesting things about focus are about the bouquet, the stuff that's out of focus. And that is the shape of the BIE. And that is determined by several things. One is where in the, in the frame, it is, you can see this here on the, on the shot. There's like little BKI discs in the background and the ones towards the edge of the frame, they look like, like, like, like squashed circles, right? So you

Leo Laporte (01:33:53):

See you're in Germany, depending lens. You don't know those look like footballs. Okay. Footballs,

Chris Marquardt (01:33:59):

No, you know what? They look like. They look like lentils <laugh>

Leo Laporte (01:34:02):

And

Chris Marquardt (01:34:02):

That in Germany in, and the reason I'm saying this, because in German lens and lentil is the same word,

Leo Laporte (01:34:09):

Lenticular, Solen

Chris Marquardt (01:34:12):

Particular. Exactly.

Leo Laporte (01:34:14):

Oh, so that's interesting. It's a lens

Chris Marquardt (01:34:17):

Saved. Yeah. There's, there's weird. Yeah. There's weird lenses that do that make really crazy bouquet. This one is called a swirly bouquet. Some people modify lenses to exaggerate that,

Leo Laporte (01:34:28):

See, that looks that's trippy looking. And of course you got a mushroom in the foreground. It is. So it's perfect, but <laugh>,

Chris Marquardt (01:34:34):

It,

Leo Laporte (01:34:34):

It isn't fit. I like the little dots better than the swirls to me. Just aesthetically.

Chris Marquardt (01:34:39):

Yeah. The, the swirls and, and then some, some of it. Oh, that's okay. Well, the there's discussions about aesthetics of it's too. It's too Dotty. This one you've well, it, it has sharp edges, even that the edges are, are kind of brighter than the center of those discs, the out focus discs. And some people don't like that, cuz it makes the background more busy looking. This is

Leo Laporte (01:35:01):

Caused by the, the, the structure of the lens. Right?

Chris Marquardt (01:35:05):

Exactly. The design of the lens, how that is put together, how many elements are in there, what the aperture looks like and so on. Here's an example of like a Boca, like lenses are known to make very soft and greeny silkies smooth. Boke

Leo Laporte (01:35:20):

Love my Lius. Yes. That's why. Yeah, not perfect. Boke

Chris Marquardt (01:35:24):

It's it's generally perceived as nice bouquet, but it is expensive Boke as well. Yes. You pay for it.

Leo Laporte (01:35:30):

Why is it because they have more leaves in the shutter? Is that why it's so

Chris Marquardt (01:35:36):

Crisp? No, it's it's it comes down to the lens designed it's to the, to the precision of the lens. There are other, by the way, there are non like lenses that are as good, but they are harder to find. Yeah. Yeah. There's a donut shape. Bouquet. In this picture, you can see the background being little rings.

Leo Laporte (01:35:53):

The problem with this is it's distracting, right?

Chris Marquardt (01:35:56):

It is very distracting. Yeah. And that comes from, from mirror optics. There are certain lenses that work like telescopes. So mirror optics will create donut shape buckets and nothing you can do about it. So those are usually used like as a telescope to, to shoot stars. But that person tried to shoot a bird with it. And the bouquet is, yeah. I would say <laugh> quite distracting to be honest. And then of course the bouquet typically is, is the area behind the subject. That's in focus, but there's also a front bouquet, like stuff that's in front of the subject. Usually it looks nicer when the foreground is not that visible, but now there's a trend where people put more and more things in the foreground. And I, to be honest, I kinda like it. So nothing wrong with that. And then B okay.

Chris Marquardt (01:36:52):

And focus. They have of course a function as well. And that's to make, to make it clear what the subject is in the photo. The thing that's in focus is typically the thing that people are gonna give attention to. So it's an attention management device. Bre out focus backgrounds can be used to declutter the background. Like if it's very busy and distracts from your subject, then throwing it out. Focus is a good idea. And then the shape of the aperture in your lens will also reflect in the B here's. What is that? He HETA hexagonal. I don't know.

Leo Laporte (01:37:33):

1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Sectagon I dunno.

Chris Marquardt (01:37:36):

<Laugh> and if you, if you put a little piece of cardboard in front, your lens with a little heart cut out, you can make heart shaped. Oh, okay. So there it is. Boke is is something to learn about and to play with, if you have a bigger c