Grazia Maria Cosima Damiana Deledda (27 September 1871 – 15 August 1936), also known in Sardinian language as Gràssia or Gràtzia Deledda (pronounced [ˈɡɾa(t)si.a ðɛˈlɛɖːa]), was an Italian writer who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1926 "for her idealistically inspired writings which with plastic clarity picture the life on her native island [i.e. Sardinia] and with depth and sympathy deal with human problems in general". She was the first Italian woman to receive the prize, and only the second woman in general after Selma Lagerlöf was awarded hers in 1909.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Grazia Deledda has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Imaginative, Practical, Confident, Energetic, Kind, Creative, and Intuitive.

Intelligent and Inquisitive

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Grazia Deledda is someone who is an intelligent, inquisitive, and imaginative person, who is practical, considerate, kind, and diplomatic in dealings with others. A person who is known for being a good communicator.

Passionate and Intense

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Grazia Deledda well know them as someone who can be passionate, proud, and intense, like the sun or a blazing fire.

Imaginative and Sentimental

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Grazia Deledda as someone who is imaginative, sentimental, and in touch with emotions.

A person who has extremely good memory and analytical skills, likes to make sure that everyone gets along, enjoys all kinds of situations and people, has a talent for travel and languages, and who makes lifelong friends.

Wise and Deep

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Grazia Deledda is someone who tends to have an internal innate wisdom, and who people tend to see as an "old soul".

They are also someone who is calm, comforting, and stable, and who loves stability and being a good friend and loyal partner.

Justice-seeking and Peaceful

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Grazia Deledda tends to be someone who loves peace and is ready to go to any costs to achieve it. Who has a taste for the good things in life, tends to be a good organizer, has a thirst for knowledge, and who tends to have the respect of friends and acquaintances.

Some of Grazia Deledda's challenges

While Grazia Deledda has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Grazia Deledda can be Arrogant, Hesitant, Narcissistic, Indecisive, Unrealistic, Status-seeking, and Irritable.

Hesitant and Narcissistic

One of Grazia Deledda's key challenges is that they are someone who can be hesitant and narcissistic.

Grazia Deledda must also exercise caution as they can have a hard time reconciling wants and needs, and can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Irritable and Moody

Grazia Deledda is someone who can be irritable and moody, have a tendency to experience self-doubt, be too secretive, can take too many risks, and who can have an extreme approach to managing personal finances.

Pleasure-seeking and Indecisive

Finally, Grazia Deledda also can put others first too much, and hem-and-haw too much when making a decision.