Alright, my 'Imaginary Music Career':

I am 'The Talented One' in a very successful five-piece girlband. I do most of the lead vocals and I also write ALL of the songs. The lyrics are full of puns and hidden references. Actually there wouldn't even be a band without me, considering that the whole thing was my idea and I chose the members.

The other members are nice girls and good friends of mine, but musically they have nothing on me. When we split up, I'm sure they'll be dancing on ice before you know it. I don't think any of them will ever steal my thunder, but when one of them starts dating a footballer I think I'll start worrying.

I've been slagged off by Elly Jackson, Liam Gallagher and the Arctic Monkeys, but I don't give a rat's arse! Also, I always hit back and don't take crap from anyone.

The music is a mixture of massive up-tempo old school pop anthems and epic ballads. We've had five number ones so far. Album number three was our most successful one.

There are no covers and no collaborations with rappers on our albums. We don't use autotune.

At the moment I have plans to launch a solo career, but I'm NOT leaving the band! Unlike my predecessors, I will do everything I can to avoid 'the lead singer curse'! My album won't be half-arsed or boring. I'm a perfectionist, all of the songs will sound like hits, but they won't be generic. I might include some collaborations with flop artists on the album to revive a few careers.

Tesco called a while ago and offered me a deal, but I turned them down...

Ok, back to reality now...

(Some of this is copied from the "Weird" thread.)

There are days were I act out my popstar life. I'm basically the male answer to Gaga. I'm absolutely huge in the UK and every track on my debut album is similar to the standards of Poker Face, Hot N Cold etc (aka mindless hits), and my second album is a bit tougher with standards like Dance in the Dark and Cannibal.

I actually created my own album and track titles. It's called No Regrets and some of the songs are called: The Adventure, Murder (Children)*, Legend, Comeback, This Summer, Beach Party etc. The songs themselves sound like Teenage Dream (album) x The Fame Monster. Amazing.

*Murder (Children) isn't actually about murdering children, just a bold, controversial title with the two words found in the chorus, but not together.

One of my favourite lyrics that I created is "The heart beats on the left side, I guess that's why it's not always right". Get it? Haha I love that song!