Singer, Yoko Ono is a winner of 2001 Grammy Awards. She is a multi-talented person from Japan. Besides her singing career, she is best known for being the wife and widow of the music legend John Lennon and also an artist and peace activist. Yoko Ono is popular in the world from her own album, .

Yoko Ono's early life

Yoko Ono was from the upper-class family born in Tokyo, Japan to Isoko Ono (Ono Isoko) and Eisuke Ono (Ono Eisuke). She is Japanese and she is of Japanese descent.

SOURCE: Pinterest

She attended Gakushuin University in Tokyo but later transferred to Sarah Lawrence College in New York City.

Yoko Ono's career

She began her musical career since 1961. Since the start of her professional musical career, Yoko Ono has released a total of 14 albums.

Yoko Ono's married life and divorce

Yoko Ono is a widow of John Lennon after his death at the end of 1980. They had a son together named, Sean Lennon.

Before she got married to John Lennon, she was married twice. She was first married to Toshi Ichiyanagi. Toshi Ichiyanagi is a great Japanese composer.

They got married in 1956 and finally dissolved their marriage in 1962. It seems like her extramarital affairs were the main reason for her divorce with her first husband as she was soon married to Anthony Cox.

But this married life was annulled less than a year. This happened because her divorce was not finalized with Toshi Ichiyanagi.

After this divorce was finalized, she then again married Anthony Cox. She also has a child with him. From her singing career, she earned a huge amount of salary.

Yoko Ono's net worth

Her net worth is rumored to be around dollars. The market price of Yoko Ono's West Village Penthouse bought in 2013 is estimated to be .

Yoko Ono won prize money worth of from Oskar Kokoschka Prize in 2012. She sold a cover photo of the album at a price of .

She also released a couple of albums during her musical career. Some of Yoko Ono's earnings from her record units are given below:

Unfinished Music No.1: Two Virgins (1968):

Unfinished Music No.2: Life (1969):

Rising (1996):

Blueprint for a Sunrise (2001):

ncG1vNJzZmiekaK8tr%2FSrZirnJ%2Bie6S7zGiwqKOfYryvuw%3D%3D