Celebrities sharing their families with the world is one of the strangest effects of fame. While celebrity moms and dads revel in their children's milestones more than anyone else, their fans can’t help but feel a sort of parental pride, too. This has been the case for Mecca White, Persia White's daughter.

Mecca White is a celebrity child who has built her career through hard work and commitment. She has attended several film schools and released her productions. In addition, the budding actress has a sizeable online following, where she enjoys posting pictures with her dog.

Mecca White's profile summary

Full name: Mecca Morgan White

Nickname: Mecca White

Gender: Female

Date of birth: 7th October 1995

Birth sign: Libra

Place of birth: Los Angeles, California, United States

Age: 26 years (as of 2021)

Nationality: American

Ethnicity: Mixed-race

Eye colour: Blue

Hair colour: Dark brown with blonde highlights

Weight: 50 kg

Height: 5 feet 4 inches

Body measurements: 34-24-34

Sexual orientation: Straight

Religion: Christianity

Mecca White's father: Saul Williams

Mother: Persia White

Step-father: Joseph Morgan

Relationship status: Single

Children: None

Education: The Lond Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts, Sanford Meisner Center, New York Film Academy, and Los Angeles Film School

Profession: American actress, director, and producer

Net worth: $700K

Instagram: @meccawhitelion

Quick facts about Mecca White

Mecca White is widely recognized for her career in film and being the daughter of celebrity parents Persia White and Joseph Morgan. But, is there more to the celebrity kid? Here is everything you need to know about her real father and other interesting quick facts.

1. Her real father is Saul Williams

Is Mecca White Joseph Morgan's daughter? Unfortunately, no. Morgan is not Mecca's biological father. It is alleged that her biological father is Saul Williams. He is a talented rapper, singer, and songwriter from the United States.

Unfortunately, her father and mother separated in 2009 when she was 14 years old. After the separation, her mother married British actor and filmmaker, Joseph Morgan who is now Mecca's stepdad. She took up his name and thus goes by the moniker Mecca Morgan White.

2. She was born and raised in Los Angeles

Mecca Persia White was born on 7th October 1995 in Los Angeles, California, USA. She holds an American nationality and mixed ethnicity. Mecca White's ethnicity is a mixture of American Indian, Africana, and European.

She attended The Lond Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts, Battery Place, New York, and Sanford Meisner Center. After completion, she enrolled at the New York Film Academy. White was a student of The Los Angeles Film School, where she graduated in 2016 with a Degree in Film/Cinema/ Video Studies.

3. Mecca has worked on various projects in the entertainment industry

Mecca has accomplished so much within a short period in the industry. She attributes her success to her family (more so her mother and step-father) who worked extra hard to immerse her in the world of art, film, and laughter. She also took a course that helped in pushing her even higher.

She has featured in the comedic TV pilot Juice Truck as the writer and director. Mecca also worked on the short film crew, Carousel, directed by his step-father, Joseph Morgan. Some of her other appearances are:

2002 - Girlfriends as Savannah

2017 - Carousel as the Cashier

2018 - Juice Truck as Alex

2019 - Iconic as Niki

2021 - Dhar Mann as Court Spectator 1

4. She is the daughter of celebrity parents

Persia White's mother is a Bahamas-born American actress, singer, and musician. She is recognized for starring as Lynn Searcy on Girlfriends between 2000 and 2008. She is also a member of the XEO3 music band and a solo singer who released her debut album titled Mecca in 2009.

Her biological father, Saul Stacey Williams, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, musician, poet, writer, and actor. He is recognized for his unique blending of poetry and alternative hip hop to produce a masterpiece. Saul also took lead roles in the independent film Slam (1998) and the jukebox musical Holler If Ya Hear Me (2013).

Her step-father, Joseph Morgan, is a talented British actor and director. He is famously known for starring as Niklaus Mikaelson on the CW'S, The Vampire Diaries, and his lead role in its spin-off, The Originals.

5. Mecca is a vegan like her mother

Mecca is a vegan like her mother. She regularly holds conversations centring on veganism on her social media platforms. Similarly, her mother is a vegan, a human and animal rights advocate, and an environmentalist.

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) honoured her as 2005 Humanitarian of the Year. She is also a board member of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society.

6. Her mother has been married twice

Mecca's mother, Persia, was first married to Saul Williams on 29th February 2008. The couple exchanged their wedding vows after dating for over five years. The couple first met when Saul made a guest appearance on Girlfriends.

On 17th January 2009, Persia announced through her Myspace blog that she and Saul were no longer together. Saul married actress Anisia Uzeyman and lived in Paris for four years before relocating to Los Angeles, where he currently resides.

Persia moved on and remarried actor Joseph Morgan after the divorce. Persia and Morgan first met on the set of The Vampire Diaries. They started dating in 2011 and got engaged in 2015. They walked down the aisle on 5th July 2014 in Ocho Rios, Jamaica.

7. She has a good relationship with her step-father

Mecca found a father figure in Joseph Morgan, with whom they have a good relationship. The two have seemingly developed a great bond since Morgan entered Mecca and her mother’s life. He even adopted her and gave her his name, which Mecca has used as her middle moniker.

Mecca White has built quite a good resume for a film and art lover. She developed a passion for the movies thanks to the influence from her mother, Persia and step-father, Morgan. With the effort she is putting in, the future looks promising.

Tuko.co.ke shared an interesting article about Marta Fitzgerald. Rush Limbaugh's fans are familiar with Marta Fitzgerald. She is the ex-wife of the late American radio presenter, television host, and political analyst. Additionally, she was known for being an aerobic instructor.

Marta Fitzgerald was the third woman Rush Limbaugh married. They married Rush in 1990 but divorced ten years later. She has been married before, but this marriage ended in divorce too.

Source: TUKO.co.ke