There have been 114 winners of the Nobel Prize in Literature to date,

with 10 from the German-speaking world.

1. Theodor Mommsen (bold)

The first was Theodor Mommsen in 1902, one of the most important historians of the 19th century and the second-ever winner of the literary award. He received the award for his three-volume work “History of Rome,” which has maintained its relevance for historians through the present day. His positive portrayal of Emperor Julius Caesar influenced German research for nearly a century. It took Mommsen more than 30 years to write his comprehensive work.

2. Gerhart Hauptmann (bold)

His first play, the social drama “Before Sunrise” about a rich farming family’s downfall through alcoholism, unleashed tumult at its debut in the Berlin Lessing Theater in 1889. The dramatist received the Nobel

Prize in 1912 “primarily in recognition of his fruitful, varied and outstanding production in the realm of dramatic art.”

3. Thomas Mann (bold)

Thomas Mann also received the Nobel Prize for his exceptionally encompassing work “Buddenbrooks.” The two-volume first edition remained relatively ignored. It wasn’t until two years later, with the publication of the single-volume second edition that Mann achieved his breakthrough. Even then, it took another 26 years until the Nobel committee awarded Mann the prestigious prize for “Buddenbrooks.”

4. Hermann Hesse (bold)

Hermann Hesse, won the prize in 1946, for his inspired writings, which while growing in boldness and penetration, exemplify the classical humanitarian ideals and high qualities of style.

5. Henrich Böll (bold)

Heinrich Böll received the award in 1972 for his entire body of work, which critically examined the young post-WWII Federal Republic of German. His most famous work, the novel “The Lost Honor of Katharina

Blum” (1974), grapples with the sensation-seeking tabloid press.

6. Günter Grass (bold)

Günter Grass received the same award seven years later, though he did not receive the Nobel Prize until 1999 for his life’s works. In the opinion of the 1999 Nobel committee, Grass’ “frolicsome black fables portray the forgotten face of history.” He made his mark on the German post-WWII literary canon with the Danzig Trilogy: “The Tin Drum” (1959), “Cat and Mouse” (1961) and “Dog Years” (1963).

7. Herta Müller (bold)

The most recent German-speaking Nobel Prize recipient is Herta Müller, who won in 2009. The Nobel jury described Müller as an author, “who, with the concentration of poetry and the frankness of prose, depicts

the landscape of the dispossessed.”

8. Gerhart Hauptmann (bold)

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1912 was awarded to Gerhart Hauptmann “primarily in recognition of his fruitful, varied and outstanding production in the realm of dramatic art”.

9. Nelly Sachs (bold)

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1966 was given Nelly Sachs “for her outstanding lyrical and dramatic writing, which interprets Israel’s destiny with touching strength”.

10. Elfriede Jelinek (bold)

The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004 was awarded to Elfriede Jelinek “for her musical flow of voices and counter-voices in novels and plays that with extraordinary linguistic zeal reveal the absurdity of society’s clichés and their subjugating power”.

Author: Taniya Walia at L2L Academy