This past week Clive Barker’s final directorial effort Lord of Illusions turned twenty-three. To celebrate the occasion, I wanted to share an older interview with actor Scott Bakula that he did with the website ScreenRealm back in 2016. While most of the conversation centers around the popular show Quantum Leap, he had some very kind words to say about working with Clive and the movie itself. As many of our listeners know, he played the popular occult-detective Harry D’Amour. The one and only Harry D’Amour for me.

The Reel Word: If we’ve got time for one quick non-Quantum Leap-related question, I was wondering what your experience of working on the Clive Barker movie Lord of Illusions was like? Was that a conscious decision to do something a lot darker, after the more upbeat Quantum Leap?

Scott Bakula: I think that was part of it, but to be totally honest, I loved that script. I didn’t know Clive – I knew Hellraiser and everything – but I didn’t really know that much about Clive. And we got in a room together and I just adored him, and I adored his talents. He’s an amazingly gifted person, and he directed it, which was spectacular. He wrote it and his whole artistic world was wrapped up in that environment, and it was wonderful. It was a very difficult shoot, it was very hard to make. Oddly enough, I just worked with one of the actors who I hadn’t seen in twenty-one years or so and he just wrapped up today and he was like, “I was in Lord of Illusions with you”. So yeah, I thought it was a great movie, I thought it came out really well.

He also talked about how close they came to filming a sequel (that was going to be called Vipex) and how it was sadly cancelled at the last minute because the studio United Artist was sold off and the project fell into legal matters. That’s what seems to happen to a lot of Clive Barker properties.

To read the rest of the interview click on the link below:

https://screenrealm.com/exclusive-interview-scott-bakula-talks-quantum-leap/

Thanks to David Anderson and ScreenRealm