There’s no one answer to that. There are many different paths to getting signed. The old school, traditional way is that an A&R goes out and scouts artists. The romanticized idea of it is they go out to bars and clubs and see a band, they have a vision for the band, “this is gonna be the next Rolling Stones or Nirvana or whoever,” and they bring it back to the label.

They get the label all excited about it, they do a deal, then they develop. That’s the old way, that rarely ever happens.

Now, more and more artists are doing it without the labels. The artist and their team are the ones doing the development side of things. Labels now have the tools to be much more research-based, more data-centric, where we can see that an artist is bubbling on TikTok, for instance. Several years ago it was SoundCloud. A few years before that it was in the blogosphere. An artist just getting the right attention from the consumer directly: that’s the model that’s been built in the last ten to fifteen years.

When a label and A&R can see that there’s an audience in demand of something, that’s a huge advantage. It’s never been clearer than it is nowadays with things like social media, Instagram, back to TikTok, and streaming that show pretty much to the minute where people are tuning in and finding artists and really getting the experience of what an artist’s life is like. They’re much more exposed than they were twenty or thirty years ago.

There are different ways. I grew up around a time where, in the ‘90s, you’d read up on people getting signed, as I said, from an elevator, or L.A. Reid locking you into a room and pretty much not letting you leave because he wanted to sign you. Reading all those stories … that was super exciting to me.

Nowadays, it’s not like that. But I do believe some labels still have that old-school mentality and a way of being like, “Hey, you’re gonna sign today. But let’s put Lawyers, let’s put Managers, Executives, CEOs on the phone. Let’s figure this deal out.” I believe that still happens because it’s so competitive now.

Anything can just go up in streams within a day, within a few hours. Every label is looking at the same thing. A lot of labels are either looking at the same thing on a competitive route or looking at things that they can actually bring in and do artist development with.

The way of getting people signed is, of course, you get in contact with the A&R or the A&R reaches out or just stumbles across you, and then the A&R sets up a meeting. So on that level, you meet the artist, and then from there you report back to your team and let them know the meeting went well. Go to the A&R meeting and play it. Get people buying into it.

Then, depending on the structure of the label and your position, you put an executive into play, or you put people from the team into play to close in the deal. And then from there, you talk to Attorneys, see what the terms are, and it goes back and forth until the negotiation where the artist and team come to terms and sign off.

The competitive stuff is super competitive because you have things that are really high in streams. Like, this song can be doing a million streams a day, and that’s competitive. People are gonna wanna get that. Those recording deals can start off at a million dollars.

I think a standard recording deal now is around $500,000. That’s for artist development. So it can be extremely competitive, especially when all different labels are on it. When you get artists earlier, the number isn’t as competitive. The artist is valuable, of course—when you’re signing an artist, you see extreme value. You see growth, you see stuff that you can actually do on the artist development side. You’re thinking more long-term.

A lot of the time now, artists want ownership, and some artists don’t even want to go to a label so soon. They might want to be indie and “run their plays up,” as they like to say, and then come to a label. When other labels get into the conversation, the value goes up, extremely.

So I would say it’s very competitive. Especially when you have artists that are growing that people are extremely excited for, that you can hear outside your house, see on platforms, things of that sort.

It’s not hard. I think if you do all the things I said before, nine out of ten times, the labels are going to come to you. Find out who your audience is and embrace them, no matter if it’s ten, twenty, or thirty people. They’re going to be your biggest supporters and advocates. When someone is excited about an artist, they’re quick to tell their friends. So that peer-to-peer endorsement or peer-to-peer cosign is still the most important part of promoting an artist.

If I have a friend who listens to the same kind of music that I do and he says, “Hey, listen to so and so,” I’m going to do so. And I would have done so when I was fourteen or fifteen years old. My best friend on the first day of seventh grade said, “Hey man, do you listen to Wu-Tang?” and I was like, “Yeah,” and we became best friends because of that. That seems to be universal in people’s lives.

My advice to an artist would be to embrace your audience and cater to them. I think a lot of artists find it difficult to understand how important they are to their fanbase. Or because it’s not a large number, they overlook it.

But again, if there are twenty people and you continue to feed that audience, to engage that audience: that’s going to be your support team. The Beliebers and whatever Ariana’s calling her fanbase, they started somewhere. Trust me, that continues to multiply and grow as time goes on.

We always say, once you’re signed, that’s when the real work happens. Everybody puts so much emphasis on getting signed. They’re like, “Oh, I’ve made it,” and no, no you haven’t made it yet. There’s so much work going into being signed and after the fact of being signed. You can’t expect a record company to come in and wave a magic wand and turn you into the next pop star. It just doesn’t happen that way.

You have to remember that the artist did something right to get signed. Don’t underestimate that; what has worked, has worked to a point and caught the attention of a record company. At that point, an artist should have fans.

If an artist has a project that they want to work on, A&R is the first person to work with them and put them in the studio. Getting them Producers they maybe haven’t had access to before, getting them Writers they couldn’t collaborate with before, creating music.

Then once that’s done, we sit collectively with the artist and the artist’s team to figure out: how do we go into the marketplace with this? Who do we have to identify with? Who do we have to target? Is there a song that stands out in the bunch, or is this more of an experience project where maybe it’s ten songs and it doesn’t really hold a single? Will the audience embrace that? We live in a very “give it to me now” generation where things get tuned out very quickly.

Do we go to DSPs with a full project or do we do an EP? EPs have come to life after many years of not being existent because they’re shorter projects. They’re quicker to consume. They get the message through. It’s still the same quality music. It’s a good way to introduce the artist to a fanbase who hasn’t normally tuned in there.

There are many questions that come up when an artist gets signed onto a label. Maybe they have a song that’s resonating at the moment, and as a result, it got them signed to the label. Maybe you take that song and promote it up to a point where it sees more eyes and gets more ears than the artist has gotten up to that point.

Maybe the song hasn’t worked on radio. Radio is still a very huge component of introducing fans to music. There’s a lot of people who spend a good amount of time per day in the car. So hearing a song on the radio is still very much a way to introduce people to them.

Some artists don’t even see radio. That’s why it’s important to see who the people are who are consuming your music. Who are the fans that are embracing this artist? A fan who’s listening to Ariana Grande on the radio may not be the same fan that’s listening to Snoh Aalegra on DSPs. A fan who’s listening to Tyler, the Creator may not be the same fan that’s listening to Drake.

You have to know who you’re dealing with. Artists like The Weeknd have gone from being this very mysterious, underground personality with a cult following to having a bigger commercial following and now playing the Super Bowl. It’s a matter of figuring those things out once an artist gets signed to a label.

Well, I’m always gonna refer back to the traditional route. A&R stands for artists and repertoire. Back in the days of Motown, The Supremes, The Temptations, all these guys … they had a house: [Motown Founder Berry] Gordy built a house for artist development. He would teach them how to walk, how to eat, how to perform, and how to look. That’s the stage of artist development: taking someone and slowly making them into a star. So, the next step after someone gets signed is supposed to be artist development.

When you take an artist that’s already streaming, you’re hoping that artist already has a project. They should be like, “I’m gonna drop X, Y, and Z,” and be ready to have those talks with management and know their game plan. Because, especially on the hip hop side, Rappers are constantly coming out with music, constantly coming out with content. So you’re thinking very differently when you sign them. They already have music that they want to release.

The label might have signed an artist because of a single or something. A lot of things are coming in single-heavy these days. A single is going crazy and labels are going after it.

TikTok is one of those platforms that can get things really moving. Young teens, they’re listening to these things, and adults are getting on these things, too. Older people are getting into it. It’s really exciting. The music industry is shifting and being like, “Hey, we need to look at that, too.” So there are different ways for artists to come in.

But it should start with the artist development phase. You signed that artist because of that single, but you’re working with that artist on their craft, their music, finding Producers, Writers, Vocalists, whatever you think the artist needs. You’re working on a project and adding different elements to really enhance it, and then planning from there.

Working with the marketing team; working with the digital team; working with a commerce team. Thinking about, what’s the vision? What’s the message of the artist? How do we roll this out and put it into the world? Having a pre-plan and a post-plan is very important. A lot of times, people release things without having a plan after that.

There are different types of artists coming in. They’re not all in development. The majority of them already have music out, already got themselves moving. So they’re coming to a label saying, “I wanna do this project next month,” and we need to get it cleared and processed, get Producers and all that stuff. Mixing, mastering, side artists, all that stuff.

We need a marketing plan, digital plan, commerce plan, we need to decide what the content rollout looks like. We need to ask ourselves, what other opportunities do we have for the artist? And figure out grassroots marketing, because, for a street artist, you have to cater to that audience.

If the artist is more commercial, what is radio looking like? What’s the radio plan? What’s the impact date? So there’s a lot. You have to look at it from all different angles: what kind of artist are they, and where are they at in their career? Because A&R can play many different roles.