Takeaway is popularly used to mean the main thing you’ve learned, will remember, or need to take action on after having been presented with information, such as during a meeting or in a report.

Take away is a common phrasal verb that’s used in a lot of contexts, and takeaway as a noun has a lot of different meanings. It’s sometimes spelled take-away.

In the U.K., takeaway is the word for what Americans call takeout—food picked up from a restaurant to eat elsewhere, typically at home. It can also refer to the restaurant where you get it.

In hockey and American football, a takeaway happens when the puck or ball is somehow taken away from the opposing team.

Example: The biggest takeaway from the intern meeting was to not post pictures or videos on social media that could reflect badly on the company.

As a phrasal verb, take away has been in use since at least the 1400s, but the first records of the noun takeaway come from the 1900s.

In the sense of a main idea or point that you take away from something, takeaway is popularly used in business, especially in the context of meetings and presentations. The takeaways from a meeting are the one or two things you leave having learned or knowing that you now need to do. But takeaways can also come from any source of information that’s been presented to you. The takeaways from a news article will probably be the main facts you’ve learned from it.

Takeaway is also used in the context of business to refer to something that is taken away—removed—from an employee contract, such as certain benefits.

In the U.K., takeaway is the food you pick up, as in I don’t feel like cooking tonight—let’s get some takeaway. To get the takeaway, you go to the takeaway. (In American English, takeout is most often used as a noun, as in Let’s get some takeout. It can be used as an adjective referring to the type of restaurant, but not by itself—you would say, “Let’s get something from the takeout place,” not “Let’s get something from the takeout.”)

In American football, a takeaway is when the defensive team somehow takes the ball away from the offensive team. The defense can create takeaways by forcing a fumble (causing an offensive player to drop the ball) or intercepting the ball (catching it before an offensive player can catch it). The result of a takeaway is a turnover (when the other team gets possession of the ball).

In the context of business, takeaway is sometimes seen as a buzzword, but it’s useful, and there’s no very close synonym, so it has become very popular. In the context of fast food in the U.K., takeaway is just as common as takeout is in the U.S.