Sadiq Khan has come under fire after his official website published a photo of a white family which said they do not "represent real Londoners".

The Labour politician faced calls to apologise after the message appeared in a branding guide on the Greater London Authority (GLA) website.

A spokesperson for the London Mayor insisted the caption was added "in error" and "doesn’t reflect" his views.

The document, titled "Look Book – Mayor of London Brand Guidelines", has since been taken down.

The picture shows a white couple and their two children out and about in the capital with the London Eye and the Palace of Westminster in the background.

The caption read: "Doesn't represent real Londoners."

Join our free WhatsApp group to get all the latest politics news

READ MORE: Sadiq Khan faces ULEZ revolt as hundreds of cameras stolen or vandalised

Tory London mayoral candidate Susan Hall called on Mr Khan to say sorry.

She told The Mail on Sunday: "All Londoners are real Londoners, no matter their ethnicity, and Sadiq Khan needs to apologise and stop these desperate, politically-motivated attempts to divide people."

Outspoken Tory deputy chairman Lee Anderson branded it "dog whistle politics" and urged Mr Khan to "do your job".

Politician turned broadcaster Nigel Farage said: “Sadiq Khan’s London is run by an anti-white prejudice, which could be called racism.”

Tory MP Steve Tuckwell, who represents Uxbridge and South Ruislip, said: "Shocking evidence that Labour's London Mayor Sadiq Khan wants to divide people across London - Khan is out of touch and needs to go."

Conservative peer Shaun Bailey added: "Enough of these poisonous identity politics. My wife is white; so she’s not a proper Londoner?! Are our kids half Londoner?! It’s absurd & wrong. Our Mayor is more intent on taking ‘on brand’ photos dividing our city than improving London for everyone."

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

The guide opened with the words "A City For All Londoners" and promised to appeal to "everyone no matter, their age, gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, religion, disability or family make-up".

A section gave detail on the "best images of the Mayor", including over 20 pictures of Mr Khan.

It said: "He should be shown interacting in real and relatable environments."

It also made a veiled reference to Mr Khan's predecessor Boris Johnson, warning against using photos of a bus project by the Tory politician.

It said: "Never use images from the previous administration such as the 'new bus for London'."

A spokesperson for the Mayor of London said: "The photo caption was added by a staff member in error, and doesn’t reflect the view of the Mayor or the Greater London Authority.

"The document has now been taken off the GLA website and is being reviewed to ensure the language and guidance is appropriate."