Joseph Adam "Joe" Jonas (born August 15, 1989) is an American singer, musician, actor and dancer. He shares the lead singer role with his younger brother Nick of the Jonas Brothers, a pop-rock band made up of him and his two brothers, Nick and Kevin. He currently stars as Joseph Lucas in the Disney Channel original series Jonas.

Joseph Adam Jonas was born in Casa Grande, Arizona, the son of Denise (née Miller), a former sign language teacher and singer, and Paul Kevin Jonas, Sr., a songwriter, musician and former ordained minister at an Assemblies of God church.] He is of Irish (from his maternal grandfather), Cherokee, Italian, and German descent.

JONAS BROTHERS

In early 2005, Columbia Records' new president, Steve Greenberg, listened to Nick's record. While Greenberg did not like the album, he did like Nick's voice. After hearing the song, "Please Be Mine", written and performed by all the brothers, Daylight/Columbia Records decided to sign the three as a group act. After being signed to Columbia, the brothers considered naming their group "Sons of Jonas" before settling on the name "Jonas Brothers".

It's About Time, the brothers' first album, was released on August 8, 2006.According to the band's manager, it was only a "limited release" of a little over 50,000 copies. Because Sony was not interested in further promoting the band, the Jonas Brothers then considered switching labels. The band was ultimately dropped by Columbia Records in early 2007.

After shortly being without a label, the Jonas Brothers signed with Hollywood Records in February 2007.Around the same time, the brothers began appearing in GAP commercials for Baby Bottle Pops, singing the jingle. Their self-titled second album, Jonas Brothers, was released on August 7, 2007. It reached number five on the Billboard Hot 200 chart in its first week.

The Jonas Brothers' third studio album, A Little Bit Longer, was released in the United States on August 12, 2008 and peaked at #1 on the Billboard 200.