Birth Name: Joseph Adam Jonas

Place of Birth: Casa Grande, Arizona, U.S.

Date of Birth: August 15, 1989

Ethnicity: Irish, German, English, Scottish, Italian/Sicilian, French-Canadian, possibly other

Joe Jonas is an American singer, songwriter, and actor. He is a member of pop rock band The Jonas Brothers, with his siblings Kevin Jonas and Nick Jonas. He has also been lead vocalist for dance-rock band DNCE, of which JinJoo Lee is also a member. He has starred in the made-for-tv Camp Rock movies, had a voice role in the animated Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation, co-starred in the film Devotion, and appeared on the series Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream and Jonas.

Joe is the son of Denise (Miller), a singer and sign language teacher, and Paul Kevin Jonas, a songwriter and musician, who was an ordained Assemblies of God minister. Also among his siblings is actor Frankie Jonas. He was raised mostly in New Jersey. Joe is married to English actress Sophie Turner, with whom he has two children.

Joe’s father, who is from a family from the American South, has German, English, and Scottish ancestry. Joe’s mother, who is from the New Jersey area, has Irish, as well as Italian/Sicilian and French-Canadian, ancestry.

The Jonas Brothers have also stated that they have Cherokee Native American ancestry. It is not clear if this ancestry has been verified/documented.

Joe is related to congressmen Charles A. Jonas (1876-1955), and Charles’s son, Charles R. Jonas (1904-1988), both of North Carolina. Joe descends from the same Jonas line.

It is not publicly known who Joe’s biological paternal grandfather is.

Joe’s paternal grandmother, now Cecilia Lucas, was born under the name Cecilla/Cecilia Paulette Jonas (the daughter of Paul Adam Jonas and Nellie May/Mae Fox). Cecilia was born in North Carolina. Paul was the son of Henry Walter Jonas and Nora Lee/Leigh Campbell. Nellie was the daughter of Nathan/Walter Henry Fox and Elizabeth/Lizzie Mae Hamilton. Through the Jonas line, Joe is descended from German immigrants to the United States in the 1700s.

Joe’s maternal grandfather was Gerald “Jerry” Miller (the son of Henry J. Miller and Agnes Marie Carroll). Gerald was born in The Bronx, New York. Henry was the son of Henry J. Miller and Anna Kelly, who was of Irish origin. Agnes was born in New York, to Irish parents, Michael Carroll and Bridget/Bridgette Lyons.

Joe’s maternal grandmother is Frances Madonia (the daughter of Fortunato Angelo “Frank” Madonia and Margaret Anna Berard). Fortunato was born in New York, the son of Angelo Madonia and Maria Chimero, who were of Italian descent, with Maria’s family being from Sicily. Margaret was born in Bennington, Vemont, the daughter of Milton Dewey Berard and Anna Mary/Rose Ducharme, who were of French-Canadian ancestry.

Sources: Genealogy of Joe Jonas – https://www.geni.com

Information on Joe’s paternal great-grandfather, Paul Adam Jonas – http://www.findagrave.com

Obituary of Joe’s paternal great-grandmother, Nellie May/Mae (Fox) Jonas – http://www.legacy.com

Death record of Joe’s maternal great-grandfather, Henry J. Miller – https://www.familysearch.org