Ages 7-11

Duration 40 mins

Speaking Roles 16+

Cast Size 20-100

Ideal Cast Size 35

‘Glad Tidings!’ is a ready-to-go resource perfect for schools and churches. With new arrangements of ‘O Little Town Of Bethlehem’, ‘Ding Dong Merrily On High’, ‘The First Noel’, ‘We Three Kings’ and ‘Hark The Herald Angels Sing’, two brand new carols, pre-chosen readings, a beautifully written narration, two charming new poems and guidance on staging and resourcing, this really is a complete carol service.

Furthermore, with the whole service fully adaptable – and the editable script available as an additional item for a small extra charge – this book and CD/download pack will make your Christmas carol service as stress-free, enjoyable and festive as possible.

NB - An individual performance licence (if a live audience from outside of the school is to be present) and/or a filming/streaming licence (if footage is to be shared) is required to stage this carol service.

Please note, a performance Licence is required for Glad Tidings to be undertaken for family, friends and members of the community.

UK School Invoicing Available - email us at info@theschoolmusicalscompany.com

Overview

The carol service is a much-loved and important tradition within the Christian calendar, and on the face of it appears pretty straightforward to put together: choose some carols, select some readings, and you’re done. However, those people within schools and churches who have been given the responsibility for the carol service know that this could not be further from the truth. Which carols? What sequence? How many verses? Which verses? Which musical arrangement? How do you get the arrangement? Which readings? Biblical or other? Where do you get them? What links everything together? What is the tone of the service? What is the purpose of the service?

A carol service is surprisingly time-consuming to organise, and time is a luxury that most teachers simply do not have. We hope, therefore, with this book that we can make the job a little simpler by providing you with a ready-to-go, all-inclusive version. We have also included plenty of guidance on staging and suggestions on how to adapt should you wish to lengthen or shorten the service to fit your needs.

Synopsis

This carol service tells the remarkable story of the birth of Jesus. Comprising the arrival of the Angel Gabriel to Mary with the news that she is to have a baby, the journey of Mary and Joseph from Nazareth to Bethlehem, the birth of Jesus, the angels pronouncements to the shepherds, and the visit of the Three Wise Men, this carol service weaves narration, readings, poems, tableaux and carols into a straightforward but beautiful account of the nativity.