Scholes History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

England

Germany

The surname Scholes is a nickname surname; it is derived from a nickname given to the original bearer. A broad and miscellaneous class of surnames, nickname surnames referred to a characteristic of the first person who used the name. They can describe the bearer's favored style of clothing, appearance, habits, or character. The distinguished name Scholes is derived from the Old German word "scolla" or "scollo," which meant "lump of earth."

Loading...

Early Origins of the Scholes family

The surname Scholes was first found in Hessen, where this family name became a prominent contributor to the development of the district from ancient times. Always prominent in social affairs, the name became an integral part of that region as it emerged to form alliances with other families within the Feudal System. Chronicles first mention Heinrich Scholle of Bretten around 1207 and Ludeke Scholver of Luebeck in 1326. One of the roots of the name is "Ackerscholle," which means "soil" or "earth."

Loading...

Early History of the Scholes family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Scholes research. Another 150 words (11 lines of text) covering the years 1528, 1833, 1839 and 1880 are included under the topic Early Scholes History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Scholes Spelling Variations

Spelling variations of this family name include: Scholley, Scholle, Scholler, Scholl, Scholey and others.

Loading...

Early Notables of the Scholes family

More information is included under the topic Early Scholes Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Scholes migration to the United States +

Some of the first settlers of this family name were:

Scholes Settlers in United States in the 17th Century

George Scholes, who arrived in Lynn, MA sometime between 1620 and 1650

James Scholes, a bonded passenger who arrived in America in 1696

Scholes Settlers in United States in the 18th Century

John Scholes, who settled in Virginia in 1747

Daniel Scholes, a bonded passenger who arrived in 1749

Scholes Settlers in United States in the 19th Century

William Scholes and Ann Scholes, who arrived in New York in 1849, aboard the "Marmion," bound for Wisconsin

Scholes migration to Australia +

Emigration to Australia followed the First Fleets of convicts, tradespeople and early settlers. Early immigrants include:

Scholes Settlers in Australia in the 19th Century

Mr. William Scholes, British Convict who was convicted in Lancaster, Lancashire, England for 7 years, transported aboard the "Earl Cornwallis" in August 1800, arriving in New South Wales, Australia 1

Mr. Thomas Scholes, British Convict who was convicted in Lancaster, Lancashire, England for life , transported aboard the "Commodore Hayes" in April 1823, arriving in Tasmania (Van Diemen's Land) 2

Mr. James Scholes, English convict who was convicted in York, Yorkshire, England for 7 years, transported aboard the "Eliza" on 25th June 1828, arriving in New South Wales, Australia 3

Joseph Scholes, English convict from Lancaster, who was transported aboard the "Arab" on February 22, 1834, settling in Van Diemen's Land, Australia 4

Mr. Richard Scholes, English convict who was convicted in Leeds, Yorkshire, England for 14 years, transported aboard the "Aurora" on 18th June 1835, arriving in Tasmania (Van Diemen's Land) 5

... (More are available in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.)

Scholes migration to New Zealand +

Emigration to New Zealand followed in the footsteps of the European explorers, such as Captain Cook (1769-70): first came sealers, whalers, missionaries, and traders. By 1838, the British New Zealand Company had begun buying land from the Maori tribes, and selling it to settlers, and, after the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840, many British families set out on the arduous six month journey from Britain to Aotearoa to start a new life. Early immigrants include:

Scholes Settlers in New Zealand in the 19th Century

Joshua Scholes, who landed in Wellington, New Zealand in 1841

Robert Scholes, who arrived in Auckland, New Zealand aboard the ship "Zealandia" in 1874

Eliza Scholes, who arrived in Auckland, New Zealand aboard the ship "Zealandia" in 1874

Contemporary Notables of the name Scholes (post 1700) +

James Christopher Scholes (1852-1890), English antiquary, son of James Scholes, printer and bookbinder, born at Bolton, Lancashire

Robert Scholes, American literary critic and theorist

Percy Scholes (1877-1958), English musician and journalist

Paul Scholes (b. 1974), English footballer

Gordon Glen Denton Scholes, Australian Politician, member of the House of Representatives for Corio, from 1967-1993

Alwyn Myron S Scholes (b. 1941), Canadian economist, Nobel-Prize-winning economist and creator of the Black-Scholes model

Joseph N. Scholes, American politician, Representative from Ohio 20th District, 1902 6

Related Stories +

The Scholes Motto +

The motto was originally a war cry or slogan. Mottoes first began to be shown with arms in the 14th and 15th centuries, but were not in general use until the 17th century. Thus the oldest coats of arms generally do not include a motto. Mottoes seldom form part of the grant of arms: Under most heraldic authorities, a motto is an optional component of the coat of arms, and can be added to or changed at will; many families have chosen not to display a motto.

Motto: Virtus sola nobilitas

Motto Translation: Virtue is the only nobility.

Citations +

Convict Records Voyages to Australia (Retrieved 13th August 2021). Retrieved from https://convictrecords.com.au/ships/earl-cornwallis

Convict Records of Australia. Retrieved 4th March 2021 from https://convictrecords.com.au/ships/commodore-hayes

Convict Records Voyages to Australia (Retrieved 17th February 2022). Retrieved from https://convictrecords.com.au/ships/eliza

State Library of Queensland. (Retrieved 2015, January 8) Arab voyage to Van Diemen's Land, Australia in 1834 with 230 passengers. Retrieved from http://www.convictrecords.com.au/ships/arab/1834

Convict Records Voyages to Australia (Retrieved 20th August 2020). Retrieved from https://convictrecords.com.au/ships/aurora

The Political Graveyard: Alphabetical Name Index. (Retrieved 2015, October 22) . Retrieved from http://politicalgraveyard.com/alpha/index.html