Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy was the youngest daughter of Victor Emmanuel III of Italy and Elena of Montenegro. In 1939, she married Prince Luigi of Bourbon-Parma. She was a sister of Umberto II of Italy and of Tsarita Giovanna of Bulgaria.

Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy was born on December 26, 1914, in Rome, Lazio, Italy. Her birth geographical coordinates are 41° 53’ 31” North latitude and 12° 30’ 41” East longitude, with an altitude of 20 meters above sea level. Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy passed away at the age of 86 in 2001.

Astrologically, Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy falls under the Sun sign of Capricorn, with Aries as her Ascendant, Aries as her Moon sign, and Taurus as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Capricorn Moon Aries Ascendant Aries Midheaven Capricorn Mercury Sagittarius Venus Scorpio Mars Capricorn Jupiter Aquarius Saturn Gemini Uranus Aquarius Neptune Cancer Pluto Cancer Ceres Pisces Chiron Pisces Eros Aries Hygiea Cancer Juno Virgo Pallas Aquarius Vesta Gemini Black Moon Lilith Taurus North Node Aquarius South Node Leo Part of Fortune Cancer Vertex Libra

Sunin Capricorn3° 51’ 11”

The Sun in Capricorn in a Natal Chart is a placement associated with patience and reliability. You are consistent and preserve tradition. You look to […] Read more »

Moonin Aries27° 13’ 48”

The Moon in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are intense and can be passionate and optimistic. Your moods drive […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aries2° 52’ 28”

Aries Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates a dramatic personality. You have a passionate appearance and often go to extremes to show your individuality. You […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn1° 28’ 42”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius28° 0’ 22”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Scorpio28° 17’ 19”

Scorpio Venus in the Natal Chart makes you loving and sensitive. You are creative and relate to your loved ones emotionally and intellectually. You are […] Read more »

Marsin Capricorn3° 15’ 36”

Capricorn Mars in the Natal Chart makes you eager to thrive. You are intense and can be persistent. You are patient and willing to face […] Read more »

Jupiterin Aquarius21° 15’ 15”

Aquarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart is less individualistic than the closer planets. Given Jupiter’s slow transit, the planet’s journey through Aquarius takes over a […] Read more »

Saturnin Gemini28° 25’ 60”

Gemini Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you part of a group born within the same three years who share a collective responsibility. You are […] Read more »

Uranusin Aquarius9° 34’ 56”

Aquarius Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to bring technological breakthroughs and social change. You are part of […] Read more »

Neptunein Cancer29° 43’ 49”

Cancer Neptune in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that impacts people born within fourteen years. You are born to help society awaken to […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer1° 8’ 3”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Pisces2° 1’ 17”

Ceres in Pisces in the Natal Chart indicates a loving and mystical generation. You are part of a cohort that follows your ideals and can […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces14° 46’ 26”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Aries5° 23’ 30”

Eros in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and strong. You are excitable and have a spicey and adventurous sex life. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Cancer29° 14’ 4”

Hygiea in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to help others fulfill their potential. You are compassionate and devoted to encouraging your family […] Read more »

Junoin Virgo23° 12’ 25”

Juno in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you reserved and traditional. You take a cautious approach to settling down and are slow to fall […] Read more »

Pallasin Aquarius9° 34’ 17”

Pallas in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you explosive and creative. You can be eager to pursue your futuristic vision and motivated by your […] Read more »

Vestain Gemini10° 47’ 11”

Vesta in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you talkative and insightful. You are outgoing and can be playful. You find fulfillment by exercising your […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus13° 58’ 56”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

North Nodein Aquarius29° 22’ 16”

Aquarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you rebellious. You break from tradition, and your destiny involves leading others in grassroots campaigns. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Leo29° 22’ 16”

Leo South Node in the Natal Chart makes you born with passion and desire to succeed. You are confident in your abilities and have a […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Cancer26° 15’ 6”

Cancer Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and comforting. You are nurturing and can be loving and sensitive. You are […] Read more »

Vertexin Libra1° 11’ 2”

Libra Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intelligent and friendly. You are charming and can easily manifest love and romance. You can be peaceful […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon First House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eighth House Mars Tenth House Jupiter Twelfth House Saturn Third House Uranus Eleventh House Neptune Fifth House Pluto Third House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Twelfth House Eros First House Hygiea Fifth House Juno Sixth House Pallas Eleventh House Vesta Third House Black Moon Lilith First House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Fifth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 40 major aspects, alongside 22 minor aspects, as well as 4 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mars Square Ascendant Pluto Opposite Midheaven Mercury Opposite Saturn Venus Quincunx Saturn Sun Square Ascendant Sun Conjunct Mars Moon Trine Mercury Moon Quincunx Venus Moon Sextile Saturn Ascendant Square Midheaven Venus Trine Neptune Sun Conjunct Midheaven Pluto Square Ascendant Mars Conjunct Midheaven Neptune Quincunx Midheaven Mercury Quincunx Neptune Mars Opposite Pluto Sun Opposite Pluto Moon Square Neptune Neptune Trine Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Saturn Opposite Midheaven Mercury Opposite Pluto Venus Quincunx Pluto Saturn Conjunct Pluto Sun Quincunx Neptune Moon Trine Midheaven Moon Sextile Pluto Saturn Square Ascendant Mars Quincunx Neptune Sun Opposite Saturn Mercury Square Ascendant Venus Trine Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Mars Mars Opposite Saturn Sun Conjunct Mercury Moon Trine Mars Moon Sextile Jupiter Sun Trine Moon Jupiter Trine Saturn

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy’s life journey.

Mercury Opposite Saturnorb: 0°

When Mercury is opposite Saturn in a Natal Chart, the person experiencing this opposition will usually be intelligent, but they may not always come across […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Saturnorb: 0°

Venus quincunx Saturn in a chart typically creates difficulty expressing emotions, especially feelings of love and affection for others. There is a strong desire for […] Read more »

Sun Square Ascendantorb: 1°

The Sun square Ascendant in the Natal Chart creates friction between your identity and outer appearance. Your first impressions don’t align with your authentic self. […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Marsorb: 1°

Your Natal Chart aspects describe your personality and individualistic qualities. These placements create a lifelong influence on your personality. When the Sun is conjunct Mars […] Read more »

Moon Trine Mercuryorb: 1°

When the Moon trines Mercury, there is a strong connection between the mind and the heart. It is not difficult for a person with this […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Venusorb: 1°

Stable romantic relationships might be difficult if you have the Moon quincunx Venus in your Natal Chart. This does not mean you’ll never find one, […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Saturnorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person is responsible and more on the serious side. They […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

Mars conjunct the Midheaven in a chart indicates a person may be career-oriented, competitive, and a quick-thinker. They are likely very decisive, especially when it […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Neptuneorb: 2°

Mercury quincunx Neptune in a chart creates a confusing dynamic between logic and creativity. A person with this aspect in their chart will possess both […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Plutoorb: 2°

Mars opposite Pluto in a chart typically indicates a lot of internal conflict regarding goals, how to express emotions, and how to deal with setbacks […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Plutoorb: 3°

The Sun opposite Pluto in a Natal Chart is an intense placement. You come across as severe to others. You can be intense and have […] Read more »

Moon Square Neptuneorb: 3°

The Moon square Neptune in a chart typically indicates a tie between emotional satisfaction and fantasy. This aspect could be positive or negative, depending on […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 3°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Mercury Opposite Plutoorb: 3°

Mercury opposite Pluto in a chart can create many struggles, but getting through those struggles will bring intelligence, better intuition, and self-awareness. Anyone with this […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Plutoorb: 3°

Venus quincunx Pluto in a chart creates obsessive and intense energy in a person. They will likely have trouble balancing their emotions and expressing themselves […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Plutoorb: 3°

Saturn conjunct Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has faced, or will face, some intense hardships. These might be experienced while […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Neptuneorb: 4°

The Sun quincunx Neptune in a Natal Chart gives you an unsettled emotional nature. You are emotional and subject to volatile mood swings. You can […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Plutoorb: 4°

The Moon sextile Pluto in a Natal Chart usually makes a person highly emotional. Their feelings can be profound and intense. They aren’t just connected […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Neptuneorb: 4°

Mars quincunx Neptune in a chart can create an overinflated sense of self. An inability to set realistic goals and follow reasonable boundaries causes someone […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Saturnorb: 5°

The Sun opposite Saturn brings hardships that force you to confront your limitations. You may see yourself objectively, and you don’t get excited about whimsical […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Marsorb: 5°

Mercury conjunct Mars in the Natal Chart makes you outspoken and dramatic. You are intense and speak passionately. You are demanding and can be focused […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Saturnorb: 5°

Mars opposite Saturn in a chart can be incredibly difficult to deal with. There is a lot of aggression and anger in this aspect. There […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 6°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Trine Marsorb: 6°

What does the Moon trine Mars mean? In a Natal Chart, this can indicate a person has a charismatic, passionate, and ambitious personality. They are […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Midheaven Square Vertex Uranus Conjunct Pallas Neptune Conjunct Hygiea Neptune Quincunx North Node Pluto Square Vertex Moon Square Part of Fortune Ceres Sextile Midheaven Mercury Quincunx Hygiea Mercury Sextile North Node Mercury Trine South Node Venus Trine Hygiea Venus Square North Node Venus Square South Node Mars Sextile Ceres Saturn Trine North Node Saturn Sextile South Node Uranus Trine Vesta Neptune Sextile Vertex Pluto Trine Ceres Sun Square Eros Ascendant Opposite Vertex Pluto Trine North Node

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Uranus Conjunct Pallasorb: 0°

Uranus conjunct Pallas in a chart connects wisdom with individuality. Someone with this aspect in their chart will likely have a unique way of thinking […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Hygieaorb: 0°

Neptune conjunct Hygiea in a chart can create a strong interest in spirituality and how that connects to mental and physical well-being. People with this […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Hygieaorb: 1°

Mercury quincunx Hygiea in a chart can be difficult to deal with because it creates a disconnect between the healing powers of Hygiea and the […] Read more »

Sun Square Erosorb: 2°

The Sun Square Eros makes you shy and inhibited in the bedroom. You avoid pursuing pleasure and criticize yourself for your hedonistic desires. But with […] Read more »

Ascendant Opposite Vertexorb: 2°

The Ascendant opposite the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you feel hesitant to pursue your destiny. You wait for a partner or loved one […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Hygiea Quincunx North Node Ceres Quincunx Vertex Chiron Sextile Black Moon Lilith Pallas Trine Vesta

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.