Release Date:8 May 1969

Director :Satyajit Ray

Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne is a 1969 Indian

fantasy adventure comedy film written and

directed by Satyajit Ray and based on a story

by his grandfather Upendrakishore Ray

Chowdhury. It is a fantasy-musical film, with

the music and lyrics written by Ray himself.

This is the first film of the Goopy Gyne Bagha

Byne series.

The film was based on the characters Goopy

Gyne and Bagha Byne.The movie ran for 51

straight weeks.lt won the Best Feature Film

and Best Direction awards at the 16th

National Film Awards, and went on to win

many other international awards as well.

Critical reception was highly positive.

The story revolves around Gopinath Gyne

alias Goopy.(Tapen Chatterjee), the son of a

poor grocer Kanu Kyne from a village called

Amloki. Goopy wants to become a singer but

unfortunately, he sings terribly without

melody, rhythm or tune. Goopy does so and

is driven out of Amloki on a donkey for

waking up the king with his terrible singing

Exiled into a forest, he meets Bagha

Bayen(Rabi Ghosh), another exile from

nearby village Hortuki. Bagha has been exiled

for playing the drum badly. They soon make

a team after encountering a tiger and start

singing and drumming, initially to scare offF

the tiger, but in the process attract a group of

ghosts who are fascinated by their music.

The pair travel to Shundi, where a benevolent

king appoints them court musicians.

However, the king of Halla (the long lost twin

brother of the king of Shundi and both played

by (Santosh Dutta), is planning to attack

Shundi, after being poisoned by his chief

minister (Jahor Roy) with the help of a magic

potion that makes him evil. He is aided by a

senile sorcerer(Harindranath

Chattopadhyay),who recipes that evil potion

and also the potion that has made all the

Shundi people mute.Goopy and Bagha travel

to Halla in an attempt to prevent the attack,

but are captured instead. They also lose their

slippers when captured and hence cannot

escape the jail by magic, but manage to do

so by strategy of luring the famished

gatekeeper (Nripati Chatterjee) with delicious

foods. Next, they wish for unlimited food and

sweets which rain from the sky on the

starving soldiers who forget the battle and

settle for filling the bellies. Not only this, their

evil effects of the

singing takes

potion

given to the King of Halla, who drops the idea

of capturing Shundi, and reunites happily

with his brother. For averting the war, the two

kings of Shundi and Halla respectively marry

their daughters to Goopy and Bagha.