The new community of Aster in Southeast Edmonton has a lot going for it, but is it right for you? Have a read and figure out if this up-and-coming neighbourhood should be your future address!

Want to stay Active?

The Meadows Recreation Centre is just across the street, and it’s one of the city’s newest facilities. The Meadows is beautifully designed and has everything you need to stay active.

Fitness centre

Drop in programs

Pool area with

Lap pool

Adjustable depth pool for teaching and fitness classes

Massive hot tub

Gradual depth leisure pool with squirting water features

Waterslide

Easily commute

Aster is only two-minute drive to the Anthony Henday, meaning you have unparalleled access to Edmonton’s east side, including the nearby communities of Beaumont and Sherwood Park.

Plus, if you’re heading out of the city, the Henday can quickly take you whichever direction you’re heading: east on the Trans Canada for a quick day trip to Elk Island Park, west to see the mountains around Jasper, north to explore the forests around Athabasca, or South visit some friends in Calgary.

Wherever you want to go, Aster is your ticket to a convenient getaway.

Do you like to get outside?

Aster is currently being developed with extensive pedestrian networks that tie in seamlessly to the surrounding communities. Southeast Edmonton has kilometers of walking paths that Aster will connect to, giving you endless options when taking an evening stroll.

As the community develops, more parks, playgrounds, and wetlands will be integrated into the path system, giving you the opportunity to breathe in the surrounding nature while staying close to all the services and amenities that you love.

Appreciate convenience?

There are so many shops and services nearby!

Tamarack Common has a Chalo FreshCo grocery store opening soon, restaurants, banking, auto repair, tutors, and more.

To the west at there’s a Save-on-Foods, Shoppers Drug Mart, vet, banking services, medical centre, physiotherapy, and a gas station.

5 minutes to the north you’ll reach Rio Can Meadows, a huge shopping centre with a Wal Mart, Superstore, Best Buy, Winners, and other big box stores.

Everything you need is less than five minutes away!

Have kids, or thinking about starting a family?

Aster has you covered.

Not only are there plenty of great places to play being developed into the first phase of Aster, there’s also a future school and park planned for the east side of the community. That means when your kids are ready to start learning in earnest, the classroom will only be a short walk from your front door.

Need a community with options?

It’s one thing to find the perfect place to live, but it’s not always easy to find the perfect home in that location. That’s not something you have to worry about at Aster. We’ve packed loads of options into this exciting new community, with four unique Home Styles and five high-quality Home Builders to choose from.

Aster has the following home styles available:

Single Family Homes with a front attached garage.

Single Family Homes with a garage accessible from the rear lane.

Townhomes with a garage accessible from a rear lane.

Duplexes with both garages attached to the home at the front.

The following Home Builders are excited to be part of this highly anticipated community:

Coventry Homes

Pacesetter Homes: A Qualico Company

Sterling Homes: A Qualico Company

Streetside Developments: A Qualico Company

Victory Homes

Want a community that’s built to last?

Aster is being developed by Qualico Communities, a residential land development company that’s been in the industry for over 65 years. Our parent company, Qualico, is the largest privately-owned integrated real estate company in Western Canada.

As an organization, we’re committed to more than just developing great communities. We’re working together, across western Canada, to help build better cities. That means ensuring every community we develop, including Aster, has all the right elements to ensure it has a lasting positive effect on the fabric of the city.

Want to move in soon?

Are you itching for a change of scenery? Construction is just getting started in Aster, and depending on your preferred style of home, you could be moving into Southeast Edmonton’s newest community as early as this Spring. Homes are already selling in Aster, so now is a great time to get the lot you want before they’re all gone.

Although Asters Showhomes aren’t open quite yet, you can make an appointment with the Builders to visit their Showhomes in Laurel Crossing, just a couple minutes away.

There are also quick possession homes available in the community. These homes are already undergoing the planning, permitting, and approval process, and are the quickest way to move into the community!