Reviewing the film “65” back in March, I was surprised to see it has quicksand as a plot point. Quicksand was everywhere in the TV and movies I grew up with, but through overexposure it tipped over into cliche and faded away.

“Dungeons & Dragons,” released later the same month, also featured quicksand. I suddenly wondered if a revival was at hand. When I saw quicksand a third time, in July’s “Haunted Mansion,” it was official. Quicksand is BACK, baby.

If you’ve avoided the vast jungle of G-rated hackwork that is American children’s cinema from the second half of the 20th century, quicksand is a substance that looks solid but will suck you down and drown you unless someone throws you a branch or a rope or a vine.

If you’re a villain, no one will throw you a vine and the viewers at home will learn an important lesson about relationships. You can often see an adumbration of understanding pass across the stricken villain’s face just before total submersion. I like to think Flannery O’Connor and Alfred Hitchcock would approve.

Quicksand is also a thing in real life. It doesn’t actually suck you down like that because of boring bits of realism like “buoyancy.” This isn’t about real quicksand, though.

Anything that can kill you in cinema develops a specific mythology. Dying to the sword means something different than dying to gun. Dying to quicksand means you were most likely a bad person, that you were deprived of dignity at the last, and, perhaps most importantly, that the forces which orchestrated your demise weren’t feeling particularly inspired.

If I’m being honest with you and myself, the return of quicksand to the cultural shorthand is almost certainly coincidental, and is at most a fad. Storytelling conventions go in and out of fashion the same way clothes do. But that doesn’t change the fact that quicksand feels right for this cultural moment, when nothing is as solid as it looks and peril could be anywhere.

Every day is full of tiny routine things that now require vast exertion as we push against a morass we can’t see but feel acutely. I’ve started to notice how the perfunctory interactions where one normally says “Oh, I’m fine” tend to produce different, less positive answers now.

I see it in myself; I see it in others. There’s no hostility. We’re just tired of pretending.

Over this summer I’ve seen, or been part of, moments of human expression I don’t understand. In West Lebanon I saw a woman busking near the exact center of the Upper Valley Plaza, to the apparent benefit of no one. On the sidewalk in Greenfield, Mass., I saw a man shout a single expletive, slam-dunk a half-full bottle of water into the concrete and keep walking.

I am reminded of how it felt in the early months of 2020, when nobody knew what to do with their nervous energy. What IS there to do when the sky turns white and the rivers run brown, when California floods and Hawaii burns? If you can still bear to follow the news, your reward often feels like a box seat to vast, saturnine forces beyond your control.

The people are angry. The planet is angry.

Here we find ourselves, indignant and undignified, each in our own personal pocket of quicksand, with full view of other people trapped in theirs. It’s a little bit funny.

The interesting thing about movie quicksand is that it works the same on good and evil characters alike. Your senses betray you and you fall in. A battle or an argument can contrast wits in a myriad of ways, but with quicksand you simply sink, good or bad.

Quicksand is the great equalizer. If a character is lucky enough to be in a story that allows for realism, they might also be smart enough to know it’s better not to struggle. A lot of the time, though, the quicksand just sucks you down like a vacuum. The deciding factor then becomes whether you have somebody around who’s willing to throw you the vine.

We should throw each other more vines. I think that’s the only way we get out of this.

Kevin Paquet is a movie reviewer and culture critic. He lives in Springfield.