Almost exactly one year ago, we heard that production was underway on a survival thriller called Quicksand, which is (along with Prey) looking to remind us how dangerous the titular liquefied soil can be. Now the Shudder streaming service has announced that they have acquired Quicksand distribution rights and will be releasing the film in the US, the UK, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand on June 23rd. The film will also be streaming on AMC+ in the US, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.

Directed by Andrés Beltrán (MalaYerba) from a screenplay by Matt Pitts (Fringe), Quicksand stars Carolina Gaitán, who provided the voice of Pepa in Disney’s Encanto, and Allan Hawco of Jack Ryan. The English-language thriller was filmed in the Colombian capital Bogota and tells the story of a married couple on the brink of divorce who become trapped in quicksand while hiking through a Colombian rainforest. It’s a struggle for survival as they battle the elements of the jungle and must work together in order to escape.

Quicksand was produced by Sangre Films, a joint venture between Elemental Stories, 222 Pictures, and Dawn’s Light Movies. The individual producers are Jason Cherubini of Dawn’s Light Media, Nicolas Reyes of Elemental Stories, and Sean Patrick Burke of 222 Pictures. Richard Switzer, Martin Ramos, John Harris, and Kris Meyer serve as executive producers.

Beltrán provided the following statement: “Making Quicksand was such a thrilling and challenging experience. I hope people can relate to the intense emotions Carolina and Allan portrayed so well. We shot the film on location, in a cold forest in the mountains of Colombia. Although the weather conditions were harsh for the actors and crew, we kept enjoying the process because we wanted to tell this story as real as possible.”

Cherubini added: “This has been such an exciting project to be a part of. Working with the Colombian crew was amazing and seeing the very talented Carolina Gaitan and Allan Hawco bring the vision of our director Andres Beltran to life has been a fantastic experience. I can’t wait for audiences to experience it.”

Does Quicksand sound interesting to you? Let us know by leaving a comment below. I’m definitely going to be watching this movie when it reaches Shudder.