Share

Christina Louise Tocco aka “Tocco”, 43, of Holly Hill, Florida, went home to be with Jesus, Thursday, July 08, 2021.

Christina was born June 29, 1978, in Daytona Beach, FL to Marshall Tocco and Gail MacLean. She played softball her entire childhood (short-stop) but lastly for Seabreeze High school where she graduated in 1996. Ormond/Daytona Beach was her hometown, stomping grounds and the place she chose to raise her family.

In her life, Christina was the “Life of the Party” and collected a mind-blowing amount of friends from ALL walks of life. She had one criteria to keep company with you…. love to laugh! She embraced her Italian heritage, was PROUD of her last name and made a name for herself with her exuberant personality. Christina was incredibly hard working and a dedicated employee. She found her niche as a restaurant server and boy did she LOVE this position that allowed her personality to SHINE. She loved her “job” and was EXTRAORDINARY in it. This showed in a steady stream of people, time and time again specifically asking for HER to wait on them; to others giving her 180% of the total in a tip! From starting out at Bennigan’s on “beachside” as a young woman, to thriving at the famous Charlie Horse and choosing to spend the last 15 years building relationships and brightening her customers days at D.B. Pickles in Ormond Beach, FL. All would agree that whether you knew her 5 minutes or 5 years…. you remembered her for a LIFETIME!

The GREATEST passion in Christina’s life however, was her CHILDREN! She loved her “babies” and gave HER ALL everyday to being a MOM. She always said, it was her greatest accomplishment and the one thing she KNEW she did right in life! She was their LOUDEST supporter and FIERCEST protector. She was ok as long as they were ok.

Christina was SO many different things to SO many different people and she WILL BE dearly missed by everyone that had the privilege of knowing her.

She is survived by her fiance Dan Zavalick of Holly Hill, FL; children, Sophia and Sebastian Tocco; Shelby and Leigha Zavalick; sister and brother-in-law Marissa and Wayne Smith of Ormond Beach, FL; sister Laurie Ahola of Holly Hill. FL; nephews Nicholas Varnes and Landon and Logan Smith, her uncle Dr. Anthony Tocco of Daytona Beach, FL and countless cousins, aunts, and close friends. She was preceded in death by her Father, Marshall Tocco and her grandparents.

A Celebration of Life service and gathering will be held at 11:00am, Saturday, July 24th at Tomoka Christian Church, 1450 Hand Ave., Ormond Beach, FL, 32174.