DIVERSITIES WITHIN POST-WAR PHILIPPINE PROTESTANTISM INTRODUCTION Floyd T. Cunningham, Ph.D. Today Philippine Protestantism reflects a kaleidoscope of various denominations. The founders of Protestantism in the country around the turn of the century did not plan it to be that way. They hoped for one united church. They established comity arrangements that stood for 50 years. But harmony in the pre-<strong>war</strong> period was not as strong as it was perceived to be, and gave way to a flood of new denominations as well as 55 sectarian rivalries after the Second World War. It is tempting but dangerous to divide this kaleidoscope of Protestant 56 groups into two parties. Just as in the United States, there are two large blocks of Protestants. Certain denominations are affiliated with the World Council of Churches-oriented National Council of Christian Churches of the Philippines, and others with the Philippine Council of Evangelical Churches, <strong>which</strong> has ties to the World Evangelical Fellowship. Just as <strong>within</strong> American Protestantism, denominations affiliated with either of these ecumenical bodies were richly diverse in tradition and theology. Missouri Synod Lutherans, the Salvation Army and Independent Methodists have affiliated with both groups. Seventh Day Adventists, one of the largest Protestant groups in the Philippines, joins with NCCP-affiliated denominations in its theological education. The Christian and Missionary 55 R. Pierce Beaver, Ecumenical Beginnings in the Protestant World Mission: A History of Comity (New York: Thomas Nelson, 1962), 136-140. 56 Reforming the Center: American Protestantism 1900 to the Present, eds. Douglas Jacobsen and William V. Trollinger, Jr. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998). See especially the .Introduction,. 1-14, and David E. Harrell, Jr., .Bipolar Protestantism: The Straight and Narrow Ways,. 15-30. Compare Timothy L. Smith, .The Evangelical Kaleidoscope and the Call to Christian Unity, Christian Scholar.s Review 15 (1986): 125-140. 43