Day by Day, the thriving International Business Machines corporations have taken the spotlight, by acquiring top-notch on-demand startups all over the world. Since the incorporation of IBM, the American Technology MNC has operated in over 177 countries through merging, acquisition, and absorption with other reputable companies.

Besides, IBM accomplished success through acquiring startups across the world and developed the brand name by rendering the best services to the people. Generally, International Business Machines (IBM) is an American-based technology company, which was founded by Charles Ranlett Flint, who merged his computing-tabulating recording company with other four major corporations in 1911, New York.

Initially, the company set the objectives of manufacturing machinery such as slicers, time recorders, punched cards, etc. for sale & lease. Subsequently, 3 years after Thomas J.Watson joined CTR with an ingenious mind in increasing the sale by underscoring customer service and enlarged the production scale, as well as operations overseas. By 1950, IBM became foreign operations by enabling technical services to the people.

For instance, the company came up with the first practical AI- IBM 701, a mass-produced computer with floating-point arithmetic hardware, in 1956. Moreover, IBM acquired many startups from 1912 to now to prosper universally.

In other words, IBM is a multinational corporation that manufactures and sells computer hardware, middleware, and software, as well as hosting and consulting services in a variety of fields, from mainframe computers to nanotechnology.

here is the list of IBM acquisitions made from its incorporation to this time on.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1912 - 1929

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1930 - 1949

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1950 - 1969

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1970 - 1989

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1990 - 1999

Companies Acquired by IBM in 2000 - 2011

Companies Acquired by IBM in 2012 - 2021

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1912 - 1929

1917

American Automatic Scale Company

The very first company acquired by IBM was the American Automatic computing scale company. It is considered the world’s first automatic computing scale and was renamed a Computing-tabling-recording company in 1924.

CTR (Computing-Tabulating-Recording) Company

This company was founded in 1911 by Charles R.Flint and was a holding company manufacturer of record-keeping and measuring systems enterprise.

International Time Recording Company of Canada

Willard & Frick Manufacturing Company along with, Bundy manufacturing, and other two companies amalgamated and formed ITR in 1911.

Computing Scale Co. of Canada

Formed in 1901 by Charles R.Flint. Computing Scale Co. became the fourth company to be acquired by IBM. The company was a manufacturer of record-keeping and measuring systems.

Bundy Manufacturing Company

An American manufacturer of timekeeping devices, which was founded in 1889 and became a part of IBM in 1911.

1921

Pierce Accounting Machine Company

IBM acquired Pierce Accounting machine company in 1921, an asset purchase. the company provides business advisory & accountancy services.

Ticketograph Company

This Chicago company became a division of IBM after the acquisition in 1933. The activity of the Ticketograph company was a device that used a coupon system of wage payments to control job labour costs and manufacturing operations.

1923

Dehomag

It is a German-American inventor of the technology of punched cards, which became a subsidiary of IBM and was located in Germany before as well as during WWII as a monopoly company.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1930 - 1949

1932

National Counting Scale Company

IBM acquired the company on 1st January 1932 for an undisclosed amount. The company is one of the famous makers of counting scales.

1933

Electromatic Typewriters

It is a series of electric typewriters company, which was acquired by IBM starting in the mid-1930, for using their fixed carriage & type ball in IBM Selectric.

1941

Munitions Manufacturing Corporation

It is a profit organization that renders Electromatic Model 04 electric typewriters, which was later acquired by IBM.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1950 - 1969

1959

Pierce Wire Recorder Corporation

This company was founded in 1920 as Radiotechnic Laboratories, which made wire recorders for the U.S Army in the 1940s. On 15th August 1959, IBM bought the patents and assets of the Pierce Company and later the company changed its name to IBM as its dictation division.

1964

Science Research Associates

It is a Chicago-based publisher company, which was established in 1938, was purchased by IBM in 1964, and later acquired by McGraw-Hill Education in 2000.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1970 - 1989

1974

CML Satellite Corporation

This company was renamed Satellite Business System, which was formed by IBM, Aetna, and COMSAT on 15th December 1975. CML was established to build terrestrial network facilities and later IBM sold the company to MCI Inc.

1984

ROLM

IBM partnered with a technology company, which was founded in 1969, and later IBM sold half of the assets to Siemens AG in 1989, In the aftermath of 1998, the ROLM corporation Defunct.

1986

RealCom Communications Corporation

IBM acquired RealCom Communication Corp. in 1986. It is a technology services company based in Texas, United States. It provides telecommunications and technology solutions to companies.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 1990 - 1999

1993

CGI Informatique (France)

CGI Informatique, which IBM acquired in 1993, operated autonomously until 1996 when it was gradually integrated by IBM, nation by country until it was completed in 1999.

1994

Transarc Corporation

It was a private Pittsburgh-based software company, which was bought by IBM in 1994 and became a part of IBM Pittsburgh in 1999.

1995

Lotus Development Corporation

It is an American-based software company established in 1982 and acquired by IBM and now became a parent company of HCL India. IBM purchased the company for $3.5 billion.

Information Systems Management Canada (ISM Canada)

It is a Canada-based & subsidiary of Kyndryl, Information technology services company, founded in 1973 and later acquired by IBM in 1995 in producing IBM System/370 Model 168.

K3 Group Ltd

K3 is a company that specializes in business technology. In the supply chain market, the company offers integrated business solutions such as enterprise resource planning software, customer relationship management software, e-commerce, and managed services, which was purchased by IBM in 1995.

1996

Wilkerson Group

Wilkerson Group is a high-impact, real-time consultant and coach who helps organizations and individuals make significant success, which later became a part of IBM in 1996.

Tivoli Systems

This company was launched in 1989, producing Tivoli software, and became a parent organization to IBM.

Data Sciences

IBM bought Thorn EMI Software, Datasolve, and the Corporate Management Services Division of Thorn EMI(Formerly known as Data Science Ltd) for $95 million in 1996.

Object Technology International (OTI)

This company was founded in 1988 and later acquired in 1998, where the VisualAge range of Smalltalk and Java development tools which were developed by OTI in collaboration with the IBM development lab in Cary, NC, and finally resulted in the open-source Eclipse tool platform and integrated development environment (IDE). Additionally, OTI was disclosed in 2003.

Cyclade Consultants

It is a legal plus consultancy management, which was bought by IBM in 1996. The company advises both major industrial enterprises and SMEs.

Professional Data Management, Inc. / LifePRO

LifePro is a leading provider of life, annuity, long-term care, and securities-based insurance to financial professionals across the country, which was again purchased by IBM in 2021.

1997

Software Artistry

IBM obtained Software Artistry for $200 million in 1997 for its best-known software programs. It is an Indianapolis-based software company that provides strategic and automated support solutions.

Unison Software

It is a profit organization, which was established in 1983, as a Procurement, supply chain, and contract management software provider to federal government departments and government contractors.

Dominion Semiconductor (Manassas, VA)

Dominion Semiconductor (Manassas, VA) is formed as a 50/50 joint venture with Toshiba to manufacture 64MB and 256MB DRAM chips.

1998

CommQuest Technologies

CommQuest is an electronic components manufacturer that Integrated wireless communication chipsets, systems, and related software are designed, developed, and marketed to provide the basic functionality of wireless communication subscriber equipment.

DataBeam Corporation, Lexington, KY

The company is a provider of real-time collaboration and distance learning software and developers platforms, which was acquired by Lotus Development Corp, a subsidiary of IBM.

Ubique

It is an Israel-based technology company that provides outsourcing and consulting services to its customers.

1999

Dascom Technologies (USA)

Dascom is a security firm based in Verona, Virginia, the United States founded by Greg Clark. It was acquired by IBM in 1999.

Mylex Corporation

The company is known for manufacturing high-disk performing technology and network founded in 1993. The company manufactured wood television and radio cabinets.

Sequent Computer Systems

It is a computer-based company, which produces multiprocessing computer systems, launched in 1988, and defunct in 1999.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 2000 - 2011

2001

Mainspring

It is a business strategy consultancy company, which was bought on 7th July 2001 by IBM. IBM acquired Mainspring for $80 million.

Informix Corporation

It is a software company, which was a relational database software developer for machines running Unix, Microsoft Windows, and Apple Macintosh operating systems.

2002

CrossWorlds Software

It is a business service provider company, founded in 1996 and renders Corporate integration software from CrossWorlds Software unifying and expanding business operations. Its business integration solution consists of ready-to-use applications.

Meta merge

This company was established in 1999, is a critical enabler for IBM security solutions, and specializes in directory integration technologies, including meta-directory utilities, and was acquired by IBM on 25th June 2002.

Trellisoft

Trellisoft was founded in 1999. This company transforms your business into Artificial Intelligence, which helps to solve all your business challenges. The company provides business intelligence, digital marketing, mobility & enterprise software solutions.

Holosofx

It is a business process reengineering and consultancy service, which was founded in 1990. The company provides business integration software applications.

PricewaterhouseCoopers

It comes under the MNC PricewaterhouseCoopers for business consultancy and other technology services. It is the second-largest professional services network in the world.

Access360

Access360 is a simple and effective solution for any company's Resource Provisioning Management (RPM).

EADS Matra Datavision

It was founded in 1979, which is an integrated business consultation unit. The company developed design software applications. It was acquired by IBM in 2002.

Tarian Software

The Tarian eRecordsEngine is an embedded electronic recordkeeping technology for business application software developed by Tarian Software.

2003

Rational Software Corporation

This was founded by Paul Levy and Mike Devlin in 1981, to provide tools to promote the adoption of modern software engineering approaches, particularly explicit modular architecture and iterative development.

Think Dynamics

It was established in September 2000, which creates software that integrates genuine Utility Computing into contexts with different e-Business Internet infrastructures.

Information Laboratory

It's a Laboratory Information System (LIS) that collects, processes saves and maintains data from all phases of medical procedures and tests.

CrossAccess Corporation

IBM purchased this company on 17th October 2003, for data-handling services, and plays as a provider of infrastructure software that allows businesses to access data housed in mainframe databases and make it accessible to new business applications.

Green Pasture Software

This organization looks after Document management software from the company aids in the organization, development, and management of papers, allowing businesses to modify and manage various documents.

2004

Trigo Technologies

Manufacturers, distributors, and retailers use Trigo Technologies' product information management solutions.

Daksh e-Services

Daksh eServices is an Indian outsourcing firm that provides a variety of web-based customer support solutions and is also the first Indian-based company to be acquired by IBM.

Business Continuity Services unit of Schlumberger

The Business Continuity Services section of Schlumberger, situated in London, is one of Europe's major workplaces in the business continuity and disaster recovery industry.

Candle Corporation

This company was launched in 1977, as the Developer of mainframe management software for enterprise infrastructure deployment and administration.

Alphablox Corporation

AlphaBlox is the only open Web-based platform for eBusiness analysis applications, allowing businesses to examine their data, which was inaugurated in 1996.

Cyanea Systems

Cyanea Systems was established in 2001, which makes software that analyses and manages web-based business application performance.

Venetica

Venetica is an enterprise information integration company. The company is based in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Systemcorp ALG Ltd

It is a Project Portfolio Management (PPM) software Canada-based company, which was founded in 1991 and acquired by IBM on 19th November 2004.

Liberty Insurance Services

This company provides insurance sector software and business process management solutions and was acquired by IBM for an undisclosed sum.

Maersk Data and DMdata from Maersk

This is a Danish-based company from the head branch of Maersk that provides technology services to the business.

KeyMRO

KeyMRO offers sourcing and procurement services for non-production and indirect purchases of products and services.

2005

Systems Research & Development

This company was founded in 1983 by Jeff Jonas, to develop and market business intelligence and security analytics software for commercial and government organizations.

Corio

George Still and Roger Lee founded Corio in 1998 as an enterprise Application Service Provider (ASP) that distributes and manages corporate applications.

Gluecode Software

The company was founded in 2000, that provides open-source application infrastructure. The company is based in Los Angeles and was acquired by IBM in 2005.

Meiosys

Meiosys is a company that makes computing middleware for large data centers. The company has customers in telecommunications, financial services, manufacturing, energy, and government industries.

PureEdge Solutions, Inc

PureEdge Solutions develops and sells business process management software and services based on electronic forms.

Isogon Corporation

The firm provides a cross-platform inventory, use, and contract management software suite.

DWL

It is an enterprise information integration company that renders translation solutions for your businesses. It was founded in 1996 and is based in Greater Atlanta Area, East Coast, Southern US.

DataPower Technology

The IBM WebSphere DataPower SOA Appliances are a set of pre-built, pre-configured rack-mountable network devices (XML appliances) that can speed XML and Web Services deployments while also extending SOA architecture.

iPhrase Systems

For the banking, technology, manufacturing, healthcare, and retail industries, iPhrase Technologies delivers e-business and e-service solutions.

Network Solutions

It is an Indian-based enterprise, That provides a wide range of company solutions, including website construction, optimization, social media, and online advertising, among others.

Collation

Collation is a resource mapping firm that develops service-oriented network solutions that are automated.

Bowstreet

It is a portal-based tool, and delivers portals, bundled composite applications, and distributed Web-based services with application development tools.

2006

ARGUS

Argus is a communication and system monitoring tool. Its purpose is to keep track of network services, routers, and some other network equipment. Notably, when it finds difficulties, it will send out alerts.

CIMS Lab

It is It-based financial management, that looks into the financial statements of the company, which was purchased by IBM on 20th January 2006.

Viacore

For private trade communities, Viacor provides a suite of inter-business integration services, which was founded by Fadi Chehade in 1999.

Micromuse

It is an American-based company that renders network management software services, founded in 2006 by Christopher Dawes Phill Tee.

BuildForge

BuildForge creates and sells software for building process management. The company was founded in 2001 and is based in Austin, Texas.

Unicorn Solutions

This company is a European-based that offers computer software printing services and other information-related services.

Rembo Technology

Rembo Technology is a privately held software corporation that manufactures tools that ease the process of installing and updating operating systems on servers as well as client machines like desktops and laptops.

Webify Solutions

Webify Solutions specializes in developing and marketing SOA software and services for the healthcare and insurance industries.

Global Value Solutions

The automotive, car components, metallurgical, finance, services, and telecommunications industries are all addressed by Global Value Solutions SA.

DORANA

DORANA is a software asset management tool Ubiquity that enables businesses to make intelligent software investments and decisions based on actual software use behaviour on both networked and centralized platforms.

MRO Software

The company was founded in 1968 by Bob Daniels, was a software firm that is based in Bedford. MRO software was bought by IBM on 3rd August 2006 for $739 million and defunct in 2007.

FileNet

FileNet, founded in 1982, created software to assist businesses in managing their content and business processes.

Internet Security Systems (ISS)

It offers software and services for PCs, servers, networks, and remote locations that include proactive security against attacks before they have an impact on a company's operations.

Palisades Technology Partners

Palisades Technology Partners, LLC is a software company that specializes in mortgage finance.

2007

Consul Risk Management

Consul Risk Management International is a global provider of security event management solutions.

Vallent Corporation

Vallent Corporation is a company that works in the field of service assurance. Performance, business, and service management are all services provided by the corporation.

Softek Storage

Softek Storage Solutions Corporation is a software firm that specializes in storage management. Transparent data movement is a service provided by the company.

Watchfire Corporation

Watchfire Corporation develops and sells online risk management software and services to ensure that websites are secure and compliant.

WebDialogs

Webdialogs creates online meeting and communication solutions such as phone, video, and Web conferencing, as well as data collaboration and Web. On August 22, 2007, IBM acquired WebDialogs, Inc. for an undisclosed amount.

DataMirror Corporation

The company claims to have over 2100 commercial customers in industries such as healthcare, retail, telecommunications, and financial services and provides real-time data integration, protection, and Java database technologies. Later, in 2007, the company became a wholly-owned subsidiary company of IBM.

Quinnova, Inc

Quinnova Pharmaceuticals is a biotech firm that specializes in the development and marketing of prescription medication products.

Princeton Softech

Princeton Softech is a developer of enterprise data preservation and test data management software as well as commercial data management tools for activities including data assessment, data privacy, data classification, data storage, and archiving.

NovusCG

NovusCG is the provider of software consulting and independent enterprise storage services. IBM acquired the company in 2007.

2008

XIV

In 2002, an Israeli start-up company led by engineer and businessman Moshe Yanai developed the IBM XIV Storage System. In 2005, they delivered their first system to a client.

AptSoft Corporation

AptSoft Corporation provides a design and executive platform for event processing to assist businesses in implementing event-driven applications.

Solid Information Technology

SolidDB offers both an in-memory and a standard disk-based database, both of which have the same SQL interface and a high-availability option.

Cognos

The Ontario-based company that renders business intelligence and performance management software, was founded in 1969 and acquired by IBM on 18th January 2008.

Arsenal Digital Solutions

On-demand data protection services for servers and personal computers are provided by Arsenal Digital Solutions.

Net Integration Technology

Net Integration Technologies Inc. (NITI) is a software company that specializes in providing autonomous Linux-based server operating systems and other technology services.

Encentuate

Encentuate, Inc. was a privately held corporation situated in Redwood City, California, that was founded in Singapore in 2002. Peng T. Ong launched the company in 2001. In 2008, IBM purchased the company.

Telelogic AB

Telelogic AB was a software development company. Telelogic was established in 1983 as Televerket's research and development department. The headquarters are located in the Swedish municipality of Malmö.

Diligent Technologies

Diligent is a pioneer in the field of enterprise-class disk-based data protection. Dedicated to overcoming the issues of data storage, protection, and management. In the year 2002, the company was established. In April 2008, IBM purchased Diligent.

FilesX

When working with z/OS data sets, Db2, CICS, IMS, or WebSphere MQ data, IBM File Manager provides configurable, user-friendly tools for enhanced file processing. IBM bought the company in 2008.

InfoDyne Corporation

InfoDyne, Ltd. produced system software and large-scale systems for United Nations organisations. In Hong Kong, the company was founded in 1991 by Filipino IT specialists.

Platform Solutions

Platform solutions combine powerful infrastructure options, a sophisticated development platform, and industry-leading services to create cloud-based solutions. IBM announced the acquisition of Platform Solutions Inc. in 2008.

ILOG

ILOG was a multinational software development firm. Pierre Haren and Greg Nuyens launched the firm in 1987. In January of 2009, IBM bought the company. It developed supply chain, business rule management, visualisation, and optimization enterprise software.

Transitive Corporation

Transitive Corporation is a manager in cross-platform virtualization, with technology that is installed on more than 17 million PCs. It was formed by Alasdair Rawsthorne in the year 2000, and its headquarters are in Los Gatos, California.

2009

Outblaze

Outblaze provided services on EMailing. It was a privately held online messaging service and collaboration service. The company is based in Hong Kong. In Jan 2009, IBM announced its intention to acquire Outblaze.

Exeros Assets

Exeros' technology reveals hidden connections between databases, allowing users to make sense of several data sources more quickly. Its headquarters are in Santa Clara, California, and it specialises in data discovery software.

SPSS Inc

SPSS Inc. was a software company best known for its proprietary programme with the same name. Norman H. Nie created the company in 1968, and it is situated in Chicago, Illinois, United States. In 2009, IBM purchased the company.

Ounce Labs

Ounce Labs is a company that sells security software. The firm developed a software analysis tool that examines source code for security flaws and fixes them. The company was created on October 1, 2002, and is headquartered in Waltham, Massachusetts.

RedPill Solutions

RedPill focuses on creating customer value and customer-centricity. The company provides Customer Management services to the Telecom, Technology, Financial Services, and Retail verticals. The company was founded in 2000.

Guardium

IBM Security Guardium Data Protection facilitates a zero-trust safety method. It finds and categorizes sensitive data from across the organization. The company was established in 2002. In 2009, IBM purchased the company.

Lombardi

Lombardi Software was a business software firm. The company is based in Austin, Texas, and was created in 1998. They developed business process management software. IBM purchased it at the end of 2009.

2010

National Interest Security Company

For the Intelligence Community, NISC is a prominent source of new information technology, information management, management technology consulting services, and security efforts. The company was created in 2007 and is situated in Fairfax, Virginia.

Initiate Systems

Initiate Systems is a software company that helps businesses leverage and share important data assets strategically. Jeff Galowich and Ron Galowich established the company in October of 1994. Its headquarters are in Chicago, Illinois.

Intelliden

Intelliden develops Intelligent Networking software that helps businesses control, manage, and scale their networks. Glen Tindal and Dale Hecht launched the company in 2000. Menlo Park, California, is home to the company's headquarters.

Wilshire Credit Corporation

Wilshire Credit Corporation's main operating assets, including the Wilshire mortgage servicing platform, have been acquired by IBM's mortgage servicing business, which will hire Wilshire's approximately 900 employees.

Cast Iron Systems

Cast Iron Systems is a cloud-based and SaaS-based software platform that offers integration tools to large and mid-sized businesses. The company was created in 2001 and is headquartered in San Jose, California

Sterling Commerce

Sterling Commerce was an Omni-Channel Commerce software and services company. The company was created in 1975 and is based in Dublin, Ohio, in the United States. Its Parent organizations are IBM, AT&T, and Southwestern Bell Yellow Pages.

Coremetrics

Coremetrics is a company that specializes in digital marketing optimization and online analytics. Brett Hurt created the company in 1999, and it is headquartered in San Mateo, California.

BigFix

BigFix, Inc specializes in networked desktop, mobile, and server computer management. David Hindawi and David Donoho established BigFix in 1997. BigFix is a simple and easy-to-use compliance, endpoint, and security management solution.

Storwize

RAID computer data storage systems with a raw storage capacity of up to 32 PB were virtualized using Storwize systems. Storwize used to be a stand-alone data storage company. The company was founded in 2011 and was eventually shut down on February 12, 2020.

Data cap

Datacap is a computer software and services firm that creates and distributes software and services. It was established in 1988. Datacap compiles documents, extracts significant information, and educates it into downstream company operations.

Unica Corporation

Unica is an HCL software brand that includes numerous Enterprise Marketing Management components and is part of HCL Technologies. It was created in 1992 and is headquartered in Waltham, Massachusetts. Its parent company is HCL Technologies.

OpenPages

OpenPages is a software package for governance, risk management, and compliance (GRC). Scott Killoh and Warren Ondras launched OpenPages in 1990. In October of 2010, IBM officially bought the company.

Netezza

Netezza is a company that creates and sells high-performance data warehousing equipment and advanced analytics solutions. Jit Saxena created Netezza in 1999, and it is based in Marlborough, Massachusetts, in the United States

Blade Network Technologies

Blade Network Technologies manufactures Ethernet network switches for blade servers, server and storage data center racks, and other applications. The company was established in 2006 and is headquartered in Santa Clara, California. In 2010, Blade was acquired by IBM System Networking.

PSS Systems

PSS Systems specializes in enterprise discovery management software for the formal holds and anthologies industries. The company was created in the year 2000 and is based in California. PSS Systems was acquired by IBM in 2010.

Clarity Systems

Financial governance software is provided by Clarity Systems. The business was established in 1995. On October 21, 2010, IBM purchased Clarity Systems, a privately held corporation situated in Toronto, Canada.

2011

Tririga

The TRIRIGA solution delivers a comprehensive workplace management system on a single technology platform. It was a public company and was founded in 2000. Its headquarters is located in Las Vegas, Nevada.

i2 Limited

For military intelligence, law enforcement, and commercial entities, i2 Limited develops visual intelligence and investigative analysis software. The firm was established on April 9, 1990. It was acquired by IBM in 2011.

Algorithmics Inc

Ron Dembo started Algorithmics in Toronto, Ontario, which provides risk management software to financial institutions. Algorithmics was founded by Ron Dembo in 1989 and it's based in Toronto, Canada.

Q1 Labs

Q1 Labs is a global provider of risk management, security information and event management, user activity monitors, and log management systems that are high-value and cost-effective. Q1 Labs was acquired by IBM on Oct 4, 2011.

Platform Computing

Platform Computing was a software business well known for its Load Sharing Facility task scheduling application. It was created in 1992 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and has departments across the United States, Europe, and Asia.

Cluster and Grid Management

Platform Cluster Manager for Power V4.2 makes scale-out and cloud computing infrastructures simple to handle. It was acquired by IBM in 2011.

Cúram Software

Cram Software is a social enterprise management software firm that also provides consulting, certification, and training. Its headquarters are in Dublin, Ireland, where it was formed in 1990.

Emptoris

Emptoris was a software company that specialized in strategic supply and contract management. Patrick D. Quirk is the CEO of Emptoris. The company was founded in 1999 and is headquartered in Burlington, Massachusetts. IBM announced a formal deal to buy Emptoris on December 15, 2011.

DemandTec

DemandTec uses data science to help retailers achieve optimal pricing, promotions, and markdowns, as well as deal management with vendor partners. DemandTec was established in 1999 and is headquartered in San Mateo, California.

Companies Acquired by IBM in 2012 - 2021

2012

Green Hat

Green Hat is a software testing company that operates in the cloud. Rational Integration Tester from Green Hat prevents integration issues by allowing iterative and agile development. On January 4, 2012, IBM announced the completion of its acquisition of Green Hat.

Worklight

Worklight is a software company that develops powerful mobile application platforms and solutions for smartphones and tablets. Worklight was created in 2006, and the company's headquarters are in New York, New York.

Varicent

Finance, sales, human resources, and IT departments all benefit from Varicent Software's incentive and sales performance management software. Marc Altshuller, the CEO of Varicent, started it in 2003. Toronto, Canada is home to the company's headquarters.

Vivisimo

Vivisimo is a company that specialises in the creation of computer search engines. Vivisimo is a software company situated in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States, that was created on June 21, 2000. In May of 2012, IBM purchased the company.

Tealeaf Technology

Tealeaf was a firm that specialised in web and mobile analytics software. Tealeaf was started in 1999 by Robert Wenig. The corporation is headquartered in San Francisco, California.

Texas Memory Systems

Texas Memory Systems, Inc. was a company that invented and manufactured solid-state discs and digital signal processors in the United States. Holly Frost created TMS in 1978, and Dan Scheeland is based in Houston, Texas.

Butterfly Software Ltd

Butterfly Software creates software that aids in the discovery, analysis, and migration of data center infrastructures. In 2011, Butterfly Software LLP was established.

StoredIQ

StoredIQ was founded to manage the lifecycle of unstructured data information. Jeff Erramouspe, Jeff Bone, Russell Turpin, Rudy Rouhana, Laura Arbilla, and Brett Funderburg founded Deepfile in Austin, Texas in 2001. Its headquarters were in Austin, Texas, in the United States.

2013

Star Analytics

Star Analytics, Inc. is a major developer of financial automation and integration tools for EPM and BI applications. It's a privately held company founded in 2004. Its headquarters is located in San Mateo, CA.

CSL International

CSL creates cutting-edge biotherapies and influenza vaccinations that save lives and aid people suffering from life-threatening illnesses. In 2013, CSL International was acquired by IBM.

UrbanCode

UrbanCode Deploy is a solution that allows you to automate application deployments across many environments. It's made to make agile development easier by allowing for quick feedback and continuous delivery. The company was founded in 1996 by Michael Sayko. Its headquarters is located in Cleveland, Ohio, United States.

Softlayer Technologies

SoftLayer Technologies, Inc. was a cloud computing, managed hosting, and dedicated server company. Lance Crosby founded the company in 2005, and it is headquartered in Dallas, Texas, in the United States. In 2013, IBM purchased the company.

Trusteer

Trusteer is a computer security division that develops a suite of security products. Trusteer was founded in 2006 by Mickey Boodaei and Rakesh K. Loonkar. And was acquired by IBM in September 2013 for $1 billion. The company's headquarters are in Boston, Massachusetts, in the United States.

Daeja Image Systems

Daeja Image Systems Ltd. is a prominent developer of software that enables viewing huge documents and photos easier for business and IT professionals. Daeja is a privately held software firm based in Milton Keynes, United Kingdom. On September 19, 2013, IBM purchased Daeja Image Systems.

The Now Factory

The Now Factory offers data network solutions that improve the client experience for Communication Service Providers. The company is based in Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, and was founded in 2006. IBM acquired The Now Factory in October 2013.

Xtify

Xtify is an IBM subsidiary that provides tools for mobile app publishers to run push and location-based notification campaigns. In 2007, Xtify was established. IBM's Xtify mobile messaging capabilities, as well as a new SMS digital messaging offering, are included in the Enterprise Marketing Management portfolio.

Fiberlink Communications

Fiberlink Communications Corporation offers mobility as a service, assisting businesses in connecting, controlling, and securing laptops and mobile devices. Its headquarters are in Pennsylvania, United States, and it was created in 1991.

Aspera Inc

IBM Aspera is a software application that enables customers to move crucial files and data sets of any size at high speeds via existing infrastructure and global IP networks. Aspera was created in 2004 and is headquartered in California, United States. In January 2014, IBM purchased Aspera.

2014

Silverpop Systems, Inc

Silverpop Systems, Inc. Is best in digital marketing. The business provides automated email marketing ideas, campaign management, execution, and campaign performance analytics. It's based in Atlanta, Georgia, United States, and was established in 1999.

Cloudant Inc

Cloudant is a scalable, disseminated cloud database for web, mobile, IoT, and serverless applications built on Apache CouchDB. The company was founded in 2008 and was acquired by IBM in 2014.

Cognea

Cognea creates interactive virtual agents by designing and developing artificial intelligence technology platforms. The company was founded by John Zakos and Liesl Capper in 2013 and it's based in the Greater New York Area, East Coast, Northeastern US.

CrossIdeas

Identity & Access Governance Solutions from CrossIdeas help you manage people, applications, and entitlements in a unified way. IBM's leadership in delivering innovation, services, and software for protecting companies will be strengthened with the acquisition of CrossIdeas.

Lighthouse Security Group

Experts in the domains of identity management and access management (IAM), cloud computing, and software make up the Lighthouse Security Group. The year the company was founded was 2007.

2015

Blekko

Blekko was a web search engine whose declared objective was to produce better search results than Google Search. On November 1, 2010, the institution was established.

AlchemyAPI

AlchemyAPI was a machine learning related software business. Deep learning was used in its technology for a variety of purposes. It was created in 2005 and is situated in Denver, Colorado, United States.

Explorys

Using the Explorys Platform, healthcare organisations may collect, link, and combine data from hundreds of different sources across their corporate and clinically integrated networks.

Phytel

Phytel is a leading provider of integrated population health management software, according to numerous observers. It is a population health company based in Dallas. In May 2015, IBM announced that it has completed the acquisition of Phytel.

Compose, Inc

Compose, Inc. runs a managed platform for database deployment, hosting, and scaling that is used by developers. Customers in the United States are served by Compose. In 2009, the company was established.

Bluebox

Blue Box combines the security of a private cloud with the ease of a public cloud, giving our clients a road to a hybrid cloud. This company was purchased by IBM in 2015.

Merge Healthcare Inc

Merge Healthcare Inc. provides patients and physicians with an efficient electronic healthcare experience. The firm was created in 1987 and is situated in Chicago, Illinois, United States. Merge Healthcare Solutions Inc and Cedara Software Ltd are the subsidiaries.

Meteorix LLC

Meteorix LLC specializes in the implementation of financial and human resource services. It's a company based in Boston. Meteorix was founded in 2011 and employs around 200 people.

StrongLoop Ltd

StrongLoop is the key code contributor that develops StrongLoop Suite, a top Mobile API Tier. StrongLoop is established in San Mateo, California, and employs over 30 Node.js developers.

The weather Company- Digital assets

Weather.com and Weather Underground are owned and operated by The Weather Company, a weather forecasting and information technology company. The Weather Company's digital assets were purchased by IBM for about $2 billion.

Gravitant, Inc

With roughly 200 workers, Gravitant cloudMatrix is an IT services and consulting firm. It is based in Austin, Texas. The complete IT value chain is addressed by Gravitant software and it was founded in 2004.

Clearleap

IBM Cloud Video is an IBM subsidiary that provides live video streaming services. The company was founded in 2007 by Gyula Feher, Brad Hunstable, and John Ham and its headquarters is located in San Francisco, California, United States.

Cleversafe

Cleversafe Inc. was a developer of object storage software and systems. Chris Gladwin created the company in 2004. Cleversafe was purchased by IBM in 2015 for $1.3 billion dollars.

2016

Iris Analytics

IRIS Analytics specializes in IBM Safer Payments to assist clients in reducing risk, increasing productivity, and increasing profits. IRIS Analytics was acquired by IBM on January 15, 2016, and the company's headquarters are located in Germany

Ustream

Ustream is a firm that broadcasts live video. Its headquarters are in San Francisco, and it employs about 180 people. In March 2007, the company was founded, and in 2016 it merged with IBM. The company was rebranded IBM Cloud Video in 2018.

Resource Link

Resource Link is a customized Web-based service that gives you access to data for planning, installing, and managing IBM Systems servers and applications.

Aperto

In the DACH region, Aperto is a renowned digital agency. In 2016, the company merged with IBM. The company was founded in 1995 and has its headquarters in Berlin. They work with both domestic and international clients.

Ecx.io

ecx.io works with its clients to identify digital opportunities and help them grow their businesses. The company was formed around 25 years ago. The company merged with IBM in 2016

Truven Health Analytics

Truven was acquired by IBM Corporation on February 18, 2016, and incorporated with IBM's Watson Health subsidiary. Truven Health Analytics provides a solution that ensures pharmaceutical safety, health, and disease management.

Optevia

Optevia specializes in the public sector Microsoft Dynamics CRM. It's a UK-based systems integrator that IBM purchased in 2016 in order to address rising software demand.

Resilient Systems

Security teams can use the Resilient Systems, Inc. platform to design and maintain key enterprise software. They create computer software and safeguard businesses from cyber-attacks. In 2010, the company was established.

Blue Wolf Group LLC

Bluewolf is a consulting firm that specializes in developing digital solutions that produce outcomes. Bluewolf, a cloud consulting firm, was acquired by IBM for approximately $200 million. Bluewolf was bought by IBM on May 12, 2016.

EZSource

EZSource is a comprehensive product suite that offers reliable, automated analysis and measurements. Developers can see which programs have changed thanks to EZSource's visual dashboard. The company was established in 2033.

Sanovi Technologies

Sanovi Technologies Inc is a software development company that creates and builds applications. Cloud migration, disaster recovery, private cloud infrastructure, and enterprise application solutions are all available through the company. The company was started in 2002 and is headquartered in Bengaluru.

Promontory Financial Group

Promontory Financial Group is a firm that provides financial services advice to clients. It is being completed under IBM's supervision. The company was created in 2001 and is based in Washington, D.C., in the United States.

2017

Agile 3 Solutions

Agile 3 Solutions creates products that help clients renovate their businesses. The company's headquarters are in San Francisco, California, USA. Raghu Varadan, the company's founder, started it in January 2009.

Verizon – Cloud services

Verizon Business is a Verizon Communications division that delivers services and products. Verizon Business was founded in January 2006. Verizon split up into three groups in 2019, renaming Verizon Business Solutions as Verizon Business Solutions

XCC

IBM joined with XCC so that it will strengthen the IBM Connections portfolio by providing tools to organizations, and reduce content fragmentation, enabling individuals to work and communicate more effectively across their organization.

Cloudigo

Cloudigo is a company that provides network infrastructure. Cloudigo is a new brand that came out in 2016. Cloudigo is owned by International Business Machines Corporation, a New York-based firm. Information Technology Services is Cloudigo's industry.

Vivant Digital

In the United States and Canada, Vivint Smart Home, Inc. is a publicly-traded smart home firm. Keith Nellesen and Todd Pedersen launched APX Alarm Security Solutions Inc in 1999. The company's revenue in 2020 was 1,260.7 million dollars. There are approximately 11,000 people employed there.

2018

Armanta, Inc

Armata Pharmaceuticals is a biotechnology firm that develops drugs to treat drug-resistant bacterial diseases. The company's headquarters are in Marina del Rey, California.

Oniqua Holdings Pty Ltd

Oniqua was established in 1990 and is headquartered in Denver, Colorado. There are between 50 to 200 individuals employed there. MRO Analytics, Supply Chain Management, Asset Performance Management, Maintenance, Repairs, and Operations are among the services offered by the organization.

2019

Red Hat

Red Hat, Inc. is a software corporation that specializes in providing open-source software to businesses. Raleigh, North Carolina is home to the company headquarters. Bob Young and Marc Ewing launched the company in 1993.

2020

Spanugo

For the enterprise hybrid cloud, Spanugo offers Cybersecurity Posture Assurance. The company began operations in April 2016 and ceased operations in June 2020. Doc Vaidhyanathan, Doss Karan, and Janga R Aliminati are the company's founders.

WDG

WDG works with your firm to help you get the most out of your money. IBM's Robotic Process Automation application is cloud-based, clever and intuitive, and simple to use, allowing you to get the most out of your investment

TruQua Enterprises

TruQua Enterprises is a service provider and it's specialized in SAP Finance, deployment strategies, development libraries, best practices, implementations, development libraries, blueprint designs and solution research. The Headquarters is located in Chicago, Illinois, United States. The company was founded in 2010.

Instana

Instana, a German-American company, is best in creating APM software. This application performance management software is used for handling the software used in microservice architectures and 3D visualization. This company is based in Chicago, Solingen, and San Francisco.

Expertus

The company's headquarters is in Canada. The company assists in Case Management, Data Management, Fraud Detection, Messaging Services, Payment, Processing, Payments Solutions, Regulation Compliance, Security Service, Software Updates, and Technical Maintenance. On 15 December 2020 IBM announced its acquisition with Nordcloud.

Nordcloud

Nordcloud is a cloud consulting services provider company. Its headquarters are in Helsinki, Finland, and was established in 2011. Over 450 employees are working under this company and its turnover is about $61 million. On 21, December 2020 IBM finally acquired Nordcloud.

2021

7Summits

7Summits is a Salesforce Platinum Consulting Partner in transmitting transformative digital tests. It formed an acquisition with NYSE: IBM on January 11th, 2021 and it focuses especially on Salesforce ecosystem-focused assistance.

TAOS

It is an IT service management company. The services they provide are migration, strategic information technology planning, cloud architecture, security assessments, network and systems engineering, and technical program management. On the 14th of January, 2021, IBM announced that it will acquire Taos.

MyInvenio

MyInvenio is a facet of the IMB company. It allows the unions to use AI-powered automation and helps to simplify business processes by providing a finding in the mining process. On April 15, 2021, IBM announced a conclusive pact to acquire myInvenio.

Turbonomic

It is one of the fastest-growing technology companies. They provide applications that manage IT. Their software fulfils the demand regarding the network, storage, and performance and also protects the automation in context. On June 17, 2021, IBM announced the finale of its acquisition of Turbonomic.

Boxboat

BoxBoat is Cloud Migration engagements, DevOps, and Continuous Delivery. They use modern technologies for enabling organizations in revising the digital data in the cloud. On the 29th of July, 2021, IBM announced its acquisition with Boxboat Technologies.

Bluetab

It is a technical services and business software company. Their departments can be founded in the UK, Mexico, and Spain. The Java EE, Microsoft. NE and other open-source devices are the technologies the company operates with. In 2021, Bluetab Solutions Group joined with IBM.

Conclusion

IBM progressed plenty of coalitions and acquisitions in the last decade. IBM has its tract in 20 countries and 25 different US states. Its substantial exchange was in 2014, peddled IBM’s x86 Server Business for $2.1B to Lenovo Group and the substantial acquisition transpired in 2018, Red Hat for $34.0B. Software and technology are IBM's most accomplished sectors.

As of 2020, IBM's annual net income is $5.6 billion and its revenue is $73.6 billion. And as of July 13, 2021, its market capitalization is $125.3 billion. As per the above-mentioned IBM Acquisitions list, IBM made a total of 199 Acquisitions.

FAQ

How many acquisitions has IBM made?

IBM has made nearly 200 acquisitions from 1912 to 2021.

Who is IBM owned by?

The major shareholders of IBM are James Whitehurst, Arvind Krishna, James Kavanaugh, Vanguard Group Inc., BlackRock Inc., and State Street Corp.

Who is the CEO of IBM?

Arvind Krishna is the current CEO of IBM.