"The Blue Kite" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival. Here are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2. The film -- in Mandarin with English subtitles -- opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street.

In China it can't be easy being a film maker, someone who wants to explore on screen the contradictory events that have shaped not only the Communist revolution but also his own life. It's a delicate, complicated task. The film maker is dependent on Government departments created by the same system whose legacies he's examining. The production and release of any film of this kind thus become something of a triumph.

Such a film is "The Blue Kite." A co-production by the Chinese Government and private Hong Kong movie interests, it's the work of Tian Zhuangzhuang, whose "Horse Thief" was seen at the Film Forum in 1988.

"The Blue Kite" is the story of the Chen family of Beijing, as the son, Tietou, recalls his infancy, childhood and adolescence. It follows the fortunes of the Chens, their relatives and their friends from 1953, when Tietou's parents marry and Chairman Mao's revolution is still young and vigorous, into the dark, vengeful days of the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's. This mix of politics and domestic drama isn't always easy to follow, but Mr. Tian demonstrates a rigorous, unsentimental control of the material that becomes very moving, at least in part because of the director's understatement.

The Chens initially appear to be members of an enlightened, comparatively prosperous lower middle class. Some of the Chens enthusiastically support the new Government's radical reforms. Others seem apolitical. Whatever their commitments, all suffer equally.

The movie comes to dramatic life only in its final sections, relating to the excesses of the Red Guards. These sequences are harrowing. "The Blue Kite" looks gorgeous. It's well acted by a large cast, but, to appreciate it fully, one needs more footnotes to history than most ordinary moviegoers are going to have in mind or pocket.