As part of the Monday Movies series, Mandala Theatre screened a Chinese film “The Blue Kite”, directed by Tian Zhuangzhuang, on November 17. The screening was followed by an interaction programme regarding Chinese cinema in general and the movie in particular. Monday Movies screenings feature films from a single country, every Monday, for an entire month.

Film critic Yangesh and director of Kathmandu international Mountain Film Festival, Ramyata Limbu, were the main speakers during the interaction programme. The discussion revolved around the subject matter, technical quality and characters of the movie.

Set in 1950/60s Beijing, “The Blue Kite” is a story told from the perspective of a young boy named Tietou. The three major political episodes that the boy endures, the Hundred Flowers Campaign, Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution, forces him to seek sanctuary in his protective but unemotional stepfather. The movie also explores the issue of patriarchy in the then Chinese society through the portrayal of an evolving Chinese family.

Yangesh, during the interaction, told the audience that he found layers of metaphors in the film that the filmmaker had conveyed through the visual medium. “There are a lot of symbols used in the film. The film shows us how a variety of approaches can be applied to tell a story,” he added.

Similarly, Limbu shared with the audience the difficulty of incorporating the spoken-language of the people in movies. “Writing script for a film is a tedious task. Dialogues, expressions and moods are important ingredients of a script. So, while making a film, if we can take care of these elements, we can produce a good movie on a small budget,’’ she said.

“The Blue Kite” was banned in mainland China but it went on to win two major international film awards at the Tokyo International Film Festival and the Hawaii International Film Festival, both in 1993.

Monday Movies Club is jointly founded by the members of Critic Society, Mandala Theatre Nepal and Indigenous Film Archive. Participation is open to all