Data about population living in Magliano Vetere

NOTICE: in what follows data refers to Magliano Vetere, where rises the City Hall of Magliano Vetere, (and then not to the whole territory of Magliano Vetere). For the sake of simplicity we will us the term of Magliano Vetere.

In Magliano Vetere live two hundred and fourteen people: ninety-six are males and one hundred and eighteen are females.

There are seventy-eight singles (thirty-six males and fourty-two females). There are ninety-seven people married, and zero people legally separed. There are also four divorced people and thirty-five widows and widowers.

Please find in what follows the table of the distribution of inhabitants by age.

Data about foreigners living in Magliano Vetere

In Magliano Vetere live three foreigners, zero are males and three are females. 3 come from Europa, 0 from Africa, 0 from America, 0 from Asia and 0 from Oceania.

Please find in what follows the table of the distribution of foreigners by age.

Education in Magliano Vetere

There are in Magliano Vetere one hundred and ninety-nine people in school age, ninety are males and one hundred and nine females.

Employment rates and workers in Magliano Vetere

There are in Magliano Vetere 72 people aged 15 years or more. 61 are employed and 5 were previously employed but now are unemployed and seeking for a new job. There are 47 males aged 15 years or more, 42 are employed and 3 were previously employed but now are unemployed and seeking for a new job. There are 25 females aged 15 years or more, 19 are employed and 2 s were previously employed but now are unemployed and seeking for a new job.

Families and their compositions

There are in Magliano Vetere 105 families, for a total of 214 people.

Please find in what follows a table showing the number of families along with the number of people for each family.

There are 105 famiglie living in Magliano Vetere. 1 live in rented houses, 77 live in houses of their own propertyÂ and 27 live in houses for different reasons.

The buildings and their characteristics in Magliano Vetere

There are in Magliano Vetere 191 buildings, but only 123 are used. 121 buildings are for residential use, 2 buildings are for commercial or productive pourposes. Among the 121 buildings for residential use 59 were build using bricks of tuffs, 21 were built using concrete and 41 were built using other materials like steel, wood and so on. Among the 121 buildings for residential use 38 are in excellent condition, 50 are in good conditions, 28 are in mediocre conditions and 5 are in bad conditions.

In the following three tables the buildings built for residential use in Magliano Vetere are classified by building year, by floors number and by rooms number.

Buildings in Magliano Vetere by year of construction

Buildings in Magliano Vetere by floors number

Buildings in Magliano Vetere by rooms number