Maps of Magliano Vetere

This detailed map of Magliano Vetere is provided by Google. Use the buttons under the map to switch to different map types provided by Maphill itself.

See Magliano Vetere from a different perspective.

Each map type has its advantages. No map style is the best. The best is that Maphill lets you look at each place from many different angles.

Sure, this google hybrid detailed map is nice. But there is good chance you will like other map styles even more. Select another style in the above table. See Magliano Vetere and Campania from a different view.

What to do when you like this map?

If you like this Magliano Vetere, Salerno, Campania, Italy map, please don't keep it to yourself. Give your friends a chance to see how the world converted to images looks like.

Share this detailed map.

Use the buttons for Facebook, Twitter or Google+ to share a link to this google hybrid map of Magliano Vetere. Maphill is the largest map gallery on the web. The number of maps is, however, not the only reason to visit Maphill.

Get detailed map of Magliano Vetere for free.

You can embed, print or download the map just like any other image. All Magliano Vetere and Campania maps are available in a common image format. Free images are available under Free map link located above the map.

Is there anything more than this map?

Sure, there is. It has been said that Maphill maps are worth a thousand words. No doubt about that. But you can experience much more when you visit Magliano Vetere.

Be inspired.

Campania has a lot to offer. Each place is different. Each place is worth a visit. It will never be possible to capture all the beauty in the map.

Magliano Vetere hotel deals.

If any of Maphill's maps inspire you to come to Magliano Vetere, we would like to offer you access to wide selection of nearby hotels at low prices and with great customer service.

Thanks to our partnership with Booking.com you can take advantage of up to 50% discounts for hotels in many locations in the area of Campania. Book hotels online and save money.

Magliano Vetere hotels

See the full list of hotels in or close to Magliano Vetere, the list of destinations in Salerno or choose from the below listed cities.

Magliano Vetere hotels »

Hotels in popular destinations in Salerno

Salerno hotels »

Cava de' Tirreni hotels »

Scafati hotels »

Battipaglia hotels »

Nocera Inferiore hotels »

Eboli hotels »

Pagani hotels »

Sarno hotels »

Angri hotels »

Pontecagnano hotels »

Nocera Superiore hotels »

Capaccio hotels »

Mercato San Severino hotels »

Agropoli hotels »

Baronissi hotels »

more »

Learn more about the map styles

Each map type offers different information and each map style is designed for a different purpose. Read about the styles and map projection used in the above map (Detailed Google Hybrid Map of Magliano Vetere).

Google hybrid map

Google Maps provide an easily pannable and searchable map of Magliano Vetere. Hybrid map combines the high-resolution aerial and satellite images with a detailed street map overlay.

In addition to the default map view, this map lets you explore many places around the world through the panoramic street-level views. StreetView provides panoramic 360° images from positions along highways and roads in numerous countries around the world. Discover world landmarks, natural wonders and popular tourist attractions.

Mercator map projection

This map of Magliano Vetere is provided by Google Maps, whose primary purpose is to provide local street maps rather than a planetary view of the Earth. Within the context of local street searches, angles and compass directions are very important, as well as ensuring that distances in all directions are shown at the same scale.

The Mercator projection was developed as a sea travel navigation tool. It preserves angles. If you wish to go from Magliano Vetere to anywhere on the map, all you have to do is draw a line between the two points and measure the angle. If you head this compass direction, and keep going, you will reach your destination.

Technology

We unlock the value hidden in the geographic data. Thanks to automating the complex process of turning data into map graphics, we are able to create maps in higher quality, faster and cheaper than was possible before.

Forever free

We created Maphill to make the web a more beautiful place. Without you having to pay for it. Maphill maps are and will always be available for free.

Real Earth data

Do you think the maps are too beautiful not to be painted? No, this is not art. All detailed maps of Magliano Vetere are created based on real Earth data. This is how the world looks like.

Easy to use

This map is available in a common image format. You can copy, print or embed the map very easily. Just like any other image.

Different perspectives

The value of Maphill lies in the possibility to look at the same area from several perspectives. Maphill presents the map of Magliano Vetere in a wide variety of map types and styles.

Vector quality

We build each detailed map individually with regard to the characteristics of the map area and the chosen graphic style. Maps are assembled and kept in a high resolution vector format throughout the entire process of their creation.

Experience of discovering

Maphill maps will never be as detailed as Google maps or as precise as designed by professional cartographers. Our goal is different. We want to redefine the experience of discovering the world through the maps.

Fast anywhere

Maps are served from a large number of servers spread all over the world. Globally distributed map delivery network ensures low latency and fast loading times, no matter where on Earth you happen to be.

Spread the beauty

Embed the above google hybrid detailed map of Magliano Vetere into your website. Enrich your blog with quality map graphics. Make the web a more beautiful place.