Lawrence J. "Larry" Miller (born October 15, 1953) is an American actor, voice artist, comedian, podcaster, and columnist. He is an actor and writer, known for Kiss Kiss Bang Bang (2005), 10 Things I Hate About You (1999) and The Nutty Professor (1996). He has been married to Eileen Conn since March 1993. They have two children. He portrayed Principal Fickman on the Disney Channel Original Comedy Series, Liv and Maddie.

Biography[]

Early Life[]

Miller was born in Valley Stream, New York, on Long Island. He is Jewish. Miller married television writer Eileen Conn in 1993. The couple have two children. In April 2012, Miller suffered a severe traumatic brain injury when he fell and the back of his head hit the sidewalk. He has since recovered completely.

Career[]

His roles include the vindictive doorman on Seinfeld, Walter Stratford in the movie 10 Things I Hate About You, as well as several characters in Christopher Guest's mockumentary movies. He has also appeared in Carry On Columbus, The Nutty Professor, Nutty Professor II: The Klumps, Max Keeble's Big Move, and Pretty Woman. He played Edwin Poole in the ABC dramedy Boston Legal. He is close friends with Jerry Seinfeld and auditioned for the part of George Costanza. He played night club owner Michael Dobson in two different Law & Order episodes, first in the episode "Coma" and then later in "Encore". Miller appeared as himself in a third episode, "Smoke". He was also in 8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter, where he played Tommy, Kyle's obnoxious father, and Paul's colleague. He also played himself in a later episode of the same series.[citation needed] Additionally, he was the writer for the television shows Uncommon Sense (2005), Just Words (1992), and Pros & Cons (1999). Miller has a weekly podcast on the Carolla Digital Network, This Week with Larry Miller. He suspended his podcast after falling and injuring his head severely in April 2012, and after hospitalization and a coma said in January 2013 he is convalescing. The podcast resumed on January 9.

Trivia[]

He graduated from Valley Stream South High School on Long Island, New York.[1]

His long-time best friend is Jerry Seinfeld.

He has played a college/ university dean three times: The Nutty Professor (1996), The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes (1995) and Necessary Roughness (1991), Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000).

He frequently appears in Garry Marshall films.

He is the only actor to appear in both 10 Things I Hate About You (1999) and the subsequent television adaptation 10 Things I Hate About You (2009).

Gallery[]

To view the Larry Miller gallery, click here.

[]

Larry Miller at