Al Pacino told the audience at the world premiere of his new documentary, "Looking for Richard," that the film is "kind of a flier for `Richard III' - now you can go out and read the play, see the movie!"

The film is an attempt by Pacino to bring the work of William Shakespeare to mainstream audiences, and especially young people, he said at a Sundance Film Festival press conference Friday at the Shadow Ridge Hotel.The snowfall was heavy and traffic on Main Street at a standstill as Pacino arrived at the Egyptian Theater Thursday night for the first public showing of his directing debut. But the place was packed with an overflow crowd, and those with standby tickets had braved the falling snow in line for 11/2 hours just to see the Oscar-winning actor introduce his film.

It's not stretching the metaphor to say that Pacino took the festival by storm.

Despite all the movie and TV stars in and around Park City during the previous seven days, it quickly became clear that Pacino was the big draw. He was introduced in the theater by Robert Redford to a blaze of flashes and TV camera lights. "The film that he has made is a model for (the festival's) purpose," Redford said.

The official "Centerpiece Premiere" had played the night before, but Pacino's film handily took over as the festival's true centerpiece attraction.

Pacino directed, co-produced, co-wrote and stars in "Looking for Richard," a unique documentary that explores his love of Shakespeare. The film features interviews with historians, people on the street and stars who have performed Shakespeare, ranging from Kenneth Branagh to James Earl Jones. There are also in-costume performances of scenes from "Richard III," with Pacino in the title role and a supporting cast that includes Alec Baldwin, Winona Ryder, Aidan Quinn and many others.

"I could have picked an easier play for this kind of thing," Pacino said during Friday's press conference, acknowledging that "Richard III" is one of Shakespeare's most complicated and difficult works.

"But it was a Shakespeare play that I was familiar with. I'm familiar with several of his plays. I've played Othello, and I've played Julius Caesar and I've played Hamlet," he said. "But I really knew Richard."

Pacino said the seed of the film was planted in the late '70s when he toured colleges on the East Coast reading excerpts from plays and poetry to students, followed by question-and-answer sessions. "At every one of the schools, I would mention Shakespeare, that I was going to read some Shakespeare, and I was surprised at how few of the kids had read `Hamlet.'

"And I would talk about the play and read an excerpt from it, and I would find that by doing that they would find the equinox of their world to Shakespeare; they would make the jump.

"Years later, I was asked to do `Richard III' as a movie, and I just couldn't see myself doing it. Olivier did it. Then I got this idea that would be a way of doing it, and at the same time addressing the thing that happened in the schools."

It took 31/2 years for Pacino to finish the film. He made three movies and performed in two plays in the interim.

The resulting film, he said, is not really a documentary. "I don't know what it is."

But it may be awhile before Pacino goes behind the camera again. "I don't think of myself as a director. I think that if I were to direct again, make a film again, it would probably be something that I'd have to have a strong feeling about in that way. Because I feel that it's a whole way of looking at things, a whole way of perceiving things - and I don't have that."

Then, after a pause, he added, "But the good thing about it is the control."