Share:

March 07, 2024

C.S. Lewis Fellowship aids faculty and students in navigating Narnia

By Martha Young

C.S. Lewis’ contributions as a theologian and writer are the focus of the newly established C.S. Lewis Fellowship at Providence College.

Lewis wrote more than 30 books which have been translated into as many languages. Perhaps the most famous are those that make up The Chronicles of Narnia, popularized on stage, television, radio, and cinema.

Founded in 2023 through PC’s Humanities Program, the C.S. Lewis Fellowship is led by Rev. Isaac Morales, O.P., associate professor of theology, who believes Lewis’ notable works create a timeless tapestry of work and wisdom worthy of celebration.

“The primary goal of the fellowship is not to generate scholarship — though we have benefited from it and support those who pursue it — but rather to promote Lewis’s teachings at the high school and college levels,” Father Morales said.

Cultivating friendships among those who have been inspired by Lewis’s writings is just part of Father Morales’ mission.

“We seek to foster a network for those who find teaching Lewis’s works invigorating and effective in leading students to fall in love with reading and to come to a new perspective on Christianity,” he said.

A hallmark of the first year of the fellowship was its spring break trip to Oxford, England. Ten students and three faculty members immersed themselves in reading seminars on Lewis’ great works, followed by visits to Oxford area landmarks connected to his life. Among them were Magdalen College, where Lewis worked for nearly 30 years and served as a fellow; his home in nearby Headington; and his final resting place on the grounds of Holy Trinity Church. An even larger group will take part in spring break engaged learning experience in 2024.

A faculty grants program was launched in 2023 to promote the development of courses incorporating Lewis’ life and thoughts. Grants of up to $1,000 are awarded on a rolling basis and can be used for curriculum-connected initiatives such as travel, book purchases, and other expenses.

The inaugural grant recipients are Jillian Waugh, R.N., MSN ’04, assistant clinical professor of nursing, and Kevin McMahon, CFA, assistant professor of practice in finance.

More Providence College news