Sir Edward Heath's crowning achievement and his lasting legacy after more than half a century in the House of Commons was to lead Britain into Europe.

But he will also be remembered as the one-term Conservative Prime Minister who never forgave Margaret Thatcher for ousting him from the Tory leadership.

The bitterness over his loss of the leadership was deep, reflected in almost ceaseless, and sometimes savage, attacks on her policies.

No Tory leader this century had been subjected to such ferocious assaults from within the party.

He consequently attracted controversy, anger and even bitterness among many Conservatives instead of basking in the afterglow of wide respect traditionally accorded to Tory elder statesmen.

Sir Edward became Father of the House in 1992 as the continuously longest-serving MP, and was active in the Commons until his mid-80s. And he fought the 1997 General Election with a vigour and gusto which would have done credit to a man half his age.

But on October 24, 2000 - the day after he had conducted the election for the new Speaker - he announced that he would be retiring from the Commons at the end of that Parliament, an announcement which brought a cascade of tributes, even from some of those Conservatives who were his principal critics.

He retired at the June 2001 General Election, and declared that he had no desire whatsoever to enter the House of Lords.

His style as a politician hardly changed. He remained, even as an old man, one of the few MPs who could make a speech without notes, and he sat in the Commons, on virtually every sitting day, po-faced, amid the catcalls and shouting - something he hated about a modern Parliament.

Sir Edward astonished his colleagues when, in his late 70s, he undertook the arduous and perilous road trip across the desert to treat with Saddam Hussein over the release of British hostages.

But his invective never deserted him. Even John Major, the complete antithesis of Margaret Thatcher, often found himself a target for Heath's criticism, but the ex-Prime Minister's attacks on him were far less venomous than those directed at her.

Nor did Sir Edward - in April 1992 he was appointed a Knight Companion of the Order of the Garter, the most senior order of chivalry - spare some of Mr Major's most senior right-wing ministers, accusing them of downright arrogance and even disloyalty, saying they should be sacked.

Builder's son

A builder's son from Broadstairs in Kent, Edward Richard George Heath reached the top by tenacious hard work and determination.

He was in many ways an unlikely choice to lead the Conservatives - grammar school education at Chatham House, Ramsgate, followed by an organ scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford. He had no personal wealth and remained a bachelor.

At Oxford he joined the university Conservative Club and became president of the Union in 1939.

During his time at Balliol the college also included other future statesmen Roy Jenkins, the miner's son, and Denis Healey, then a Communist.

Balliol set Edward Heath on the road to power, equipping him with the belief there was nothing he could not achieve. When he came down with a degree in Modern Greats - politics, economics and philosophy - he was plunged into the Second World War, volunteering for the Army a few days after the outbreak of hostilities.

He was eventually called up in the Royal Artillery as the Battle of Britain raged in August 1940. Promotion followed as he served as a gunner in France, Belgium, Holland and Germany. He became adjutant of the regiment and displayed typical efficiency when his battery took part in crossing the Rhine.

He was mentioned in despatches and awarded the MBE on his demobilisation as a Lieutenant-Colonel in 1946.

Back on Civvy Street

Once back in Civvy Street, Mr Heath made up his mind to get into Parliament - and meanwhile to earn his living in an area likely to aid that ambition.

Learning more about the machinery of government and public administration seemed a good idea and he joined the Civil Service, appointed to the Ministry of Civil Aviation.

In 1947 he was adopted as Tory candidate for Labour-held Bexley in North Kent, leaving the Civil Service and, to the surprise of those who knew him, entering journalism as news editor of the Church Times.

There, according to a friend, he was "bored stiff", quitting in less than two years and opting for merchant banking.

His first election came in February 1950. The Attlee Government clung on to power with a wafer-thin majority, deprived of many seats it held in 1945 - among them Bexley, where Edward Heath scraped in by just 133 votes.

He did not remain on the backbenches for long. After Churchill's victory in 1951, he rose rapidly through the whips office, becoming Deputy Chief Whip in 1952 and Chief Whip under Eden in December 1955.

In that powerful position, his mettle was put rigorously to the test as the Suez crisis engulfed the Government.

After Harold Macmillan secured a Tory hat-trick at the polls in October 1959, Mr Heath was appointed Minister of Labour, and Lord Privy Seal in 1960.

Negotiated terms for Common Market

During his three years in that post, he became the centre of public attention as he doggedly tried to negotiate terms for Britain's entry into the Common Market, despite obstruction by Gaullist France.

He received recognition in Europe for his work: the Charlemagne Prize for the "most notable achievement in the services of encouraging understanding and co-operation in Europe" and the European Prize for Statesmanship.

His rise through the Cabinet continued apace under the administration of Alec Douglas-Home - later Lord Home - who created a special post for him in October 1963, Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and Regional Development, and President of the Board of Trade.

But time was running out for the Tories - and Alec Douglas-Home - who were turned out of office by Harold Wilson's Labour Party in October 1964.

Sir Alec went as Conservative leader the following year. Mr Heath's hour had come.

The Tories scrapped their traditional "magic circle" method of picking their leader and the parliamentary party voted in Mr Heath - the loser, Reginald Maudling, becoming his deputy.

Tories flourished again

Soon the Wilson Government was running into financial problems, culminating in the "pound in your pocket" devaluation of sterling. The Tories flourished again, but Mr Heath, seen by many as remote and aloof, often trailed in the opinion pollsters' personality charts.

In 1968 he sacked Enoch Powell from the shadow Cabinet after the so-called "rivers of blood" speech which provoked a national outcry.

Heath was so outraged by this speech that he never again spoke to Powell. And when Powell died, 30 years later, Heath pointedly refused to pass any comment on his death.

By 1970, Labour appeared to have regained the

initiative and pundits were writing Mr Heath's political obituary as the June election campaign saw him apparently outpointed by Mr Wilson at the hustings.

This only added impact to the surprise of his 30-seat victory at the polls - the grammar school boy from Broadstairs moved into Number Ten ...with his grand piano.

It was the high point of a political life over which the shadows of failure were soon to lengthen.

Mr Heath introduced the Industrial Relations Act and its attendant Court, setting himself on collision course with the unions.

Output sagged as strikes intensified. His firm line against propping up ailing industries suffered a body blow when Ministers had to backtrack as Upper Clyde Shipbuilders foundered. The nationalisation of Rolls-Royce was another humiliation for Selsdon Man.

But while Mr Heath's industrial policies were increasingly becoming bogged down in confrontation, his determined efforts to take Britain into the European Community were rewarded with a big Commons majority - helped by Labour rebels - in favour of the principle of joining.

On January 22 1972, he signed the treaty of accession in Brussels but the elaborate ceremony was marred when a woman protester threw ink over him.

Meanwhile at home, bitter relations with the TUC boiled up into a statutory wage freeze in 1972 - a three-stage Prices and Incomes policy which enraged the Opposition and dismayed many of his own supporters.

Confrontation between the Government and the miners plunged the nation into a three-day week as energy-starved industry tried to keep going. Candles were rationed in some shops as blackouts hit homes.

'Who governs Britain?'

Mr Heath had had enough. Despite doubts among some of his colleagues, he decided on an early General Election in February 1974, asking what he believed would be a winning question of the electorate: "Who governs Britain?"

Voters delivered an ambiguous answer and a hung Parliament. After desperate attempts to do a deal with Jeremy Thorpe's Liberals, Mr Heath and his piano quit Downing Street, never to return.

At a second election in October 1974, Mr Wilson gained a tiny overall majority for Labour and the cry of "Heath must go" began to be heard with growing stridency among Tory backbenchers.

The following year, Mrs Thatcher wrested the leadership of the party from him in a ballot of Conservative MPs and he went to the backbenches, refusing to serve under her. His personal war had begun.

In and out of the Commons he kept up a sometimes-ferocious attack on her policies covering a wide range - from her handling of the economy, jobs, overseas aid, European policy and local government reform. But many of his critics saw it as more a personal vendetta against the Prime Minister rather than an objective critique.

His long-standing feud with Mrs Thatcher showed no signs of abating despite the passing of years since she toppled him from the Tory Party leadership.

He watched from the sidelines as she was the subject of a Westminster palace coup herself in November 1990.

And in probably the most vicious and insulting blast of all, Heath suggested in a television interview in April 1992 that she would be no more than a footnote in history.

In the Commons debate on the Maastricht Treaty on European union, he attacked her "rabid and bigoted" warnings about German domination. And in another outburst he denounced her as a woman with "a minute mind", of being ignorant and telling lies about Europe as she conducted "foghorn diplomacy" with Brussels.

Humanitarian mission to Iraq

Earlier, during the Gulf crisis of 1990-91, Mr Heath undertook a humanitarian mission to Iraq and pleaded with president Saddam Hussein for the release of sick and elderly British hostages.

His venture proved successful when he returned with 33 British hostages.

Mr Heath also intervened with Saddam to ensure the freedom of jailed British businessman Douglas Brand in June 1991.

He was admitted to hospital on June 20 1992 for what a member of his staff described as a "routine operation". It was a minor problem and Sir Edward was soon back at work.

Overall his health remained good, and even his critics were full of admiration that a man well into his 70s should undergo the gruelling desert road journey of many hours to reach Baghdad on his hostage mission to Saddam Hussein. He appeared to suffer no ill-effects from an experience which would be regarded as a severe ordeal for much younger people.

He fought and retained his Old Bexley and Sidcup seat at the April 1992 General Election and became the Father of the House of Commons as its longest-serving continuous Member.

It was in that capacity that he chaired the historic Commons sitting which elected Betty Boothroyd as its first woman Speaker - a choice

which he endorsed.

In the Parliament which began in 1992, Sir Edward appeared a lot more relaxed than before, more cheery and amiable. His friends attributed that marked change in his demeanour to the fact that Margaret Thatcher was no longer in the Commons.

It was, as one of his colleagues said at the time, as though he had "seen her off", while he remained at the hub of political life.

Musician and yachtsman

Even at the age of 80 he was unanimously endorsed as the candidate for Bexley and Old Sidcup for the forthcoming General Election - and did not even rule out fighting the election after that.

Outside politics, Mr Heath distinguished himself both as a musician and an international class yachtsman.

His ocean racer Morning Cloud - there were to be a series of them bearing that name - became as familiar a name to the public for a time as Mr Heath's own.

While Prime Minister, in 1971, he captained Britain's winning Admiral's Cup team. Two years earlier he won the Sydney to Hobart race.

One Morning Cloud sank off the south coast in 1974 with the loss of two of the crew, including his godson.

His musical interests were varied and intense. He took equal pleasure in conducting the annual Christmas carol concert at Broadstairs or holding the baton in front of a symphony orchestra.

He was linked at various times with the Royal College of Music, the London Symphony Orchestra, the Bach Choir and the European Youth Orchestra.

A non-smoker who rarely drank, he was never regarded as a great orator in or out of Parliament. But he invariably spoke without notes in the Commons, in an apparent casual way. But it was a highly effective and telling style, largely because it was not grandiloquent.

It was a strange paradox that for a man who shunned gimmickry, his toothy grin and heaving shoulders when he laughed became his nationally recognisable trade marks.

Sir Edward was taken ill with a pulmonary embolism while on holiday in Austria in August, 2003. He was flown back to London and detained for a while in the King Edward VII Hospital for Officers.