SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. – When Rep. J.D. Hayworth (R-Ariz.) took the podium from Newt Gingrich at a fundraiser here last week, the decibel level doubled.

“Tell your friends! Tell your neighbors! Get them to the polls!” the 6-foot-5 former sportscaster bellowed into the microphone, employing the high-octane imperatives that have been his trademark in Congress.

At the same time, a dozen miles south, the Democratic candidate Harry Mitchell was also speaking to voters, but he used a decidedly different style. The avuncular former high school civics teacher and Tempe mayor was projecting a softer image to the Kiwanis Club of Tempe, making the race for Arizona’s 5th Congressional District a contrast in styles. The contest pits a tough, boisterous Republican from upscale Scottsdale against an easygoing Democratic native son from a university town.

“I’m more low-key. I believe in building consensus and working toward compromise,” Mitchell said Monday between fundraising calls. “J.D. is very aggressive, very loud. He’s big. He’ll invade your private space and I think that’s how people view him.”

Hayworth countered that Mitchell was too laidback to be effective.

“It’s fine to try to project a quiet personality, [but] I walk to the talk and I get things done. If Harry were to go, he would go along to get along. He would be conspicuously inconspicuous.”

In television ads and on the stump, the pair carve out stark differences in personality.

Mitchell, 66, sports an ear-to-ear smile, glasses and a grandfatherly gray comb-over. He portrays himself as friendly and accessible in campaign ads, appearing with children and senior citizens amid soft lighting and cheerful hues, a deliberate strategy, said one Democratic aide. He has pushed to make his support of embryonic stem-cell research a key distinction in the race. He welcomed Rep. Diana DeGette (D-Colo.) to a press conference on the issue last week.

He stresses his homegrown roots. His grandfather was a local developer for whom Mitchell Drive, Mitchell Park and the old Mitchell elementary school were named. He has lived in the same house in Tempe for over 40 years. He went to school at Tempe High, went to college just blocks away at Arizona State University (ASU), married his high-school sweetheart, then returned to his high school to teach. He spent 28 years there, simultaneously running for local offices. He served as mayor of Tempe for 16 years and earned such admiration that the town erected a 35-foot steel statue of him outside City Hall, which was renamed the Harry E. Mitchell Government Center. A local bar, Harry’s Place, sits across the street.

“I think of him as your neighbor, the every-guy, the beloved ordinary guy,” said Richard Herrera, associate professor of political science at ASU. “He’s been a mayor but he’s also a high school teacher. He’s approachable and friendly. He’s the opposite of J.D. Hayworth in that he’s not bombastic. He’s not somebody you would fear.”

Hayworth, 48, with his buzz-cut, broad shoulders and booming voice, welcomes the tough-guy image, arguing that he delivers for his constituents. He is a vigorous campaigner with an uncanny memory for names and personal details that is rare even among seasoned politicians. His ads focus on cracking down on illegal immigration, showing him at a cattle ranch talking with worried residents. Images of border patrol vehicles, migrants slipping across the border and a high-speed dirt-road chase appear between jarring flashes of white and orange. One television ad, entitled “Gonna hurt,” asserts that Mitchell favors allowing illegal immigrants to collect social security benefits.

That ad, coupled with other negative salvoes, aims to tarnish Mitchell’s image as a popular Democratic mayor and “wonderful guy,” said Bruce Merrill, a pollster and communications professor at ASU.

“J.D.’s been very successful in the district. He’s not a buffoon. He’s really an intelligent guy and he’s running pretty vicious attack ads against Harry,” Merrill said.

In a district that leans Republican, that strategy can work. Outside of Tempe, Mitchell is less well-known.

The ads prompted Mitchell to retaliate with his own negative ads, pulling him away from his purely positive message. One Mitchell ad showed Hayworth apparently in the crosshairs of a firearm, prompting outrage from the Hayworth camp. Mitchell said he is not afraid of a brawl.

“J.D. is doing everything I expected because I was warned about the way he campaigns beforehand,” Mitchell said. “But I am not taking it sitting down.”

Recent independent polls show Mitchell gaining on Hayworth. A SurveyUSA poll commissioned by TV station KPNX showed Hayworth leading Mitchell 46 to 43 percent in mid-October, within the survey’s margin of error. A similar survey by the same pollster a month earlier had Hayworth ahead by 12 points. During that time, however, Republicans across the country suffered political damage from the teenage page scandal involving former Florida congressman Mark Foley (R).

A Democratic poll conducted in mid-October showed Mitchell trailing by one point.

But Hayworth enjoys an ample lead in fundraising. According to recent disclosure reports, he raised $480,000 in the third quarter and ended with $1.35 million in the bank. Mitchell raised $320,000 and $570,000 in cash. National parties have been active on both sides.

And Hayworth could still use Mitchell’s easygoing persona against him.

“Harry is the nicest man you’ll ever meet but no one would ever accuse him of being very dynamic,” Merrill, the communications professor, said.

Chatting after the Gingrich fundraiser, Hayworth suggested that Mitchell, in the twilight of his career, would not care enough to deliver results.

“The voters will have a choice of who in his mind’s eye views this seat in Congress as a reward for a long time in office or someone who says what he means and means what he says and will continue to make things happen,” Hayworth said.

Mitchell called that charge “absolutely wrong.”

“My whole concern is to represent this district. I’m not going to run for speaker or Senate,” he said. Hayworth launched an unsuccessful campaign in 2002 to lead the House Republican conference. He has been mentioned as a contender for statewide office.

“My heart is in this very much, let me tell you, because I think it would not be good to return J.D. to Washington,” Mitchell said. “I think he underestimates my desire to run.”

Whether Hayworth has underestimated Mitchell is an open question. He sent surrogates to speak at an Oct. 17 forum before the National Council of Jewish Women. Jonathan and Irit Tratt, Jewish friends of Hayworth, struck a sour note with the elderly Jewish crowd, which booed and hissed when the Tratts first appeared, when they mentioned slain journalist Daniel Pearl to underscore the ongoing threat to Jews and when they suggested that Mitchell apologize for putting crosshairs in his ad. At one point, an exasperated Jonathan Tratt gave up.

“I don’t have to speak on his behalf if you don’t want me to.”

“Good!” “Get off the stage!” the hecklers responded.