Ten years ago today, in the midst of New York’s fall 2010 collections, Alexander McQueen died, having taken his own life. Weeks later in Paris, his final collection would be presented posthumously. It was a testament to all he had achieved in his 20 years in fashion: the sweeping romance of his historical references and the sensational Savile Row–trained tailoring, his unrepentant dark streak having been tempted by the light. McQueen was “a designer who scaled the heights of couture accomplishment,” as our colleague Sarah Mower wrote at the time. But he was also a fearless provocateur, unleashing bumsters on the world and at least once mooning his runway audience.

McQueen’s shows were justly legendary. One featured a wind tunnel, another a glass cage that was likened to an insane asylum, and yet a third required models to walk through fire. Spring 2004’s recreation of the Sydney Pollack film They Shoot Horses, Don’t They? involved weeks of choreography and rehearsals. Fall 2006 concluded with a Kate Moss hologram, and he’s credited with the industry’s first-ever livestreamed show, for spring 2010. In tribute, we asked the models who were his greatest collaborators to share their memories of the designer and his unforgettable runways.

Debra Shaw

If my memory serves me well, I first met Lee in a basement where he was working at the time. Other than it being extremely hot, I have a vision of him in my mind wearing light-green nail polish on his toes. I was immediately entranced by his aura. Watching the way he moved and expressed himself was quite a fascinating sight to behold.

In McQueen shows we were given the freedom to be wild! His garments encouraged that unabashed sense of abandonment. Wearing his clothes made me feel empowered! Statuesque! Mighty! Extraterrestrial! And they helped me come to a greater understanding of the frame of my own body. His cuts and his shapes, the cinching of my waist (especially with one particular gold bustier he made for me), made me understand the story I could tell with my body through the power they instilled in me.

Lee had a thoughtful awareness of social issues and consistently included it in his work. I miss his talent, the passion he gave to each and every show, his fresh and unique approach to all he created. He never rested on his success but continually pushed the boundaries of his own imagination. I miss his energy and would give the world to give him one more huge hug!

Jodie Kidd

From moment one, there was a real buzz [about Lee]. We knew there was something happening and we were in the middle of that. Watching him work backstage—the creativity, the dressing, the fittings—being with him in his environment, we were witnessing something very unique and very special. That was why he became who he became and was so unique and incredible and a genius. I’m honored that we shared that short, incredible journey with him.

Lee used to love me going out and not going crazy but just being really theatrical and really getting into the energy and the psyche of the collection. He let us showcase his piece in any way that we felt would fit. I always was quite...extravagant, shall we say, going down the catwalk. We ended up working together for years and years and years and creating such a great strong bond. I think very much Lee loved me to bring my kind of character across. He designed clothes for the characters of the models. He was never one to say, “Just go up and down. Don’t smile. Don’t do that. It’s all about the clothes, the clothes, the clothes.” It was about those, of course, but it was the combination of the model’s character, the clothes, the music, the environment, the hair, the makeup all kind of adding up [and becoming] kind of individually unique. It wasn’t just like there’s a trouser suit. It was theater. It was a show.

You used to come out of watching a show or being part of the show and be kind of like, What on earth has just gone on? You know, it was just spellbinding. We used to almost have to have therapy—in a really positive way, not in a negative way. Just every bit of your soul kind of went along with him. He’d be standing there as you’d be about to go down, and he’d be literally pushing you out. He’d be like, “Come on, Jodie!” It was like going to war. It was so intense. He was so powerful. There was this creator side [of him] that was just like a firestorm, but we could [also] see this wonderful kind of special, fragile side, his really sensitive side.

It will always be where, where were you when you heard the news. The same as when Lady Diana died or being in New York for New York Fashion Week [during 9/11]. [Lee’s passing] is one of those moments you’ll never ever forget. It’s such a fine line between genius and absolute implosion, and you know he walked that line. That’s why he designed some of the most incredible things I’ve ever seen.

Jade Parfitt

For Voss [McQueen’s spring 2001 show], my look was The Birds. The atmosphere backstage was extraordinary, as with all McQueen shows, the excitement and growing tension palpable. We were shown the runway space—a bright quiet box where all we could see was our reflection. Ordinarily at a big show of that scale, you feed off the music and audience, but here for Voss your senses were deprived. Instead all you had was your mirror image and silence and the knowledge that there were hundreds of audience members beyond the glass.

Lee’s reference for my look was the iconic Hitchcock film The Birds, and he asked me to “freak out” on stage. My look was toward the end of the second half of the show, and with the tension backstage and everyone egging each other on, my performance of freaking out wasn’t far off my actual emotion at the time!

As a model you would have done anything Lee asked of you. I always felt powerful in his clothes, and so walking one eye blind with cars blowing up on the runway or walking down a giant staircase into a large pool of water, or having shoes literally sellotaped to your feet all felt wildly exciting. I loved being part of his vision.

Lee was a force to be reckoned with. He proved that with real passion and commitment you can achieve huge success in fashion even if you don’t come from a wealthy family. His energy, skill, and determination were extraordinary to see firsthand.

Laura Morgan

I worked as Lee’s in-house model, which meant for six months of the year I was with Lee and the team. I would be there from when the concept was being put together, from the sketch to the first samples made from the sketches (mostly still held together by straight pins and in muslin fabric), then the pieces in the chosen fabric, to the final piece for the runway. I walked the shows. I was there when they were testing lights, choosing music. I had my body cast and watched other models wear my torso in leather. I could go on and on. For three years pretty much every piece of the runway and commercial collections had been on my body; many of those pieces had been sculpted to my body. It was part of my job to tell them how the clothes felt. If it was too tight somewhere, constricting. Sometimes the feel they were going for was to be constricted.

Lee’s shows were theatrical and evoked emotion. They had an energy and a charge. He took you into worlds and introduced you to characters that were wild, mysterious, weird, ugly, insane. [Like] the woman in the glass case with the moths—I mean, Jesus. Bam! Take that, fashion world. No pretty girls walking down a white runway here. He was an artist and surrounded himself with other great artists. To me, many of his pieces, especially the showpieces, came from an emotional place. He showed me [how important it is] to have a vision and relentlessly work and work until that vision is turned into a physical reality; to keep like-minded creatives around you. It takes a village to produce amazing work. He gave life to fashion. He challenged fashion and challenged the people viewing it.

Plum Sykes

I really adored Alexander, both as a person and as a fashion designer. I mean, we all know his clothes were exquisite and very, very cool. But he was also an incredibly fun, maverick personality. There was never a more fun place to be than backstage at his The Birds show, watching him roll a tire dipped in black paint across a pristine white suit for the show. Magic, mad, and marvelous!