So you’ve always wanted to know how the world’s most brilliant architects create elegant shapes and soaring vistas?

They crumple paper, you see, and stick one end over here, add a little Scotch tape, and then bend the thingamajig over toward that tall doohickey.

Bingo. Master builder at work.

Funny thing is, World’s Hottest Architect Frank Gehry actually seems to work that way.

Of course, there’s more to it: Decades of careful study, a cadre of young model-makers, a score of computer-assisted design engineers. But the brilliance of the thoroughly engaging documentary “Sketches of Frank Gehry” is that it allows us to believe creation involves futzing with torn paper.

Genius is complicated. But it’s also simple, and director Sydney Pollack bounces us back and forth between those indisputable truths with intelligence and flair.

Gehry became a rock star of the drafting table in 1997 with the opening of the Guggenheim museum in Bilbao, Spain. Subsequent commissions for buildings like the Disney symphony hall in Los Angeles increased his fame – boosted by guest appearances on “The Simpsons” and Apple ads – and a movie that combines his buildings with his ideas starts with a perfect subject.

And it turns out, Pollack is the perfect director for the job. Though, as he admits to Gehry on camera, the director of “Tootsie” and “Out of Africa” knows nothing about making nonfiction. Pollack is a shameless name-dropper, a 50-story ego in his own right, a raconteur who sometimes shoulders his subjects aside to fit himself into the frame. Those supposed detriments to documentary naturalism serve here to draw out Gehry, a longtime friend of Pollack, and set up an engrossing dialogue between creative equals that allows Pollack to explore everything from Gehry’s ex-wives to his therapist.

Not to mention Gehry’s critics, which, though a minority these days, do exist. Pollack’s confidence in himself and in Gehry’s talents allow the filmmaker room to call on serious doubters of the architect’s work.

Too many documentaries recently have neglected to put their subjects in the context of worldly critique, making viewers suspicious and defensive. “Sketches” strides right into those debates, enriching our understanding of greatness by making us at least consider the mediocre.

As in another assured documentary, “My Architect,” the filmmakers go three-dimensional by asking citizens about the importance of these bold buildings they pass by every day. The answers are enlightening, and surprisingly moving.

“If you took this building out of here, no one would understand this city now,” said the director of the Bilbao museum.

Pollack follows up with a paradoxically egotistical and self-deprecating response from Gehry:

“Because a building takes so long to realize, by the time it’s done, I don’t like it anymore.”

Reach Michael Booth at mbooth@denverpost.com; try the “Screen Team” blog at denverpostbloghouse.com

“Sketches of Frank Gehry” | *** 1/2 RATING

PG-13 for some rough language|1 hour, 22 minutes|DOCUMENTARY|Directed by Sydney Pollack; featuring Frank Gehry, with commentary by Michael Eisner, Barry Diller, Philip Johnson, Bob Geldof and others|Opens today at Landmark’s Mayan Theatre.