technical details:

Production A-37.

Filmed December 15 to 31, 1924. Retakes shot January 2 to 10, 1925. However, it's likely that shooting for "Ask Grandma" (no. 38) was included within these dates. See the 'miscellaneous' section below for details.

Copyrighted April 2, 1925, by Pathé Exchange, Inc. Registration no. LU21305. Since the copyright was not renewed, this film is now in the public domain.

Released April 5, 1925. It was the 37th film in the series to be released.

Silent two-reeler.

Probable opening title: '"Our Gang" Comedies - Hal Roach presents His Rascals in "The Love Bug".'

Released into TV syndication as Mischief Makers episode no. 1044, "The Beauty Parlor," copyrighted Sep. 1, 1960, with registration number LP17349.

the crew:

Produced by Hal Roach

Probably credited in the film as a presenter.

Directed by Robert F. McGowan

This credit probably appears in the film, but without his middle initial.

Assistant Director: Lloyd French

This credit derives from French's payroll status as the Our Gang assistant director during this period.

Photographed by Art Lloyd

This credit derives from Lloyd's payroll status as the Our Gang cameraman during this period.

Titles by H. M. Walker

This credit probably appears in the film.

Props by Charles Oelze and G. D. Abbott

This credit derives from their payroll status as Our Gang prop men during this period.

Story by Hal E. Roach

This credit probably doesn't appear in the film. Edward Flannigan was listed in the studio payroll summaries as an Our Gang gag man until the week ending Dec. 6th, so he may have contributed gags to this film.

Teacher: Fern Carter

Released by Pathé Exchange, Inc.

Passed by the National Board of Review

Probably indicated in the film.

studio personnel

general manager - Warren Doane

assistant general manager - L. A. French

secretary-treasurer - C. H. Roach

construction supervisor - C. E. Christensen

laboratory superintendent - Charles Levin

publicity director - Garrett Graham

purchasing agent - Clyde Hopkins

still photographer - Bud "Stax" Graves

transportation director - Bob Davis

possible uncredited involvement

supervision - F. Richard Jones became director-general of the studio after this film was shot, but before it was released.

editing - Credits were in a transition between Thomas J. Crizer and Richard Currier during this period.

writing - Robert F. McGowan, Thomas J. Crizer, Frank Terry and James Parrott may have contributed gags.

animal training - Tony Campanaro may have been among the animal trainers.

the kids:

Mickey Daniels as "Mickey" aka "Michael"

Featured role. He's the new kid in town, and flirts with Mary, but a misunderstanding makes him want to get rid of his freckles.

Joe Cobb as "Joe"

Featured role. He's in love with Peggy, but she thinks he's too fat, so he uses the weight-reducing machine at the beauty parlor.

Allen "Farina" Hoskins as "Farina"

Featured role. One of the girls comments on his hair, so he gets it worked on at the beauty parlor. We also see him in the opening scene with Dorothy.

Eugene "Pineapple" Jackson

Supporting role. The nickname doesn't appear in the film. He works at the beauty parlor and gets the gang in.

Jackie Condon

Supporting role. We first see him charming a lollypop from Grandma. At the beauty parlor, he's responsible for most of the mayhem.

Mary Kornman

Supporting role. She falls for Mickey and his freckles, but doesn't like freckles on her grapefruit. Mickey thinks she's talking about him.

Peggy Ahern

Supporting role. Listed as Peggy Ahearn by Maltin & Bann. She gets a lollipop from Joe by getting him to close his eyes before letting her dog kiss him.

George "Sonny Boy" Warde

Supporting role. He's part of the group of boys at the beauty parlor, and takes an interest in an air hose.

Dorothy Hughes

Small part. We first see her being picked on by Johnny, then hanging out with the other girls.

Johnny Downs

Small part. He's seen picking on Dorothy Hughes, then getting into a fight with Mickey.

Dorothy Morrison

Small part. Farina pays a call on her at the beginning of the film.

Emma Wong

Small part. She's the Asian girl that hangs out with Mary, Peggy and Dorothy.

Lassie Lou Ahern

Undetermined role. A publicity photo shows Jackie offering her a lollipop while the two of them sit on the same bench that Joe and Peggy otherwise sit on.

the animals:

animals

Small parts.

(1.) Peggy's puppy, which kisses Joe for her.

(2.) The mule that pulls Gene's wagon.

the adults:

Florence Lee as "Grandma Thomas"

Supporting role. She's seen off and on during the film, helping the kids however she can.

William Gillespie as the beauty parlor manager

Supporting role. He's the high-strung manager of the parlor, and is given a fairly large role.

Joseph "Ernie" Morrison as the father of Farina's girlfriend

Bit part. He's seen shooing Farina away from his daughter.

Helen Gilmore as the beauty parlor customer

Bit part. She's the old woman who's dissatisfied with the service.

other adults

Small parts and bit parts.

(1.) The cop shown at the end of the film chasing Grandma and the boys.

(2.) The Chinese man working at the beauty parlor.

(3.) Six women working at the beauty parlor.

the locations:

Motor Avenue and Woodbine Street, Palms district, Los Angeles

The vacant lot on the southwest corner of this intersection is shown during the escape from the cop, with Masonic Hall at 3402 Motor and the People's Water Company at 3392 Motor being noticeable. At one point, everybody actually runs past the south side of the Masonic Hall, during which we get a glimpse of the back of the Shoe Repairing shop run by J. A. Pryor at 3406 Motor. At the beginning of the film, Farina walks past the Micholithic Mfg. Co. on the east side of the 3300 block of Motor. This building had previously housed the Palms Chamber of Commerce. Joe and Peggy are sitting on the park bench at the northwest corner of Motor and Woodbine. The bench advertises the chamber, which was now on the 3400 block.

Culver Hotel, Culver City

Gene's wagon is parked along Washington Boulevard, with the hotel seen in the background. It appears that he's at or near the eastern corner of Van Beuren Place. The railing for the entrance to the underground walkway can be seen on the opposite side of Washington.

Venice Boulevard, Los Angeles

The cop phones in after arresting the gang at the northwest corner of Venice and Arlington. Next to him is the Co-operative Sheet Metal Shop. Also seen is the Geo. C. Bell Service Station on the northeast corner, at 2575 Venice.

miscellaneous:

Reportedly, 19 shooting dates went into the making of this film. However, the 1924 and 1925 studio datebooks don't mention "Ask Grandma" (no. 38), which is somewhat of a sequel to "The Love Bug." Since most of the films during this period didn't require 19 shooting dates, it's probable that some of the A37 dates actually belong to A38. Nearly three weeks after shooting had finished for "Dog Days" (no. 36), the 'start' date arrived for "The Love Bug" on Dec. 15th. Shooting continued until Dec. 31st, when filming was considered 'finished.' No shooting took place on the 14th, 21st or 28th, which were all Sundays, nor on the 24th, 25th, or 26th, when the studio closed over the Christmas holiday, nor on the 30th. After taking a day off on New Year's Day, retakes were shot on Jan. 2nd and 3rd. Filming then continued until Jan. 10th, when it was again considered 'finished'. However, the word 'retakes' is not used for the last week of shooting, further suggesting that "Ask Grandma" may have been in production. No shooting took place on Jan. 4th, which was a Sunday. After this, the unit took a week off before filming "Shootin' Injuns" (no. 39).

40 still images were printed into numerous press photos to promote this film.