John Lennon was born on 9 October 1940, at 6:30 p.m. in Liverpool's Maternity Hospital at Oxford Street. A German air raid took place that day. His mother gave him a combined name: John Winston Ono Lennon, named after his grandfather, John "Jack" Lennon and Winston Churchill. A plaque adorns the wall of the Maternity Hospital to memorialize his birth.

Want to visit this sight? Check out these Self-Guided Walking Tours in Liverpool . Alternatively, you can download the mobile app "GPSmyCity: Walks in 1K+ Cities" from Apple App Store or Google Play Store. The app turns your mobile device to a personal tour guide and it works offline, so no data plan is needed when traveling abroad.

Create Your Own Walk in Liverpool

Creating your own self-guided walk in Liverpool is easy and fun. Choose the city attractions that you want to see and a walk route map will be created just for you. You can even set your hotel as the start point of the walk.

Beatles Pub Crawl

Alright, so you're in Liverpool, the hometown of The Beatles, and you're thirsty. There are lots of pubs in Liverpool, all different in character, with some claiming that The Beatles drank or played there at some point.

Indeed, the lads performed in many small venues throughout the city, but the joints they usually played were not the ones they liked for their drinks. Now, if... view more

Tour Duration: 1 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 1.8 Km or 1.1 Miles

Beatles Tour in Liverpool, Part I

The hometown of Paul McCartney, John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Star, Liverpool is called “The Beatles Capital” for a reason. The city saw the dawn of the Fabulous Four's musical career and is brimming with Beatlemania: Beatles-themed bars, restaurants, hotels, and other places associated with the iconic band.

The Beatles Story, an immersive museum, chronicles the Fab... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 3.4 Km or 2.1 Miles

Beatles Tour in Liverpool, Part II

Liverpool is permeated with The Beatles who seem to be everywhere! There are so many places associated with the band in the city: childhood homes, schools, bars... Some of them are rather unassuming, at a glance, and thus can be easily overlooked.

George Harrison's Birthplace, located at 12 Arnold Grove, is where the lead guitarist of The Beatles was born on February 25, 1943. Despite its... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 4.1 Km or 2.5 Miles

Beatles Tour in Liverpool, Part III

Now that you have been to a good number of spots around Liverpool associated with The Beatles, it is high time to explore the “early days” of the Fab Four in their hometown and see where it all started.

One such place is Strawberry Field, immortalized in their song "Strawberry Fields Forever." It was a Salvation Army children's home, and although the original building no... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 5.3 Km or 3.3 Miles

Liverpool Introduction Walking Tour

Famously, the hometown (aka the “capital”) of the Beatles, Liverpool is more than just the Fab Four. Closely associated with the arts, music, culture, and architecture, as well as industrial innovation, the city is renowned for its multitude of historic landmarks, world-class sport arenas and shopping/entertainment. The abundance of art galleries, national museums and listed attractions in... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 3.6 Km or 2.2 Miles