Publish date: 2024-05-08

Birth Name: John Winston Lennon

Date of Birth: 9 October, 1940

Place of Birth: Liverpool South, Lancashire, England, U.K.

Date of Death: 8 December, 1980

Place of Death: Manhattan, New York City, New York, U.S.

Ethnicity: Irish, Welsh, one eighth English

John Lennon was a British musician, singer, songwriter, and composer. He was a member of the band The Beatles, along with George Harrison, Paul McCartney, and Ringo Starr.

John was the son of Julia Elizabeth (Stanley) and Alfred Lennon. John was married to Japanese artist, singer, songwriter, and peace activist Yoko Ono, until his death. He had a son, musician and photographer Julian Lennon, with his former wife, Cynthia (Powell); and a son, musician and composer Sean Lennon, with Yoko.

John’s paternal grandfather was John Lennon (the son of James Lennon and Jane McConville). John’s grandfather John was born in County Down, Ireland. James was the son of Patrick Lennon and Elizabeth. Jane was the daughter of James McConville and Bridget Tuohy.

John’s paternal grandmother was named Mary “Polly” Maguire (the daughter of James Maguire). Mary was born in Liverpool, Lancashire, England, and was likely also of Irish ancestry.

John’s maternal grandfather was George Ernest Stanley (the son of William Henry Stanley and Eliza Jane Gildea). George was born in Liverpool, Lancashire, England. William was English, born in Birmingham, England; his own father, William Henry Stanley, was an English immigrant to Australia, and his own mother, Susannah Sarah New, was born in Australia, to English parents. Eliza was born in Omagh, Co. Tyrone, Ireland, the daughter of Charles Gildea and Ann Rogers.

John’s maternal grandmother was Annie Jane Millward (the daughter of John Dumbry Millward and Mary Elizabeth Morris). Annie was born in Chester, Cheshire, England, to Welsh parents, from Bridgend. John was the son of Thomas Millward and Jane Williams. Mary Elizabeth was the daughter of William Morris and Ann Roberts.

Sources: Genealogy of John Lennon – http://www.geni.com

Family history of John Lennon – http://brakn.com

ncG1vNJzZmidpJ27qq%2FEpZybq16YvK57yaifp2Wcmruvu80%3D

ncG1vNJzZminkqrBtbHRnKypZpKhvKN6wqipnmannrulu9asZaedpGTAta3RpaCfnZOdv7C6yJyjnmeapLWvecuepaennmO1tbnL

Share!