This is a topic that’s a little basic, but it’s a fundamental building block of understanding how to market your film. So I thought I would do a breakdown of why genre is so important to independent filmmakers in terms of marketing and distribution. I do touch on in my book The Guerrilla Rep: American Film Market Distribution Success on No Budget, but even there I only cover it in a sense as it pertains to the market. Let’s get started.

​

Before we begin, we should talk about what a genre actually is. At its core, the genre of your film is primarily a simple tool for categorizing how your film compares to other films. It’s a broad bucket of similar elements that lump films together in a way that makes it easier to sell them and easier to convey the general experience of a film succinctly. Knowing this will inform everything else on this list.

​

Generally, there are both genres and sub-genres. Sub-genres can generally pair with any genre, but some pairings work better than others. Here’s a somewhat complete list of genres and sub genres. Genres tend to focus on plot elements and overall feel whereas Sub Genres also have more to do with themes or settings.

Genres

Action

Horror

Thriller

Family

Comedy

Drama

Documentary

Sub-Genres

Adventure

Sci-Fi

Fantasy

Crime

Sports

Faith Based

LGBT

Romance

Biographical

Music/Musicals

Animated

So Why is Genre So Effing Important?

Genre provides a general set of guidelines for filmmakers to follow when crafting a story.

Since there are certain elements that are inherent in any particular genre, understanding the tropes of any particular genre can be very helpful in crafting your narrative and in shooting your film. If you know you’re shooting an action film, then there had better be fight scenes, shootouts, and car chases. If you’re making a thriller, there should be a lot of suspense. If you’re shooting a horror, a good amount of your budget will go on buckets of blood. Knowing the tropes in advance can really help frame your story and what you need to shoot your film.

Genre categorizes it for potential customers

As mentioned above, genres are simply categorizations of similar elements of a film. As such, certain viewers will develop an affinity for a certain genre. Some people will like some genres more than others. Sometimes a viewer will be in the mood for one genre, but not in the mood for another. Kind of like how sometimes you’re craving Mexican food, and other times you’re craving Chinese.

Genre helps to find an audience for the film

Think of this as the reverse of the point above. If your film has a well-defined genre, it can be great for discovery by the audience that’s seeking it out. Again, think about the food example. If you’re a Mexican food restaurant in an area where the community is all huge fans of Mexican cuisine, you’re likely to do well. However, if you’re a barbecue joint in a city known for its insanely high levels of Veganism, you might be in for a rough go of it. Of course, this kind of ignores the problem of oversaturation but there’s only so much I can tackle in 600-800 words.

Genre categorizes your film for Distributors and sales agents

Distributors and Sales agents understand the issues above. In addition, they often build a brand around certain genres so that there’s a high degree of audience recognition from them. Buyers and distributors often continually serve the same end viewer, and as such their brand is particularly important, and they often seek a similar sort of film time and time again. Think about the difference between the programming on Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network, or the difference between Comedy Central and MTV.

​

Sales agents generally develop deep relationships with the same buyers. As such, they become acutely aware of that buyer’s brand, and the sort of content they normally buy. As such, that’s the sort of content they look to acquire.

What happens if I cross-Genres?

So this is somewhat beyond the scope of this blog, but it’s a point that should be made and I don’t think I could spend an entire blog on it. So keep in mind that cross-genre is different than a genre and a sub-genre. A Cross Genre would be a horror comedy or an action thriller. Those are two examples that generally work, at least in the right circumstances. Other genre-crossing like Action Drama or Family Horror probably don’t work so well.

Here are a couple of things to keep in mind about going cross-genre.

It doesn’t add to the audience it limits it

If you make a film that’s both horror and comedy, it doesn’t sell to people who like either Horror and Comedy, it generally only appeals to people who like BOTH horror AND Comedy. So instead of expanding your horizons, it limits them. However, people who like both of these genres are going to be far more likely to really enjoy your film, just because they don’t get as much horror/comedy content as they might like. That said, getting to these people can be both difficult and expensive.

If done poorly, it confuses the message.

As you can see from the later two examples above, if you cross genre poorly it can be very creatively limiting. A horror family movie doesn’t sound like it would be possible to do very well. I know that Indiana Jones and the Temple of doom had elements of this, as did Gremlins, but The Temple of Doom was primarily an Action Adventure movie, and Gremlins would be very difficult to package in this day and age.

If you'd like to learn more about film marketing and distribution, you should join my mailing list. You'll get access to a FREE set of film market resources, as well as several digests over a few months of articles just like this one, organized by topic, delivered directly to your inbox.