HANK WILLIAMS died 40 years ago Friday, in the back seat of a car, somewhere on the road between Knoxville, Tenn., and a scheduled New Year's Day concert in Canton, Ohio.

Boozed up, his body poisoned with prescription drugs he abused to kill the pain of a bad back, he died of heart failure. Williams was all of 29 years old.

Ironically, he had a hit song moving up the charts at the time. Its title: "I'll Never Get Out of This World Alive."

Williams was really suffering with back pain that day, and according to musical researcher Don Cusic, he had received some medication from a quack doctor. Williams wanted badly to make it to Canton for the first show of 1953.

"First he tried flying out of Knoxville, but the weather was so bad, they had to turn back. Hank hired a cabdriver to drive his Cadillac all the way to Canton," Cusic said.

Williams sat in the back, with some prescription drugs and a bottle of whiskey for company.

Just an hour outside Knoxville, a policeman stopped the Cadillac. The officer took a look at Williams and told the driver, Charles Carr, "That guy looks dead."

Thinking Williams was just sedated, Carr drove on for five more hours. Finally, in Oak Hill, W. Va., he stopped for gas and reached back to touch Williams. Hank was cold dead.

"Truth be known," Cusic said, "I think Hank died just a few miles outside Knoxville."

For all his success -- many consider him the greatest country singer and songwriter of all time -- Williams is remembered as a tragic figure.

"This man was 29 years old, but with all his illnesses and personal problems, he looked older to me," recalled Ramblin' Lou Schriver, the WXRL-AM radio station owner who is the dean of country disc jockeys in Western New York. "You can only imagine what he would have done if he had lived."

Schriver, who has been booking country acts locally since the late 1940s, has bittersweet memories of Williams. In 1951, he booked the performer to play a concert in Niagara Falls, Ont. Williams made it to Niagara Falls, but was too sick to leave his hotel room and didn't do the show.

In 1952, about six months before Williams' death, Schriver had him booked to play two concerts in Niagara Falls, N.Y. This time, Williams -- without explanation -- failed to make the first show.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

Was he drunk?

"I'd rather not get into that," said Schriver. "He had his problems with alcohol, which the public knows about. When he took his medication for his back and drank, it was a bad combination.

"When he finally got to the theater, I saw him backstage. He was wearing a back brace and was in a lot of pain. He was a string bean of a guy, very frail. But he did make that second show, and I'll tell you, he sang his heart out. People loved him."

Four decades after his death, people all over America still love Hank Williams and his music.

Just say "Hank" in any country bar, and people will know whom you mean. Williams remains one of the dominant figures in country. His songs get re-recorded, often by his son Hank Jr., and new songs are written about him several times each year. The most recent hit about Williams was last year's "Midnight in Montgomery" by Alan Jackson.

"The presence of Hank Williams is still palpable in the world of country, and his ghost still haunts the singers and songwriters who inhabit that world," said Cusic, the editor of "Hank Williams: The Complete Lyrics" (St. Martin's, 152 pages, $12.95). "Many have drunk nights and lives away trying to recapture his spirit, but they have more often reclaimed his alcoholism than his talent."

Cusic's book features the lyrics of more than 130 songs, every one Williams ever published, including several "lost classics" whose lyrics were recently found in file cabinets at the Opryland Music Group.

Williams is best-known for songs that reveal the heart of a man tortured by broken relationships with women. Many of the songs bear titles that make him sound bent on self-destruction, virtually suicidal -- "I Don't Care (If Tomorrow Never Comes)," "Your Cheatin' Heart," "You Win Again," "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" and "Why Should We Try," to name a few.

Cusic, a music professor at Middle Tennessee State University, calls Williams a man of little formal education who became one of America's greatest poets.

"There are names in popular music that jump out at you -- like the Beatles, Elvis, Sinatra, the Rolling Stones. In country, the name is Hank Williams," Cusic said. "His lyrics touch people to this day.

"He could write lyrics, but musically, he was illiterate. He'd write his lyrics and put them in a shoe box. He knew how he wanted the song to sound. He would record a demo, then somebody else would have to transcribe it for him."

"People think of Hank and they think of the tragic side of his music. The sad songs are what he was most famous for. But I think it's also important to remember that he was a fun-loving guy who liked to stay up and party all night long. There is humor in a lot of his songs. Even 'I'll Never Get Out of This World Alive,' that's a bouncy, funny song, not a tragic song."

The sorrowful circumstances of his death might have made another perfect Hank Williams song.

"Alone and on the road," Williams might have sung. "Nothin' to live for. Nothin' to die for. So I'll just say goodbye."

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.