Lin Huiyin, a famous talented woman in the Republic of China period, an outstanding architect, poet and writer in modern and modern times, was the first wife of the architect Liang Sicheng, one of the designers of the Monument to the People's Heroes and the national emblem of the People's Republic of China. The poetry work "You Are the April Day on Earth" is her masterpiece and is the most well-known to the public. Lin Huiyin's life, in addition to being known for her talent, also her love experience is often talked about.

In 1928, Lin Huiyin and Liang Sicheng married at the Chinese consulate in Ottawa. The combination of the two people at that time seemed to be a door-to-door pair, a match made in heaven, and a talented woman. Why? Lin Huiyin and Liang Sicheng received Western education, their parents were good friends, and under the arrangement of their parents, they also went to the United States to study architecture together. They have the same hobbies and people are very optimistic about the couple.

In fact, before Lin Huiyin married Liang Sicheng, he already had a favorite person, he was Xu Zhimo. In 1921, the 16-year-old Lin Huiyin traveled to Europe and met Xu Zhimo, who was studying here, in Britain. At that time, he was already married to Zhang Youyi, and the two had a two-year-old child. But Lin Huiyin was still attracted by Xu Zhimo's profound knowledge, elegant talk, and handsome appearance, and Xu Zhimo was also attracted by her outstanding talent and beauty, and wrote her a lot of romantic love poems. Both express their love through letters, Xu Zhimo never wrote poetry before meeting Lin Huiyin, and after meeting her, he inspired his own new poetry creation. In March of the same year, Xu Zhimo filed for divorce from his wife.

After that, Lin Huiyin and Xu Zhimo acted together and organized the activities of the Crescent Moon Society together, and often exchanged letters. In 1924, Tagore visited China, and the two worked together as translators. But then Xu Zhimo accompanied Tagore to Japan, and Lin Huiyin also went to the United States for further study with Liang Sicheng under the arrangement of Liang Qichao. It had been four years since the two had met again, when Xu Zhimo had already married Lu Xiaoman and Lin Huiyin had also married Liang Sicheng. Xu Zhimo also had a great influence on Lin Huiyin, and was the guide on her literary road, which made her start literary creation.

After Lin Huiyin married Liang Sicheng, her husband took great care of her, and the two devoted themselves to the architectural cause they loved, assisting each other and completing some architectural matters together. Even if they are married, they cannot hide lin Huiyin's charm, and the appearance of a person leads to contradictions in the couple's lives.

The couple held salon gatherings at home almost every week, and Liang Sicheng's good friend Jin Yuelin often came to the house as a guest. The three have the same interests and cultural backgrounds, so they quickly become friends. Jin Yuelin admired Lin Huiyin's talent, took great care of her, and developed a heart of admiration, and Lin Huiyin also admired and admired him. One day, Lin Huiyin said to Liang Sicheng: "I am very distressed, because I am in love with two people at the same time, and I don't know what to do." Liang Sicheng replied, "You are free, and if you choose Jin Yuelin, I will bless you." ”

After that, Jin Yuelin took the initiative to quit, but still often went in and out of the Liang family. Someone who loves his wife, who has not been married for the sake of his wife all his life, can still freely enter and leave his home, in exchange for whom, can not stand it. All kinds of signs show that the married life of Liang Sicheng and Lin Huiyin is not very harmonious and happy.

What makes Liang Sicheng regret most for life is the six words left by Lin Huiyin before his death. In the autumn of 1954, Lin Hui was admitted to the hospital because of illness, and soon Liang Sicheng was also admitted to the hospital because of illness, and Lin Huiyin's illness was much more serious than Liang Sicheng's. On the last day of March 1955, Liang Sicheng may have had a premonition that his wife could not hold back. So he stayed by Lin Huiyin's bedside during the day and didn't leave until the lights were turned off in the ward at night.

However, what Liang Sicheng did not expect was that when he met his wife again, he was already separated by yin and yang. At 6:20 a.m. on April 1, Lin Huiyin died. Before dying, she called the nurse in the early hours of the morning, hoping to see her husband, telling the nurse, "I have something to say to him." The nurse considered that it was late at night, and Liang Sicheng had already gone to sleep, so she told Lin Huiyin that she could speak tomorrow morning. And Lin Huiyin did not wait for Liang Sicheng to see his last side, and he left this world. "I have something to say to him", which also became her last words. In this regard, Liang Sicheng is very guilty.

After Lin Hui died of illness, Liang Sicheng personally designed a cemetery for her, and Jin Yuelin and others attended her funeral. At the memorial service, Jin Yuelin also wrote a famous elegy for Lin Huiyin: "A poetic thousand waterfalls, a monthly day on earth", in order to mourn his beloved.