Metzgar History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

Germany

Bavaria, Germany is the ancestral home of the Metzgar family. The Germans began using hereditary surnames in the 12th century. Metzgar is an occupational name, which was derived from the kind of work done by the original bearer. It is a name for a butcher. The surname Metzgar is derived from the German word metzger, which means butcher.

Early Origins of the Metzgar family

The surname Metzgar was first found in Bavaria, where the name became noted for its many branches within the region, each house acquiring a status and influence which was envied and enrolled by the princes of the region. Chronicles first mention Burch vor der Mezzje of Zuerich in 1258, and Conrad hinter der Mezzje of Constance in 1259. The literal translation of the name into English would be "butcher" or "meat market." In their later history the family became a power unto themselves, and were elevated to the ranks of nobility as they grew into a most influential family.

Early History of the Metzgar family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Metzgar research. Another 100 words (7 lines of text) covering the years 1623, 1632, 1635, 1637, 1683, 1687, 1701, 1702, 1740 and 1775 are included under the topic Early Metzgar History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Metzgar Spelling Variations

In the medieval era, many different cultural groups lived in the German states. There are thus many regional variations of German surnames from that era. Westphalians spoke Low German, which is similar to modern Dutch. Many German names carry suffixes that identify where they came from. Others have phrases attached that identify something about the original bearer. Other variations in German names resulted from the fact that medieval scribes worked without the aid of any spelling rules. The spelling variations of the name Metzgar include Metzger, Mezger, Metzeler, Metzler, Mezler and others.

Early Notables of the Metzgar family

Prominent among members of the name Metzgar in this period include Georg Balthasar Metzger (1623-1687), a German physician and scientist, one of the four founding members of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina in Schweinfurt; Joseph Mezger (1635-1683), an Austrian Benedictine of St. Peter's Archabbey, Salzburg; Francis Mezger (1632-1701)...

Another 48 words (3 lines of text) are included under the topic Early Metzgar Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Metzgar migration to the United States +

Between the mid-17th and mid-20th centuries, German settlers arrived in North America by the thousands. Persecution based on religion and poverty were great motivators in this large-scale migration. So too was the opportunity for tenant farmers to own their own land. Ample land and opportunity awaited the settlers who went to such states as Pennsylvania, Texas, New York, Illinois, and California, as well as Ontario and the prairie provinces of Canada. Research into the origins of individual families in North America revealed records of the immigration of a number of people bearing the name Metzgar or a variant listed above:

Metzgar Settlers in United States in the 19th Century

Conrad Metzgar, who landed in Pennsylvania in 1861 1

Rudolph Metzgar, who arrived in Arkansas in 1891 1

Related Stories +

Citations +

Filby, P. William, Meyer, Mary K., Passenger and immigration lists index : a guide to published arrival records of about 500,000 passengers who came to the United States and Canada in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries. 1982-1985 Cumulated Supplements in Four Volumes Detroit, Mich. : Gale Research Co., 1985, Print (ISBN 0-8103-1795-8)