Georg Balthasar Metzger was a German physician and scientist notable as one of the four founding members of the Academy of Sciences Leopoldina in Schweinfurt.

Georg Balthasar Metzger was born on September 23, 1623, in Schweinfurt, Bavaria, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 50° 2’ 58” North latitude and 10° 13’ 18” East longitude, with an altitude of 250 meters above sea level. Georg Balthasar Metzger passed away at the age of 64 in 1687.

Astrologically, Georg Balthasar Metzger falls under the Sun sign of Libra, with Sagittarius as his Ascendant, Virgo as his Moon sign, and Gemini as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Libra Moon Virgo Ascendant Sagittarius Midheaven Virgo Mercury Virgo Venus Scorpio Mars Capricorn Jupiter Leo Saturn Leo Uranus Leo Neptune Libra Pluto Taurus Ceres Sagittarius Chiron Pisces Eros Sagittarius Hygiea Taurus Juno Libra Pallas Sagittarius Vesta Pisces Black Moon Lilith Gemini North Node Libra South Node Aries Part of Fortune Scorpio Vertex Cancer

Sunin Libra0° 0’ 43”

The Sun in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you compassionate. You are artistic and sincere, making others comfortable. You can be friendly and attract […] Read more »

Moonin Virgo17° 38’ 60”

The Moon in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you realistic and helps you keep your feelings in check. You are honest, can ignore your […] Read more »

Ascendantin Sagittarius3° 38’ 53”

Sagittarius Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you daring and passionate. You are intense and can be determined to succeed. You can be enthusiastic and […] Read more »

Midheavenin Virgo28° 40’ 25”

Virgo Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for service and careers related to health and science. You are diligent and cautious in […] Read more »

Mercuryin Virgo29° 0’ 2”

Virgo Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you rational and logical. You are thoughtful and intelligent. You use your intellectual gifts primarily and often ignore […] Read more »

Venusin Scorpio16° 31’ 34”

Scorpio Venus in the Natal Chart makes you loving and sensitive. You are creative and relate to your loved ones emotionally and intellectually. You are […] Read more »

Marsin Capricorn19° 8’ 30”

Capricorn Mars in the Natal Chart makes you eager to thrive. You are intense and can be persistent. You are patient and willing to face […] Read more »

Jupiterin Leo21° 12’ 9”

Leo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you open about your ideals. You pursue your desires and can be creative and expressive. You are charming, […] Read more »

Saturnin Leo14° 58’ 28”

Is Saturn in Leo good or bad? Leo Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you uplifting and determined to succeed. You are part of a […] Read more »

Uranusin Leo15° 18’ 49”

Leo Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you a part of an excitable and enthusiastic generation. You are born among people with a Karmic mission […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra17° 23’ 17”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Taurus16° 1’ 20”

Taurus Pluto in the Natal Chart is a generational placement associated with dramatic changes to beauty, romance, and power. Your generation helps redefine security and […] Read more »

Ceresin Sagittarius3° 11’ 40”

Ceres in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings an abundance of hope and faith. Your generation is committed to fulfilling your ideals. You are energizing […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces14° 58’ 51”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Sagittarius18° 35’ 34”

Eros in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a daring and bold approach to intimacy. You seek a partner who shares your carefree attitude toward […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus0° 19’ 40”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Libra23° 19’ 26”

Juno in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for romance and marriage. You are eager to settle down with your partner and […] Read more »

Pallasin Sagittarius24° 1’ 2”

Pallas in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are generous and can be a natural leader who inspires others to […] Read more »

Vestain Pisces25° 10’ 33”

Vesta in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you endearing and romantic. You are sensitive and obsessed with spiritual growth. You delve into the occult […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Gemini12° 47’ 41”

Gemini Black Moon Lilith makes you dramatic and eager to push boundaries. You can fall for extreme ideas and are attracted to taboo and unconventional […] Read more »

North Nodein Libra22° 33’ 60”

Libra North Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to heal wounds through partnerships. Your relationships are critical to fulfilling your destiny. You use […] Read more »

South Nodein Aries22° 33’ 60”

Aries South Node in the Natal Chart makes you a leader with a passionate personality. You are driven by a desire to learn from others. […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Scorpio21° 17’ 11”

Scorpio Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart indicates a penchant for mystery and mysticism. You are a gifted psychic and use your intellectual and […] Read more »

Vertexin Cancer17° 27’ 14”

Cancer Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. Your instincts can bring you closer to your purpose. Your destiny relies on your […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Ninth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Second House Jupiter Ninth House Saturn Eighth House Uranus Eighth House Neptune Tenth House Pluto Fifth House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Third House Eros First House Hygiea Fifth House Juno Tenth House Pallas First House Vesta Third House Black Moon Lilith Seventh House North Node Tenth House South Node Fourth House Part of Fortune Twelfth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 29 major aspects, alongside 16 minor aspects, as well as 7 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Saturn Conjunct Uranus Sun Conjunct Midheaven Sun Conjunct Mercury Moon Sextile Venus Moon Trine Mars Venus Square Uranus Venus Opposite Pluto Saturn Square Pluto Uranus Square Pluto Neptune Quincunx Pluto Moon Trine Pluto Venus Square Saturn Mars Quincunx Jupiter Mars Square Neptune Saturn Sextile Neptune Uranus Sextile Neptune Venus Sextile Mars Mars Trine Pluto Sun Sextile Ascendant Mars Quincunx Saturn Mars Quincunx Uranus Jupiter Sextile Neptune Ascendant Sextile Midheaven Mercury Sextile Ascendant Venus Square Jupiter Jupiter Square Pluto Jupiter Conjunct Saturn Jupiter Conjunct Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Georg Balthasar Metzger’s life journey.

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Uranusorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct Uranus in a chart can make a person seem highly energetic. They will have a side of them that is practical and grounded […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 1°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Venusorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Venus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is a kind and loving person. They tend to […] Read more »

Moon Trine Marsorb: 1°

What does the Moon trine Mars mean? In a Natal Chart, this can indicate a person has a charismatic, passionate, and ambitious personality. They are […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Plutoorb: 1°

Venus opposite Pluto in a chart creates intensity regarding romance, attraction, and relationships. There is also a darkness in this opposition. The intense love and […] Read more »

Neptune Quincunx Plutoorb: 1°

Neptune quincunx Pluto in a chart can create tension between the imagination and the subconscious mind. Someone with this aspect might want to evolve but […] Read more »

Moon Trine Plutoorb: 2°

The Moon trine Pluto in a chart typically indicates that someone can develop profound connections with themselves, others, and the universe. Someone with this trine […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Jupiterorb: 2°

Mars quincunx Jupiter in a chart creates tension between serving your own needs and serving the needs of others. There is typically a desire to […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Marsorb: 3°

Venus sextile Mars in a chart typically indicates that a person is highly social and energetic. They love being around other people, gaining new experiences, […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Ascendantorb: 4°

The Sun sextile Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and entertaining. You have a gift for sharing your creative talents. Being around friends […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Saturnorb: 4°

Mars quincunx Saturn in a chart typically indicates that someone struggles with perfectionism. Their perception of themselves tends to be off, and they are often […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Uranusorb: 4°

Mars quincunx Uranus in a chart typically creates a unique personality and a desire to be seen as different in some way. People with this […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Saturnorb: 6°

Jupiter conjunct Saturn in a chart can indicate that a person is optimistic, determined, and a bit prideful. Someone with this aspect in their chart […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Uranusorb: 6°

Jupiter conjunct Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone craves freedom and needs to try new things constantly. There are both positive and negative […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Quincunx Hygiea Moon Sextile Vertex Ceres Conjunct Ascendant Jupiter Square Part of Fortune Saturn Quincunx Chiron Uranus Quincunx Chiron Neptune Square Vertex Moon Square Eros Venus Trine Vertex Jupiter Sextile North Node Jupiter Trine South Node Neptune Sextile Eros Pluto Sextile Chiron Pluto Sextile Vertex Venus Trine Chiron Mars Opposite Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Georg Balthasar Metzger’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mars Opposite Vertexorb: 2°

Mars opposite the Vertex in a chart can cause a person to have fated encounters that alter their desires, ambitions, or goals in some way. […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Eros Quincunx Vertex Juno Sextile Pallas Juno Conjunct North Node Juno Opposite South Node Pallas Square Vesta Pallas Sextile North Node Pallas Trine South Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Georg Balthasar Metzger’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Juno Conjunct North Nodeorb: 1°

Juno conjunct the North Node in a chart connects someone’s commitments and partnerships with their purpose and full potential. They will find more success collaborating […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.