Amzici Map — Satellite Images of Amzici

original name: Amzići

geographical location: Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, Europe

geographical coordinates: 43° 29' 40" North, 19° 50' 42" East

detailed map of Amzici and near places

Welcome to the Amzici google satellite map! This place is situated in Srbija, Serbia and Montenegro, its geographical coordinates are 43° 29' 40" North, 19° 50' 42" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Amzići. See Amzici photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Amzici in Serbia and Montenegro. Amzici hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Amzici or add new placemark for Amzici.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Amzici hotel reservations

Book hotel in Amzici online and save money

Amzici hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Serbia and Montenegro »

Amzici hotels – sortable list of all Amzici hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Amzici hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Amzici, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Amzici, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Amzici hotels map

The location of each Amzici hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Amzici hotel map is available where all hotels in Amzici are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Amzici hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Amzici hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Amzici hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Amzici hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Amzici

Hotel Javor ** (in Kusici, distanced approximately 22 km)

Vila Angelina *** (in Koprivnica, distanced approximately 22 km)

Cottages Zakos **** (in Zlatibor, distanced approximately 25 km)

Villa Natural Wood **** (in Zlatibor, distanced approximately 28 km)

Apartments Carevo Polje *** (in Zlatibor, distanced approximately 28 km)

Hotel President *** (in Zlatibor, distanced approximately 28 km)

Vila Pina **** (in Zlatibor, distanced approximately 28 km)

more Amzici hotels »

Amzici car rental

Compare Amzici car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Amzici rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Amzici car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Amzici — we will do it for you!

Car hire Amzici and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Amzici the city centre. Compare Amzici car rental offers by various suppliers.

Sarajevo car rental (distanced approximately 130 km)

Sarajevo - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 130 km)

Sarajevo - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 130 km)

Tuzla - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 140 km)

Tuzla car rental (distanced approximately 150 km)

more offers and Amzici car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Amzici

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Amzici »

Overview of flights to and from Serbia and Montenegro »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Amzici. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Amzici and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Amzici are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Uzice Ponikve Airport (distanced approximately 47 km) – airport hotels

Zabljak Airport (distanced approximately 65 km) – airport hotels

Sarejevo Butimir Airport (distanced approximately 120 km) – airport hotels

Sarajevo Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Rajilovak Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Amzici 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Amzici in Serbia and Montenegro

You can also dive right into Amzici on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Amzici 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Amzici, Serbia and Montenegro in Google Earth »

Get more out of Amzici map

Add placemark to Amzici

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Amzici map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Amzici google map link options

link to us:

small Amzici google map image link

medium Amzici google map image link

large Amzici google map image link