Christian Petersen/Getty Images

Earlier this week, Marc Stein of ESPN reported that the New Orleans Hornets are pursuing deals to rid themselves of Chris Kaman and his cumbersome contract.

The New Orleans Hornets are actively trying to trade center Chris Kaman, who was not with the team for its home game Friday night against Orlando as the league-owned Hornets field trade calls for him.

The Hornets have decided to shelve Kaman until they can find a trade home for him after making the decision to give his minutes to young players. Kaman had been made inactive for Wednesday's loss at Oklahoma City even though he's not injured.

The main suitors interested in the services of the 29-year-old center are the Houston Rockets, Indiana Pacers, Utah Jazz and San Antonio Spurs. One notable absentee from this list is the Orlando Magic, who are in desperate need of a veteran backup center.

Adding Chris Kaman makes almost too much sense for the Orlando Magic. Kaman is an automatic upgrade at the backup center position, as Glen Davis is too small to be effective against the elite centers. Davis would then revert back to his natural position of power forward, where he found much success in Boston.

Plus, Kaman would add size to a team that desperately lacks that quality. As of right now, the Orlando Magic have no players listed above 6'11". In a league where size dominates, this is a problem that the Magic need a solution for.

Currently, the Magic use only three big man in their rotation in Ryan Anderson, Glen Davis and Dwight Howard. By adding Kaman, Orlando would boast one of the elite big man groups on the NBA.

Also, Van Gundy could explore intriguing line-up combinations where Howard and Kaman are both on the court. Kaman would presumably play the power forward in this interesting line-up and knock down open mid-range jumpers when Howard is double-teamed. Kaman would also alleviate the pressure on Howard as the only effective rebounder on the roster.

Kaman also brings value in another way, as his $14.3 million expiring contract would be extremely important to the Orlando Magic.

Even if the Magic lose Howard in free agency or trade the dominant center, having extra cap space starting next season would be important in the rebuilding process.

If O-Town convinces Howard to stick around, Kaman's expiring contract would open up space for them to sign or swing a deal for a second star.

Both scenarios would open up the Orlando Magic to explore a plethora of options, which is a luxury the Magic have not had the last few years.

The Hornets are looking for youth, draft picks and expiring contracts in exchange for Kaman. Sure, Orlando does not possess many enticing trade assets, but the Magic can put up a reasonable trade offer.

A trade offer comprised of J.J. Redick, Chris Duhon, Quentin Richardson, Justin Harper and Daniel Orton would probably be enough to pry Kaman away from the Hornets.

In this deal, the Hornets would add depth and youth to a rebuilding squad. Both Harper and Orton have been used sparingly in Orlando and have tons of potential. Richardson, Duhon and Redick would become valuable players in the rotation and keep New Orleans competitive every night.