ORLANDO, Fla. – Without center Chris Kaman, the Clippers proved to be no match for Superman.

Dwight Howard had 22points and 13 rebounds to help the Orlando Magic beat the Clippers, 110-86, securing their first winning season since 2002-03.

The Clippers got 22points from Corey Maggette and 17 apiece from Cuttino Mobley and Al Thornton, but were hampered by the absence of Kaman, who missed his second straight game with a sore back.

“I knew it was going to be a pretty long night against Dwight (Howard) without Chris,” Clippers coach Mike Dunleavy said. “Dwight was just a nightmare matchup for us. We had to collapse and double team him and they have too many good shooters. Sooner or later someone is going to catch fire.”

Kaman’s ailment is just the latest woe for the Clippers, whose players have missed a league-high 221 games this season because of injuries.

Howard, who memorably donned a Superman-like costume during the All-Star weekend’s dunk contest, got his league-high 57th double-double this season.

It is the first time Howard has played on a winning team in his four-year NBA career.

“It feels good to have a winning season, but we’re not satisfied,” Howard said. “We’ve got a lot of stuff to work on for the playoffs. We want to be great so you’ve got to push to get better.”

He also had plenty of help.

Rashard Lewis had 19 points and nine rebounds and Hedo Turkoglu added 17 points for the Magic, who put all five starters in double figures by the end of the third quarter. Carlos Arroyo had 13 points off the bench.

The Magic converted 113-pointers Wednesday to give them a league-leading 622 this season, which ties a club record for a single season.

Seven of the 3s came in the third period, including four straight when the Clippers had pulled within nine points.

Trailing by 15 at halftime, the Clippers pulled to 69-60with 7:48 to play in the third quarter. However, Jameer Nelson drilled a 3-pointer and Turkoglu added three straight 3s to spark a 14-4 run that pushed the Magic’s lead to 83-64.

ETC.: Smush Parker, released by Miami earlier this week, signed a contract with the Clippers. Terms weren’t announced. Parker, a 6-foot-4 guard, played in only nine games for the Heat this season, averaging 4.8 points, 1.7 assists and 2.1rebounds. The former Laker had been on paid leave since an incident Nov. 27 with a Miami valet parking attendant.