The Niagara Region is full of life, love and culture. Many great artists live amongst us, inspiring others to achieve their dreams and live passionately. One artist in particular struts his eccentricity with such dramatic flair that he is almost impossible to ignore. His name: Joachim Alexander Fernandez. Currently residing in St Catharines, Joachim explores his love for art as a teacher at A.N Myer Secondary in Niagara Falls, while also channeling his creativity into creating his own masterpieces at home.

“I think what I value most as an artist is that it allows me a creative outlet, to express where I am or where I've been.” Joachim states when asked what role he plays as an artist in society. “I realize that people are going to look at my art at some point, some day and they're going to value it or not value it. To be honest I really don't care what society thinks about my work, it's not for them, it's for me.”

Growing up Joachim expressed his passion for art at a very early age. “Some of my earliest memories revolve around making art, and the journey behind making art,” he recalls. “I think I remember once as a seven year old, making an excursion down to Lake Ontario to reclaim some clay. And we walked it back; it was probably about a mile journey. I recall coming back and the dedication it took to haul that huge bucket of clay all the way back. And I remember the wire, you know bending its way into the palm of my hand, and the determination to get home so I could make something with it.”

Joachim spoke fondly about his career as an artist and his ongoing development as a result of his artistic journey. “I started off in school doing crafts and design, and doing sort of higher end pottery, that was art, but very slick, very clean and always pottery,” he reminisced. “Over the years that sort of changed and I started working more sculptural and less working utilitarian, less pottery and to the point where I don't even remember the last time I finished a piece of pottery – other than a demonstration for my students. Now my work goes to almost any medium that's out there.”

Joachim’s passion is evident as he expresses his love for mixed media. “I like the idea of working big; I like the idea of art being alive – literally alive and sometimes even dead. And sometimes alive elements weaving through dead elements.”

Finding time to create such extraordinary pieces can be a challenge due to his strict schedule as an art teacher. However there is always a little wiggle room; Joachim also likes to bring his creations into class for his students to see become inspired. “I like to think that professionally in some sort of way I'm making artists. That's been a goal to make artists, but that's changed over time, and I've discovered some things that are fairly important. So over the last year or so I've been working with trying to develop creative confidence with my students, and my students work, so that has been sort of an ongoing project.”

As a committed mentor to aspiring artists, Joachim hopes to instill in his students the same confidence he gained during his memorable journey to Lake Ontario. “I was willing to explore and go on this voyage to find something, so when I look at my students, I'm directing them to, at some point, in different ways as to where theirs comes from, what are their experiences? That allows them to be the person they are, to draw from the strengths that they have.”

With is commitment to being a serious facilitator of the arts, Joachim believes that funding such school programs is critical to developing future artists. “There should always be more funding for the arts, I don't think as a whole it's as valued as it could be. My experience is, is that other things always take precedence. If people valued the arts more ... I mean some people do value the arts it all depends. The more educated people are, the more they realize that the arts are as truly important, but we're in a very competitive world. Sometimes, the squeaky wheel gets the grease.” Joachim’s vision for his school includes “an auditorium towards the arts, a state of the art facility. Who wouldn’t love that?”

In his typical positive fashion, Joachim Fernandez’ final piece of wisdom is one that encourages us to think and look towards a bright and happy future, a piece of advice he himself was once given. “I recall this old friend of mine, he's passed away now, Toby Anderson. One day I was talking to him about what was going on in my life and the art and my friends and what not and he did his best to console me. And he said 'don't worry, everything works out in the end.' And then he laughed a little bit and he said 'I didn't say how it was going to work out, I just said it works out in the end.' And I suppose that's fairly decent advice. Having said that, one of the best advices, I suppose, was from listening to a documentary on Andy Warhol, who said 'don't worry about what other people think, just make art. While they're busy trying to interpret or figure out what you're doing, make more art.' And that's it. Just make art.”

By Meaghan Morris