(1904-1983)

Who Was George Balanchine?

George Balanchine studied ballet and music in Russia before making his way to the United States. He gained notoriety as a young choreographer and co-founded the American Ballet. Balanchine was the co-founder, artistic director and chief choreographer of the New York City Ballet, and nearly every ballet company in the world has performed his work.

Early Life

Georgy Melitonovich Balanchivadze was born on January 22, 1904, in St. Petersburg, Russia. The son of a composer, Balanchine had a robust understanding of music. In 1914, he enrolled at the Mariinsky Theatre's ballet school. He graduated in 1921 and subsequently attended the Petrograd State Conservatory of Music, leaving the conservatory after three years.

In 1922, Balanchine married a 15-year-old ballet student named Tamara Gevergeyeva. This was the first of four marriages to dancers, and for each of his wives, Balanchine would make a ballet.

In 1924, Balanchine was invited to tour Germany as part of the Soviet State Dancers. A year later, the young choreographer joined Serge Diaghilev's Ballet Russes. (His birth name, Balanchivadze, was shortened to Balanchine at Diaghilev's insistence.) At just 21 years old, Balanchine took over as choreographer for the group, one of the most renowned ballet companies in the world.

Life in America: 'The Nutcracker'

After the Ballet Russes collapsed, Balanchine created the company Les Ballets in 1933. Following a performance, American dance aficionado Lincoln Kirstein approached Balanchine about collaboration and the two began a 50-year creative partnership, co-founding the School of American Ballet in 1934. The following year, the professional company known as the American Ballet emerged, becoming the official company of New York's Metropolitan Opera until 1936.

In 1946, Kirstein and Balanchine co-founded a company that would become the New York City Ballet. Balanchine served as artistic director of the company, based out of New York State Theater at Lincoln Center. He produced more than 150 works for the company, including "The Nutcracker." While money was tight, Balanchine presented the dancers in practice clothes instead of ornate costumes.

Legacy and Death

In addition to ballet, Balanchine choreographed Hollywood movies and Broadway musicals. He is known for his connection to Igor Stravinsky; Balanchine created many ballets to his work, some in collaboration with the composer. He made more than 465 works, which have been performed by nearly every ballet company in the world.

Balanchine created plotless ballets, where the dancing upstaged glitz and storytelling. His work never featured a star, as he believed the performance should outshine the individual. He is credited with developing the neo-classical style distinct to the 20th century. Balanchine served as the artistic director of the New York City Ballet until his death, on April 30, 1983, in New York City.

QUICK FACTS

Name: Georgy Melitonovich Balanchivadze

Birth Year: 1904

Birth date: January 22, 1904

Birth City: St. Petersburg

Birth Country: Russia

Gender: Male

Best Known For: George Balanchine was a ballet choreographer who co-founded and served as artistic director of the New York City Ballet.

Industries

Theater and Dance

Art

Astrological Sign: Aquarius

Schools

Imperial School of Ballet

Mariinsky Theatre

Petrograd State Conservatory of Music

Soviet State School of Ballet

Death Year: 1983

Death date: April 30, 1983

Death State: New York

Death City: New York

Death Country: United States

Fact Check

We strive for accuracy and fairness.If you see something that doesn't look right,contact us!

CITATION INFORMATION