The French Croix de Guerre is the closest Allied award to the German Iron Cross.

The award documents handed out to the Croix de Guerre recipients are very often more decorative and detailed than those for the Iron Cross. In this section we shall post variations of the documents and do our best to describe the deeds of the recipients within their historical context.

Pictured here is the Medaille Militaire and Croix de Guerre awarded to Henri Chetou, killed on the 31st of September 1915.

A citation at Armee level for Captain Henri Barthelemy Carras of the 174eme R.I. fighting in the Champagne in September 1918. As a bonus a commendation certificate to one of his opponents.

A Verdun group to a stretcher bearer named Armand Detrus, he was killed on the night 8th to 9th of June 1916 while evacuating the wounded.

A Croix de Guerre awarded for the October 1917 reduction of the "Laffaux Ecke" to Grenadier Henri Cuillerier.

Some men are brave in the heat of battle, fewer are brave when they make a sober decision to sacrifice themselves. Charles Chedeville made the choice... and survived. The 101eme R.I. in front of Rheims, 15th July 1916.

The Croix de Guerre with four citations awarded to Paul Garron for his part in the fighting at Fleury and Thiaumont in July/August 1916.

The confusion in front of Thiaumont Farm in the second week of June 1916. The Documents to men who took part in the fighting and in the patrols, including a Croix de Guerre to Henri Hequette

On the 27th of June Soldat 2eme Classe Eugene Guillaume of the 5eme Compagnie was wounded at his post in Front of Souville at verdun. His was awarded the Croix de Guerre with a citation at Regimental level.

Jean Baptiste Aime, a messenger from the 4eme Regiment de Marche de Zouaves was awarded a citation for his Croix de Guerre during the Regiments sojourn on the Souville heights. He counter attacked with his bayonet on the 5th of August 1916.

Jean Baptiste Aime won a citation for his Croix de Guerre while acting as a runner for the 4eme Batl. of the 4eme Zouaves during the 38eme Division d'Infanterie attack on Fort Douaumont on the 24th of October 1916.

Haucourt, the death of a Regiment. Soldat Maurice Richard was killed when the 69eme R.I. was annihilated while defending the road to Cote 304.

Liaison Runner Aime won a citation for his Croix de Guerre in the mid December 1916 offensive at Verdun. His Battalion suffered heavy losses at les Chambrettes.