Julia Cameron will teach a blend of her two writing books: The Right to Write and Write for Life.

In this highly-interactive workshop, you will learn that writing is not dependent on our mood.

Contrary to our mythology, which tells us that writers need special times, special places, and even special pens, we will learn that it is possible to write anytime, any place.

Using a wide variety of tools drawn from both books and her own writer’s experience, she will teach you simple practices to free yourself from perfectionism, the tyranny of the inner critic, and more.

Expect to dismantle your negative, culturally-induced beliefs around writing – and yourself!

Drawing on fifty-five years of writing experience, Julia will guide you into a more fulfilled writing practice.

Bring your favorite writing materials. Writers of all levels are invited to this intensive.

Did you know that your untold truths are healing medicine? The trouble is that most of us learned from an early age that being fully honest and vulnerable is not safe. As a result, we experience the pain of hiding from ourselves and the world.

In this powerful, intimate workshop with New York Times bestselling author and healer, Alex Elle, you will be invited into group and personal work designed to free you from the fear of showing up as who you really are. Gentle and trauma-informed, this work will allow you to experience the joy and liberation of expressing yourself more fully – which will infuse your writing with magnetic authenticity and love.

Bring your journal and writing instruments, curiosity, and an open heart.

Optional but recommended: a meditation pillow or cushion for healing mindfulness practice.

In this fun interactive workshop, you will be immersed in an intimate haven of writing miracles with SARK as your ultimate activator, catalyst, and magical mentor!

You will be guided and led through the innovative, highly effective processes and methods SARK used to produce 19 bestselling books, all of her current transformational, life-changing programs, and significant writing results for clients in her private mentoring practice.

You’ll learn how to easily develop a habit of completion and be able to feel newly inspired to write and keep writing consistently.

You and your writing will receive exquisite self-care and love, and you will leave this workshop with a transformed writing practice, an overflowing heart, and a unique personalized Magical Map to use to finish each of your writing projects and become the writer you came here to be.