Originally posted on Fringe.fm

Joe Haldeman is a famed American science fiction author best known for his novel The Forever War (1974). That novel, and other of his works, including The Hemingway Hoax (1991) and Forever Peace (1997), have won major science fiction awards, including the Hugo Award and Nebula Award.[2]

Joe was awarded the SFWA Grand Master for career achievements and in 2012 he was inducted as a member of the Science Fiction Hall of Fame. He’s a member of Author’s Guild, Writer’s Guild, Science Fiction Writers of America, National Space Society (on Board of Advisors), Space Studies Institute and was President of Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America from 1992-1994.

Many of Haldeman’s works, including his debut novel War Year and his second novel The Forever War, were inspired by his experiences related to serving in the Vietnam War. Wounded in combat, he struggled to adjust to civilian life after returning home.

During Joe’s prolific career, he’s authored 30 books, 7 short fiction novels a set of comics and even a poem.

You can grab a copy of The Forever War here or a free audiobook download here.

Listen online here or subscribe via: iTunes | Stitcher

In our wide-ranging conversation, we cover many things, including:

The evolution of science fiction

How author’s like Joe research, describe and often help create technology

Routines for increasing creativity

How astronomy and a curiosity for space pushed Joe into his passion

What goes into creating a compelling story

Why many authors and creatives resort to alcohol and hard drugs to create masterpieces

How exercises inspires creativity

Why Joe is optimistic about extraterrestrial life

The reason Joe writes and importance of obsession

How to stay humble in face of success

The reason Joe’s worried about starvation and the incentive structures of society

When to be a kid and when it is time to be an adult

How the shift from public to private space companies is transforming industry

Why sci fi is the lifeblood of technologists and creativity

How to hone your craft and becoming worldclass

Which industries Joe’s most excited about

Like this? Subscribe via: iTunes | Stitcher

Fringe FM is the podcast where we explore the edges of human understanding and look at the technologies, trends and societal norms shaping our collective future. Here the world’s top minds share their passion projects and how advances in genomics, space travel, connected devices, artificial intelligence and other exponential tech is converging to create the future of tomorrow.

#AI #Podcast #ScienceFiction #Space #asimov #scifi #theforeverwar