Seven years after Joe Jonas took off his purity ring, the former boy bander opened up about losing his virginity in a Reddit Q&A on Tuesday.

“I lost my virginity to this girl named Ashley,” Jonas answered a fan who inquired about his first time. “You can probably just Google it. It’s pretty easy to figure out. I dated a girl named Ashley, so just Google it to figure out which Ashley that is.”

WATCH: Joe Jonas Opens Up About His Ex-Girlfriends Demi Lovato, Taylor Swift and Gigi Hadid

The “Ashley” that the 27-year-old singer refers to is presumed to be Twilight star Ashley Greene, who he dated when he was 20 -- the age he previously revealed was when he lost his virginity.

During the fan Q&A, Jonas went into even more detail about that fateful day.

“It’s quite a great story because I didn’t have any condoms, so I went to our drummer, Jack’s room, who was my roommate at the time and I demolished his room looking for them,” he recalled. “Found them underneath his underwear drawer. When he came home, he thought somebody broke into his room because his whole room was demolished because I was in dire need. Needed to happen then and now. Safety first, kids.”

Jonas was also extremely honest about his band DNCE’s racy new “Body Moves” music video, which co-stars model and actress, Charlotte McKinney.

“Thank you very much about saying it’s tastefully sexy,” he told a fan. “There was definitely some half chubbing going on during the video. I wouldn’t say a full blown boner, but I would say a halfie. I mean it’s kind of hard not to in that situation, especially when you’re trying to be intimate.”

MORE: Joe Jonas Makes Out With Model Charlotte McKinney in Sexy DNCE Music Video

He also opened up about working with supermodel Ashley Graham on DNCE's music video for “Toothbrush,” saying, “The first thing out of her mouth – I never told anybody this – she actually said, 'If you get a boner, I’m gonna start to laugh.' So, that was how she broke the ice to get us comfortable on set.”

For more on Joe’s past relationships, watch the clip below!