In the opinion of many, Milena Dravić and Dragan Nikolić were the most beautiful acting couple of the old Yugoslavia.

When they met, Milena was already a movie star and Dragan’s career had just begun. They met at the set of the film Horoskop (Horoscope), and love was born out of a friendship. Shortly after, they decided to start living together.

They got married in 1971, during the filming of the New Year film “Kako su se volele dve budale” (How the two fools loved each other), based on the text by Duško Radović. In the break between the shooting, they asked for an extra one hour of time, went to the Vračar Municipality and got married.

On rare occasions when they talked about each other, they always highlighted that their spouse is their biggest support, as well as the biggest critic.

“You can find more reasons to end a four-decade long marriage, than to save it. The easiest thing you can do is to cut something out and end it; it is a lot more difficult to fight for a marriage to survive. Sometimes a quarrel can refresh the day. Sometimes you just have to be jealous, because that is also one indicator of love,” Dragan said once.

Their great love survived, and can be used as an example.

Gaga Nikolić has been considered one of the biggest charmers in the region for decades, despite of his age.

Nikolić interpreted over 20 theater roles in the Belgrade Drama Theater and Atelier 212. He will be remembered for the roles in films “Mlad i zdrav kao ruža”, “Kičma”, “Nacionalna klasa”, “Ko to tamo peva”, “Banović Strahinja”, “Nešto između”, “Balkan ekspres”, “Obećana zemlja”, “Belo odelo”, “Turneja”, “Ni na nebu ni na zemlji”. One of the roles that made him especially popular is the role of Prle in the TV soap opera “Otpisani”.

Nikolić won the audience throughout the region with his roles, modesty and enormous talent. Atelier 212 published the news of his death. Although he passed away, the character of Dragan Nikolić will continue to live among the people.

(Source: zenskikutak.rs)