Back in 1978, a small record label was created that over the course of the next 25 years, would set the standard for film soundtrack releases. That label, Varèse Sarabande, has released hundreds - if not thousands - of soundtracks since its conception. Now, to celebrate this wondrous anniversary, the good folks at Varèse have put together a four disc compilation highlighting their many releases.

Many tracks from their big releases are included here: The Omen, Total Recall, Robocop, Halloween, The Empire Strikes Back, Sunset Boulevard, Emma, The Last of the Mohicans, City Slickers, and more. It would be redundant to list them all here, but just know that there are tracks from 84 soundtracks here on this set. As such, there are plenty of scores missing that couldn't be included - a shame, but practicality needs to intervene at some point.

While including plenty of well-known soundtrack cues, there are also some more obscure titles that you might not be familiar with that make a welcome appearance here: The Winds of War, Raggedy Man, A Little Romance, Moby Dick, The Dead, Eye of the Needle and others. It's clear from listening to this album that it is not intended for the film score collector at heart - rather, it's aimed at a more generalized listening audience, to expose them to the wide variety of film music styles that are out there, and that Varèse has to offer.

It is this variety that has seemingly helped determine the sequencing of the album. It's not organized by genre (although there are certainly moments where that appears to be the case). Rather, it was organized in such a way that the listening flow is never interrupted abruptly, and each track segues quite nicely into the next. Kudos to the person(s) who was tasked with that job! The ability to smoothly from Pee Wee's Big Advenure into Halloween, then Nightmare on Elm Street, The Fly, and end up at Robocop just before hopping into The Empire Strikes Back takes a level of skill and foresight that is rather remarkable.

There are nearly five hours of music presented here, on four albums. It has plenty to offer any listener, whether they be a casual film music fan, or a die-hard fanatic. It's the perfect album to give as a gift to someone who you want to be exposed to film music. You might even discover some new gems, and then make it a goal to seek out the regular Varèse release. (I know I have!) Here's to the past 25 years with Varèse, and here's to 25 more!