The two friends had made their usual 15-minute commutes — Eric Goldstein from North Caldwell, Dave Grossman from Short Hills — to a Starbucks in Roseland to discuss work at their social media startup company, Amplify. But on that morning in December 2010, all conversation veered to their beloved Giants and how they had blown a 21-point fourth-quarter lead against the Eagles in the “Miracle at the New Meadowlands.”

It would be therapeutic to commiserate with fellow fans, they thought, and searched for a social media outlet to do so.

Then it hit them: There wasn’t one exclusively for sports. From that void came the roots of SportsYapper, a social media platform dedicated to sports and the brainchild of the two New Jersey residents that counts Yankees first baseman Mark Teixiera among its partners.

“What’s more social than sports? Honestly?” said Goldstein, a Long Island native. “To think that there’s this mass global movement towards social media, but nothing for sports fans made no sense to me. But now there is SportsYapper.”

AN EXPERIMENT GROWS

Grossman first stepped into the digital world in 1996 when he created Rare Medium, which designed, built and marketed websites. Goldstein’s experience dates to the late 1990s when he created one of the first online fantasy football websites and continued when he founded clipmarks.com, a social news site that was sold to Forbes in 2007.

The two then co-founded Amplify, a social bookmarking website.

The daily conversations over coffee continued and in May 2011 they decided to give it a try. Neither knows how to write code so they flew a developer, Darren Bounds, up from Jacksonville, Fla., in June. That summer, the three developed the prototype for a website. A Google document with hundreds of names dwindled to one, and a logo and color scheme — dominated by green to conjure playing surfaces — were chosen.

In October, the website was tested for the first time during the Yankees’ playoff series against the Detroit Tigers. The group was encouraged when the testers would check in each night to discuss the games for hours at a time.

“It was just electric,” Grossman said.

SportsYapper went from an experiment with minimal expectations to a viable business opportunity when Goldstein read about the “second screen” — the concept of following an event on a device as a complement to television — and venture capitalists’ interest. It hit them that SportsYapper was a second-screen sports destination, they just weren’t aware of it.

“A light went off in my head and I went, ‘Whoa, whoa. This can be the next big industry,’ ” Goldstein said.

After an initial investment of $50,000 between the original three, Kenny Dichter became the first partner in November. Dichter, of Livingston, was a co-founder of two successful businesses, Marquis Jet and Tequila Avion. In January, Goldstein and Grossman sold Amplify.com to focus on SportsYapper.

The company rethought its plan. Instead of a website, they decided SportsYapper would begin as a mobile application to maximize second-screen capability. Inspired by Twitter’s format and Instagram’s simplicity, the application was developed over the winter and went live for 25 people during Super Bowl XLVI.

In late April, version 1.0 was released to the public for the iPhone, iPad and Android.

As soon he read SportYapper's concept, Brian Perkins understood its audience — he was part of it.

A basketball player at Rutgers in the mid-1970s and current vice chairman on the school’s Board of Overseers, he engages in e-mail and text message conversations with as many as 15 people during Rutgers football games. They dissect each play, criticize each call, question each coaching decision. Rutgers’ 28-25 upset of No. 3 Louisville in November 2006 alone resulted in 217 e-mails and texts from four continents, he said.

A former executive at Johnson & Johnson who served as Head of Global Marketing, Perkins thought if fans were passionate at Rutgers, imagine fans at the Floridas and Oklahomas of the world.

“It can be kind of a hassle sending e-mails or texts,” said Perkins, a native of Ramsay who left Johnson & Johnson in February after 30 years and became a partner in December. “Sports-Yapper is meant for this.”

For instance, most of Mark Teixeira’s 180,000 Twitter followers follow him because he plays for the Yankees, not for his opinions on Georgia Tech football.

“I love Georgia Tech football,” said Teixeira, who attended the school, “but after one tweet it’s, ‘All right, Mark, that’s enough. I don’t want to hear about Georgia Tech football.’ ”

When Dichter introduced Teixeira to SportsYapper in November, he saw an outlet without the backlash and became a partner.

SPORTS IN A REAL-TIME STREAM

Like Twitter, SportsYapper’s central feature is a real-time stream of microblog posts and users “follow” others, but Teixeira’s example is why Goldstein and Grossman maintain Sports-Yapper isn’t redundant. Certain sporting events, like the Super Bowl, are exceptions, but they argue the average Twitter user doesn’t want their feed flooded with sports.

“There’s no friction in being able to post about every pitch, every hit, every drive, everything,” Grossman said. “Whereas on Twitter, you’ll be the loud guy. Like, ‘I get it. You’re a Yankee fan and you’re watching the game.’ ”

Differences in features also exist. In addition to a stream with “friends,” there is a central public stream and streams divided by individual sports and teams. On SportsYapper, there is a 300-character limit as opposed to 140 on Twitter. And hash tags, a prominent Twitter tool, serve no purpose.

“It looks like something that might compete favorably with Twitter because sports fans wouldn’t have to filter out non-sports content by using a hash tag,” said Susan Keith, an associate professor in the Department of Journalism and Media Studies at Rutgers. “And trying to figure out whether the tag is @Mets or @NYMets.”

So far, the company is encouraged by the early returns: The average user spends an hour on the application per session, and 10,000 users have posted over 70,000 “yapps” in the 14 different sports since its release. The application’s first update will be released this month and a website is due in August.

The challenge, the company admits, is to convince athletes and media — and fans — to migrate from their venue.

“Sports are inherently social,” Goldstein said. “It’s why sports bars and sports radio exist. It’s why people have Super Bowl parties. And it’s why we believe in SportsYapper.”

Jorge Castillo: jcastillo@starledger.com