Obituary of Robert N. Lowry

Robert N. Lowry (89) longtime Plummer, ID resident passed away at Kootenai Health on December 18, 2022. He was born to William and Eleanor (Peters) Lowry on August 21, 1933 in Plummer, ID. Bob was raised in Plummer and graduated from Plummer High School with the class of 1952.

Following high school, Bob attended North Idaho College for a couple of years before attending the University of Idaho. He obtained a BA in Education. The first and only teaching job Bob had was at John Brown Elementary in Rathdrum, ID. He taught 3rd grade and after one year decided teaching was not for him. He worked for 3 years in Clarkia with the US Forest Service, 7 years with the Milwaukee Railroad in Avery, and 33 years with GTE.

In 1978 Bob met Bennie Barden through her brother Gary, and the couple married in 1982 at the Hitching Post in Coeur d’ Alene. They built their dream home near Plummer, and it has served as their forever home. Bob enjoyed anything with an engine, specifically classic cars and tractors. He and Bennie attended several car shows all over the Pacific Northwest and into Canada. Bob also enjoyed traveling, camping, fishing, and just being outdoors in general.

Bob is survived by his wife Bennie at their home near Plummer; children Janice (Coady) Beauchamp of Spokane, WA, Jody (Kellie) Barden of Coeur d’ Alene, ID, Tammy (Adam) Folden of Brush Prairie, WA, and Staci Halterman of Post Falls, ID; brother Russell Lowry of Plummer, ID; 13 grandchildren; 14 great grandchildren, 4 great-great grandchildren, and numerous nieces and nephews. He is preceded in death by his parents, his siblings Bill Lowry and Charles Lowry, brother in-law and best friend Gary Raines, and daughter Amy Lowry.

A Memorial Service will be on Saturday, March 25, 2023, at 11:00 am at Hodge Funeral Home in St. Maries, ID. A gathering of family and friends to share a meal will follow at the Eagles Lodge in St. Maries. Bob’s ashes will be interred at Woodlawn Cemetery in a private service.