August Strindberg (1849 – 1912), Swedish playwright, poet and painter is known for his experiments in promoting theatre as an intimate introspective experience inspiring meditative reflection. His Chamber plays have often been perceived as being preoccupied with the dynamics of sinning and evil. In this paper I shall discuss the Ghost Sonata - one of Strindberg’s Chamber plays, as drama that is diabolical in its content but leads to the reverse aspects of the spiritual and the spirit. Strindberg was an avid follower of Emanuel Swedenborg’s tenets. His philosophy of life, his insights into the spirit world of angels and souls of the dead along with his spiritual stature as ‘the new age Buddha of the West’ is well acknowledged, so also his magnum opus, his book Heaven and Hell. The purgatory hell played out in the Ghost Sonata disturbs the perceptive reader, at the same time it also leads her to the playwright’s engagement with ideas of spiritual purity and the route available to sinning humankind through the process of purgation, repentance and redemption. References are made to Christ and the Buddha, but none to Swedenborg who in fact was a huge driving force for Strindberg and his interest in the occult. Perhaps the large sized statue of the Buddha mentioned in Act three of the Ghost Sonata was in fact an allusion to his very own mentor Emanuel Swedenborg, the ‘new age Buddha’?

Emanuel Swedenborg (1688-1772) is one of Sweden’s greatest sons who had contributed to the prosperity and scientific advancement of seventeenth-century Sweden. He is remembered in the scientific halls of ivy in Sweden and elsewhere for his brilliant inventions and contributions to science. His lasting influence through the last two-hundred and fifty years, however, had been chiefly exercised through his spiritual writings about heaven and the afterlife. His writings and publications on the Bible and the afterlife are extensive. In the wake of scientific and empirical studies of near-death-experiences, which have their origins in the 1960s, the seventeenth-century seer’s writings contribute to the ongoing research on several subjects of interest related to the afterlife. These include life-before-life, near-death and shared-death-experiences, and death-bed visions. The purpose of this essay is twofold: first, to succinctly present Swedenborg’s understanding of the afterlife based on his theology and spiritual visions. Second, to demonstrate the influence of his theology throughout the last two-hundred and fifty years.

The Swedish scientist-turned-mystic Emanuel Swedenborg (1688-1772) came to believe that the ideas contained in his mystical writings constituted the coming of the New Jerusalem, the dawning of a new age as foretold in the book of the Apocalypse. Both allegorical and yet tied to a specific historical claim – that a spiritual apocalypse, a “last judgement,” began unfolding in the year 1757 – Swedenborg catalysed a later generation of Romantic thinkers and writers (such as William Blake) who gravitated towards his millennial combination of Enlightenment empiricism with visionary accounts of things “seen and heard” in heaven and hell. This essay surveys Swedenborg’s conceptualisation of Jerusalem within his eschatological contexts, before considering how his delineations of alternative spiritualities, flourishing outside Christendom, galvanised later Swedenborgian and New Age imaginaries. Attention will also be given to how Swedenborg’s New Jerusalem led to distinctive artistic and ecclesiastical iconographies within the Swedenborgian church tradition.

This article discusses the relationship between Western esotericism and literature. As an example of a secular author who uses and benefits from esoteric texts, ideas and thoughts as resources in creating a literary artwork, the article analyses Laura Lindstedt’s novel Oneiron. A Fantasy About the Seconds After Death (2015). It contextualises the novel within the frames of Western esotericism and literature, focusing on Emanuel Swedenborg’s impact on discourses of the afterlife in literature. Laura Lindstedt’s postmodern novel indicates various ways that esoteric ideas, themes, and texts can work as resources for authors of fiction in twenty-first century Finland. Since the late eighteenth century Swedenborg’s influence has been evident in literature and among artists, especially in providing resources for other-worldly imagery. Oneiron proves that the ideas of Swedenborg are still part of the memory of Western culture and literature.

In mid-1853, the worldwide "table-turning" craze swept through Copenhagen, and while Kierkegaard is silent on the topic, we know that such important figures as Heiberg and Martensen were eager participants in "borddansen" seances. But why should the two leading Hegelians in Golden Age Denmark be so fascinated by what had initially been seen as a mere parlor-game? If we consider the epistemological and soteriological beliefs of the Spiritualist movement that grew out of these early experiments, we can see that both Spiritualism and Hegelianism are reactions to post-Enlightenment collapse of religious certainty and the desire to ground comforting beliefs about the afterlife in empirical science. And this means that Kierkegaard's critique of his age - that it hubristically wanted to replace faith with a disinterested (yet utterly optimistic) scientism, and sought to evade the concept of eschatological judgment - provides a useful basis for understanding Spiritualism's place in the 19th Century crisis of religion.

Abstract. The history of mankind comprises many unique cases of combinations of exceptional characteristics in one and the same individual. Most often, the combinations include positive as well as negative characteristics. The combinations are almost entirely random as they depend on too many variables, both endogenous and exogenous. In the current paper, a description of the personality of the scholar Emanuel Swedenborg, a truly unique personality in all investigational aspects, is offered. A psychiatric evaluation of the personality of Swedenborg is performed and it is concluded that his life is an example of a psyche, which has developed paraphrenia, i.e. a late-onset or involutional schizophrenia. Many of the fundamental moments from the writings of Swedenborg are quoted in the paper and a philosophical as well a as neurological-reductionistic analysis are performed. Attention is directed to two other cases involving paraphrenization of the psyche. The metaphysical world of the soul is revealed as a psychopathology of the psyche, an idiosyncratic paraphrenization of the inner world of man.

This article sets out to trace possible influences of Emanuel Swedenborg, the Swedish theosophist and spirit-seer, in the production of the Finnish national poet Johan Ludvig Runeberg. We argue that the influence of Swedenborgianism on nineteenth-century culture in Finland was greater than has generally been suggested by literary scholars. The first part of the article provides a historical background of Swedenborgianism in the country. The latter part indicates a larger epistemic and religious accord between Swedenborg and Runeberg, to be accounted for in greater detail in terms of influence. Both authors subscribed to an emblematic worldview within the Classical discourse of nature as a book, ultimately supported by a framework of logocentrism and theism. Runeberg’s discussion of words and things,and his use of the metaphor of light, places him within a mainstream nineteenth-century spirituality, which may be juxtaposed, in addition to general Romantic views, also with Swedenborgi...