Breaking News: January 2009

After their marriage, Brian Baker and Terry Farrell retired from acting and moved to Hershey, Pennsylvania to start a family.

Now, several years later, they return to acting, together, starring in the play Love Letters at the Hershey Area Playhouse.

The production is running for a limited time, two weeks, to be precise:

February 12, 2009 to February 15, 2009

February 19, 2009 to February 22, 2009

You can also read a blog by Brian Baker about his return to acting in this play at the theater's The Imagination Blog.

The Launchpad: The Sprint PCS Commercials

They wanted the product to be the star, not the pitchman. They wanted someone anonymous. They wanted someone who wouldn't stand out. They chose Brian Baker. Three years and 35 Sprint PCS ads later, Brian Baker was voted 'Sexiest Pitchman' by People magazine in 2001.

Brian's character, ``The Sprint PCS Guy,'' was introduced in Sprint PCS' television ads in May 1999. Through his travels, Sprint's mystery man helps people overcome their ``cellular miscommunications'' by introducing them to the digital clarity of Sprint PCS...''

Donna Osborn of Sprint said that unlike the company's ads for long-distance, which feature actress Sela Ward and, before her, Candace Bergen, the PCS division wanted an unknown to play the Sprint PCS Guy.

''When you're using a spokesperson, you're using some borrowed equity that person brings to your brand,'' Osborn said. ''This campaign is about Sprint PCS and the total package.''

When the agency handling Sprint PCS, Publicis & Hal Riney, started casting for the character played by Baker, they were looking for ''an ordinary guy with something extraordinary about him.''

''I remember the first take on the first spot where he's got this black coat on and he's walking down this stark white hallway,'' Osborn said. ''That really set the mood. No matter how much you do in casting to find the right character, they do bring their own personality to the spots.''

In spite of Baker's newfound, not-so-anonymous fame, Osborn thinks the PCS product will continue to be the star of the ads featuring Baker. ''We're really thrilled for Brian and thrilled about the added exposure this will bring us, but really, the campaign isn't about him per se,'' Osborn said. ''He's just this kind of anonymous guy on a mission to clear up problems with cellular.''