WCSP gives its distribution as Trop. & Subtrop. Asia to Queensland;

Catalogue of Life gives its distribution as Andaman Is.; Assam; Bangladesh; Bismarck Archipelago; Borneo; Cambodia; China South-Central; China Southeast; Christmas I.; East Himalaya; Hainan; Jawa; Lesser Sunda Is.; Malaya; Maluku; Myanmar; New Guinea; Nicobar Is.; Philippines; Queensland; Sulawesi; Sumatera; Taiwan; Thailand; Vietnam; West Himalaya.

IDENTITY: Attaching two images of a plant. The first image is of flowers and the second of the fruit.

I will remain grateful if you please identify it.

This is a species of Calicarpa possibly C.longifolia.

Yes …, you are right

Callicarpa sp.

Yes I too agree with Callicarpa sp.

May be Callicarpa arborea

It can’t be Callicarpa arborea, which is a tree of 8m tall. I think … is correct. At least search of google indicates the plant to be Callicarpa longifolia

The plant is from North Bengal. I have seen it at Assam also. I am with …, most likely the plant is Callicarpa longifolia.

Comparison of Callicarpa arborea and Callicarpa longifolia

IDENTITY OF A CALLICARPA SPECIES : 4 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (8)

Attaching few images of a Callicrpa species along with image of Callicarpa arborea (?) for comparison.

Callicarpa species in eFloraofindia (with details/ keys from published papers/ regional floras/ FRLHT/ FOI/ Biotik/ efloras/ books etc., where ever available on net)

I think matches with images at Callicarpa macrophylla

It may be Callicarpa longifolia as per your & … images herein.

I agree with …

Callicarpa longifolia Lam from Assam : Attachments (8). 3 posts by 2 authors.

Attached images may be Callicarpa longifolia Lam. Please validate.

Date :24.11.2013

Location: Kamrup district

Family : Verbenaceae

Genus & species : Callicarpa longifolia Lam

Habitat: Grows wild on hilly slopes, road side

Habit : Shrub

Lamiaceae (inc. Verbenaceae) Fortnight: Verbenaceae- Callicarpa longifolia Lam. from Assam –KD 03MAY 2015 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (4)

Attached images are Callicarpa longifolia Lam.

Location : Assam

Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl : 6 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (3)-1, 2 & 2 mb.

Location: Ranimahal, Palpa

Date: 25 September 2019

Elevation:453 m.

Habit : Wild

Nepali Names : दहीचाउँले Daheechaaunle / दहीकाम्लो Daheekaamlo / दहीचामल Daheechaamal / प्रियंगु Priyangu / दहीजालो Daheejaalo / गोल्दार Goldaar / गुएँलो Guyenlo / सुमाली Sumaalee

Attachments (2) – 3 mb each.

Attachments (1)- 6 mb.

the indian beautyberry

Sanskrit name : Priyangu I think

One name same in Nepali as well since Hindi and Nepali both are same. Devanagiri script and derived from Sanskrit !

I think it should be Callicarpa longifolia Lam. as per keys and comparative images at Callicarpa‎

Catalogue of Life gives its distribution as Andaman Is.; Assam; Bangladesh; Bismarck Archipelago; Borneo; Cambodia; China South-Central; China Southeast; Christmas I.; East Himalaya; Hainan; Jawa; Lesser Sunda Is.; Malaya; Maluku; Myanmar; New Guinea; Nicobar Is.; Philippines; Queensland; Sulawesi; Sumatera; Taiwan; Thailand; Vietnam; West Himalaya.

It is also reported in Flora of Bhutan.

WCSP gives its distribution as Trop. & Subtrop. Asia to Queensland

So I feel that it may very well be available in Nepal also at such low elevation.

References: