On Wednesday, they buried 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, one more fatally abused child. Year after year, they die at a rate of more than one a week in New York City.

This year, Elisa was No. 58.

Elisa's story is remarkable not because of her suffering, but because so many knew so much yet did so little. And because she had her chances.

Her loving father protected her and, as he was dying, devised a plan to keep her from her crack-smoking, abusive mother.

A Greek prince befriended her.

The staff of her Montessori preschool doted on her and stayed alert after early signs of abuse by her mother.

The Family Court judge handling her case had shown a willingness to deny custody to a biological parent.

But the father died the day he was to have sent her to safety. The judge overruled the objections of teachers and relatives and gave Elisa to her mother.

The mother pulled her out of school, tortured her in attempted exorcisms, and finally, police say, killed her by smashing her head against a concrete wall.

Elisa's parents were Awilda Lopez, whom crack addiction had rendered homeless, and Gustavo Izquierdo, a worker at a homeless shelter. The city gave Elisa to her father. With help, he mastered diapering and feeding and later enrolled Elisa in a Montessori school in Brooklyn.

She was a lovely child, expressive and clever, with long dark hair. Prince Michael of Greece had asked the school to pair him with a child during a visit. When he arrived, Elisa leaped into his arms.

"Love at first sight," said a staffer.

The prince paid Elisa's tuition, sent holiday gifts and offered a scholarship to attend private school through grade 12. She would respond with a simple note _ "Thank You!" _ or a drawing.

Meanwhile, her mother had gotten off crack and settled down with a new husband, his children and the two kids she had before Elisa was born.

At her mother's behest, Elisa began to stay with her some weekends. During one visit, Lopez was stabbed 17 times by her husband, who was later jailed.

The girl began to seem scared, withdrawn. A teacher noticed a suspicious bruise.

Then her father got cancer. Friends say he planned to obtain sole custody and send Elisa to live with relatives in Cuba. But he died on May 26, 1994 _ the day the girl was to leave, according to her godmother.

Lopez stepped forward to claim her daughter.

She was supported by social workers, who found the Lopez home neat and orderly and the other children adequately cared for. Elisa's court-appointed lawyer said the girl _ all of 5 _ wanted to be with her mother.

Lopez was opposed by the Montessori staff, by relatives, by the prince. But the judge gave the child to her mother, telling social workers to keep tabs. Lopez rejected the prince's scholarship offer and placed Elisa in a public school.

School staffers noticed the child was despondent and seemed to walk strangely. The school reported suspicions of child abuse. Lopez withdrew her. And somehow, social workers lost sight of the peril.

The child had been defecating in her bed, and relatives say Lopez thought her possessed by the devil.

Lopez has been jailed without bail on murder charges.

Monday, before Thanksgiving, Awilda smacked Elisa into the wall, bursting blood vessels in the child's brain. A city supposedly beyond outrage rose up.

The Daily News said in a front-page editorial: "Elisa Izquierdo is finally at peace. May her mother never find a moment of it again. . . . She will get doctors, medication, lawyers _ innocent until proven guilty. Damn her."

Elisa was given a wake in an open casket, with a red rose in her hand and a crown of white flowers. Long sleeves covered the bruises on her arms, but makeup could not hide those on her face.