Gauhati University was established in 1948 as a public university. It is the 1st university in the North Eastern region of the country. It was approved by the University Grant Commission [UGC] and the Association of Indian Universities [AIU]. It is accredited by the National Institutional Research Framework [NIRF] and National Assessment and Accreditation Council [NAAC]. Gauhati University Admission 2022-2023 is in process. Admission to courses like BA, LLB, MBA, M.Sc, etc., are based on scores in qualifying examinations such as GATE/JRF/CEE/CAT/MAT.

Gauhati University believes in transforming the university from an institution of higher education to an institution of higher development and success with continuous collaboration, self-development, and knowledge sharing with institutions of excellence. It offers quality education in the field of Arts, Engineering, Science, Management, Law, and many more. The university has state-of-the-art infrastructure facilities.

Established about 75 years ago, Gauhati University is one of the prominent universities in the region. Here is a look about the campus life at GetMyUni Verdict.

Table of Contents

Gauhati University Quick Insights

Gauhati University Admission Dates 2022

Gauhati University Ranking

Gauhati University Courses

Gauhati University Departments

Gauhati University Admission

Why Choose Gauhati University?

Gauhati University Cutoff

Gauhati University Results

Gauhati University Infrastructure

Gauhati University Placements

Gauhati University Scholarships

Gauhati University Collaborations

Gauhati University Distance Education

Gauhati University Faculty

Gauhati University Alumni

Gauhati University Quick Insights

Gauhati University currently has 341 affiliated colleges along with 39 PG departments. The university has been ranked 45 under the university category by NIRF 2021. Under all its affiliated colleges and departments, the University offers over 100 courses across Science, Law, Arts, Management, Medicine and Health Science and Technology. Some of the highlights of this university are given below.

Gauhati University

Year of Establishment

1948

Type of Institute

Public

Campus Area

508 Acres

Approvals

UGC, AIU

Accreditations

NIRF, NAAC ‘A’ Grade

Program Levels Offered

Undergraduate, Post Graduate and Doctoral

Infrastructure Facilities

Hostel, Library, Bus Transportation

Location

Guwahati, Assam, India

Gauhati University has 42 post-graduate departments, IDOL (Institue of Distance and Open Learning), a constituent college for Engineering and law. Key exam dates regarding the admission process for this university are as follows.

Event Date

PhD online admission (seat confirmation) dates

September 16, 2022 - September 24, 2022

Gauhati University Ranking

Gauhati University has been securing the highest positions. It is the first well-established university in the northeastern region of the country. GU is acknowledged by different national organizations for its excellent support in various fields. Some of the Gauhati University rankings include

GU has been ranked 36th position by NIRF 2022 in the university category.

NIRF 2022 has ranked Gauhati University at 64th position in the Overall category.

Gauhati University is ranked 45th under the university category by NIRF 2021.

GU has been ranked 3rd in the 2021 Assam University Rankings by Unibank.

Gauhati University Courses

Gauhati University offers courses in various fields like arts, science, management, law, etc. It offers the program at the undergraduate, master's and doctoral level. All its UG, PG, diploma, certificate and doctoral courses fall under 39 PG departments and a constituent Law college. Also, the university has an Institute of Distance and Open Learning (IDOL) to offer distance programmes learning to students. Listed below are the courses offered under each department

Course Duration Selection Criteria BA 3 Years 10+2 with a minimum of 50% marks + Merit based scores LLB 3 Years 10+2 with a minimum of 50% marks + Merit based scores MBA 2 Years Graduate Degree + CAT/MAT/XAT scores B.Tech 3 Years 10+2 with a minimum of 50% marks + JEE Advanced/CEE scores PhD 5 Years Master's Degree + GU-RET scores

Read More: Gauhati University Courses

Gauhati University Fee Details

Gauhati University offers various undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral programs in science, management, law, etc. Applicants pay their fees online or offline mode. Given below are some of the fees for different courses offered by the institute

Course Total Tuition Fee BA INR 99,000 LLB INR 66,000 MBA INR 63,170 B.Tech INR 78,990 PhD INR 27,900

Read More: Gauhati University Fee Structure

Gauhati University Departments

Gauhati University has various departments for engineering, science, law, etc. Students can study M.Tech, M.A, Ph., B.A, M.Sc, etc., in the different departments. The departments are designed to offer value education in the relevant field. Given below are some of the departments offered by GU.

English

Mathematics

Physics

Law

Computer Science

IT

Statistics

Library & Information Science

Mass Communication

Gauhati University Admission

Gauhati University admission 2022 is live now on the university's official website. Students can take admission by filling up the online application form with the correct details and submitting the same. Admissions for courses such as BA, MBA, M.Ed, LLB, etc., are based on the scores secured in JEE/GATE/CEE. Admission to all Postgraduate Courses will be based on the student's performance in the Offline Entrance Test.

Gauhati University Eligibility Criteria

Gauhati University offers various courses in different disciplines. The university decides eligibility criteria for every course; if the students fail to fulfil them, their application will be considered invalid for admission. Below is a list of a few courses offered by Gauhati University with their eligibility criteria:

B.Tech Eligibility Criteria

A candidate should have passed the 10+2 examination from a recognized university.

The candidate should have a valid test score for JEE Advanced or CEE examination.

MBA Eligibility Criteria

A bachelor's degree in any discipline with 50% marks (relaxation up to 5% in the qualifying marks shall be allowed to the candidates belonging to the reserved categories) from any recognized university.

Candidates appearing in the final semester examination of the qualifying bachelor's degree are eligible to appear and, if selected, must meet the eligibility criteria of the MBA Programme in due course of time.

M.Phil Eligibility Criteria

The candidate should have a Postgraduate Degree with not less than 55% of marks in the concerned subject and 50% for SC/ST/OBC and a differently-abled candidate with 40% disability.

Read More: Gauhati University Admission

Why Choose Gauhati University?

Gauhati University has one of the greenest campuses in Assam. The Autumn and Spring season witnessing blooming flowers and colourful trees bearing flowers proves to be a splendid scene. It offers a wide range of academic programs among the institutions of North-East India.

Offers a wide range of courses

Signed many MoUs with international universities

Excellent infrastructure

Gauhati University Academic Advantages

Gauhati University has 350+ affiliated colleges offering various undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in 7 main streams, such as commerce & management, arts, law, science, engineering & technology, medicine & allied health sciences. Below are some of the academic advantages of this university over the rest:

Good student-faculty ratio

Holistic learning environment

Well-structured academic curriculum

Good placements

Pre-examination training sessions

Gauhati University Cutoff

Gauhati University cutoff 2022 is yet to be released. The university offers courses like B.Ed, M.A, MTech, MSc, MCom, MBA, MMLS, and M.L.I.Sc and MTM for Ug and PG admission. PhD admissions are offered based on the cutoff marks secured in GURET(GU Research Eligibility Test), followed by counselling. Given below are deciding criteria for the cutoff

Reservation of seats based on various criteria.

Merit based on qualifying examination according to the GU rule.

Gauhati University Expected Cutoff 2022

B.Tech Specializations Expected Cutoff Rank Computer Science and Engineering 88000 - 96000 Civil Engineering 250000 - 300000 Electronics and Communication Engineering 990000 - 103000 Food Processing Technology 590000 - 640000 Instrumentation Engineering 190000 - 220000

Read More: Gauhati University Cutoff

Gauhati University Results

Gauhati University semester results 2022 will be released online through the university's official website. Students can check the entrance examination results by visiting the respective exam controller website. Given below are the steps to check the result:

Visit the official website of Gauhati University

Search for the 'Results' tab on the home page.

In the Results Tab, find the course-wise result link.

Enter the details after opening the result link.

Check the details and submit.

Results will be displayed, and candidates can download the same for future use.

Read More: Gauhati University Results

Gauhati University Infrastructure

Gauhati University campus offers facilities, a canteen, auditorium, laboratories, hostel, research centres etc., for students, scholars and professors. The campus has a library named Krishna Kanta Handiqui library has a collection of 34495 volumes of bound periodicals, 269369 books,4500 compositions, and 3704 proposals. It has a seating limit of 200 individuals. It provides sports facilities for students. There are hostel facilities for boys and girls on the campus. It has 23 hostel blocks, of which 11 are for boys, and 12 are for girls. Some of the other facilities that the campus has been listed below

Wi-Fi

Medical Facility

Gym

Convenience Store

Guest House

Post Office

Bank

Read More: Gauhati University Infrastructure

Gauhati University Placements

Gauhati University placements 2022 statistics are yet to be released. As per the NIRF 2022 report, 489 students were placed during Gauhati University placements in 2021. The placement & training cell is well-equipped. The infrastructure for the cell is well-developed and has all the necessary facilities for it to function properly.

The average package offered for UG placements in 2021 was INR 3.25 LPA.

Gauhati University Top Recruiters

Some of the top recruiters who come in for recruiting candidates from this university are listed below

ICICI

Cipla

Kanbay

TCS

Infosys

Wipro

Read More: Gauhati University Placements

Gauhati University Scholarships

Gauhati University has scholarship provisions for SC/ST and OBC students. Scholarships are also available to students based on merit from the state and central government. The scholarships are also based on research requirements and financial conditions.

Given below is the information about various scholarships

Scholarship Description Visvesvaraya Fellowships Visvesvaraya Fellowships at Gauhati University are granted to research leading students of PhD degrees in the domain of IT (Information Technology) / ITES (IT Enable Services), ESDM (Electronics System Design and Manufacturing). MHRD-DRDO Fellowship MHRD-DRDO (MHRD - Defence Research Development Organisation) Fellowships at Gauhati University are only available to students of the science & technology departments of Gauhati University. These fellowships are only available for full-time research students PhD program. Internal Fellowships There are several funded fellowships by Gauhati University from time to time. For further assistance, students should contact the academic registrar of Gauhati University. Other Fellowships There are several fellowships awarded to faculty members and scientists in the domain of research of various academic departments

Read More: Gauhati University Scholarships

Gauhati University Collaborations

Gauhati University has collaborated with various national and international institutions/universities for the mutual benefits of research and education. Given below are some of the partners of GU

International Collaborations

Country

Partnering Universities

Bhutan

Sherubtse College

South Korea

Chungnam National University

London

University of Greenwich

National Collaborations

Burdwan University

National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources

Indira Gandhi National Center for the Arts

Assam Don Bosco University

E & ICT Academy

Gauhati University Distance Education

Gauhati University has an Institute of Distance and Open Learning(GUIDO). It has 50,000 students across 90+ centres. GUIDO offers 8 postgraduate diploma courses, 4 undergraduate programs, and 16 postgraduate courses. It has an online learning portal known as eEkalavya. The study centres provide well-equipped computer labs, multimedia study materials, a library, digital classrooms, etc. Given below are some of the courses offered by GUIDOL

BA

B.Sc

BCA

B.Com

MA

M.Sc

M.Com

PG Diploma

Gauhati University Faculty

Gauhati University has highly qualified faculty members who are experts in their respective fields. Most of them are PhD holders in their respective subjects. They have a very dedicated team of 340+ faculty members working for the growth of students and the institute.

Gauhati University Alumni

Gauhati University alumni have a separate portal to register to join the alumni network. The alumni are working in top positions in several organizations worldwide. There are several notable alumni from this university, and some of them are listed below