Demi Moore showed up at Versace’s spring 2024 show in Milan, Italy wearing a plunging navy blazer embellished with beaded embroidery, gold beaded fringe trousers, and a pair silver metallic heels. But her most exciting accessory this season has been her impossibly tiny dog, Pilaf, who is about the size of a Jacquemus Le Bambino bag.

The 3-year-old Chihuahua is rivaling seasoned fashion editors with her fast-growing status as a fashion week VIP. The well-traveled dog has most recently been spotted at Milan Fashion Week, enjoying the Versace show from Moore’s lap. Among other notable front row attendees (including Cole Sprouse, Dwayne Wade, and Gabrielle Union) was Valentino creative director Pierpaolo Piccioli’s dog, Miranda (whom Pilaf even tried to say hello to during the show.)

Pilaf tends to get A-list treatment when she attends fashion events. She traveled with her owner to Stockholm earlier in the summer for Max Mara’s resort show. For the label’s Midsommar welcome dinner, Pilaf even got her own custom Max Mara sling, which Moore carried her in through the evening. When Moore attended Dior’s menswear show this past summer, the brand’s menswear director Kim Jones (Moore and Pilaf’s Versace seatmate) even created a custom pink and white pinstriped bow embellished with gems for the dog (who, sadly, did not attend).

While she may not always be invited to sit front row, don’t cry for Pilaf—she’s still reaping the benefits of her owner’s fashion week plans. Moore’s Instagram has chronicled her life with the Chihuahua, including when she chilled in her shirt while she got a manicure in Milan before the Versace show. She also took Pilaf to see the Karl Lagerfeld: A Line of Beauty exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art before it closed.

Pilaf Moore is living a better life than most: she’s gotten a tour of the Louvre, attends horse races, regularly flies in style, and hangs on Jeff Bezos’s superyacht. While she may not be a welcome guest at all fashion events (perhaps because she can't control her barking or bladder) Pilaf is becoming something of a socialite.