Demi Moore is having a moment — and her three daughters are here for it.

Moore enjoyed a 13-minute standing ovation at the Cannes Film Festival May 19 for "The Substance," Deadline reported, marking the Brat Pack member's debut at the prestigious competition.

At a press conference May 20, her co-star Dennis Quaid called her performance "an incredible third act," unfolding on the screen and through her viral red carpet appearances.

While some called it a comeback, others, including Rumer Willis, the eldest daughter of Moore and her ex-husband Bruce Willis, dubbed it a "Demi-ssance."

"We were hijacking it from Matthew McConaughey," Rumer Willis quipped during her appearance on TODAY with Hoda & Jenna May 29. Her reference was a nod to the "True Blood" actor's 2013 self-titled "McConaissance."

Rumer Willis said her and her sisters have a text chain titled "Lineage of Females" dedicated primarily to hyping up their moms red carpet looks.

"We're like, 'Oh my god, mom, mom, mom, this is amazing, you look iconic!'" Rumer Willis said, as she mimed furiously typing on a phone. "We're losing our minds."

Moore, 61, shares three children with Bruce Willis — Rumer, 35, Scout, 32, and Tallulah, 30.

During the interview, Rumer Willis reflected on the sacrifices her mom made, specifically when it came to her acting career, for the sake of her kids.

“I think especially my mom, when we were growing up in Idaho, she really took some time off to be with us,” Rumer Willis said.

Now, the eldest daughter gets to witness her mom live out her dreams.

"It's so much fun to get to be part of that, right? Like to get to watch our parents' dreams come true, too, you know?" Jenna said.

Rumer Willis also recalled preparing for auditions with her mom during the COVID-19 pandemic and realizing, "Damn, you're really good at this."

"To see her be acting and getting accolades for her work and her fashion and all of it — it's just, it's so nice to see, and I'm excited to see where this moment goes for her," she added.

Rumer Willis is set to sing for a residency at New York's Café Carlyle in June. She also recently celebrated her daughter Louetta's 1st birthday in April.

Louetta has notably brought Moore and Bruce Willis, whose family announced that he’d been diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia in February 2023, into their “grandparent era.”

"The Substance," a body horror film about cosmetic enhancement, has been said to mark a shift in Moore's career from a string of supporting roles back to the lead. The film is expected to hit theaters later this year.

Filming "The Substance" notably involved nude scenes for Moore.

"It was a very vulnerable experience and just required, I think, kind of going into it with a sensitivity and a lot of conversation about what we were trying to accomplish, how we were going to approach it and I think finding that common ground of mutual trust," Moore said at a press conference at the Cannes Film Festival.