Celebrate the vinyl holiday with a walking tour of Calgary’s central stores.

Article content

Celebrate the vinyl holiday with a walking tour on Saturday of Calgary’s central stores.

Recordland @ 1208 9th Ave. S.E.

Recordland’s intimidating collection of used vinyl is a dangerous place to start; it’s easy to spend a whole day digging through the towering shelves. You’ll need discipline to make it to your next stop. 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. 403-262-3839, facebook.com/recordlandcanada.

Sloth Records @ 736B 17th Ave. S.W.

Sloth Records has been slinging new vinyl since before the revival. They are also the place you’ll want to go to grab tickets for the after-party at The Palomino later in the day. 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. 403-265-6585, slothrecords.wordpress.com.

Blackbyrd Myoozik @ 1126 17th Ave. S.W.

Though the store’s home is up the QEII in Edmonton, its Calgary location gets into the civic spirit by inviting local label Inner Ocean Records to spin during their Record Store Day activities. 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. 403-367-7811, blackbyrd.ca.

Heritage Posters and Music @ 1316 11th Ave. S.W.

The store’s previous location in a vinyl-covered Quonset is history, but Heritage’s curated collection of used and new vinyl and cool wall-art made the trip east down 11th Avenue to its new digs. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. 403-802-1846,

heritagepostersandmusic.com.

Advertisement 2

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.

Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.

Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.

Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.

Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.

Access articles from across Canada with one account.

Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.

Enjoy additional articles per month.

Get email updates from your favourite authors.

Sign In or Create an Account

Email Address

or

Article content

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

The Palomino @ 109 7th Ave. S.W.

Sloth Records’ All-Star DJs will also be making the trip north; they’ll be DJing upstairs. Downstairs, neo-soul Minnesotan Har Mar Superstar plays with Fake Diamonds and The Torchettes. It’s also the Calgary Underground Film Festival’s wrap-up party. To be safe, you might want to take a trip home first to drop off your special Record Store Day releases. Doors, 9 p.m. Upstairs, free; downstairs, $20 at Sloth. 403-532-1911, thepalomino.ca.

twitter.com/thejonroe

jroe@postmedia.com

Article content

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories