Land Records

Records of land transactions for the City of Danville are located in the Public Records Area of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court. The records exist from 1841 to the present day.

These records are available to the public for reference and research. Copies of the records can be provided at a cost of $.50 per page. An additional fee of $2 per instrument is required for certified copies.

Recordation

All recordation of land transactions in the City of Danville takes place in the Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court. Instruments presented for recordation must meet certain statutory provisions and be authorized by law to be recorded in the Deed Book.

The Virginia Courts Deed Calculation System can be used to calculate fees and taxes for recording deeds and contracts. Fees and taxes vary according to the type of instrument. Payment may be made by cash or check payable to the Clerk of Circuit Court. Please contact the Clerk's Office if you have specific questions about recording an instrument.

Remote Internet Access to Land Records is available on a subscription basis. Contact the Clerk's Office at 434-799-5168 or via email for further information.

Important Notice

The Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court is committed to public service. We are dedicated to providing our patrons with excellent customer service and will assist you with any questions or concerns about our policies and procedures.

However, we are prohibited by law from giving legal advice, restating the law or recommending legal action. It is not the intention of our office, nor of this web site, to offer legal solutions. Questions regarding interpretation of the law should be directed to an attorney licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia.

The purpose of this information is to better inform the general public of procedural matters. Nothing contained herein is intended to advise anyone as to legal remedies for a particular circumstance. Circuit Court Clerks and their Deputy Clerks cannot render legal advice.