LAND RECORDS DIVISION

The Land Records Division of the Fairfax Circuit Court is located on the third floor of the Fairfax County Courthouse at 4110 Chain Bridge Road in Suite 317. Telephone 703-691-7320 (press 3, then 3) (TTY 711).

Overview

The Land Records Division accepts documents from property transactions in Fairfax County and the City of Fairfax. Transactions involving property located within the City of Falls Church must be recorded with the Arlington County Circuit Court. Real property transactions involving property located in the City of Alexandria must be recorded with the Alexandria Circuit Court. All document types can be submitted over-the-counter, through the mail, and all land record documents, except multi-jurisdiction documents or those with highway plats, can be submitted electronically via the Court's Electronic Filing System (EFS).

Recording Over-The-Counter

Customers submit over-the-counter land documents (separated into batches of no more than 20 sets) for recording from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. The recording line closes promptly at 3 p.m. Documents received prior to 3 p.m. will continue to be processed until 4 p.m. at which time any unrecorded portion will be returned to the customer. Over-the-counter documents cannot be left overnight and customers must be present when their documents are being recorded in case any questions arise. All documents must include the Fairfax Land Records' cover sheet.

The mailing address for the Land Records Division is:

Fairfax Circuit Court

4110 Chain Bridge Road

Suite 317

Fairfax, VA 22030

Attention: Land Records Division

All documents presented for recordation must be the original, signed and notarized documents.

Forms

Certificate of Satisfaction for Trust/Mortgage

To release a trust or mortgage from record, an original, notarized Certificate of Satisfaction signed by the lender or the settlement agent who has paid the obligation must be recorded in the Land Records Division. All information on the form must be completed in full. Most lenders will mail the Certificate of Satisfaction form directly to the Land Records Division; however, some will mail the form to the borrowers with instructions on how to record the document. It is then the borrower's responsibility to ensure the document is recorded.

A return address or box number should be inserted in the margin of the first page of the Certificate of Satisfaction as well as a tax map number. The tax map number can be obtained from a current tax assessment notice or you can call the Fairfax County Department of Tax Administration at 703-222-8234 or visit their website or Fairfax City at 703-385-7840. Please provide a self-addressed, stamped envelope of sufficient size for return of the recorded document(s). Documents will be returned to the address or box provided.