Watch: Anthony Edwards beats Stephen Curry in CRAZY half-court competition

The last season of the NBA has shown the great rise of Anthony Edwards. Ant-Man proved that he could be the main star of the team. He carried the Minnesota Timberwolves to the Western Conference Finals but failed to beat the Dallas Mavericks.

Wolves Summer League playoff fate in the balance; Miller dominating, Shannon injury

The Timberwolves took down the Rockets 93-83 on Thursday night, moving to 3-1 in Summer League play. Second-year forward Leonard Miller stuffed the stat sheet with a game-high 21 points but the other big takeaway from the game was rookie Terrence Shannon Jr.

Wolves' Luka Garza sets Twin Cities Pro-Am record with 59 points

After re-signing with the Timberwolves earlier this offseason, Luka Garza made his Twin Cities Pro-Am debut on Thursday night and he wound up setting an event record with 59 points.

Our New Commenting Policy

Hey, Canis Faithful! I hope you all are having a wonderful summer and enjoying the off-season. We’ve had some exciting events recently with the NBA Summer League, and soon we’ll be watching Anthony Edwards, Rudy Gobert, and others put on a great show at the Olympics!

Anthony Edwards hilariously clowns fellow Team USA stars over swimming abilities

The Team USA basketball squad continues to gear up for what should be an exciting run in the 2024 Olympics. Minnesota Timberwolves star Anthony Edwards looks to make a massive impact in his first Summer Games, although he is also having fun off the court.

Jeff Teague Explains What Happened Between Jimmy Butler And The Wolves

Jeff Teague, during his appearance on the Draymond Green show, provided an inside look at the tumultuous period when Jimmy Butler was with the Minnesota Timberwolves and how the situation deteriorated due to financial disagreements and personality clashes.

Minnesota Timberwolves Urged To Go After ‘Ideal’ Backcourt Weapon

The Minnesota Timberwolves are fresh off a deep run in the 2024 NBA Playoffs, as they made it all the way to the Western Conference finals where they got eliminated by Luka Doncic and the Dallas Mavericks.

Rob Dillingham can be to Anthony Edwards what Kyrie Irving was to LeBron James?

Hey, nobody here at Minnesota Timberwolves On SI is saying Rob Dillingham is the next Kyrie Irving. But what if the Timberwolves made the bold move to trade up in the draft for Dillingham because they believe Dillingham could have an Irving-like impact on Anthony Edwards?

Minnesota Timberwolves 2024-25 Over/Under Win Total is Set

The Minnesota Timberwolves are coming off of arguably their best season ever. In 2023-24, they won 56 games, the 2nd most in franchise history, and made it to the Western Conference finals, tied for their deepest ever playoff run.

Anthony Edwards comes off the bench in dominant Team USA win over Serbia

Timberwolves' superstar Anthony Edwards moved into the starting lineup on Monday against Australia but moved back to the bench for Wednesday's exhibition against Serbia.

Report: Nadir Hifi leaves Wolves Summer League for family emergency

Nadir Hifi has impressed in three Summer League games with the Timberwolves but his future with Minnesota is now shadowed with doubt after he left the team Tuesday because of a family emergency, according to Timberwolves insider Jon Krawczynski.

Minnesota Timberwolves’ Anthony Edwards Hilariously Throws Team USA Teammates Under the Bus

Not only is Minnesota Timberwolves guard Anthony Edwards one of the top superstars in the NBA today, but he also happens to be one of the fastest swimmers in the country — at least according to the 22-year-old himself.

Sixers 92, Wolves 90: Turnovers, Fouls, and Lack of Offense Lead to Loss

Leonard Miller, Daishen Nix, and Josh Minott combined for 62 points, but their efforts weren’t enough to make up for 37 team fouls and 23 turnovers. The Minnesota Timberwolves entered Tuesday night as one of the nine undefeated teams in the 2024 NBA Summer League.

Wolves rookies Dillingham, Shannon quiet in Summer League loss to 76ers

The Timberwolves are undefeated in Summer League no longer after falling to the 76ers in a sloppy, tightly contested game in Las Vegas on Tuesday night.

This Just In: Anthony Edwards Dominates in Water Too

Anthony Edwards and Team USA have begun their quest for gold, starting with exhibition games to gear up for the real competition. The official games begin on July 28th against Serbia, marking the start of the group stage.

Minnesota Timberwolves Officially Sign 6-Year NBA Player

PJ Dozier is coming off a season where he played for a team in Serbia. He finished his season with averages of 9.2 points, 3.0 rebounds, 3.1 assists and 1.3 steals per contest while shooting 48.6% from the field and 29.4% from the three-point range in 33 EuroLeague games.