Christian Petersen/Getty Images

Veteran swingman Martell Webster was waived by the Minnesota Timberwolves on Friday in an effort to clear salary cap space, according to the Star Tribune.

The Timberwolves have agreed to pay Webster $600,000. In exchange, they get to take his $5.7 million salary off the books next season.

The move is expected to be the start of several cuts, including Brad Miller and Anthony Tolliver, so the Timberwolves can go after Nicolas Batum and account for $8 million in obligations to Brandon Roy and Alexey Shved.

Now the question becomes, where will the former first-round pick land this summer?

Here's a look at some teams that should go after the seven-year veteran.

Cleveland Cavaliers

The Cavaliers could use some help at small forward. The Timberwolves have used Webster primarily at shooting guard the past two years because of their rotational needs, but Webster started out as a small forward, and that's where I think he belongs. He averaged the highest PER of his career (12.5) in the 2009-2010 season with the Portland Trail Blazers starting at small forward.

Milwaukee Bucks

Given the Bucks have Mike Dunleavy and defensive specialist Luc Richard Mbah a Moute at small forward (and could lose Carlos Delfino to free agency), they could use some help in that area. Webster gives the Bucks another swingman to use alongside Ricky Rubio. With Rubio's knack for creating open shots for his teammates, there's a shot Webster rebounds in Milwaukee coming off the bench.

Orlando Magic

The Magic are a team on the downswing. They don't have much at small forward and they could trade away what they do have there if they find a trade for center Dwight Howard.

In that sense, it can't hurt to grab Webster and see if he will come back to life and finally start playing like a former first-round pick.

Phoenix Suns

Given Grant Hill appears set to leave Phoenix and the Suns may lose Shannon Brown, they could certainly use another small forward.

Webster at least gives Phoenix depth, and it can't hurt adding him given their overall lack of talent on the team at the moment. He's not going to make anyone forget about the departure of Steve Nash—or Grant Hill and Shannon Brown, for that matter—but he could add something to the roster.

Toronto Raptors

The Raptors basically have James Johnson as their starter for next season, and that's not going to get it done. Of course, they could move DeMar DeRozan to small forward and start rookie Terrence Ross at shooting guard, but it's too early to tell about that.

Webster would at least give Toronto some depth on the wings, as well as some experience alongside Ross.