NIA LONG

February 22, 2009

“I think you grow through your experiences. You get better as you grow and I’m not nearly where I think I’m going to be, eventually where I aspire to be. And hopefully, the opportunities will continue to come.”

– NIA LONG

Nitara Carlynn “Nia” Long (born October 30, 1970) is an American actress and occasional music video director.

Long was born in Brooklyn, New York, U.S. to Talita, a teacher and printmaker, and Doughtry “Doc” Long, a high school teacher and poet. Long’s half sister is comedienne Sommore, star of The Queens of Comedy.

Long is of Afro-Trinidadian descent. Her parents divorced when Long was two years old, and she and her mother moved to Iowa City, Iowa, where her mother studied fine arts. While living there she got an early education in the significance of being black, especially since she was the only black child in her school. As she recalled in People, “. . . one day this boy pushed me off my bike and called me nigger. It was the first time I knew I was different.” After the incident, Long’s mother contacted the police and made her go over to the home of the attacker. This experience and other tough-love measures dished out by her mother made Long a hard-edged kid who refused to accept any abuse from her peers.

They subsequently moved to a South Los Angeles neighborhood when Long was seven. Her mother supported the family by driving a city bus, selling beer at the Los Angeles Coliseum, and teaching art part-time in a local school and at a prison. She also urged her daughter from junior high school on to pursue acting.

Long attended the Roman Catholic school St. Mary’s Academy and studied ballet, tap, jazz, gymnastics, guitar and acting. She graduated from Westchester High School in 1989. Due to the lack of employment opportunities in the arts in Los Angeles when Long and her mother first arrived there, Long’s mother took various low-paying jobs (despite having two master’s degrees). The family suffered through financial struggle for years.

After attending Santa Monica City College for two years, Nia quit her studies to give her full attention to acting. Long was instructed by acting coach Betty Bridges, better known as the mother of Diff’rent Strokes star Todd Bridges. Success came quickly, as she landed a role in John Singleton’s highly praised Boyz N The Hood, which was filmed near her own neighborhood. Long could easily relate to the story, which dealt with high school kids growing up in the tough neighborhoods of Los Angeles where gangs ruled the streets and violence was a constant threat. In the film she portrayed the girlfriend of a boy who is trying desperately to get a clean break from gang life.

From there Long made an unusual transition, from the big screen to the grind of a television soap opera. Returning to New York City, she got the role of character Kathryn Speakes on CBS-TV’s The Guiding Light and stayed with the series for three years. Long became highly regarded among soap opera stars, receiving an Image Award nomination for her performance in the series in 1993. During this period Long also was reunited with her father, a poet and English teacher who was living in Trenton, New Jersey, at the time.

After her stint on The Guiding Light, Long returned to the West Coast in hopes of landing more film roles. She faced a grueling five weeks of auditioning for a role she eventually landed 1993’s Made in America. This role demonstrated that Long could also do comedy, and it paid off thanks to Will Smith being one of the co- stars. Smith was then the star of NBC’s The Fresh Prince of Bel- Air, and he was so impressed with Long’s talent that he chose her to play the role of his girlfriend on the series. From 1994 – 1995, she played Will Smith’s girlfriend and fiancée Beulah “Lisa” Wilkes on The Fresh Prince of Bel Air. Jada Pinkett-Smith was originally supposed to play Lisa, but she was late to auditions, thus leaving Nia to take the part.

Long really came into her own in 1997, when she made a splash in two films that demonstrated the range of her talent. In Soul Food she played the daughter of a matriarch whose family gathered every Sunday for a massive feast in her Chicago home. Her big breakthrough was in that year’s Love Jones, in a role that director/writer Theodore Witcher gave to her upon meeting the actress, without an audition. Love Jones dealt with the topsy-turvy romance of two Chicagoans, a photographer (Long) and a poet (Larenz Tate). Rare in its portrayal of black characters in an educated, middle-class context, Love Jones won the Audience Award at the prestigious Sundance Film Festival. It received many favorable reviews, especially for the pairing of Long and Tate. “When we put Nia and Larenz together for a test, the chemistry between them jumped off the screen,” remarked the writer/director Witcher in Essence. “The best reason to see the movie is the hot-blooded chemistry between Tate and Long,” noted Owen Gleiberman in Entertainment Weekly. Long’s role also earned her another nomination for an Image Award.

Long played a leading role, or a member of the primary ensemble, in several other films, including Boiler Room, Big Momma’s House, Are We There Yet?, and The Best Man. Ice Cube has starred with her in four films, while Regina King has starred with her in two. Long starred alongside Michael Beach in Soul Food and in the TV series Third Watch.

She appears in the video for Kanye West’s “Touch The Sky“. She directed Yolanda Adams’s music video for “This Too Shall Pass”. Long was voted one of the 50 most beautiful people in the World 2000 by People. Long co-directed and appeared in Ashanti’s music video, “Baby”. She also made a guest appearance on the successful sitcom Living Single during its first season.

In 2003, she joined the cast of the drama Third Watch, where she played NYPD Officer Sasha Monroe, continuing until the series finale in 2005. She won a NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series in 2004 for her performance on Third Watch. In 2005 and 2006, Long appeared on Everwood, and appeared on Boston Legal during its 2006-2007 season.

Long and her former long-time boyfriend and fellow actor Massai Z. Dorsey have a son, Massai Zhivago Dorsey II, born on November 26, 2000. Dorsey and Long were engaged to be married, but ended their relationship.

SOURCE: Wikipedia, answers.com