Canadian Daniel Nestor and Mark Knowles of the Bahamas reached the final of tennis's Masters Cup in Shanghai for the second year in a row on Saturday with a re-run of last year's semi-final victory.

The long-serving pair who split this autumn after 13 years together on court, have the chance to cap their farewell week with a year-end title victory after defeating Zimbabwe's Kevin Ullyett and Australian Paul Hanley 6-3, 6-7 (7-9), 10-5 (super tiebreak).

Victory in one hour, 45 minutes was a duplicate of last year's semifinal at the Qi Zhong stadium, where Nestor and Knowles beat the same opponents.

"We've had a good year," said Nestor, holder of 49 career titles. "We've won a Slam and had some good results.

"We've dealt with adversity really well this week," he said.

"We've had some not so good moments of play, especially me on my serve. But I bounced back, Mark's bounced back with me.I think we're playing really solid."

Belgrade-born Nestor has already begun teaming with Serb Nenad Zimonjic, with the pair winning last month's ATP event in St. Petersburg and playing the final at the Paris Masters.

World No. 2 Knowles and Nestor have it all to play for when they face Swede Simon Aspelin and Austrian Julian Knowles, the US Open champions, who put out Martin Damm of the Czech Republic and Indian Leander Paes 6-4, 6-4.

As reigning French Open champions,Nestor and Knowlesare yearning to finish their time together with a wrap up victory.

Win would make excellent swan song

"It would be a nice way to end this year because we've had some good moments and we've never won this tournament before," said Nestor, whose side lost the 2006 final in China and reached a pair of semis in recent seasons.

"It would be pretty fitting. We've lost two finals here (1998 in Hannover and 2006 Shanghai) and we lost two at the French before we won.Hopefully that's a good omen."

Nestor and Knowles won the first set on a break of Ullyett and clawed back a break of Knowles in the eighth game of the second with a re-break of Hanley in the ninth.

But after saving a set point with a Knowles service winner, Nestor's team found itself in a tiebreaker, with Ullyett and Hanley salvaging three match points before taking the match into a decider.

In the abbreviated match tiebreak (first team to 10 points by a margin of two), Nestor and Knowles sprinted into command, winning five points in a row to set up six match points, 9-3.

They clinched victory on their third of the tiebreak when Ullyett netted.

"Those guys are tough, they're a great team," Nestor said.

"We're just two pretty even teams," he said.

"It's just a matter of one or two points, who is a little tougher mentally, who catches a few breaks.That's the super tiebreaker for you."