NHL PLAYER, Alex Pietrangelo

BIOGRAPHY

Born Jan 18, 1990 -- King City, Ontario, Canada

Selected by St. Louis Blues round 1 #4 overall 2008 NHL Entry Draft

Alexander Pietrangelo (born January 18, 1990) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player currently playing for the Vegas Golden Knights of the National Hockey League (NHL). As a junior, he played with the Niagara IceDogs and shortly for the Barrie Colts of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL). Pietrangelo has competed in with Team Canada at the junior and senior level, including a gold medal win with Canada's under-20 team at the 2009 World Junior Championships. Individually, he has been named Best Defenceman at the 2010 World Junior Championship and 2011 Men's World Championship. His father is the cousin of former NHL goaltender Frank Pietrangelo.

In 2010–11, Pietrangelo played his first full season with the Blues, leading all team defencemen with 43 points (11 goals and 32 assists) over 79 games. He also led team defencemen in plus/minus (+18), shots (161), while ranking third in average ice time per game. Due to his previous eight- and nine-game seasons in the NHL, he did not qualify as a rookie. Comparatively, the league's leading scorer among rookie defencemen that season was teammate Kevin Shattenkirk, who was born a year earlier than Pietrangelo; he also recorded 43 points. At the end of the 2011-12 season, Pietrangelo was named to the NHL second all-star team.

Pietrangelo was picked to play for Team Canada's under-18 team at the 2007 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament, where he served as an alternate captain. The team finished fourth. He played next for the Canadian National Junior Team at the 2009 World Junior Championships and won a gold medal.

The following year, Pietrangelo was loaned by his NHL team, the St. Louis Blues, to play for Team Canada in his second World Junior Championships in 2010. He was selected as an alternate captain to Patrice Cormier. In the final game of the round-robin, Pietrangeo scored a shorthanded game-tying goal against the United States to send the game to overtime. Canada eventually won in a shootout and earned a bye into the semi-final. Advancing to the gold medal game, Canada met the United States in a rematch, but lost 6–5 in overtime. Pietrangelo picked up several individual honours at the conclusion of the tournament. He was named a Tournament All-Star by the media, the Best Defenceman by the directorate and was selected by the coaching staff as one of Canada's top three players.

Source: Wikipedia

NEWS