Hairspray

1482 Words | 3 Pages

The musical Hairspray started off as movie in 1988 written by John Waters and in 2003 was turned into Broadway show and then was re created into a movie again in 2007. Hairspray Is set in the 1960’s in Baltimore and is about a girl called Tracey Turnblad who doesn’t fit into the society social norm. Tracey is an overweight teenager trying to get her dream role to dance on the corny Collins show and the hope to meet her crush who is the popular and lead dancer Link. Tracey has to overcome being rejected

Essay Hairspray

917 Words | 2 Pages

film review in the style of Empire Magazine. Hairspray Plot: The opening scene presents Nikki Blonsky, as tubby teen Tracy Turnblad. After troubles and knock backs, Tracy makes her way to the Corny Collins Show Council. Tracy decides it’s not fair that the black kids can only dance on the show once a month, known as Negro Day, with the help of Seaweed, Link, Penny and Motormouth Maybelle she aims to integrate the Corny Collins show! Review: Hairspray is a mix of humor and spectacular show tunes

Analysis Of Hairspray

1553 Words | 4 Pages

One such musical that does this is Hairspray. It tells the story of Tracy Turnblad, an overweight teenager in 1962 Baltimore as she tries to make her dream of dancing on a local TV show, ‘The Corny Collins Show’, come true, whilst also campaigning for racial integration on the show and in society. Tracy faces a lot of negativity throughout the musical; her weight and her politically controversial ideas and actions make her an easy target. In order to tell the story the musical uses slightly racist

Hairspray Movie Essay

548 Words | 2 Pages

Hairspray is a musical romantic comedy film from 2007 based on the 2002 broadway musical which has the same name . This is a British american verture produced by Zadan/Meron Productions . The film developed in 2004 . It didn’t get its first drafted screenplay until 2005 and was directed by Shankman . Marc Shaiman was the composer and Scott Wittman was the lyricist , they even wrote four new songs just for the film . Hairspray first premiered on July 13 , 2007 at the Mann Village Theatre and was released

Analysis Of The Film Hairspray

532 Words | 2 Pages

girl with even bigger ideas challenges the norm. In an infectious production of “Hairspray,” Thomas S. Wootton High School had the audience tapping their toes and moving to the beat all evening. Based on the 1988 non-musical film of the same name, Hairspray was written by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman and was originally created as a social commentary on racism and integration. The Broadway production of Hairspray opened in 2002, winning eight Tony Awards, including one for Best Musical, and has

Analysis Of The Film Hairspray

2361 Words | 5 Pages

themes covered in musical performances in this modern society, for example war and love in Miss Saigon, feminism in Mamma Mia! and racial issues in Porgy and Bess. In the musical film Hairspray, there are more interesting ideas in the plot so I would like to discuss the musical further in this piece of work. Hairspray was an American musical film in 2007, it was a adaptation from a musical and comedy in 2002 and 1988 respectively. There were several changes in the 2007 film, for example some characters

Hairspray: Taking Camp to the Next Level

1303 Words | 3 Pages

INTRODUCTION What could make a comedy film better? Combine it with a musical that will have you singing along with it. I have decided to look at the 2007 movie “Hairspray”. This is a light hearted film that is loved by all ages. While most see this movie as a comedy/musical the film can also add campy to its genre list. This movie address several different social issues while making the audience laugh and sing along with it. The main social issue at hand in this movie is that one of racism. This

Singin In The Rain Genre Analysis

1178 Words | 3 Pages

musicals. A musical is a film which has musical performances from the actors to express their feelings. The films from this genre that i studied are 'Singin' In The Rain' (Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen, 1952), 'Grease' (Randall Kleiser, 1978) and 'Hairspray'(Adam Shankman, 2007). I studied two characteristics of the musical genre (Breaking Into Song And Dance and The Grande Finale) that are shown in the films studied. The identifying characteristics of 'Breaking Into Song And Dance' and 'The Grande

Tracy Turnblad Character Analysis

778 Words | 2 Pages

onstage, and end up feeling guilty because I probably could have done no better. On top of this warped superiority/inferiority was the nature of the musical they were performing; all throughout third grade I had been obsessed with the movie-musical Hairspray. I knew all the songs, most of the lines, and wasn’t sure if anyone could top Queen Latifah. But I was mistaken.

The Help Theme

1751 Words | 4 Pages

I have chosen to investigate the theme: “Standing up for what you believe in”. This theme exists in the films “The Help” directed by Tate Taylor, “Hairspray” directed by Adam Shankman, “The Blind Side” directed by John Lee Hancock and the novel “To Kill a Mockingbird” written by Harper Lee. These works show evidence of people, mainly from the dominant culture, putting their own comfort, status and safety on the line for the voice of the marginalised. The film “The Help” directed by Tate Taylor

Hairspray Segregation

876 Words | 2 Pages

The movie Hairspray was set in Baltimore in the year 1962. This film demonstrated the culture, segregation, and change that happened in America during the 1960’s. The characters in the movie displayed the fashion of the 60’s and referenced some events that were going on in America at the time. The main issue that was extremely prominent throughout Hairspray was segregation and how normalities concerning this matter were starting to evolve. The clothes and fashion that the characters put on

Essay On Hairspray

1030 Words | 3 Pages

The product I choose is Big sexy hair spray & stay intense hold hairspray by Sexy Hair. I use this product everyday to keep my hair in place. This hairspray can be found a purchased at Ulta, JC Penneys and beauty stores throughout the world. It is advertised to be “the strongest long lasting hairspray ever created by Sexy Hair. It’s stronger resin and new production technology allows it to create a stronger, longer-lasting hold. Delivers intense hold, long-lasting strength, humidity protection and

Hairspray Hypothesis

1106 Words | 3 Pages

“Does applying hair spray damage your hair and affect the strength of the hair compared to the ones that are not hairsprayed?” The manipulated variable of this experiment is the amount of hairspray. It is either a specific amount in mL (abbreviation of milliliter) of hair spray, or all-natural, without any hairspray at all. This manipulated variable will be set up and measured by mL, which means that I will take a hair spray bottle and spray out some of it into a small container that measures a set

Hairspray Movie Comparison

717 Words | 2 Pages

Musical and Hairspray. Both of these musical romantic comedy movies exhibit singing and dancing. Their plot lines are similar due to the fact that they revolve around important auditions as well as high school drama while both including humorous elements. While some differences between the two are evident, the similarities are prominent. I believe that Hairspray is the better of the two because it includes a more serious racial theme and centers around the civil rights movement. The 2007 Hairspray movie

Hairspray: Racism In Theatres

1045 Words | 3 Pages

These shows can deal with heavy social issues in a light fashion (Jacobs). For example, Hairspray is a musical about racially segregated life in Baltimore during the early 1960s. This was a time when African Americans were given the freedom to vote and legally voice their opinions in society. Hairspray was produced on a Broadway stage in the late 1990s and early 2000s during a time when racism was prevalent through many racist occurrences and

Hairspray Gender Roles

974 Words | 2 Pages

Raul Noguera-McElroy You Can’t Stop the Expanding Role of Women in the Workplace Hairspray, a John Waters’ musical, demonstrates progressive messages about the expansion of race-based civil rights in the 1960s . Although this is typically the lens through which Hairspray is viewed, this is not the only significant societal shift portrayed in the film. The stories of Edna Turnblad and Velma Von Tussle illustrate the progressive shift of women from “old” gender roles such as being excluded from

Hairspray: A Media Study

1150 Words | 3 Pages

Yashkarn Pabla September 19th, 2014 HAIRSPRAY: A Media Study of Sociology Theories and Areas of Interest Feminism is thoroughly repeated in the movie hairspray. Feminism is the promotion to make political, social and economic rights equal to men. Movies these days rarely have an overweight actor playing a lead role. People in our generation have an idea that all women actresses have to be beautiful and flawless in order to have lead roles. Tracy, Edna and Penny are affected by this horrific

Paper On Hairspray Movie

551 Words | 2 Pages

Hairspray was first released as a film in 1988, and it was later adapted into a musical in the early 2000’s by Shaiman and Whitman. Shaiman wrote the music, and Whitman wrote the lyrics. The musical won eight tony awards out of thirteen nominations. It was even awarded for Best Musical. The first musical ran for 2,642 performances. Hairspray first opened at the Neil Simon Theatre on August 15, 2002, directed by Jack O’Brien and Jerry Mitchell as choreographer. David Rockwell designed the set, and

Hairspray Movie Comparison

542 Words | 2 Pages

On Friday November 13th, I had the pleasure of seeing the JFKS production of Hairspray. I think the staging and some of the acting could have been improved but overall it was a fun show and I even found myself singing the songs to myself on the way home. The story is about a “bigger” girl, Tracy Turnblad, who gets on a dance show called the Corny Collins show. Much to the chagrin of the producer and her mean girl daughter, Tracy advocates the desegregation of the show and becomes a huge Baltimore

The Importance Of Hairspray Essay

1122 Words | 3 Pages

shows, including Hairspray and Caroline, or Change, clearly display the effects of racism and the importance of the civil rights movement. Hairspray follows the story of a young Tracy Turnblad who is fighting to desegregate the Corny Collins Show. The musical celebrates black culture and displays healthy relationships between whites and blacks. U.S.A. Today wrote that, “with a message about accepting ourselves and each other while celebrating and embracing our diversity, this Hairspray felt more relevant