1. The Aristocats is based on real family of cats. The film is based on a story by Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe, which centers around a real family of cats that inherited a fortune back in 1910.

2. Scat Cat was originally going to be voiced by Louis Armstrong. Animators modeled Scat Cat (originally named Satchmo Cat) after Louis Armstrong because they wanted him to voice the character. Everything down to the gap in his teeth to the way he played the trumpet was based on the singer. When Armstrong was too sick to play the part, Scatman Crothers was offered the role.

3. There were supposed to be four kittens. The original script featured a fourth kitten named Waterloo, but he was removed because the writers thought four kittens was too many.

4. The film was intended to be live action. Aristocats was meant to be a two-part live-action installment of Walt Disney’s Wonderful World of Color back in 1954. It was Walt himself who decided the story was better suited for animation.

5. Some of Napoleon and Lafayette’s barks were recycled. A couple of the barks heard in the film were actually recycled from the Twilight Bark scene in 101 Dalmatians.

6. A famous singer left retirement to sing the opening song. Composers Richard and Robert Sherman convinced Maurice Chevalier to come out of retirement to sing the film’s title song “The Aristocats.” We’re glad they did, because that song is great.

7. It was the last film to be approved by Walt Disney. The Aristocats was the final film to be approved by Walt Disney, the first to be completed after his death, and the last to include the phrase, “A Walt Disney Production” at the end.

8. O’Malley was based on and voiced by Phil Harris. Phil Harris, who is famous for playing Baloo in The Jungle Book, was used as inspiration for Thomas O’Malley. In fact, the writers let the actor change some of his lines to better suit his personality. The first song he sings bears a strong resemblance to Baloo’s famous tune “The Bear Necessities.”

9. Eva Gabor (Duchess) and Pat Buttram (Napoleon) were co-stars on a famous TV show during filming. While they were recording their parts for The Aristocats, the actors starred in the TV seriesGreen Acres.