In 1915, this was a bad year for Zhang Youyi, who was only 15 years old. Her studies had not been completed, and a marriage was arranged by the family. The man had never seen it before. Zhang Youyi, who was exposed to new ideas, was very disgusted with this marriage, but did not stubbornly stubbornly at home, so she had to marry the man, who is the well-known poet of the Republic of China, Xu Zhimo.

Xu Zhimo was 18 years old at the time, he had received a new education, and his heart was very resistant to arranged marriages, but for the wife who was forcibly forced by the family, he said She couldn't resist, but could only accept. Although she was married to Zhang Youyi, Xu Zhimo was not friendly to her. Three years later, Zhang Youyi gave birth to the two's first son, and Xu Zhimo took advantage of the situation and left home.

Until 2 years later, the two met again. After meeting Lin Huiyin, he and Zhang Youyi filed for a divorce. In that era, the woman who was driven away by her husband naturally had to be pointed out by many people. Zhang Youyi relied on herself Strong perseverance survived. In 1926, Zhang Youyi, who was abroad, returned to China. She started a new life.

First of all, she served as Shanghai with the support of her brother. Vice President of Women’s Commercial Bank, as a result, she also became the first female banker in China. Soon, Zhang Youyi opened a Yunshang clothing company, and the appearance of a strong woman was undoubtedly revealed,

from Zhang Youyi’s first half of life. See, since she left Xu Zhimo, the life she has lived is simply enviable, and the greatest fortune in her life is to leave Xu Zhimo early. In 1949, Zhang Youyi went to Hong Kong to settle, and she was extremely disappointed in her marriage. Unexpectedly, because of a person, his own ideas have been changed.

Su Jizhi, a Chinese medicine doctor, he and Zhang Youyi are neighbors, and the two have developed feelings in their long and plain life. When they reached the point of discussing marriage, Zhang Youyi hesitated. After all, she has been severely hurt by Xu Zhimo. This time, she wants to remarry and wants to ask her son Xu Jikai's opinion. Xu Jikai is the first son of Zhang Youyi and Xu Zhimo,

received from her mother. Letter, Xu Jikai was very happy. When he learned that his mother had a beloved person, Xu Jikai immediately replied to Zhang Youyi, "Mother and widow have lived on the festival for more than 30 years. I gave birth to me and caressed me, and I gave birth to me...母如得人，儿请父事" To the effect, if a mother has a husband, I will treat him as filial to him as a father.

After receiving a letter from her son, Zhang Youyi burst into tears when she saw the 8 characters. In 1953, she officially married Su Jizhi, and the two spent the rest of their lives happily.