Text/Xiaozhi

Title: Zhang Youyi wrote to her son for advice on remarriage. He replied with 8 characters, which became a satire to Xu Zhimo. Marriage, she married Xu Zhimo when she was 15 years old and still ignorant. After marriage, she fulfilled her responsibilities. She was filial to her parents-in-law and caring for her husband. In 1918, he gave birth to the eldest son A Huan for the Xu family. However, Xu Zhimo has always followed free love. He didn't like the original wife and thought she was not worthy of him at all.

and think this woman is very ugly and has a very big nostril, so in order to leave her, Xu Zhimo went to Europe and fell in love with Miss Lin. Under the temptation of Miss Lin’s beauty, he proposed to talk to Zhang Youyi After the divorce, Zhang Youyi reluctantly accepted the divorce. But instead of aborting her second child, she gave birth to the child, but the child died soon after.

The woman after the divorce is like an inspirational drama. The marriage does not treat her kindly, but it opens the window of career for Miss Zhang, after divorcing Xu Zhimo. After going to Germany successively to teach German at Soochow University. In 1928, she served as the vice president of the bank. Since then, she has opened the path of a strong woman. Although she has divorced Xu Zhimo, she did not give up her responsibility to take care of her former in-laws. , And also raised his own son. When

was just divorced, Ms. Zhang was only 22 years old. She did not give up her son's education problems. Not only did she let A Huan finish college, but she also went to study in the United States and had a happy marriage. After her son settled down, Miss Zhang felt that she could pursue life. At that time, a Hong Kong doctor named Su asked her to marry her. At this time, Miss Zhang was 54 years old, and she planned to accept this relationship from the heart.

has not been married for so many years, so I think more about my own son, for fear that I will get married again and cause some injury to my son. So after so many years, she chose to be single. Now her son has her own life destination. She has reached the age of 54 and is about to enter her later life. The young lady wants to live for herself once, decides to remarry others, and wants to before marrying. Soliciting his son's opinion, he brought up a pen and wrote a letter to his son.

The son’s answer is the best irony to his father. The son’s 8-character reply is deeply affectionate: "A mother is like a man, and the child asks the father." It means that the mother has kept the widow for me for nearly 30 years and worked hard. Raise me up. Now I have become an adult who can be alone. My mother's responsibilities have been fulfilled. I should find someone who can accompany me for life. If my mother is lucky enough to meet the beloved in life, A Huan is willing to treat him as a father. Seeing her son say this to Miss Zhang, why don't you understand? So in 1954, he married Dr. Su with the blessings of relatives and friends.

Although Dr. Su is not as ostentatious as Xu Zhimo, he gave Zhang Youyi a warm marriage, so that her heart can get home. The two lived for 20 years. Mr. Su died in 1972. Ms. Zhang moved her family to the United States and lived with her son. Later, in 1988, Ms. Zhang died in New York at the age of 88 and was buried in a cemetery on the outskirts of the city. The tombstone was engraved with Su Zhang Youyi, perhaps from Xu The moment Zhi Mo divorced her, he had already put down Xu's surname.