Shahid

Director: Hansal Mehta

Cast: Raj Kumar Yadav, Prabhleen Sandhu, Mohd Zeeshan Ayub, Tigmanshu Dhulia

Rating:

Shahid is one of those rare films that re-inforces your belief in good cinema. It reminds you that there are filmmakers who will do anything to ensure that they are true to their vision of telling a good, compelling story, no matter how controversial, difficult, demanding the subject on hand is. Commendable that director Hansal Mehta makes no comprises, adopts no half-hearted measures in documenting the story of slain criminal lawyer and human right activist Shahid Azmi.

The film opens with a terrifying scene of Mumbai riots in early 1993. You see human bodies set ablaze, people screaming amidst a chaotic mob running helter skelter. Cut to the film's scarred protagonist Shahid (Raj Kumar Yadav) so charred with what he witnesses that in a weak moment he takes recourse in a militant training camp in POK. Disillusioned by militant philosophy the unlikely hero returns to Mumbai.

But Shahid is picked up by cops to land up in Delhi's Tihar jail amidst hardened criminals and extremist forces. Strangely, while in long police custody Shahid finds a will and way to complete his graduation.

He is eventually set free after some five years when the State is unable to sufficiently establish his link with any terror groups. "Mujhe na insaafi dikhakar Khuda ne mujhe insaaf karna sikhaya." Guided by that principle Shahid studies to become a lawyer to fight the cases of many who, like him, have been wrongly accused of being terrorists because of their religion and poor background.

When the end credits roll you are told that in a short career spanning seven years Shahid got 17 acquittals for many like him who were thrust into prison for years because they had no one to fight for them. It is worth mentioning that the director-scriptwriter does not pile up all or even few of the cases that Shahid fought in your face. He sensibly picks up two and through it shows the grit, determination and fearlessness with which Shahid defended his hapless clients. A steely resolve for which he eventually pays with his life.

You can see the nifty attention to research that the director has invested whether it is in selection of the supporting actors, the setting, locations or just the way the story is captured by its cinematographer and how sharply the end product has been edited. Even a very brief romantic track between Shahid and his wife Mariam (Prabhleen Kaur) is seamlessly and organically weaved into the otherwise tense, political narrative without letting it disturb the larger picture.

The courtroom scenes are kept real and the even actors who appear for few seconds have been selected to look credible to the larger narrative. Humour, when employed whether in the courtroom or in Shahid's own life or even in a scene where the family is fighting to get the light switched off when Shahid is trying to study at night, is gentle.

Of the performances, Raj Kumar Yadav proves that he is one of the most amazing and brilliant contemporary actors that Indian cinema has to offer. Only he could have done justice to Shahid's character with the understated braveness required for it. He is so much in sync with Shaihd's character that he makes you believe he is Shahid. Mohd. Zeeshan Ayub as Shahid's brother deserves a worthy mention after a scintillating and powerful cameo in Maazii. Baljinder Kaur as Shahid's mother is a find, making you believe that she is the mother of the three boys in the low-income Muslim household.

An honest film made on a difficult subject like this is rare to find. Not many in the Bollywood factory would want to touch a subject like this. Do yourself a favour - watch Shahid, you will come out enriched!

Published By:

AtMigration

Published On:

Oct 17, 2013

--- ENDS ---