ROCKFORD, Ill. (WIFR) - One of Rockford’s hidden gems, J.L. Clark, sits on 23rd Street.

The manufacturing company started in 1904 and makes plastic, aluminum and tin packages for many household items.

On Aug. 6, the company marked 120 years in business, with a celebration for employees.

In 1900, John Lewis Clark had a hardware store and patented the Gem Flue Stopper, a tool designed to seal chimneys. Later, he started making other products and opened J.L. Clark.

“We started at Kishwaukee and State Street with Mr. Clark’s hardware store. He believed firmly in his guiding principles which are to take care of our customers, take care of our team and take care of the community,” said J.L. Clark’s President Bob Morris.

These days, packaging for McCormick’s pepper, Johnson & Johnson plastic bandage containers, Hallmark containers and Carmex lids are made in Rockford. Morris says many people don’t know the tins are made in the Forest City.

“We are sort of out of the way, though we have been here for so long. And we’re hiring right now and often that is the case,” says Morris. “Folks come in and say, ‘I didn’t know you make Altoids, Breath Savers or Carmex, I use that every day.’”

Melvin Smith marks his own milestone this August, having spent 45 years with the company. He says he worked hard to become Lithography Manager and loves the stability of his job.

“After finding out that college was not going to start for me because of cost, I had to come up with a plan B. Plan B was to get a solid job in a solid company and be able to provide for myself at the time,” Smith said. “In a couple of years, you end up providing for not just yourself but for a new wife and a new child.”

Smith prints designs on the metal sheets that become the tins.

“Most tins that you pick up in the store, even holiday tins with popcorn inside have probably been produced here and I have probably printed on those cans,” he says.

For more information about the company’s history, visit J.L. Clark’s website.