about us

Company

Founded: 1971

Type: Private Company

Headquartered in Rockford, Illinois, Rockford Systems, LLC delivers workplace safety.

Rockford Systems stands as a trusted and dedicated provider of industrial solutions, specializing in turnkey machine safeguarding, lockout/tagout and combustion safety solutions. Our unwavering commitment to safety and risk reduction positions us as the go-to choice for organizations looking to elevate workplace safety, ensure regulatory compliance and reduce risk in industrial settings.

Our Core Services and Solutions:

Machine Safeguarding:

Rockford Systems excels in machine risk and safety assessments, helping organizations identify potential hazards and craft effective strategies for their mitigation.

We offer tailor-made, factory direct engineering services, ensuring safeguarding solutions are customized to meet the unique needs of each client.

Providing expert guidance throughout the safeguarding process, our technical support is a cornerstone of our services.

Our factory direct installation services guarantee the proper and effective implementation of safeguarding solutions.

Comprehensive training and education programs equip employees with the knowledge and skills necessary for safe machine operation.

Lockout/Tagout (LOTO):

Rockford Systems extends its expertise to deliver full-service lockout/tagout programs.

Our services begin with gap analysis to identify deficiencies in LOTO programs.

We develop machine-specific procedures to enhance the precision and effectiveness of LOTO practices.

Program development services assist in creating comprehensive LOTO policies and protocols.

Our authorized training ensures employees are proficient in LOTO procedures.

Lockout/Tagout Workshops empower organizations to cultivate in-house expertise in LOTO practices.

A wide array of lockout/tagout products is available to support secure equipment isolation.

Rockford Combustion:

Rockford Combustion specializes in fuel-train management and combustion-safety solutions.

The company caters to safety-conscious organizations dealing with fuel-fired equipment in thermal processes.

We design and locally manufacture turnkey combustion systems for clean-heat applications, ranging from simple to complex.

Rockford Combustion provides best-in-class delivery, installation, and customer support for our combustion systems.

End-to-end solutions offered by us include consultative inspections and assessments, complex engineering services, and technical safety training.

The product lineup includes high-quality burners, standard valve trains, and engineered-to-order (ETO) valve trains, controls, and components.

Rockford Combustion’s comprehensive solutions aim to improve NFPA compliance, worker safety, efficiency, and air quality.

Our offerings focus on reducing the risk of fires and explosions associated with fuel-fired equipment.

In summary, Rockford Systems, LLC is your trusted partner in the realm of industrial solutions, offering comprehensive machine safeguarding, lockout/tagout, and combustion safety solutions. Our vast expertise, extensive range of services, and unwavering commitment to safety establish us as an invaluable resource for companies aspiring to create safer, more compliant work environments, all while reducing risk. Join us in the pursuit of workplace safety.

Senior Staff

Joe Nitiss

Chief Executive Officer

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3634

Joe Nitiss is a proven leader driving double-digit growth with an emphasis on strong execution and operational efficiency.

He drives the mission to reduce risk and workplace injuries by becoming our customer’s trusted advisor and source for machine safeguarding, training, assessment services, and provider of turnkey engineered safeguarding solutions.

Joe served as General Manager of the North American business unit of Elster. Mr. Nitiss also spearheaded major strategy and technical shifts as President North America of Emerson’s Chloride Group and during his tenure overseeing Genesis Cable (now Honeywell Cable) as General Manager.

Prior to those positions, Mr. Nitiss was Vice President of Marketing & Business Development for Honeywell International and Vice President of Marketing for Emerson.

Joe holds an BA in Economics and an MBA in Finance and Marketing from The University of Chicago.

Matt Brenner

Vice President & General Manager – Machine Safeguarding

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3653

Matt Brenner has served in a variety of leadership roles for Rockford Systems.

With over 20 years of experience at Rockford Systems, Matt has broad experience with risk reduction techniques for industrial equipment across a wide variety of different industries including some of the largest and most complex businesses in North America.

Matt is an acknowledged expert, an author and a speaker on the topic of industrial safety standards and regulations and proper application of safety equipment.

Matt serves as an Alternate on the ANSI B11 series Standards Development Committee.

He holds a bachelor’s degree in Applied Sciences from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.

John Norris

CFO

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3602

Coming Soon!

Scott Stone

General Manager – Lockout/Tagout

[email protected]

Direct: 815-520-3661

Scott Stone has more than 25 years of experience in the safety industry developing and managing safety management systems that resulted in driving cultural change for organizations.

Over his career, he has worked as a safety manager for outsource facilities and production maintenance organizations, worked in the safety services industry where he developed and successfully launched lockout/tagout services and worked in the safety management software industry.

Scott also has experience as a Six Sigma Black Belt where he applied advanced statistical and problem-solving techniques for process improvement.

Outside of work, he enjoys including boating, fishing, snowmobiling, and four wheeling with family and friends.

Brian Boes

Vice President of Electrical Engineering & Service

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3650

Brian Boes is accountable for the day-to-day operations of the Electrical and Mechanical Engineering Department.

He oversees the design process of Safety Integration to Controls and Machinery, works to develop new products, and assists account managers in the field with product applications.

Brian is a member of the ANSI B11 Standards development Committee representing Rockford Systems as a Voting member. He is also active on the ANSI B11.1 & B11.2 subcommittees, which he assists in writing the mechanical and hydraulic punch press standards.

He has been with Rockford Systems for 23 years and holds an Associates in Applied Science for Electronics Engineering Technology from Rock Valley College.

Phillip Reuter

Director of Machine Safeguarding Services

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3628

Phil Reuter has more than 15 years of combined experience at Rockford Systems.

He began his career as a Machine Safeguarding Installation Lead Technician, then advanced to Regional Sales Manager/Machine Safeguarding Specialist, and is currently leading the company’s Installation and Account Management departments.

Phil has worked in aviation, and industrial maintenance positions prior to his tenure with Rockford Systems.

Phil holds an Associate’s Degree in Aviation Maintenance Technology from Southwestern Illinois College.

He is an ANSI B11 Licensed Machinery Safety Specialist (LMSS), with a certificate of his knowledge of U.S. machinery safety standards and his understanding of the risk assessment process, application of risk reduction measures, and appropriate choices for the design of safety functions. His certificate was issued by B11 Standards, Inc, the ANSI-accredited Standards Developing (ASD) organization.

Matthew Clutter

Director of Training

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3648

Matthew Clutter has over 20 years of experience at Rockford Systems with increasing roles of responsibility.

He has extensive experience in Bulk Hazardous Chemical Transportation, Delivery, Storage, and Safety Training.

A unique experience in clearance-required national security aboard Naval and Marine Corps installations, to include guard force supervision and training roles.

He has admirable experience in private sector Loss Prevention and Loss Control.

Matthew is a United States Marine Corps Veteran and has attended both Rock Valley College and Western Illinois University.

Kari Larson

Director of Marketing

[email protected]

Direct: 815-874-3603

Kari Larson is the Director of Marketing; responsible for Market Insights, Inbound Marketing, Data Analytics, Project/Product/Brand Management and Strategic Planning.

Kari began her career performing market research in the media/communication industry, and has spent the past 20+ years accomplishing roles with increasing responsibility in companies specializing in Hardware, Packaging, Bearing, Paint/Craft/Hobby, Adhesives, Capital Equipment, Solenoid Valve, Heat Treat and Chemical Industries.

Kari’s ’s work experiences include product lifecycle management, project management, process improvement, brand management, Partners in Leadership trainer, LEAN leadership certified, public relations, trade show management, channel management, competitive market intelligence, marketing automation, content creation, voice of the customer, and P&L responsibilities for product lines ranging from $5 million to $500 million.

Kari holds a Bachelor Degree in Marketing from Bradley University and an MBA.