In One Life to Live, Kelly McGillis made her acting debut in 1964 as Glenda Livingston. Despite having a great performing career and appearing in over 50 films and TV shows, the actress’ off-screen life, particularly her love life, has recently made headlines. Are you curious about Kelly McGillis’ spouse? Here is a list of the men and women she has had romantic relationships with over the years.

RELATED: Maja Janeska Death: What caused the death of the…

Profile summary

Who is Kelly McGillis’ spouse?

The actress is seemingly not in a relationship and has no spouse now. However, she was married thrice and is a mother of two children. Here is a look at Kelly McGillis’ former couples:

Boyd Black (1979–1981)

In 1979, American author Boyd Black was Kelly McGillis’ husband. She married in an effort to win back her parents’ approval since she was anxious to do so. But in 1981, her marriage fell apart.

Fred Tillman (1989–2002)

In 1989, she married restaurateur Fred Tillman from the United States, and they had two children together. She battled substance misuse during the marriage, which prompted her to give up performing, and when they separated, her husband was given custody of her kids. Tillman and her were married for over 13 years until divorcing in 2002.

Melanie Leis (2010–2011)

Who is Kelly McGillis’ wife? She is not married now. However, her last marriage was with Melanie Leis. She was an employee at a restaurant McGillis had opened with her former husband, Fred Tillman. Melanie, a recovering alcoholic, and Kelly started seeing each other, and their close relationship gradually turned into a romantic one.

RELATED: Who Madison Beer’s boyfriend timeline: her dating…

On 15 September 2010, the partners entered a civil union at Collingswood Municipal Court. However, after approximately one year into their union, they divorced in 2011.

Kelly McGillis’ relationships

The actress has also been involved with the two other known people. Here is more about the relationships.

Barry Tubb

American actor and filmmaker Barry Tubb dated actress Kelly McGillis. On the set of the movie Top Gun in 1986, Barry and Kelly initially met and clicked. Although they apparently called it quits in 1987, their love relationship reportedly lasted beyond the film’s filming.

Jodie Foster

In 1988, Kelly had a romantic relationship with the actress Jodie Foster. They claim that their relationship started while they were filming the movie The Accused, in which Foster portrayed Sarah Tobias, a young waitress, and McGillis played Kathryn Murphy, a lawyer. Their brief relationship ended in the same year, indicating how fleeting it was.

Does Kelly McGillis have children?

Yes. The actress has two children, Sonora and Kelsey Tillman, with her former husband, Fred Tillman. Her first daughter Kelsey was born on 24 May 1990, while she welcomed Sonora on 10 April 1993.

Is Kelly McGillis gay?

Yes. The Top Gun actress came out as homosexual in 2009 when she stated that she was no longer interested in men in an interview with SheWired. Kelly also disclosed to Philadelphia Gay News that she was drawn to girls in high school and that as a result of her actions, her parents sent her away at the age of 17.

Is Kelly McGillis married now?

Who is Kelly McGillis’ wife? After parting ways with her former partner Melanie Leis, the actress has not been married and has no partner.

Fast facts about Kelly McGillis

Who is Kelly McGillis? She is an American actress known for portraying Charlotte Blackwood in the movie Top Gun. She has also been featured in The Accused and Stake Land.

Where is Kelly McGillis from? She hails from Newport Beach, California, United States.

Was Kelly McGillis married to Tom Cruise? She played Tom Cruise’s love interest in the movie Top Gun, but the two did not have a romantic relationship in real life.

Are Kelly McGillis and Melanie Leis still married? No. The former spouses divorced in 2011. They reportedly had a romantic relationship for about ten years.

Who is Kelly McGillis married to? She is not married and is supposedly not in a relationship.

Who are Kelly McGillis’ children? She has two children with her former husband, Fred Tillman. Her daughters are Sonora and Kelsey Tillman.

Who was Kelly McGillis married to? The actress has been married thrice. Her ex-partners are Boyd Black, Fred Tillman, and Melanie Leis.

Who is Kelly McGillis’ spouse? The actress has been in a few relationships and has been married thrice. She is currently not married and is seemingly not in any romantic relationship. She has two children from her second marriage.

RELATED: Who is Maude Apatow’s boyfriend? The actress’…

The actor is reportedly in a relationship with actress Meagan Good. They have been spotted in a few events together, sparking their dating rumours. Despite the speculations, the two have not confirmed whether they are an item.