Melanie Leis came to the limelight after being linked to Kelly McGillis. They were partners from 2010 to 2011, but they had known each other for much longer since the beginning of the 2000s. You probably know Kelly McGillis's story because of her fame in the movie industry. She is famous for her film roles, such as Rachel Lapp in Witness and Charlie in Top Gun. However, not much is known about her former significant other. So, what is Melanie's story?

After separating from her ex-husband, Fred Tillman, her relationship with Melanie Leis is the longest Kelly McGillis has been in. The relationship attracted great attention because it was different.

So, who is the beautiful lady that caught McGillis's attention but later decided to let her go? What is their relationship story?

Melanie Leis’s profile summary

NameMelanie LeisDate of birth1967Birthplace/hometownUSAAge55 years oldNationalityAmericanEthnicityWhite CaucasianSolar signZodiac Faith ChristianityPresent residencePhiladelphia, United StatesAlma MaterBerklee College of Music, New Burry CollegeCareerSales executive and music festival agentWell-known forBeing the ex-wife of Kelly McGillis (Actress)Height160 cm (1.6 m)Weight56 kg

Who is Melanie Leis?

Melanie Leis is renowned for being the ex-partner of a famous actress, Kelly McGill. She is a sales executive and theatre artist from the United States of America. Melanie was born in 1967, meaning she is 55 years old as of 2022.

Since she came to the limelight after being associated with Kelly McGillis, not much is known about her formative years. Melanie attended college at Berklee College of Music, graduating in Arts, Music Production, and Performance. She also has an associate degree in Hotel and Restaurant Management from New Burry College.

Leis is good with musical instruments and knows her way around a few. She started playing the piano when she was six years old and later played the drums.

Melanie’s career

Melanie Leis set a good foundation during college by acquiring the best knowledge that boosted her career. She started working as a retail manager for Cingula Wireless (AT&T) from September 2001 to July 2003. She later worked for PC Management from February 2004 to January 2008.

Melanie's other roles include her position with Sovereign Bank, where she worked as a portfolio specialist until May 2009. She has also worked for Simply Wireless/Mobile Now as a Dist. Sales Manager. After this role, she joined Retail Business Development in 2010 as their market launch team DM.

Leis’s other workplaces include Independence Communications, Broadview Networks, All Covered Inc., Society Grownups, Vendeni, PD Corp, and Tappit. Melanie joined Tappit in 2021 and has been the vice president ever since.

How did McGillis and Melanie meet?

Kelly McGillis and Melanie Leis met at a restaurant in Florida. During an interview with the New York Times in September 2010, Leis talked about her first encounter with McGillis in 2000 at Kelly’s, the bar in West Florida.

I started working at the restaurant while Kell was out of town working on a movie. One day I looked up, and there she was. I did not see her from across the room or anything like that… Her presence, not the image of who she is professionally, but her sense of humour, absolutely grabbed me.

She stated that she saw McGillis past her stardom and got impressed. After their first encounter, Leis and McGillis became part of a group that went out for a friend's birthday and started talking.

Once they sparked, they started seeing one another and fell into a destructive pattern. By 2001, they were living together in Mohnton, Pa. However, despite McGillis and Melanie being together, they never had photos of them together.

McGillis came out in 2009 and admitted that she had been finding girls attractive since high school.

McGillis and Melanie’s breakup

Unfortunately, McGillis's relationship with Melanie took a considerable toll on her children. In addition, their new location was quite conservative. Kelly McGillis and Melanie Leis broke up in 2009, and the primary reason was that they had changed and grown at different rates. However, they started dating again.

Melanie Leis and Kelly McGillis's wedding

Melanie and McGillis decided to marry in the second chance of the relationship. Leis proposed to the actress, and she agreed to see if it worked out. They tied the knot on September 15, 2010, Wednesday morning. The event was attended by 11 of their friends, including Kelly’s ex-husband, Tillman.

Why did Kelly McGillis and Melanie Leis separate?

Unfortunately, Kelly and Melanie nullified their lovely relationship in 2011, and it is unclear if they have been dating other people. They also didn't reveal the primary reason for their separation, and fans can only speculate.

Where does Melanie Leis live today?

Melanie Leis resides in Boston, Massachusetts, and is currently running her ticketing and music festival gigs. She also advocates for various fundraising programs via her Facebook page.

Quick facts about Melanie Leis

How old is Melanie Leis? Melanie was born in 1967, meaning she is 55 years old as of 2022.

Is Kelly McGillis still married? Kelly was married to Fred Tillman, but they divorced. She later got into a relationship with Melanie Leis, but it didn't last as they separated in 2011.

What is Melanie Leis’s profession? Melanie is a sales executive and music festival agent by profession. She serves as a regional sales executive in Philadelphia with Independence Communication.

Where did Melanie go to school? Melanie attended Berklee College of Music, graduating in Arts, Music, Production, and Performance. She also holds an associate degree in Hotel and Restaurant Management from New Burry College.

Where did Melanie and McGillis meet? Melanie and McGillis met at a restaurant in Florida where Melanie was a bartender.

When did Melanie Leis and McGillis marry? Melanie married the famous actress on September 15, 2010, when they stepped into Judge Robert T. Zane III's chambers at Collingswood Municipal Court.

What is Melanie Leis's net worth? Melanie Leis has only been in the limelight because of being the ex-partner of famous actress Kelly McGillis. Therefore, not much about her wealth is out in the open.

Melanie Leis came to the limelight because of her association with the famous actress Kelly McGillis. They were married from 2010 to 2011 but have been in a relationship since the early 2000s. However, it is not clear whether they are dating currently.

Are you looking for more information about Drew Dober? Tuko.co.ke featured an informative article about the famous American mixed martial artist that started his professional career in 2009.

The MMA fighter has registered an impressive record during this period, becoming renowned as one of the best. So, what is the fighter’s story?

Source: TUKO.co.ke