Atari 7800

Overview

The Atari 7800 application is an emulator for the Atari 7800 ProSystem game console.

Settings

The Atari 7800 Application includes a custom settings dialog.

To access these settings, display the "Pause" screen and select the "Atari 7800 Settings" option (See screenshot above).

Atari 7800 Settings Tab (Session Only)

The Atari 7800 Application's "settings" tab is detailed below. It is important to note that the settings on this tab are Session only meaning they will not persist between gaming sessions.

Field Description Left Difficulty Switch Toggles between the A and B left difficulty switch options (is a physical switch on the 7800 console). Right Difficulty Switch Toggles between the A and B right difficulty switch options (is a physical switch on the 7800 console). Dual Analog Whether to enable twin stick style controls (player 1 uses player 2's joystick for firing, etc.).

Controls

The emulator supports up to two controllers. The keyboard and gamepad mappings are listed in the tables below.

Keyboard

Keyboard support is only available for controller one.

Name Keys Comments Move Fire 1 Fire 2 Pause Reset Select The Right Shift Key. Show Pause Screen

Gamepad

Gamepad support is available for both controllers.

Name

Gamepad

Comments Move or Dual analog (if applicable) Player one's right analog stick can be used to produce input for player two's joystick (d-pad) for games that support a 2-stick mode (For example, the homebrew game TiME Salvo). Fire 1 Fire 2 Pause Reset Not available for Xbox and not recommended for iOS (see alternate)

Press the Menu (Start) Button. Reset

(Alternate) and Hold down the Right Trigger and click (press down) on the Right Thumbstick. Select Not available for Xbox and not recommended for iOS (see alternate)

Press the View (Back) Button. Select

(Alternate) and Hold down the Right Trigger and click (press down) on the Left Thumbstick. Show Pause Screen and Not available for Xbox and not recommended for iOS (see alternate 3 or 4)

Hold down the Left Trigger and press the Menu (Start) Button. Show Pause Screen

(Alternate) and Not available for Xbox and not recommended for iOS (see alternate 3 or 4)

Hold down the Left Trigger and press the View (Back) Button. Show Pause Screen

(Alternate 2) and Not available for Xbox and not recommended for iOS (see alternate 3 or 4)

Hold down the X Button and press the View (Back) Button. Show Pause Screen

(Alternate 3) and Hold down the Left Trigger and click (press down) on the Left Thumbstick. Show Pause Screen

(Alternate 4) and Hold down the Left Trigger and click (press down) on the Right Thumbstick.

Feed

This section details how Atari 7800 application instances can be added to feeds.

Type

The type name for the Atari 7800 application is js7800.

Properties

The table below contains the properties that are specific to the Atari 7800 application. These properties are specified in the props object of a feed item.

Property Type Required Details rom URL Yes URL to an Atari 7800 ROM file or a zip file containing a ROM file. zoomLevel Numeric No A numeric value indicating how much the display image should be zoomed in (0-40).

This property is typically used to hide the black borders that are present on some games.

Example

The following is an example of a complete feed that consists of a single Atari 7800 application instance (type value of 7800). The rom property value is a URL that points to a Dropbox location that contains the excellent homebrew game TiME Salvo by Mike Saarna.

This example can be tested by adding a feed with the following URL within the webЯcade player:

https://tinyurl.com/7800-feed

References