Most movies start at the beginning of a story, but Fury is a war film that chooses to kick off at the tail-end of one, when the stakes are high and the soldiers broken. Proceedings commence in early 1945, with the conclusion of WWII fast approaching. But the American tank units on the ground don’t know that, having suffered staggering losses to the superiority of German armour and fire-power.

Don ‘Wardaddy’ Collier (Brad Pitt) heads up one such battalion – a band of disparate brothers who have traversed Europe in a tank called Fury, leaving a trail of dead Nazis in their wake. They are now deep behind enemy lines, facing off against the fanatical resistance of the German soldiers that have thus far survived.

We meet them moments after one of their number has been killed, with blame and recriminations being thrown around the inside of the tank, handily giving us an introduction and insight into each of the characters.

Wardaddy is the no-nonsense commander of the Fury; Trini Garcia (Michael Pena), a fast-talking, hard-drinking wise-ass who drives the tank. Boyd Swan (Shia LaBeouf) is sensitive and god-fearing, in spite of the fact that he’s the unit’s gunner. And Grady Travis (Jon Bernthal) is the tank’s loader, a bully whose lack of smarts is matched only by his aggression.

The unspeakable horrors of war are etched on their faces; the men of Fury clearly having been to hell and back. Which is why they are dismayed when ‘assistant driver’ Norman Ellison (Logan Lerman) is forced upon them. A young typist sent to the front line in spite of the fact that he’s never seen a day of combat, he’s bewildered and confused, while the rest of his new team see Norman as the weak link that could get them killed.

What follows is 24 hours in and around Fury as the platoon journeys deeper into German territory, first claiming a town that puts up little fight, and then being charged with the task of guarding a crossroads that proves to be a much more dangerous mission; one that could end their journey once-and-for-all.

It’s a story that makes sense for writer-director David Ayer to tell, having scripted the economical and testosterone-fuelled likes of U-571, Training Day and End of Watch. Like those films, Fury deals with the bonds that men form as they endeavour to deal with the very real horrors of conflict and combat.

Trouble is, these brilliantly scripted exchanges inside the Fury are punctuated by multiple tank battles, some of which simply don’t work onscreen. Because once you understand the mechanics of such warfare, the spectacle isn’t great, the struggles themselves slow and unwieldy, playing out like a violent version of the game of tractor-chicken in Footloose.

Ayer’s script also takes something of a nose-dive at the mid-way point when the men of Fury encounter two German women. There’s great character work in this extended scene as we learn more about the unit, their relationships, and the horrific war experiences they have shared. But it lasts too damn-long, the script’s efforts to give each character their moment resulting in the film losing all momentum.

But perhaps the biggest crime Fury commits is the way in which a perceptive contemplation on the horrors of war suddenly goes all-out ‘Hollywood’ in the final few reels. The concluding battle feels alien to the previous two hours; a far-fetched face-off that mixes melodrama with the action, and is filled with ‘noble’ deaths that undermine the subtle solemnity of what has gone before.

But while Fury has its fair share of shortcomings, the film still works, thanks largely to several outstanding performances from an ensemble that oftentimes elevates the material.

Pitt is predictably excellent as the tank commander forced to make appalling decisions in order to save his men. As audiences witnessed throughout Inglourious Basterds, he’s brilliant when barking army orders, but Pitt’s performance is even better when he’s away from the men, and we’re shown a soldier ravaged by war and practically falling apart at the seams.

Jon Bernthal delivers a similarly powerful performance as Travis, a monster who bullies, intimidate and dominates his fellow soldiers, but as the actor peels away the character’s layers, it gradually becomes clear that the men of Fury would be as lost without Travis as he’d be without them.

And Logan Lerman is a revelation as new kid Norman, the vessel through which the audience experiences the film. His character goes on Fury’s most complex journey, transitioning from wide-eyed innocence into battle-hardened warrior in the space of a day. And while that time-frame is barely believable, Lerman wholeheartedly sells it so that come the end of the movie you’re truly willing him to survive.

Their efforts make it easier to forgive the odd misstep along the way, the resulting film not really telling us anything new about war but presenting the harrowing horror of it all in honest, authentic, and – when those tanks aren’t crawling towards each other – frequently gripping fashion.