I'd often read this as being the maritime version of Hell Drivers (the excellent film made a year earlier by blacklisted American director Cy Enfield and his star Stanley Baker) but having now watched it, I'm sad to say that Sea Fury doesn't by any means reach the heights of that earlier film.

This is largely because it spends far too much time focusing on the rivalry between Baker's drifter and Victor McLaglen's salvage vessel captain for the affections of Luciana Paluzzi's Spanish siren. This element of the plot is very much of its time let's say, because watching it in 2019, it's quite creepy to see McLaglen's 60-odd year old seadog letch over Paluzzi's teenager, especially when she's effectively…

A story of tugboaters in love.

Oh fine, I'll elaborate... One is old tugboat captain Bellew (Victor McLaglen in his final film), one is younger sailor Abel (Stanley Baker), and the object of their affections is beautiful young Spanish villager Josita (Luciana Paluizzi). She has been shadily foist upon Bellew by her father in the hopes that he'll fall for her and leave her (and thus, her father...) everything he has when he dies. She goes along with it, but things change for everyone once Abel enters the scene.

This was quite an interesting film overall, showing life in a village where the most exciting thing is welcoming back competing tugboat crews after they've completed a mission. The relationship between…

A tiny handful of people have had the adventurous life Victor McLaglen had. To give you an idea, his rich and rollicking autobiography was published near the *beginning* of his acting career, a career that would later give him a Best Actor Oscar and a Best Supporting Actor nomination almost two decades after *that*. Before becoming an actor, he managed to fight in both the Boer War and World War I, fight (in a different sense) freshly-crowned heavyweight champion Jack Johnson, play vaudeville, mine for gold, and serve as Provost Marshal for the city of Baghdad!

McLaglen was neither a grandly handsome actor nor a great one (though he gave a few great performances, most notably the one that…

Sea Fury doesn't immediately deliver the nautical thrills implied by the title. Instead, for the first two thirds or so, we get a- now horribly dated- 'romantic' triangle between Luciana Paluzzi's young and naive Spanish woman (horrificly pimped fresh from school by her dad), Victor McLaglen's elderly alcoholic sea captain and Stanley Baker as McLaglen's younger, but still rather unpleasant, second in command. It's a prime example of 'they don't make them like this anymore'- and for good reason! What counted as mild romantic intrigue in the 1950s leaves a nasty taste now. There's one particularly unpleasant sequence where the old sea captain gets the woman drunk, invites her back to his cabin, presents her with lingerie and then voyeuristically…

Two tug-boat captains must salvage a sinking freighter carrying explosives and tow it to port in this drama directed by Cy Endfield.

Stanley Baker and director Cy Endfield teamed up a year earlier to do the thrilling British classic film-noir Hell Drivers, which also features a young Sean Connery (in what I consider to be one of his best early roles before signing on to play James Bond five years later).

Now, following the success of Hell Drivers, Endfield and Baker team up again to do another British film, but this is completely different from Hell Drivers.

The story of Sea Fury concerns Abel Hewson and Captain Bellew (Stanley Baker and Victor McLaglen, the latter in his final film), two…