Actor David Carradine, star of the 1970s TV show Kung Fu, has been found dead in his luxury hotel room in Bangkok.

Police said Carradine was found hanged and there were no signs of other people in the room.

The body of the 72-year-old actor has been sent to a hospital for an autopsy.

Lori Binder, a representative for Carradine's Los Angeles-based talent manager, said the actor was in Thailand to shoot a film called Stretch.

She declined to give further details of his death while it was under investigation.

Carradine - from a family of performers and the eldest son of character actor John Carradine - enjoyed a long career on Broadway, television and in movies such as director Quentin Tarantino's Kill Bill: Volume 1 and Kill Bill: Volume 2.

RIP Grasshopper

Condolences are pouring in to the actor's website.

"What a sad day it is for all who grew up watching David Carradine and knowing this great actor. May you rest in eternal peace," said one post.

Another simply said "RIP Grasshopper" - the nickname of his Kung Fu character Kwai Chang Caine, a wandering monk in America's Old West who became an iconic figure of US TV in the 1970s.

Varied career

The actor was born John Arthur Carradine on December 8, 1936 in Los Angeles and was educated at San Francisco State University, where he studied music theory and composition.

While writing music for the drama department's annual revues, he discovered his own passion for the stage, joining a Shakespearean repertory company.

After working on Broadway in The Deputy and The Royal Hunt Of The Sun opposite Christopher Plummer, Carradine earned a spot on Hollywood's map in the 1960s in TV westerns such as Wagon Train and The Virginian, as well as his starring role in a TV version of the hit western movie Shane.

But it was his role in Kung Fu that earned Carradine his greatest fame. The series aired on US television starting in 1972 and immediately won a large fan base for Carradine as Caine.

The show spawned a movie and numerous other offshoots.

Overall, Carradine's credits include more than 200 roles in movies and television spanning nearly five decades.

His role as Caine earned him a nomination for an Emmy, US TV's highest honour, and his turn as the villainous Bill in Kill Bill: Volume 2 led to his fourth Golden Globe nomination.

He also won critical acclaim for portraying folk singer Woody Guthrie in the Oscar-nominated 1976 film Bound For Glory.

Carradine was married five times and had two daughters from previous marriages.

His latest wife was Annie Bierman, whom he married in 2004.

In his 1995 autobiography Endless Highway, Carradine wrote that he tried to kill himself when he was five years old.

The book also described his extensive drug use, ranging from LSD to cocaine, and ended with a chronicle of his efforts in the mid-1990s to get sober by attending a support group for alcoholics.