David Carradine was a versatile and charismatic actor who rose to fame as the star of the TV series Kung Fu, in which he played a Shaolin monk wandering the American West in search of his brother.

He also appeared in more than 100 films, including the cult classics Death Race 2000, Bound for Glory, and Kill Bill.

He was known for his martial arts skills, his distinctive voice, and his eclectic personality.

David was a member of the Carradine family of actors, which included his father John Carradine, his brothers Keith and Robert Carradine, and his daughter Calista Carradine.

He was also a musician, a painter, and a writer. He died in 2009 in Bangkok, Thailand, under mysterious circumstances.

David Carradine was a legendary actor who left behind a rich and diverse body of work that spanned genres and generations.

David Carradine young

He was a handsome young actor who started his career in the 1960s.

He was born in Hollywood, California, as John Arthur Carradine Jr., the eldest son of legendary character actor John Carradine and his wife Ardanelle Abigail McCool.

David was part of an acting family that included his brothers Keith and Robert Carradine, and his nieces Ever Carradine and Martha Plimpton.

He studied music theory and composition at San Francisco State College and discovered his passion for the stage while writing music for the Drama Department’s annual revues.

He joined a Shakespearean repertory company and learned his craft on his feet.

After serving in the army for two years, he moved to New York and worked as a commercial artist.

He then found fame on Broadway in “The Deputy” and “The Royal Hunt of the Sun” opposite Christopher Plummer.

David returned to Hollywood and landed the lead role in the TV series Shane (1966), and then starred opposite Barbara Hershey in Martin Scorsese’s first Hollywood film, Boxcar Bertha (1972).

He also wrote, directed, produced, and composed music for some of his projects.

David Carradine net worth

David Carradine’s net worth was estimated to be around $500,000 at the time of his death in 2009.

His main source of income was his acting career, which spanned more than six decades and included more than 100 films and TV shows.

He also earned money from his books, music, and directing and producing projects. Some of his most successful and acclaimed works were the TV series Kung Fu, the Kill Bill movies, and the Woody Guthrie biopic Bound for Glory.

He received several awards and nominations for his performances, such as a Golden Globe nomination and a Saturn Award for Kill Bill: Vol. 2.

David Carradine movies and tv shows

David Carradine was a prolific actor who appeared in more than 100 movies and TV shows in his career. Some of his most notable roles include:

Kwai Chang Caine in the TV series Kung Fu (1972-1975) and its sequel Kung Fu: The Legend Continues (1993-1997)

David Carradine kill bill (2003-2004) directed by Quentin Tarantino

Woody Guthrie in the biopic Bound for Glory (1976) for which he received a Golden Globe nomination

Frankenstein in the cult classic Death Race 2000 (1975)

Cole Younger in the western The Long Riders (1980) which he co-produced with his brothers Keith and Robert Carradine

Abel Rosenberg in the thriller The Serpent’s Egg (1977) directed by Ingmar Bergman

Detective Shepard in the horror film Q (1982)

Rawley Wilkes in the action film Lone Wolf McQuade (1983) opposite Chuck Norris

Eugene Sorenson in the comedy Bird on a Wire (1990) with Mel Gibson and Goldie Hawn

Gideon Fisk in the animated film Evil Toons (1992).

david carradine kung fu

David Carradine was best known for starring as the titular villain in Kill Bill and in the TV show Kung Fu as Caine, a Shaolin monk wandering the American Old West.

The show presented the saga of a Shaolin monk wandering the American West of the 19th century.

During the height of the show’s popularity, Carradine not only lacked a black belt, he lacked any kind of formal martial arts training.

David Carradine spouse

David Carradine had five spouses in his life. They were:

Donna Lee Becht (1960-1968), his first wife and the mother of his daughter Calista Carradine

Barbara Hershey (1969-1975), his domestic partner and the mother of his son Tom Carradine

Linda Gilbert (1977-1983), his second wife and the mother of his daughter Kansas Carradine

Gail Jensen (1986-1997), his third wife and a former actress

Marina Anderson (1998-2001), his fourth wife and an actress who appeared in films such as The Italian Job and The Devil Wears Prada

Annie Bierman (2004-2009), his fifth and last wife who had four children from previous marriages

David Carradine children

David Carradine had four children from his various marriages.

His first two children, Calista and Tom, were born during his relationship with Donna Lee Becht (his first wife) and Barbara Hershey (his domestic partner), respectively.

Kansas, his third child, was born during his marriage to Linda Gilbert (his second wife).

His fourth child, Free, was adopted by him and his fourth wife, Marina Anderson.

He also had four stepchildren from his fifth and last wife, Annie Bierman². They are Amanda, Madeleine, Olivia, and Max.

David Carradine grandchildren

David Carradine had four grandchildren from his three children.

They are Mariah, Kuwaleah, Phoenix and Sienna.

Mariah is the daughter of Calista and her husband Mark Gauthier.

Kuwaleah and Phoenix are the children of Kansas and her husband Jason Gauthier.

Sienna is the daughter of Tom and his wife Amy Carradine.

David Carradine death

David Carradine’s death was a tragic and mysterious event that shocked the world in 2009.

He was hanging from a closet with a cord wrapped around his neck and genitals, in what appeared to be a case of accidental asphyxiation due to a sexual practice known as autoerotic asphyxiation.

However, some of his family and friends disputed this theory and suggested foul play or murder.

His death sparked a media frenzy and a lot of speculation about his private life and his involvement in martial arts and kink.

His body was examined by two different autopsies, one in Thailand and one in the US, which both ruled out suicide and natural causes.

The Thai authorities officially ruled his death as accidental, but the exact circumstances and motives remain unclear.

Conclusion

David Carradine was a versatile and charismatic actor who rose to fame as the star of the TV series Kung Fu, in which he played a Shaolin monk wandering the American West in search of his brother.

He also appeared in more than 100 films, including the cult classics Death Race 2000, Bound for Glory, and Kill Bill.

He was known for his martial arts skills, his distinctive voice, and his eclectic personality.

David was also a musician, a painter, and a writer.

He died in 2009 in Bangkok, Thailand, under mysterious circumstances.

David was a legendary actor who left behind a rich and diverse body of work that spanned genres and generations.

We hope you enjoyed this article about David Carradine and learned something new about his amazing career and life.

If you want to read more of our celebrity articles, check out the links below;

ncG1vNJzZmibnq6urMHNnaBnm5%2BifKWt1aKbZpuRp7%2BisMinnGg%3D

ncG1vNJzZmijqZi2b63MrGpnnJmctrWty6ianpmeqL2ir8SsZZynnWSxosLInWScmaKnrqW1zZ5loaydoQ%3D%3D