Lucent Technologies is in talks to buy Ascend Communications, a computer networking firm, for more than US$16 billion, in a deal that could challenge networking leader Cisco Systems.

While industry sources said the talks were ongoing and serious, both New Jersey-based Lucent, the world's biggest maker of telecommunications equipment, and Ascend, the fourth-biggest maker of computer networking gear, declined any comment.

The companies were expected to meet Tuesday to discuss details of a deal and an announcement could be made as early as Wednesday, although the timing could change, industry sources said. One industry analyst said Lucent could pay more than $80 a share in stock for Ascend.

Under the discussed deal, Lucent (LU) -- valued at about $150 billion -- would buy Ascend (ASND), which has a market value of about $15.5 billion based on its Friday closing price of $71.44 a share on the Nasdaq. Lucent shares closed at $115.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trade on Friday.

"They've been considering a deal for months," one industry source said. "It was just a matter of waiting for Lucent's stock to hit a level where they could pull it off. It could still hit a snag if they can't find a price that is worthwhile enough for Ascend, but not too dilutive for Lucent."

Even as whispers of that deal made the rounds, Lucent announced that it had acquired Kenan Systems, which makes third-party billing and customer-care software. Among its customers: British Telecom, MCI WorldCom, and France Telecom.

Lucent said the deal for Kenan will cost it 12.88 million shares of stock, or about $1.48 billion. A good-sized piece of action, to be sure, but small potatoes next to the reported acquisition of Ascend.

Lucent and Ascend have been working closely together for months but are still conducting due-diligence reviews to evaluate a potential deal, according to an industry sources who declined to be identified.

Such an acquisition would bolster Lucent's position as it confronts the converging markets of traditional voice networks and high-speed data networks, analysts said. That growing convergence has meant Lucent and Ascend, headquartered in Alameda, California, increasingly compete against each other.

The combined companies would pose a greater threat to Cisco, which is now Ascend's chief rival. Lucent would gain access to sophisticated Ascend technology while Lucent's greater financial resources and large sales force would put more muscle behind Ascend's products.

Ascend now has a lead in the phone market over Cisco (CSCO) because it has developed a switch that shunts vast amounts of data on phone networks. Analysts believe Cisco will not be able to match the technology until the middle of the year.

Even so, sources close to Ascend on Sunday night reiterated that the company intends to remain independent as it competes against Cisco and 3Com (COMS), the second-biggest maker of networking gear.