1. ðŸ˜ŽWhy You Should Go To College Essay. 10 Reason 1. Step To get started, you must first create an account on site HelpWriting.net. The registration process is quick and simple, taking just a few moments. During this process, you will need to provide a password and a valid email address. 2. Step In order to create a "Write My Paper For Me" request, simply complete the 10-minute order form. Provide the necessary instructions, preferred sources, and deadline. If you want the writer to imitate your writing style, attach a sample of your previous work. 3. Step When seeking assignment writing help from HelpWriting.net, our platform utilizes a bidding system. Review bids from our writers for your request, choose one of them based on qualifications, order history, and feedback, then place a deposit to start the assignment writing. 4. Step After receiving your paper, take a few moments to ensure it meets your expectations. If you're pleased with the result, authorize payment for the writer. Don't forget that we provide free revisions for our writing services. 5. Step When you opt to write an assignment online with us, you can request multiple revisions to ensure your satisfaction. We stand by our promise to provide original, high-quality content - if plagiarized, we offer a full refund. Choose us confidently, knowing that your needs will be fully met. ðŸ˜ŽWhy You Should Go To College Essay. 10 Reason ðŸ˜ŽWhy You Should Go To College Essay. 10 Reason

2. Personal Reflection On Officership Personal Reflection Who were you before entering as a Cadet in CFOT? I am a mother of a thirty year old daughter, was a wife, registrar and ambulance coder, administration assistant, medical biller/coder. Also, I was also the Sunday school teacher and Sunbeam troop leader in my home Corps. The journey to Officership was long and a disobedient one, I was called at the age of eighteen, but I did not want that kind of responsibilities. Growing up in the Salvation Army, I did not see anything positive being a Salvation Army officer due to the fact they wear many hats. It was not a glamorous career to choose, it a calling and you have to be willing and obedient. So I stay clear from the word Officership until I met an officer and his family that would change my life. My goals of becoming a singer took a back burner after becoming tangled with this family. The Lord also blinded me while I was driving to work, and take there without being in an accident. However, this was the push that gives me the motivation to say yes to Officership after twenty three years of disobedience. He showed me he could lead me blindly if I would just go and trust him. How did you change/grow in CFOT? College for Officer Training was not overwhelming for me because I was prepared to welcome all the challenges ahead of me. My heart and soul were into what lies ahead of me, I change and grow when I started trusting the Lord more. More so, I learn to be humble and to have patience with everything that comes my way. The things struck me most during the two years at College for Officer Training was, that individuals who supposed to be Christian and in training to become leaders lack integrity. I ask myself this question how could this be, and how are they going to lead people to Christ as an Officer and Pastor. This learning experience bothers me for a while, but I gave it to God in prayer and focused on why I was at CFOT. What are you learning now as you are in the field as a Salvation Army Officer? Working in the field as an officer is entirely different from what I was taught in Training College. More so, my appointment came without any type direction or someone there to help me transition. More so, I had to figure out ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

3. The Management Of Chicago Bank Contents Abstract 2 Introduction 3 Proposal 4 Loan 4 Amortization 5 Balloon Payment 5 Loan to Value 6 Abstract Consortium Bank A subsidiary bank created by numerous banks. A consortium bank is created to fund a specific project (such as providing affordable homeownership for low and moderate income home buyers) or to execute a specific deal (such as selling loans in the loan syndication market) . (Investopedia, 2009) The Consortium generally strengthens the individual bank s assets to meet their objectives. All member banks have equal or proportionate ownership shares the member with the highest percentage of shares has the leading authority. After the bank s objective is met the consortium typically dissolves. This ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... All these banks came together so as to invest in the Real Estate Sector that too in the East Lansing area. The main focus of our Consortium is to finance inner city and mixed used projects. Inner City Projects are basically for the redevelopment of the city so as to improve the urban infrastructure, financial services, land tenure regularization, enhanced community capacity and improvements in public safety. (Jackson, 2015) Mixed Used Projects are any urban, suburban or village development, or even a single building, that blends a combination of residential, commercial, cultural, institutional, or industrial uses, where those functions are physically and functionally integrated, and that provides pedestrian connections. (Jackson, 2015) So basically we are interested in investing in any such project that is in the well fare of the city of East Lansing as well as its residents. It can be a hospital, a residential complex, a commercial office building, a school or any such project that enhances the real estate market of the city and should be for the wellness of the residents of the city. In this report further I am going to discuss about the Loan policies of the consortium for the Real Estate Developers. Why is a Consortium needed? A syndicate bank is formed by multiple banks, for a particular purpose of financing a specific project that is too big for an individual bank to finance on its own. Under this procedure the

4. ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

5. New York Daily News Article Analysis The paper that is being looked at is the New York Daily News, published on the 6th of July, claiming to have the largest circulation in the Manhattan Bronx area(ref3). The circulation is quite substantial for the city, but doesn t spread any further within that paper. It is one of the first tabloids within the area to have grown popularity, and in the chosen article suggests a more conservative lean, having a strong impact on the language used within the pages of the newspaper. It seems to be more likely to be focused on appealing for the middle class. In this article especially, there is the use of strong homophobic language, and refusal to correctly gender those taking part in the riot, including referring to the patrons of the bar as little girls (ref4). This brings into question the amount of seriousness this was taken in, ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... At the beginning of the section focused on them, Nan spoke about the fact that she disliked the paper that they were being interviewed for, describing it as being anti fag and pro cop (ref5), giving a view of how the community around Greenwich village and the Stonewall Inn viewed both the paper itself, and the police force. The pair describe what they know to have happened within the building and the questions that were asked throughout the community. All questioning the actions of the police, and their prior motives as well. Not only do Bruce and Nan provide an understanding of how the LGBT community generally viewed the paper, but within their search for answers, they give a strong impression of how they view the police force, and especially how the force treated the LGBT community in New York at the time. The couple comment about a payoff having been one of the main reasons for the riot, suggesting the lack of effort that it took to influence that division of the police ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

6. Personal Narrative-Puerto Rico Wasp Attack Puerto Rico Wasp Attack We were walking down the step path in the rainforest of Puerto Rico. We spotted a dad and his daughter and started to talk them. They told us that their was river up ahead with some rocks you could walk on. We had a small conversation with them and then parted our separate ways. We decided to go check out the river. The path to get there was very dangerous and slippery, so we had to watch where we stepped. Me and my friend heard some water up ahead but it turned out to be a waterfall were people were hanging around by. My dad said we had to keep walking if we wanted get to river before we had to leave, so we stoped looking at the waterfall and kept walking. As we were walking we kind off got use to the steps, but my ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

7. Still Alice Analysis I decided to do my review on the movie Still Alice. The movie started off with Alice giving a speech in an auditorium to hundreds of people when all of a sudden she forgot part of her speech. At first, she is diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer s at the age of 50. But later on, things start to get worse, she began to forget things more and more; she was officially diagnosed from a doctor with dementia later on. The movie itself was very saddening and showed how Alzheimer s can affect one s family, friends, and everyday life traumatically. From the aspect of the caregiver, the symptoms of dementia are disheartening. Dementia itself is a progressive decline in memory, learning, and thinking abilities. In terms of education, people with Alzheimer s have the intelligence of people who are about 10 years old in grade school. For the sociological aspect of ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Some people view Alzheimer s patients in a negative way and don t treat of them as a normal thinking person. Many people believe people with this disease are confused. Some research indicated that traits like fun and happy were at the bottom of how someone would describe a person with dementia. In the movie, not everyone viewed people with dementia with respect, mostly loved ones gave the most respect to Alice throughout the movie. I think that the title of the movie Still Alice brings up a good point. When someone is diagnosed with Alzheimer s, how much of their identity do they still have left? It is disheartening to think about because this genetic disease affects so many families around the world. In spirit, Alice is still there throughout the movie. But her memory and social skills have slowly dismantled who she truly is as a person. Dementia takes over someone s life so rapidly it is frightening. I have learned from this movie to never take any moment for granted and to enjoy your time with loved ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

8. Final Analysis on John Lewis Partnership JHON LEWIS PARTNERSHIP TABLE 1: Value Chain Administration amp; Infrastructure | 1. Innovative management for safety amp; occupational health for both partners amp; customers(12) 2. Constitution system that Set out for principles amp; governance system amp; rules(12) 3. Good internal control amp; risk management(12) | Inbound Logistics | * Relaunch of gusset(14) | | | Operations | * Johnlewis retailer of the year(11) * Produce less waste, conservewater,greener energy, reduce carbon emission(13) | HRM | 1. Built relationship powered by principle of honesty, trust amp; engagement with employers as well as with customers.(1) 2. Partnership experience relative,consistant amp; rewarding(1) 3. ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... House of fraser amp; m amp;s(5) 3. Battle rival with value range(6) | STRENGHTS * Waitrose more compassionate market in 2009/10(1) * Waitrose amp; johnlewis across europe amp; global( ) * Launch of waitrose essential(4) * Greenbee launch(5) | WEAKNESS * Sale detiorate in 2008(2) | OPPERTUNITY * Growing online market growth(3) * Expension plans in stratford during 2012 olympic * Pioneer of brand aggretion(6) | THREATS * Intense market compitition * Labour cost rise in UK with tax raise | Stars * Johnlewis biggest ever sale for Christmas(4) * Launch of tourist shop for London Olympics (8). * Fantastic results for home sale with 15.9% rise in sale(9) * Johnlweis signed up by ACID for retailer code of conduct(10) | Question marks * Fall in sale at outlet despite rise in sale on website?(6) | Cash cow * Waitrose break into US market through Duchy originals range(2) * Waitrose deal with Welcome brake at service stations(3) * High street department most growth come from WAITROSE aabout 20%(5) | Dogs * Waitrose setting up direct compition with Ocado(1) * Milestone for Tithe barn project(7) * Closure of Windsor department store(11) | BCG MATRIX ANSOFF Market Extension * Jhonlewis expansion into 25 EU countries internationally.(1) * Waitrose extension ST.Saviour amp; jersey(1)Construction of new shops in Olympic site amp; in ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

9. From Sandwich Shop to Subway Subway Report Subway was founded in 1965 by Fred DeLuca and Peter Buck. The duo opened their first sandwich shop when DeLuca was only seventeen years old. DeLuca s childhood dream was to become a prominent doctor. Therefore, he needed to find a way to pay for his medical career. On the other hand, Peter Buck was a family friend who offered DeLuca the possibility to become business partners. Their first store was opened in Bridgeport, Connecticut. It was called, Pete s Super Submarines. They sold over three hundred sandwiches on the opening day. The price range for each sandwich was between forty nine to sixty nine cents. Although they struggled for couple of years they were optimistic. Their goal at that time was to open over thirty stores in the next ten years. The pair wanted to create a success image. Later, Fred learned that good customer service, quality food and low prices were important to stay in business for a long time. In 1968, the little submarine shop changed their name to the trademark Subway. They made seven thousand dollars only on that year. However, the duo was too ambitious to settle with that. It was in 1974, and after sixteen stores in Wallingford, Connecticut that Subway grew into a franchise. In this way, becoming the first franchise in the United States. The mindset of DeLuca and Buck was to allow the now chain brand, to expand countrywide. But at this point they fell half way short on their original goal ten years ago. This ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

10. The Maternal Mortality Rate Of Afghanistan Essay Goal 5 The fifth goal is to increase maternal health in countries with a focus on reducing the maternal mortality rate by three fourths and universal access to reproductive health both by 2015. Despite a 43% reduction in maternal deaths since 1990, there are still a large number of women who die during childbirth from preventable causes such as hemorrhaging (United Nations, 2015, p. 38). In 2002 Afghanistan reported a baseline figure of 1,600 deaths per 100,000 with a 2015 targeted reduction to 315 (Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, 2013, p. 53). While Afghanistan was able to reach the original goal it had set for itself, new goals were created to combat the continuous high number of maternal deaths. Afghanistan has identified general lack of family planning, a limited supply of qualified midwives, and limited access to health care in general as contributing factors towards such high maternal death rates. The state has been working with UNICEF, WHO, and other international partners to implement its National Reproductive health strategy to help combat the conditions in which Afghanistan mothers find themselves. Goal 6 The sixth goal is to combat HIV/AIDS and other diseases, focusing on reversing their spread and providing universal access to treatment. We have seen progress made in most countries towards achieving this goal, with the statistics falling every day, however, we are far from the finish line as a little over 2 million people still contract AIDS/HIV. Afghanistan ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

11. The Economic Implications Of The Civilization Of India One of these complications was their Economic instability. Following the partition, the first consequence, was the uneven distribution of area and population. India was burdened with with 82% of the population and only procured 77% of the total area. The remaining 18% of population along with 23% of the total area went over to Pakistan. However, it is only when we look at the way in which the agricultural resources were distributed, that the real loss that India experiences become evident. Respective of the partition, 84% of the diffused area was handed to India, while the remaining 16% went to Pakistan. Although Pakistan got slightly less than what its population would demand, they more than made up for it, through the benefit of irrigation facilities. Out of the 70 million acres of irrigated land in the undivided country, 67% (48 million) went to India and 33% (22 million) went to Pakistan. Ergo, 45.2% of the total area Pakistan dominated, was made up of irrigation works, the reciprocal percentage in the Republic of India was only 18.9%. Pakistan, not only received a larger share of irrigated land, but also, India had the percentage of irrigated land that was only of protective nature (eg. they were only in place as last resort in times of famine conditions as opposed to feeding the entire population). This was especially so of the irrigation land in the South of India, notably in Bombay, Mysore and Madras. The partition, therefore, hauled India to have greater dependence on the whimsical of rainfall, reckoning for the their annual fluctuations in agricultural production. This was detrimental to India s well being as even before the partition, India had a shortcoming in food, more specifically grains. This partition only further aggravated the problem. This can be seen through India having 82% of the population, but only producing 65% of the total crops. This was not so for the Pakistani population as they produced about one million tonnes of surplus food. The partition was therefore conducive in precipitating a net loss of 700,000 800,000 of annual supply in the Indian union. Additionally, the partition also initiated a severe shortage of raw cotton and raw jute as well. This effected the Indian economy ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

12. My Buddy Holly Analysis My Buddy Holly Buddy Holley had gotten a contract with Decca Records after sending a sample of four Acetate discs to Nashville, which were previously recorded at the Nesman Studio in Wichita Falls. At the time, it was Buddy, Sonny Curtis and Don Guess who first went to Nashville to record. All of the guys who traveled in this music crowd were excited to see their peers actually recording in a big Nashville studio. Jerry Allison was still in high school and stayed in Lubbock while his colleagues traveled to Music City. After recording a few songs like Blue Days Black Nights , the boys couldn t wait for the songs to be released. The song did get released, but met with dismal sales. The boys took Allison back with them in the summer and recorded even more songs for Decca. Whether it was lack of promotion or lack of interest from the general public, the records simply didn t make very many sales. The trip wasn t a total ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... The youths, by all accounts, were clean cut budding musicians, but typified the rebellious look present of youth in those days; however, having grown up in the Panhandle of Texas, they were respectful, courteous and soon won the hearts both Petty and his classically trained musical wife. They often wore identical white t shirts, blue jeans and donned slicked back hair reminiscent of James Dean s insurgent appearance. Their professional demeanor in the studio and fervent love of music perhaps intrigued both Petty and Vi, who at this time knew very little about rock n roll and the unique style of music created and performed by Holly and his friends. Vi Petty noted, They didn t look like musicians, but when they played, they showed otherwise. Holly and the boys were becoming seasoned studio ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

13. Ford Hybrid Case Study Paper # 2 Ford Hybrid 09/13/2012 Abstract Which stages of the project life cycle are evident in the case study? Did Martens select the right two project managers in Patil and Wright? What are toughest challenges faced by the project manger during a high visability and high risk project? Would you like to have been involved with the Ford Escape Hybrid project? Paper # 2: Ford Hybrid The Ford Escape Hybrid program was the midterm step of the company s steps of sustainability. The program was included in the company s long term plans for more than two decades. The program in the past decade accelerated rapidly due to increased pressure from recently enhanced EPA regulations for improved gas mileage and pollution standards. ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Hybrid Project personnel Decisions The task of managing a project of the magnitude Martens was assigned could either fail, succeed. The scope of the job contains extremely complex engineering feats combined with a rigid timeline. The only path for success was to find a project manager well versed in both aspects of the project. Instead Martens decided to split the responsibilities of the project with two managers with different experience and subject matter expert qualities. Patil was brought his PhD scientific experience to the table. While Wright brought the can do spark plug approach to the project. The two will be instrumental in the projects outcome (Salter 2004). Challenges This type of project required an organized approach to working out side of the normal confines of Ford s production models. The bench mark for success is not in comparison to other previous projects. Large scale engineering designs had been implemented in the past, but never a machine with dual means of propulsion. The company had already announced release of the Hybrid and the whole world was waiting to see the outcome (Tierney 2005). Member of the Team Having the opportunity to be part of a team steeped in innovative engineering tradition would be an honor for anyone in the automotive production industry. The overall project requires more than just strong management, designers, and engineers. The entire project requires ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

14. Main Elements of a Contract Main elements of a contract A contract is a written or verbal agreement made between two or more parties in which the exchange of goods and/or services is agreed upon through unilateral or bilateral exchange. A successful contract contains at least six key elements, which detail how this exchange or exchanges will take place. A contract can also include details of how breach will be handled or details about how the contract can be legally terminated. Furthermore, a contract can have several defenses that will make it unenforceable by law. The six major elements of a contract are offer, acceptance, objections, mutuality of obligation, and competency. In contracts, an offer specifies what goods and/or services are going to be exchanged. An order can be defined as an expression of willingness to contract on certain terms, made with the intention that [terms] shall become binding as soon as it is accepted by the person to whom it is addressed (Treitel, 2007). As stated in the definition of offer, the next step in creating a successful contract is acceptance. Acceptance can also be referred to as genuine assent and requires that all parties partaking in a contract agree to the terms outlined in the offer. Legally, all terms outlined in a contract cannot be transferred to a third party, nor can services be subcontracted out to a third party unless there is a provision included in the contract that addresses how these circumstances should be handled. Furthermore, all terms ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

15. Frist Nation Group Analysis The Frist nation people have more emphasis on the importance of community, they primarily think of themselves as members of a group and this concept is also connected to my own personal tribal connection. We have different groups and for one to be identify you need to belong to a tribal group, in order for people to understand your origin of existences. And it also create a supportive force in time of needs. Moreover the concept of seven generation is also an interesting aspect for the Frist Nation people, where the responsibility is to take care of the present self for the well being of the future generations. These attitude can make someone to be conscious on how they live their life, knowing that is not just for their own personal benefit ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

16. Seder Plate Analysis A seder plate is is a special plate containing symbolic foods eaten or displayed at the Passover Seder. The first object on the Seder Plate is the Charoset. It represents the mortar the Isrealites were forced to use to build structures for the Egyptians. A way it applies to my life is that my mother used to always make me accompany her to work and have me help her with the children or elderly she watched. A food that may represent this event is Chitterlings. This is because , in my head they are okay to watch other people eat. When it comes to me eating them there is a problem. The second object on the Seder PLate is the Roasted Lamb Shankbone. It represents the tenth plague in Egypt, when all first born egyptians were killed.Isrealites marked their door with lambs blood so God knew who not to kill. They sacrificed a lamb to get the blood. A way it applies to my life is during the school year I always have a lot of free time but, I also need to study. I have to sacrifice the free time I have to study. Chicken may represent this event because. Chicken is a very good food but, it takes the sacrifice of many chickens to enjoy this luxury. ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... This represents the flourishing of the Isrealites in their first few years in Egypt. A way it applies to my life is how my first few years at Snowden were where I got my best grades. I was really quiet and very focused on school. As I got older I started losing focus on school. A food that represents this is bread. As my grades weren t as good as they were in the beginning it is like how bread gets stale over ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

17. The Causes Of Obesity And Obesity Aaron Heiden Robert S. Pilsner WR 121 17 March 2013 The Causes of Obesity Many people speculate that obesity is genetic, but is it? Is childhood obesity caused by a lack of exercise, an unhealthy diet, or both? Obese people, or more commonly referred to as fat people or overweight people, are defined as adults who s BMI (body mass index) is over 30 percent. There have always been overweight people in human society, but the rate of growth for this percentage of our population has been steadily rising in the last few decades. When it comes to the topic of obesity, most of us will readily agree that it is a problem. Where this agreement usually ends, however, is on the question of why it is happening. Whereas some are convinced that this trait is genetic, others maintain that people become obese simply due to diet and lack of exercise. In discussions of overweight children, one controversial issue has been who is at risk. On the one hand, A. Cattaneo argues that ...excess adiposity is a key risk factor for many chronic diseases. On the other hand, Reilly, J. J. contends that there is a ...need for practical, objective, methods that both identify the fattest children and adolescents adequately, and identify those who are at greatest risk of the co morbidities of obesity. Others even maintain these traits are genetic and obese people are not more at risk than others. My own view is obesity is not inherited genetically, and that maintaining a proper diet and exercising can ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

18. Caracal Research Paper Interesting Facts about the Caracal There are many people who might know much about the caracal; however there are many interesting facts to note about this cat. The caracal is also known by the name desert lynx, African lynx, Persian lynx and Asian lynx; however they are not members of the lynx family, rather they are from the Felidae family. The name caracal translates to mean black ear, borrowed from the Turkish language. This is because the caracal has long hairy tufts on the ears, and it is longer than that of other cats. This makes them noticeable and so when they go hunting, they will often flatten the ears so as to prevent their prey from noticing them. Even though they hunt for prey, interestingly the caracals will also eat plants ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... The cubs will stay hidden in a den until they are about one month old and that is when they gradually start going outside the den. They are born blind and will stay blind for up to ten days after which their eyes open. They start eating meat when they are 2 months old and they become sexually mature at 1 year, after this they start becoming independent and may leave their mother shortly after. Once they leave, they will go away to establish their own territory, living a solitary lifestyle just like other adult caracals. Conservation of the caracal The caracals occur in a widely spread manner across various locations in the world and as such they are not considered to be threatened and they are therefore taken to be of least concern. The main threats for the caracal come in the form of habitat loss due to climate change and human activities, being killed by human beings due to the threat they pose to livestock and being killed by larger cats and other animals that view them as competition for prey such as lions, cheetahs, leopards and hyenas. However, there are areas in which the caracal is protected so as to prevent humans from killing them at will so as to protect their ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

19. The POM1 Project Lar03342_app2_625 641.indd Page 625 2/3/10 9:06:02 PM user f498 A P P E N D I X /Users/user f498/Desktop/03:02_evening/MHBR165:Larson:208 T W O Computer Project Exercises In developing the exercises, trade offs had to be made to enrich the learning experience. One of the major problems students initially encounter is data and detail overload. This reduces their ability to identify project and data problems and to compare alternatives. Although the project found in the exercises is real, it has been reduced and detail has been eliminated many times to concentrate on applying project management principles and understanding linkages. In addition, other simplifying assumptions have been made so that students and instructors can trace ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... c. Which activity has the most total slack? d. How sensitive is this network? e. Identify two sensible milestones and explain your choice. Lar03342_app2_625 641.indd Page 627 2/3/10 9:06:03 PM user f498 /Users/user f498/Desktop/03:02_evening/MHBR165:Larson:208 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 627 Include the following (one page) printouts: A Gantt chart. A network diagram highlighting the critical path. A schedule table reporting ES, LS, EF, LF, and slack for each activity. Hints: Change the timescale to months and weeks. The estimated duration of the project is 135 days. Remember: Save your files for future exercises! The following information has been derived from the WBS. Note that the activity number is what appears in the software with the complete WBS entered. #*

20. Activity 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 15 16 17 19 20 21 Need survey Set product specs Shelf life report Nutrition report Select fruit suppliers Equipment rehab Production trials Quality trials Quality metrics Quality training Market testing Package design Select distributors Complete FDA certification Register trademark Prepare product launch Duration 20 15 10 5 20 30 15 20 5 15 30 15 25

21. 15 5 15 Predecessor(s) None 3 4 4 5, 6 4 7, 9 10 11 12 5, 6 15 5, 6 7, 15 7, 15 13, 16, 17, 19FS 1 25 days, 20FS 1 15 days FS = Finish to Start lag Part 2 Remember the old saying, A project plan is not a schedule until resources are committed. This exercise illustrates this sometime subtle, but ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

22. 1972 Discharge Problem 1972 saw new discharge regulations drive shut down and 1/4 mile times up. The 1972 model was almost indistinguishable to the 1971 with a couple of minor changes. The grille outline was tidied up, and the tail lights were changed to coordinate the new streamlined look of the grille. Side marker lights transformed from the flush mounted side markers to the surface mounted units that were received over the whole Chrysler line up for the 1972 model year. The discretionary guard monitors for 1972 incorporated an elastic strip encompassing the tail lights and an elastic strip beneath the grille. The enormous contrasts returned in the cutting of execution choices for the auto. The suspension, back pivot proportions (a 3:55 proportion was the tallest accessible), and most observably the motors changed, with the huge square 383 being supplanted by a ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... The little square 340 CID and the execution rendition of the 440 CID motor (with a 4 barrel carburetor, execution camshaft, and double depletes) were additionally accessible, and for the last time a 4 speed manual transmission could be combined with any of the three motors. The greater part of the motors endured a drop in pressure proportions to permit utilization of low lead/no lead gas and to meet the first round of discharges regulations. The 280 hp (209 kW) 440 motor was the premise for the GTX bundle (the GTX was no more a different model) accessible on Road Runners from 1972 to 1974. The 1971 72 Road Runner sheetmetal was utilized by a few NASCAR dashing groups for their racecars and ran well on the circuit amid the 1971 74 seasons. Richard Petty won the title both in 1971 and 1972 ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

23. Hmong Social Structure Social Structures: Hmong vs. Lao Migration is inevitable in the case of the aftermath of conflicts and wars. Indochina or mainland Southeast Asia is a region where similar stories of migration result to settlement for diverse groups of people. Two ethnic groups that fall into this story are Hmong and Lao. Both groups have their unique characteristics, ranging from living in different elevations to having distinctive social organization patterns. Both Hmong and Lao have very idiosyncratic ethnic identities. Hmong are known for their diaspora from the mountainous region of southern China into Southeast Asia (Lecture, 02/07/17). They reside in the highlands ranging from 3,500 to 9,000 feet, while Lao reside in the lowlands below 3500 feet (Lecture, ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Hmong followed a patrilineal kinship system. Only men can inherit properties and belongings; the father holds title to family property. When couples are married, residence after marriage is either patrilocal or neolocal, but in the vicinity of paternal house (LeBar, 75). When daughters marry, they move out of the house. Hmong marriage is regarded as a bond between two clans, so they have strict exogamy practices. Hmong men remain members of their birth clan for life (Hein, 68). Each of the family clans have a leader, who is the eldest male of the line. Their society was male centered (Lecture, 01/26/17). On the other hand, Lao followed the Southeast Asian pattern, which was a bilateral kinship system. Kinship ties are felt to be equally strong on both sides, the mother and the father (LeBar, 217). Lao kinship is more laid back compared to Hmong. They pay little attention to genealogies, since tracing more than three generations is difficult for them (LeBar, 217). Both men and women can inherit in the family as well, so Lao women are less subordinate to Lao men. Unlike Hmong, Lao couples have freedom in choosing whether to live on their own or with either spouses family (Lecture, 01/26/17). Lao marriage does not ensue strict exogamy practices, and Lao, traditionally, have no family names. Lao are known by their given names, not family names. Overall, Hmong and Lao have the exact opposite types of ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

24. Hershey Chocolate Co-Marking Case Study Both Hersey Chocolate and Betty Crocker both have a notoriety for being delectable sweets that individuals love to enjoy. The way to co marking is to pick a brand that will best compliment or improve your items as well as administrations. The marking association between the two is presence of mind in light of the fact that the Hershey chocolate makes the cakes, treats and different pastries taste a great deal more tasty. There are many advantages to building a co marked relationship in illustration, both of the organizations fabricate validity, and helps pick up the enthusiasm of each other s market, costs are part between the two gatherings. A fruitful co marking relationship relies upon collaborations among brands, clearness to the buyer, simplicity of conveyance of item or benefit and the capacity to adequately coordinate the brands business frameworks. Both of these organizations chose to take their most grounded components of some of their items and consolidate them with the best correlative things from the other to offer new products and ventures. With doing this they both expanded the potential worth of the items as opposed to ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... General Mills made sense of that having a superior fixing will help offer a greater amount of their item than rivals. Hershey s long standing notoriety of making great chocolate syrup along these lines the co mark system works for them and Betty Crocker. In spite of the fact that this association works out extremely well in this situation it could go terrible in others. Bloomberg Businessweek states that a fixing was observed to be conflicting, or more terrible, or substandard quality, it could discolor the essential brand. So co mark accomplice choice is vital. Eventually, being extremely monotonous while picking a co marking accomplice is essential since it couldn t just crush the entire undertaking yet it could discolor your image s ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

25. The Maya Civilization During The Preclassic Period It was during the Paleo Indian period when early nomads crossed into the Americas over 15,000 years ago. These were the First People to inhabit the Americas. They d first crossed into North America until eventually splitting off from other groups and eventually migrating south through Mexico into the YucatÃ¡n Peninsula of Mesoamerica. These migrating First People in the Maya region developed their tool and hunting technologies and went from being nomadic hunter gatherers into forming more permanent settlements. These settled groups became more developed as they exploited the plentiful local resources. These now settled groups progressed into the Archaic period and began advancing into a more complex society. These archaic settlements developed culture and technology that was shared with neighboring settled groups. The exchange of ideas between these groups formed into a shared culture that began developing into a culturally distinct people. The Maya Civilization originated in the YucatÃ¡n region during the Preclassic Period at around 2000 BC. There is some argument as to when the Preclassic Period began for the Maya. It s argued to have began as late as 2600 BC, while there s claim that it s earlier because there are permanent Maya settlements along the Pacific coast that date to 1800 BC. A difference of eight hundred years, depending on region. The Preclassic period begins where the first signs that the Maya can be recognized as a distinct people. The two ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

26. Astronomy a Science, Astrology a Pseudo-Science The word science probably brings many different pictures into your mind, some being: a fat textbook, white lab coats, microscopes, an astronomer looking through a telescope, a naturalist in the rainforest, Einstein s equations scribbled on a board, the launch of the space shuttle, bubbling beakers.... All of those images reflect some aspect of science, but none of them provides a full picture of what science completely is. Science is defined to be the knowledge attained through study or practice, or knowledge covering general truths of the operation of general laws, especially as obtained and tested through scientific method and concerned with the physical world. According to the TOK book, astronomy is considered a science and astrology a pseudo science. Do you agree? Before I start discussing this statement, we should know what science, pseudo science and astronomy, astrology really is. Science is the pursuit and application of knowledge and understanding of the natural and social world following a systematic methodology based on evidence. pseudo science is a concept that is considered to be science but it does not have enough evidence to go along side with it and prove the concept to be right. Astronomy is a science that studies everything outside of the earth s atmosphere, such as planets, stars, asteroids, galaxies; and the properties and relationships of those celestial bodies. Astronomers base their studies on research and observation. Astrology on the other hand, ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

27. Childhood Vaccines Research Paper More than 70 viruses, parasites, fungi and bacteria are considered dangerous pathogens to the humanity [1]. Vaccine administration has been the most creative and precious discovery in the twentieth century [2]. For most of these pathogens vaccines are present and other vaccines under establishing, in phase three clinical trial, for almost all the other viruses such as influenza virus B and bacteria such as staphylococcus aureus and about half of the parasites such as leishmania [1]. Vaccines have a major impact in reducing childhood mortality and saving millions of human beings [2]. Vaccines are the most efficient and cost effective measure to prevent several serious and life threatening infectious diseases. The successful global eradication ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Persistent infection occurs when the agent succeeds in devastating or sidestepping elements of the immune response. Acute infection occurs when a sublethal dose of the agent is controlled and quickly removed by the immune system; most current vaccines are directed against such infections [6]. Adverse effects related to the vaccines of childhood are sometimes classified as early and late reactions. Early reactions, within the first 24 hours, include swelling and erythema at the injection site, prolonged crying, fever, syncope, seizures and seldom, anaphylaxis or hypotonic, hyporesponsive episodes. While late reactions, within a few weeks after vaccine administration, include encephalopathy and encephalitis and sometimes lead to brain damage [7]. Comprehensively, there is no high scientific or clinical evidence that administration of any vaccine causes autism, asthma, a specific allergy, the sudden infant death syndrome or multiple sclerosis [8]. There are some studies which have assessed infant vaccinations as a substantial cause of infant mortality [9 14]. In several countries, all newborns are recommended to receive the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine (HBV) a few hours after ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

28. Ged210 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology Unit 2 Exam GED210 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology Unit 2 Exam Follow Below Link to Download Tutorial https://homeworklance.com/downloads/ged210 introduction to cultural anthropology unit 2 exam/ For More Information Visit Our Website ( https://homeworklance.com/ ) Email us At: Support@homeworklance.com or lancehomework@gmail.com 1. One goal of anthropological linguistics is to determine the number of phonemes (phoneticstructure) that exist in different languages. This goal is accomplished by employing the use of: minimal pairs phone taps maximal differences syntax units 2. The word lower contains: two bound morphemes two bound phonemes two free morphemes one bound morpheme and one free morpheme ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... According to Franz Boas, in order to conduct a historical particularist study of a society, one must adopt the notion of ___________, or the belief that each society should be understood in terms of its own cultural practices and values. particular evolution cultural relativism lagged diffusionism functionalism 14. During your lifetime you will probably be a member of two families, the family of orientation (the family into which you were born and enculturated) and the family of __________ (the family in which you will have or adopt children). acculturation deculturation procreation life 15. Which of the following is not a function of the family? nurture and enculturation of children regulation of sexual activity protection and support for members regulation of statuses, roles, and gender 16. A typical ____________ family consists of two parents and their immediate biological offspring or adopted children. basic atomic extended nuclear 17. Marriage within the same social group or category is __________, while __________ is marriage between people from different social categories or groups.

29. incest; outcest endogamy; exogamy in marriage; out marriage monogamy; polygamy 18. From a female perspective, you will be a daughter and possibly a mother and wife. As such, you assume what are called __________ roles that correspond to these different status positions. family ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

30. Enterprise Risk Management Enterprise Risk Management The Non Linear Pro salesman told the manager of Quick Takes Video that the editing system leased would allow the employees to edit material twice as fast after only a day and a half of set up and training. After all employees received the one day training course, completed the video tutorial, and read the manual, problems with the equipment stopped production of a Quick Takes Video project. During an attempt to insert a CD, an employee cut her finger on a sharp edge of the poorly designed equipment. Two different types of torts arose in the Product Liability Video. One type, an intentional tort occurred as a result of the implied warrantee when the salesman described the benefits of the editing system. ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... An effective compliance oversight team has several tasks in an organization like looking over contracts to ensure said contracts meet all legal guidelines. The team also investigates future and present clients of the business and turns in written reports of the team s findings. The team also gives its company a risk analysis of its endeavors reporting to management in writing. An effective compliance oversight team is an immeasurable asset to any company. The purpose of the team is to minimize the financial, name or brand, organizational, and safety risks. A company is dependent upon maximizing profits and building name recognition, without an effective compliance oversight team this would not be possible. Effective Training and Education for Roles and Responsibilities Ensuring the proper and effective training for jobs the employees do remains a function of management. A subject matter expert should provide the training to ensure smooth, safe, and effective standards of performance. An effective training and education program within a company allows the business to flourish. Proper training and ensuring the employees had the necessary resources prior to putting the new equipment in the production environment may have prevented the situation from becoming unproductive. Effective and Efficient Framework A company requires both formal and informal mechanisms to coordinate the risk ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

31. Before the Melting Pot by Israel Zangwill A lot of what we read today about out history, is told to us through wartime victories and tragedies, slavery, and political power. The book, Before the Melting Pot gives a great account of how much ethnicity factored into these ideas and how New York City was made into the melting pot of culture we see today. The book starts out in New Amsterdam, detailing the importance of The Dutch West India Company and its importance in trade; including the African slave trade. The citizens of New Amsterdam had little to no say in governmental decisions. At times, there were citizen advisory boards created, and a director general that made decisions, but for the most part even these issues were at the mercy of the Dutch West India Company s control. More specifically, the commander and ruler named Peter Stuyvesant was the director general that made all the Dutch West India Company s decisions in New Netherland, until the English took over power. The book goes into detail about the people over the courses of their lives, more specifically, three different generations of men starting with those present at the English acquisition of New Netherland in 1664, the sons of these men who stayed in New York City, and then their grandchildren. She also discusses the French, the Jews; Dutchmen already present there, Africans, and Englishmen. The Dutch had little to no trouble getting along because the culture was already established there, and community was bound by religion, and the Dutch ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

32. Havisham by Carol Ann Duffy Essay In Havisham, Carol Ann Duffy creates an interesting character. Write about the way the character is created, and compare this with the way other characters are created in three other poems. You should compare it with one poem by Simon Armitage and two poems from the pre 1912 poetry bank. In Havisham, Carol Ann Duffy explores the character of Mrs Havisham and develops her by using vivid imagery and metaphors. She starts the poem with Beloved sweetheart bastard which is an oxymoron, used to display her mixed emotions about love and the man who jilted her. The plosive sounds of b and d reinforce her angry tone and helps show how she mocks romance. She is displayed as a bitter, hateful character who seeks revenge, shown with not a ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Havisham and The Laboratory link not only because of their sinister characters but because both poems have a strong use of colours. In Havisham colours are used to create a contrast between a white veil which is the colour of virginity and purity, and a red balloon which can be the colour of love and sex but also for anger, hatred and embarrassment. Duffy uses this as a way to explore all the feelings and emotions of the character and could be interpreted as Duffy trying to make the audience have sympathy for Mrs Havisham. The Laboratory uses colours to create a superficial character who doesn t see the poison as dangerous or deadly, but as some sort of treasure. She refers to gold oozings and the exquisite blue as if to think of them as magical potions and not poisons. This is done to create an almost naivety to her character and suggests that she doesn t understand how dangerous her actions are. The Laboratory is set out in rhyming couplets to create a playful rhythm to show the character s childish behaviour, and how she may not be fully aware of her dangerous her actions are. As the poem starts, the speaker mentions only one woman who she wishes to poison. Yet as the poem continues, she mentions other women who ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

33. Compare And Contrast American Terrorism Vs French Counter... French Counter terrorism compared to the UN Charter The struggle against international terrorism has become more of a serious issue since 9/11, but France has treated counterterrorism which is the strategies that the government and military used for decades in respond to any terrorist acts. The French government views counterterrorism whether domestic and foreign in the same manner. France treats the enemy combatant at a high priority level, while America has now gain universal acceptance since 9/11. However, the French governments view the threat of terrorism differently from the United States. Although France considers Islamic terrorism a major threat, it does not view terrorist actions as an act of war against France or against the ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... While, the French government surveillance controls the practical capacity of terrorist; the UN Charter is committed to freeze and seized any terrorist activities that intimidate a country. Both the UN charter and France have to follow the rule of law which is to fairly apply and enforced the principle of law. This had to be changed after the National Security Agency (NSA) former contractor Edward Snowden whistleblower leaked highly classified government surveillance in the United States (US) It has had a material impact on our ability to generate insights as to what terrorist groups around the world are doing,. (Leopold, J., February 25).This did not only affect the US but it affected the United Kingdom s Government Communications Headquarter (GCHQ) that is responsible to provide signal intelligence to the British Government. As a result of Snowden leaked of information it impacted on the terrorist intelligence service worldwide. After 9/11 the terrorist intelligence has been working a little better than before but with profound impact on security agencies after extremist groups, including Islamic State and Al Qaeda, used them to learn about the spy agencies techniques, allowing them to train members to avoid detection. (Sanderson, A. (2015, May 26). To wrap it up, now with the damages conducted ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

34. The Myth Of The Spoiled Children When regarding helicopter parenting, most of the time there is a misconception of what this type of parenting is really about. In which, I was included in this misconception, as before reading an excerpt from Alfie Kohn s book, The Myth of the Spoiled Child: Challenging the Conventional Wisdom about Children and Parenting, I thought every aspect of helicopter parenting was bad for children. However, Kohn s excerpt from his book has changed my point of view on excessive parenting. As before reading this excerpt I thought helicopter parents were overbearing with their children, but now I see them just as parents trying to carry out what is best for their children. Except I agree with Kohn to a certain extent, since not all helicopter parenting ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

35. The War Called Operation Iraq Freedom Mainstream media has extensively covered the war called Operation Iraq Freedom where thousands of our armed forces were killed leaving millions without their mother and father. It has been said that this was a senseless way that should have never begun; in the same manner, it is a war that many feel was needed and very necessary. The purpose of my extended is to uncover the facts of this topic that has been considered off limits and inappropriate especially in the mainstream media. In efforts to uncover the facts, there are many questions that must be answered; however, in making the attempt to answer any question, the questions leads into millions of other unanswered questions. For instance, is this war between Afghanistan and the United ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... It has been said that the reason for such a war was in fact an effort to protect the interest of certain political and prominent parties that had vested interest in the oil industries. UNOCAL (Union Oil Company of California) is a defunct company that was a major petroleum explorer and marketer in the late 19th century, all the way through the 20th century, and even into the start of the 21st century. This would deliver oil and natural gas from the Caspian Sea through Afghanistan and Pakistan. Due to the civil war in Afghanistan, the development had been blocked. Yet, the government of United States trusted and believed the Taliban and that the Iraqi military would protect the interest of the project. By the late 1990s, after President Clinton was out of office President George W. Bush came into power and gave the Taliban one last chance to vindicate themselves It is said that President Bush, proposed an agreement which insisted that they share power with the United States and said Either you accept our offer of a carpet of gold, or we bury you under a carpet of bombs. (Quote from the www.thedailypaul.com) ) The Taliban allegedly declined which followed the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The terrorists who attacked were not strong enough to terminate the United States in a military way therefore; instead, they attacked something we thought was symbolic The Twin Towers. These two building as the centerpieces of the World Trade Center ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

36. Legalizing Abortion Legalizing Abortion As the rate of abortion has rapidly increased for past several years, it has been an issue that everyone has thought about it at least once. Abortion is the deliberate killing of the weakest and most defenseless among us. There can be plausible reasons that they support abortion. However, I oppose to legalize abortion because not only that parents should accept the responsibility that comes with producing a child, but also it is highly risky for women both physically and mentally and the fact that it is undeniably a murder. Firstly, people need to take responsibility for their actions and accept the consequences. Unwanted pregnancy is often caused by the sexual intercourse for pleasure. We already have learned that ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... If we legalize the abortion, the pain of unborn human beings will be unstoppable in the end. Some people would say that when the baby is fertilized by a rape, it would be a horrible for the women. However, in that case, there are a lot of caring systems where professionals give women comfort and get psychological treatment. Also, the baby can be adopted by someone who really wants adoption. By that, the women can at least get rid of the stress of raising kid. I strongly oppose abortion, it should not be taken lightly; as one of the solutions, more of education has to be done for all of the young adults which can teach responsibility of their actions. In addition, a lot of dangerous factors caused on women are very disastrous, which can cause infertility for the whole life or even death. The gravity of death of women is not light. What if the action of killing unborn child is equal to killing grown man and women? Wouldn t legalizing the abortion be considered again? Citation: Bellieni, Carlo V.Buonocore, Giuseppe. Abortion And Subsequent Mental Health: Review Of The Literature. Psychiatry Clinical Neurosciences 67.5 (2013): 301 310. Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection. Web. 7 Mar. 2015. Holmlund, SusannaKaljonen, AnneJunttila, NiinaRaiha, HanneleMakinen, JuhaRautava, Paivi. Psychological Ill Being Experienced By First Time Mothers And Their Partners In Pregnancy After Abortion: A Cohort Study. Journal Of ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

37. Peter Paul Rubens Dichotomy Peter Paul Rubens is known as one of the great artists of the Baroque period. Notorious for his paintings of religious scenes, mythology, and portraits, his style is easily recognizable through his portrayal of large, pale, nude women (Johnson 144, 145). In his painting, Diana and Her Nymphs Departing for the Hunt, Rubens positions Diana, a goddess in Roman mythology, at the forefront of the piece partially topless, reflecting her fertility and sexuality; meanwhile in the background a confrontation between a nymph and satyr display the conflict between nakedness and nudity, male and female, and obscene and control. Diana is the Roman goddess of the moon, the hunt, childbearing, and chastity. According to the Cleveland Museum of Art, different ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... In the article, Erotic Ambiguities: The Female Nude in Art, Helen McDonald, graduate of fine arts at University of Melbourne, argues that the difference between nude and naked can be simplified to the difference between privilege form over matter, male over female, and art over obscenity (McDonald 61). In order for the naked body to survive as art, Rubens must discipline and regulate the body (McDonald 61). In the painting, Diana and her nymphs are nude as opposed to naked because they are bounded by clothes and their body movements seem controlled. However, the satyr is naked instead of nude because his motions appear erratic and forceful, not within bounds, and the nymph is trying to control him. Diana, the goddess of the hunt, epitomizes control in the photo not just through her body language but because she has the power to tame wild animals, which is illustrated with her interaction with the dogs in the painting. Additionally, Nicole Sault in The Savage Body claims that a savage can be distinguished through his nakedness and that savages are typically portrayed as males until they have been controlled, in which they are depicted as female (Sault 4). The male satyr is a clear representation of a savage through his bare, partially animalistic body, while Diana is noticeably calm and composed. The ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

38. The New York City Draft Riots [H1]15.4: The Union Triumphant [keywords] Copperheads New York City Draft Riots Sherman s March to the Sea [/keywords] [learning objectives] By the end of this section, you will be able to: Describe the reasons why many Americans doubted that Abraham Lincoln would be reelected Explain how the Union forces overpowered the Confederacy By the outset of 1864, after three years of war, the Union had mobilized its resources for the ongoing struggle on a massive scale. The government had overseen the construction of new railroad lines and for the first time used standardized rail tracks that allowed the North to move men and materials with greater ease. The North s economy had shifted to a wartime model. The Confederacy also mobilized, perhaps to a greater degree than the Union, its efforts to secure independence and maintain slavery. Yet the Confederacy experienced ever greater hardships after years of war. Without the population of the North, it faced a shortage of manpower. The lack of industry, compared to the North, undercut the ability to sustain and wage war. Rampant inflation as well as food shortages in the South lowered morale. [H2]THE RELATIONSHIP WITH EUROPE From the beginning of the war, the Confederacy placed great hope in being recognized and supported by Great Britain and France. European intervention in the conflict remained a strong possibility, but when it did occur, it was not in a way anticipated by either the Confederacy or the Union. Napoleon III of ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

39. Explain The Principles For Implementing Duty Of Care In... Principles for implementing duty of care in health, social care or children s and young people s settings 1.1 To have the duty of care in a care setting means to provide safety for all service users, to give them choice no matter what their capacity is. It is my responsibility to provide all the best services possible, making sure that their health and wellbeing is being looked after by all staff. You must follow all works policies and procedures to provide the quality of care they need and wish. You must make sure that you are adhering to all their needs in their best interests. Although they may have the right to do things such as go out alone or know passcodes on doors doesn t mean its at their best interests, so you are there to provide the duty of care for that service user and have evidence at why you think it is not for their best interest, and to support them in any choice they make. TC 34.1.1 1.2 Safeguarding is a service which is there to report and discuss any issues concerning the welfare of all service users. If there has been an incident you must report this to safeguarding and then they will follow up in the correct manner. You work along side safeguarding to ensure the safety of all service users and if there has been an incident then you must provide evidence that you have provided them with the quality of care and not neglecting them. You are there to protect all individuals and safeguarding can be there to support what you have done as long as you are ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

40. A Brief Introduction to the Pinch Analysis The economics of industrial production, limitation of global energy supply, and the realities of environmental conservation are an enduring concern for all industries. Wherever you turn, there s another entreaty to save energy, reduce carbon emissions and protect the environment for posterity. Pinch analysis is a tools used to design a heat exchanger networks (HEN) that reduce the energy usage. This paper will be about brief introduction for the pinch analysis, application of the second law of thermodynamics in design heat exchanger network Pinch Analysis: Pinch technology is the technology that provides a systematic methodology for energy saving in processes and total sites. The methodology is based upon first low and second low of ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Minimizing the total entropy produced by heat exchanger network lead to minimizing the use of high energy quality. The entropy can define for single heat exchanger i.e. exchange heat of one hot stream with one cold stream as S=âˆ®â–’dS=âˆ«â–’dq/T S=âˆ«_(T_Hi)^(T_Ho)â–’(C_H dT_H)/T_H âˆ«_(T_Ci)^(T_Co)â–’(C_C dT_C)/T_C ã€–S=Cã€—_C lnâ¡ ã€–(T_Co/T_Ci ã€—) C_H lnâ¡ ã€–(T_Hi/T_Hi ã€—) Sets of heat exchanger network will have constant total entropy when they use same type and amount of utilities. On the other hand, the entropy will vary for networks having different types and amount of utilities. The networks entropy that is used high energy qualities is higher than the one that used low energy qualities. The changes come from using high energy qualities, and this lead to have higher temperature different in some heat exchangers, hence high entropy. Due to that, the total area of the networks also will vary with the use of different utilities since total area is in related with temperature different in heat exchanger. As the temperature different increase the area will decrease. Furthermore, total entropy can be used as objected furcation in mathematical programing. Total entropy can help to find total energy required with from each energy levels in small code. Case study: The objective of this case study is show the change of total entropy when different types of utility used i.e. LP steam, MP steam and HP steam. The case study has three hot streams and three ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

41. How Is Discrimination Different from Prejudice and... University of Phoenix Material Appendix C Part I Define the following terms: |Term |Definition | |Discrimination |The denial of opportunities and equal rights to individuals and groups because of prejudice | | |or for other arbitrary reasons | |Institutional discrimination |A denial of opportunities and equal rights to individuals or groups, resulting from the | | |normal operations of a society ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... Stereotyping can be proved to be wrong, but with discrimination you can not prove it otherwise false, if your denied rights. What are the causes of discrimination? The causes of discrimination are having a certain preference for different groups of people. In example, preferring a man over a woman to be a president of a company, even though they are both qualified the same. Being misinformed also causes discrimination. Often, racism and prejudice cause discrimination. When an negative attitude is formed over a certain group of people, mainly the minority group. They face a social challenge, which leads to adding a denial of certain rights to a person. Although, discrimination is illegal, it happens often. Family type business, who can hire freely can cause a type of discrimination. They have the choice to hire family, verses someone who is an outsider. Often discrimination is from our ancestors. If they had a certain way of living, it is passed on through generation. Often, we feel like we are better than a certain group, or that a certain group may owe us something because of our ancestors. How is discrimination faced by one identity group (race, ethnicity, religious beliefs, gender, sexual orientation, age, or disability) the same as discrimination faced by another? How are they different? Discrimination

42. ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

43. Factors That Influence Rainfall in the United States Factors that Influence Rainfall in the United States A type of precipitation is rainfall and it develops when water vapor condenses into droplets in the atmosphere thus becoming too heavy to stay suspended in the air so gravity causes them to fall. The pattern or occurrence of rainfall in the United States or basically anywhere in the world depends on several factors such as ground elevation, wind directions, location within a continental mass, areas of low pressure, cool fronts, jet streams and even mountain ranges. For instance mountains have an influence on wind and wind is an important feature in rainfall, The windward sides of mountainous islands in the trade wind regime are among the rainiest places on earth, where rains exceed ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... When the pressure is high it means that the air s pressure is higher than the pressure of the surrounding air in the area. A low is where it is lower. This means that where the air is slowly descending the pressure is high and vice versa. So, as air descends, it warms, which inhibits the formation of clouds. This means that the air that descends in high pressure area has to get to high altitudes in some way which is why air actually rises in low pressure areas. Winds tend to blow into low pressure areas because are moves from higher pressure areas into lower pressure areas. When the wind moves into a low area the air moves up and eventually cools and rainfall comes about. Also the low pressure that causes the air to rise has to do with the Criolis Effect, which is the force caused by the Earth s spin that redirects moving air to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. According to meteorologist Tony Pann, who works with Coriolis Effect stated, With the Coriolis effect, air circulates in patterns that depend on latitude. At the mid latitudes of the USA, most weather systems move from west to east. However, systems tend to move from east to west near the poles and in the tropic (Pann). The upslope flow is also related low pressure areas which is basically the result of air rising and cooling while being forced to ascend to higher terrain. ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

44. Team Based Structure Of Team Team based structures have become immensely popular in today s work world. This is due to an endeavor by companies to restructure and increase efficiency in order to combat an accretion in competition. Teams have their advantages and their drawbacks, just like any other company strategy. Team based structures are quite engrossing, due to their capability to be utilized by companies in almost any industry. This universal applicability has enabled teams to be structured and utilized in multitudinous ways. Subsequently, companies are still searching and experimenting to find the quintessential structure of work teams. During this ongoing conquest for the ne plus ultra of team based structures, it is incumbent upon companies to consider the ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... When compared to individual efforts, teams provide a more effective way to utilize employee talents. Furthermore, team based structures are an effective means for management to democratize companies and increase employee motivation. To illustrate, individuals on teams report higher levels of job satisfaction than other individuals. Also, a work team generates positive synergy through coordinated effort. The team is constructed to be symbiotic in its member interaction. Positive synergy allows organizations to increase performance. In summary, the primary advantages of using team based structures within an organization are increased employee motivation and a collaboration of diverse knowledge and skills. With the vast amount of benefits which team based structures bring to the workplace, there are also disadvantages which come as well. Primarily, the issue which frequents work teams the most is interpersonal disputes. Incidentally, teams in the workplace typically do not manage conflicts well. Oftentimes disputes arise, cooperation stops, and power struggles ensue which leads to lower level performance. These disputes also lead to a decrease in a team s efficiency with regards to time management. In particular, the storming stage of team formation is the most time wasting. During this stage, team members have not yet learned how to properly employ trust and teamwork. Consequently, this results in increased ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...

45. A Research Study On Quantitative Research A Quantitative Research Study Overview Sheila E. Brooks Stanbridge College Introduction As we continue our discussion in comparing qualitative versus quantitative research, we now focus our attention on quantitative research. In my personal opinion, I feel that quantitative research is harder to understand but breaking the article into sections allows me to understand the basic concepts. This week we will examine and in discuss a quantitative research article. The name of the article is First time mothers: social support, maternal parental self efficacy and postnatal depression written by authors Leahy Warren, McCarthy, Corcoran in 2011. First, I take a look at the abstract to get a general overview of ... Show more content on Helpwriting.net ... However, there is little research that provides a clear definition of what is meant by social support (Leahy Warren et el, 2009). In other words, there is no research which has measured the relationship between social support and maternal parental self efficacy using a domain specific instrument developed and supported by self efficacy model and post natal depression with first time mothers at six weeks post delivery (Leahy Warren et el, 2009) Maternal Parental Self Efficacy and Depression By now, some of you may be asking the same question that I had when I first started reading this article. What is meant by maternal parental self efficacy and post natal depression? It is important to understand these two definitions in order to understand the article. Maternal parental self efficacy is a belief that a parent holds about themselves in terms of being able to care for and parent a child (Leahy Warren et el, 2009). These includes the ability to plan, organize, and execute actions in order to produce the desire results with the belief that there is a strong correlation between the age of the mother and the number of children (Leah Warren et el, 2009). I can t help to think about my own experience as a mother as I read this article. I am a single mother of six children and I can say that my confidence grew more as I ... Get more on HelpWriting.net ...