This tape opens with the end of a Panorama about Margaret Thatcher becoming the longest serving Prime Minister.

There’s a trailer for the new series of QED.

Then, being shown in two parts, The Right Stuff.

The story behind The Right Stuff is quite interesting. Tom Wolfe wrote the book, and Philip Kaufman directed the movie. There’s a very interesting chapter in one of William Goldman’s books about working on a screenplay for the movie, and his creative differences with Kaufman. Talking of Goldman, his chapter on Marathon Man was even better. For this movie, Goldman was interested in the stories of the Mercury astronauts, the main focus of the book, but Kaufman was far more interested in the character of Chuck Yeager, the first man to break the sound barrier, and played here by Sam Shepard at his coolest.

His wife is played by Barbara Hershey. They’re the kind of couple who race each other on horseback, which he does the night before he’s supposed to be going up to break the sound barrier, falls off his horse and breaks a couple of ribs.

He can’t lean over to secure the hatch of the experimental aircraft, so his mechanic fashions him a handle, an inanimate carbon rod.

He breaks the sound barrier, and the question is raised, where next?

Next, it’s the beginning of the US space program, the Mercury project. We meet the various pilots who become the Mercury Seven. First, it’s Gordon Cooper, played by Dennis Quaid.

Pamela Reed plays his wife Trudy

Fred Ward plays Gus Grissom.

Veronica Cartwright plays his wife Betty.

Then, Jeff Goldblum breaks the news to a room full of important people. “It’s called Sputnik”

Donald Moffat plays Lyndon Johnson.

Jeff Goldblum and Harry Shearer have a recurring role, as recruiters looking for the perfect people to be astronauts. I’m sure the part where they’re showing film of high divers, trapeze artists, surfers and human cannonballs as potential subjects must be apocryphal.

Ed Harris plays John Glenn, a literal Dudley Do-Right, who does everything One Hundred Percent.

Scott Glenn plays Alan Shepherd

Charles Frank plays Scott Carpenter

Rounding out the seven, Scott Paulin plays Deke Slayton.

And Lance Henrickson as Wally Schirra.

There’s a disheartening montage of failed rocket tests. I wonder how many of these were contemporaneous with the events in the film. That seems like a lot of rockets.

There’s a nice scene, after the astronauts decide they need to take more initiative in the direction of the program, where they insist on having a window added to the capsule (sorry – spacecraft). Gus Grissom also insists on a door with explosive bolts, which feels a bit too much like foreshadowing.

That’s where this broadcast of the first part ends.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 4th January 1988 – 22:10

Before the next part, there’s the end of QED – a quite interesting one presented by Paul Daniels, about tricks to improve your memory.

There’s a Public Information Film about Condoms.

Then, Part 2. Goldblum’s back. “They’ve got a man up there. Gagarin.”

Interesting observation – the shot of the astronauts walking down a long corridor, that’s been parodied and homaged ad infinitum, isn’t actually in slow motion. It looks possibly a little overcranked, but it’s definitely not full slow-mo.

There’s some playing with the audience as to which of the astronauts would be the first into space. John Glenn is commonly remembered as the first, but his was later, the first to do multiple orbits. The first Mercury astronaut in space was Alan Shepherd. And I believe the anecdote, enacted here, about him having to urinate into his suit because they had him sitting on the launch pad for hours (“It’s only a 15 minute flight”) is true.

The next up is Gus Grissom, and his story has a tinge of tragedy. After splashdown, he’s shown starting to panic while waiting for the rescue helicopter to hook the capsule, then from the outside we see the hatch blow, and Gus jumps out of the craft. He claimed that the hatch blew on its own, but the general suspicion was he’s blown the hatch himself, either deliberately or accidentally. The tragedy is multiplied when we’re reminded at the end of the film that Grissom was one of the three Apollo 1 astronauts who died in a fire in their command module, during a routine test on the launchpad.

When it comes time for John Glenn’s flight, the first in the newer, less thoroughly tested rockets, there’s one of my favourite scenes in the whole film. The launch is delayed, and vice president Lyndon Johnson is sitting in a car outside Glenn’s home, and he wants to go and meet Glenn’s wife, reassure her, and basically puff his image. But We’ve met Glenn’s wife already, and we know she has a stammer, and doesn’t want to be on TV. The other wives are with her, backing her up. So Johnson decides to escalate it to the highest levels of Nasa. Due to the delay, Glenn is brought out of the capsule, and he’s told his wife is on the phone and it’s urgent.

HEAD OF PROGRAM John, there's a problem with your wife. JOHN GLENN Is it serious? HEAD OF PROGRAM We think it is. There's a phone hookup, we've got her on it. JOHN GLENN (on telephone) Annie? It's me. Are you all right? Tell me what's wrong. ANNIE GLENN (heavily stammering) Johnson... wants me... on... T... V... JOHN GLENN The Vice President? HEAD OF PROGRAM Tell her to let him in with the networks, John. It's coverage, you know. It's important, John. JOHN GLENN Annie. Listen to me. Are you listening? If you don't want the vice president or the TV networks or anybody else to come into the house then that's it as far as I'm concerned. They are not coming in. And I will back you up all the way on this a hundred percent and you tell them that. Okay? I don't want Johnson or any of them to set as much as one toe inside our house. ANNIE GLENN OK JOHN GLENN You tell them that astronaut John Glenn told you to say that. (Laughing) All right? ANNIE GLENN (Laughing, relieved) Yes. JOHN GLENN I'll talk to you in a little while. HEAD OF PROGRAM (angrily picks up the receiver) Can't do that John. The Vice President is the head of the programme. You've got to think of the broader interests of this project. JOHN GLENN You're WAY out of line here. HEAD OF PROGRAM I'm out of line? JOHN GLENN YES SIR! HEAD OF PROGRAM I'm running this show here. JOHN GLENN We'll see about that. HEAD OF PROGRAM Yeah? Well I'm thinking of changing the order of flight assignments. DEKE SLAYTON Oh yeah? Who you gonna get? HEAD OF PROGRAM Who am I gonna get? SCOTT CARPENTER You heard what he said. The head of program realises he's inches from a mutiny. HEAD OF PROGRAM Just take it easy, fellas. ALAN SHEPHERD Step aside, pal.

I love that scene.

During Glenn’s orbits, fellow astronaut Gordo Cooper has gone to Australia to use one of their radio telescopes so they can keep in contact with Glenn as he’s orbiting. He meets one of the locals. “See that old bloke over there? He knows the moon. He knows the stars. He knows the Milky Way.” He’s played by David Gulpilil, seemingly the only Aborigine actor Hollywood ever cast.

While Glenn is orbiting the Earth, there are various technical issues, and these are intercut with the Aborigines around a campfire, and as the sparks from the campfire are rising in the night, Glenn sees strange lights outside his capsule.

After Glenn’s flight and dramatic re-entry, the film can’t resist returning to see what Chuck Yeager is doing, and intercuts him taking another dangerous test flight with the astronauts being entertained by a naked woman doing a fan dance. I think William Goldman was right when he observed that Philip Kaufman was far more interested in Yeager and test pilots than he was the astronauts. The scene is played to make us think that this might be Yeager’s last flight, as he has to eject and falls from the sky, but when the ambulance arrives at the crash site, he’s walking away from it.

I’ve definitely grown fonder of this movie over time. I think the first time I saw it, I was a bit bored by it, but now I can really enjoy it. I ought to, as I’m a sucker for space movies, Apollo 13 being my favourite film of all time. One hundred per cent.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 6th January 1988 – 22:20 (Not Christmas but definitely new year)

After this, there’s a look at programmes for tomorrow.

There’s some Weather, then a public information film on electric blankets.

Then BBC1 closes down.