ABOUT THE GAME STUDIO

About Petroglyph Games

At Petroglyph, we are always looking for new team members who share our passion. We are an independent company with talented people and a strong culture which gives us the flexibility to create the kind of games we all want to play. Our work environment is open, fun, and casual, allowing individuals to foster their career growth and achieve their greatest potential. Personality, outlook, work ethic, and motivation are just as important to us as industry-leading talent. We believe in personal honesty, integrity and openness in all areas of the company.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

For more help you can read our Frequently Asked Questions or contact us.

What is their history and background?

Petroglyph Games was founded in 2003, and have been around for 21 years. Their first title was Conan Unconquered (2019), and have since created a total of 3 video games for 3 different platforms in collaboration with 4 other game studios.

To learn more about Petroglyph Games visit their official website: petroglyphgames.com.

Do they have any upcoming titles?

We don't have any announced upcoming titles on file for Petroglyph Games. As soon as we know about any we'll add them in here!

What companies have they often worked with?

Petroglyph Games has worked with a total of 4 other game studios to create their games, here is the full list:

Funcom (1 games)

Lemon Sky Studios (1 games)

Electronic Arts (1 games)

Frontier Foundry (1 games)

What is their official website?

The official website for Petroglyph Games that we have on file is petroglyphgames.com. Visit their website for news, potential job openings and more!

VISIT petroglyphgames.com

Do they have any job openings or career opportunities?

Unfortunately, we don't have a job openings page on file for Petroglyph Games - there is still a chance this game studio is hiring; feel free to check their website and social channels for more information.

How many video games have they released?

Petroglyph Games has released 3 video games from the years 2019 to 2023. They have created games on the following 3 platforms:

Epic Games Launcher

Origin

Steam

How do I report out-of-date/incorrect details or submit edits?

If you would like to report out-of-date or incorrect information about a game studio please contact us and we will investigate further. For any page edit requests please also get in touch and we will get our team to update accordingly.

SHARE THIS PAGE WITH OTHERS

Spread the word about Petroglyph Games with friends, family & others.

Studio Images (Branding)

Download studio logo as Logo (Square), Logo (Banner) or Logo (Original).

These images are property of Petroglyph Games - please use fairly.

SOCIAL MEDIA

Follow Petroglyph Games on social media if you're a fan.

Name:Petroglyph Games Type:Company Founded:2003 (~21 years ago) Games Created:3 (3 released / 0 upcoming) Official Website:https://petroglyphgames.com/

© NEXARDA™ 2018 - 2024, All Rights Reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

By using our website you agree to the Terms & Conditions, Privacy Policy & Cookie Policy.