Publisher Trion and developer Petroglyph today announced a collaboration to create a new massively multiplayer online real-time strategy game to market, that, according to the official announcement, is "set to define a new genre and standard for online games."

Petroglyph, a developer best known for the Sega-published strategy title *Universe at War *(pictured above), is said to be leveraging Trion's "advanced server architecture" which allows for "massive scalability, dynamic content evolution and cross platform development."

"Petroglyph is extremely excited to be working with a visionary publisher like Trion World Network," said Petroglyph president Michael Legg in the announcement. “Combining Trion’s platform and industry expertise with our GLYPH game technology and our development pedigree will allow us to unleash a groundbreaking MMORTS gaming experience to the world."

Image courtesy Petroglyph

See Also:

First Dawn of War II Screens Revealed

Interview: The Future of WAR

Microsoft Promotes Live with Free Cross-Platform Play

The Australian Breaker Who Broke the Internet

It’s been a week since Rachael Gunn, aka Raygun, competed in the breaking competition at the Paris Olympics. The memes—and the controversy—haven’t stopped since.

NBC Sent 27 Creators to Paris. It Only Needed Snoop and Olympic Athletes

In an attempt to lure in younger viewers, NBCUniversal sent dozens of social media influencers to the 2024 Paris Olympics. But the athletes and entertainers were the ones who went viral.

We Tried 30 Popular Energy Drinks. Here’s How They Rank

The future is here, and it is jacked up on B vitamins, red dye, and taurine. These are the best energy drinks to get from tired to wired.

The 20 Best Movies on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Idea of You, Brittany Runs a Marathon, and American Fiction are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The 36 Best Shows on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Boys, Batman: Caped Crusader, and Fallout are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The 29 Best Shows on Apple TV+ Right Now

Sunny, Constellation, and Presumed Innocent are among the best shows on Apple TV+ this month.

The 21 Best Movies on Apple TV+ Right Now

Fancy Dance, The Velvet Underground, and Argylle are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Apple TV+ this month.

The 40 Best Shows on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

House of the Dragon, The Sopranos, and Industry are just a few of the shows you need to be watching on Max this month.