Extended Family star Abigail Spencer proves family is everything, and not just onscreen with NBC’s latest sitcom.

Abigail Spencer plays Julia, a woman recently and happily divorced from her ex, Jim (Jon Cryer). While co-parenting and sharing a home with Jim is going well, their relationship is shaken up when Julia starts dating the owner of Jim's favorite sports team (Donald Faison). In real life, it sounds like Spencer might have also found the perfect balance between starring in Extended Family while parenting her teenage son.

Here's what you should know about Abigail Spencer and her family life.

Who is Abigail Spencer?

Spencer graced the small screen in the late 1990s, beginning with her role as Becca Tyree in the legendary soap opera All My Children, per the actress’ IMDB page. At the start of her acting career, she did guest roles for a bunch of popular series’ including CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Gilmore Girls, and Bones, to name just a few.

Fans will most likely recognize Spencer, however, for her role as Dana “Scottie” Scott on USA’s Suits across 15 episodes between 2011 and 2019. In 2009, Spencer also appeared on half a dozen episodes of period drama Mad Men and co-starred on Rectify between 2013 and 2016.

True Detective Season 2 as well as Grey’s Anatomy Seasons 14 and 15 also helped showcase Spencer’s acting abilities.

She can now add Extended Family to her impressive résumé.

Is Abigail Spencer married?

In 2004, Spencer married business executive Andrew Pruett, current C.E.O. for NRG Esports, according to his LinkedIn profile. Pruett, who is based in Los Angeles, studied at John Brown University and worked as the global director of iAd Publisher Relations and Business Development for Apple Inc. for several years, and notably spent a decade as an advertising director for the Walt Disney Internet Group.

Like Spencer’s Extended Family character, the marriage didn’t work out, and the couple divorced in 2013. Per TMZ, it was Spencer who began proceedings by filing for divorce in 2012 at the Los Angeles County Superior Court, citing “irreconcilable differences.”

The split appeared amicable, according to TMZ, and Spencer granted Pruett joint legal and physical custody of their then-3-year-old son, Roman Pruett.

RELATED: Quantum Leap Just Made a Huge, Surprise Connection to the OG Series

These days, Spencer is reportedly single and focused on her son and her career.

Does Abigail Spencer have kids?

Before parting ways, Spencer and Pruitt had son Roman in 2008. Roman can often be found on Spencer’s Instagram page, including in a Mother’s Day post earlier this year, with several photos and video clips of the mother and son.

“Becoming your mother has been the greatest adventure & the wildest ride,” Spencer wrote. “Heart-expansion-overload.”

Over the summer, Spencer and the teen boy visited their “happy place” in Paris before celebrating Roman’s 15th birthday in September, as Spencer described how his entry into the world changed her life forever.

“I fell into unconditional love & the deepest journey of life,” Spencer wrote on Instagram. “Honored your soul chose me to be your mother, Roman. Love you so… to the moon & back. Find what you love & make a whole life out of it.”

While fans adore Spencer’s sweet tributes for her real-life son, we’re sure to also adore her character as Julia in Extended Family.

Onscreen, Julia and Jim’s primary focus is their young son and adolescent daughter, though things may get a little sticky once Julia brings her new boyfriend, Trey (Donald Faison) into the mix. According to the show’s bio, the “new unconventional family has to learn how to navigate life, love, and every awkward situation in between."

Extended Family premieres Saturday, December 23rd at 8/7c on NBC, with new weekly episodes returning Tuesday, January 2nd at 8:30/7:30c on NBC. All episodes will be available to stream next day on Peacock.