• Andrew Pruett was born on 1 February 1980 in the USA

• Studied at John Brown University and majored in Broadcasting

• Ex-husband of actress Abigail Spencer, married in 2004 and divorced in 2013

• Currently dating Kristin Dawn Chenoweth

• Abigail Spencer is an actress known for "Mad Men", "Suits", and "How I Met Your Mother"

Andrew Pruett Short Biography

Best known as the ex-husband of actress Abigail Spencer, Andrew Pruett was born under the zodiac sign of Aquarius on 1 February 1980, in the USA, . Pruett was a student of John Brown University, where he majored in Broadcasting. He is also known for working for Apple, after which he became the CEO of NRG eSports. He was also briefly engaged with The Walt Disney Company. He has a net worth estimated at over $2 million, while that of his ex-wife is reputedly over $3 million, as of mid-2024..

Relationship Status

Pruett and his ex-wife, Abigail Spencer, met through a mutual friend in 2004, and exchanged vows in the same year, in a private ceremony. In 2008, they welcomed their first child, a son named Roman. Sadly, their relationship fell through in 2012 and their divorce was finalized in 2013, with Abigail awarded custody of their child. Nonetheless, Pruett’s divorce stirred some drama, as his ex-wife stated that he bullied her, allegations made in the wake of their battle for custody with the whole event covered by the press.

“He is verbally abusive and a bully”, Spencer stated. She then added that she avoids talking to him while alone, as she doesn’t want to be the subject of verbal abuse. Some people defended Pruett, saying that the actress was making things up, and trying to make her ex- look bad. After the divorce from Abigail, Andrew began dating Kristin Dawn Chenoweth.

Ex-Wife Abigail Spencer

Abigail Spencer was born under the sign of Leo, on 4 August 1981, in Gulf Breeze, Florida, USA.

She is best known as the actress who has been a part of some of the most acclaimed and beloved TV projects as of today – “Mad Men”, “Suits” and “How I Met Your Mother”. Abigail spent her formative years in her hometown alongside her two brothers, Yancy Spencer IV and Sterling Spencer, and her parents Lydia Ann Brown and Yancy Spencer III. Spencer’s father is well-known as a skillful surfer in their area, and he’s been surfing since he was 15 years old. Reportedly, the actress is of mixed race and including Cherokee ancestry.

She’s spoken nostalgically about her hometown – “The sand is like sugar. The water is pure turquoise. It’s like the Caribbean.”

Abigail Spencer Career

Spencer began her career in 1998, joining the cast of “All My Children” as Becca Tyree, and having finished with that project in 2000, she worked on “Campfire Stories”. During the early 2000s, Spencer had a series of smaller roles, in projects such as “Are We There Yet?” After that, she was a guest star in “CSI: Crime Scene Investigation” and “Gilmore Girls”, and in 2006 played the main character in the TV movie “Introducing Lennie Rose”.

In the same year, she starred as Angela Henson in “Angela’s Eyes”, an excellent student who discovers that her parents are connected to the CIA. Then in 2007, Spencer could be seen in “Ghost Whisperer”. She made her big breakthrough in 2009, when she was cast to play Suzanne Farrell in “Mad Men”, which follows the stories of the employees of an advertising firm. As of 2011, she played Alice, one of the main characters in the film “Cowboys & Aliens”.

Latter Career

In 2012, the actress appeared in “Burning Love” and in the same year joined the cast of “This Means War” in the role of Katy. In 2015, she played Gena Brune in six episodes of “True Detective”, and in the following year landed the role of Lucy Preston in “Timeless”, which follows the story of a criminal who tries to steal a time machine and change the past of America, intending to destroy it. “Timeless” received a generally positive response from the audience, and as Abigail put it, the support she got from her fans was overwhelming.

In the next year, she began appearing in “Grey’s Anatomy”, as Megan Hunt, one of the main characters’ sister. Her following series was “Reprisal” (10 episodes in 2019) , nine episodes of “Rebel” in 2021, and 13 episodes of “Extended Family in 2023 and ’24.

Other Work

Spencer’s other engagement in entertainment includes being featured on the soundtrack of “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon”, and in “Timeless”. She has also appeared on “The 27th Annual Daytime Emmy Awards”, “Through the Mind’s Eye of Colleen Atwood”, “The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson” and “The Late Late Show with James Corden”.

Overall, Spencer has had almost 70 gigs. An acclaimed actress nowadays, things weren’t so rosy for her when she became engaged with acting, thus she quit it for a year and worked as a nanny and a restaurant host. “I worked a lot and I failed a lot. But the whole time I was training” – she recalls the early period of her career.