Caption : CEO, Andrew Pruett of NRG Esports

Source : Fake Images

Andrew Pruett early life, career and nationality

Andrew Pruett was born on February 1, 1980 in the United States, which makes his nationality American. Andrew’s career began working as the owner and operator of the Sonic Drive-In, where he worked for a year, after which he moved to Walt Disney Studios. There he served as senior coordinator and brand marketer. In 1999, he became the Executive Coordinator of the Walt Disney Internet Group. During his tenure at Disney, he also worked as a sales associate, account executive, advertising and sponsorship sales, senior account executive and West Coast team leader. He spent eight years at Walt Disney, after which he moved to Quattro Wireless as vice president of advertising.

Subtitle : Andrew Pruett at his workplace

Source : esports

Andrew Pruett later became IAD’s Global Director of Publisher Relations and Director of Advertising for the West and South Central US – iAd. He then went to NRG Esports as CEO, where he also currently works. Andrew

Andrew Pruett: wife and personal life

Talking about Pruett’s personal life, he is quite popular as he was previously married to American actress Abigail Leigh Spencer. Abigail, who has appeared in movies like, In My Dream, Cowboys, and Aliens, This Means War is famous for her recurring roles. Andrew and Abigail met through a mutual friend who introduced them to each other. They started dating and were in a relationship for four long years.

Subtitle : Andrew with his wife Abigail Leigh Spencer

Source : Shutterstock

In the year 2004, they decided to turn their love into a stronger marriage bond. The couple married in a private ceremony among family and friends. The two even have a child together, a son named Roman Pruett. However, things changed for the couple and they decided to end their 8-year long marriage in the year 2012. Their divorce was officially finalized in the year 2013 after which they separated. After the divorce, he was linked to another actress, Kristin Chenoweth. Some sources also cited that they were dating.

Andrew Pruett: Net Worth

With an impressive career track record, Pruett is without a doubt the consummate man. Speaking of her monthly income and his salary, all of that is quite private. Therefore, the net worth estimate of him is also a mystery as of now. His ex-wife Abigail has a net worth of $3 million.