Love Actually is a holiday favourite, with millions watching it every year in the lead-up to Christmas. The 2003 movie delivers all the feels from love lost and found to deaths and marriages, with plenty of laughs along the way. Here's what the main cast is doing now.

Hugh Grant

Hugh Grant played the newly elected British Prime Minister David, who found he was falling for a staff member. One memorable moment features Hugh dancing in the halls of 10 Downing Street to the song Jump by The Pointer Sisters. However, Hugh hated that scene.

"I saw it in the script and I thought, 'Well, I'll hate doing that'. I didn't fancy doing the dance at all, let alone rehearsing it," Hugh told Variety this year.

"To this day, there's many people, and I agree with them, who think it's the most excruciating scene ever committed to celluloid. Then some people like it. But I will give myself this credit... it was my idea to have that secretary lady catch me. Genius."

Since Love Actually Hugh has continued acting, starring on the big and small screen with the likes of Sarah Jessic Parker, Henry Cavill, Halle Berry, Meryl Streep, Matthew McConaughey and Nicole Kidman. He also has three movies due out next year.

Emma Thompson

Emma Thompson played the prime minister's sister Karen, whose heart-breaking storyline has her questioning her marriage. She revealed this year she knew the grief and pain her character experiences from her own marriage to Kenneth Branagh, who had an affair with her friend Helena Bonham Carter.

"I was utterly, utterly blind to the fact that he had relationships with other women on set," she told The New Yorker. "What I learned was how easy it is to be blinded by your own desire to deceive yourself. I was half alive. Any sense of being a lovable or worthy person had gone completely."

However Emma moved on to find love with her second husband, actor Greg Wise, and remains an A-list actor. Some of her blockbuster hits include Men In Black 3 and Men In Black: International, Saving Mr Banks, Nanny McPhee and the Harry Potter films.

Liam Neeson

Liam Neeson played the recently widowed Daniel, who now has to bring up his stepson Sam. Helping Sam through his first time falling in love helps Daniel move on as well.

Liam Neeson cemented his reputation in Hollywood well before Love Actually with lead roles in Schindler's List, Star Wars: The Phantom Menace, Les Misérables and Gangs of New York. Since 2003, he has most famously starred in action thrillers such as the Taken franchise and Unknown.

Tragedy struck Liam when he lost his wife Natasha Richardson after a tragic skiing accident in 2009. "Plenty of times I've thought about this film and my own life. Love Actually, that's the way it is. That's the tapestry of life," he told Hello magazine.

Colin Firth

Colin played writer Jamie, who escapes to France after discovering his girlfriend has cheated on him with his brother. There he meets Portuguese housekeeper Aurélia and before long, realises he is falling in love with her.

Over the years Colin has played the perfect romantic lead, from Mr Darcy in Pride and Prejudice to, well, Mr Darcy in the Bridget Jones's Diary sequels.

He has won an Academy Award, two British Academy Film Awards, a Golden Globe Award and three Screen Actors Guild Awards.

SHOP

Dog lovers - here's the perfect Christmas gift for your fur baby

Custom phone cases: Save 10% and level up your summer style

Shop TikTok's dessert explosion boxes for the ultimate Christmas surprise

Despite often playing the romantic lead, Colin says he is far from that himself. "I'm not necessarily an optimist in terms of romantic love. I'm not the type of romantic who enjoys the weepy movie and then sighs sweetly about it. I'm more interested in the obstacles and the impossible than I am in resolution and happiness."

Alan Rickman

Alan Rickman plays Karen's husband and design agency head Harry, whose ego is stroked when he starts to receive romantic attention from his secretary Mia.

Alan had already received critical acclaim with supporting roles in Die Hard and Sense and Sensibility, and leading roles in films such as Truly, Madly, Deeply. After Love Actually, he is probably best remembered for playing Severus Snape in the Harry Potter films.

Sadly Alan died of pancreatic cancer in January 2016 at the age of 69.

Bill Nighy

Bill Nighy starred as rock'n'roll legend, Billy Mack who tries to prove his critics wrong by getting the Christmas number-one spot for his latest single. He won Best Supporting Actor at the BAFTAs in 2003 for his portrayal of the fading pop star.

His character has some great one-liners, which he never gets sick of hearing from fans. "It was a big and important thing for me and changed the way I went to work. I'll never get bored talking about it," he told ITV's This Morning. "People have used it for all sorts of purposes to get through dark times... there's nowhere in the world where people don't watch it on a regular basis, every Christmas."

Bill slaos appeared in two Pirates of the Caribbean sequels, The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel, About Time and the 2022 TV drama The Man Who Fell to Earth.

Martine McCutcheon

Martine McCutcheon played tea girl Natalie, who works for the British Prime Minister and despite trading jabs and their difference in status, she manages to win his heart.

Since filming Love Actually, the former EastEnders star has played parts in a few TV series and does guest appearances on reality and talk shows in the UK. In 2011, she revealed she had been diagnosed with myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) and in 2017 she was diagnosed with Lyme disease.

Martine still keeps in touch with Love Actually co-star Hugh Grant. "He had an award given to him a couple of years ago and he asked myself and Bill Nighy to come along and support him. That was the last time I actually saw him but we tweet and message each other once in a while and check in and see how we're doing," she told the MailOnline.

Keira Knightley

Keira Knightley was just 18 when she played the role of newlywed Juliet in Love Actually. While we get to see how happy she and her new husband Peter (Chiwetel Ejiofor) are at their wedding, Peter's best man Mark is secretly in love with Juliet.

In an interview in 2018, Keira had to be reminded of who she chooses in the end after admitting she'd watched the film only once. "I don't remember! Who do I end up with in Love Actually? I'm with my husband, aren't I? Aren't I with Chiwetel Ejiofor?" she asked.

Last year, the mother of two revealed to Entertainment Weekly that she still hadn't re-watched the movie. "No, I have not watched the film again. Yes, I know that I stay with my husband," she said.

Andrew Lincoln

Andrew Lincoln plays the best man to Juliet's husband Peter, waiting until after the couple marries to profess his love for Juliet.

"In one of the most romantic movies of all time, I got to play the only guy who doesn't get the girl," Andrew told Entertainment Weekly. "The story is set up like a prism looking at all the different qualities of love. Mine was unrequited. So I got to be this weird stalker guy," he added. "I kept saying to Richard [Curtis, the film's writer-director], 'Are you sure I'm not going to come off as a creepy stalker?'" he said.

Andrew is best known for playing Rick Grimes in the apocalyptic TV series The Walking Dead and also starring in the movies Made in Dagenham and Penguin Bloom.

Laura Linney

American actress Laura Linney was one of the only leads from across the pond. She pays Sarah, who works for Harry at his design agency and is in love with the creative director Karl (Rodrigo Santoro). While it turns out Karl is also in love with her, the whole relationship is shut down by Sarah's duties as a carer to her brother Michael.

The role of Sarah is one of the few romcom roles that Laura has ever taken. "I don’t think I'm quite seen as romcom material. Love Actually was as close as I was going to get," she revealed in Vulture magazine this year. "And now I don't know what a really successful romcom even looks like. I haven't seen one in a while."

Laura is a highly praised actress, having won two Golden Globes and four Emmys. She is best known for her award-winning performance as Wendy Byrd in the drama series Ozark.

If you want to know what the kids from Love Actually look like today, find out here.

Never miss a thing. Sign up to Yahoo Lifestyle’s daily newsletter.