The trailer has dropped for Hugh Grant's new horror film - and it's looking to test your limits of faith.

Grant originally made his name as a romcom star, appearing in flicks such as Bridget Jones' Diary, Notting Hill and Love Actually.

Fearing being typecasted as a romantic antihero; the actor then shifted his career towards a wider variety of films, appearing in the likes of Paddington, Cloud Atlas and The Gentlemen.

The actor even recently tried his hand as an Oompa Loompa in the recent Willy Wonka film - role which he reportedly hated.

And it appears that Grant is continuing explore new characters, with the latest iteration of his career seeing him play the antagonist in a psychological horror film.

Written and directed by Scott Beck and Bryan Woods, the brains behind John Krasinski's A Quiet Place, Heretic follows the story follows the story of two Mormon missionaries who attempt to convert a man to their religion.

However, the endeavour turns out to be more dangerous than they could've expected after the man locks the women in their house.

Chloe East and Sophie Thatcher will star alongside Grant as the two missionaries.

Watch the trailer below:

The trailer gives us a first glimpse of the small town where Grant and the missionaries live, with the 63-year-old actor's character initially appearing to be warm and welcoming to the pair.

However, things aren't what they initially seem, with the women lured into a game of cat-and-mouse with Grant's character after he locks them in the house against their will.

"I won't keep you, if you choose to leave. But I want you to choose which door to go through based on your faith," he said, informing the women that their decision has 'everything' to do with their wish to leave.

Further details about the plot - and what Grant's character is planning to subject the women to - remains to seen, but it would appear that he's up to no good, as the women are later seen bloodied and afraid while navigating a series of eerie looking backrooms.

How far will he go in testing the two women's faith?

Heretic is currently scheduled to be released in UK cinemas on 22 November, a week after its premiere in the US.

The film comes amid the excitement to see Grant once again reprise his role as the famous Daniel Cleaver for the upcoming Bridget Jones movie.

Titled Bridget Jones: Mad About The Boy, the fourth instalment will see Grant appear alongside Renee Zellweger as she returns to the iconic titular character - with the new movie reported to see Bridget navigate the world of dating as a single mother.

Leo Woodall and Chiwetel Ejiofor, will also star in the film, which will be released on Valentines Day 2025.