It is always good to know about some basic information before you travel to an unknown place, so as to avoid disappointments. To make your journey a pleasant one, find below some interesting information and facts about the island.

Climate in Rodrigues

The island has a tropical climate with warm temperatures throughout the year, varying between 28ºC and 30ºC, and gets slightly hotter during the summer seasons starting from November till April, where you might encounter cyclonic conditions. And during the ‘winter’ season the temperature may drops a little, varying between 18ºC and 27°C, depending on the locations.

Unlike Mauritius, Rodrigues Island has a much dryer climate with occasional short term droughts, with rare instances of rainfalls which turn drained rivers into torrents gushing down to the sea, at times transforming into spectacular but ephemeral waterfalls.

Language

Just like its sister island, Rodrigues share the same mother tongue, the creole pidgin of French based. With a slight difference of the accent, creole is widely spoken throughout Rodrigues, together with the French language which are mostly used by the local media.

Yet, English is usually used in official documents and at the Regional Assembly. There are also some oriental languages such as hindi, bhojpuri, and among others that are spoken by the very few.

Communication

When it comes to communication, Rodrigues lags a little behind, especially with its internet speed.

ADSL and Wi-Fi Internet are accessible, with a number of free Wi-Fi Spots, an initiative by the government.

A number of free Information is available on the spot regarding opening hours. Wifi connection is also available at the hotels across the island, and at certain guest houses with a slow to average internet speed.

There are two mobile phone networks which serve the island, with access to international roaming.

Transportation

By arriving here you will find an eclectic number of transport options to explore this little paradise. Those who prefer to mingle with the locals can opt for the public transport such as the buses which also run to the remotest corners of the island. Slow but fun, the buses can be very packed sometimes.

There are also car, scooter, and motorcycle rental services if you want to travel with or without drivers. The most adventurous way to discover this tiny island is through scooters and bikes, which are easily available at a reasonable hiring price.

Taxi cabs are available as a public means of transportation and a number of them are stationed at various points, namely in the surroundings of the hotels.

You can hire a taxi for a one-off trip from one place to another or by the day depending on your programme.

Rodrigues’ Population

Even though, life is pretty much rough, and with no job around, Rodriguans live to the rhythm of the passing time, calmly and serenely. Discretion, kindness and simplicity are their principal traits. Apart living in a calm and harmonious environment, the Rodriguans are well known for their friendly attitude.

The population of Rodrigues is estimated to be 41, 669 of inhabitants, with the vast majority being Creoles. Inhabitants with jet-black skin, descendants of Malagasy and African slaves and a minority of half-castes, descendants of the first European settlers, form the greater part of the population in Rodrigues. You can also find the inevitable Chinese traders and some Indian civil servants coming from Mauritius.

The main religion is Roman Catholicism with small minorities of other religions like Jehovah’s Witnesses, Hindus, Muslims and Buddhists.

Most of the inhabitants are of mixed African and French descent and there is a minority of mixed-raced peoples; descendants of the first European settlers. Interestingly, religion, respect of traditions and family are the pillars of the Rodriguan lifestyle.

Here, you will find women playing an active part in the economy of the country. Courageous and determined, you can find them everywhere: at home, in the fields, at the market and even, at the sea catching the octopuses!

Economy

Despite, gaining autonomous status from Mauritius in 10th December 2002, Rodrigues is financially dependent upon its sister island.

The economy of Rodrigues is at a very low base, as most of the economic activities are fishing, stock breeding and cultivation, especially of onions, garlic and chilli. The maize plantations have lost their importance of the once golden days, as rice has nearly become its main substitute as basic food.

You will find many farmers, fishermen, masons, stock breeders who earn their living with a simple philosophy. Due to many fishermen around, the marine resources are being depleted, such as the catch of octopuses, however, the local government has implemented new laws in order to control their reproduction.

Most of the habitant’s income derive from the export of cattle, sea products and food crops, but it is largely in deficit when compared to the costs of the imported products. There have been attempts to establish textile units but these endeavours have been vain to the extent that supply in water has been the main problem.

With a slow paced lifestyle, and less developments around, the island cannot generate enough job opportunities for its youths, and this is one of the major cause of the brain drain.

Working in governmental administrative sector is considered as a privilege, however, young people are being encouraged to become entrepreneurs in different sectors such as agriculture, food processing, Information Communication and Technology, tourism and so on.

Lately, the economy of the island has nevertheless undergone certain fundamental changes: tourism has become the focused sector. Rodriguans have now become aware of the value of their island but also, of their handicrafts such as basketwork, embroidery, condiments, and honey that they have intelligently developed.

Fortunately, they do not seem to want an excessive establishment of tourist infrastructure so as to preserve the calm, charm and authenticity of their island.

Currency

The currency used in Rodrigues is the Mauritian rupees.