On Friday 12 April at 12.15 hrs. Willem Ouwehand will defend his PhD thesis ‘De smalle marge van het ambt. Het politiek leiderschap van minister-president Joop den Uyl’ (The small margins of the job. The political leadership of Prime Minister Joop den Uyl).

Although Prime Minister Joop den Uyl took office over 50 years ago, the interplay between his political persona, his leadership style, and the socio-political and economic climate of the 1970s continue to capture the imagination. In his dissertation, Willem Ouwehand contributes to the knowledge about Joop Den Uyl in his role as Prime Minister (on behalf of the Partij van de Arbeid), the opportunities and obstacles of the Dutch Prime Minister’s office, and the theory of political leadership.

Den Uyl’s leadership style

After a theoretical exploration, Ouwehand offers an analysis of the political context of the 1970s: it shows the limited possibilities for realizing the ambitious reform agenda of the Den Uyl government (1973-1977). In addition, the thesis provides a profile of Joop den Uyl's personality and leadership style, characterised by great self-confidence, task orientation and, above all, the conviction of being able to influence political events.

Den Uyl's leadership is described and analysed in two case studies. They cover substantial challenges facing the Den Uyl government at the time in two complex issues that occupied the minds of the public and remain in the public and political spotlight of today: Suriname's independence and the ‘abortion issue’.

Decolonisation

In a first case study, Ouwehand examines the process towards Suriname's independence and the non-realisation of independency in the Netherlands Antilles. It shows how Den Uyl's leadership took shape and then led to different outcomes in both countries. Because of his great self-confidence, Den Uyl grossly misjudged the possibilities of putting decolonisation on the Antillean government's agenda. In the process, his limited attention to relational aspects also led to irritation among Antillean interlocutors.

The abortion issue

In a second case study, Ouwehand describes how the ‘abortion issue’ cornered Den Uyl politically and personally and how Justice Minister Dries van Agt was able to profile himself as the political leader of the CDA with the credo 'Ethical Reform'. From the early 1970s, the number of abortions in the Netherlands rose sharply, partly due to the arrival of special abortion clinics.

Although abortion is criminally prohibited, prosecution remains absent. But the working methods of the Bloemenhove clinic in particular caused tension in the cabinet. Advanced pregnancies are terminated at this clinic. Justice minister Dries van Agt tries to take action against this. Den Uyl keeps a low profile on this issue because he personally had a different view from that of his party. He only comes to the fore when the survival of the cabinet is threatened by Van Agt's actions.

The small margins of the job

The case studies show that while Den Uyl had an impact on political events, also his leadership was determined by the small margin of the office of Prime Minister in a coalition government - in which other cabinet members, the coalition parties and certainly his own political party helped determine the possibilities for leadership of the Prime Minister.