Early indications suggest that Pentair’s upcoming $4.53 billion merger with Tyco’s flow control business should not seriously affect the company’s Minnesota presence.

The merger, announced Wednesday, keeps the Pentair Inc. name and has Randall J. Hogan, Pentair’s chairman and chief executive officer, leading the combined operation. The new company will be headquartered in Switzerland, where Tyco is based, but Pentair’s U.S. headquarters will stay in Golden Valley.

“The main U.S. office remains in Golden Valley being led by the same management team with Mr. Hogan continuing as chairman and CEO. In the long term, there are opportunities for growth,” Pentair spokeswoman Betsy Day said in an email response to questions about how the merger will affect the company’s Minnesota presence.

Pentair employs about 15,000 people, about 2,000 of them at the Golden Valley headquarters, at the Colonnade office tower at 5500 Wayzata Blvd., and at plants in Anoka, White Bear Lake and New Brighton. Adding in the Tyco business will double the workforce to about 30,000 employees worldwide.

The merger, which is subject to shareholder approval, is an all-stock deal worth about $4.53 billion, uniting two of the biggest players in water and fluid products systems.

Tyco shareholders will own about 52.5 percent of the combined company, and Pentair shareholders will own about 47.5 percent, the companies said.

The news sent Pentair’s shares up $6.95, or 17.3 percent, to $47.21 in morning trading, while Tyco International Ltd. shares rose $2.35, or 4.4 percent, to $55.87.

The move is part of a plan announced by Tyco last year to break itself into three independent companies, including one for flow control products. The business sells valves and controls for the energy, mining and water markets. It also designs and installs heat management systems for the energy and general process industries.

The deal with Pentair is subject to the completion of the breakup, which Tyco said it still expects to complete by September.

Pentair said the addition of Tyco’s business will boost its global reach and give it greater access to developed and fast-growth regions, while also allowing it to capitalize on growth trends in the energy, infrastructure and industrial sectors.

Golden Valley-based Pentair’s water and fluid solutions business makes products and systems for use in the movement, storage and treatment of water for residential, industrial, commercial, municipal and agricultural uses.

Pentair said it expects the deal to boost its 2013 adjusted profit by about 40 cents per share and help its annual profit pass $5 per share by 2015, largely as a result of cost cuts. At the same time, the company expects to incur about $230 million in one-time costs related to the deal over the next one to two years.

The companies said the deal values Tyco’s flow control business at $4.9 billion, including $275 million in debt and $94 million in minority interest.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.