Landsbankinn has signed an agreement with the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) providing for a 15-year USD 40 million (ISK 5.8 billion) loan in connection with the Bank’s new headquarters at Austurbakki, Reykjavík. The building is expected to achieve BREEAM Excellent certification and the loan is eligible for funding from NIB’s environmental bond proceeds.

Lilja Björk Einarsdóttir, CEO of Landsbankinn: “We have set ourselves clear and ambitious goals when it comes to environmental concerns. The entire design and construction phase of the building has been aimed at achieving a BREEAM Excellent rating. In so doing, we reduce the negative impact caused during the construction and operating lifetime of the building. We were also mindful of the options for more favourable financing an excellent rating would create and the agreement with NIB has proven this to be the case. Since 2015, we have worked with NIB on three very successful projects and this new agreement is a testament to the mutual confidence in our relationship.”

Landsbankinn’s new building has a total of 16,500 square metres. The Bank will utilise just over 10,000 square metres for own activities and the Icelandic State has purchased the so-called North Wing of the building, around 6,000 square metres. The international BREEAM standard evaluates environmental management during the construction and operating phases, energy and water husbandry, selection of environmentally-friendly construction materials and minimisation of various pollution during construction.

Landsbankinn hf. is the largest universal bank in Iceland. The Bank was established in 2008 with a history going back to 1886. It is majority-owned by the Icelandic State Treasury.

The Nordic Investment Bank is an international financial institution owned by eight member countries: Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and Sweden. The Bank finances private and public projects in and outside the member countries.

More about NIB

You may also be interested in

19 July 2024

Information regarding service disruption

Last night and early this morning, the Bank experienced disruptions to several of its services. These disruptions were related to issues that have affected companies around the world.

15 July 2024

Nine entries awarded grants from the Pride Parade Fund

The panel of judges of the Pride Parade Fund of Reykjavík Pride and Landsbankinn have awarded grants to nine entries in this year’s Pride Parade.

12 July 2024

Even easier to start using Landsbankinn’s app

Signing up for Landsbankinn’s app has never been easier – now everyone can try the app without any commitment. This step opens access to Landsbankinn’s services even further.

5 July 2024

Corporate Finance advises the Ministry of Finance on the sale of the State’s shareholding in Íslandsbanki

The Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs has retained Landsbankinn Corporate Finance as independent financial advisor for the management and supervision of the public offering or offerings of the State’s remaining shareholding in Íslandsbanki hf.

4 July 2024

Björn Auðunn Ólafsson hired to Landsbankinn

Björn Auðunn Ólafsson is the newest addition to Landsbankinn Corporate Finance and has already joined the team.

3 July 2024

More information in Polish on landsbankinn.pl

We have now launched a Polish version of our website, in addition to Icelandic and English. The Polish site contains information about our app, payment cards, currency exchange rates, supplementary pension savings, electronic ID, the Auðkenni app and more.

2 July 2024

Even tighter security in Landsbankinn’s app

We have now added settings to Landsbankinn’s app that further enhance security in card transactions and banking. These settings allow you to easily deactivate certain payment card functions in the app and to reactivate them just as easily at your convenience. If necessary, you can activate emergency closure that suspends the function of all of your cards and shuts down access to the app and online banking.

14 June 2024

The Auðkenni app can be used to log in

Landsbankinn’s customers can use the Auðkenni app to log in and to authenticate in online banking and the app. Before long, it will also be possible to use the Auðkenni app for valid electronic signatures. This is particularly useful where there is an Internet connection but no phone connection, and for those who have non-Icelandic phone numbers.

12 June 2024

Amaroq Minerals Capital Markets Day

Amaroq Minerals Capital Markets Day will be hosted in Landsbankinn‘s headquarters at Reykjastræti 6, Thursday, June 13th, from 2:00 pm to 4:00 pm Icelandic time, GMT. The doors open at 1:30 pm and light refreshments will be served after the meeting.

10 June 2024

Warning against phishing attempts

We warn against emails that are currently being sent, ostensibly in Landsbankinn’s name. The email states that the recipient’s bank account with Landsbankinn has been closed and asks people to click on a link to log in. This is an attempt to get people to enter their login information on a fraudulent site.

Landsbankinn hf.

Reykjastræti 6, 101 Reykjavík

Reg. No. 471008-0280

Swift/BIC: NBIIISRE

Tel: +354 410 4000

landsbankinn@landsbankinn.is

Legal notice