Munich, October 29, 2020 - The Nemetschek Group, one of the leading software providers for the construction industry, is one of the strongest-growing mid-sized companies in Germany. This is the result of the study "TOP 100 Ranking of SMEs 2020" carried out by the management consultants Munich Strategy for the Handelsblatt newspaper. This year, the Nemetschek Group took second place, further improving compared to fourth place last year. The business figures for the third quarter of 2020, which the company published today, also show a positive trend despite the challenging environment.

"Long before digitization became a buzzword, Nemetschek, as an industry pioneer, was already involved in digital construction", explains Dr. Sebastian Theopold, founder of Munich Strategy and author of the study, which was conducted for the eleventh time. "In recent years, the company has built up a broad platform around the design, construction and management of buildings. With the Media & Entertainment business unit, Nemetschek has further diversified its portfolio and thus laid the foundation for future growth".

Munich Strategy surveyed over 4,000 German companies from all industries with annual sales between 10 million and 1 billion euros. The "TOP 100" companies were identified based on their long-term growth and profitability. The selection is based on the companies' performance in the years 2015 to 2018/2019, half of which is made up of average sales growth and half of the average EBIT ratio of the companies.

"We are very pleased to be among the top 3," says Dr. Axel Kaufmann, Spokesman of the Executive Board and CFOO of the Nemetschek Group. "The Nemetschek Group supports the construction industry with innovative solutions for the digital transformation. We are well positioned and, thanks to our close customer relationships, the broad diversification in target industries and regions and the increasing share of recurring revenues, we have fortunately coped better with the current situation than initially expected".

The results of the ranking were presented on October 27, 2020 in Handelsblatt and on handelsblatt.com.