Carl Schmitt read The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951), Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (1963), and several essays from Hannah Arendt. By utilizing Schmitt’s extensive comments on Arendt and other novel materials, this essay reconstructs a ‘debate in absence’ between Schmitt and Arendt concerning the nature of totalitarianism, political power, and banality of evil. First, I demonstrate how Schmitt became greatly excited about The Origins, which he (mis)read as an exculpatory document that allowed him to draw an absolute distance between himself and the more racist strains of Nazism. Second, I show how and why Schmitt’s understanding of Arendt became more reserved after he read Eichmann in Jerusalem. Beyond offering a novel empirical starting point for comparing Schmitt and Arendt and providing a comparative account of their understandings of Nazi totalitarianism, power, and political responsibility under totalitarian regimes, the article also contributes to the broader discussions surrounding the nature totalitarianism and on the debates around Arendt’s report on Eichmann.

Responding to the increasingly influential role of Hannah Arendt’s political philosophy in recent years, Hannah Arendt and the Limits of Total Domination: The Holocaust, Plurality, and Resistance, critically engages with Arendt’s understanding of totalitarianism. According to Arendt, the main goal of totalitarianism was total domination; namely, the virtual eradication of human legality, morality, individuality, and plurality. This attempt, in her view, was most fully realized in the concentration camps, which served as the major "laboratories" for the regime. While Arendt focused on the perpetrators’ logic and drive, Michal Aharony examines the perspectives and experiences of the victims and their ability to resist such an experiment. The first book-length study to juxtapose Arendt’s concept of total domination with actual testimonies of Holocaust survivors, this book calls for methodological pluralism and the integration of the voices and narratives of the actors in the construction of political concepts and theoretical systems. To achieve this, Aharony engages with both well-known and non-canonical intellectuals and writers who survived Auschwitz and Buchenwald concentration camps. Additionally, she analyzes the oral testimonies of survivors who are largely unknown, drawing from interviews conducted in Israel and in the U.S., as well as from videotaped interviews from archives around the world. Revealing various manifestations of unarmed resistance in the camps, this study demonstrates the persistence of morality and free agency even under the most extreme and de-humanizing conditions, while cautiously suggesting that absolute domination is never as absolute as it claims or wishes to be. Scholars of political philosophy, political science, history, and Holocaust studies will find this an original and compelling book.

This paper aims to shed light on Hannah Arendt's analysis of the growth of the modern anti-Semitism. She assumes in her monumental masterpiece, The Origins of Totalitarianism (published in 1951) that the identification of the modern anti-Semitism with the rise of the nation-states in Europe is a misleading thought and a mere ready-made explanation. For her, the modern anti-Semitism grew as the European system of nation-states crashed. On the other hand, Arendt, through almost all her writings, has seemed supporting the idea of establishing a Jewish state in Palestine, for that, this paper aims as well to discover Arendt's position towards founding a Jewish homeland, her proposals concerning that issue and her relationship with Zionism.

In the Nazi concentration camp of Theresienstadt, around 150 people rebelled against the Nazis not through violence of attempts to escape but with music. Musical conductor Rafael Scachter brought all the people together using merely his memory and a single piano in a dark basement of the camp, and in singing Verdi’s Requieum, reached a level of excellence that even the Nazis themselves permitted the music (Bor, et al., 1963) (Manivannan, 2016). The Terezin Requiem is one of the most touching tails of resistance against the Nazis, for the fact that the concentration camps weren’t merely focused upon destroying the physical aspect of the person, but rather the cultural and historical aspect as well. As Peter Baehr puts it, while speaking of Hannah Arendt’s views, “…concentration camps sought to swallow people into “holes of oblivion” and eliminate traces of their ever having existed.” (Baehr, 2010) It was in 1950 that Hannah Arendt finally became a citizen of the United States, and it was also that year that she began meeting and developing a romance with Martin Heidegger once again. Hannah Arendt having been a Jew and in Germany for a long period of her life, not merely wrote of her objective ideas but rather funneled her personal experiences into her writing. It was in the same year 1950 that she wrote her seminal work titled Social Science Techniques and the Study of Concentration Camps (Arendt, 1950). She stated critiques of the social sciences and removed key assumptions that the discipline held about the utilitarian, functionalist, and self-interest driven elements of human nature with respect to totalitarianism and concentration camps. This paper will provide an account of the arguments that she provided with regards to the limitations of social science techniques, with the context of the extermination of Jews in concentration camps in Nazi Germany. The paper will begin with certain key definitions and proceed to delineate the various arguments of Hannah Arendt.