That is Carl Schmitt on the right, shown with Ernst Jünger. Schmitt was one of the political theorists who provided the intellectual scaffolding that permitted the construction of the Nazi state. Jünger was a Nazi, too, and served as an army captain in occupied Paris.

According to Wikipedia, by 1943 Jünger had "turned decisively against Nazi totalitarianism and its goal of world conquest, a change manifested in his work 'Der Friede' (The Peace). Jünger was dismissed from the army in 1944 after he was indirectly implicated with fellow officers who had plotted to kill Hitler."

So, in the picture shown above, the guy with the Nazi uniform is the "good guy." Schmitt, it appears, was not, and never became, a "good guy."

I think I knew the names of both Schmitt and Jünger, but I can't say I really knew anything about them. I was alerted to the continuing influence of Schmitt's thinking by Roger Berkowitz, the Founder and Academic Director of The Hannah Arendt Center, at Bard College. In a recent posting to Amor Mundi, the weekly newsletter of the Hannah Arendt Center, Berkowitz references the "Friend/Enemy" theory of politics advanced by Schmitt. Berkowitz linked his own brief comment to an extensive discussion by N.S. Lyons, who produces a blog called "The Upheaval."

I was happy to find out about "The Upheaval," since it is a blog that explores "the shared upheavals of our era, including technological and cultural change, the ideological revolution consuming the West, the rise of China, and the crisis of liberalism." I am definitely interested in these topics, so I have now signed up for one more blog! You can sign up for "The Upheaval," too, if you are of a mind to, by clicking right here.

Getting back to Schmitt, "The Upheaval" discusses his career and thinking at length. If you are willing to spend a little time doing so, you can find out a lot about Schmitt from Lyons' blog posting titled," The Temptations of Carl Schmitt." According to Lyons, Schmitt was not only a political theorist, but the "Crown Jurist of the Third Reich," and Lyons says that Schmitt's thinking has, today, "returned to center stage."

From the liberal state’s flailing degradation of its popular legitimacy, to the emergence of governance by permanent emergency, to the radical polarization of politics, to the birth of post-modernism and the dominance of identity: Schmitt foreshadowed all of these things. Indeed, to read Schmitt in 2023 can easily present the alluring feeling of having opened a hidden dialogue willing to honestly diagnose the undercurrents so obviously raging beneath the chaos, absurdity, and official obfuscations of a Weimar America.

Even more significantly – but far less well known or understood – Schmitt was among the first to truly wrestle with how we should collectively respond to the arrival of what he labeled the “Age of Technicity,” in which, in a disenchanted world, technology now threatened to dominate Man. But his proposed solution would in the end only help birth the modern techno-nihilist total state and provoke a cataclysm of violence.

To read Schmitt seriously is to flirt with the abyss. It is both to see hard truths revealed and to listen to the false whispers of a snake. Nonetheless, or therefore, I believe Schmitt is truly a symbolic man of our moment – just perhaps not in the way either his newfound admirers or long-time detractors, right and left alike, have necessarily thought through.

Lyons goes on to say the following, outlining the fundamental basis of Schmitt's political philosophy: