Everything to Know About the ‘Mean Girls’ Musical Movie Adaptation: The Cast, Tina Fey’s Involvement and More

The MEAN GIRLS musical movie adaptation is officially a go — and creator Tina Fey is ready to bring even more pink to the big screen.

“I’m very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen,” Fey said in a statement to Playbill in January 2020. “It’s been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences.”

Fey wrote the 2004 film Mean Girls, which starred Lindsay Lohan (Cady Heron), Rachel McAdams (Regina George), Amanda Seyfried (Karen Smith) and Lacey Chabert (Gretchen Wieners). Fey, for her part, played teacher Ms. Norbury in the comedy alongside longtime friend Amy Poehler as Mrs. George, Jonathan Bennett as Aaron Samuels, Lizzy Caplan as Janice Ian and Daniel Franzese as Damian.

Fey brought the hit film to Broadway in 2018 and is taking the musical production back to the movies with an all new film — and a few familiar faces. Reneé Rapp will be playing queen B, Regina George, in the upcoming film after previously playing the role on Broadway.

Thank You!

You have successfully subscribed.

Subscribe to newsletters

By signing up, I agree to the Terms and Privacy Policy and to receive emails from Us Weekly

Check our latest news in Google News

Follow Us

Check our latest news in Apple News

Follow Us

“We have an amazing cast,” Fey said during a February 2023 appearance on Late Night With Seth Meyers. “I’m super excited about the cast.”

Scroll down for everything to know about the new MEAN GIRLS film:

Credit: Shutterstock (3)

Everything to Know About the 'Mean Girls' Musical Movie Adaptation: The Cast, Tina Fey's Involvement and More

The MEAN GIRLS musical movie adaptation is officially a go — and creator Tina Fey is ready to bring even more pink to the big screen. "I'm very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen," Fey said in a statement to Playbill in January 2020. "It's been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences." Fey wrote the 2004 film Mean Girls, which starred Lindsay Lohan (Cady Heron), Rachel McAdams (Regina George), Amanda Seyfried (Karen Smith) and Lacey Chabert (Gretchen Wieners). Fey, for her part, played teacher Ms. Norbury in the comedy alongside longtime friend Amy Poehler as Mrs. George, Jonathan Bennett as Aaron Samuels, Lizzy Caplan as Janice Ian and Daniel Franzese as Damian. Fey brought the hit film to Broadway in 2018 and is taking the musical production back to the movies with an all new film — and a few familiar faces. Reneé Rapp will be playing queen B, Regina George, in the upcoming film after previously playing the role on Broadway. “We have an amazing cast,” Fey said during a February 2023 appearance on Late Night With Seth Meyers. “I’m super excited about the cast.” Scroll down for everything to know about the new MEAN GIRLS film:

Credit: Shutterstock (3)

Everything to Know About the 'Mean Girls' Musical Movie Adaptation: The Cast, Tina Fey's Involvement and More

The MEAN GIRLS musical movie adaptation is officially a go — and creator Tina Fey is ready to bring even more pink to the big screen. "I'm very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen," Fey said in a statement to Playbill in January 2020. "It's been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences." Fey wrote the 2004 film Mean Girls, which starred Lindsay Lohan (Cady Heron), Rachel McAdams (Regina George), Amanda Seyfried (Karen Smith) and Lacey Chabert (Gretchen Wieners). Fey, for her part, played teacher Ms. Norbury in the comedy alongside longtime friend Amy Poehler as Mrs. George, Jonathan Bennett as Aaron Samuels, Lizzy Caplan as Janice Ian and Daniel Franzese as Damian. Fey brought the hit film to Broadway in 2018 and is taking the musical production back to the movies with an all new film — and a few familiar faces. Reneé Rapp will be playing queen B, Regina George, in the upcoming film after previously playing the role on Broadway. “We have an amazing cast,” Fey said during a February 2023 appearance on Late Night With Seth Meyers. “I’m super excited about the cast.” Scroll down for everything to know about the new MEAN GIRLS film:

Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock

What Is the New ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Movie About?

The film is based on the Tony-nominated Broadway musical which ran from 2018 to 2021 and had 883 performances. The musical, for its part, was originally adapted from the 2004 movie by Fey.

Credit: John Lamparski/Getty Images

Is There a ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Trailer?

One month after fans got a first glimpse at the movie musical as a preview for Taylor Swift’s Eras Tour concert film, Paramount released the film’s first official trailer. Set to “Get Him Back!” by Olivia Rodrigo, the sneak peek featured several iconic moments from the original 2004 movie, including Regina’s cheese fries, the Plastics’ Burn Book, the school-wide showdown, the “Jingle Bell Rock” dance scene and more.

The preview also included clips from several of the musical’s biggest numbers, including Karen’s Halloween song “Sexy” and Regina’s revenge tune “World Burn.”

“Get in loser,” Rapp says straight to the camera as Regina George.

Credit: Paramount

Is There a ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Poster?

The movie’s first official poster was released alongside the full-length trailer. Dubbed “a new twist from Tina Fey,” the image features Rapp as Regina sporting rings that spell out the film’s name. “Plastic is forever,” reads the movie’s tagline.

Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock

When Will ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Premiere?

The movie musical will premiere in theaters on January 12, 2024.

Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock

Which Original ‘Mean Girls’ Movie Stars Are Coming Back?

Fey confirmed in February 2023 that she and Tim Meadows, who played principal Mr. Duvall in the 2004 film, would be back for the musical movie.

Credit: Greg Allen/Invision/AP/Shutterstock

Are Any of the Former ‘Mean Girls' Musical Actors in the Film?

Rapp will return as Regina George after previously taking over the role on Broadway. Ashley Park, who played Gretchen Wieners in the original musical, joined the cast in March 2023. Her role wasn’t initially revealed.

Rapp, who previously portrayed Regina George on Broadway, told Entertainment Tonight she found out she would be reprising her role for the film while walking on the treadmill. “I just finished a day of the [Sex Lives of] College Girls filming and my agent called me,” she shared in December 2022. "My mom rushed into the house ... She was like, 'Renee!' 'cause she obviously knew because everybody in my family and on my team is in cahoots.”

Credit: Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP/Shutterstock

Who Else Is in the ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Cast?

Angourie Rice will play Cady Heron, Auli’i Cravalho is set as Janis 'Imi'ike (formerly Ian) and Jaquel Spivey will portray Damian Hubbard. Senior Year’s Avantika Vandanapu will play Karen Shetty (formerly Smith), the Summer I Turned Pretty star Christopher Briney will portray Aaron Samuels and Love, Victor actress Bebe Wood is set as Gretchen Wieners.

Busy Philipps was announced in March 2023 as Regina’s mom, Mrs. George, while Jenna Fisher will portray Cady’s mom, Ms. Heron. That same month, Deadline confirmed the addition of Mahi Alam as Kevin Ganatra (formerly Gnapoor) and Connor Ratliff as a teacher named Mr. Rapp.

Credit: David Fisher/Shutterstock for SAG Awards

What Does Amanda Seyfried Think About the New ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Movie?

Seyfried, who played Karen Smith in the first film, told Entertainment Tonight in February 2023 that she and her former costars are “100 percent into” making a cameo in the new movie. “It’s been a long legacy for Mean Girls and I think we all kinda need to hang,” she said of her former castmates, noting she’s “still hoping for a miracle” when it comes to Fey bringing her back in some capacity.

Credit: Evan Agostini/Invision/AP/Shutterstock

Who Is Directing ‘MEAN GIRLS?’

Arturo Perez Jr. and Samantha Jayne will be directing the upcoming project. Fey, for her part, is credited as writing the 2004 screenplay, the current screenplay, the script and the stage playbook. Nell Benjamin, meanwhile, has signed on as the lyricist.

Credit: Greg Allen/Invision/AP/Shutterstock

How Long Did the ‘Mean Girls' Musical Run on Broadway?

The musical made its world premiere in October 2017 in Washington, D.C. The production hit Broadway in April 2018 and ran through March 2020. In January 2021, the show closed permanently but it continued to tour. Mean Girls national tour kicked off in Buffalo, New York, in September 2019. The U.S. schedule is ongoing.

Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock

When Did Filming for ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Begin?

The cast began production on March 6, 2023.

Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock

Where Can You Watch ‘MEAN GIRLS?’

Though the film was initially set to stream on Paramount+, Deadline reported in September 2023 that the movie would be getting a full theatrical release.

Credit: Evan Agostini/Invision/AP/Shutterstock

Who Is Jon Hamm Playing in ‘MEAN GIRLS?’

Hamm joined the cast in March 2023 as Coach Carr, according to The Hollywood Reporter. In the original film, Carr famously taught his gym class students about sex — and how not to get “chlamydia and die.”

Credit: BauerGriffin/INSTARimages.com

What’s Rachel McAdams’ Advice for the New ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Cast?

McAdams told Entertainment Tonight in March 2023 that she didn’t think the new Regina George, played by Rapp, “can do any wrong” with the role. “She is amazing,” the Notebook actress said of Rapp.

"She's already got me beat with that voice. So, I'm just excited to see her incarnation,” McAdams added. “It's such a great character. It's so much fun to play, so, I hope she has a great time with it. And I can't wait to see it."

When it comes to whether the OG Regina would make a cameo in the new film, McAdams teased she would “never” say no to Fey “ever.” She gushed over the movie’s creator, saying, “She’s the greatest. So, we’ll see how it all shakes out.”

Credit: MOVI Inc.

Will ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Feature the Full Broadway Soundtrack?

Rapp exclusively told Us Weekly in April 2023 that there will be some changes to both the script and track list. "A lot of it is different. Tina [Fey] is such a creative genius and such a creative freak, and her partner, Jeff Richmond, who does all of the music, is as well. So there's definitely different things," Rapp hinted. "There might be different songs. Some songs that are in the musical version might be in the movie or might not be."

Credit: Jojo Whilden/Paramount

What Songs Are Featured on the ‘MEAN GIRLS’ Track List?

Unveiled in January 2024, the film’s official track list features many of the Broadway show’s biggest songs, including Janis and Damian’s opening number, “A Cautionary Tale,” and the Plastics’ entrance tune, “Meet the Plastics.” Additional songs that made the cut include “Stupid With Love,” “Apex Predator,” “What’s Wrong With Me,” “Sexy,” “Someone Gets Hurt,” “Revenge Party,” “World Burn,” “I’d Rather Be Me” and “I See Stars.”

Other songs from the original musical will not appear in the film adaptation, including several reprises, the Act I closer “Fearless,” Damian’s numbers “Where Do You Belong” and “Stop,” the party track “Whose House Is This?,” Cady and Aaron’s “More Is Better” duet and the Mathletes’ competition song “Do This Thing.”

Cady's introductory song, “It Roars,” appears to have been replaced with a new track titled “What Ifs.” The Mean Girls album also features “Not My Fault,” Rapp’s new collaboration with Megan Thee Stallion.

In order to view the gallery, please allow Manage Cookies

For access to all our exclusive celebrity videos and interviews – Subscribe on YouTube!