Yo-kai Watch Episode 3 Information Season 1 Number 3 English titles The Rare One, Yo-kai Manjimutt, Here Comes Roughraff, Manjimutt Part 2 Japanese titles Rea na Aitsu (レアなアイツ), Yōkai Jinmenken (妖怪じんめん犬), Temē Gurerurin! (てめーもグレるりん!), Yōkai Jinmenken Part2 (妖怪じんめん犬 Part2) Original air date January 22, 2014 English air date October 7 2015 Channel Disney XD Previous Yo-kai Watch Episode 2 Next Yo-kai Watch Episode 4 Discussion Episode 3 Forum Post

Yo-kai Watch Episode 3 is an episode of Yo-kai Watch Anime. It consists of The Rare One, Yo-kai Manjimutt, Here comes Roughraff! and Manjimutt: Part 2 stories.

The Rare One

This short is all about rare things, as the title gives away. Nate's mom arrives home and presents him with a rare and hard to get whoopie pie, which apparently involves quite a waiting list. Whisper isn't too impressed, but Nate is in heaven. Later, Whisper decides to teach Nate about rare Yo-kai, such as the extremely rare Yo-kai known as Noko. It's apparently so rare that nobody has ever seen one before-- until one appears right next to Nate when Whisper has his back turned! A hilarious scene ensues in which Nate tries to convince Whisper that he's DEFINITELY seen a Noko... and he scores Noko's Yo-kai medal to boot!

(Fun facts about this episode: Noko's original Japanese name is Tsuchinoko. Tsuchinoko is an actual Japanese legend; it's supposed to be an extremely rare creature in Japanese mythology, thus the basis for its Yo-kai form!)

Yo-kai Manjimutt

What's an "HFD"? Apparently it means "human-faced dog." Nate and his friends are talking about rumors of a human-faced dog appearing late at night, when Katie shows up claiming that she actually saw it! Whisper thinks it's definitely a Yo-kai at work, so Nate goes to investigate the spot where Katie saw the HFD. Right on cue they encounter Manjimutt, an Eerie Yo-kai with the face of a middle-aged businessman and the body of a toy poodle.

Manjimutt was indeed a middle-aged businessman who fell on hard times, and when he got into a freak accident he was transformed into a Yo-kai! Nate and Whisper share a drink with him (no hard drinks, just orange soda... and toilet water.) but before long Manjimutt is caught by the police while marking his territory, and is sent to jail. Right before the cops take him away, he gives Nate his Yo-kai Medal.

Here comes Roughraff!

Sometime later, there's trouble at school because one of Nate's friends is enspirited by another Yo-kai called Roughraff, a Yo-kai whose specialty is making good kids turn bad! Nate manages to track down his friend, but even when Roughraff runs away, his friend doesn't return to normal. It's up to Nate to take down Roughraff to get his friend back to being a good kid.

Eventually, Nate tracks Roughraff down to a field by a stream. Roughraff isn't going down without a fight, though! But when Nate tries to summon Jibanyan to take down Roughraff, instead Roughraff jumps on Jibanyan and transforms him into Baddinyan, a bad-boy version of Jibanyan! Baddinyan doesn't seem too intent on helping Nate; he just wants to be a bad boy and eat candy in bed. How are they going to defeat Roughraff now?

Nate realizes that in order to sort out bad kids, you need the help of an adult. And who better to call on than their new friend Manjimutt? However, everything doesn't go quite as expected, as Manjimutt's jail cell apparently comes with him when he's summoned and he's not keen to come out of it! But with some convincing from Nate, Manjimutt gives Roughraff a stern scolding that quickly degrades into an all-out brawl between the two.

By the time they've finished brawling the sun is setting, and surprisingly enough Roughraff and Manjimutt have come to respect each other. The conflict comes to an end with Manjimutt and Roughraff shaking hands as the sun sets in the background.

Manjimutt: Part 2

Later, back in his jail cell, Manjimutt realizes that even as a Yo-kai he needs to get a job. Who knows what awaits him?

This episode definitely leans toward entertainment rather than the moral messages like previous episodes. Given Manjimutt's presence in the show's opening/ending and his lengthy character introduction, it's safe to say he'll be joining Nate's adventures again soon!

(More fun facts about this episode: Manjimutt's original name is Jinmenken. Again, a jinmenken is an actual Japanese urban legend about a human-faced dog; they're supposed to be found at night in city areas, just like how Nate discovers Manjimutt! Also, when Manjimutt asks to be left alone, this is a reference to the urban legend as well, as it is said that jinmenkens will often ask to be left alone.)

Characters

Humans

Nate

Eddie

Bear

Katie

Yo-kai