Kuroi Yokai Watch ~Guided Scum~ Fourth Person: "Katie" (Japanese: 黒い妖怪ウォッチ 〜導かれしクズたち〜 四人目『フミ』, Kuroi yōkai u~otchi 〜michibika reshi kuzu-tachi〜 shitori-me “Fumi”), Komasan and Komajiro's Japanese Whole Country Journey: IN Fukuoka (Japanese: コマさんコマじろうの日本全国もんげー旅 IN福岡, Komasan komajirō no nipponzenkoku monge ̄tabi iin Fukuoka) and Yo-kai City Licker (Japanese: 妖怪 自慢ハッタン, Yōkai Jimanhattan) is the 160th episode of the Yo-kai Watch anime series. It was broadcasted in Japan on March 3, 2017.

Summary[]

Kuroi Komasan, Kuroi Jibanyan and Kemushi-otoko meet Katie who insults them. Komasan and Komajiro visit Fukuoka and look around at the local culture. After Eddie returns from a big city, he starts taking advantage of the city life, despite only going for a short break while Yo-kai City Licker inspirits him.

Plot[]

Characters[]

Humans[]

Nate

Hailey

Bear

Eddie

Katie/Kuroi World Katie (debut)

Nathan Adams (Kuroi World)

Phonius (mentioned, pictured)

Manga Artist Girl (flashback)

Yo-kai[]

Jibanyan

Whisper

Komasan

Komajiro

Usapyon

Tomnyan (cameo)

Kuroi Jibanyan

Kuroi Komasan

Kuroi Yo-kai Watch

Kemushi-otoko

Kuroi Kyubi (debut)

Kuroi Ikemenken (debut)

Kuroi Jinmenken (debut)

Kamakiri On'na (debut)

Hinozall Awoken (debut, cameo)

City Licker (debut)

Tomorrow Gal (flashback, silhouette cameo)

Koma Knomads (flashback, silhouette cameo)

T-Wrecks (flashback, silhouette cameo)

Trivia[]

The box Kuroi Ikemenken gives to Katie has the Yo-Zon branding on it, implying that Yo-Zon either delivers to other dimensions or may be the Kuroi World's counterpart. The Komasan Taxi makes a cameo in the next episode, taking the style of the original anime series, making the latter more of a likely confirmation.

This is the first and only time that the Kuroi Yo-kai Watch punch other Yo-kai out of the way.

This is the third time Jibanyan gets an unlucky summon.

It is revealed that the miniature model of a city, the light bulb on his tail, and the star patterns on City Licker’s body are all detachable.

The scene where Komasan eats the overly-spicy cod roe is a reference to EP156 where Komasan tries the wasabi ice cream.

This episode features a cameo at Level-5's offices in Fukuoka. Though it may seem like it's live-action, it's actually redrawn to be in style of the anime series. The layout is also taken exactly from this photo.

Hinozall Awoken also appears as a cameo in the television screens after their Komasan and Komajiro take their photo in the building.

This is the first episode where a Yo-kai other than Snottle attacks Jibanyan when he is summoned to fight.

Komasan is summoned for the first time in 87 episodes, making him the second-longest Yo-kai to not be summoned after a while. The first would be Shogunyan, where he wasn't summoned for 116 episodes.

In City Licker's backstory flashback, the Koma Knomands can be briefly seen as well as other 'Merican Yo-kai.

Errors[]