Yo-kai Peppillon (Japanese: ゴールデンウィークは妖怪がいっぱい, Gōruden Wīku wa Yōkai ga Ippai!), Komasan in the City: My Cool Brother (Japanese: コマさん ～オラのカッコいい兄ちゃん編～, Komasan ~Ora no Kakkoii Niichan-hen~), and Manjimutt: The Great Dog Escape: Episode 5 (Japanese: じんめん犬シーズン2 犬脱走 Episode5, Jinmenken Shīzun 2 Inu Dassō Episode5) is the 16th episode of the Yo-kai Watch anime series. It was broadcasted in Japan on May 2, 2014, and in the United States on December 31, 2015.

Summary[]

Nate's family visits a waterfall on a trip, but he also meets three new Yo-kai. Komasan helps Komajiro at a confrontation in the night club when everyone discovers he is from the countryside. Manjimutt discovers the other inmate is actually an undercover cop who is looking to get Charlie incarcerated further, and is pleased he may be able to get out early.

Plot[]

Yo-kai Peppilon[]

Komasan in the City: My Cool Brother[]

Manjimutt: The Great Dog Escape: Episode 5[]

Characters[]

Humans[]

Nate

Lily Adams

Aaron Adams

Federal Agent

Charlie

Yo-kai[]

Whisper

Jibanyan

Komasan

Komajiro

Drizzle (debut)

Robonyan

Manjimutt

Peppillon (debut)

Mirapo (debut)

Trivia[]

This is the first episode segment to have the name completely changed from it's original Japanese title, rather than a translation.

The episode was initially promoted and listed with the title "Spring Break Present" for the first segment in addition to "Yo-kai Peppillon"; however, the former title is not present in the episode. Most listings for the episode continue to use both titles.

The Japanese text present on the Yo-kai Amulet is one of the few instances to actually not be painted over in the English dub.

Nyson is a parody of Dyson, which specalize in vacuum cleaners.

This is the 2nd episode Whisper blasts off.

This is also the 2nd episode Nate smacks Whisper with a paper fan and the 1st episode Jibanyan smacks Whisper with a paper fan.

This is the first episode to show Komasan fighting against others. Second would be in the Dog of the North Star segments.

This episode's English dub aired on New Year's 2016 Eve, making it the last episode to air in 2015.

In the Recap Time, Whisper makes a similar pose to Detective Conan from one of the opening themes.

This is the first episode to exclude sponsor cards and the end card from its international masters, as well as include the puzzle game featured in-between the ending theme song and the Recap Time corner.

No episodes would feature dedicated sponsor cards again in Japan until Y School Heroes.

Dub differences[]

Golden Week was renamed to Spring Break.

Errors[]