Rodney Dangerfield

American comedian

Rodney Dangerfield (born November 22, 1921, Babylon, Long Island, New York, U.S.—died October 5, 2004, Los Angeles, California) was a popular American comedian known for his wide-eyed, fidgety delivery style and his hapless, self-deprecating demeanor, expressed by his famous lamentation, “I don’t get no respect.”

Early life

Jacob Cohen’s parents, Dorothy (née Teitelbaum) and Phillip Cohen, were both of European Jewish ancestry. He and his elder sister grew up in the New York City borough of Queens. His father, a vaudeville comic and juggler, abandoned the family soon after Cohen’s birth. Because the family needed money when he was growing up, Cohen took odd jobs, such as delivering groceries after school and selling ice cream on the beach. During his childhood he suffered from depression and a feeling of being inferior to others, the result of his mother’s uncaring attitude and the regular anti-Semitic abuse he endured from his teachers. He eventually began to write jokes as a way of becoming more popular with his classmates.

Britannica Quiz

Pop Culture Quiz

In his late teens, Cohen began telling his jokes onstage, performing as a singing waiter and comic throughout New York City and New Jersey after legally changing his name to Jack Roy. He also performed in the resorts of the Catskill Mountains region of upstate New York, known as the Borscht Belt for its tradition of Jewish performers. But after a difficult night there in the early 1950s, Roy decided to give up show business, quipping later, “To give you an idea of how well I was doing at the time I quit, I was the only one who knew I quit.”

Roy married Joyce Indig, a singer, and the couple settled in Englewood, New Jersey, where they had two children. He made a living selling paint and aluminum siding for nearly a decade. The couple divorced in 1962 and remarried a year later—only to divorce again, this time permanently, in 1970.

In the 1960s, when he was in his early 40s, Roy decided to give comedy another chance. As he explained in a 1986 interview, “It was like a need. I had to work. I had to tell jokes. I had to write them and tell them. It was like a fix. I had the habit.”

A late-blooming career

Roy practiced his routines in the Catskills on the weekends. It was there that he asked a club owner to invent a stage name for him, and the owner suggested Rodney Dangerfield. In 1967 Dangerfield’s career received a huge boost when he appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show and gave millions of viewers a glimpse of his “loser” routine. He soon became a popular and regular guest on several talk shows and variety shows, in which he delivered dozens of self-deprecating one-liners while feigning uneasiness by constantly adjusting his necktie. He delighted audiences with jokes such as:

“I was an ugly child. I got lost on the beach. I asked a cop if he could find my parents. He said, ‘I don’t know. There’s lots of places for them to hide.’ ”

“Last week my house was on fire. My wife told the kids, ‘Be quiet, you’ll wake up Daddy.’ ”

“Every time I get in an elevator, the operator says the same thing to me: ‘Basement?’ ”

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now

A 1970 New York Times profile described Dangerfield as the favorite comic of the “silent majority,” the phrase that U.S. Pres. Richard Nixon had used to describe Americans who supported him in the wake of large demonstrations against the Vietnam War. “His is the plaint of millions of middle-aged, middle-class, middle Americans who feel that they’re out of the fun, out of the money, out in the cold while everybody else is getting theirs,” the news article observed. “His patter is in the familiar meter of the Borscht Belt. What is novel about this performance is the kind of audience it now delights. Instead of being the humor of elderly Jews in the Catskills, it is now the entertainment of tough truck drivers in New Jersey.”

After his ex-wife died in the early 1970s, Dangerfield took over parenting his two children, and he decided to stop touring and open his own nightclub, Dangerfield’s, in Manhattan so he could be close to home. That club eventually became a proving ground for previously unknown comics such as Jerry Seinfeld, Jim Carrey, Adam Sandler, and Roseanne Barr.

Dangerfield also began a movie-acting career in the 1970s, beginning with his role in The Projectionist (1971). He later appeared in the hit comedies Caddyshack (1980), Easy Money (1983), and Back to School (1986). He also impressed critics with a much darker role in the American director Oliver Stone’s Natural Born Killers (1994), in which he played an abusive father.

Dangerfield won a Grammy Award in 1981 for his debut comedy album, No Respect, and in 1983 he released a popular song, “Rappin’ Rodney.” In 1993 he married his second wife, Joan Child.

Fred Frommer