George Stephanopoulos has gone from the White House to Good Morning America, and his supportive wife has been by his side every step of the way. So, who is George Stephanopoulos’ wife? Here’s everything to know about the GMA host’s decades-long marriage and family life.

Who is George Stephanopoulos’ wife?

George Stephanopoulos is married to actress and comedian Ali Wentworth, who is best known for starring on the FOX sketch comedy series In Living Color. Her other credits include Seinfeld, Headcase, Nightcap and Felicity. Like her husband, Wentworth has also dabbled in unscripted television, serving as a co-host of the syndicated talk show Living It Up! with Ali & Jack and a guest host on Live with Kelly and Ryan, The Talk and The View.

Stephanopoulos and Wentworth had a whirlwind romance. The pair met in 2001 when they were set up on a blind date by mutual friends. “I had a birthday party, all girls, and everyone said, ‘You know, you have to start dating, Ali.’ And I said, ‘You know what, I live in L.A., it’s either agents or actors — I’m not interested,'” Wentworth recalled during a 2017 appearance on The Tonight Show. “One of them said, ‘You should go out with my old boyfriend, George Stephanopoulos.’ And I said, ‘No, thank you.'”

She continued: “I came in, we sat down, we both ordered the crab salad,” she said. “And, I’m telling you, by the end of lunch, [it was] done.” Stephanopoulos, for his part, also knew immediately that Wentworth was the one. “You know how when you go on a date and the first 15 minutes are on automatic pilot? About 15 minutes in, she just leaned in and said something, and we were suddenly in another place, in another universe, immediately,” he told the New York Times during a November 2001 interview. “We went from strangers to friends to being in love in days.”

After just two months of dating, the couple got engaged in June 2001. They wasted no time in tying the knot, either, and got married that November. Stephanopoulos and Wentworth went on to welcome daughter, Elliott Anastasia, on Sept. 9, 2002, and daughter Harper Andrea, on June 2, 2005.

In December 2009, Stephanopoulos was offered Diane Sawyer’s position on Good Morning America following her move to World News. Stephanopoulos and Wentworth then relocated their family from Washington, D.C. to New York City so that he could take the job.

In addition to supporting each other professionally, the pair have also been there for one another during personal challenges. In June 2024, Stephanopoulos lost his father, Reverend Robert George Stephanopoulos. Wentworth dedicated a sweet tribute to her father-in-law on Instagram, writing alongside several photos from her and her husband’s wedding: “Reverend Robert George Stephanopoulos, PhD, Dean Emeritus Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity passed away on June 19th. He was my father-in-law and I loved him dearly. He married us. He laughed with us. He debated our daughters. He praised my Thanksgiving turkey. He loved ice cream. He was everyone’s council. He married or baptized almost every Greek on the eastern seaboard. He was held in the highest regard. He will be missed by so many. Sagapo Father Bob.”

As for the secret to the long-lasting marriage, Wentworth credits their commitment to each other. “People always say, ‘Oh you have to have a sense of humor.’ But I always say, you just have to really come to terms with this idea that ‘I’m going to be with this person forever,’” she told PEOPLE in 2018. “Not, ‘Oh I can always get a divorce or have an affair.’ You have to just go, ‘We’re in it until a nurse comes in and changes our diapers and wipes the drool off our faces.’ That makes the fights less scary.”

Stephanopoulos added that spending quality time together and having a “no phones at the dinner table” rule has been the key to their marital bliss.