Badfinger and Beyond – the authorized biography of Joey Molland

Written by Michael A. Cimino

The Biography of Joey Molland is an in-depth look into the life and times of Joey Molland, guitarist and songwriter from Liverpool, England, who played with superstars George Harrison, John Lennon, Eric Clapton, and the legendary Apple Records recording artists Badfinger. In the late sixties, Badfinger were the first group signed to The Beatles’ Apple Records. During their time working with The Beatles they produced a string of hit records, including “No Matter What”, “Come and Get It”, “Baby Blue”, “Day After Day”, and wrote the international smash “Without You.”

The book Badfinger and Beyond traces the Rock Revolution of the Swinging Sixties through first hand quotes from Joey and his colleagues. It is a revealing portrait of a generation of stars who forever changed the look, sound, and attitudes of youth.

Author Michael A. Cimino is no stranger to the Rock world. His news publication, Cottage Views Classic Rock News, has been read by music enthusiasts internationally and is well respected within the industry.

Some of the artists who contributed their time to Badfinger and Beyond are Badfinger’s original drummer Mike Gibbins, Apple Records label chief Al Steckler, Apple Records former House Hippie Richard DiLello, Beatles’ original drummer Pete Best, guitarist extraordinaire Dave Mason, Roger McGuinn of the Byrds, Kinks’ guitarist Dave Davies, the late great bassists John Entwistle of The Who and Noel Redding of the Jimi Hendrix Experience, and of course Joey Molland and his family.

Joey Molland’s story is one of perseverance, survival, and validation, and is the perfect companion to anyone who is, or ever was, a fan of Badfinger, The Beatles, or the history of Rock ‘n’ Roll.

“…an upbeat book filled with interesting and amusing anecdotes.”

Barb Alan Atkinson – Badfinger Boogie

“…a great read for anyone with a love affair with the history of British rock music.

…a fun romp of a read… well worth the ‘price of admission’.”

Rick Landers – Guitar International

Buy it from Amazon today!

photo credit: Apple Records/Joey Molland (shown left to right, Pete Ham, Tommy Evans, Mike Gibbins, Joey Molland)