Our top priority is for you to be delighted with your purchase from start to finish and exceed your expectations. Please don't hesitate to call or email us with any questions.

We offer loss & theft protection options at checkout for the ultimate peace of mind* See full shipping policy for terms & conditions.

All shipments require an adult signature on delivery. Please make sure an adult 21 or older will be available to sign for your package. We recommend shipping to a business address when possible.

For large corporate/studio/VIP gift orders to multiple addresses, you've come to the right place. Large studio & corporate orders have been our specialty for over 50 years. We also offer an easy Excel large order template- click here to download it.

We ship packages Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

Express (overnight & 2 day) are usually shipped the same-day if placed by Noon Pacific time.. Please call for priority overnight services. We're happy to accommodate whenever possible.

Ground orders are usually packaged and shipped within 1-3 business days after the order is placed, Monday through Thursday, excluding holidays.

This is a summary of our shipping & Delivery policy

View our full Shipping & Delivery policy here

A wine list from Flask published in the early 1970s

Driving down Ventura Blvd in Studio City in the 1960’s has something in common with today, Flask Fine Wine & Whisky- Flask first opened its doors to the public in 1962. Decades later and it still remains a respected fixture in the Los Angeles community.

We work directly with the wineries, distilleries and breweries to maintain a personal relationship with the creators of some of our favorite products.

We want to know their stories and how they produce bottles that fit into our unique collection. We make a point to keep our selection stocked with a wide variety, offering your classic Napa icons to your natural & organic wines.

We like to think of our whiskey and spirit section as more of a library where the rarest of bottles can be found.

We look forward to helping you find your next favorite bottle!

Click Here to see our store locations, hours, and contact form.