The KL Sentral (Stensen Sentral Kuala Lumpur) is the most connected transit point in the city of Kuala Lumpur (KL), Malaysia. Regardless of where you are from or where you are heading to, you will find the most convenient transit at KL Sentral. Apart from Car Rental, Bus & Taxi Services, KL Sentral is also connected to several major rail systems that serve the city of Kuala Lumpur.

Kuala Lumpur Integrated Public Transportation Route Map (Click to zoom in)

KL Sentral – A World Class Transportation Hub

Stesen Sentral, Malaysia’s largest transit hub, is Kuala Lumpur’s integrated rail transportation centre, offering global connectivity and seamlessly linking all urban and suburban residential, commercial and industrial areas. It is also a direct link to Kuala Lumpur International Airport, Putrajaya (the Federal Government Administrative Centre), Cyberjaya and key areas within the Multimedia Super Corridor. Such amazing connectivity has been established through direct access to important rail systems and links to major highways.

A Self-sustained “City-within-a-City” concept

As an international business address of choice, Kuala Lumpur Sentral has gained momentum, with the resident as well as visiting population growing exponentially. Originally, this self-sustained city-within-a-city has been planned around Malaysia’s largest transportation hub Stesen Sentral to encourage the use of public transportation as well as to reduce carbon footprint, which in turn has significantly reduced traffic movement within Kuala Lumpur Sentral serving its green agenda.

However, with the growing population, Kuala Lumpur Sentral continues to cater to specific needs of its tenants, residents as well as other stakeholders especially to enhance the parking facilities and increase provision for more. For better convenience and ease of travellers, the parking spaces will be nearly doubled in the next 3 to 5 years. Currently, the total parking facilities under construction in commercial, residential, lifestyle components number at 9,354. Additionally, approximately 3000 parking lots will be provisioned when planning for future projects in Kuala Lumpur Sentral.

Opening Hours

24 hours, but most shops and facilities close after midnight

Ticket Counters

KLIA Ekspres and KLIA Transit: 4:15 AM -to 12:45 AM

LRT (Kelana Jaya Line): 6:00 AM – 11:55 PM

KL Monorail: 6:00 AM – 11:30 PM

KTM Komuter: 6:00 AM – 11:15 PM

KTM ETS and KTM Intercity: 7:00 AM – 9:30 PM

Address

Stesen Sentral Kuala Lumpur, Jalan Stesen Sentral, 50470 Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Contact Details