334 Topics about Television & Examples

Searching for a good topic about TV? Not a problem! Our experts have collected a list of amazing titles for you.

Write about the history of reality shows or the negative effects of watching TV – or something entirely else! Get a perfect topic about television below.

🏆 Best Television Topic Ideas & Essay Examples

Is Watching TV Bad or Good?

Watching the TV is one of the most relaxing activities, because in most cases, as one is watching the television there is a tendency of the human mind to switch off from thinking about stressing […]

Television Effects on Society

Nevertheless, the impact of television on children is the most dangerous because children have no abilities to assess the information presented in TV programs and shows critically.

“Empire”: TV Show Overview

In particular, the analysis will be comprised of the introduction of the selected show, the examination of its background, and the impressions it makes on critics, the industry that produces the show, the social context […]

Print Versus Television Media Comparison

However, it is a fact that in the underdeveloped world where the internet and other technologies have not reached, it is only the print media that dominates.

The Role of Television and Movies in Our Life

Instead of movies and TV programs overwhelmed with cuss words and the usage of abusive language, media should be directed on the education of the society.

Evolution of Television

Throughout the decade, the cable television was the means of transmission between the transmitters in television network premises and the receivers at the viewer’s home.

TV Advertisements Aimed at Children in Australian should be banned

Advertisements on TV have a negative effect on the lifestyles of children as they tend to affect their preferences. Banning of television advertisements aimed at children may not be the solution to changing their lifestyles.

“Watching TV Makes You Smarter” by Steven Johnson

It is the belief of this paper that television programming can be considered as one of the most important teaching tools currently in place due to the unprecedented access to information that people can get […]

Sony Television’s Life Cycle: Company Information

The money that is generated through sales is invested in the purchases and operations leading to the production of the product.

Comparison and Contrast of TV Villains

Both shows have high ratings due to the creativity of the story setting and the characters. Due to similar ratings and the fact that the shows ended; the comparison is appropriate.

“Encoding and Decoding in the Television Discourse” Book by Stuart Hall

Stuart Hall wrote the context of the statement in the book, Encoding, and Decoding in the Television Discourse. Politicians and those in the ruling class set the standards through media and the signs to spread […]

Positive Effects of Television on the Way People Understand Themselves

In efforts to investigate the role that television has on making people understand gender, Williams conducted a study on how children classified men and women after watching some television shows.

The US in the 1950s in “Leave It to Beaver” TV Show

The period after World War II and the transition to the time of the Cold War affected the culture of American society in many ways.

Child’s Emotional Development in Caillou TV Show

The main conclusion of the article is as follows: it is critical to make an effort to establish secure attachment between parents and children in order to avoid the development of RAD.

Impact of Television Shows on Family Values

Creation of awareness of the surrounding by bringing the most current news has aided in decision making such as those decisions related to the participation of the family unit to issues affecting the society such […]

Forensic Psychology: Television v. Reality

The qualification of a psychologist in the forensic field to qualify as an expert witness is dependent on the reputation as well as the experience that a psychologist has in this field.

Crime TV: How Is Criminality Represented on Television?

The public’s views and comprehension of crime are heavily influenced by television, the internet, and print media, which can spread the message about the exaggerated danger to society.

Ideologies and Popular Culture: A Popular Television Commercial

The humorous nature of this commercial might appeal to many cultures and people. In addition, the commercial has the ability to formulate a new ideology among men and women.

Television Advertising and Television Shows

In the show, there is always a change in the life of the characters based on the episodes. A clear picture of the family is brought to fore in the drama Bette and Boo.

The Television: A Boon or a Bane to Society

Various studies have been undertaken to examine the power of television as a social force and they all underline the fact that the television has a major impact on society sometimes in a positive way […]

French Specific Content in Media and Television

Broadcasting, on the other hand, is the process of disseminating the contents of the programme to target audience. This policy serves to check and regulate the contents of programmes by media houses and the mechanism […]

Why Do People Watch Reality TV?

Thirdly, most of these programs deal with the real life situations that people are facing. Another appeal is that viewers are given a chance to compare their lives with those of the shows’ protagonists.

Anatomy & Physiology in ”House, M.D.” TV Series

The scenes related to Anatomy and Physiology were evaluation of the brain MRI and X-ray of her lower extremities and tracheostomy when the patient developed an anaphylactic shock to the contrast.

Television Influence on People

Despite the intention to control the impact of TV on children, it is hard for parents to ensure that proper shows and episodes are chosen for watching.

Closed-Circuit Television Surveillance and Security

This aspect has led to the emergence of new forms of physical security systems to counter the changing security threats by improvising mechanisms of security threats perceptions and surveillance.

Multi-Choice Africa TV Company

As any other business entity and due to the different tastes of its customers and the diverse products the company offers, it is often faced with challenges and opportunities as it tries to provide good […]

Television Advancements

This paper will discuss the advancement of television, the time period for the advancement invention and factors that led to the advancements.

The Television Impact on the Music Industry

Some bands, such as the Monkees, the American response to the Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music.

Broadcast on Television Analysis

The fact remains that the news channels need to be directed in a manner that would allow them to ensure that the sort of information being broadcasted is according to the needs and requirements of […]

TV Is Extremely Harmful to Children

What they do not realize is that the children whom they entrust to the moving screen are at an impressionable age wherein they consider everything they see on television to be a part of reality […]

Supply Chain Management in the TV Industry

Generally, supply chain management refers to the systems of managing the transfer of information, materials, and services right from the raw materials to the final consumers.

Television Show: “Wil Time Bigtime”

Since its inception, Wil Time Bigtime has aired a number of shows that can deemed offensive and bad for society and this is one of the reasons why the show had to change its name […]

TV Violence, Increasing Crime Levels and Child Aggression

Most of the proponents of that theory state that by witnessing a certain behavior in fiction people become more prone to repeating it in real life. One of the powers these advancements have given us […]

Reality TV Show Analysis: Masterchef Australia

The analysis of this reality TV show can therefore be taken as the comprehensive analysis of the majority of today’s reality TV shows that have the same aspects of style as this one.

Sony Television: Company Analysis

The President and CEO of Sony Corporation also attested to the harshness of the market and environment in which their television business operates.

What Is “Real” About Reality TV Through Susan Boyle’s Debut On Britain’s Got Talent

This was depicted with the look on the faces of the judges and the audience who thought she was just in the competition to make a normal appearance.

The Invention of Television

According to Street, Paul Nipkow developed the Nipkow disc in 1884, which was capable of transmitting pictures by use of a cable. In the earlier times, it was hard to send a message for its […]

TV Show Analysis: The Simpsons

The setting of this show is a fictional and unknown US state, Springfield, and the name Simpsons is used in the show as a family name.

Leadership in Lost TV Series

For instance, at the end of the plot, he volunteers to sacrifice his life to save other people on the island.

“Super Nanny” and “Wife Swap”: Analysis of Episodes From TV Shows

The main behavioral problem of this family is the mother’s inability to make the children respect her. The head of the Wiggins family is ex-marine; the family has a high socio-economic status; they are respected […]

👍 Good Essay Topics on Television

“Gossip Girl” the TV Show Analysis

Based on the thorough investigation of the scholarly sources, which discuss the primary aspects of the theory and its criticism, the foundation for the development of the original research will be established.

“Watching TV Makes You Smarter” by Steven Johnson

Although “Red Queen” is based on solving one mystery of killing an antiques dealer, viewers receive the opportunity to stimulate their cognition because of the necessity solve a range of additional mysteries proposed by the […]

How TV Affects Your Child: Article Rhetoric

Ethos has been employed in the article in order to convince the audience that the writer is credible. At the beginning of the essay, the author cites the Kaiser Family foundation and then also mentions […]

Transmission and Reception of Television Signals

In his book Electronic signals and systems: television, stereo, satellite TV, and automotive, he explains to the reader the process of signal transmission and reception.

Changing Notion of Nuclear Family as Portrayed in Television Shows

The Simpson displays frustrations and irritations in a family and how sometimes it suffers lack of money and other important effects and it portrays nuclear family which is a very important image of the family.

Influence of Television on the American Society

The paper will consider the various negative and positive influences this invention has had so as to demonstrate the major impact that the television has had on our society.

The “Friends” TV Show as a Cultural Artifact

The intended audience is men and women between the ages of 15 and 20 or the ones who were born after the 2000s.

Netflix: The Largest Supplier of Films and TV Series in the World

In the age of the rapid development of technology, people do not have to go to the cinema, buy CDs, or turn on the TV to get acquainted with new products of the film industry.

History of Television: The Most Influential Personalities That Contributed to the Development of Television Technology

The paper discusses the most influential personalities that contributed to the development of television technology. The most important events in the sphere of broadcasting happened in 1925 when John Baird, the Scottish engineer, for the […]

Television and Its Impact on the Society

There are observations that a person that watches too many killings on TV tends to become paranoid and be distrustful of people around him and worse feels unsafe all the time.

The Television Show “Law and Order: SVU”

The pacing of the show supports the formula and leads to a suspenseful hour of television. Unfortunately, my favorite character has left the show, but I do not intend to stop watching because it is […]

Television: Features, Functions and Outcomes

In the twentieth century, the saint then became the patron of television, and this story appears to reflect the desire of people to be involved in the magic of a personal TV set.

Digital Media Impacts on Television

This has significantly reduced the number of people who rely on television to get breaking news for various incidents that occur in different places. As a result, their popularity has reduced the amount of time […]

China’s Flat Screen TV Industry

In china, the flat screen television industry has been one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy over the last decade.

Effects of TV and Other Medias on Child Development

The study will therefore highlight some of the effects that accompany the use of televisions and other forms of media in homes and other areas of resident.

The TV Series “Hannibal” by Brian Fuller

This is one of the qualities that make the show art: a sense of detail, revealing the complex elements of different cultures, and understanding the intricacies of cuisine and its role in everyday life.

TV Shows Shaping Human Expectations About the World

This show taught me to expect that a supportive family and friend base will be with you through the good and difficult times.

Watching Television: Genetic Influence

This can be testified by the manner the research question correlates to the dynamics of examining why watching TV has such a huge influence on genetics.

Experiencing Sports Event in the Open Air or by Watching It on TV

Taking the example of any sports activity it is possible to criticize and analyze it from different points of view, such as the expectations from attending the sports activity and watch it in the open […]

TV Culture: The Oprah Winfrey Show

The theme chosen for the discussion is intriguing and important to the American viewers of the program. In addition, the multi-camera style allows the audience to capture the host and guests as well as the […]

Group Roles in the “Survivor” TV Show

The purpose of this paper is to identify the stages of group development processes as well as individual group roles, as shown in the first episode of season one of Survivor: New Mexico.

Television and Communication with Viewers

In this article, the author shares some insights on the contemporary media communication between fans and the creators of popular TV shows.

The Influence of Medical TV Programs on Viewers

Before analyzing the impact of medical melodramas on nursing students, it is necessary to identify the reasons why people watch this kind of TV shows and what they are searching for in them.

Natural and Artificial Selection in Cosmos TV Series

In order to explain the same notion Tyson uses the example of wolves and the origin of dogs. The diversity of species is explained by Sagan and Tyson as a process of the natural selection […]

TV Cartoons and Children’s Behavior – Psychology

That is why the impact of TV cartoons as the provocation for the further violent behavior of children should be also discussed with references to the gender differences between boys and girls.

Digital TV and Its Consequences: A Changing Media Industry

The main idea that is being promoted throughout the article by Gripsrud is that the very paradigm of TV-broadcasting, in the traditional sense of this word, is somewhat inconsistent with the discursive implications of the […]

“10 Years Younger” and “How to Look Good Naked” Television Shows

The most important thing about appearances here is that the older get to look younger on the “10 Years Younger” show and those with insecurities about their shapes and sizes get to accept who they […]

Television and Children

To be able to deal with the situation, it is vital to conduct a study that may help in identifying the impact of television viewing on children.

Censorship for Television and Radio Media

This paper seeks to provide an in-depth analysis of censorship with the aim of determining the extent to which content on broadcast media can be censored. A good example of a situation in which moral […]

Watching TV Makes Us Smarter Debate

As in the case of the ’24’ in relation to how it can make me smarter, I believe that the complexities of plot lines and the quick paced action is an effort to make viewers […]

Al-JAZEERA “Arabic Television Network”

However, over the years Aljazeera has acquired the trust of many of its viewers especially from the Middle East although a notable portion of the rest of the world also trusts the channel.

Commercial Advertisements in Television

This was well captured in the DAX Hair Care advertisement which portrayed the symbol of perfection in the image of the beautiful user of the air product.

Discourse in the “Prison Break” TV Series

Moreover, seeking to bring back the success of the past, Fox, the channel that used host Prison Break, decided to revive the show in the form of a short sequel.

Television Advertisement’ Negative Effects on Children

Such adverts may bring conflict with the parents; when the parents try to guide the child on the right way to follow, the child is left at cross roads on whom to believe, is it […]

Television Commercial

It is also necessary to add that the commercial also has a valuable message. In conclusion, it is possible to note that the commercial of Kellogg’s Froot Loops can have two implications.

Television Desensitizing of Modern Children

This is one of the main risks that should not be overlooked by parents and educators who need to understand how the values of children are formed.

The Evolution of Television

The discovery of the photoconductive properties of selenium by Willoughby Smith and his assistant in 1873 completely changed the things in the history of television.

Media Violence and Aggressive Behavior

From one perspective, it is said that the person will learn to like the violence and use it in real life.

The Effects of Television on the Way People Understand Themselves

This is because, despite the fact that the advocates of political correctness encourage citizens to believe that the specifics of one’s racial affiliation are not being reflective of his or her tendency to commit crimes, […]

Marketing Design and Innovation: Smart TV’s

The marketing team of Samsung has been coordinating closely with the production unit to ensure that the design, colour, shape, and functionality of the product meet the needs of the market.

📌 Simple & Easy Topics about TV

The Impact of the Pilkington Report on the British Television in the 1960s

In spite of the fact that the main ideas presented in the Pilkington Report were actively criticised by the broadcasters, government, sponsors, and by the public, the effect of the report on the further growth […]

TV Show Classification

According to my classification system, TV shows can be classified according to main theme of the show. Under the theme of conflict, three different types of conflicts were used to categorize the TV shows.

Japanese TV Drama “14 Sai no Haha”

To be specific, the language of the four main characters is analyzed with the remarks to the use of words and expressions.

Episode 3, Season 1 of ‘Good Times’ TV Series

Welfare is shown as an undesirable charity due to the harsh nature of U.S.welfare, as seen by the denial of emergency monetary aid to Evan’s family.

Drama Devices in the “Master of None” TV Series

However, the darkness or lightness of the skin is a non-issue because, as long as the individual is not a Caucasian, they are considered Black and treated as such.

Readers on Morality: Don’t Let TV Be Guide

The article “Readers on Morality: Do not Let TV be a Guide” published by the Today is focused on the perception of people about the impact of TV on morality.

Day of the Dead by Community Education Television Review

The main goal of the SHG founders was to attract and empower people to realize the benefits of art and graphics in the Chicano and Chicana communities.

The Role of Television in Capitol Insurrection from a Different Perspective

The people in both camps are disinclined to pay attention to the importance of television broadcasting in the attack on the administration building and contributing to the deaths and injuries.

TSA Tech Interactive TV Casting Solution & Smart Integration

This is a reputable and trustworthy company that is focused on ease of management and unparalleled reliability, and its creative and modern approaches allow Nomadix to achieve successes that are well-known and admired globally.

John Walsh’s Role in the True Crime Genre on the TV

This essay will attempt to argue that John Walsh’s efforts in true crime are inherently rooted in empathy to the victims and therefore are beneficial to society.

Podcasts, Television, and Print Media Comparison

The failure of the responsible authorities to address the issue and the unfortunate cases of victim shaming in some cases is disappointing.

Rhetorical Modes of the “Billions” TV Show

On the one hand, the attorney is desperate to reveal the secrets and wrongdoings of Axe Capital, which would help the legal system battle all evil.

Analysis of The Television Role in the 6th of January Capitol Insurrection

The case of the Capitol attack is examined through the lens of the social sciences, which allows considering the event as people’s actions in a social environment.

The Role of Television in the 6th of January Capitol Insurrection

Thus, the Capitol Insurrection is examined through the lens of the social sciences because of the community processes that took place at the time, and the involvement of TV in its causes is significant.

The Increase in the Number of Television Networks

Besides, the increase in the number of users meant that the service providers had to optimize the quality of their service to better compete for clients. In conclusion, increase in the number of cable TV […]

The “16 and Pregnant” Reality TV Show

The audience gets to know the characters and sees part of the pregnancy, preparation for childbirth, the process of birth, and the postpartum period.

Broadcast Television and Advertising in the US

Television has had a significant impact on the advertising industry, and despite the competition from other media, it is still a viable and successful way to advertise. Thus, identifying the link between media and its […]

Ethical Dilemma of a 2016 TV Commercial for Milk by Juhayna

At the end of the ad, the creators claim that Juhayna’s milk is the best in Egypt after Dondou. The message presented in the advertisement can influence the decision of mothers to stop breastfeeding, which […]

Ethics of Television Reality Shows

From the audience’s perspective, these shows should preserve the principles of honesty and responsibility to show behavior that could become a universal law in accordance with Kant’s categorical imperative.

Dominant-Minority Relations in Television

As for the topic, I want to discuss the relationship between the minority and dominant groups on TV. The topic can be seen as a more thorough discussion on the portrayal of power and society […]

TV Media and Reality Observation

In the show, the hosts give financial advice to callers on how-to and the importance of achieving debt-free life. The skin tone of media characters is lightened in the media compared to authentic images.

Representation of People of Color in Film and Television

However, the lives of people of color have never been represented truthfully without imposing any racial stereotypes and perpetuating the supremacy of the white race. The ideology of the 19th century presumed that the West […]

Community Television of Santa Cruz County Board Meeting Analysis

The Community Television of Santa Cruz County Board of Directors Meeting was observed and analyzed from the point of efficiency of communication and participants’ language styles.

Impact of Television on American Culture

In the middle 20th century, however, the active spread of the brand new medium created a considerable sensation and was able to change the society.

KTLA5 vs. ABC7 TV Channels: Comparative Analysis

While the stations were observed live, the nature of the assignment required a further examination of the content. For example, the second segment is three times as short as the first and the third ones, […]

Women in Society Through the Prism of TV Shows

At the center of the plot of the current British project, Fleabag is the story of the life of an unnamed young woman suffering from nymphomania and friend loss syndrome.

Homosexuality and Feminism in the TV Series

The depiction of these complex topics in the TV series of the humoristic genre implies both regressive and progressive impulses for the audience.

The Popular TV Shows: Political and Social Topics

The Laugh-In and The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour make counter-cultural ideas more accessible to Middle America by acknowledging the racial tensions and the Vietnam war, unlike mainstream television.

Music and Advertising in Television

The changing nature of the music industry has presented a new challenge to the new program producers: breaking into the limelight and drawing a good number of audiences to attract many companies yearning for such […]

Constructing Femininity on TV

The concept of femininity in its relation to the behavior of women and their treatment is a difficult topic to address.

Development of Successful TV Programs

The author suggests that the process of TV programs development is quite challenging since the projects’ directors are always vulnerable to the customers’ unresponsiveness and inattention.

Television (TV) Ad Execution Styles

The ad humorously exposes the male spouse by taking advantage of the zoom meeting, which only requires a good appearance on the upper part of the body.

“Does TV Viewing During Toddlerhood Predict Social Difficulties and Conduct Problems?”: Analysis

The most significant conclusion of Jackson is that the development of toddlers depends not on the amount of time they spend watching TV per se but on the content they consume.

Close-Circuit Television: Crime Control vs. Privacy

The reason for that might be a deterring effect of the cameras since possible offenders found that the risk of getting spotted and arrested is not worth the potential benefits from the crime.

Analysis of “Brigerton” TV Show

I think that this TV series is art because it is made in a form of a novel and contains various elements of art.

Marx’s Ideas in Relation to the TV Series

Through the lens of popular culture, the notion of upholding The Simpsons as a segment of the civilization that lingers in people’s minds all through a nuclear apocalypse appears strange and ironic.

Youngsters Not Abandoning Live TV

This wears a person out more quickly and just to relax the person will eventually go and sit in front of a TV.

TV Advert: “2020 Inspire Change”

Inspire Change aims to spread the message of social justice in the wake of increasing cases of police brutality that have led to the deaths of many Americans.

The Depiction of Birth in Reality TV Show

Given the advent of hospitals, the need for midwifery decreased and eventually, the majority of women lacked the know-how on childbirth.

The Wire: A Crime-Drama Television Series

This relationship highlights the structure of inequality in America and the role of the “system” in contributing to the social and economic challenges of the urban poor.

💡 Engaging Topics about Television

Popular Culture and TV Shows: Analysis of American Idol

The positive aspect of the show is the interactive aspect that is essential in all popular cultures. The first group is comprised of the judges who guide and monitor the performance of the contestants.

Definition of 3D Television Technology

The first one of course is to wear eyeglasses, which will do the work of filtering offset images before they reach the eye, and secondly, we can use a light source to divide the images […]

Gender Roles in TV Commercials and Values in the Society

Each of them will watch, code, and analyze the TV commercials separately; at the end of the procedure, their results will be compared in order to ensure the inter-observer reliability of the chosen research method.

ER TV Series and Healthcare System Issues

In particular, it is necessary to discuss the episode Viable Options, and the questions, explored in this film, namely 1) the consumerism of Medicare and the relations between physicians and patients; 2) the distribution of […]

The Monitor Convergence and the Television Consumption

Explain what those are used for, history on what development on TV and monitor and how the 2 have in common and how they are different The monitor and the television are both viewing devices […]

Feminist Analysis of Gender in American Television

The analysis is guided by the hypothesis that the media plays a role in the propagation of antagonistic sexual and gender-based stereotypes.

TV Violence Programs: Finding Common Ground

The articles, “Honey, I warped the kids”, and “The Hollow Crusade against TV Violence” elaborate on the impacts of TV violence programs.

TV and Hollywood Flats on a Theatre Stage

The draught of these two kinds of units is similar; the main difference is in the location of constructing materials and the joint.

The Types of Television Comedies

Overall, television comedies can differ considerably in terms of such criteria as the setting of the movie, the number of actors involved in the film, the themes explored by the authors, and the use of […]

Influence of Television on People’s Happiness

The idea of mass culture influencing the development of society is closely connected with a concept of a need to be happy.

Shuga’ TV Series: Reasons to Watch

These stations are Kenyan citizen, Nation Television and Kenya Television Network.”The series aims to lift the lid on the reckless sex lives and loves that many Kenyan youths and their partners live”.

TV Presence in the Life of Infants

The issue of the effect of TV on the distribution of their attention during the play was raised. During the first half of the procedure, the TV was on, and the rest of the time […]

The SCI Effect of TV

By the example of the article, derived from this journal, one may see that the impact of the “SCI effect” is tracked in the minds of regular television viewers.

Watching TV: Is It Good or Bad?

The general perceptions and explanations that are attributed to the effects of television in the social life tend to incline on the negative aspects thereby disregarding the other factors that bring about the positive effects […]

TV Character Evaluation: Personality Theories

When most people think of personality, the first thing that they think of is the difference and the similarities, the types, and traits that people hold.

Philosophical Aspect of “Judge Judy” TV Show

The reason why this approach is the most appropriate when analyzing the case of a traffic officer and a speed driver is that it focuses on the immorality of the young girl’s behaviour and situation […]

Narrative in Reality TV: An American Idol

The first thing that makes it appealing to the public is the continuous narrative and the element of competition as American Idol is a contest reality show. American Idol, being a reality show, has made […]

How Television Shows Reflect American Culture

In this show, the characters are portrayed as very energetic, romantic, and wealthy because those elements are the most attractive to the set of viewers. It appeals to the adult population who face many of […]

Aboriginal Peoples Television Network in Canada

This paper will look at the role of the Aboriginal Peoples Television Network in the aboriginal communities. APTN describes itself as the first aboriginal television channel formed by the aboriginal people, for aboriginal people, and […]

Television. The Worst Years of Our Lives by Ehrenreich

I believe that TV is mostly entertaining and enriching until the point where people let it govern their lives; not because of the content but the personal choice not to do anything else with their […]

Three Episodes of “Friends” Television Program

The three episodes of this program to be analyzed are the following: ‘The One Where Nana Dies Twice’, ‘The One Where Eddie Wo not Go’ and ‘The One Where Ross is Fine’.

Death in TV-Series “Six Feet Under”

The paradox that is based on the conventional fear of death and the perception of death almost as one more member of the family cannot but leave a significant sign on each member of the […]

Reality TV Genre in Australian Television Programming

Reality television entered into the general usage of television programming in the early decades of the 1990s through the footage of Fox’s Cops and other emergency programs.

“Desperate Housewives”: The Television Comedy Drama’s Connection and the Gender Theories

There has been a distinct subjugation of women in the hand of the male and society and women’s role in the household has been strictly demarcated.

The American People & Television

The show is one of many that are related to healthcare and have kept its charm in the eyes of the American public.

The Impact of Television on Today’s America

The common opinion is that TV is so harmful that it may be considered the root of all evil because it is one of the main causes of poor eye-sight, fatness, and even an increase […]

Film and Television’s History and Magic

Both mediums require the use of technical hardware such as cameras for capturing the images, projectors for film presentation, lenses that allow the director to present various aspects of story sequences and scenes, and a […]

Influence of Television Advertising on the People

The focal point of this paper is to present a debate on the issue of negative influence of television advertising on people of the country in the context of sex and violence.

How TV Showed the Vietnam War

At the dawn of television media emergence, the coverage of the Vietnam War was subjective as the opinion of the public was manipulated by the government to get the desired reaction from the Americans to […]

The London Underground: Preparing a TV Programme

One of the major problems is the issue of the inhumanity of the system. This has to do with the complications and technicalities involved in the usability and comfort of the system.

Gender Differences by Television

According to Durkin, K, female especially between the age group 8 and 12 give more attention to the male characters than the female one, while boys are not ideally influenced by the sex of the […]

Nielsen Media Research Company

The present name of the group is The Nielsen Company. The Company provides products and services to the following categories of customers.

Television Systems: Innovation and Evolution

The invention and subsequent innovation and evolution of the television may not be the greatest since ‘the invention of the wheel’.

The Dynamics of the Television Industry

Most of the time, customers are in need of watching programs on the television to be entertained and are interested in learning about the new products in the market and services.

Should Sex and Violence on Television or in Movies Be Restricted?

Objective The key goal of the study is to establish whether watching movies or television programmes with sexual content or scenes of violence is harmful to the youth and the young generation as a whole.

Negative Influence of Television Advertising on Consumer Choice

Television advertising is powerful because it empowers the producers to appeal not only to the hearing and sight but also increase the interest in the product other techniques.

“Ugly Betty”: Race and Ethnicity in TV

Also, another irony in this drama series lies in the fact that betty, being part of a Mexican family who migrated to the US territory, is just on a low-level or rank and file level, […]

How Digital Technology Revolutionized Television News

In the traditional form of gathering news stories to be in television, the reporters have to go on location, shoot the video and go back to the station for the video to be edited.

The Reality TV Shows Addiction: Cause-Effect

The viewers feel like the actors are just in the same scenario as them and every development is a success to both the actor and his viewer.

Development of High Definition Television Technology

However, looking at the present state of the US electronic consumer market, it is a surprise to note that in the twenty-first century, the availability of the HDTV is not at par with the set […]

🥇 Most Interesting Television Topics to Write about

Global Mass Communication: Web Television

Television Families: What Do They Tell Us About Race Relations?

Homosexual Stereotypes in Film and TV

Equality: The Use of TV to Develop Our Gender Roles

La Hija Del Jardinero Television Show

Television Maintaining Class Division in Society

Non-Verbal Communication in “When They See Us” TV Show

What’s Inside TV Commercial by FedEx

Violence Against Women in the TV Shows

Al Ghad TV Company’s Internship Experiences

In Sickness and in Wealth: “Unnatural Causes” TV Series

Northern Exposure TV Show of Medical Dramedy Genre

Will TV Succumb to the Internet?

TV Programming Analysis: Gendered Themes

Netflix’s Business: Renting Movies and TV Episodes

Reality Television Definition and Impact

Vietnam as the First Television War

Direct Response Television and Its Requirements

Trisha TV Show Analysis and Pop Culture Issues

“Pepsi Next Baby” TV Commercial Analysis

“Insecure” Comedy-Drama TV Series by Rae and Wilmore

Utopia Fantasia in the “Black Mirror” TV Show

SmartBridge Company’s Smart TV System

The American TV Series: Characters and Themes

Television Show Suggestion: M*A*S*H

Ford Explorer’s TV Commercial Advertising

Television, Its Invention and Technical Evolution

Closed-Circuit Television Cameras in Crime Reduction

Northern Exposure: TV Medical Comedy Series

TFC TV Company’s Competition Problem

TV Content: “The Walking Dead”

Samsung as Color TV Manufacturer in China

Aggression and Violence in the “Vikings” TV Series

Crime Television Series: “Al Fin Cayó!”

TV Visual Analysis: Boardwalk Empire

“The Walking Dead” Television Series

Arab Stereotypes in the “Tyrant” TV Series

Douyu TV and Young People in the Virtual Community

Quite Interesting, British Television Programme

Bridgestone’s “Hands” TV Advertising

Amy Zimmerman: It Ain’t Easy Being Bisexual on TV

TV Shows: House, Scrubs and Quincy

Coordination Issues in High-Definition Television

The Fashion Channel: Cable TV Network

Television News Coverage Analysis

The TV Series: “The Vampire Diaries”

TV Shows’ Influence on Families

TV Soap Operas: Reasons of Popularity

Watching TV Makes You Smarter?

Devious Maids – How Television Portrays Race?

The Value of Reanalysis: TV Viewing and Attention Problems

Reality TV Role in Human History

Television Show “What’s My Line?”

Sony PlayStation TV Micro-Console Marketing Project

Does TV Shows Have a Negative Influence on the Children?

Technologies: High-Speed Internet vs. the Cable Television

The Oprah TV Show

Newspaper Report and TV Report: Comparison and Contrast

Television Shows and Obscene Language

Is the Television Series, Friday Night Lights Literary?

Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commissions

Market Opportunity Assessment for Apple TV Box

Television in Emirati Culture

Influence of Television on Contemporary Chinese Culture

Literature Review and Methodology for the Case of Violence on TV

Television Violence Context

Central China Television’s (CCTV)

Framing Effects of Television News Coverage of Social Protest

“Viewing and Avoidance of Al Jazeera 24 Hour Satellite Television Channel” by Jamal, A., & Melkot, S. R.

Effects of Food Advertising in Australian Television on Children Aged 5-12 Years

Australian Advert Banned on UK TV

Television History and Technology

📑 Good Research Topics about Television

Is TV Advertising Dying as Mass Media in the EU?

Persuasive portfolio of Net-A-Porter and Samsung Smart TV

American Television History

Legal Themes in the Good Wife TV Series

Motivation Theories in the TV Comedy Series “Sex and the Sally”

The Types of Features Used in Different Television Shows

Cable TV Provider Marketing Management

Reality Television and Social Evaluation

The Role of Interactivity to the Success of Reality Television Shows

Change in the TV Station

Television as a Domestic Technology

Television and Cultural Change and Fragmentation of Audiences in the 21st Century

TV Show’s Influence on Perception

The Effects of Background Television on the Toy Play Behavior of Very Young Children

How Entertainment Television Shapes Social Values and Beliefs

Television Criticism in Advert

Need for Reality TV on Television Programming

Television Genres and New Media Technologies

Change Management within Direct TV Business

History of Television Broadcasting in Canada Before 1968

TV Shows v. The Common View of Nuclear Families

Television Shows Taxonomy

Al Jazeera TV: A Propaganda Platform

TV in America: Usage, Preferences, and Trends

TV News Role in Citizens Life

Bridalplasty Television Show

Television Effects & Freedoms

Understanding Media: Reality TV Shows—The Jersey Shore

Relationship between Indirect and Physical Aggression on Television and in Real Life

NBC Television Network Analysis

Psychological TV Programs Doctor-Patient

The History of the Coldstream Guards: TV Programme

Media Control and Censorship of TV

TV Advertising as the Most Appropriate Communication System

Does TV Increase Violence Among Children and Teenagers?

Influence of Television Advertising on Children’s Eating Behavior

The Cultivation Effects on the Watching Television

Shopping Diaries: Brand New Flat Screen 47-inch TV

What MTV Hath Wrought: A Change in Network Television and Advertising

Popular Culture of TV Watching in USA and China

TV Reality and People’s Lifestyle

How TV Affects Kids

Seeing a Movie in a Movie Theater Versus Watching a Movie on a Television Set

Two Poems with TV Drama 24

Gender Stereotypes on Television

❓ Research Questions about Television

Why Are Television Ads for Alcohol Misleading Viewers?

What Influences Advertising Price in Television Channels?

What Is the Relationship Between Violence on Television and Violence in Real Life?

Why Will Television Ultimately Ruin Sports?

What Impact Does Television Have on Children’s Lifestyles?

How Does Television Influence the Moral Thinking of Children?

What Are the Positive and Negative Prospects for the Impact of Television on the Development of Children?

What Is the Connection Between Television and Childhood Obesity?

How Does Television Negatively Affect Education?

Why Should Children Be Restricted From Watching Television?

How Has Television Destroyed the Communication Between Friends and Family?

Why Did the Dramatic Growth in Radio and Television Advertising Come About?

How Has Television Influenced the Development of Pop Culture?

What Negative Conventions Does Television Show and Their Impact on People?

How Does Television Affect Our Social Life?

Why Shouldn’t Parents Encourage Their Children to Become Famous Movie or Television Star?

How Has Television Evolved From the Sixties to the Present?

What Is the Role and Significance of Music in Television Show?

How Has Television Made Our Lives Better?

Why Can’t Television Replace Books as a Teaching Tool?

How Does Television Affect American Culture?

What Are Some Anti-Black Bias That Pops Up on Television News All the Time?

How Has Television Influenced Society Since Its Inception?

Why Shouldn’t People Spend Too Much Time Watching Television?

How Has Television Affected the Population of India?

What Are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Television as a Means of Communication?

What Was the Significance of Television in the Vietnam War?

What Effect Does Television Have on the Brain?

How Do Television Commercials Reinforce Gender Stereotypes?

What Is the Argument for the Liquidation of Television?