1st day: tour start day

Transfer or independent arrival to Cannigione.

2nd day: Costa Smeralda loop (54 km)

Discover the beauties of the fabled Costa Smeralda when the millionaires are away! Cycling through Cannigione to Arzachena, and up into the hills of San Pantaleo and down to the Jet set Porto Cervo along to Baia Sardinia and back to Cannigione.

3rd day: La Maddalena archipelago (60km)

From Cannigione along the coast to Palau, where you take the ferry to the vibrant town of La Maddalena, cross the bridge to Caprera, home of the Garibaldi museum and back through Palau to Cannigione.

4th day: Cannigione – Tempio Pausania/Nuchis. Gallura discovery (51 km)

Today you venture inland to Arzachena and up into the hills and lakes of Sant’Antonio di Gallura. Forbidding peaks look down on endless expanses of ancient cork forests strewn with weird, wind-blasted granite boulders to make the scenery dramatic. We are in the heart of the island’s major cork production area. Hundreds of cork businesses (sugherifici), large and small, are concentrated around Tempio, the main centre of the area, which is your base for the night.

5th day: Tempio Pausania/Nuchis – Castelsardo (49 km)

Ride to Aggius, home of the banditry museum, that recalls troubled times gone by. Cycle past the impressive valley of the moon, consisting of amazing granite rocks shaped by the force of the weather over thousands of years to end your day back to the coast in Castelsardo, a charming village perched high up on a cape overlooking the sea.

6th day: Castelsardo – Sassari (33/55 km)

Ride along the coast to Lu Bagnu and then head inland again to Nulvi and Osilo, enjoying the spectacular views of the Anglona rolling hills and pastures. End your day in the city of Sassari, 2nd largest in Sardinia.

7th day: Sassari– Alghero (44 km)

After the breath taking descent of Scala di Giocca, cycle along backroads to reach the fortified town of Alghero, probably the nicest town in Sardinia and final destination of your trip.