The months of November and December might feel a bit overwhelming for film fans, as they run out to watch the big Oscar contender films that studios rush out for consideration during the late fall. However, those films, though buzzed-about, are never a guarantee. Sometimes they fail to live up to their awards aspiration hype. So, as we approach 2020, why not watch a film that is guaranteed great and a real Oscar winner? Enter “Mephisto.”

Thanks to Film Forum, filmgoers are going to get the chance to watch a 4K restoration of the 1981 classic, “Mephisto,” directed by the legendary filmmaker István Szabó. And in honor of the film’s upcoming release, we are thrilled to give our readers an exclusive look at the trailer for the restoration. “Mephisto” tells the story of a stage actor that finds himself starring as Mephistopheles in a version of “Faust” in pre-WWII Germany. The role becomes incredibly popular and the actor finds himself hiding behind is role as the Nazis begin to gain power in the country.

READ MORE: ‘Come And See’ 2K Restoration Trailer: Elem Klimov Incredible War Film Gets Re-Released In 2020

The film stars Klaus Maria Brandauer, alongside Krystyna Janda and Ildiko Bansagi. “Mephisto” is the first-ever Hungarian film to win the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar. Interestingly, the only other Hungarian film to win that award was “Son of Saul,” 35 years later.

“Mephisto” will begin its run at Film Forum in NYC on January 8 and run until January 16. You can watch the trailer below.

In addition to “Mephisto,” Film Forum is also presenting screenings of 4K restorations of other István Szabó films, “Confidence” and “Colonel Redl.” Here’s information about those films:

CONFIDENCE (1980, Szabó)

End of the WW II in Budapest, and the resistance stashes Péter Andorai and Ildikó Bánsági for their own safety as a married couple with a seemingly safe elderly couple — only trouble is, they’re happily married to others. Tightly controlled, atmospheric chamber piece. Oscar nominee, Best Foreign Language Film.