(1811–72). The French poet, novelist, critic, and journalist Théophile Gautier exerted a strong influence in the period of changing sensibilities in French literature—from the early Romantic period to the aestheticism and naturalism of the end of the 19th century. His literary output was prodigious, but his art and dramatic criticism alone—partly reprinted in Les Beaux-Arts en Europe (1855) and in the six-volume Histoire de l’art dramatique en France depuis vingt-cinq ans (1858–59; History of Drama in France for Twenty-Five Years)—would ensure his reputation.

Théophile Gautier, sometimes known as Le Bon Théo, was born on Aug. 31, 1811, in Tarbes, France, and lived most of his life in Paris. At the Collège de Charlemagne he met Gérard de Nerval and began a lasting friendship. He studied painting but soon decided that his true vocation was poetry. Sympathetic to the Romantic movement, he took part in the cultural battle that ensued when Victor Hugo’s play Hernani was first performed in Paris in 1830. He humorously recalled this period in Histoire du romantisme (1874; History of Romanticism) and in Portraits contemporains (1874; Contemporary Portraits), in which he gave an excellent description of his friend Honoré de Balzac. He satirized his own extravagances, as well as those of other Romanticists, in Les Jeunes-France (1833; Young France). Les Grotesques (1834–36) is about more obscure earlier writers whose individualism anticipated that of the Romantics.

Gautier’s first poems appeared in 1830. Albertus, a long narrative about a young painter who falls into the hands of a sorcerer, was published in 1832. At this time he turned from the doctrines of Romanticism and became an advocate of art for art’s sake. The preface to Albertus and the novel Mademoiselle de Maupin (1835) express his views, which caused a considerable stir in literary circles by their disregard of conventional morality and insistence on the sovereignty of the beautiful. His pessimism and fear of death were expressed in the narrative poem La Comédie de la mort (1838; The Comedy of Death).

In 1840 Gautier visited Spain; the color of the land and people inspired some of his best poetry, in España (1845), and prose, in Voyage en Espagne (1845). After this trip he found traveling to be a welcome escape from the constant pressures of his journalistic work, which he pursued to support himself, two mistresses, and his three children, as well as his two sisters. From 1836 to 1855 he was a weekly contributor to La Presse and Le Moniteur Universel. Besides this work he contributed to many other periodicals and papers.

Traveling, especially in Greece, strengthened his theory of art, his admiration of classical forms. He felt that art should be impersonal and free from the obligation of teaching moral lessons and that the aim of the artist is to concentrate on achieving perfection of form. He developed a technique in poetry that he called transposition d’art (transposing art), recording his exact impressions when experiencing a painting or other work of art. These poems, published in Émaux et camées (1852; Enamels and Cameos), are among his finest, and the book was a point of departure for the writers Théodore de Banville and Leconte de Lisle. Charles Baudelaire paid tribute to Gautier in the dedication of his verse collection Les Fleurs du mal.

Gautier’s poetic and fantastic imagination is seen to advantage in his short fiction such as the evocations of ancient Pompeii in “Arria Marcella” (1852) and the vampire story “La Mort amoureuse” (1857; The Dead Lover). He also wrote plays and the popular ballet Giselle, written in collaboration with Vernoy de Saint-Georges.