Queen Elizabeth II's "cheeky" response to an interviewer when handling the crown jewels for a special documentary in 2018 has gone viral after a clip resurfaced on TikTok.

The video of the monarch handling the Imperial State Crown while discussing its jeweled elements with broadcaster Alastair Bruce was recorded to commemorate the 65th anniversary of her coronation, which took place at Westminster Abbey on June 2, 1953.

The TikTok video has gained more than 2 million views since being uploaded by user Brittoker and received in excess of 176,000 likes.

Users have praised the humorous video which shows Bruce reverentially asking the waiting crown jeweler to move the crown closer to the queen, whereupon she picks it up herself and says, "This is what I do when I wear it!"

According to custom, only three people are permitted to touch the crown: the queen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the crown jeweler.

The Imperial State Crown is the principal crown worn by the British sovereign and is kept at the Tower of London alongside the other regalia used in coronations and official ceremonies, such as the sovereign's sceptre and Queen Mary II's golden orb.

The current state crown was made in 1937 for the queen's father, King George VI, and is based on the crown made in 1837 for Queen Victoria. It contains a number of the British monarchy's most historic jewels—including St Edward's Sapphire, the oldest gemstone in the collection.

This blue stone has been set into the center of the crown and is said to have belonged to Edward the Confessor, who ascended to the throne in 1042.

Among other notable stones in the crown is the 317-carat Cullinan II diamond, also known as the Second Star of Africa. The Cullinan diamond was mined in South Africa in 1905 and the 3,106-carat diamond was presented as a gift to King Edward VII after failing to sell privately in 1907. The rough diamond was cut into nine smaller stones included in other jewels that are in the private use of the queen.

The TikTok video also features the queen's reaction to another jewel in the Imperial State Crown: the Black Prince's ruby.

"Can I look at this end?" she is shown asking Bruce, as she moves the crown around on the table in front of her. "I like the Black Prince's ruby."

The ruby is in fact a cabochon spinel that throughout history was deemed to be the same thing until in the 18th century, when it was found that the two stones were chemically different in composition.

The "ruby" is reputed to have been presented to Edward the Black Prince and was also worn during the Battle of Agincourt in 1415 by Henry V. The stone was sold during the English Civil War but reentered the royal collection in 1660 with the monarchy's restoration. Queen Victoria had the stone set in her state crown, which was replicated in King George VI's.

Commenters on the TikTok video have praised the queen's good humor in the clip with one writing: "I love the cheeky grin she gives when she look at it after adjusting it."

"Wow! She's actually funny, wasn't expecting that. The way she just man handles the thing like it's a party hat," posted another.

"I'm not necessarily a fan of the monarchy on the whole but the Queen definitely has given us a few of these wonderfully endearing moments!" explained a further user.

The majority of the crown jewels are reserved for use in the coronation ceremony, but the Imperial State Crown was worn by the queen every year of her reign for the State Opening of Parliament until 2017. In 2019, it was decided that the crown was too heavy for the nonagenarian monarch and she wore the George VI Diamond Diadem instead.