Q What services do you offer in Bridal Veil, OR?

At Herford’s Tree Inc., we offer a wide range of tree services, including:

Tree removal

Tree cabling

Tree pruning and hedge and shrub trimming

Stump grinding

Tree planting

We currently serve Bridal Veil, Oregon and the neighboring areas.

Q Why should I hire an ISA Certified Arborist to handle my tree care needs?

ISA Certified Arborists are specialists in tree care. They are trained and equipped to evaluate a tree’s needs and provide it with everything it requires to grow and flourish. Arborists certified through the International Society of Arboriculture, are educated, experienced, and accountable, and give you the best chance at the best service. This can mean the difference between having healthy, attractive trees that add value to your property or poorly maintained trees that are a danger and liability.

Additionally, dealing with large trees can be dangerous work, in terms of damage to your property from falling limbs during pruning or removal or injuries sustained on the job site. Arborists are trained in all safety products taking proper precautions and minimizing the risks. Please feel free to browse our services and see how we can help you.

Q How much does it cost to remove a tree in Bridal Veil, OR?

The cost of a Portland Tree Removal depends on several factors, including your tree size, location, equipment to be used, potential risk, and other factors.

We ensure to keep our prices fair and competitive, while also making sure not to underestimate the resources and time needed for each service. Call us to get your free quote.

Q How often do my trees need to be pruned?

Tree pruning requirements can vary widely depending on factors, such as:

Tree species, size of trees, and how close they are to buildings, utility lines, etc.

Shading & decline issues causing deadwood

Storm frequency

Mature trees should generally be inspected annually for safety and health. The pruning frequency will generally range from 3 to 7 years.

Q Should I remove my tree?

There are many reasons to remove a tree, including hazardous conditions, disease, thinning due to overcrowding, improper location or species choice, construction, or other issues. Herford’s Tree Care, Inc. has ISA Certified Arborists, who can evaluate your trees and help with this decision.

Q Why is it important to prune trees?

Clearance pruning from buildings and utility lines can prevent costly damage to these structures. Crown cleaning removes hazardous dead, broken, and weak limbs. Crown restoration and structural pruning will aid the tree in maturing into a stronger and better-looking specimen. Pruning also helps reduce disease and decline in many trees.

Q How can I tell if my tree is safe?

In most cases, a brief evaluation by our Arborists can easily decide if tree removal or preservation is the best course of action. In some situations, a thorough hazard tree evaluation may be required to make the determination. Techniques used during a hazard tree evaluation may include truck core sampling, root crown evaluation for signs of decay/disease, and other health evaluation and diagnostic methods.

Q Do I need a permit to remove a tree in Bridal Veil, OR?

Requirements, which are usually based on tree species, trunk diameter, property location, etc. You should always check with your City’s Planning or Urban Forestry Department to determine any permit requirements that may apply to your property. In some cases, Herford’s Tree Care, Inc. Experts can help you with this process. Click here for permit information in some of our local cities.

Q How do I tell if my tree needs cabling?

There are various factors to consider before cabling a tree. We offer a free consultation to evaluate and determine if cabling is a suitable option for your tree.

Q Do you offer emergency services in Bridal Veil, OR?

Definitely! We offer 24/7 emergency services for your tree needs or accidents.