On a busy day in Bridal Veil, the back room of the tiniest post office in Oregon is filled to the brim with packages and the all-important wedding invitations from brides seeking its coveted postmark.

"We just received this large box of wedding invitations," says Postmaster Geri Canzler on Tuesday, pointing to a three foot long box filled with over 100 neatly wrapped and neatly handwritten addresses to guests all over the U.S.

The bride-to-be called the post office about two weeks ago, and Canzler provided her the details for shipping her box of invitations. She told her when the invitations would be mailed and the cost for postage and asked the woman which Bridal Veil postmark she wanted on the envelopes. The future bride chose the two doves tying a ribbon in flight with the all-important "Bridal Veil, Oregon 97010" postmark.

While the town of

has diminished in size from its lumber mill days of the 1880s, two Bridal Veil sites remain – the cemetery and the post office.

The Bridal Veil post office is fully staffed with the postmaster working every day hand canceling thousands of wedding invitations.

On occasion, substitute postmaster Andrea Schwartz-Feit, a nearby resident of Coopey Falls takes charge of the busy station. She knows the area residents, and she knows how important the beautifully hand-addressed wedding invitations are to the thousands of women who chose each tiny detail for their special day.

The post office has two unique hand-crafted wedding images, both popular. One includes two doves, the other two encircled hearts. This post office is listed in the top ten "wedding" post office names in America, ranking among places such as Bliss, N.Y.; Lovely, Ky; and Kissimimee, Fla. – each with a unique zip code and a hand-cancelled postmarks.

Canzler conservatively estimates she postmarks over 100,000 wedding invitations a year. She says nearly 75 percent are brought or sent to her post office with postage already on the envelope just to get the "Invitation Station" or "Marriage Station," Bridal Veil, Oregon 97010 hand-cancelled postmark added. The time-consuming work is free for the first 50 and a nickel for each additional envelope. Most wedding invitations include an RSVP envelope which also has the stamped enclosed envelope.

"Selling the stamps is why we are able to stay open," adds Canzler, with the doves stamp and envelopes in one hand and a sheet of postage stamps in the other. Close by, another postal bin holds more than 100 announcements from Portland going to far off places like Bogota, Colombia, from this tiny wooden shed that once belonged to the Bridal Veil Falls Lumber Company.

The shed has weathered the storms – both from fierce gorge winds and winds of change from the

.

The little wooden building has its regular customers from the area and almost all of the sixty metal wall boxes rented. During the busy summer months, tourists who seek out the post office while journeying through the gorge want their postcards mailed from Bridal Veil. Within fifty feet at the back of the 10-foot-by-10-foot planked building run the tracks of the Union Pacific Railroad, which owns the post office building.

Canzler is a Bridal Veil resident, lives near the cemetery and on occasions walks to work. She opens at 9 a.m. weekdays and closes at 3:30 p.m., and Bridal Veil Post Office is one of only a few post offices still open on Saturdays.

Two months ago, on July 7,

D-Ore., recognized the post office's 125th anniversary with a commemorative announcement to Congress.

"It was a big party," says Canzler of the anniversary.

A commemorative historical envelope for the occasion sold out in less than two hours. Canzler continues sorting and stamping the envelopes as local residents stop in to pick up their mail and get some "community news." The post office provides such an essential connection to the community – both locally and at-large, she says.

"We now can communicate online with brides who need information about our services, and we can do it much more efficiently," she says. "We've put the Bridal Veil Post Office postmark on wedding invitations from England, Australia and Germany."

-- Karol Dietrich