Oskarshamns AIK's performance of the last 5 matches is better than Ljungskile SK's.

In Ettan, Sodra, Oskarshamns AIK has better performance than Ljungskile SK.

Ljungskile SK have not managed to score in their last 3 matches.

Both teams haven't won their last match in Ettan, Sodra.

Ljungskile SK scores 1.19 goals when playing at home and Oskarshamns AIK scores 1.27 goals when playing away (on average).

Average number of goals in the first half in meetings between Ljungskile SK and Oskarshamns AIK is 0.8.

Average number of goals in meetings between Ljungskile SK and Oskarshamns AIK is 3.

Ljungskile SK scores 1.6 goals in a match against Oskarshamns AIK and Oskarshamns AIK scores 1.4 goals against Ljungskile SK (on average).

In the last 5 meetings Ljungskile SK won 2, Oskarshamns AIK won 2, 1 draws.

Ljungskile SK has streak of 3 matches with 0 scored goals.

Ljungskile SK's performance of the last 5 matches is better than Oskarshamns AIK's.

In Ettan, Sodra, Ljungskile SK has better performance than Oskarshamns AIK.

When Oskarshamns AIK is down 1-0 away, they win 14% of their matches.

When Ljungskile SK is down 0-1 home, they win 11% of their matches.

When Oskarshamns AIK leads 0-1 away, they win in 83% of their matches.

When Ljungskile SK leads 1-0 at home, they win in 66% of their matches.

On their last meeting Oskarshamns AIK won by 1 goals.

The winner of their last meeting was Oskarshamns AIK.

Ljungskile SK wins 1st half in 38% of their matches, Oskarshamns AIK in 30% of their matches.

Oskarshamns AIK have conceded a goal in each of their last 14 matches.

Ljungskile SK have conceded a goal in each of their last 6 matches.

Oskarshamns AIK haven't scored in 3 of their 8 away matches in Ettan, Sodra this season.

Ljungskile SK haven't scored in 4 of their 8 home matches in Ettan, Sodra this season.

When playing at home, Ljungskile SK have not lost to Oskarshamns AIK in their last 4 encounters.

Ljungskile SK have played 5 home matches in a row without winning.

Ljungskile SK have lost 4 matches in a row.

Did you know that Oskarshamns AIK scores 39% of their goals between the minutes 76-90?

Did you know that Ljungskile SK scores 31% of their goals between the minutes 46-60? This is the highest percentage in the league.

Ljungskile SK have a losing streak of 4 matches in Ettan, Sodra.

Last season's matches: 2-1 (Ljungskile SK at home) and 3-2 (Oskarshamns AIK at home).

During the last 13 meetings, Ljungskile SK have won 4 times, there have been 3 draws while Oskarshamns AIK have won 6 times. The goal difference is 25-20 in favour of Ljungskile SK.