Oskarshamns AIK live scores, players, season schedule and today’s results are available on Sofascore.

Oskarshamns AIK next match

Oskarshamns AIK will play the next match against Ängelholms FF on Aug 24, 2024, 2:00:00 PM UTC in Ettan, Södra.

When the match starts, you will be able to follow Ängelholms FF vs Oskarshamns AIK live score, standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics.

We may have video highlights with goals and news for some Oskarshamns AIK matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.

Oskarshamns AIK previous match

Oskarshamns AIK previous match was against Norrby IF in Ettan, Södra, the match ended in a draw (1 - 1).

Oskarshamns AIK fixtures tab is showing the last 100 football matches with statistics and win/draw/lose icons.

There are also all Oskarshamns AIK scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.

Oskarshamns AIK performance and form graph is a Sofascore unique algorithm that we are generating from the team's last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own knowledge.

This graph may help predict future Oskarshamns AIK matches.

Current Oskarshamns AIK players

Forward: David Burubwa, Rasmus Niklasson, Anton Nyholm Midfielder: Olatomi Olaniyan, Tarek Alnator, Jonathan Tesfay Habte, Ahmet Tuhral, Renato Pitibull, Casper Burehed, Ayomide Jibodu, Leo Rydberg, Oskar Gabrielsson, Malsor Ulaj Defender: Adnan Ćatić, Amer Eriksson-Ibragić, Olle Samuelsson, Sebastian Nilsson, Emil Karlsson Goalkeeper: Melker Uppenberg, Michael Hartmann

The current Oskarshamns AIK roster, stats and player performance can be found on this page.

There are also statistics for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals scored, number of cards and much more.

Oskarshamns AIK top scorers list is updated live during every match.

You can click on players from the roster above and see available personal information such as nationality, date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc.