Africa is known for producing some of the most promising talents in world football, but several have failed to live up to expectations - here are 10 wonderkids who flopped, including three former PSL players.

The recent news that Nigeria midfielder Ogenyi Onazi has paid for his former teammate Sani Emmanuel's operation to save his career reminded the football world of one of the most sought after prodigies.

Scroll through the gallery above to see 10 African wonderkids who failed to live up to their early potential

The now 26-year-old starred a decade ago on home soil as he scored five goals to help Nigeria finish runners up while he won the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player.

READ: 'Fake' former CTC footballer jailed in Europe

After earning a move to Serie A side Lazio, much was expected of the Nigerian - but 10 years on, he's played just 16 professional games, the last of which came in 2016 for Swedish minnows Oskarshamns AIK.

With Nigeria one of the dominant forces in youth international football, it comes as no surprise to see many compatriots within the list.

Macauley Chrisantus, the top scorer at the 2007 FIFA U-17 World Cup earned a move to German side Hamburg SV, but was unable to break into the senior team before enduring a nomadic career,

Now at the age of 29, he featured for Iranian side Zob Ahan, the 12th club of his career, where any aspirations of representing the Super Eagles have seemingly died out.

READ: Euro wonderkid eligible for SA attracts PL interest

Rabiu Ibrahim is another U-17 World Cup winner and made his international debut at the age of 16, but has never kicked out to become the leader many expected him to be when he joined Sporting Lisbon in 2009.

Currently at Slovan Bratislava, the five-time capped senior international is another who is a long way from returning to the international fold.

In South Africa, Mkhanyiseli Siwahla, is one of the standout names, having made his league debut for Ajax Cape Town at the tender age of 15.

Now in the lower leagues of Poland, the diminutive midfielder amassed 76 games in the Absa Premiership, scoring six goals and never represented Bafana Bafana.

READ: 10 Footballers who altered their age

One player who did, Mbulelo Mabizela, and in fact captained the nation at the age of 22, which still ranks as the record for the youngest ever to achieve the feat is also included.

While he earned a move to the Premier League with Tottenham and earned 45 caps for the country, the enormous potential he displayed in the early stages of his career suggests it was unfulfilled.

His last stint in the game was in the National First Division with Royal Eagles after a string of disciplinary issues saw him unable to attract interest in the top-flight.

One of the biggest names, which has become a reference point for youngsters cracking under media pressure and crooked agents is 38-time capped former Ghana international Nii Lamptey.

Lamptey was smuggled into Belgium with a fake passport posing as Stephen Keshi's son and became one of the most sought after talents in world football.

After making his debut for Anderlecht at 16 he went on to lead Ghana to the 2001 U17 World Cup title and make his Black Stars debut.

However, his career quickly unravelled after several dubious moves in England, Italy, Argentina, Turkey and China.

The now 48-year-old ended his career in South Africa with Jomo Cosmos after a journey spanning two decades after fleeing his hometown of Accra.

The rest of the list comprises of former Pirates playmaker, Nhlakanipho Ntuli, Souleymane Coulibaly and McDonald Mariga.