Herbert Scheffel Funeral Held in Northwood

Funeral services for Herbert Scheffel, 81, retired farmer, who died at Burr Oak Manor February 10, were held February 13 at Deer Creek Valley Lutheran church in Northwood with the Rev. Theodore Anderson officiating.

Herbert Scheffel, son of the late Matthew and Matilda Scheffel, was born on a farm near Carpenter, Iowa, on December 20, 1892. He was a veteran of World War I with service in the U. S. Army, and was a member of the American Legion. Mr. Scheffel was a member of Deer Creek Valley Lutheran church.

He attended an automobile school in Detroit, Mich. He was united in marriage to Nettle Nelson December 17, 1919 at the parsonage in Lyle.

Mr. Scheffel is survived by his wife; one son, Richard of Lyle; one brother, Roy of London, Minn.; two sisters, Mrs. Emma Kvale of Lyle and Mrs. Durbin (Erma) Ball of Hampton; three grandchildren, Judy Stark, Arnold and Roger Scheffel; three great-grandchildren, Matthew, Mindee, Patricia Scheffel, all of Lyle.

Mr. Scheffel was preceded in death by a brother, Matthew, and a sister in infancy, and a great granddaughter, Amy.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery in Lyle with Rev. Anderson in charge of committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 21 Feb 1974,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, column 6

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Mrs. Louis Taylor Funeral Held At Bethel Alliance

Funeral services for Mrs. Louis LaVerne Taylor, 49, who died at Methodist hospital in Rochester January 23, were held January 26 at Bethel Alliance church in Lyle with the Rev. Robert Dutton officiating.

Louise Taylor, daughter of Robert and Louella Barr, was born February 1, 1925 in Wykoff, Minn. She attended the Wykoff schools and was graduated from high school there in 1943.

She was married to Louis L. (Tip) Taylor of Lyle on January 12, 1946, and they established their home in Lyle. Mrs. Taylor was a member of the Lyle American Legion Auxiliary and the Bethel Alliance church where she also served several years as Sunday school secretary.

Survivors include her husband, Louis LaVerne; three sons, David of Lyle, Rodney of Austin and Michael at home; one daughter, Mrs. Luella Barr of Wykoff, Minn.; one granddaughter, Terri Sue Barr; also four sisters, Mrs. Jean Steinblock and Mrs. Loren (Roberta) Stanton, both of Austin; Mrs. U. H. (Bette) Haney of Lyle and Mrs. Jerry (Sandy) Raichle of Minneapolis; two brothers, Dale and Gordon Barr of St. Paul.

Out of town persons attending the services were from Lowell, Ind.; Minneapolis, St. Paul, Austin, Wykoff, Dexter and Oronoco, Minn, and Osage.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery west of Lyle with Rev. Dutton in charge of the committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 7 Feb. 1974,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, column 5

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Rev. James Sopko Funeral

Held At Otranto Church

Funeral services for the Rev. James Sopko, 70, who died at a hospital in Rochester, Minn. November 20. were held November 24 at the Otranto Community church with the Rev. Howard Grossoehme officiating.

James Sopko was born July 30, 1903 in Holyoke, Mass., the son of Charles and Anna (Oberla) Sopko. He was educated in grade and high school in Plymouth, Penna. He received his degree from the Theological Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran church in Chicago, Ill. May 12, 1926, and was ordained May 13, 1926 at Maywood in Chicago.

Rev. Sopko was in service to the church for 47 years, and had pastorates at Guttenberg; Blue Island, Ill.; Hatfield, Mass.; Tucson, Ariz. ; Lubbock, Tex. ; and Otranto. On July 28, 1932 he was united in marriage with Lydia Nuehring in Galena, Ill.

He is survived by his wife, Lydia of Otranto; three brothers: Albert Sopko of Middlesax, N. J.; Paul Sopko of Blue Island, Ill.; Joseph Sopko of Portola, Calif.; three sisters: Cecilia Sopko, Plymouth, Penna.; Mrs. Helen Hielberger of Plymouth, Penna. and Mrs. Anna Janson of Greenlawn, N.Y.; also several nephews and nieces. He was preceded in death by his parents and one brother, Charles.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery near Lyle with Rev. Grossoehme in charge of the committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 29 Nov. 1973, page 1, column 3

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Elmer C. Holst Funeral Held

At Our Savior's Lutheran

Funeral services for Elmer C. Holst, 63, who died at his home in rural Lyle September 29, were held October 2 at Our Savior's Lutheran church in Lyle with the Rev. H. Luecke officiating.

Elmer Clemens Holst was born March 23, 1910 in Fort Dodge, the son of Henry and Alvina (Stahlbock) Holst. He made his home in Clare, Iowa, until 1950 when the family moved to Lyle. He attended Trinity Lutheran school and was married to Anna Buske of Palmer February 25, 1940. He was engaged in farming most of his life. He was a member of Our Savior's Lutheran church, Lyle.

He is survived by his wife, Anna; one son, Galen of Lyle; one daughter, Mrs. Glen (Janice) Helgeson, Glenville, Minn.; also three grandchildren, Lyn Helgeson, Steven and Scott Holst; five sisters, Mrs. Esther Lehman, Humboldt; Mrs. Beau Burns, Barnum; Mrs. Stanley Larsen of Melrose; Mrs. Forrest Davenport and Mrs. Welden Hett of Fort Dodge; three brothers, Martin of Manson, Alvin of Barnum and Victor of Fort Dodge; an aunt, Alice Anderson of Fort Dodge.

Out of town people attending the funeral were from: Lyle, Austin, Rose Creek, Dexter, Adams, Albert Lea, Brownsdale, Glenville and Mazeppa; Clare, Gilmore City, St. Ansgar, Otranto, West Bend, Manson, Palmer, Humboldt, Lytten, Barnum, Fort Dodge, Melrose, Northwood, Rockwell City, Fenton, Vincent, Eagle Grove, Rolfe, Cedar Falls, and Ellis, Kansas; Springfield, Mo. and Belvidere Illinois.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery with Rev. Luecke in charge of committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 11 Oct. 1973,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, columns 6&7

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Mrs. Hazel Sherman Funeral

Held At Bethel Alliance

Funeral services for Mrs. Hazel Sherman, 82, who died at Mitchell County Memorial hospital April 14, were held Wednesday, April 18 at Bethel Alliance church in Lyle with the Rev. Robert Dutton officiating. Interment was in Woodbury cemetery.

Hazel Viola Riehm, daughter of George W. and Sarah (Schermerhorn) Riehm, was born July 16, 1890 in Hancock county, Iowa. She received her education in a rural school at Marble Rock and moved with her family to Lyle in 1918 to reside here until her death.

She was a telephone operator in Lyle for many years after her marriage to Walter Sherman. She was a member of the Royal Neighbors at Lyle for over 50 years, and of the American Legion Auxiliary, Lyle.

She was preceded in death by her husband, Walter; her parents, two sisters, Mrs. Iola Hoffman and Mrs. Lenora Griggs, both of Rockford; one brother, Ross Riehm of Mason City.

Her only survivors are her brother, O. K. Riehm of Carpenter and nieces and nephews.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 26 April 1973,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, columns 5&6

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Cornelius Koopal Funeral Held At Bethel Alliance

Funeral services for Cornelius (Case) Koopal, 62, who died at Mitchell County Memorial hospital Wednesday, October 11, were held Saturday, October 14, at Bethel Alliance church in Lyle with the Rev. Robert Dutton officiating. Interment was in Woodbury cemetery.

Cornelius (Case) Koopal, the son of Sybrand and Anna Koopal, was born November 9, 1909 in the Netherlands. At the age of one he and his parents and brothers and sisters came to America. Following the death of his mother, he went from Platte, S.D. to Hospers to live with his foster parents, Mr. and Mrs. Rein Talsma. He attended schools at Hospers and Matlock.

On November 29, 1933, he was married to Jennie Bass of George and three sons were born to this union, John, Sammy and William.

Case operated a filling station at Matlock for five years before moving to Sheldon where they farmed for eight years. In 1947 he and his family moved to Lyle township where he has farmed until his death.

He served ten years as a 4-H leader; was a past Chancellor of the Knights of Pythias and was out going president of the Lyle Lions at the time of his death.

Survivors are his wife, Jennie; three sons, John of Waverly; Sammy at home; and William of Austin; two daughters in-law, Mrs. John (Betty) Koopal and Mrs. William (Eileen) Koopal; three grandsons, Steven, Craig and Michael, and three granddaughters, Kellie, Kathi and Susan; two brothers, William Koopal of Boise, Idaho and Anton Talsma of Sheldon; one sister, Mrs. Kathryn Markus of Nampa, Idaho and nieces and nephews.

He was preceded in death by his parents, and one brother, Martin Koopal.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 19 Oct. 1972,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, column 6

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Ida L. Schossler Funeral Held At Otranto Church

Funeral services for Mrs. Ida L. Schossler, 78, of Otranto, who died at the Mitchell County Memorial hospital March 30, were held April 1 at the Otranto Community church with the Rev James Sopko officiating.

Ida L. Schossler was born May 29, 1894 In Gallipolis, Ohio, the daughter of William Henry and Viola Catherine May. The family moved to Iowa when she was nine years of age.

She was married to Chester John Schossler in Mason City on December 1, 1917. They farmed in Minnesota for a number of years, and moved to Otranto in 1932. They celebrated their golden wedding anniversary on December 1, 1967. Mrs. Schossler was a member of Otranto Community church and Ladies Aid. She had been a resident of the St. Ansgar Samaritan Center since May 1, 1969.

Surviving are two daughters, Mrs. Mllburn Priem (Betty) of St. Ansgar and Mrs. Harold (Frances) Clark of Plymouth; six grandchildren and three great-grandchildren; five sisters, Mrs. Irvin (Mary) Beaver of Eddyville; Mrs. Thomas (Bessie) Lenz of St. Ansgar; Mrs. Viola Dockstader, St. Ansgar; Mrs. Albert (Hazel) Pettitt of Austin, Minn.; Mrs. Glen (Susie) Byington of Plymouth.

Mrs. Schossler was preceded in death by her husband In 1968, her parents, one brother and one sister. Burial was in Woodbury cemetery near Lyle with Rev. Sopko In charge of committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 6 April 1972,

page 8, columns 6&7

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Clara Peterman Funeral Held November 3

Funeral services for Mrs. Clara Peterman, 71, who died at St. Olaf hospital, Austin, November 1, were held November 3 at Jordan Mortuary in Austin, with the Rev. Einar Unseth of Mona officiating. Interment was in Woodbury cemetery west of Lyle.

Clara Mae Peterman, daughter of Frank and Anna (Cerny) Prihoda, was born May 25, 1900 in Freeborn county, Minn.

She attended school in Freeborn county and on October 4, 1927 she was married to Geo. Peterman in Austin. They farmed in the Lyle community until her husbands death in 1962 and she moved to Lyle. She had lived in the Lyle area for 44 years.

She was a member of the Six Mile Grove church; the Auxiliary of the Lyle American Legion where she served as president; the London Royal Neighbors and Lyle Star Project Group.

She was the last remaining member of her family of seven.

She is survived by three sister in-laws, Mrs. Lucille Prihoda, Albert Lea ; Mrs. Laura Campbell, Myrtle; Mrs. Anna Lukes, Austin; a brother-in-law, Frank Zavasil of Michigan; and nephew, nieces and cousins.

She was preceded in death by her parents, her husband Geo., two sisters and four brothers.

Relatives attending were Mr. and Mrs. Richard Kudlik, Plainfield, Illinois; Mr. and Mrs. Walter Rush, Sheridan, Mich.; Mr. and Mrs. Joe Prihoda, Geneva, Minn.; Mrs. Lucille Prihoda, Mr. and Mrs. Floyd Prihoda of Albert Lea; Mr. and Mrs. Mike Cafourek, Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Nelson, London; Mr. and Mrs. Mike Prantner, Blooming Prairie; Mrs. Laura Campbell, Myrtle; Mr. and Mrs. Vernon Campbell, Mrs. Ed Steinblock, Mr. and Mrs. Richard Lukes, Mrs. Anna Lukes, Austin.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 11 Nov. 1971,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, column 6

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Mrs. Guy Pike Highway Fatality

Mrs. Guy Pike, 58, of Carpenter was killed outright Saturday, July 31 at 4:15 p. m. as the result of a two-car collision six miles east of St. Ansgar on Highway 218.

An auto driven by Garry E. Miller of Dexter, Minn, was traveling east on 218 when he crossed the center line of the highway and was in collision with a car driven by Mrs. Pike. Miller was taken to the Mitchell County Memorial hospital for treatment of facial and chest injuries. Three passengers in the Miller vehicle were also hospitalized. Wayne A. Krull of Dexter suffered head injuries, and Bucky Kulmann of Dexter and Chuck MacLachlon of Rose Creek, Minn, were transferred to St. Mary's hospital for treatment of multiple injuries. Miller was charged with reckless driving.

Deputies Vince Putzier and Curt Younker investigated the mishap. Both vehicles were total wrecks. This was the third highway fatality in Mitchell county this year.

There was a collision between a pickup truck and a semi-trailer Thursday, July 29 at 3:15 p.m. three and a half miles north of Osage on Highway 218. Marvin J. Johanns of rural Osage, driver of the pickup, was making a left turn into a farm driveway as the semi, operated by Harry C. Evert of Faribault, Minn, was passing. Both vehicles ended up in the east ditch. There was an estimated 512,000 damage to the semi and left front and side to the pickup. Johanns was taken to the Mitchell County Memorial hospital for treatment of bruised ribs Sheriff Richard Jahnel and deputies Putzier and Younker investigated.

An accident involving an auto and a semi-trailer truck occurred Friday, July 30 at 12.55 p. m. in the parking lot of the Plaza Shopping Center in east Osage The car, driven by Linda J. Lee of rural Elma, was proceeding south in the parking lot when she was struck by the semi driven by Raymond Wigley of Fort Payne, Ala. Damage to the car was estimated at 5200 and $25 to the truck. Deputy Putzier investigated

Mrs. Guy Pike Funeral Held Otranto Church

Funeral services for Mrs. Guy Pike, 58, who died as the result of a highway accident east of St. Ansgar Saturday, July 31. were held Tuesday, August 3 at the Otranto Community church with the Rev. James Sopko officiating, assisted by the Rev Elwin Labrenz.

Arlene Louise Pike was born February 24, 1913 in Wiota, Minn., the daughter of Eli and Nell Sheumaker. The family later moved to Worth county, and she attended and graduated from Otranto high school.

She was united in marriage to Guy Pike February 26, 1936, and three children were born to them. They farmed in Worth county until 1951 when they moved to Oakdale. They returned to the Otranto area in 1952 when she was employed as a cook at the Otranto school. In the fall of 1961 the Pike family moved to Carpenter where she was employed by the St. Ansgar school system as assistant cook until the time of her death.

Mrs. Pike is survived by her husband, Guy, one daughter, Mrs. Roger (Sara) Osmonson, one son, Roland at home, one granddaughter, Jill Osmonson.

Preceding her in death were her parents, four brothers, one sister, and a son, Roger.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery in Lyle with Rev Sopko in charge of the committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 5 Aug. 1971, page 1, column 6

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Rosie B. Dockum Funeral Held Deer Creek Lutheran

Funeral services for Mrs. Rosie B. Dockum, 98, who died at the Mitchell County Memorial hospital Thursday, June 4, were held Saturday, June 6 at Deer Creek Lutheran church, Carpenter, with the Rev. R. Lehmann officiating.

Rosie Belle Townsend was born August 3, 1871 in Mansfield, Ill., the daughter of George and Anne Townsend. Her parents had migrated from England in 1861. Mrs. Dockum was the youngest of four daughters. Her three sisters are deceased.

In 1889 she married Harry A. Dockum in Mansfield, Ill. They both taught school, and later moved to a farm. In 1902 they moved to a farm near Ames, and in 1907 moved to Cherokee, Okla. where they farmed for one year, returning to Iowa to live near Ames until 1913 when they bought the farm near Meltonville, and moved there the following year. Mr. Dockum died in 1916.

Seven children were born to them: Paul, Mrs. H.B. (Lucy) Dockstader,Ernest and Mrs. William (Velda) Anderson, all of St. Ansgar; Leslie of Hansell, Mrs. Kenneth (Helen) Harrison, Hampton; and Alpheus who died in 1968.

Mrs. Dockum is also survived by three granddaughters she brought up, Mrs. Rosamond Gordon, Carpenter, Mrs. Glen (Dorothy) Kittleson, Osage, and Mrs. Paul (Jeanette) Kittleson, Ore.; 15 grandchildren; 35 great-grandchildren and eight great-great-grandchildren; nieces and nephews.

Mrs. Dockum was baptized in the Episcopal church, Mansfield, Ill., later uniting with Christian church where her husband had his membership. In 1938 she was confirmed and became an active member of Deer Creek Lutheran church.

Burial was in Woodbury cemetery, Lyle, with Rev. Lehmann in charge of the committal services.

Source: St. Ansgar Enterprise, 11 June 1970, page 1, column 4

Credit: Mitche Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Albert Hansen Funeral Held in Austin April 18

Funeral services for Albert Hansen, 71, of rural Austin who died April 14, were held April 18 at Grace Baptist church in Austin with the Rev. Jack Dowden officiating. Also participating in the service was the Rev. Merland Johnson of Lyle.

Albert Hansen, the son of Christian and Anna Christine Hansen was born February 8, 1896 on the home farm south of Austin where he resided until his death.

He was baptized and confirmed at St. Olaf Lutheran church in Austin, and attended Enterprise grade school.

On September 3, 1924 he was united in marriage with Lorna M. Miller. Four children were born to this union.

Mr. Hansen was engaged in farming on the home place until his retirement in 1963. He served on the Enterprise school board for many years, and was a member of the Enterprise Cemetery board, Danish Brotherhood and Farm Bureau.

He is survived by his wife, Lorna, two sons, Lawrence and Everett, daughter, Mrs. Charles W. (Shirley) Lightly, all of the Austin area; 10 grandchildren; one sister, Mrs Emma Denisen, one brother, Fred Hansen and mother-in-law, Mrs. Mary Daniel-son.

He was preceded in death by his parents, one son, Edward, a brother and a sister.

Also surviving are several nieces and nephews and a host of friends. Casket bearers were Lester Berry, Russell Parmenter, Floyd Lehman, Henry Lausen, Carleton Sayles, Ercell Anderson.

Out of town persons attending the services came from Boulder, Colorado, Wilmar, Hastings, Blooming Prairie, Winnebago, Adams, Rose Creek and Lyle, Minn, and St. Ansgar and Riceville and surrounding area.

Interment was at Rose Creek-Enterprise cemetery, Austin.

Source: the St. Ansgar Enterprise, 27 April 1967,

Lyle Leader News supplement, page 1, column 3

Credit: Mitch Helle

©2016 MNGenWeb

Hazel E. Baldner, 84, of Austin, Minnesota, died Thursday, April 14, 2016, at Mayo Clinic Hospital - Rochester, Saint Marys Campus, after sustaining an accident at her home last Saturday night.

Hazel Ellen Wester was born November 1, 1931, in Reynolds, North Dakota, the daughter of Frank and Ellen (Moore) Wester. She was a graduate of Grand Meadow Schools. On Aug. 16, 1952, Hazel married the love of her life, Walter David Baldner, Jr. in Austin. To this union three sons were born, and for over 50 years the family farmed south of Austin on the Baldner family farm.

Hazel was devoted to her family while working and enjoying her life with her constant companion, Walter Jr. She enjoyed many adventures in her life, which included family events, sporting events, birthday parties, church events and card club. Hazel also loved to sew and bake. She belonged to Our Savior’s Lutheran Church in Austin. Hazel took each day as it came and relied on God to help and sustain her throughout her life. She was compassionate and loyal to all who knew her, and will be dearly missed.

She is survived by her three sons, David (LaVonne "Loni") Baldner of Austin, Minnesota, Dean (Rhonda) Baldner of Austin, Minnesota, Wayne (Jodie) Baldner of Brownsdale, Minnesota; six grandchildren: John Baldner, Alisha (Zach) Martinson, Mandy Hanson, Kassie Baldner, Jason (Tina) Baldner and Jessica Baldner; 10 great-grandchildren: Taylor, Joslyn and Carson Peck, Nolyn and David Martinson; Penelope and Bennet Hanson, Kiley and Karter Baldner, Tristan Baldner; many other family members and friends.

She was preceded in death by her parents Frank and Ellen Wester; her beloved husband "Junior" Walter in 2006; and her sister Arlene.

Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. on Monday, April 18, 2016, at Our Savior's Lutheran Church in Austin with Intern Pastor Lisa Meshke officiating. Friends may call from 4 to 7 p.m. on Sunday, April 17, 2016, at Worlein Funeral Home in Austin and at the church one hour prior to the service on Monday. Interment is at Rose Creek Enterprise Cemetery, rural Austin. Worlein Funeral Home of Austin is assisting the family with arrangements. Condolences may be expressed to the family online at www.worlein.com.

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/17/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Marion June McRoberts, age 95, was called to her heavenly home on Friday April 15, 2016.

She was greeted in Heaven by her husband Lyle, her son Kenny, her parents John and Katie Mossyge, her brother Don and her baby sister Virginia.

Marion was born September 17, 1920 in Taopi, Minnesota to John and Katie (Hamm) Mossyge. She grew up on the Mossyge family farm, attended country school and two years of high school in LeRoy, Minnesota. On Dec. 29, 1939 she was united in marriage to Lyle McRoberts at the First Presbyterian Church in LeRoy and to this union three children were born, Fern, Kenny and Lila. Marion enjoyed farm life, gardening, needlework and spending time with her family. Marion and Lyle enjoyed camping, wintering in Arizona and snowmobiling. She was active in First Presbyterian Church and its’ ladies activities, American Legion Auxiliary Unit No. 161 and LeRoy Senior Citizens. She enjoyed living at Wild Wood Grove and Partaking in the many activities there.

Marion is survived by her two daughters: Fern (George) Dohlman, and Lila (Bill) Feather both of LeRoy and a daughter-in-law Mary McRoberts also of LeRoy. Seven grandchildren: Rick (Jan) Dohlman, Pete (Brenda) Dohlman, Patty (Dennis) White, Dave (Jill) McRoberts, Clint (Lynn) McRoberts, Dan (Kelly) Feather and Brenda Hofner-McRoberts, 23 grandchildren, 13 great-grandchildren and a sister-in-law Marjorie Mossyge and many nieces, nephews and cousins.

Blessed be her Memory.

Services will be 11 a.m. Tuesday April 19, 2016 at the First Presbyterian Church in Le Roy with Pastor John Kerr officiating. Visitation will be from 4 to 7 p.m. on Monday at the Hindt Funeral Home in LeRoy and will continue for one hour prior to the service on Tuesday. Burial will be in the LeRoy Cemetery.

Condolences may be left at www.Hindtfuneralhomes.com

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/17/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Mae C. Hele, 90, of Austin, Minnesota, died Tuesday, April 12, 2016, at Sacred Heart Care Center.

Mae was born May 18, 1925, in Brainerd, Minnesota, to Joseph and Stella Horak. On November 1, 1942, she was married in Brainerd to Arthur Hele. He preceded her in death on November 13, 1996.

Shortly after their marriage, Art left for the war overseas and Mae worked in the office of the Nabisco Biscuit factory in Minneapolis until his return when they moved to Austin, Minnesota, where Art began work at the Hormel plant and Mae became a homemaker and mother to their five children.

She was a member of St. Augustine Catholic Church in Austin and enjoyed camping, square dancing, traveling and most of all, her children and grandchildren. She was also an avid reader and loved to crochet, specializing in beautiful keepsake afghans for her family members.

Survivors include her son, David Hele (Mary), Birchwood, Wisconsin; her daughters, Mary Bottin (Steve), Austin, Minnesota, Janice Tamke, Austin, Minnesota, Karen Baier (Ron), Owatonna, Minnesota; her son, James Hele (Nancy), McAllen, Texas; grandchildren, Scott Billadeau, Albert Lea, Minnesota, Brian Billadeau, Austin, Minnesota, Cathy Elit (Mike), Austin, Minnesota, and Brenda Anderson (Dean), Austin, Minnesota; great-grandchildren, Madison Elit, Mckenzie Elit, Alec Anderson and Alyssa Anderson.

A memorial mass will be celebrated 10:30 a.m. on Wednesday, April 20, 2016, at Sacred Heart Care Center with Father Donald Zenk officiating. There will be a 5 p.m. CCW Rosary on Tuesday at Mayer Funeral Home where friends may call from 5 to 7 p.m. Interment will be in Fort Snelling National Cemetery at a later date. Condolences may be left online at www.mayerfh.com.

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/17/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Jerald W. Kelly, 94, of Austin, Minnesota, died Thursday morning, April 14, 2016, at St. Marks Lutheran Home.

He was born April 9, 1922, in Jackson, Minnesota, the son of Roy and Hazel (Griffith) Kelly. A 1942 Austin High School graduate, Jerry served his country in the U.S. Navy from 1942-1944. He worked for 18 years on the Great Lakes ore boats as a maritime seaman, retiring in 1987.

On December 13, 1958, he was united in marriage to Annamae Hansen in Austin. The couple lived in Faribault from 1994 to 2004 and raised one son. Jerry worked at Austin Drug for many years. Jerry considered himself a free spirit, and loved his work as a maritime seaman. He also enjoyed traveling, reading, fishing, attending Vikings games and playing cards. He will be dearly missed by his friends and family.

Jerry is survived by one son, William Kelly of Oronoco; brothers, Kenneth Kelly and Richard Kelly, both of Austin; his sister Shirley (Donald) Erickson, also of Austin, and brother-in-law Howard Nepp, Austin.

He was preceded in death by his parents Roy and Hazel Kelly; his wife Annamae Kelly in 2013; his sisters Elline Kelly and Mary Nepp; his brothers Claude (Fern) Kelly and Eugene (Marilyn) Kelly; and sisters-in-law Elnora Kelly, Charlene Kelly.

A graveside service will be held at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016, at Oakwood Cemetery in Austin with Pastor Ron Kelly officiating. Military honors by American Legion Post 91 and V.F.W. Post 1216. There will be no visitation or reviewal. Memorials can be directed to Westminster Presbyterian Church or recipient of donor’s choice. Service prearranged and performed by Worlein Funeral Home, Austin. Condolences may be expressed to the family online at www.worlein.com.

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/17/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Evelyn LaVern Scheer (Simes), age 93, was guided to heaven by her angel to be with the Lord on Friday April 15, 2016 at Our House Senior Living in Austin, Minnesota.

Evelyn L. Albert was born on July 7, 1922, daughter of Jack and Clara (Ebel) Albert in Chester, Iowa. She married Glenn B. Simes at the Little Brown Church in Nashua, Iowa. Together they moved to Corning, Minnesota, until they purchased a farm by Dexter, Minnesota, where Glenn and Evelyn raised their three children. After Glenn's death she continued to live on the farm as a housewife and enjoyed her children, beautiful flowers, taking care of the lawn, and garden. She loved to can her wonderful dill pickles and tomatoes. She later married Donovan Scheer and continued to live on the farm for 55 years when dementia became an issue. Evelyn lived at Our House Memory Care for almost 14 years, and the kindness, hugs, and kisses given to her during that time will always be appreciated. Evelyn was a happy person, never complained, and walked most of the day singing "You Are My Sunshine" and "Jesus Loves Me."

The love Evelyn gave each of her children and grandchildren will always be with them, and she will always be in their hearts as a wonderful Mom and Grandmother. She is at peace with the Lord and her angel. Her daughter, Gail, always told her when it was her time to go to heaven her angel would fly her up there and that she would not have to walk. Evelyn will be missed by her daughter who was with her almost every day and by her loving sons. She is in heaven now and at peace.

Evelyn is survived by her children Jerry Lee (Mildred) Simes of Austin, Minnesota, Gail Marie (Dennis) Lorenzen of Austin, Minnesota, and Glenn W. (Linda) Simes of Venice, Florida; eight grandchildren, great-grandchildren, great-great-grandchildren; and her sister Beth Marie Samuelson.

She was preceded in death by her parents Jack and Clara, her first husband Glenn B. Simes and second husband Donovan Scheer, and four brothers: Lester, Vernie, Jackie, and Lorraine Albert.

Services will be 1:00 P.M. Thursday, April 21, 2016 at the Hindt Funeral Home in Grand Meadow with Pastor Jon Marburger officiating. Visitation will be from 5-7 P.M. on Wednesday at the Hindt Funeral Home in Grand Meadow and will continue for 1 hr prior to the service on Thursday. Burial will be in the Chester Hill Cemetery.

Condolences may be left at www.Hindtfuneralhomes.com

Source: Hindt-Hudek Funeral Home

©2016 MNGenWeb

Obituary for Richard Donald Olson

Richard D. "Dick" "Dixie" Olson, age 88, of Austin, passed away on Wednesday, April 13, 2016, just shy of his 89th birthday.

Richard was a lifelong resident of Austin and attended Austin High School (Class of 1945). He enlisted in the Navy during World War II where he served in the Pacific Theatre and participated in the first atomic bomb experiment. He married his wife of 67 years, Helen, in 1948 and returned to Austin to begin his family and his lifelong employment with the Milwaukee Railroad where he retired after 30 years of service.

Richard enjoyed hunting and fishing, as much for the chance to be with friends as for the sport itself. He was also an avid auction participant, as his collection of antique clocks and furniture will attest to.

Survivors include his loving wife, Helen; son, Rick (Lynda) Olson; daughters, Stasia (Tony) Nelson, Peggy (Rick) Pelzl; son, Eddie Olson; 13 grandchildren; four great grandchildren.

The family's heart felt gratitude goes out to Hospice and St. Mark's in Austin for their tender loving care at the end.

Funeral services will be held 11 am on Monday, April 18, 2016 at Mayer Funeral Home with Chaplain Theresa Turnbull officiating. Friends may call one hour before the service at Mayer Funeral Home on Monday. Interment will be in Oakwood Cemetery with military rites by American Legion Post #91 and V.F.W. Post #1216.

Condolences may be left online at www.mayerfh.com

Source: Mayer Funeral Home

©2016 MNGenWeb

Barbara J. Coggins, a longtime resident of Valparaiso, Florida, passed away on Friday, April 8, 2016.

She was born on Sept. 6, 1937, in Austin, Minnesota, to Robert and Albina Auer. She had three brothers, Bob Auer and wife Thelma; Dick Auer and wife Cathy; and Mike Auer and wife Jean; who still reside in Minnesota.

Barb, as she was known by her friends and family, moved around the world as the former spouse of an Army officer and was the loving mother of three children, Andy Coggins and wife Debbie; Christy Walker and husband P.J.; and David Coggins; as well as two grandchildren Jordan Coggins and Kristan Coggins.

The loving compassion and devotion of Barbara’s neighbors, Sue and Chuck Hartness, and the caregivers at The Manor in Niceville, Florida, mean more to the family than words can express.

She will be missed by all who knew and loved her.

You may go online to offer condolences to the family and share memories of Barb at www.barbara.coggins.muchloved.com.

Memorialization will be by cremation and she will be laid to rest in Austin, Minnesota. In celebration of her life, donations may be made to Barb's favorite charity: St Jude Children's Hospital.

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/17/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Dean C. Greibrok, 57, of Austin, Minnesota, died Tuesday, April 12, 2016, at Mayo Clinic Hospitals, St. Marys Campus in Rochester.

Dean Carlyle Greibrok was born May 13, 1958, in Albert Lea, Minnesota, the son of Carlyle and Dorothy (Kuhlmann) Greibrok. He was baptized at Oakland Lutheran Church and confirmed at Deer Creek Valley Lutheran Church. He attended rural school and graduated from Glenville High School. Dean completed his education at the Mankato Technical College.

Dean married Canda Seys on Sept. 25, 1993, at the Little Brown Church in Nashua, Iowa. He became a farm machinery mechanic working for Veldman Implement in Hollandale, Minnesota, and most recently was a salesman with Ag-Power at Hollandale.

Dean was a toy tractor collector and liked to work in the yard and go camping. He enjoyed doing field work on the farms and loved spending time with his family and friends.

He was preceded in death by his father Carlyle Greibrok; mother-in-law, Judy Seys; brother-in-law, Robert Edwards; and a nephew Dustin Leidall.

Dean is survived by his wife, Canda Greibrok, Austin, Minnesota; sons, Jordan Greibrok, Austin, Minnesota, and Michael Fadden, Austin, Minnesota; mother, Dorothy Greibrok, Austin, Minnesota; brothers, sister and spouses, David and Julie Greibrok, Lyle, Minnesota, Becky and John Westra, Wheaton, Illinois, Dwight and Patty Greibrok, Glenville, Minnesota, John Greibrok, St. Ansgar, Iowa, Allan and Laurie Greibrok, Austin, Minnesota; nieces and nephews; father-in-law, Ed Seys; sisters-in-law, Kim Leidall, Kelly Seys and brother-in-law and wife, Chad and Jennifer Seys, all of Austin, Minnesota.

Funeral services will be held at 2 p.m. on Saturday, April 16, 2016, at Faith Lutheran Church, London, Minnesota, with Pastor Kent Otterman officiating. Interment will be in Calvary Cemetery in Austin. Visitation will be at Clasen-Jordan Mortuary on Friday from 4 to 7 p.m. and at the church for one half hour before the service on Saturday afternoon.

Source: Austin Daily Herald website, 4/15/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Emma Amanda Halvorsdatter Wambeam was born May 3, 1870 at Rock, Mitchell, Iowa to Hans Halvorsen Wambiem and Britha Aadsdatter Himle, the fifth of their six children and their only daughter.

Her five brothers were:

Halvor (b 1858, d before 1863),

John (b 1860),

Halvor (b April 1863, d August 1864),

Halvor Edward (b May 26, 1865, d August 1865) and

Halvor (b July 21, 1874).

Emma was baptized at the First Lutheran Church at St Ansgar, Mitchell, Iowa and confirmed at same on October 4, 1885.

Found in the 1870 & 1880 censuses living on a farm at Rock, Mitchell, Iowa:

1870: Hans Holverson 40, Betsey Holverson 37, John Holverson 9, Emma Holverson 3 mos.

1880: Hans Halverson 56, Betsy Halverson 47, John Halverson 19, Amanda Halverson 10, Helver Halverson 5, Maria C. Nelson 17, Betsy C. Nelson 74.

Emma Amanda married Ole I. Thon (b June 16, 1867, d July 28, 1935) on March 15, 1893 at the First Lutheran Church, St Ansgar, Mitchell, Iowa.

The couple had five children:

Mabel (b January 1, 1894, d May 25, 1907);

Iva Bell (b 1897);

Ada O (b 1899);

Clifford (b 1901) and Viola M (b 1907).

Found in the 1895 - 1905 censuses living at Barton, Worth, Iowa:

1895: Emma Thon age 24.

1900: Ole I Thon 31, Emma Thon 30, Mabel Thon 6, Iva Thon 3, Ada Thon 1.

1905: Emma Thon age 35

Found in the 1910 census living at Adams, Mower, Iowa: Ole I Thon 42, Emma Thon 39, Iva B Thon 13, Ada O Thon 11, Clifford L Thon 9, Viola M Thon 3, Hans Warnbeam 85.

Found in the 1920, 1925 censuses at Devil's Lake, Ramsey, North Dakota:

1920: Ole I Thon 52, Emma A Thon 49, Iva Bell Thon 23, Ada O Thon 21, Clifford L Thon 19, Viola M Thon 13.

1925: O R Thon 51 (should be 56), Emma Thon 55, Iva Thon 28, Viola Thon 18, Ada Thon 26, Clifford Thon 24.

Found in the 1930 census at Minneapolis, Hennepin, Minnesota: Ole I Thon 62, Emma Thon 59, Ada Thon 30.

Emma Thon died November 24, 1935 at Hennepin, Minnesota, just months after her husband, Ole's death.

Emma is buried at the Little Cedar Cemetery, Adams, Mower, Minnesota.

There is a memorial for her at Find a Grave # 17276403 and photos of her gravestone.

Credit: Diedre Badker, 4/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Leo Hildreth Rites In Austin

Funeral services for Leo Hildreth, 49, of Austin, who died suddenly while vacationing with his wife in Quebec City, Canada September 18, were held Saturday, September 23 at the Worlein Funeral Home in Austin with the Rev. G. C. Knutson of Our Savior's Lutheran church officiating.

Mr. Hildreth was born in Waterloo March 25, 1912 and lived there and at Albert Lea until the death of his father during the flu epidemic in 1918.

The family then moved to Lyle He was confirmed in the Lyle Lutheran Church, and was a graduate of Lyle high school He was united in marriage to Violet M. Kittleson of St. Ansgar October 2, 1934. They lived in Lyle a few years, and then moved to Austin where they had resided for the past 19 years. He was an employee of the George A Hormel Co., a member of the Moose and Elk Lodges, a Boy Scout counselor, helped organize the Humane Society and the Austin Archery club, and took part in other community activities.

Mr. Hildreth is survived by his wife and one sister, Mrs. Kent Lagen of Minneapolis and other relatives. His parents and one sister preceded him in death Burial was in the Oakwood cemetery in Austin with the Rev. Knutson in charge of the committal services.

Source: the St. Ansgar Enterprise, 28 Sept. 1961, page 1, column 4

Credit: Mitche Helle, 4/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Roger P. Gibson.

Roger P. Gibson, born in London, Freeborn county in 1868, died at his home in Duluth last Tuesday, following a sickness with tuberculosis for some years.

Deceased was a barber in Lyle some years ago, going from there to Devils Lake, N. D. He came back to Minnesota and went into business with his brother Joe in Duluth in the Barber Supply Shop.

He leaves a wife and four children, also four brothers and two sisters, John Gibson resides in Austin, George, Joe and Will at Duluth, Mary Gibson and Mrs. Rose Gibson-Hildreth of Pasadena, Calif.

Mr. Gibson had not been well for some time: and tuberculosis developed. He was taken to a sanitarium, but obtained no relief, only temporary. His brother Joe, with whom the deceased was associated in business was unable to accompany the remains, as he too was ill and it thought has symptoms of the same dread sickness.

Source: the Mower County Transcript-Republican, 27 Aug. 1919, page 5,

columns 1&2 under heading "OBITUARIES"

Credit: Mitche Helle, 4/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Funeral Services for Virgil Bisbee at Osage Friday, August 20

Virgil Eugene Bisbee, 74, died at his home at Stacyville Monday from a heart attack. he had been ill some time, and had never recovered his strength. However, he was about as usual and his sudden death was a great shock to his family. He was about to start with his car on an errand when the attack came.

Mr. Bisbee was born November 4, 1869, in Nevada township, Mower county, Minnesota, the son of Augusta C. Bisbee and Helen Buell Houghton. He spent his boyhood on the farm there.

He was united in marriage to Hannah Jacobson of Lyle, in 1890, and they established their home on the parental farm. They continued to live there until 1910 when they moved to Baker, Montana. In 1932 they returned to Iowa and have lived at various places.

Mr. and Mrs. Bisbee were parents of 15 children, only one of whom preceded him in death. That was Lester Bisbee, who passed away in 1918 from influenza at the age of 18 years.

Surviving is Mrs. Bisbee and children Mrs. Delos Van Alstin (Helen) at Royal Oak, Michigan; Mrs. Cora Olson of Fargo, N. D., and her twin, Curtis Bisbee of Lyle; Mrs. Thomas Kelley (Myrtle) of Miles City, Mont.; Bradford Bisbee of Stacyville; Arthur Bisbee of Toeterville; Mrs. Nick Reis (Irene); and Mrs. Louis Jenson (Marle) both of Billings, Mont., Howard Bisbee of Wichita, Kansas; Raymond Bisbee of Minneapolis; Mrs. Luverne Hough (Lottie) of Los Angeles, California; Mrs. Ray Bundlie (Vivian) of Vancouver, Washington; Mrs. Herbert Morse (Verna) of Spokane, Washington; and Leonard Bisbee of Los Angeles, Cal.

Thirty-five grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren also survive; also a brother, Allen C. Bisbee of Lyle, Minn., and a sister, Mrs. William Mayers of Sumner, N. M., Mrs. C. M. West of Mitchell, is a cousin.

Funeral service was held last Friday afternoon at 2 o'clock at the Champion Funeral Home in Osage in charge of the Rev. Harvey Risse of Mitchell and burial was in the Six Mile Grove cemetery east of Lyle.

Source: the St. Ansgar Enterprise, 26 Aug. 1943,

page 1, column 1

NOTE: birth year differs between obituary and headstone

Credit: Mitche Helle, 4/2016

Virgil E. Bisbee

Virgil Bisbee Dies at Stacyville Home

STACYVILLE, IOWA - Virgil E. Bisbee, 74, died suddenly at his home Monday. He had been in failing health a long time. Surviving are his wife and 14 children.

The children are Mrs. Cora Olsen, Fargo, N. Dak.; Mrs. Van Alstine, Detroit, Mich.; Mrs. Herb Morse, Spokane, Wash.; Mrs. Lewis Jensen, Billings, Mont.; Mrs. Nick Reis, Billings, Mont.; Mrs. Thomas G. Kelley, Miles City, Mont.; Mrs. L. E. Hough, Los Angeles; Howard Bisbee, Wichita, Kansas; Leonard Bisbee, Los Angeles; Mrs. Raymond Bundlie, Vancouver, Wash.; Raymond Bisbee, Minneapolis, Curtis of Lyle, Minn.; Art of Toeterville, and Bradford of Stacyville. He also leaves a sister, Mrs. A. C. Meyers of Fort Sumner, N. Mex., and one brother, A. C. Bisbee of Lyle.

Mr. and Mrs. Bisbee celebrated their golden wedding in 1939.

Funeral services will be held at Champion funeral parlors Friday afternoon and burial will be at Six Mile Grove cemetery east of Lyle, Minn. The Rev. H. M. Risse of St. Ansgar will officiate.

SOURCE: The Mason City Globe Gazette, 18 Aug. 1943, page 14, column 6

Credit: Kathy Pike, 1/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

MRS. O. A. NAVERSATH PASSES AWAY, FEBRUARY 4

Mrs. O. A. Naversath passed away on Tuesday afternoon, Feb. 4, at the home of her daughter, Mrs. Tom Dahl at Lyle, Minn., after an illness of two weeks. She suffered a heart attack, but had apparently improved, when the second attack caused her death.

Mrs. Naversath (Bertha Peterson) was born Sept. 9, 1866, near Adams, Minn. She was married to O. A. Naversath, Dec. 21, 1883 and to this union were born ten children.

Surviving are Mrs. Albert Leidall of Enderlin, N. D.; Mrs. Anna Palmer of Osage; Mrs. Gilbert Nelson of Albert Lea, Minn; Mrs. Tom Dahl of Lyle, Minn.; Mrs. Ole Helgeson of Austin, Minn.; Mrs. Art Anderson of Grand Meadow, Minn., and Orville on the home farm. Two daughters preceded her in death, Mrs. Ted Anderson of Grand Meadow in 1932 and Mrs. Oscar Thompson of Adams, Minn., in 1935. Her husband, O. A. Naversath , passed away July 4, 1939. She is also survived by 14 grandchildren and nine great grandchildren.

Funeral services were held Friday afternoon at Six Mile Grove church, in charge of Rev. Langehough. Six of her grandchildren acted as pall bearers. Burial was in Six Mile Grove cemetery.

Source: the St. Ansgar Enterprise, 13 Feb. 1941,

page 1, column 3

Credit: Mitche Helle, 4/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb

Arthur Dockstader Rites Held Sunday

Funeral services for Arthur F. Dockstader, 74, who died at his home in Otranto Thursday, December 18, were held Sunday, December 21 at the Otranto Community church with the Rev. Elwin C. Labranz officiating.

Arthur Franklin Dockstader, son of Frank and Mary Dockstader, was born October 2, 1884 on the old family farm west of Otranto.

He was married September 25, 1918 to the former Viola May. Two daughters were born to this union, Marion (Mrs. [illegible] Abele) of Garner, and Gret [illegible] (Mrs. Pete Gomez) of Otranto.

Mr. Dockstader is survived by his widow, his two daughters, 10 grandchildren, one sister, Kate Dockstader, and many other relatives and friends.

Pallbearers at the funeral were H. B. Dockstader, D. J. Campbell, Charles Crane, James Balsey and Raymond Carlson.

Burial was in the Woodbury cemetery with Rev. Labrenz in charge of the committal services.

Source: the St. Ansgar Enterprise, 25 Dec. 1958,

page 1, column 1

NOTE: some portions of the newspaper scan are illegible.

Credit: Mitche Helle, 4/2016

©2016 MNGenWeb