Elinor Ostrom (1933–2012), the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2009, died of cancer at the age of 78 in Bloomington, Indiana, on June 12, 2012. She was a great friend of Nepal who brought yet unrecognized natural heritage of Nepal to the attention of the world and founded her theory of common- property resource management. Nepal’s traditional system of managing local forests and water was recognized when Dr. Ostrom was awarded the Nobel Prize for her study in Nepal of the management of the commons. Ostrom has often said that the prize actually belongs to the farmers of Nepal. She explained features of farmer- managed irrigation systems in her Nobel Prize acceptance speech.

In 1988, she visited Nepal for the first time to study Decentralization, Finance, and Management (DFM) under the USAID program. Instead of study of centralized decentralization in Nepal, she engaged herself in intense study and fieldwork in natural resources management of farmer-managed irrigation systems and forestry resources management at the community level.1 Her first visit to Nepal became a very strong bond to continue further research on irrigation systems through her PhD students. Among them are: Shui Yan Tang, Rita Hilton, Wai Fung Lam, and Ashok Regmi. She has several students in forestry resources management.

She travelled many parts of Nepal going up and down the hills, interviewing the farmers, travelling to the terai to look at the farmer-managed systems. I would like to flash back to the memory of 20 years ago visiting an irrigation system in Indrawati Watershed Basin with Dr. Ostrom. Near Bahunepati on the bank of the Indrawati River, getting herself ready by rolling up her trousers and taking off the shoes to ford Indrawati River by naked feet in that cold winter morning to visit Majha Kulo Irrigation system by a climbing hill on the other side of the river for the next hour. Nothing prevents her from visiting the irrigation systems and interacting with the farmers. She is really a fieldworker and believes that we can learn a lot from the farmers and villagers. She strongly believes that we learn from the farmers and we have to give to farmers what we have learned so she propagated the idea “from farmer to farmer.”

In connection with the research in Nepal, the most important activity that she initiated was the establishment of the “Nepal Irrigation Institutions database” in collaboration with the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Sciences, Tribhuban University. The database was established at IAAS, Rampur, as well as at Indiana University, USA, and has been frequently updated. Both in Rampur and Indiana, the database became a precious mine deposit to active inquiring minds.