Find out how popular the last name McManus is in the United States and learn more about the meaning, history, and race and ethnic origin of people in America who are named McManus.

McManus, like all of the last names we have data for, is identified by the U.S. Census Bureau as a surname which has more than 100 occurrences in the United States in the Decennial Census survey. The most recent statistics we have for the McManus surname is from the 2010 census data.

Popularity of McManus in America

McManus is the 1498th most popular name in America based on the data we have collected from the U.S. Census Bureau.

The McManus surname appeared 23,909 times in the 2010 census and if you were to sample 100,000 people in the United States, approximately 8 people would have the surname McManus.

We can also compare 2010 data for McManus to data from the previous census in 2000. The table below contains all of the statistics for both years in a side-by-side comparison.

The history of the last name McManus

The surname MCMANUS has its roots in Ireland and can be traced back to the 16th century. It is an Anglicized form of the Gaelic name "Mac Magnusa," which means "son of Manus." Manus was a popular name among the Irish, derived from the Latin name Magnus, meaning "great."

The name MCMANUS was initially concentrated in counties like Fermanagh, Donegal, and Tyrone in Ulster, the northern province of Ireland. In these areas, the name was often spelled as McManus, MacManus, or MacMannus, reflecting the variations in spelling and pronunciation common in the Irish language.

One of the earliest recorded instances of the name MCMANUS can be found in the Fiants of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, a collection of official records from the 16th century. The name appears as "McManus" in reference to several individuals from Ulster.

In the 17th century, during the Plantation of Ulster, many Irish families with the surname MCMANUS were displaced from their ancestral lands. This led to the spread of the name across Ireland and eventually to other parts of the world through emigration.

Notable individuals with the surname MCMANUS throughout history include:

Hugh McManus (c. 1600-1644), an Irish Catholic priest and leader during the Irish Confederate Wars.

James McManus (1738-1824), an Irish-American soldier who fought in the American Revolutionary War.

Blanche McManus (1870-1935), an American writer and feminist activist.

Edward McManus (1886-1954), an American politician who served as the 33rd Mayor of Little Rock, Arkansas.

Francis Patrick McManus (1909-1979), an American prelate who served as the Bishop of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.

The name MCMANUS has also been associated with various place names in Ireland, such as Ballymacmanus, a townland in County Antrim, and Drummanmanus, a townland in County Fermanagh.

Race and ethnic origin of people with the last name McManus

We also have some data on the ancestry of people with the surname McManus.

The below race categories are the modified race categories used in the Census Bureau's population estimates program. All people were categorized into six mutually exclusive racial and Hispanic origin groups:

White only

Black only

American Indian and Alaskan Native only

Asian and Pacific Islander only

Hispanic

Two or More Races

For the most recent 2010 census data, the race/ethnic origin breakdown for McManus was:

Note: Any fields showing (S) means the data was suppressed for privacy so that the data does not in any way identify any specific individuals.

Since we have data from the previous census in 2000, we can also compare the values to see how the popularity of McManus has changed in the 10 years between the two census surveys.

Data source

The last name data and ethnic breakdown of last names is sourced directly from the Decennial Census survey, conducted every 10 years by the United States Census Bureau.

The history and meaning of the name McManus was researched and written by our team of onomatology and genealogy experts.

If you have a correction or suggestion to improve the history of McManus, please contact us.

Reference this page

We spend a lot of resources downloading, cleaning, merging, and formatting the data that is shown on the site.

If you found the data or information on this page useful in your research, please use the tool below to properly cite or reference Name Census as the source. We appreciate your support!