The Kingdom of Volhynia is a landlocked country in Europe. Volhynia borders countries, Belarus to the north, Hungary at the south eastern border, Moldova and Romania in the south, Poland at the Western Parts, Ukraine to the East. It is split into 9 provinces and one capital.

Volhynia was once part of the Poland, Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, Russia (The Soviet Union and Russian Empire), Austria-Hungary. After years of recovering from the Collapse of the Soviet Union. They chose to ask the Ukrainian Government to formally cede from Ukraine. The Government accepted and it was established as a Kingdom under Paul Lukcyzk (Fictional Person) or Paul the First on August 21st 2022 (which is celebrated as Independence Day in Volhynia)

The Kingdom of Volhynia is a Constitutional Monarch with a diverse cultural history influenced by its rulers in the past. The country's official language is Volhynian, a mixture of Ukrainian and Polish and is spoken by approximately 64% of the population. Most people can choose to speak there native languages if they choose to but Volhynian is recommended since most of the Population will speak it in the decades to come. Volhynians are a mixture of Ukrainian and Polish peoples which makes 88% of the population. The rest being Moldovan, Hungarian and other ethnicities.

Volhynia's Economy flourishes from being part of the European Economic Area (EEA) It produces Metal, Oil, Machinery and Transport and Food Products to export to many countries. These make up 90% of its exports and despite Volhynia's effort to make it's economy more diverse. It has to keep up with demands for other countries which will make the industry more concentrated which in return can hurt the economic growth.

History[]

The Kingdom of Volhynia was formed during the Wars of Independence in 2022 where many countries was denied independence from Russia.

Volhynia was first formed as Galicia-Volhynia in Kievan Rus' under Roman the Great. It was dissolved and incorporated into the Tsardom of Russia a while after. After the partitions of Poland-Lithuania, the area now was under Austrian Control which promised autonomy but Volhynia was only granted a little bit of autonomy. During WW1 Volhynia was formed as a vassal of the German Empire, which Volhynia was greatful for. Once WW1 was over Volhynia was incorporated into the Greater Polish Republic, this was a plus for them as they both have similar culture and history.

WW2 and Nazi Germany had divided Poland along with the Soviets, many were killed in a massacre known as the Lviv massacre which sparked rebellion amongst the Polish and Volhynians. This all ended when the rebellions were crushed by the occupying Soviet Forces which established the Polish People's Republic (PPR) and the Volhynian Federative Socialist Republic (VFSR). Poland and Volhynia were both Satelite states until the Fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 where it was merged with Ukraine instead of Poland. This continued until 2016 where the Russians invaded the Baltic States, Belarus and Ukraine in a last ditch to restore the Russian Empire. This attempt was successful until 2022 when 5 republics (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Volhynia and Pyzantion/Ukraine) with the support of the Republic of Caucasia fought against Russia which they surrendered.