Kingdom of Galicia-Volhynia-eastern-european country existing from 880 to 1325.

History[]

Country's ancient origins comes from mythical Kingdom of Severia that held territories from San to Don River.

Duchy of Volhynia[]

Severia has split up, one of the countries formed by this collapse was Duchy of Volhynia. It conquered neighbouring duchies-Turov and Galicia creating Duchy of Galicia and Volhynia. First king to entitle himself King of Galicia-Volhynia was named Vyacheslav.

Kingdom's first years[]

Kingdom was almost always at war, with another country, or in rebels war.

Around 890 there was Galician-Lendian war ended by annexation of Lendian lands, though in 930 they split up to the Pannonia

Around year 900 Galicia inherited Duchy of Bohemia and Kingdom of Moravia, but around year 950, Bohemia split up from Galicia-Volhynia forming Kingdom of Bohemia. Although Moravian lands were still in demense of Galicia-Volhynia. For short time even capital of Galicia-Volhynia was in Veligrad (Ve'lihrad), city lying in Moravia, because they were far more rich than Galicia-Volhynia proper.

Country inherited also Duchy of Kiev and Duchy of Chernigov.

In one of civil wars Galicia also lost control over Moldavia.

First Baptism of Galicia-Volhynia[]

In 930 king Sviatopolk embraced catholic faith. Volhynia became almost fully catholic. After his death country came back to pagan rules.

Galician-Meryan War[]

It has taken place in 1006. It was one of major wars in history of Galicia-Volhynia, it was symbolic holy war on Suomensko belief. United forces of Slavic Pagans, Romuvans and Catholics conquered Merya.

Yeremey I[]

In 1026 king Yeremy has taken Second Baptism of Galicia. In 1044 Galicia-Volhynia adopted feudalism.

In 1054 he won Galician-Pannonian war over Lesser Lendia.

Expansion to the east[]

Galicia-Volhynia was very often fighting with pagan and muslim rulers on the east.

The Empire of Rus[]

In 1183 by Pacta Imperia, King Daniil has formed The Empire of Rus.

Rulers[]