Offenbach am Main is a modern city within the Frankfurt metropolitan area. It’s set on the banks of the River Main and boasts beautiful historical buildings and palaces. Visit a museum dedicated to the city’s centuries-old leather industry and meet European animals at a family-friendly zoo. Ride the train into Frankfurt to explore the half-timbered Old Town, visit world-class museums, and of course, enjoy some of the best sausages in Germany.

Things to do in Offenbach am Main

While the Offenbach am Main was heavily damaged during World War II, you’ll still find some beautiful historic buildings in the city. Set in a tree-filled park, Neo Baroque-style Büsing Palais is one of the most beautiful. Isenburger Schloss is another architectural jewel and features an elegant Renaissance façade.

From ancient Egyptian vessels to luxury Louis Vuitton handbags, the German Leather Museum showcases leatherware from throughout the centuries. The collection is incredible and features treasures from around the world. See Chinese perfume sachets, South African shields, Native American baby carriers, Asian shadow puppets and modern German sneakers.

Shop for fresh produce at the Farmers’ Market held in Wilhelmsplatz, the city’s picturesque main square. Dozens of stalls pop up in the chestnut-lined square and sell everything from organic fruit and vegetables to honey, cheese and baked goods. It’s held three times a week and attracts shoppers from Frankfurt and beyond.

Meet Shetland ponies, Scottish Highland cattle and raccoons at Waldzoo Offenbach. The zoo focuses mostly on domesticated European species, though you’ll also see the occasional kangaroo and parrot. Paths wind through the woodlands and take you past enclosures and pastures. Buy a bag of animal pellets and hand-feed friendly goats, sheep and pigs.

Getting around Offenbach am Main

Offenbach am Main is pedestrian-friendly and easy to get around on foot. The city is a 20-minute drive from Frankfurt and 10 minutes by train. Frankfurt Airport is a 20-minute drive away.