'Auntie Mame' is a comedy movie made in 1958, directed by Morton DaCosta and starring Rosalind Russell in the title role.The movie was based on the 1955 novel by Patrick Dennis and the subsequent Broadway play in which Russell also starred and which Morton DaCosta directed. The play ran for over 600 performances at the Broadhurst Theater between 1956 and 1958. The original sharp and witty Broadway script by Lawrence and Lee needed very little change and was adapted for the screen by Betty Comden and Adolph Green.

Search Amazon for 'Auntie Mame'

Reception

The film received six Academy Award nominations including Best Picture, Best Actress (Rosalind Russell), and Best Supporting Actress (Peggy Cass), but won no Oscars. It lost the Best Picture Award to to Vincente Minnelli's spectacular musical 'Gigi'.

Commercially it was a great success. It became the highest grossing movie of the year and helped turn around the fortunes of Warner Brothers, who in 1958 had been in dire financial straits owing to a series of movie flops. The film became the highest grossing movie of 1958 and its net profit of $3.4 million made a significant contribution to the studio's return to the black in 1959.

Plot

During the Great Depression of the 1930's an orphan, Patrick Dennis, goes to live with his father's sister Mame Dennis, played by Rosalind Russell. Mame is an eccentric, flamboyant woman with an unconventional, bohemian lifestyle. She takes the boy under her wing, always making sure he tries to live life to the fullest. Patrick grows up with many extraordinary and often hilarious adventures, but conflicts arise with the trustee of his father''s will, strait-laced banker, Mr. Dwight Babcock, played by Fred Clark.

The film shows Patrick and his aunt over the course of about 20 years through a series of episodes as Mame teaches her nephew to "Live, live, live". She survives losing her money in the Depression, finds a wealthy husband, Beauregard, played by Forrest Tucker, and never loses her zest for life.

There is much scope for comedy and it is exploited to the full by the wonderful cast and witty screenplay.

Production

Although Rosalind Russell had been a great success in the lead role of Mame on Broadway from 1956 to 1958, Warner Brothers also considered Eve Arden for the role after she had wowed audiences in a West coast run of the play. The fact that Russell had a large investment in the show tilted the balance in her favor.

Vivian Vance (Ethel Mertz on 'I Love Lucy') was considered for the part of Vera Charles, Mame's alcohol loving best friend, but the part was eventually given to Australian actress Coral Browne who had made a name for herself on the London stage. Director Morton DaCosta brought two other Broadway cast members for the screen. Jan Handzlik plays Patrick Dennis as a child and Peggy Cass plays mousy secretary Agnes Gooch.

At the end of each scene chief Warner Brothers electrician, Frank Flanagan, created a series of theater style fade outs whereby each time the stage was blacked out so that only Russell's face could be seen. The technique became known as the "Flanagan fade". The system made clear when a sequence ended, and also made sure that Rosalind Russell continued to be the focus of attention.

The success of the film spawned a Broadway musical version of the story in 1966 called 'Mame', starring Angela Lansbury. It was a great success but a subsequent movie musical in 1974 starring Lucille Ball, fared badly at the box office.

Credits

Director ... Morton DaCosta

Producer ... Morton DaCosta

Written ... based on the play by Jerome Lawrence and Robert Edwin Lee from their stage adaptation of the novel by Patrick Dennis

Screenplay ... Betty Comden, Adolph Green

Music ... Bronislau Kaper

Cinematography ... Harry Stradling Sr.

Production Company ... Warner Bros.

Format ... Color (Technicolor)

Release date ... November 11, 1958

Running time ... 143 minutes

Academy Awards

No Wins:

Six Unsuccessful Nominations:

Best Picture ... Warner Bros.

Best Actress ... Rosalind Russell

Best Supporting Actress ... Peggy Cass

Cinematography (Color) ... Harry Stradling Sr.

Art Direction/Set Direction ... Malcolm Bert, George James Hopkins

Film Editing ... William Ziegler