I don't know if Oregon Ducks coach Mark Helfrich won the day or lost it on Saturday. But what I do know is that Helfrich did an interview with ESPN that left me wishing he'd drop his guard and let us get to know him.

Helfrich's team has lost four straight games. He's in trouble. The season feels lost. Boosters and fans are growing impatient. And so it makes complete sense that Helfrich used a bye week to grant ESPN's Tom Rinaldi an interview. Except I wanted so much more from the experience than an up-close look at Helfrich's poker face.

It's not Rinaldi's fault. He's a former KATU-TV reporter -- a smart guy with good chops. Rinaldi is a storyteller, and is often invited in first. He got the first Tiger Woods post-scandal interview and the first post-catfish Manti Te'o interview. Cracked those guys open like a couple of walnuts. But this Helfrich thing requires heavier machinery.

Helfrich said in the interview his program is not winning every day, but is winning the "majority" of them. He shot down the sentiment that 30 to 40 percent of his players don't care if the team wins or loses. Ducks veteran lineman Cameron Hunt raised it after the Washington loss, but Helfrich framed Hunt's remark as an emotional outburst. He said "it's untrue," and Helfrich said he wished Hunt would have shared his thoughts privately, if true.

That's about as far into the woods as Helfrich let us come with him on Saturday.

Rinaldi tried to push deeper. He asked Helfrich what outsiders didn't understand. He invited Helfrich to share some of himself, his frustrations and feelings about being only measured by wins and losses. He could have shared what it's like to drive home after giving up 70 points at home to a rival. Or how much harder the pillow feels when your screwy PAT strategy costs you a game.

Instead, Helfrich said: "That's reality. That's sports. It's perfect or you're an idiot."

Helfrich's problem isn't just that he's 2-4 this season. It's that all this disappointment and angst comes in the wake of last season. There was the Alamo Bowl meltdown at the end of last season, a blown 31-0 lead that left Oregon looking unprepared and out-coached. High school coaches slapped their foreheads, watching Oregon fumble around in that game, unable to snap the football cleanly.

It's not that he's an idiot. Helfrich is smart. A nice guy, too. It's why everyone keeps saying things such as, "Maybe he's just better suited to being an offensive coordinator" instead of shouting, "Fire the bum!"

Helfrich has lost five of his last seven games dating to last season. In the last seven Pac 12 Conference games at Autzen Stadium, Helfrich has only three wins. And high-level boosters at Oregon have invested a lot of money in facilities and in building the Ducks brand. That's not to mention the 10,000 or so season tickets for next season that insiders say hang in the balance right now.

See, this isn't about people painting in broad strokes. It's about heavy fiscal investment. Mostly from people who have run successful businesses and know how cutthroat you must be to stay on top.

"I think it's comical that Mark Dantonio all of a sudden is a bad football coach or Charlie Strong can't coach defense or Brian Kelly can't coach offense," Helfrich told Rinaldi. "It's just such a narrow view and there's a lot of ball left to play."

Rinaldi shot back: "What's the narrow view of Mark Helfrich right now?

It was a great question. Helfrich opened the door. Rinaldi was offering him a chance to rip it off the hinges. I expected this might be the moment in which Helfrich dug deep -- and let us all in. He's a husband and a father, after all. There's some healthy life perspective there. Also, he knows how proud his late father would have been to see him be the coach at Oregon. Maybe Helfrich draws upon his father's strength and wisdom in dark times. I don't know. But I know I leaned forward, waiting for the answer.

Helfrich said: "The narrow view is we've lost four in a row and that's not good enough."

Then, he talked about having 14 new starters, and a bunch of players out for the year.

I've been in Rinaldi's seat a couple of dozen times. I've volleyed with Helfrich. I've asked him about the first car he drove, and whether he mows his own lawn. I've asked him what he's afraid of. Not really because I care so much to know the answers, but because I've always felt him on the other end of the conversation, hands up, guarded, wanting nothing more than to keep jabbing from a distance.

Like you, I want to know this guy some. I want to like him. I want to pull for him. I want these things as much as I want to believe Helfrich has the answers and can fix what's wrong with Oregon football in the next six games. But I keep coming back to the fact that all Helfrich allows us is the narrow view.

What's Helfrich like?

He's 2-4.

What's he really like in a crisis? Or when happy? Good day? Bad day?

Again, you know, he's 2-4.

Prior to Helfrich's second season as head coach, I took a trip to Ashland to visit with his college coach at Southern Oregon University, Jim Palazzolo. When Helfrich found out I was making the trip, he had a university spokesperson call me to ask me if I wanted to talk with him and run anything in the column by him.

It was an unusual move. One that has not happened since. Helfrich and I talked about the column that day, and I gathered he really wasn't worried about anything I'd write. He just wasn't totally comfortable letting anyone get close to who he really was, and my sense is, he wanted to know where I was going with it all.

I learned that day that Helfrich played a key role in saving the embattled football program at Southern Oregon. Palalzzolo told me that when Helfrich was a player, the program positioned him in student government as vice president and another football player as president. The deft political maneuver put the two players on a small committee that would later vote to use student fees to subsidize the football program.

Palazzolo said, "Mark could have been president if he wanted, but he didn't want that. He deferred to his teammate."

It was a telling anecdote. A small glimpse into Helfrich. But I had to drive to the southern tip of Oregon to discover it. Also, it came with Helfrich on the other end of the telephone, nervous about where the column was going.

I wrote the column. Helfrich read it. We never spoke of it again. And I've wondered for the last month what might happen if Helfrich let the rest of the world in. Would it buy him some patience? Understanding? Maybe it would just humanize him some as he struggles on the way to either fixing the program or being fired.

Not sure. I just know Helfrich is unwilling to really go there. Like ever. Especially not on a bye week in an ESPN interview. It makes me wonder what he's like in a high-level recruiting setting, or when he's standing in front of his team, searching for answers.

I ran into Helfrich away from the football once last spring. He was in Spokane for the NCAA Tournament on vacation with his family. They were there watching the Ducks basketball team.

I was walking from the hotel to a diner early one morning and saw a guy coming down the block toward me with two young children in tow. It was Helfrich. He was on the telephone, mid-call, and his son was trying to climb up him, dangling off his extended arm. Helfrich struggled to walk along, holding the phone with one hand and his son with the other. The Ducks football coach passed, looked at me, smiled, and shook his head.

Helfrich's expression said, "You're a dad. You know what this is like."

It's the most revealing thing he's ever said to me.