Crystal Cruises announced it has signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with prominent Italian shipbuilder Fincantieri for the construction of two high-end cruise ships with the option for a third new build. The initial agreement states the first ship will be delivered in the spring of 2028.

The new builds will be developed by prominent international architectural firms Studio Ibsen and Studio Gem which are the same companies that refurbished both Crystal Serenity and Crystal Symphony. The designs will feature marble, Italian fabrics and other materials typically seen in high-end private homes.

“This order is another milestone in the 40 years of productive collaboration between Fincantieri and my family that started with Sitmar Cruises, continued with Silversea and now is flourishing again with Crystal,” said Manfredi Lefebvre d’Ovidio, Executive Chairman of A&K Travel Group.

Guests will find many similarities between Crystal’s current fleet and the new builds such as a wraparound promenade that allows for “leisurely strolls with stunning ocean views.” Dining venues will include world-class cuisines such as Umi Um, the only Nobu at sea, and the recently announced Beefbar. There will be an all-inclusive spa and fitness center and a dedicated space for those traveling with children.

Crystal’s newly announced Casino de Monte-Carlo at Sea will be included, a venue currently being added to the cruise line’s existing ships. The partnership with Monte-Carlo Société des Bains de Mer was announced just days ago and brings an elevated level of entertainment onboard the fleet. Gaming options include slot machines, blackjack, roulette, and more.

The 690-passenger vessels will offer all-suite accommodations with private verandas, including accommodations for solo travelers. Guests can expect exceptional personalized service with one of the highest crew-to-passenger ratios in the industry.

Cristina Levis, CEO of A&K Travel Group said, “Our aim is to continue setting a new standard in cruising, offering our guests an unmatched level of service and sophistication.”

This announcement comes just two years after Lefebvre purchased Crystal Cruises out of bankruptcy for A&K Travel Group and resumed operations just last year.