Railway Barcelona Cerbère

I8i12i13i15i16i16i18i20

The Portbou Station (in Catalan Estacio de Portbou - also Port Bou Bou or port ) is the penultimate station of the cross-border railway line Cerbère Barcelona in Spain. The area lying on the border station was up to the commissioning of the new line Perpignan - Figueres next to Irun railway station is the most important border station in the direction of France. The goods and marshalling yard bears the name Portbou Mercancías.

Location

Portbou situated on the Catalan Mediterranean coast at the eastern edge of the foothills of the Pyrenees in the province of Girona. The passenger station is located on the western edge of the town, the train yard behind it was partially " built into " the mountain. The plant is similar to that of the neighboring French border station Cerbère.

History

The station was built in 1878 by the Compañía de los Ferrocarriles de Tarragona a Barcelona y Francia and taken over in 1929 by the Compañía de los Ferrocarriles de Madrid a Zaragoza y Alicante. 1941, the track and the train station were nationalized. He is stop or end point for long-distance and regional trains as well as the Spanish Renfe terminus for trains of SNCF. The infrastructure was since 1996 the Gestor de Infraestructuras Ferroviarias (GIF), since 2005 is the successor to the Administrador de Infraestructuras Ferroviarias ( ADIF ).

Description

The station located in 30.8 meters has two different track widths, the Central European standard gauge and the Iberian broad gauge. The Colera coming out of a tunnel broad-gauge, double track main railway runs directly north of the station Portbou in a single-track tunnel in the French border town of Cerbère. From there the station achieved in a parallel tunnel the standard gauge, double track line from France that ends in Portbou.

The building of the passenger station is located between the two ending here standard gauge tracks and the broad gauge tracks, which lead on to Cerbère. The standard gauge tracks are located on the eastern side facing the city, they end up in a tunnel. Four of the broad gauge tracks are in the cantilever concourse, a fifth next to west. To the south of the building is the former Hall of border crossing in the south of the lead tracks both gauges. Other tracks of through station serving the freight.

The up to 560 meters long stump tracks of large estates area obliquely applied to the transit station. From the Spanish side, they can only be reached via a Sägefahrt. The 28 tracks are mostly in standard gauge, partly in broad gauge and partially implemented as a three-rail tracks for both gauges. There are open and covered Umladebereiche, scales and crane systems.

In a hall at the northern end of the station is a built in 1968 Umspuranlage for continuous Talgo trains from and to France, Switzerland and Italy. There, the track width of the car is at a slow passage, adapted to the rail network.

Gallery

Two Talgo trains before the tunnel from Colera

Concourse and interlocking

Parked Talgo usually trace

Spanish passenger train on the broad gauge page 1989