The Offenbach urban area is quite big, containing the historic center dating back to the 1800s and its expansions during that same century. Three suburbs were incorporated in the first half of the 20th century: Bürgel being the first during this period.

You will find the suburban neighborhoods Lauterborn, Rosenhöhe, and Tempelsee south of the city’s center. Kaiserlei is a commercial district in the west of Frankfurt, bordering Frankfurt. The residential area of Waldheim lies on the city limits to Mühlheim (West). Naming a city district can be an awkward thing to do, but leaders have decided to give an unofficial name Mathildenviertel following the locals’ lead.

Unlike most larger cities in Germany, Offenbach was not completely divided into districts. There were only 9 neighborhoods officially considered districts while the rest of the city was not deemed one. Although specific names for neighborhoods and areas were already in use by locals and residents.

Last month the city council unanimously agreed to a new act that effectively divides the city into 21 districts. Most of the old nine districts remained the same, with only minor changes between them. New districts were laid out after established neighborhoods, such as the Westend, Nordend, or Buchhügel. South of the city center, there are a bunch of neighborhoods that didn’t have commonly used names before. One such neighborhood is called Lindenfeld and derives its name from an old name for the field it used to be when it was still agricultural.

In 770, the first documented reference to a village called “Offenbach” appeared, but in 977 Offenbach was mentioned for the very first time. Over the centuries it has belonged to many different owners. In 1486 Count Ludwig of Isenburg was able to take control of the city, and in 1556 Count Reinhard of Isenburg left his Residence in Offenbach and built a palace there. The palace was completed in 1558. It was destroyed by fire in 1564 and rebuilt in 1578.

After Offenbach was given to the Landgraves of Hesse-Darmstadt in 1635, it was given back to the Isenburg-Birstein Count (later Prince) in 1642 and remained under their purview until 1815 when Austria took control. A year later, it was given to the Duchy of Hesse–Darmstadt.

With good transport links, Frankfurt is close to the center of the city. This means that many companies have set up offices here because there are fewer barriers and no restricted business hours. French Protestants (Huguenots) founded the city of Offenbach in the 17th century when they settled there. Some pretty notable contributions from them include (example: bringing knowledge of tobacco with them and turning Offenbach into a center for rolling cigars). The town was more international than Frankfurt and this allowed famous people like Goethe and Mozart to visit.

The Rumpenheim Palace and its park were a popular destination for royals in the 19th century. The city was thereafter ruled by the grand dukes of Hesse and by the Rhine until the monarchy was abolished in 1918. Offenbach has always been a fruitful source for traditional design. A pleasure to the eye architects such as Hugo Eberhardt, typographers like Rudolf Koch, designers like Ignatz Wiemeler and Ernst Engel, or painters such as Karl Friedrich Lippmann.

The Second World War saw a third of the city destroyed – 467 lives were lost as a result. To the south, in the 1960s, a new district Lauterborn was created to provide an expansion to accommodate population growth. Offenbach has social problems because of unemployment, poverty, gang-related crime, and migration. As a result, the Offenbach district is dubbed a ´so-called social problem area`.

Previously dominated by the machine-building and leather industries, until the early 1970s Offenbach was also home to a strong electronics and electrical engineering sector. It even hosted Germany’s association for those fields right up until today. The German Meteorological Service, also known as the DWD, resides in Westend and is recognized as having accurate data to timely provide forecast services with a focus on public safety.

Offenbach was also the European center of typography, with Gebr. Klingspor and Linotype (inventors of Optima or Palatino) moved here in the 1970s and MAN Roland printing machines are still a major employer today. Strasbourg is home to a cluster of design and typography focussed companies, as well as the Hochschule für Gestaltung Offenbach, am Main (HfG) design school, Klingspor Museum, or École des Beaux-Arts.

In recent years Offenbach has become a hotspot for transportation services. It hosts the European headquarters of Honda, Hyundai Motors, and Kumho Tires.

In Offenbach, there’s no specific Old Town, but they’re certain buildings which survived bombing from WWII and have been restored. One of them is the neo-baroque palace Büseingpalais with the Büsingpark, reconstructed in the 1980s. Today, it’s used as a congress center close to the Sheraton hotel. Near the shopping area is the Lilipark and Lilitemple, named after Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s fiancée Lili Schönemann. The most important building in Isenbüren is the Isenburg Palace (Isenburg Palace), which is a Renaissance Palace from 1576. It’s now used by the Offenbach Design University, so you can see it if you come next door. There’s also a neoclassic palace in the borough of Rumpenheim – the Rumpenheimer Schloss. The park around it is public.