Psychological: level 1

What Exactly Did I Just Watch?

You discovered a whole new world of weird. Keep on watching.

Psychological: level 2

My Mind Is Full of Fu**

Your attempt to wrap your mind around this failed completely.

Psychological: level 3

Is This the Real Life?

It has become hard to distinguish between reality and fiction.

Psychological: level MAX

「 Ｗｉｒｅｄ Ｓｏｕｎｄ 」

You've seen too much. You've transcended humanity and operate on another level now.

GAR: level 1

So Manly I Can't Breathe

Watching all those men made you feel like a little girl... and you liked it.

GAR: level 2

Testosterone Storm

Your body has adapted into GAR anime. You can hear your muscles growing.

GAR: level 3

You Are Already Man

Resistance is futile. People are simply no match for you.

GAR: level MAKSHIMUM

Alpha Male

You aren't made out of testosterone. Testosterone is made out of you.

Historical: level 1

History Class

History doesn't have to be boring. There's a lot to learn.

Historical: level 2

A Look at Passing Time

Instead of dreaming of the future, you prefer to look back at the past.

Historical: level 3

Archaeologist

You have learned that sometimes going further just isn't worth it. And yet you try.

Historical: level MAX

Time Machine

Kids these days are boring. You'd rather watch something heartwarming about siblings catching fireflies.

Horror: level 1

Paranoia Fuel

It's not like you needed to sleep tonight, anyway.

Horror: level 2

Too Many Teeth

You know something is following you. You just don't know what.

Horror: level 3

Extreme Phobia

You are terrified; you are transfixed.

Trauma: level MAX

Flowers of Flesh and Blood

It's far too late, now.

Mahou Shoujo: level 1

Signed the Contract

Became a magical girl and started saving the world, step by step.

Mahou Shoujo: level 2

Magic Is My Middle Name

Transformed into a magical girl: level two. In the name of the Moon, I will punish you!

Mahou Shoujo: level 3

Too Magical to Comprehend

Watched so many mahou shoujo anime that you sparkle occasionally.

Mecha: level 1

Me? PILOT This Thing?!

A secret organization wants you to pilot a huge mecha. Can you do it?

Mecha: level 2

Engineer

After watching over 40 mecha anime you should be able to build your own mobile suit. Remember not to kill the rest of us.

Mecha: level 3

Mechazawa

Having watched over 80 mecha anime, you've probably become a robot already. Nice job, hero.

Music: level 1

Gettin' Your Keys On!

You don't know what you've just listened to, but you like it.

Music: level 2

This Is Even Better Live

Proudly display the badges you have earned in the fancafe.

Music: level 3

Dreaming of the City

Your musical knowledge has expanded so much you are tempted to make a career out of it.

Mystery: level 1

Growing Suspicions

It's suspicious because nothing looks suspicious, and if it looks suspicious from the start it's obviously suspicious.

Mystery: level 2

Detective's Assistant

Now it's your business to know what other people don't know too.

Mystery: level 3

Genius Detective

You're already a genius at unraveling mysteries... but how is it possible that everywhere you go someone ends up dead?

Mystery: level MAX

Golden Truth

You can solve any mystery by now. The path to the Golden Land has already been revealed to you.

Romance: level 1

Stalker

I'll stalk you so hard you won't notice me for 24 episodes. Why don't you love me yet?

Romance: level 2

Unrequited Love

If you won't confess, they'll never know how you feel. But don't bother if you're the best girl - these never win.

Romance: level 3

Sparkles and Bubbles

Every time you two get close you feel butterflies in your stomach. Now kiss.

Romance: FULL LOVE

Heart Full of Love

So many romance anime! You surely are an expert in relationships already.

Slice of Life: level 1

Normal High School Boy

Got started into the furious ride with slice-of-life anime.

Slice of Life: level 2

Cute × ( Girls + Things )

Didn't get bored of watching cute girls doing cute things. As if that's possible.

Slice of Life: level 3

Enjoying Life

Found the equilibrium between boring and interesting.

Space: level 1

3... 2... 1... Liftoff!

You've taken one small step for man, not such a giant leap for mankind.

Space: level 2

The Earth Looks So Small from Up Here

You're finally outside the atmosphere, but there's still a lot to explore.

Space: level 3

Interstellar Traveler

You've traveled vast interstellar distances and seen many galaxies in your way.

Sports: level 1

Knockout!

You've held your own in the ring, time to go all the way.

Sports: level 2

Get Your Head in the Game

The odds are against you, time to get in the zone.

Sports: level 3

Welcome to the Big Leagues

There's no stopping you, just one final push.

Studio Ghibli

Memories

Once you've seen them, you can never forget them.

Nice Boat

It's Just Me and You Now

Awarded for completing School Days. And they say true romance is dead!

Awarded for watching these: (1)

School Days

Original: level 1

Uncharted Waters

You have just stumbled across a wonderful, strange new world.

Original: level 2

Into the Jungle

The deeper you go, the less you want out.

Original: level 3

Center of the Earth

You have forgotten about the outside world; nature has assimilated you. An apple falls - not only have you flowered, you have produced fruit.

Original: level MAX

Transcendence

You have been returned to the primordial ocean. From the highest point in the sky, you can peer into every universe, and lose yourself in an infinity of stories.

Shorts: level 1

Blink, and You'll Miss It

It was over before it started, but it managed to tell an enticing tale.

Shorts: level 2

Quickie Addict

You've been saying "one more" for the past nine hours.

Shorts: level 3

Block by Block

Just like in a game of tetris, you're building something great out of small pieces.

Shorts: level MIN

Short but Gold

You have learned that some of the greatest things come in small packages.

Game: level 1

Eternal Spring

It all started one fateful morning in April...

Game: level 2

At the Gates of Eden

You're so close to heaven, you can almost feel it.

Game: level 3

Banquet of the Golden Witch

You've challenged her to a game. There is no turning back, now.

Immersion: level MAX

Hacking to the Gate

All these games have made of you a wizard; you can crack any code without breaking a sweat.

Anime, That Is

I Like Them Long

Didn't fall asleep while watching long anime series. 100 episodes isn't a big deal to you.

Classics: level 1

Cassette Tape

The first time you watched these, you didn't even know what they were.

Classics: level 2

Solid Color

Bomber jackets, high-waisted jeans, an overload of patterns, and bishies everywhere.

Time: level 3

Consciousness Upload

Consuming the medium becomes a lot easier once you yourself are raw data.

Youth: WASTED

Wicked Cultured

By making a deal with the devil, you have ensured access to even the most obscure of materials.

Passed 100 Mark

The first step

Watched 100 anime. Congratulations, you broke the magical number. Take a breath now, it will only get more difficult.

Passed 200 Mark

Casual watcher

Watched 200 anime. You're used to seeing character's eyes bigger than their nose. If they have any nose.

Passed 300 Mark

A millionaire

Watched 300 anime. You DID buy all of them, right?

Passed 400 Mark

Bragging rights

Watched 400 anime. That's... a lot. You can be proud of yourself, that's for sure.

Passed 500 Mark

A lot of free time

Watched 500 anime. Now pause, take a breath and stretch a bit. Remember not to sit too close to the screen.

Passed 750 Mark

Not Even My Final Form

Watched 750 anime. Your power level is way above others'. The only way is up.

Passed 1000 Mark

Gotta Watch Them All!

Watched 1000 anime. You should already know what that picture means.

Passed 1500 Mark

The Collector

Watched 1500 animes. No, wait. The plural of anime is anime.