“Ab batao mere kanoon ke zamadaron”

Mohan Joshi Hazir Ho! is one of the films, which is the result of new wave in Indian Cinema arise in 80’s. It is directed by Saeed Akhtar Mirza who later direct Nukkad on TV centering around almost same theme, or more appropriately on same emotion.

MJHH tries to tell the story of common man in real situation. One can say that it is almost filmed in same manner as Jane Bhi Do Yaaron, another cult of the same era. Just the two photographer were replaced by an old couple fighting against the system in more surrealistic manner. They filled a case against their landlord for renovation of their Chawl, but later they get trapped in the web of case.

MJHH begins with a satirical song on Mumbai. Then later Pankaj Kapoor kicks off the drama with a detail explanation on urbanization. Pankaj Kapoor represents himself as the promoter of this urbanization. They goes on to force the landlords to develop their Chawl in multiplexes & other skyscrapers. The story moves from housing problem towards the judiciary flaws. We saw the group advocates running for new clients like vultures. Advocates of different genders discussing their dates according to their priorities in bed. We also saw how client was forced to sell their ornaments & other goods so that lawyers can go on to build their offices & farms. Meanwhile the case never ends.

From various directors & writers, I’ve heard that they get fascinated for love story set against the backdrop of small town. But in this movie we see that there could be a possibility of much fascinating love story in metro. Metros hold various small city in their by lane (Though it has also been dealt in detail in Piya Ka Ghar)

Saeed Akhtar Mirza handles the subject with utmost sincerity & realism. First time I saw the real court in a movie. We never came up with the fighting spirit in real life as shown in films. Mostly people tries to adjust instead of reverting back like a hero. But they want their share in advantages, is gained after someone else struggle. And that’s what MJHH shows. No star of even parallel cinema, was cast in the lead role. Instead Bhisham Sahni, a renown writer was cast in the title role along with Dina Pathak. It adds a great touch of originality, surreality. Just songs should be edited out of the movie especially Haye Re Muqaddama. It decelerate the pace of the movie.

Bhisham Sahni & Dina Pathak played their part exceptionally. May be because they don’t have any particular image prior to this. Though Dina Pathak is a common face of theater & cinema but she is a chameleon & know how to change the skin according to the character. Naseeruddin Shah is another sheer talent. He was & will be the biggest face of parallel cinema in India. Satish Shah supports Naseer well as menacing partner. Amjad Khan as the landlord add his unique stamp in the character. He plays Kundan Kapadia along with Gabbar’s moral value. Rohini Hattangadi is good. Pankaj Kapoor is as usual in the character. Mohan Gokhale doesn’t get much scope. Deepti Naval is perfect in small role. Haroun Mirza also appears in small appearance.

Overall, MJHH address the housing problems & corrupt system along with systematic flaws, all at the same time. It also shows how divide & rule is still applicable on Indians. So it’s worth a watch, if you want to see some sensible cinema in Bollywood.