Jeepers Creepers 2 is a 2003 American horror film written and directed by Victor Salva. A sequel to the 2001 film Jeepers Creepers, the film portrays the Creeper, a demonic creature and mysterious serial killer who pursues a school bus filled with high-school students. Ray Wise also appears as Jack Taggart, a farmer who seeks to hunt down and kill the Creeper as revenge for his younger son who the Creeper had murdered that same week. Additionally, Francis Ford Coppola returned to the franchise as an executive producer. Jeepers Creepers 3 was released in 2017 as a prequel.

After his son is set upon by a scarecrow that seems to have come alive, farmer Jack Taggart Sr. (Ray Wise) and his son, Jack Taggart Jr. (Luke Edwards), go looking for an explanation. Meanwhile, a bus carrying high-school students breaks down nearby, and a creature known as the Creeper (Jonathan Breck) starts a killing spree. The elder Taggart soon realizes that the killings and the attack on his son are connected, and, after alerting the community to be on guard, he aims to kill the Creeper.

Victims[]

Billy Taggart - Dragged away and eaten by the Creeper off-screen.

Coach Charlie Hanna - Dragged away and eaten by the Creeper.

Bus Driver Betty Borman - Dragged away and eaten by the Creeper.

Coach Dwayne Barnes - Dragged away and eaten by the Creeper.

Unnamed Man - Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, car seen.

Unnamed Woman - Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, car seen.

Dante Belasco - Head ripped off by the Creeper.

Jacob "Jake" Spencer - Stabbed in the back of the head with a shuriken thrown by the Creeper.

Kimball "Big K" Ward - Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, implied.

Seven Unnamed Male Team Members- Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, implied.

Unnamed Female Team Member - Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, implied.

Scott Braddock - Dragged away and eaten by the Creeper.

Unnamed Truck Driver - Eaten by the Creeper off-screen, truck seen.

The Creeper - Killed by Jack Taggart Sr. after it was done hibernating off-screen, implied.

Deaths[]

Total - 20

19 Humans

16 Men

3 Women

1 Demon

Kill Counts[]

The Creeper - 19 (Deceased)

Jack Taggart Sr. - 1

Navigation[]