John Marvin Curtis, 71, passed away Friday June 14, 2024. He was born November 28 ,1952 to Marvin E and Kathryn Curtis and was a lifelong resident of Watson LA. He had a love for the people of his small community and was well respected among his farming community, his peers and his students. He received his bachelor’s and masters degree from Southeastern Louisiana University and his plus 30 from Southern University. He began his career at Walker High School in 1976 as a vocational teacher and retired as principal of Live Oak High School in 2006 with 33 years of educational service.

He married his wife of 45 years, Joyce on July 14, 1979 and he was a beloved husband, daddy, paw paw, uncle and friend and mentor. He adored his children and grandchildren and was passing the love of farming and cattle down to them on Twin Oaks Farm. He could always be found on a tractor, bailing hay or at a cattle show. He was a lifelong member of the First Baptist Church of Algiers. He was an avid supporter of the 4H and FFA organizations and a lifelong member of the Louisiana Cattleman’s Association, Louisiana Farm Bureau and the National Santa Gertrudis Association.

He is survived by his wife Joyce Pendarvis Curtis and 2 children Jessica Curtis Doiron (Billy) and Jonathan Welch Curtis (Katelynn); 4 grandchildren Gracie Kathryn and Kash David Doiron; Jameson Welch and Weston James Curtis. He is also survived by his sister Frances Curtis Bolen (Charles) and his father in law James Albert Pendarvis, in-laws, Judy Pendarvis Doughty (Milton) Robert Pendarvis (Ella) and numerous nieces, nephews and great nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death by his parents Marvin E. and Kathryn Fleniken Curtis; grandparents, Welch and Frankie Fleniken and Elmo and Virginia Curtis; and mother in law Joyce Chandler Pendarvis.

Visitation will be held Wednesday, June 19 from 5PM until 9PM and again on Thursday, June 20, 9AM until 11AM with the funeral service starting at 11 am, all at First Baptist Church of Algiers, 9559 Florida Blvd, Walker LA. Pastor Albert Pendarvis and Bro Howard Brooks will officiate. Graveside services to follow at the Curtis Family Cemetery on Twin Oaks Farm. Pallbearers will be Billy Aime, Hugh Bolen, Perry Everhart, Ken McMorris, Zack Pendarvis, and Scott Pendarvis. Honorary Pallbearers: Olan Ray Davis, Warren “Buster” Curtis, Eddie Ambrose, Jerry Morgan, Kevin Owen, and Tony Terry.