Status Quo is streaming a lyric video for the track “And It’s Better Now”, taken from their upcoming album Aquostic (Stripped Bare).

Status Quo will release the game-changing Aquostic (Stripped Bare) album on October 20th via Rhino/Warners (UK/Australia) and October 17th via earMUSIC/edel (ROW).

After 50 years at the top of their game as one of the world's premiere hard rock acts, Quo have leapt out of their comfort zone and now give the songs the chance to shine in a stripped down format; the amps are turned off, this album is fully acoustic and Quo recorded a total of 25 completely reworked Quo hits and fan favourites.

The band are helped out along the way by additional musicians, a female backing vocalist and even a string section. The arresting cover image was shot by none other than the superstar Bryan Adams. Stripped of the sheer power of the famed twin-Tele assault it's time for the melodies and the band's innate musicianship to shine through.

And shine they do. Rendered here in a simpler, sharper focus, it's the tunes and the progressions that are the stars. The lyrics seem to benefit from the extra space and these stone cold rock classics are given a fresh personality and potency. Tracks are taken from across the band's incredible output throughout the decades; some permanent features of the electric setlist, others being issued into the limelight for the first time - having been scrubbed and polished and reappraised through the prism of a new approach.

Recorded at Francis Rossi's studios, Aquostic (Stripped Bare) is the result of a band looking back at where they've come from, peeling back the years, and taking a fresh look at what's been done. Aquostic (Stripped Bare) is a triumphant collection of some of the defining moments of a truly seminal British rock act.

A set to change a few peoples' minds. A set to raise a few smiles. A set that didn't require producer Mike Paxman to keep putting 50p in the meter. A set to be treasured.

The album will be available on CD, double gatefold vinyl, box set and download. The first single, "And It's Better Now", will also be released on October 20th.

Tracks recorded and available across the various formats:

"Pictures Of Matchstick Men"

"Down The Dustpipe"

"Na Na Na"

"Paper Plane"

"All The Reasons"

"Reason For Living"

"And It's Better Now"

"Caroline"

"Softer Ride"

"Claudie"

"Break The Rules"

"Down Down"

"Little Lady" (bonus track)

"Mystery Song" (bonus track)

"Rain"

"Rockin' All Over The World"

"Again And Again"

"Whatever You Want"

"What You're Proposing"

"Rock 'N' Roll"

"Don't Drive My Car"

"Marguerita Time"

"Rollin' Home" (bonus track)

"Burning Bridges"

"Rock 'Til You Drop"