On 13 November 1801, Caroline of Baden, second wife of Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria, gave birth to twins: Elisabeth Ludovika and Amalie Auguste.

Shall we learn more about these two princesses who became queen consorts and were aunts of Franz Joseph and Elisabeth of Austria?

Elisabeth Ludovika (1801-1873), who was also godmother to her niece and future Empress Elisabeth, married the future King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia in 1823 and supported his intellectual and artistic interests that were close to his heart.

She refused to become a Protestant as a condition for marriage, insisting that she would only convert if she was convinced by the merits of this faith after studying it for herself. On 5 May 1830, seven years after her marriage, Elisabeth spontaneously converted to Protestantism.

Her union was apparently happy, but remained childless: after a single miscarriage in 1828, Elisabeth was unable to have any more children.

She became Queen consort of Prussia in 1840 and never failed to influence Prussian politics, where she worked to preserve the close friendship between Prussia and the Austrian Empire. For Frederick William IV she was an exemplary wife and, during his long illness, a devoted nurse.

A curiosity: initially Elizabeth Ludovika was hostile to her nephew’s British wife, Victoria Princess Royal of the United Kingdom (Queen Victoria‘s first daughter), known in the family as Vicky, but their relationship thawed when Victoria took care of Elizabeth and comforted her during the first painful days of her widowhood. Elizabeth never forgot Vicky’s kindness and in her will broke with tradition by leaving her jewellery to Vicky. These jewels should have been bequeathed to the reigning queen (Augusta of Saxe-Weimar, Elisabeth’s sister-in-law, at that time Prussian queen and German empress) and this was an offence for which Augusta never forgave Vicky.

After her husband’s death on 2 January 1861, Elisabeth devoted herself to charity work in memory of her late husband. Her brother-in-law, Emperor Wilhelm I of Germany, esteemed her as a true friend. Elisabeth died in 1873 in Dresden.

Her twin sister Amalie Auguste (1801-1877) married Prince John of Saxony on 21 November 1822. He reigned as King of Saxony between 1854 and 1873.

The two young newlyweds had a very strong and cordial relationship with the then rulers of Saxony, Frederick Augustus II and his wife Maria Anna, another sister of Amalie Auguste! The two women worked together a lot for various charities. In 1851, Amalie Auguste became president of the Dresden Women’s Association, an organisation founded by her sister, the then queen.

In 1854, on the death of Frederick Augustus, who had had no children, John and Amalie became the new rulers of Saxony.

John and Amalie had nine children, six of whom died young and before their parents. It’s so sad to see so many children die before you, isn’t it?