My feeling towards Wikipedia is that it is great as a quick reference to check facts and results, but it doesn't work as well for explaining well introductory material. The reasons are various.

It is difficult to provide a good explanation for everyone. Often, different intended targets conflict: you can't explain "kernel" to a layman, to an engineer, and to a mathematician at the same time, while making the exposition clear for all of them.

Moreover, often one would like to start from scratch and lay down the whole article from a different point of view; this is diplomatically difficult because it would trash the contributions of the previous editors (good or bad as they are). Yet, for some quickly-evolving topics it might be necessary to rewrite the page from scratch every few years, to reflect the recent advances and the new understanding.

The notation of an article might need changing; however, it's a difficult job to get to agree on "the best notation" for a given topic, even among three co-authors. Edit wars are a concern, and democracy often isn't the best way to solve them.

Pages in other languages are another concern. There is nothing wrong with having a good English page translated in several languages; on the other hand, local writers will tend to start their own new pages independently, even if their quality is worse. Even if someone translates an English page at a certain moment, future changes will get de-synchronized among the different languages.

I feel that many mathematicians would rather write a (part of) a textbook or a review article, and publish it on the internet. Often, too many cook spoil the broth. A good writer working alone can trump many writers working collectively. So, maybe we'd rather need to focus efforts on making good textbooks and lecture notes easy to find on the internet.

Here's the math WikiProject's "Current activity" page, which lists each day's new articles, articles for which deletion is proposed, articles needing expert attention, articles needing references, and articles needing various other sorts of work: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Mathematics/Current_activity PS added in August 2016: The "current activity" page hasn't worked for more than a year. But there is this page that includes new articles, which often need work: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Mathbot/Changes_to_mathlists

Here's the page listing "requested articles"---mathematics articles that do not yet exist: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Requested_articles/Mathematics

(Inexperienced or non-logged-in users are no longer allowed to create NEW articles, but they can create drafts in the user space, which can be moved by experienced users into the article space.)

DO NOT begin a Wikipedia article by writing "Let $\lbrace T_n\rbrace_{n=1}^\infty$ be a sequence of bounded linear operators on a Banach space $B$." That fails to even hint to the lay reader that the article is not about theology, music, chemistry, banking, politics, etc.

The title of the article should be a singular noun phrase except when there's some special reason to use the plural. One such reason is that the article is about a set of things (in something more like the layman's understanding of "set" than that of the mathematician); for example "Maxwell's equations".

One might begin by writing "In mathematics, an oriented matroid is . . ." Or "In algebra,..." or "In number theory,..." or "In geometry,..." or "In calculus,..." But DON'T start by saying "In functional analysis,...", or "In category theory," or "In topology,....". Again with those, the lay reader is given no reason to suspect that mathematics is what it is about. There's no need for that sort of context-setting phrase if the title of the article is "Mathematical induction" or "Algebraic equation" or "Arithmetic of $p$-adic numbers".

Usually, the word or phrase that is the title of the article should appear in or near the first sentence set in bold, not necessarily verbatim identical to the title (e.g. it may be plural where the title is singular).

Do not begin a biographical article by writing "John Schmon was born in Putford in 1801. His father was a polecat farmer and his mother was a quantum software designer. He attended this school and that school. His older brother died when he was 10....." The reader should be told right at the beginning what John Schmon was notable for, thus: "John Schmon (1801–1998) was a Nevian mathematician who discovered this theorem and that theorem and made fundamental contributions to the understanding of whatever."

Use lower case initial letters in article titles and section headings except where there is a reason to use a capital (e.g. a person's name). The first letter of a section heading is capital except in rare instances where there's a reason to use lower case. Thus a section may be called

Applications of the theorem to population genetics

but should NOT be called

Applications of the Theorem To Population Genetics

If you create a new article, it's a good idea to create redirect pages from alternative names, commonplace misspelling and miscapitalizations, commonplace misnomers, etc. Thus "Schmon's Theorem" (with a capital "T") might redirect to "Schmon's theorem" (the proper title).

One of the easiest mistakes to make in creating a new article is to leave it as an "orphan", i.e. an article to which no other articles link. If you go to the "toolbox" menu and choose "what links here" you can see which other articles link to it. In the relatively early days of Wikipedia (in 2002 or 2003), I created a new article titled "exponential growth". I then used Google to find more than 150 occurrences of "exponential growth" or "grows exponentially" or "growing exponentially" in other Wikipedia articles, and linked them to the new article. Much more recently, in 2011, I found that 60 Wikipedia articles mentioned Gerald J. Toomer, in most cases by citing one of his works, but there was no article about him. I created the links to the new article about him BEFORE creating the article about him. These are "red links": links to an article that does not exist, and are red in color, whereas links to existing articles are blue. One should create appropriate red links in anticipation of the future existence of an article even when one intends never to create it oneself. A red link invites others to click on it and then create the new article.

I've put whatever came to mind instantly into these comments. I could say a lot more if I took more time.

Most of what appears above is codified in Wikipedia's style manuals and guidance pages.

Here is my rather personal answer. I like Wikipedia---both in general and the mathematically oriented part, and I would like to collaborate in its improvement and contribute in any way I can. But I don't know where to begin. With MO, when I have free time I can start "at the top" so to speak, and continue on down until I start seeing familiar entries---but in Wikipedia how does one decide what to look for that might benefit from one's inspection and possible editing. Getting over that intimidating problem is what prevents me from even getting started. I think it would help if "we" (i.e., the math community) could set up a website where there was listed mathematical subjects that either someone had spotted as being ignored by Wikipedia, or whose Wikipedia article had been recently edited, or which someone had read and felt would benefit from expansion or improvement. It would be good if such a site was maintained in chronological order by date of entry so one could view it from the top for new stuff as one had time to do so, and it should allow comments and "answers" to each entry to show any progress in fixing the problem. I guess some sort of "stack" is what I have in mind. I would certainly be willing to visit such a site frequently myself and contribute to it as I could.

+1 for question. Hope it will stimulate us to contribute more, it would be great. I feel great respect to those who contribute to Wikipedia. My experience about Wikipedia and its quality is highly positive, probably one of the reasons, is that many many articles are written by one of the Fields Medalists.

Personally I have contributed some material to Wikipedia, the main reason that my contribution is not so big - is lack of time. I feel somewhat ashamed about it, and some excuse which I see for myself - is that I am currently in industry and cannot enjoy academic freedom.

I would also be second on Jérémy Blanc's words: "One difference between MO and wikipedia is that here you get very quickly answers or remarks on what you have written, and it is then very much more attractive..." Wikipedia pages have view-counters, which somehow indicates how useful is what you have done, but it is not clear what exactly is counted ? I guess some views come from robots or other automatic engines. The page about Capelli identity (which is mostly written by me) is visited about 5 times per day according to http://stats.grok.se/en/latest/Capelli%27s_identity Are there really so many people who know what is it ? :))) Although, it is not very important for me, but just having more feedback would be nicer.

Let me also mention that when I was in academia, I did not see big use of Wikipedia for me - when you are deep in one field Wikipedia cannot help you. But when I switched into industry and I often got a new task about things which I know nothing about - then Wikipedia became extremely useful. Moreover I see that for hundreds of engineers Wikipedia is main window to mathematical knowledge.

I am probably not the only person who finds that many math textbooks are quite boring Why do so many textbooks have so much technical detail and so little enlightenment?. In my experience Wikipedia is an exception. So currently my feeling is that If I need to understand some new topic or an idea - I will look to Wikipedia, if it is described there - then it is possible to learn the subj. If something is missing on Wikipedia - no chance to understand an idea in a reasonable amount of time.

I will expand on one of Aaron Meyerowitz's remarks.

I am somewhat possessive about what I have written. Indeed one of the hurdles I had to overcome to participate on MathOverflow was to accept that what I submitted could be changed by many other people. I was upset when it happened, and the major thing that kept me from voicing that upset was the FAQ, which said other people could do that. However, most of the edits were sensitive to the thrust of the post, and turned out to be more changes to style than serious changes to content. I have grown to be more comfortable with posting answers on this forum, as my input has mainly been given due respect.

If I were a contributing author to Wikipedia, I would have to overcome a similar hurdle, especially as there would be no consensus as to what is "the" information to present. The posting would not be "mine" anymore.

If Wikipedia had a mechanism for including outside references in a useful fashion, I might be more inclined to offer material for its use. My impression of the current system is that there is a "References" section in the article which includes hyperlinks to other material. My suggestion would be to enhance this so that the link expands into essentially two documents: my version of the article, which I agree to allow Wikipedia to keep a local unedited copy and display repeatedly for their benefit, and a meta document which I agree can be modified in tandem by me and Wikipedia editors whose main purpose is to explain discrepancies, notation changes, and other elements of context to allow the reader to transition between the Wikipedia intro and my version. Wikipedia could then use (or not) my version of the article, the content of which I have control, while maintaing editorial control over their version. Even if I decided that my version was no longer appropriate, I could only petition for its removal, as I had granted Wikipedia the right to use a copy of the unedited version in perpetuity, and I have access to the meta document to say that I think a better version is available elsewhere.

It seems a little more complicated then just providing a hyperlink, but it has the advantage that it could be maintained by Wikipedia, the situation between editor and author is clearly defined and separated further, and the meta document has the flexibility to handle most of the situations that arise. Also, this kind of mechanism would accommodate my sense of possessiveness, and allow me to write things which I could use for my own purposes as well as allow Wikipedia to enhance their collection.

Gerhard "Will Write For Venti Mochas" Paseman, 2013.05.22