Wendy Oldbag Image Gallery Sprite Gallery

Wendy Oldbag is a talkative old woman who has worked as a security guard for various organizations such as Global Studios and KB Security. She was a witness to the murders of Jack Hammer and Juan Corrida, and was involved in the investigations into the murders of Colin Devorae, Manny Coachen, and Ka-Shi Nou. All of these cases have involved important observations about costumed individuals.

Early life of an Oldbag[]

Little is known about Oldbag before she worked at Global Studios. However, she has revealed (during one of her frequent nostalgic rambles) as a child, the other children would make fun of her because of her surname. This included the captain of the chess club in junior high, whom she had a crush on.

Global Studios[]

Oldbag had worked at Global Studios for a long time in some capacity, referring to herself as a "twinkle between the stars" long ago. One day, she got her hands on a photo of an accident that had resulted in the death of an actor. This incident would cause Jack Hammer, who was a popular actor at the time, to fall from grace. However, she remained a great fan of Hammer and would always watch his rehearsals and action run-throughs.

Murder at Global Studios[]

Main article: Turnabout Samurai

Five years later, during an action run-through of The Steel Samurai: Warrior of Neo Olde Tokyo that Oldbag was watching, the lead actor Will Powers messed up a move and fell, breaking the Samurai Spear prop and spraining his ankle. After the run-through ended, Hammer, Powers, and the others sat down for lunch, while Oldbag returned to her post at the security booth at the main gate.

At about 2:00 p.m., she chased off a young kid, Cody Hackins, who had tried to sneak into the studio. Half an hour later she saw someone in the Steel Samurai costume walking towards the studios, dragging his ankle. Oldbag assumed it was Powers because she had seen his injury earlier.

At about 5:00 p.m., a rehearsal was scheduled to occur at Studio 1, but it was canceled because Hammer was found dead in his Evil Magistrate costume, apparently having been stabbed through the chest by the Samurai Spear. Powers, who was taking a nap at the time, arrived late, and was accused by Oldbag of having committed the murder.

At the witness stand[]

Lawyer Phoenix Wright took on Powers's case. He and Oldbag soon met for the first time, and she asserted her belief that Powers was guilty. She was later called as a witness and immediately became smitten with prosecutor Miles Edgeworth, much to the latter's chagrin. Wright tried to buy more time by accusing Oldbag of the murder, which Edgeworth did not make a serious attempt to refute. Later, Wright got Oldbag to tell him the entire story of the murder five years prior to Hammer's murder, which eventually lead him to clinch a not guilty verdict for Powers and have the true killer arrested. After the trial, Global Studios eventually cut its security staff, and Oldbag was fired. She offered to become Edgeworth's bodyguard, but he turned her down.

Despite this rejection, Oldbag's dedication to her "Edgey-poo" did not falter. A bouquet of flowers and a Steel Samurai statue could be seen in Edgeworth's office during Wright's investigation into the murder of Bruce Goodman. Examination of these objects revealed both to have notes signed by a "Wendy".

Murder at the Gatewater Hotel[]

Main article: Farewell, My Turnabout

One year later, Oldbag once again became a security guard, this time in charge of the Hero of Heroes Grand Prix at the Gatewater Imperial Hotel. For some reason, by this point, she had obtained a space suit costume (complete with toy ray gun) which she wore as her uniform. At one point during the event, she stole a reporter's camera and learned about a scandalous story involving her latest crush, actor Juan Corrida, who was participating in the Grand Prix. She snooped around Corrida's room to investigate. Later, in the hallway, she saw someone in a Nickel Samurai costume entering the Corrida's room. Corrida was killed soon after and the actor who played the Nickel Samurai, Matt Engarde, was accused.

Phoenix Wright was on the defense's case again. Oldbag refused to cooperate in his investigation at first, but she melted and spilled most of her information on the case when Wright gave her a note autographed by Corrida addressed to "Wendy" (though it was most likely not addressed to Oldbag). To prosecutor Edgeworth's dismay, she was called as a witness during Engarde's trial, and Wright noticed that the Nickel Samurai in the photo was shorter than the one featured on a promotional poster. The person who had left Corrida's room was actually Engarde's manager, and Corrida had already been killed by then. Engarde was eventually found to be guilty of hiring an assassin to commit the crime.

At KB Security[]

Main article: The Stolen Turnabout

After the Corrida murder case, Oldbag was hired as a security guard at KB Security with Larry Butz accompanying her. Although Wright visited the KB Security offices, he never encountered her. However, the chest piece and helmet of Oldbag's space suit costume from her stint at Gatewater Imperial Hotel could be seen at Mask☆DeMasque's Hideout. Oldbag was later seen complaining that she had not appeared at all in Wright's latest investigations.

At Gatewater Land[]

Main article: The Kidnapped Turnabout

Oldbag was next seen working as an entertainer dressed as the Pink Badger at Gatewater Land on Mar. 13, 2019. She witnessed what she believed was a murder, but she couldn't see the shooter or the victim properly. Miles Edgeworth, who was investigating the murder of Oliver Deacon, rushed to the stadium of the park upon finding out about an apparent witness to the crime, only to be horrified upon learning the witness's identity. Oldbag's testimony was too vague to be of help to Edgeworth until a device called Little Thief was used to recreate the crime scene. The murder that Oldbag had seen later turned out to have been a set-up.

As the Pink Princess[]

Main article: Turnabout Ablaze

The next day, Oldbag was called to fill in as the Pink Princess (the usual actress, a woman named Mindy, was ill at the time) for a stage show at the Theatrum Neutralis between the embassies of Allebahst and Babahl. As part of her duties, she assisted the Steel Samurai in handing out boxes of Samurai Dogs to various members of the embassy's staff, however she took some of the boxes for herself, including one "special" box apparently containing a hinomaru fan design. She fractured her hip during the show, and so she was taken to the room next to Quercus Alba's office on a stretcher to recover. As she was warming her hip and drying her undershirt on a fireplace, a love letter from an apparent stalker fell through the chimney. Meanwhile, the Iron Infant (a prop from the show) was lost in a pool in Allebahst's rose garden.

Later on, Oldbag entered Alba's Office to complain about the noise coming from it. A suddenly dismayed Miles Edgeworth was there again, investigating the murders of Ka-Shi Nou and Manny Coachen. The unmasked Steel Samurai, Larry Butz, was there as well. As Edgeworth questioned Oldbag, he deduced that the fireplace in Alba's office shared a chimney with the fireplace that Oldbag had used, and that the two fireplaces were connected by a revolving wall. It also turned out that the letter's sender was Butz, who had intended the letter for Mindy.

Later that night, Edgeworth's suspect was named: Ambassador Alba himself. While he was rebutting Alba's testimonies, Butz found the Iron Infant in a pool in Babahlese Embassy. He and Oldbag went to the Theatrum Neutralis to deliver the news, which was just what Edgeworth needed to prove that there was a way to transport Manny Coachen's body from the Allebahstian to the Babahlese Embassy undetected. Through further examination of Alba's testimony, Alba was forced to admit that he had been inside the Theatrum Neutralis stage's dressing room, but that room had already been investigated and no evidence of murder had been found. At this point, Oldbag gave Edgeworth the "special" box of Samurai Dogs that she had kept for herself. This again turned out to be just what Edgeworth needed, for the hinomaru was in fact a drop of blood, which Alba had shed when Coachen tried to defend himself. Alba was consequently arrested, not only for the two murders he had committed, but also for leading an international smuggling ring.

Personality[]

Oldbag mainly comes across as a stereotypical cranky old lady. She is prone to ramble on and on when given the opportunity, lecturing others about their behavior and comparing their actions to the "good old days". She is also very stubborn, especially with those she views as "young whippersnappers", and reacts badly to anyone bad-mouthing her crushes. She has not kept track of her age since her 20s, so even she doesn't know her real age.

Crushes[]

Oldbag has had crushes on Miles Edgeworth, Jack Hammer, and Juan Corrida. She has stalked all three of these individuals and has continued to stalk Edgeworth, even sending gifts of flowers and Steel Samurai statuettes to his office. Her attachment to Edgeworth is such that, although she showed some signs of an attraction towards Shi-Long Lang, she remained on Edgeworth's side during his investigations.

Name[]

Japanese - Kaoru Ōba (大場 カオル):

"Ōba" may come from "obā-san" (お婆さん) which means "grandma", or "oba-san" which means "old lady" or "aunt" in Japanese. On the other hand, it may come from "ōbaka" (大バカ), which means "a big idiot", or a combination of "obachan" and "baka" (バカ; idiot). Another possible explanation is that her name is a play on "oba" (grandma/old lady) and kaoru (香る; smell), making her name sound like "smells like grandma/old lady".

"Oba-chan" (おばちゃん), meaning "old lady", is usually used endearingly for an unrelated older person.

English - Wendy Oldbag:

Her full name is a pun on "windy old bag" or "old windbag", which is very suitable, seeing as she has the tendency to go on and on about her youth and other unrelated topics. It could also be a play on "old hag", referring to her generally less-than-pleasant personality. According to Ben Judd, her name was chosen because "she seemed like the sort of old lady who would carry around a big bag with her whole life packed up inside it".

French - Flavie Eïchouette:

Her name may come from "vieille chouette", a pejorative expression that literally translates as "old owl", but means something closer to "hag" or "crone".

Chinese - Dàchǎng Xūn (大場 薰)

In an early unofficial Chinese localization, her given name is translated into 香 (Xīang).

Unofficial[]

Brazilian Portuguese - Savéria Ranzina: [1]

"Savéria" is an Italian variation of Xavier, and ironically means "new house".

"Ranzina" is a variation of Ranzini to approximate the word "ranzinza" (grumpy), one of her strong characteristics.

Her full name is a pun on "essa velha ranzinza" (that grumpy old woman).

Russian - Vendi Korga (Венди Корга):

The name remains as in the western version.

"Корга" which is a play on "Карга" which means "Hag".

Russian - Obaba Karoga (Fan-translation by Dant):[2]

In her name, there is the word "baba", colloquially also meaning "grandma".

"Karoga" is play on word "korga" which means "hag".

Development[]

Oldbag made an appearance in most Ace Attorney games, excluding Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney (although she did appear in a trailer for the game), until Ace Attorney Investigations 2: Prosecutor's Gambit (however, she was alluded to in the TGS 2010 Special Stage Show, which made Edgeworth regain his lost memories). In Prosecutor's Gambit, she was originally supposed to cameo in The Inherited Turnabout, appearing in the Zodiac Art Gallery, but any lines she had were cut from the game.[3]

She regularly changes outfits. In Turnabout Samurai, she wears a blue jumpsuit and black shoes. In Farewell, My Turnabout, she adds an astronaut helmet, a gray belt, and a gray box strapped to her chest, and carries a ray gun. She wears a Pink Badger costume in The Kidnapped Turnabout, and a Pink Princess costume in Turnabout Ablaze.

She was cut from Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Trials and Tribulations due to game memory issues, only making an appearance during the credits when the development team discovered that they had just enough memory left to squeeze her in. Director Shu Takumi had wanted to give her a lei to signify that she had gone to vacation in Hawaii, but even this added extra was too much and thus was not included in the finished game.[4]

Oldbag is never referred to by name in the court record or organizer, instead being listed as "Security Lady" or "Ex-Security Lady" (or "Obachan" ("オバチャン") in the Japanese versions). Her name is instead given in her court record biography text and is phrased in a way that shows neither Wright nor Edgeworth are sure about it.

Other media[]

Manga[]

Oldbag appears in both the Del Rey and Kodansha Comics manga. One story in the Del Rey manga centers around her grandmother, Wendolyn Oldbag.

Appearances in court skits[]

Gyakuten Saiban 4[]

In a court skit trailer for Gyakuten Saiban 4 (Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney), Oldbag appeared as a "witness" to the crime. She was a security guard at Capcom who stole the confidential files for Gyakuten Saiban 4 and blamed the crime on Mask☆DeMasque IV, who was aimlessly wandering around in the company storage. In her testimony, she became so excited she confessed to stealing the files. When the judge asked her why, she responded that it was for love and showed them the page describing the main character. From the descriptions, she thought it was Edgeworth who was the main character. This was disproved by Wright, who noted that the protagonist for the new game was 22, but Edgeworth was older. It was then discovered that the identity of Mask☆DeMasque IV and the main character was Apollo Justice.

Gyakuten Saiban 6[]

Oldbag made an appearance during a court skit created to promote the Gyakuten Saiban 6 (Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Spirit of Justice) DLC case Turnabout Time Traveler. The skit focused on a mysterious letter mentioning a wedding, time travel, and someone with "M" in their name who had appeared in the Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney Trilogy and Ace Attorney Investigations games. She time travelled to the court session and testified that she would end up married to Miles Edgeworth, much to his dismay. However, Edgeworth pointed out that she was still using her old art sprites from Gyakuten Saiban 2 (Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Justice for All), meaning that she wouldn't be featured in the case, since it used 3D models instead. Although he managed to send Oldbag back to her own time, she had left a message saying that she would be back for him.

References[]

Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney characters The First Turnabout

Larry Butz · Mia Fey · Judge · Winston Payne · Frank Sahwit · Cindy Stone · Phoenix Wright

Turnabout Sisters

Bellboy · Charley · Miles Edgeworth · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Misty Fey · Marvin Grossberg · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · April May · Redd White · Phoenix Wright

Turnabout Samurai

Charley · Miles Edgeworth · Evil Magistrate · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Dick Gumshoe · Cody Hackins · Jack Hammer · Judge · Sal Manella · Manuel · Mr. Monkey · Penny Nichols · Wendy Oldbag · Will Powers · Pink Princess · Steel Samurai · Dee Vasquez · Phoenix Wright

Turnabout Goodbyes

(Bellboy) · Blue Badger · Larry Butz · Charley · Chief · Blaise Debeste · Gregory Edgeworth · Miles Edgeworth · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Misty Fey · Gourdy · Marvin Grossberg · Dick Gumshoe · (Cody Hackins) · Robert Hammond · Lotta Hart · Polly Jenkins · Judge · Missile · (Penny Nichols) · (Wendy Oldbag) · (Winston Payne) · Pink Princess · Polly · (Will Powers) · Steel Samurai · Manfred von Karma · Phoenix Wright · Yanni Yogi

Rise from the Ashes

Jean Armstrong · Bellboy · Billy · Blue Badger · Charley · Chief · Joe Darke · Miles Edgeworth · (Maya Fey) · Mia Fey · Damon Gant · Bruce Goodman · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · Jake Marshall · Neil Marshall · Mike Meekins · Wendy Oldbag · Ema Skye · Lana Skye · Angel Starr · Steel Samurai · Manfred von Karma · Phoenix Wright

Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Justice for All characters The Lost Turnabout

Blue Badger · Maggey Byrde · Maya Fey · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · Winston Payne · Dustin Prince · Richard Wellington · Phoenix Wright

Reunion, and Turnabout

Charley · Gregory Edgeworth · Miles Edgeworth · Ami Fey · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Misty Fey · Morgan Fey · Pearl Fey · Turner Grey · Dick Gumshoe · Lotta Hart · Hotti · Judge · Ini Miney · Mimi Miney · Franziska von Karma · Manfred von Karma · Phoenix Wright

Turnabout Big Top

Acro · Bat · Regina Berry · Russell Berry · Charley · Miles Edgeworth · Maya Fey · Pearl Fey · Max Galactica · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · Léon · Moe · Money · Regent · Franziska von Karma · Benjamin Woodman · Phoenix Wright

Farewell, My Turnabout

Adrian Andrews · (Regina Berry) · Blue Badger · (Maggey Byrde) · Charley · Chief · Juan Corrida · Shelly de Killer · Miles Edgeworth · Matt Engarde · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Pearl Fey · (Max Galactica) · Dick Gumshoe · Lotta Hart · Hotti · Celeste Inpax · Jammin' Ninja · Judge · (Moe) · Nickel Samurai · Wendy Oldbag · Pink Princess · Will Powers · Shoe · Steel Samurai · Franziska von Karma · (Benjamin Woodman) · Phoenix Wright

Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Trials and Tribulations characters Turnabout Memories

Diego Armando · Miles Edgeworth · Mia Fey · Marvin Grossberg · Dahlia Hawthorne · Judge · Winston Payne · Doug Swallow · Phoenix Wright

The Stolen Turnabout

Adrian Andrews · Luke Atmey · Kane Bullard · Larry Butz · Charley · Desirée DeLite · Ron DeLite · Ami Fey · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Misty Fey · Pearl Fey · Godot · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · Judge (younger brother) · Mask☆DeMasque · Wendy Oldbag · Winston Payne · Phoenix Wright

Recipe for Turnabout

Jean Armstrong · Lisa Basil · Blue Badger · Gutsen Brawn · Maggey Byrde · Bruto Cadaverini · Viola Cadaverini · Charley · Chief · Glen Elg · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Pearl Fey · Godot · Dick Gumshoe · Judge · Victor Kudo · Pink Badger · Dustin Prince · Furio Tigre · Phoenix Wright

Turnabout Beginnings

Diego Armando · Miles Edgeworth · Terry Fawles · Mia Fey · Marvin Grossberg · Dick Gumshoe · Dahlia Hawthorne · Valerie Hawthorne · Judge (younger brother)

Bridge to the Turnabout

(Adrian Andrews) · (Lisa Basil) · Bikini · Larry Butz · (Maggey Byrde) · (Viola Cadaverini) · Charley · (Desirée DeLite) · (Ron DeLite) · Miles Edgeworth · Ami Fey · Maya Fey · Mia Fey · Misty Fey · Morgan Fey · Pearl Fey · Godot · Dick Gumshoe · Dahlia Hawthorne · Iris · Judge · Judge (younger brother) · (Victor Kudo) · (Adam Mada) · (Wendy Oldbag) · (Winston Payne) · Franziska von Karma · Redd White · Phoenix Wright