Currently featuring Mark Osegueda (vocals), Rob Cavestany (guitar) from the original lineup, alongside Ted Aguilar (guitar), Damien Sisson (bass) and Will Carroll (drums), the American thrash metal group Death Angel emerged in the San Francisco Bay Area in the early 80s. At the time, Osegueda, Cavestany and Gus Pepa (guitars), Dennis Pepa (bass) and Andy Galeon (drums) became known as the Bay Area prodigies. They quickly gained the respect of their older peers and, despite their young age, managed to show their strength in the effervescent thrash scene.

“There was competition between the bands, but friendship came first. In fact, it was this competition that made bands evolve, because deep down each one wanted to do better than the other. That was our initial goal in the Bay Area scene. Everyone pushed each other to improve and, at the same time, we were all friends who supported each other, as we had the same goals and objectives to achieve”, Rob Cavestany once told Roadie Crew magazine.

After the release of the demo “Kill As One” (1986), produced by Kirk Hammett (Metallica, ex-Exodus), were signed by the Enigma record label, which released their debut album, “The Ultra-Violence”, in 1987. “Kirk inspired us a lot when we went to record the demo. We admired his work in Metallica and he taught us a lot in the studio. That was important and one of the factors that led us to be signed by a record label”, recalled Cavestany.

The group developed, went on its first tour playing with Exodus, Sacrifice, Voivod and Destruction, and achieved good results with “Frolic Through The Park” (1988). The young people, all relatives and of Filipino origin, worked well on tracks such as “Why You Do This”, “3rd Floor” and “Road Mutants”, adding new elements and more groove in “Confused”, “Open Up” and the hit “Bored”, in addition to the cover of “Cold Gin” (Kiss). “I saw the original Kiss playing in 1979 and I was only 11 years old. After that show our goal was to form a band. We didn’t even know how to play, but the idea came from there”, revealed Cavestany.

After the first world tour, where he played with names like Motörhead, Overkill, Testament, Flotsam & Jetsam, Sacred Reich, Vio-Lence, Forbidden, Rigor Mortis and Death, the band managed to sign with the major Geffen Records, which released the cult hit “Act III” in 1990, produced by Max Norman (Ozzy Osbourne, Megadeth). More innovations and new features, such as the funkier and groover feel of “Discontinued”, “Stagnant” or the acoustic feel of “Veil of Deception” and the ballad “A Room With A View”.

Despite the excellent musical performance and the great reception of the album, the band was experiencing problems with the record company and management. The situation became unsustainable after an accident with the tour bus, which occurred in Arizona, which ended up leaving Andy Galeon unable to play the drums for a long period. The unexpected tragedy, added to the existing legal problems, meant that Mark Osegueda was the first to leave, moving to New York. Some time later, they officially announced the closure of activities. The Enigma record label still had time to release the live album “Fall From Grace” onto the market.

The remaining members waited for Andy's full recovery and formed The Organization, which released two albums and ceased operations in 1995. After a series of different projects, Cavestany, Osegueda and Galeon and bassist Michael Isaiah formed Swarm. However, after a benefit show for Chuck Billy (Testament), who was fighting cancer, the return of Death Angel it was a matter of time. The constant offers for shows, including Europe, encouraged the musicians. Thus, the group successfully resumed their career in 2001. Since then, they have released the albums “The Art of Dying” (2004), “Killing Season” (2008), “Relentless Retribution” (2010), “The Dream Calls for Blood ” (2013), “The Evil Divide” (2016) and “Humanicide” (2019).