Bay Area legends Death Angel have released a retrospective DVD covering their considerable history as one of the longest-running thrash acts out of the San Francisco Bay area – an area forever linked with the scene thanks to the emergence of the likes of Metallica and Exodus. Death Angel: A Thrashumentary delivers an in-depth look at life on the road with a band that continues to deliver powerful performances to fanatical audiences across the globe.

Shot on the Relentless Retribution world tour, the film also gives some insight into the importance of the Bay Area tape-swapping scene they emerged from – a movement that bears comparison with the UK DIY scene of the late 70s and the rise of C86 and indie music in the mid-80s.

A Family Affair

Family was always important to Death Angel. Founded in 1982 in the San Francisco Bay area of California, the original line-up featured no fewer than four cousins of Filipino descent – Rob Cavestany on lead guitar, Dennis Pepa on vocals and bass, Gus Pepa on rhythm guitar and Andy Galeon on drums. They embarked on developing a sound for their band, now christened Death Angel, aiming for the style of British metallers Iron Maiden or Tygers Of Pan Tang, cutting a demo, Heavy Metal Insanity, in 1983.

But the thrash scene began to grow in terms of influence as acts like Metallica and Megadeth became established, and Death Angel found a ready home among its ranks. Despite their age – averaging around 16 – Death Angel quickly began to make waves on the Bay Area scene, grabbing headline gigs and playing on the bill with older, established scene makers. Precocious doesn’t even begin to cover it.

Mark Osegueda, a second cousin of the other four members who had been working as the band’s roadie, stepped up to the plate as the group’s vocalist in 1984. His first shows as singer were on the bill with Megadeth in April that year, as Death Angel built on a growing reputation as a local draw.

He comments: “Our early days were heavily influenced by the metal scene – the new wave of British heavy metal was growing in importance and the Bay Area thrash movement was in its infancy at that time. But we found a natural fit with the thrash bands. Everyone went to everyone else’s shows – guys like Exodus, Testament and Metallica were so supportive.”

Death Angel continued to play club gigs in and around the San Francisco Bay area for nearly two years, writing songs and refining their stage show. In 1986, the band recorded their second demo, the three-track cassette Kill As One, with Metallica’s Kirk Hammett producing.

Osegueda says, “We’d got to know Kirk at a record signing and he got in touch saying he had some down time and how he’d like to produce a demo for us. What were we going to say? What an opportunity!”

Underground, overground

The underground tape trading movement of the 80s led to extensive distribution of the demo, bringing the band wide attention. Osegueda recalls that prior to the release of the band’s first album, “We were playing in LA and New York, and the crowd was singing our songs, because there was this underground tape trading… Not only did they know the three songs on the demo, they knew the rest of the set as well because live bootlegs of our shows were changing hands. That’s what keeps it alive, and I think that’s absolutely wonderful.”

The Kill As One tape led to a deal with Enigma in 1987 – the band were still all under 20 – and the release of Ultra-Violence and its follow-up Frolic Through The Park in 1988. The latter broadened the band’s musical palette and spawned the single Bored, used in the 1990 film Leatherface: The Texas Chainsaw Massacre III and a staple on MTV’s Headbanger’s Ball. The band toured worldwide for the first time and enjoyed significant success in Japan, selling out two full tours. In 1989, Geffen bought out the Enigma contract and suddenly things got serious for the Death Angel boys. Osegueda says: “This was a whole other can of beans. A whole other level happens.” Rob Cavestany admits, “We had transferred to new management and the machine just got a lot bigger around us. We were still very young and it was hard to see the bigger picture.”

Geffen and the band’s new management got Death Angel rehearsing and writing six days a week. Cavestany sighs, “We weren’t used to this type of discipline. We were still young and screwing around. We wanted to waste half the day skateboarding instead of rehearsing. But we learned a lot from that experience.”

Their third album Act III was produced by Max Norman, whose credentials included Ozzy Osbourne and Megadeth. The band’s sole major label release, it spawned two well-received singles, Seemingly Endless Time and A Room With A View, which both cracked MTV. The band embarked on a worldwide tour in support of the album… and then, suddenly, dramatically – and near fatally – it all went drastically wrong for them.

On their way to a gig in Las Vegas, the band’s tour bus crashed in the early morning and drummer Andy Galeon was critically injured. Considered lucky to be alive, Galeon took a year to recover. The other members came under pressure from within the industry and their own business contacts to hire another drummer and immediately go back to work – a move that leaves a bad taste with Osegueda and Cavestany to this day.

The band was contractually required to perform a handful of shows in Japan, which were completed with drummer Chris Kontos deputising, but when they declined to hire a long-term replacement drummer, Geffen dropped them. Osegueda left the group and the music industry, moving to New York in the process, and Death Angel effectively were no more.

The following years saw the remaining members of Death Angel plying their trade as The Organization, with Cavestany on lead vocals, releasing two albums to a largely indifferent public and touring Europe supporting Motörhead.

Towards the end of the 90s, Cavestany and a fully recovered Galeon reunited with Osegueda for the first time in nearly a decade. Touring as The Swarm, the band released two EPs and a compilation album. In 2001, Death Angel officially re-formed for Thrash Of The Titans, a cancer benefit show for Testament frontman Chuck Billy, with friend and fan Ted Aguilar on rhythm guitar (original guitarist Gus Pepa couldn’t participate as he was in the Philippines).

The reunion was warmly received and further San Francisco gigs and European dates followed, leading to a new deal with Nuclear Blast. Since then the band has released a fistful of well-received albums – The Art Of Dying, Archives And Artifacts, Killing Season, Relentless Retribution and The Dream Calls For Blood, with recording scheduled to start later this year on a new studio offering.

Mark Osegueda explains the renaissance of Death Angel has meant they are now achieving some of the dreams they had as a hungry young band back in the 80s: “We finally did some shows and festival with the big four guys – Slayer in Europe, Anthrax throughout North America, the Metallica Fillmore shows and some festivals with Megadeth. We played south-east Asia and South America for the first time.”

Cavestany adds: “We just kept getting killer offers to do shows. The tour went on and on, so long in fact that it crossed over to the 25th anniversary of The Ultra-Violence. So we extended the touring by playing The Ultra-Violence in its entirety as a special set.”

Fans can catch up with the band’s history with Death Angel: A Thrashumentary. RC cornered guitarist Rob Cavestany as the band prepared to play a European tour, including UK dates in Wolverhampton, Bristol, London and Brighton in August.

You acknowledge the importance of the tape trading scene. But were the band into it themselves?

Absolutely! The explosion in the 80s created a lot of new bands and our tapes were heavily traded – back then we had hardly played outside the Bay area yet we could play in New York with Slayer and people in the crowd were singing our songs from the tapes. The audience knew our songs – that was the power of the scene.

There was an element of magic to the tape trading scene. You’d answer ads in the back of fanzines and write to the addresses in the back and just trade. You never knew what was coming back, but that was part of the appeal. There used to be a real thrill in getting a new tape through the post… you had to put some effort in to getting it and this was your prize. It all seems much duller now – everything is so accessible in the digital age.

The importance of family seems to run through the band. Tell us about your Filipino roots – how did they inform or affect the sound?

It was why we exist as a band. Filipino families are close-knit and that led to us being around each other at family events. We were always hanging out with each other and discovered music at the same time and, at some stage, someone must have said, “Hey why don’t we form a band?” So we formed a band, even though we couldn’t play instruments at first. We just figured it out for ourselves and we had a good chemistry – there were no hang-ups or strangeness. A lot of Filipino people seem to be musically inclined and it seems to run in our family.

Frolic coughed up a hit single with Bored and a new fanbase through the MTV exposure – any regrets you didn’t chase the MTV bucks a bit harder as some considerable careers were built off the back of it?

Not at all. We were totally there as a punk rock, thrash underground band, and we were pretty much anti all that major league stuff. Most of it is just a bunch of commercial crap being forcefed on the shallow-minded people that can’t find music on their own. We played ball and gained some new fans, but we weren’t trying to push in that direction – even if that video for Bored did a lot for us. There have been so many bizarre ups and downs in our career, I just have to live with no regrets.

Lyrically, thrash metal material tends to stick to familiar tropes and themes – death, blood, pestilence, pain. Ever feel that’s a strait-jacket? No urge to go and write a happy pop song about picnicking in the park with your best girl?

The vibe and the sound of the music is a canvas for those type of lyrics. But it’s not all death and blood… we do have many songs based on the personal situations that we all go through, the challenges that aggravate us and can bring out aggression in us. After all, everything is based on relationships – your best friend, your family, your teacher, your boss. We are about exorcising the demons, not just writing about the demons! I write and record lots of other music outside Death Angel – but I have to say I am not what you would call happy go lucky.

There seem to be some regrets around signing to Geffen. It might have been less fun, but it led to the creation of your best-remembered album, in Act III?

It was a good thing, I have no regrets about that, but we were very young, 16 or 17 years old at the time. We were advised to break our contract with Enigma and we had to pay the consequences with our former manager and our former label. And we weren’t even aware of what was going on. The money coming in from Geffen was going straight out again to pay lawyers’ fees and fund settlements. It was a great move but there was a massive price to pay. Not fun at all – we just wanted to play the music. But signing for Geffen and releasing Act III, that’s something the band are proud of.

The bus crash and the terrible injuries sustained by Andy Galeon effectively put a full stop to the first part of your career. Ever muse on what might have happened if the bus had stayed safely on the road that morning?

That’s the million dollar question. Of all the “what ifs”, that is the big one. We were on a very positive path, all the contract hassles were behind us and we were moving forward. Act III was doing amazingly well, we were selling out tours and we were due to be on the Clash Of The Titans bill. Then, following the accident, because we couldn’t fulfill our commitment to the tour, our place was taken by a little-known band called Alice In Chains and we all know what happened to them. The reality was the band was totally crushed and we could never recover at that time – we imploded in fact. But what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger. If we had carried on, I don’t think we could have lasted until now. I know I was getting fairly loose and partying pretty hard after eight years in the band… we were all young, constantly being told what to do, we had a slim grip on reality. Who knows what sort of people we would have become? My one regret is all the hardships that Andy had to go through to recover, because I love that guy so much.

The comeback is remarkable, considering your significant hiatus. What’s the new generation of fans like compared to the early days?

How people react to music, the enthusiasm, the energy, the love for rock’n’roll is just the same with these younger kids as it was when we started out. The essence is the same… the music has the power to reach the soul, the magic still exists. Back then the crowd would hold lighters aloft, these days it’s a bunch of iPads going up… or you’ll see some kid texting in the front row… which is annoying when you’re putting your heart and soul into a solo. Mostly people are just rocking out like we did when we were kids.

Touring and festivals are essential if you want to survive, but hard work. Do you see yourselves still doing this into the next decade?

Yes, absolutely – we are doing it right now. It’s what you have to do, what we want to do and what we love to do. But, on the downside, leaving the family for long periods of time is painful, that never gets easier – in fact it gets harder every tour. And I’m not a huge fan of all the travelling, the endless airport lounges and tour bus itineraries. You also need a bit of personal space when you’re on tour and you just don’t get any – we are not 21 any more, laughing, partying and drinking and going crazy. Keeping it together when there’s endless “hurry up and wait” is hard work. We’re on stage for about two hours and the other 22 just need to be got through.

Do you get the biggest thrill from a great gig or a successful studio session?

Both give us a great buzz. A lot of work goes into the recording and production process because you are so focused on creating something great. In some ways it creates a longer buzz because the album is more permanent. In contrast, during the live performance the energy is incomparable to the studio, because you feed off the reaction of the crowd – the high you get when you are in the moment during a gig is so intense. Both are great!

What’s next for Death Angel?