Sneha Girap

(Editor)

I Love to read n write about Things that I find Interesting

Princess Theresa of Bavaria (b 1931)

Share on FacebookTweet on TwitterShare on LinkedInShare on Reddit

Sign in

Archduchess Theresa of Austria, German: Theresa Monika Valerie Elisabeth Ludovika Walburga Anna, Erzherzogin von Österreich (born 9 January 1931 at Schloss Wallsee in Amstetten, Lower Austria, Federal State of Austria) is a member of the Tuscan branch of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine and an Archduchess of Austria and Princess of Bohemia, Hungary, and Tuscany by birth. Through her marriage to Prince Rasso of Bavaria, Theresa is also a member of the House of Wittelsbach and a Princess of Bavaria.

Contents

Early life

Marriage and issue

Titles and styles

Honours

References

Early life

Theresa was the second child and eldest daughter of Archduke Theodor Salvator of Austria and his wife Countess Maria Theresia von Waldburg zu Zeil und Trauchburg.

Marriage and issue

Theresa married Prince Rasso of Bavaria, second son and youngest child of Prince Franz of Bavaria and wife Princess Isabella Antonie of Croÿ, on 17 October 1955 at Schloss Wallsee near Amstetten. Theresa and Rasso had seven children:

Princess Maria-Theresia of Bavaria (born 1956); married Count Tamas Kornis de Goncz-Ruszka; seven children.

Prince Franz-Josef of Bavaria (born 1957), a Benedictine monk in Peramiko, Tanzania, now called Pater Florian.

Princess Elisabeth of Bavaria (born 1959); married Count Andreas von Kufstein; six children.

Prince Wolfgang of Bavaria (born 1960); married Countess Beatrice of Lodron-Laterano and Castelromano; three children.

Princess Benedikta of Bavaria (born 1961); married Count Rudolf von Freyberg-Eisenberg; four children.

Prince Christoph of Bavaria (born 1962); married Baroness Gudila von Plettenberg; four children.

Princess Gisela of Bavaria (born 1964); married Prince Alexander of Saxe-Gessaphe; four children.

Titles and styles

9 January 1931 – 17 October 1955: Her Imperial and Royal Highness Archduchess Theresa of Austria, Princess of Hungary, Bohemia, and Tuscany

17 October 1955 – present: Her Imperial and Royal Highness Princess Theresa of Bavaria, Archduchess of Austria, Princess of Hungary, Bohemia, and Tuscany

Honours

Dame of the Order of the Starry Cross, 2nd Class

Dame of the Order of Theresa

Dame of the Order of Saint Elizabeth

References

Princess Theresa of Bavaria (b. 1931) Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA

Similar Topics