Symantec Corporation

Symantec recently announced that the New York Independent System Operator , which provides electricity to nearly 20 million New Yorkers, has standardized on Symantec software and services for data center automation, storage management and data protection. Serving one of the most important business centers in the world, NYISO relies on Veritas Storage Foundation and Cluster Server to ensure the availability of its critical information and systems. In addition to increasing data center utilization and efficiency, NYISO has been able to bring applications to market six times faster since deploying Symantec software.

Based near Albany, NYISO is a not-for-profit corporation that oversees New York's $12 billion wholesale electricity market. The organization's 400 employees are responsible for managing the state's transmission grid -- a network of nearly 11,000 miles of high-voltage power lines that deliver electricity to millions of customers.

"NYISO serves one of the world's most important business hubs, so downtime in one of our data centers could have a profound financial impact," said Mike DeSocio, supervisor of infrastructure support, NYISO. "Symantec plays a vital role in our data center standardization and consolidation efforts, helping us minimize risk and exceed disaster recovery requirements, while increasing operational efficiency."

Reducing Data Center Complexity

In response to increasing demands on its infrastructure and in an effort to reduce complexity, NYISO initiated a project to consolidate its five data centers to two. As part of the consolidation, NYISO worked with Symantec and business partner ServerWare to design a disaster recovery infrastructure to increase virtualization, consolidation, availability and utilization. Key components of the new solution include Veritas Storage Foundation and Veritas Cluster Server with the Global Cluster Server Option. "Veritas Cluster Server and Storage Foundation give NYISO considerable flexibility within the data center, helping us maximize our hardware by increasing utilization rates and improve efficiency," said DeSocio.

Since deployment of its new infrastructure, NYISO has boosted utilization from 10 percent to 60 percent, enabling the company to optimize its data center operations in order to meet growing demands without needing to expand its infrastructure. With Veritas Cluster Server, NYISO can manage its multi-platform, multi-site infrastructure through a single console to increase reliability while reducing complexity and administration time. The solution also delivers 99.9 percent availability, ensuring maximum system uptime and business continuity for NYISO and the millions of customers who depend on the reliability of their electricity.

"The new solution enabled us to move a 130-server data center with just a half-hour of downtime," said DeSocio. "Our objective for the move was that no system be without redundancy for more than four hours, so we clearly surpassed expectations."

Increased Operational Efficiencies

NYISO's new data center solution has improved operational efficiency, enabling NYISO to bring new applications to market six times faster. "We can now deploy new services to our customers in a week or two, instead of 12 to 20 weeks, allowing us to serve our market much faster," said DeSocio.

NetBackup and Storage Foundation enable NYISO to recover servers 50 percent faster, reducing IT administration time and effort. "Making storage changes previously required several hours of downtime and a month of planning, coordination and approval because of the significant impact that downtime has on our market," added DeSocio.

About Symantec

Symantec is a global leader in infrastructure software, enabling businesses and consumers to have confidence in a connected world. The company helps customers protect their infrastructure, information and interactions by delivering software and services that address risks to security, availability, compliance and performance. Headquartered in Cupertino, Calif., Symantec has operations in 40 countries. More information is available at www.symantec.com.