MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif., March 6, 2013 /3BL Media/ – Symantec Corp. (Nasdaq: SYMC) has been named one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies by the Ethisphere Institute, a leading international think-tank dedicated to the creation, advancement, and sharing of best practices in business ethics, corporate social responsibility, anti-corruption and sustainability. The complete list of rankings can be found at http://www.ethisphere.com/wme/.

“Investment in ethical and responsible operations is an essential aspect of being a successful and sought-after employer, partner, and solutions provider. Symantec employees at all levels of the organization are devoted to creating a culture of ethics and integrity,” said Steve Bennett, president and chief executive officer, Symantec. “Receiving this award for the sixth consecutive year is a testimonial to our strong ethical corporate culture. It sets an expectation for our employees, customers, shareholders and society as a whole that we will continue to exercise good business judgment and devote resources and energy to these programs.”

At Symantec, ethics and integrity are the foundation of the company’s business success. Its ethical framework reflects a programmatic approach to doing business ethically every day in any part of the world. The company’s ethics & compliance program benchmarks the highest corporate governance criteria, integrating internal controls, policies and processes that enable employees to exceed the standard compliance requirements.

Employees and partners alike are empowered to lead all organizational objectives and strategies with conviction knowing they’re operating within an ethical conduct model that provides them the tools and guidance beyond compliance with baseline laws and regulations. The company strives to demonstrate innovation and leadership in corporate governance and compliance with the goal of continuously improving ethics and compliance programs and policies. Learn more about our global corporate responsibility initiatives at http://www.symantec.com/corporate_responsibility/.