MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Symantec Corp. (NASDAQ: SYMC), the world’s leading cyber security company, today announced it has again achieved a perfect score of 100 on the Human Rights Campaign’s Corporate Equality Index. This is the 11th year in a row that Symantec has been recognized for being one of the best places to work for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) equality.

The 2019 Corporate Equality Index (CEI) is the nation's premier benchmarking survey and report on corporate policies and practices relating to LGBTQ workplace equality, administered by the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) Foundation. Symantec’s score reflects its continued commitment to equality, with respect to tangible policies, benefits and practices, such as:

Working with the academic community worldwide, experts such as the Transgender Law Center, and companies outside the cyber security industry to develop corporate policies supporting transgender employees;

Supporting Out & Equal Workplace Advocates, which enable Symantec to offer LGBTQ mentorship, training and thought leadership;

Building on an existing relationship with the Global Fund for Women, the world's leading foundation for gender equality, through a multi-year initiative to advocate for LGBT rights in India;

Launching the company’s Transitioning in the Workplace guidelines, which provide a clear, documented process for how to undergo a gender transition on the job; and

Growing the Pride Employee Resource Group to serve as champions for the LGBTQ community, to pioneer LGBTQ-friendly policy at Symantec and to identify opportunities to expand the discussion of leading-edge practices.

“A balance of diverse and inclusive perspectives and backgrounds is key to building a winning culture and creating effective change in the cyber security industry,” said Amy Cappellanti-Wolf, Chief Human Resources Officer, Symantec. “It’s a Symantec core value that all employees feel a sense of belonging, but what separates us as leaders in equality is the ability to translate this into corporate policies that provide equal opportunities regardless of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression.”

“The top-scoring companies on this year’s CEI are not only establishing policies that affirm and include employees here in the United States, they are applying these policies to their global operations and impacting millions of people beyond our shores,” said HRC President Chad Griffin. “Many of these companies have also become vocal advocates for equality in the public square, including the dozens that have signed on to amicus briefs in vital Supreme Court cases and the more than 170 that have joined HRC’s Business Coalition for the Equality Act. Time and again, leading American businesses have shown that protecting their employees and customers from discrimination isn’t just the right thing to do – it’s also good for business.”

The 2019 CEI evaluates LGBTQ-related policies and practices including non-discrimination workplace protections, domestic partner benefits, transgender-inclusive health care benefits, competency programs, and public engagement with the LGBTQ community. For more information on the 2019 Corporate Equality Index, or to download a free copy of the report, visit www.hrc.org/cei.

The Human Rights Campaign Foundation is the educational arm of America's largest civil rights organization working to achieve equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer people. HRC envisions a world where LGBTQ people are embraced as full members of society at home, at work and in every community.

About Symantec

Symantec Corporation (NASDAQ: SYMC), the world's leading cyber security company, helps organizations, governments and people secure their most important data wherever it lives. Organizations across the world look to Symantec for strategic, integrated solutions to defend against sophisticated attacks across endpoints, cloud and infrastructure. Likewise, a global community of more than 50 million people and families rely on Symantec's Norton and LifeLock product suites to protect their digital lives at home and across their devices. Symantec operates one of the world's largest civilian cyber intelligence networks, allowing it to see and protect against the most advanced threats. For additional information, please visit www.symantec.com or connect with us on Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn.

NOTE TO U.S. EDITORS: If you would like additional information on Symantec Corporation and its products, please visit the Symantec Newsroom at http://www.symantec.com/news.

Symantec and the Symantec logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Symantec Corporation or its affiliates in the U.S. and other countries. Other names may be trademarks of their respective owners.