The McAuley Catholic High School has achieved the Inclusive School Award with Centre of Excellence.

Supporting Students

The McAuley High School and Sixth Form is a coeducational Catholic Academy in Doncaster. The academy is split across 2 sites. Lower school is based predominately at the Acacia Road site and is tucked into the housing estate which surrounds the school’s grounds. The lower school is a smaller site which within it holds the Emmaus provision, supporting students with their mental health and wellbeing and the school’s Nurture provision supporting students with a range of specific learning difficulties and anxiety. The upper site and sixth form are based on Cantley Lane and stand proudly, capturing an architectural moment that brings a sense of nostalgia.

The Headteacher’s passion for the school and the young people of Doncaster washes over you within the first few minutes of meeting. It is evident that the leaders of the school believe in the power of an inclusive education and see themselves as ‘servant leaders,’ here to serve the school. The Headteacher is unapologetic when they say it is ‘staff first’ at McAuley. ‘Happy staff; Happy students’ is the Headteacher’s philosophy in ensuring that the children’s experience of McAuley is the best it can be as they are guided by adults who want to be there. This philosophy is working. The school has not seen the recruitment and retention issues other schools are facing and has successfully appointed positions in subjects that other settings struggle to recruit.

During our Assessor’s visit the retention of staff was evident as there was a healthy mix of staff with varying years of service. One staff member described themselves as still relatively new after being at the school for 13 years as they compared themselves to the number of teaching still at McAuley after 30 years. Teachers also commented that they’ve never thought about leaving due to the family nature of the school. This is impressive and not something regularly seen or heard across secondary education schools today.

Family Friendly Finish Time

The morning starts early with a tutor period for all year groups, maximising learning time and ensuring that any latecomers can be supported into school. The decision to start the day early has also been done so with staff and student wellbeing in mind. The early start allows a more family friendly finish time giving students the opportunity to return home after enjoying extra-curricular activities at a reasonable time. The earlier finish also allows staff to spend time with loved ones which is appreciated by all. The wellbeing of everyone is at the forefront of planning and the judicious choices made by leaders is evident on the smiles and the happiness of staff and students at McAuley.

During the 2-day visit our assessor found all staff to be very knowledgeable about the school and their students. As staff turnover is the lowest on record, it is welcoming to see students and staff with a real knowledge of one another. Staff genuinely love working at McAuley and the students love attending the school. When staff and students were asked about what they would change about McAuley there was a resounding ‘nothing.’

Staff who had worked in other schools talked about how they would not leave McAuley as they have never experienced a positivity like they have here. Students talked about friends and family who attend other schools in the area and all commented that they felt lucky to be at McAuley where they are listened to. Staff talk about how they all support one another and how this friendly culture has been created by the leaders at the school. The leaders set the tone for the inclusive, friendly ethos where the true measure of success is how staff and students feel they are respected and listened to.

Parents Talk Highly of the School

Parents talk highly of the school and describe the staff as ‘supportive’ and ‘responsive.’ Nothing is ever too much for the staff at McAuley and parents really appreciate how adaptive the school is to their child’s needs. The alternative and inclusive provisions such as Emmaus and Nurture are examples of how the school caters for a range of students experiencing a range of needs. For one family, they describe the support they felt when their eldest child was having a difficult time with their mental health and staff at the school ‘helped them get through it and come out the other side stronger.’ Parents express their gratitude to the staff at McAuley and commented that ‘they will never forget what the staff at McAuley did for them.’

The school has been steered by its leaders to ensure its stakeholders are truly valued at every stage of their journey. Their vision goes far beyond academic achievement and is one of an all-encompassing education service in which all children can flourish and succeed beyond the gates of the school.

The curriculum at McAuley is a 7-year journey of high expectations across a broad range of subjects. The development of the way the leaders assess students’ progress ensures opportunities to capture and celebrate all students and their achievements. The diverse needs of the students are not seen a barrier to success but rather as an opportunity to unlock potential and open the door to success in the future. There really is something for everyone at McAuley.

Find out more about the IQM Inclusive School Award

If your school is interested in obtaining the IQM Inclusive School Award or you wish to talk to a member of the IQM team please telephone:

028 7127 7857 (9.00 am to 5.00 pm)

or email: [email protected] for further details.