“The Seven Year Itch” has one of the most iconic scenes in the history of film. It also features the starlet Marilyn Monroe. Everyone who fancies themselves a Movie Buff needs to watch her on screen, at least once.

It was also a product of filmmaker Billy Wilder, himself a Hollywood legend. Wilder had a fifty-year career that saw an astounding twenty-one Academy Award nominations which he would win five.

This 1955 film may be one of the first ever into the rom-com genre. Wilder takes an incredibly simple concept and with only two main cast members, tells a complete story. Richard Sherman (Tom Ewell) has been married seven years. Obviously, he is bored and ready to have an affair. When his wife and son leave town for a vacation, Richard gets tempted by a busty blonde nameless neighbor. Oh, uh – that’s where Marilyn comes in.

I was pretty shocked at the blatant sexual innuendos that filled this 105 minute movie. Not that I’m a prude. But I always thought of 1955 as being overly conservative. It reminded me of Marty McFly debunking the traditionalist words of his mother. The idea of a married man and father flirting with a sultry temptress was quite risqué for the time.

The movie is interesting. The character of Richard is the focal point. He’s in every scene and many times, he’s alone. Much of the story progresses through his own narration in which he’s speaking out loud to himself. It’s awkward at first but I got used to it. By the end I actually sort of liked it, and enjoyed Richard as a character. Tom Ewell delivers some hysterical lines whilst attempting to woo the vixen. I laughed out loud when she asked him if he has any kids. “No. None. No kids.” He quickly responds before adding “Well, just one. Little one. Hardly counts.”

Marilyn Monroe is one of the most mythical figures in the history of our time. It’s fascinating to see her on screen. She possesses an old world beauty and seems to have fun with her caricature part. Her voice is a little off-putting – I’ll have to watch more of her films to see if it was just a choice for this particular part. The iconic scene with her dress blowing is something everyone should watch for the historical content alone. It’s amusing to think how someone in today’s world wouldn’t think twice.

“The Seven Year Itch” is an okay romcom. Aug 4th marks sixty years since the untimely death of Marilyn Monroe. I suggest watching for the historical significance and the taste of old school cinema.

“The Seven Year Itch” is currently only available on every platform