RISMEDIA, June 18, 2007-Blogging Systems Group, a blog technology provider, is helping real estate associations improve their communication and collaboration with members by providing their members with new marketing tools.

“The Internet is fragmenting the delivery of media, marketing and communication making it more difficult for associations to get their message out to stakeholders,” said Richard Nacht, founder of Blogging Systems. “Blogs and social media are the newest and most effective communication medium allowing associations to connect to their target market in a new way.”

According to the company, blogs provide a low-cost, high-results tool for association collaboration, community building, competitive differentiation, marketing, sales and customer relations management (CRM). They have a uniquely effective track record for results as they can put a human face on business leaders, products, services, and other issues which enhance the value of the association.

Recommended Blog Solutions for Associations include:

? Staff, Officer, Committee and Member Intranet Blogs

Thanks to the interactive nature of blogs, staff, officers, committee leaders and agents can contribute to an ongoing conversation. Blogs can be used to establish a sense of community within an organization. An intranet blog can give voice to many authorized individuals, and allow each to publish content on his or her own individual blog within the larger blog platform. In addition the blog platform also has Group Blogs for committees, departments (membership, affiliates, commercial, store, etc.), geographic regions and other groups, enabling those interested in specific topics to continue ongoing conversations on those topics with others in the organization.

? Agent Marketing Blogs

Associations can take advantage of the sea change in agent marketing by providing their agent members with their own individual agent marketing blogs. These are designed to use a blog as a platform to demonstrate expertise in local markets and create a new means for communicating with prospects and clients.

Each member has the ability to:

? Demonstrate expertise and knowledge of community and real estate industry

? Become a community leader and industry thought leader

? Post local and neighborhood news

? Create blogs for each client to serve as an online portfolio

? Create individual pages for each home listing

? Provide RSS and e-mail subscriptions for new home listings

? Include podcasts/virtual tours/videos for specific homes