Princeton, New Jersey – Experience Princeton added four new board members at their Annual Meeting held at the Nassau Inn on June 14, 2023.

The Nominations Team reviewed an extensive list of excellent candidates. Following interviews four new members were nominated to the Board.

The members that were unanimously elected to the Board are Julie Drobits, Property Manager at Princeton Shopping Center/EDENS; Caleb Feiring, Principal at Princevest; Raoul Momo, Co-owner of Terra Momo Restaurant Group; and Jennifer Podolsky, Executive Director of Princeton Public Library.

President Aubrey Haines in speaking of the new members said, “They bring with them a wealth of experience spanning the public and private sector, as business owners, and civic leaders. The board of Experience Princeton will be strengthened thanks to the addition of these highly qualified individuals.”

An Executive Team was also elected consisting of Aubrey Haines, President and Helena Mays, Treasurer, both returning in the same role for a second year. Additionally, Andrew Siegel of Hamilton Jewelers was elected Vice President and Bob Hillier of Studio Hillier was elected Secretary.

Leaving the board were Kate Bech, Lesley Dokos, Kathy Klockenbrink, Jack Morrison, and Charlie Yedlin. President Aubrey Haines thanked each of them for their service over the past year.

Experience Princeton board meetings are on the third Wednesday of each month and open to the public. The next meeting will be on Wednesday, July 19, 2023 at 4pm in the Nassau Inn. Those interested in learning more about Experience Princeton are encouraged to visit the website at experienceprinceton.org.

###

Experience Princeton was founded in 2022 and is a volunteer-based, nonprofit organization formed to shape, maintain and grow a flourishing Princeton economy by offering an exceptional experience for residents and visitors.

 

Short Bios of New Directors

Julie Drobits / Property Manager, Princeton Shopping Center

A commercial property manager with 20+ years of mixed use onsite and regional experience. Committed to enhancing the customer experience and ensuring a safe and enjoyable environment. A fine eye for detail, respectful to NOI in addition to tenant and customer needs. Rochester Institute of Technology, Bachelor of Science - College of Engineering Technology.

Caleb Feiring / Principal at Princevest

Caleb Feiring is a Managing Principal at Princevest, a Princeton-based real estate investment company specializing in retail, office and residential development. His active projects in the Greater Princeton Area include: development of 45 apartments at 195 Nassau Street, Princeton; development of a 6-acre retail center at the US Route 1 and Washington Road traffic circle, West Windsor; redevelopment of 16 Chambers Street, Princeton; redevelopment of 110 S Warren Street, Trenton; and three sites for 100+ unit walkable multifamily communities in Mercer County. In addition, he directs management of Princevest's stabilized properties. His grandparents moved to Princeton in 1958, and his family has actively participated in making Princeton a progressively more vibrant community ever since. Prior to his work with Princevest, Caleb helped lead acquisitions & portfolio management at IFC Investment Management, a multi-billion dollar private equity firm specializing in food & agriculture investments. Caleb also served as the host for the cable TV Show “American Farm Odyssey.” He graduated from Vanderbilt University in 2015 with a BA in English, History & Economics.

Raoul Momo / Co-Owner, Terra Momo Restaurant Group

Raoul is a restaurateur in Princeton. A founding member of the Terra Momo Restaurant Group, Raoul owns and operates several restaurants in the Princeton area which focus on serving food that is locally grown and raised. Raoul has been the recipient of several awards related to his active community involvement. Raoul and his wife reside in Princeton. He is a graduate of Rutgers University.

Jennifer Podolsky / Executive Director, Princeton Public Library

Jennifer Podolsky has been Executive Director of the Princeton Public Library since February 2020. Previously, she served as the Director of the East Brunswick Public Library for three years, where she supervised a staff of nearly 100. Prior to her tenure at East Brunswick Public Library, Jennifer was the Project Specialist for Business and Technology Outreach at the New Jersey State Library. With over fifteen years of experience, Jennifer has served in management, research, and editorial positions in both publishing and libraries. Jennifer started her career as the Senior Research Editor at Reed Elsevier, where she supervised a staff of researchers, managed various research assignments, conducted online database training and assisted in collection development. Jennifer has also worked as a Youth Services Librarian for the Somerset County Library System and as a media specialist for Millburn Public Schools. Jennifer holds a Bachelor of Science degree in English Literature and Anthropology and a Master’s Degree in Library and Information Science, both from Rutgers University.

‍

‍

‍

‍