Princeton is a charming and historic town in central New Jersey mid-way between New York City and Philadelphia.

The town is not only famous for Princeton University but for the vital role it played in the American Revolution.

Today you can spend your visit shopping in fine stores and dining in fancy restaurants, walking through the beautiful Princeton University campus, and taking in many nearby attractions.

Princeton is an easy drive from both New York City and Philadelphia and there is plenty of parking downtown.

Amtrak also serves Princeton via the busy Northeast Corridor line. At the Princeton Junction train station, catch the "Dinky" for the short trip to Princeton Borough.

Nassau Hall, Princeton University

The first stop on a stroll through Princeton University is often Nassau Hall. The iconic building was built in 1756. I​​n 1783, the building briefly served as the nation's capital, housing the Continental Congress from June to November.

The building’s interior was destroyed twice by fire, in 1802 and 1855. Each restoration resulted in a different architectural style.

The Battle of Princeton (see below) in 1777, marked a turning point in the Revolutionary War, when the British troops holding Nassau Hall surrendered to General George Washington.

The building is located just inside the main gate off Nassau Street.

Princeton University Chapel

Another striking building on the Princeton campus is the University Chapel. Calling the building a chapel is a huge understatement, it looks much more like a cathedral.

The chapel was completed in 1928 at a cost of more than two million dollars and seats two thousand. At the time it was second in size only to the chapel at King’s College, Cambridge University. (Speaking about Cambridge, you can read our blog post about visiting Cambridge).

Today it hosts many interfaith services and weddings as well as seasonal concerts.

The official hours are 7 am to 11 pm but Debbie and I found the doors locked at mid-day on a recent trip.

It’s located a short walk behind Nassau Hall and worth the short walk.

Princeton Art Museum

Normally the Princeton Art Museum would be on the list of “must visit” attractions but it is undergoing a major upgrade. The building is closed until 2025 when a brand new building will open.

The museum operates two facilities that are currently open. Art@Bainbridge on Nassau Street in downtown Princeton and Art on Hulfish, also in downtown Princeton, are hosting exhibitions. The hours at both galleries vary so check the websites for exact info.

Palmer Square area

Directly outside the front gates of Princeton University is Princeton’s main shopping and dining area including Palmer Square. Palmer Square features a wide variety of restaurants and upscale shops selling clothing, shoes, jewelry, and home furnishings

There are numerous parking decks for leaving your car and the whole area is very walkable.

Some of the best restaurants include:

The Alchemist & Barrister - The landmark hotel and bar is located in a historic building. It has two cozy dining rooms, a traditional pub, and a patio area.

Blue Point Grill - The seafood restaurant is highly rated by Zagat. Their menu changes daily based on the available seafood but they always offer 10-15 rotating east and west coast varieties of oysters.

Hoagie Haven - There is nothing more “New Jersey” than a solid hoagie or sub sandwich. Hoagie Haven has been serving uniquely named sandwiches since the 1970s. The sandwiches include The Phat Lady (Cheesesteak, Mozzarella Sticks, Fries, Ketchup, and Hot Sauce) and THe Bod Bag (Cheesesteak, Hash Browns, Egg, Ketchup, and Hot Sauce).

The Bent Spoon - After dinner a stop at the Bent Spoon in Palmer Square is almost a requirement. The Financial Times recently named them one of the best cream shops in the world.

Princeton Walking Tour

For 16 years the Princeton Tour Company has been running tours of the Princeton area.

The most popular is a 3 mile, two-hour walking tour of the area.

You can book a tour on their website.

Where to stay in Princeton

If you want to stay in downtown Princeton the classic place to stay is the Nassau Inn. Located in Palmer Square all the downtown attractions are within walking distance. More info and rates can be found here.

The nearby Hyatt Regency is a modern hotel with an indoor swimming pool. More info and rates can be found here.

There are many more hotels in the area. You can check them out here.

Note - This blog post contains affiliate links. This means that if we are recommending a product, activity, or hotel, we might be receiving a small commission if you buy or book from these links. This is done at no additional cost to you. We only recommend products we have personally used or have thoroughly researched.

This post was researched and written by John of the Empty Nest Explorers. You can learn more about the Empty Nest Explorers here.