There is no record of Dean Martin’s last words. However, the music legend died as a result of acute respiratory failure, which is caused by emphysema, on December 25, 1995, at the age of 78.

Dean Martin was one of the most famous entertainment legends of his time. His achievements and fame in the Hollywood and music industries have attracted the public’s attention to the cause of his death and what his last words were before he died. Read on as we go through the cause of his death and answers to other questions surrounding his death.

In What Year Did Dean Martin Die?

The entertainment legend, Dean Martin, passed away on December 25, 1995, in his home in Beverly Hills, two years after he was diagnosed with acute respiratory failure. Christmas Day is a day members of a family come together to have a wonderful time together. It was quite different for a large part of the public that were fans of Dean Martin as he passed on.

His death attracted a lot of condolence messages from almost all parts of the world, as he had an enormous fan base. Frank Sinatra, a member of the Rat Pack and Martin’s sidekick, released an emotionally-charged statement on the news of his old friend’s passing.

According to the Washington Post, Sinatra revealed in 1995 that Dean was his brother not by blood but by choice and that they supported one another in both good and terrible times. He further revealed that over the years, their relationship had taken many different paths and that Dean will always have a particular place in his heart and spirit.

What Did Dean Martin Die Of?

Dean Martin died of acute respiratory failure, which is caused by emphysema. Emphysema is a lung disease that results in shortness of breath. The disease damages the air sacs in the lungs, thereby making them weaker as time passes, which leads to larger air spaces instead of many small air spaces.

Around March 1988, Dean Martin was reported to be hospitalized due to a kidney problem. Ron Wise, who was the spokesman for Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre, confirmed the condition that resulted in Dean being hospitalized. However, after a series of treatments, he recovered and started his acting and music tours.

Furthermore, on September 16, 1993, Dean Martin re-visited Cedars Sinai Medical Center for a test. There, it was finally discovered that his lungs were filled with tumors. Reports have it that the doctors predicted that he could only survive for the next few months. He neglected this prediction and continued his normal life of partying and drinking.

Prior to his death, Dean Martin decided to quit touring because of the effects of his sickness. Meanwhile, before he fully retired from acting in 1995, he continued to perform as the headliner of his Vegas show.

Who Was With Dean Martin When He Died?

There are two contradictory statements as to who was with Dean Martin when he died. According to a report, Dean Martin spent his last evening alone in his house with his hired help. The hired help claimed that the last time the singer was seen that night, he was busy sipping red wine while watching television. She continued that she heard him cough uncontrollably, which was not uncommon for chain smokers. Returning in the morning, he was found dead inside his house.

On the contrary, other reports hold that Dean Martin was with his ex-wife, Jeanne Biegger, from the night before he died to the very moment he died. Based on their report, they claimed that Dean Martin’s ex-wife disclosed that she was with the entertainment legend when he was about to die. She continued that she even crawled to his bed and gave him the very last hug when he took his last breath at about 3:30 a.m. that day.

What Were Dean Martin’s Last Words?

As stated previously, there is no record of Dean Martin’s last words. As a result of this, a lot of people believed that nobody was around Dean Martin when he died. However, it is not concluded yet, as there may be a chance that someone was there but did not take note of Dean Martin’s last words.

ncG1vNJzZmiglZ60qcDLoqWeZpOkunCwxJqlZqWRp8GqutJmo5qrpGLEsL7DrGSappRisKLB0p5kqJ5dmbKiwMdo

ncG1vNJzZmiukZZ7tLLObGWdoZeewaK4zpycmqajpa6ksdJnmqilX6OyuL%2BOnZyapl2irrPAyKeqZqSRqMFuw86rm6xlkaOxbq%2FArqqeZZ%2BbeqWxwK2fZ6Ckork%3D