Dolan Media Co., Minneapolis, acquired an additional 11.32 percent membership interest in American Processing Co., Bingham Farms, Mich, increasing its ownership to 88.68 percent. The purchase was funded by internal cash and $7 million from its $150 million revolving credit facility. The sellers were Trott & Trott, P.C., and Feiwell & Hannoy, P.C., which retain membership interests of 9.07 percent and 2.25 percent.

ADC Telecommunications Inc., Eden Prairie, has completed its acquisition of LGC Wireless, a provider of specialized wireless coverage and capacity solutions for carriers and the enterprise. ADC has acquired Mountain View, Calif.-based LGC for $169 million. This includes a purchase price for the outstanding equity interests of LGC for about $148.5 million. ADC also has assumed certain transaction expenses, agreed to assure payment of LGC employee bonuses and assumed LGC's current debt, in aggregate about $20.5 million.

NEW PRODUCTS Medtronic Inc., Fridley, filed the final module of its pre-market approval application with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the Talent abdominal stent graft system. The Talent abdominal stent graft is a minimally invasive device that treats dangerous bulges in the aorta, the body's largest artery, that can rupture without warning.

VisionShare Inc., Minneapolis, provider of secure, low-cost, reliable data communications services for the health care industry, launched VisionShare Secure Exchange Site, a secure Internet portal that allows health care providers to process Part B Medicare and other payer claims directly from their Web browsers.

The Electronic Discovery Reference Model, St. Paul, an industry group created to develop and establish practical guidelines and standards for electronic discovery, launched its Extensible Markup Language (XML) standard, now available for download at the EDRM website (www.edrm.net). The standard allows for the transfer of electronically stored information to and from applications involved in different phases of the discovery process.

NEW BUSINESS Alliant Techsystems Inc., Edina, has received $23 million from the Program Executive Office for Ammunition, Picatinny, N.J., and the U.S. Army Sustainment Command, Rock Island, Ill., to design a new nitric acid concentrator/sulfuric acid concentrator for the Radford Army ammunition plant and to install new cutters and deflakers in the nitrocellulose production facility.