Genius is 99% perspiration and 1% inspiration, goes the age-old adage. But for Stephen Teang, one of the candidates for the Ernst & Young Technology Entrepreneur Of The Year, the 1% inspiration he received from others was enough for him to chart his own future in entrepreneurship.

“I started my business in 1999, having been inspired by a company which used to be called LGC Wireless,” says Teang, CEO of BSmart Technology Sdn Bhd.

“In 1996, two PhD students in the US quit their studies to become entrepreneurs based on the research they did. They found a way to adapt fibre optics to wireless communication and LGC Wireless was born.”

Teang, who previously worked for LGC Wireless as a regional manager, says LGC Wireless has since been acquired by ADC Wireless and is now one of the leading players in the wireless industry.

Born in Kangar, Perlis, Teang first came to Kuala Lumpur to further his studies at Kolej Tuanku Abdul Rahman. After completing his Advanced Diploma in Electronics Engineering, he worked as a technical manager at local company ENC, which dealt with wireless systems.

Subsequently, Teang completed his Masters of Science in Electronics in the UK. Upon graduating, he continued to work for ENC but only briefly as he received an offer to progress further with LGC Wireless.

It was there that he received his inspiration. “My philosophy was simple — no risk, no gain and that’s what the people at LGC Wireless taught me,” he explains.

Armed with determination and very little capital, Teang began BSmart Technology and the 10-year-old company has since received a number of noteworthy accolades.

These include Deloitte’s Technology Fast500 Asia-Pacific 2008 award, MSC Malaysia APICTA 2008 award for Best E-Logistics solution, the Gold Medal for British Invention of International Award 2005 (the UK) and the Golden Europe of Quality Award 2006 (France). BSmart Technology raked in a turnover of RM15 million for 2008 and is expected to do the same this year.

Exploiting a niche market

According to Teang, BSmart Technology provides telematics wireless systems specially designed to be integrated into vehicles for the commercial, private, public transport and institutional sectors. Telematics is the application of electronics, telecommunications and GPS technology to vehicle systems.

Teang says he chose to get into this business because there are not many players around.

“We have heard of ICT for homes and buildings,” he explains. “But there are not many players involved in employing ICT for vehicles as this is quite a complicated technology. I believe this is a growing sector as there are a number of applications for devices in areas such as security, logistics and automation.”

His customers in Malaysia are LTS, Singkang Logistics and Acer in the commercial sector and Delta Tumpuan Sdn Bhd, an express bus company, in the public transport sector. Regionally, BSmart Technology has customers in Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Hong Kong/China, Dubai, Oman, Saudi Arabia and South Africa, says Teang.

Besides providing customised telematics solutions for various companies, Teang says BSmart Technology is also engaged in the ser­vices business, using the build, operate and transfer (BOT) model.

“If clients should require a full network management control centre to monitor their entire fleet, we are able to do that using the BOT model. After building this centre, we will pass on the management of the centre to the clients for them to operate.”

Problems are good

The founder of BSmart Technology describes himself as a person who loves to solve problems. His philosophy of life is to meet challenges head-on and never backing down from trying to solve problems.

“As contradictory as it may sound, I believe that when there is no problem, there is a problem. When everything is all right, something’s wrong. We’ve got to continue to evolve and keep improving; if not, we become stagnant and that is not good. In fact, this is what I believe is my greatest strength,” he says.

Asked what personal areas need improving, Teang says, “I could do better with my public relations and communication skills and I’m trying to improve on that.”

On his management style, he says his core belief is that teamwork must rule at the end of day.

“I believe that individuals are only important at the inception stage when ideas are born. Beyond that stage, success will be determined by teamwork. Only then can a company truly take off and succeed.”