LGC Wireless overview

Industry

Telecommunications Equipment

Revenue

Employees

39

Founded In

Organization Type

Private

Social Media

LGC Wireless, Inc. develops in-building wireless voice/data coverage and capacity solutions, and compact GSM and CDMA networks. It offers distributed antenna systems and wireless LAN solutions; Network Systems for public operators, equipment manufacturers, and specialized GSM applications; and modular products and services, such as base station subsystems, network switching solutions, value-added services, wireless data support, and operations and maintenance applications. The company also provides CDMA-based network products that offer wireless voice and always-on data services. In addition, it offers professional services, including needs assessment, preliminary design and budget, site survey, final design and quote, carrier liaison, installation, project management, commissioning, remote monitoring, troubleshooting, onsite support maintenance, and extended warranty services. LGC Wireless offers its solutions for hospitality/entertainment/casino, corporate, government/public space, maritime, transportation, education, healthcare, and sporting events/arenas industries. The company was founded in 1996 and is headquartered in San Jose, California. It has operations in North America, the Caribbean, Latin America, Europe, the United Kingdom, Africa, the Middle East, Asia Pacific, China, and Japan. As of November 30, 2007, LGC Wireless, Inc. operates as a subsidiary of ADC Telecommunications Inc.

Founded in 1996, LGC Wireless is an established company that loves to hire graduates from California Polytechnic State University-San Luis Obispo, with 20.0% of its employees having attended California Polytechnic State University-San Luis Obispo. Want to compare LGC Wireless to some other great places to work in San Jose, CA? We suggest taking a look at Zippia's list of Best Companies to Work For in San Jose, CA.

LGC Wireless is a small telecommunication company based in San Jose, CA with only 39 employees and an annual revenue of $3.0M.