great pics and descriptions.

someone earlier mentioned Slade. can anyone tell me where the trails are in Slade and what level of difficulty they are?

thanks!

They average from general dirt trails to complete rock/waterfall type trails. Unfortunately most of the trails that are on public land are easy-moderate (which is good for most FJ'ers). If you want something challenging you usually have to go to a hosted ride where the land owners open up their land which has the harder trails.

Right now the state is trying to shut down a big part of Slade. It's a battle for sure.

U.S. Forestry Service and Powell County Judge Battle Over Road The Country Classics & The Best Songs From Today | 100.7 The Coyote | WCYO-FM

WeavinFJ (Tony) and I were talking back and forth about going to Land Between the Lakes with a group of Tacomas from TacomaWorld but as we got closer to go time the skies were not looking so great and the distance seemed a bit far for just two days. We decided to save that trip for another day down the road and during warmer weather. We opted instead for a trip down to Southern Kentucky for some camping and climbing/rappelling in Daniel Boone National Forest.

Three friends of Tony's from the Cincinnati area joined in and brought a Jeep and a bunch of climbing gear. As time passed, instead of climbing, we opted to explore a large cave. The outdoor weather was high of maybe 35 F during the day and below 20 F at night . . . but the temp in the cave was 55-56 F.

Our fearless leader and scout, Mike, had been here before but forgot the specific turns and landmarks. We went maybe ten miles out of the way before calling for directions twice. I believe this was just past Climax, KY.

A typical Appalachian valley scene. Weathered barns, tobacco barns and well-used homesteads are the norm.

The beginning of the forest road to our destination.

A bit into it and the original roadway was flooded. The trail was rerouted through a slimey mud field and then through a ditch.

After a while longer on firm trail we arrived at our campsite and a beautiful rock bluff with potential for rappeling and caving.

I pulled right in and Tony followed. The creek rocks had a slick coating on 'em (I think it is sometimes called "ice") and after a couple of tries and some tire smoke Tony made it through.

Tony was proud to setup his new rooftop tent but not so proud when the entry hatch zipper separated.

The rock bluff was within 100 yards of our camp area and we had planned to do some rappeling over the side.

Our camping spot and my $50 Coleman tent which has served me well since 2009. We are preparing some dead wood for the fire in this shot.

This trip looks awesome! A couple of buddies and I are looking to do it. Is this trail still open and are there any more details of the trailhead location, trail name, etc? Any deets would be great!