Frederik III (March 18, 1609 – February 9, 1670) was King of Denmark and Norway from 1648 until his death in 1670.

King Frederik III was the second-eldest son of King Christian IV of Denmark and Princess Anne Catherine of Brandenburg the daughter of Margrave Joachim Friedrich of Brandenburg and his first wife Catherine of Brandenburg-Küstrin.

King Christian IV met her on his journey in Germany in 1595 and decided to marry her. In 1596, Princess Anne Catherine and her parents were present at his coronation, and the next year, the marriage was arranged.

As Prince Frederik, he married Princess Sophie Amalie of Brunswick-Lüneburg. Her parents were Duke Georg of Brunswick-Calenberg, and Princess Anne Eleonore of Hesse-Darmstadt. Nothing is known of her childhood.

Princess Sophie Amalie married Prince Frederik in Castle Glücksburg on October 1, 1643. The marriage had been arranged in 1640, as it was considered suitable for the current situation of the groom: he was, at that point, Prince-Bishop of Bremen and not heir to the throne, and was not expected to succeed to the throne.

It is believed to be a political match, though the exact purpose of it is unknown. They had eight children, including King Christian V of Denmark and Princess Ulrike Eleonora of Denmark who married King Carl XI of Sweden.

Proclaimed king

The death of his elder brother Prince Christian in June 1647 opened the possibility for Prince Frederik to be elected heir apparent to the Danish throne. However, this issue was still unsettled when King Christian IV died on February 28, 1648.

At this juncture the Danish Monarchy was still elective and there was no guarantee Prince Frederik would be elected king. After long deliberation among the Danish Estates and in Rigsraadet (royal council), he was finally accepted as his father’s successor.

On July 6, the new King Frederik III of Denmark and Norway (where the crown was hereditary) received the homage of his subjects, and he was crowned on November 23rd.

However, due to misgivings about the rule of King Christian IV, as well as Frederik’s previous confrontational administrations in Bremen and Verden and his quarrels with Anders Bille, he was only elected after he had signed a Haandfæstning Charter. The Haandfæstning Charter included provisions curtailing the already diminished royal prerogative in favour of increased influence for the Rigsraadet.

King Frederik III profited by his spirited defense of the common interests of the country and the dynasty. The traditional loyalty of the Danish middle classes was transformed into enthusiasm for the king personally, and for a brief period King Frederik III found himself the most popular man in his kingdom.

He made use of his popularity by converting the elective monarchy into an absolute monarchy by the Revolution of 1660. To ensure this conversion he instituted the 1660 state of emergency in Denmark.

At the September 1660 gathering of the Estates, intended to solve the financial problems faced after the wars, King Frederik III played the different Estates against each other. He succeeded in gaining support for the hereditary monarchy, the annulment of the Haandfæstning Charter, and the institution of absolute monarchical rule by decree.

During the last ten years of his reign, the king again took a relative obscure position while the new monarchy was built up and the country tried to recover after the wars.

In 1665, the Kongeloven (Lex Regia) was introduced: the “Constitution” of Danish absolute monarchy, and the first assertion of divine right underpinned by a written constitution in Europe.

It decreed that the Monarch “shall from this day forth be revered and considered the most perfect and supreme person on the Earth by all his subjects, standing above all human laws and having no judge above his person, neither in spiritual nor temporal matters, except God alone.” This law consequently authorized the king to abolish all other centers of power. Most important was the abolition of the Council of the Realm.