This is the Linux app named Hierarchical cluster engine HCE whose latest release can be downloaded as hce-node-tests.zip. It can be run online in the free hosting provider OnWorks for workstations.

Download and run online this app named Hierarchical cluster engine HCE with OnWorks for free.

Follow these instructions in order to run this app:

- 1. Downloaded this application in your PC.

- 2. Enter in our file manager https://www.onworks.net/myfiles.php?username=XXXXX with the username that you want.

- 3. Upload this application in such filemanager.

- 4. Start the OnWorks Linux online or Windows online emulator or MACOS online emulator from this website.

- 5. From the OnWorks Linux OS you have just started, goto our file manager https://www.onworks.net/myfiles.php?username=XXXXX with the username that you want.

- 6. Download the application, install it and run it.

SCREENSHOTS

Hierarchical cluster engine HCE

DESCRIPTION

The main idea of this project – to implement the solution that can be used to: construct custom network mesh or distributed network cluster structure with several relations types between nodes, formalize the data flow processing goes from upper node level central source point to down nodes and backward, formalize the management requests handling from multiple source points, support native reducing of multiple nodes results (aggregation, duplicates elimination, sorting and so on), internally support powerful full-text search engine and data storage, provide transactions-less and transactional requests processing, support flexible run-time changes of cluster infrastructure, have many languages bindings for client-side integration APIs in one product build on C++ language...

Also, HCE includes the highlighter application. This is utility to get fast parallel multi-algorithmic textual patterns highlighting. It provides cli UI, works as filter console tool and uses json format of prot

Audience

Information Technology, Science/Research, Developers, Architects

User interface

Command-line

Programming Language

Python, C++, C, PHP

Categories

Networking

This is an application that can also be fetched from https://sourceforge.net/projects/hcengine/. It has been hosted in OnWorks in order to be run online in an easiest way from one of our free Operative Systems.