Overview: WNRJ is a broadcast radio station carrying a southern gospel format. WNRJ is licensed to Vienna, West Virginia, serving the Parkersburg, West Virginia and Marietta, Ohio area. WNRJ is known as Praise ...

Overview: WVBL-LP (99.9 FM) was a radio station broadcasting a religious radio format. Licensed to Salem, West Virginia, United States, the station was owned by Miracle Meadows School.

Overview: WBWG-LP (99.1 FM) is a religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Idamay, West Virginia. WBWG-LP is owned and operated by God's Word Broadcasting, Inc.

Overview: WDTF-LP (107.9 FM) is a Catholic religious formatted low-power broadcast radio station licensed to and serving Berkeley Springs, West Virginia, United States. WDTF-LP is owned and operated by Defenders ...

Overview: WXAF (90.9 FM) is a religious-formatted radio station serving the Charleston, West Virginia metropolitan area. The station has an effective radiated power of 800 watts. The station is simulcasting the ...

Overview: WZZW is a radio station licensed to serve the community of Milton, West Virginia. Its current programming is a simulcast of news/talk radio station WVHU. It enables that station to reach suburban areas ...

Overview: WYNL is a Contemporary Christian formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Dunbar, West Virginia, serving South-Central West Virginia. WYNL is owned and operated by Bristol Broadcasting Company.

Overview: WHFV is a Catholic Religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Shenandoah, Virginia, serving Shenandoah and Elkton in Virginia. WHFV is owned and operated by Holy Family Communications.

Overview: WOAY (860 AM) is a Religious-formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Oak Hill, West Virginia, United States, serving Oak Hill and Beckley. WOAY is owned and operated by Foothills Broadcasting.

Overview: WVGV is a Religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to West Union, West Virginia, serving Doddridge County, West Virginia. WVGV is owned and operated by Araiza Revival Ministries, Inc.

Overview: WPJY (88.7 FM) is a radio station licensed to Blennerhassett, West Virginia, United States. It is one of the 7 "WALK FM" network of stations. The station is currently owned by Positive Alternative Radio ...

Overview: WHMG-LP (98.7 FM) is a Catholic religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to and serving Purgitsville, West Virginia. WHMG-LP is owned and operated by Holy Spirit Study Institute, Ltd.

Overview: WPWV (90.1 FM) is a religious radio formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Princeton, West Virginia, United States, serving the Bluefield/Princeton/Beckley. WPWV is owned and operated by the American ...

Overview: WBHZ (91.9 FM) is a religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Elkins, West Virginia, serving Metro Elkins. WBHZ is owned and operated by the American Family Association.

Overview: WOTR (96.3 FM) is a Southern Gospel and Positive Country broadcast radio station licensed to Weston, West Virginia, United States, and serves the Clarksburg/Weston area. WOTR is owned and operated by ...

Overview: WEMM-FM (107.9 FM, "Gospel 107.9") is a Southern Gospel and religious formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Huntington, West Virginia, serving the Huntington/Charleston area. WEMM-FM is owned and ...