There’s no doubt about it, the iconic film Kevin and Perry Go Large played a huge role in the future of the party scene in Ibiza.

For those of you who weren’t here at the time, or many who may not have even been born in 2000, the laugh-a-minute movie produced by Ed Bye is no doubt the biggest screening focused on the island that has ever been released.

Writers Harry Enfield (Kevin) and Steve Cummings created something so original, so hilarious and so unforgettable, that 22 years later, the world-famous club that Kevin and his sidekick Perry (Kathy Burke) made their big break as ‘superstar DJs’ in, has hosted a reunion that will go down in history.

Cream was the party that everyone talked about.

Starting in 94′ with one-off parties at Pacha and and Space, the event held residency at Ku (now Privilege), before heading across the road to Amnesia in 96′ for an impressive series of events, spanning over two decades.

The superclub was a sanctuary for trance fans during that time, and last Monday saw the return of thousands of partygoers who flocked to relive a time gone by.

An era that was inclusive of everyone, a time that is still cherished all these years later.

Ex head of events for the brand; Nick Ferguson and business partner Dexter Jones (along with the rest of the One More Time crew) put on an absolutely outstanding night, really pulling it out the bag in terms of entertainment and added ‘wow’ factor.

From the second you arrived outside the club you could hear the ‘old’ classics, and from start to finish it was hit after hit including one of our all time favourites, ‘Ayla‘. It was almost as if we’d hopped into machine and gone back 20+ years.

There was even an appearance from Kevin and Perry themselves, who couldn’t wait to get back on stage and play to their adoring fans. Much easier without Eye Ball Paul getting in the way!

The line up was to be commended, from island-resident and world-renowned trance DJ Judge Jules, Lange, Seb Fontaine and many, many more, spinning the tunes that still make us jump out of our seats today when we hear them.

Les Schmitz (Main Room) and Stephen Kirkwood (Terrace) kicked off the night from 11pm, setting the tone for what was one of the best nights of the summer already.

One of the original DJs from the movie, Seb Fontaine returned behind the turntables, taking over from Schmitz at midnight, and what a set it was! Bringing the era back to life, and reviving the ambience of what was once, the best trance club in the world.

Over in the Terrace, Ben Nicky sped things up a notch, with his progressive selection of tunes until 3am. A bustling atmosphere and bags of energy all round.

Scottish-born DJ David Rust, a truly up and coming Trance producer played to the terrace crowd, and reminded us why the genre should continue to be enjoyed by everyone, new and old.

Jules‘s set was impeccable as always, playing a solid selection of familiar sounds, including Adagio for Strings. Simply magical.

It was amazing to see so many people from all walks of life, just enjoying living in the moment once again, without a care in the world.

We cannot even begin to describe the feeling we all collectively felt when Lange played his iconic track ‘Follow Me‘. There were hands in the air, ‘sit downs’, tears of joy and goosebumps galore. What an amazing moment for everyone involved.

We knew it would be busy but wow, it was packed to the rafters with happy faces, and still enough room to show off your best moves on the dance floor.

For the grand finale, closing the Main Room was Island resident and long-standing DJ Vicky Devine, who opened her set with the absolute whopper of a track, ‘Warrior‘. A true classic, and one that not only gets you moving, but also singing along with such emphasis and passion throughout.

There was no sign of slowing down the tempo from Vicky, and the scenes from the DJ booth were simply euphoric. A sea of smiles and plenty of signs saying ‘TUNE‘ and ‘Avin it Large‘ (deriving from the film itself), just like the good old days.

Devine‘s set was something special, an amazing end to an amazing night.

If you’re feeling the post-FOMO from such nostalgia, or you want to do it all over again then fear not. Relax, have a jam sandwich and get booking the second part of the reunion at Amnesia, when the gang returns on Tuesday 27th September 2022.

You can get your early bird tickets HERE

Written by Alexandra Ellis