Determined to prove the Farrelly brothers nonstarters, “Kevin & Perry Go Large” is a loutish Britcom that easily tops the record in erection and bodily function jokes — without realizing that gross-out humor is only passingly funny at feature-film length when bereft of pacing, plot and character development. Based on two characters that emerged from local comedian Harry Enfield’s TV sketch show, this is a fast local playoff item that will go larger on half-inch.

Enfield and Cockney actress Kathy Burke play two 15-year-old schoolboys whose place on the evolutionary scale would give Darwin pause for thought. A cross between Garth in “Wayne’s World” and Harry Dunne in “Dumb & Dumber,” Kevin (Enfield) is the rebellious son of middle-class parents (James Fleet, Louisa Rix , reliable) who, with his pudgy buddy Perry (Burke), aspires to be a world-famous rock singer.

First, however, the lads are desperate to get laid, and decide the best place for that is the Spanish isle of Ibiza, favored spot for young partying Brits into sun, sea and sex. When Kevin foils a bank robber by accidentally setting off the alarm with his uncontrollable erection, the two win a reward that provides the wherewithal for their trip. The bad news is that Kevin’s parents insist on coming along.

The pic, which barely manages to drag itself across 82 minutes, is slow to get into gear during the first two, British-set reels. These are closest to the original TV sketches: Kevin rails at his misunderstanding parents, loafs around in bad, baggy clothes with Perry and fantasizes about sex.

In Ibiza, the two morons hook up with superstar DJ Eyeball Paul (Rhys Ifans), who treats them like domestic slaves on the vague promise of listening to their demo tape. They also start pursuing two unattractive, raspy-voiced femmes, Candice (Laura Fraser, underused) and Gemma (Tabitha Wady), also desperate for some action.

Movie’s toe-curling set piece comes when les girls keep the boys waiting for three hours while they transform themselves from white-trash, acne-infested teens into glamour queens — a montage of exploding zit and body-hair jokes that sends the grossometer into orbit.

With little plot and even less verbal humor, the limitations of the two characters beyond their TV format are exposed early. Enfield’s Kevin still has his funny moments, but it’s Burke’s Perry, waddling around like a tame penguin, who often steals scenes with her coy glances and moronic obedience to the troglodytic Kev. Other characters are basically reactive, apart from Ifans’ wildly overplayed DJ, who favors vodka eye-baths as a way of getting the alcohol quicker into his bloodstream.

Direction (by TV helmer-producer Ed Bye) and tech credits are functional, with a busy pop soundtrack jogging things along.