1980 In Review - December

While investigating the death of a friend and fellow cop, Los Angeles police officer Barney Caine (George C. Scott) stumbles across evidence that Nazis created a synthetic alternative to gasoline during World War II. This revelation has the potential to end the established global oil industry, making the formula a very valuable and dangerous piece of information. Eventually, Caine must contend with oil tycoon Adam Steiffel (Marlon Brando), who clearly has his own agenda regarding the formula.

A really interesting film involving the discovery of a synthetic fuel that obviously big oil companies would want to suppress. Unfortunately I think this wastes that idea on a long and meandering murder mystery that ends up a…

I'm checking in on THE FORMULA as I try to embrace the cinema of both George C. Scott and John G Avildsen. Avildsen doesn't give us the gritty Frank Capra "Feel good about humanity or self" messaging that I feel we get from him at times. However, this works as an engaging procedural. A function of 1970s cop films, to be certain. And on paper, it probably had some marketing and awards appeal--although I don't think it really succeeded in either regard. Brando gives an interesting supporting performance while George C Scott leads the audience through an international mystery that cuts through local police noise AND international story threads whose tentacles stretch into modern oil-price fixing AND back into the…

SPRING CLEANING - FILM #52

George C. Scott is an LA detective tasked with unravelling the murder of an old friend. He stumbles onto a conspiracy involving a synthetic fuel formula that dates back to Nazi Germany.

The entire film is made of up scenes where Scott interviews a witness/suspect, leaves, and then that witness/suspect is assassinated. This happens at least 4 times. It becomes pretty tedious because the mystery is far from mysterious. Just waiting for it to end. The ending, by the way, does feature some good dialogue that hits the movie's theme nicely.

Brando is in his lazy, don't-give-a-fuck period with a very distracting set of false teeth that look fake and fuck up his already garbled…

This doesn’t look good, but it’s part of this Marlon Brando box set, so I’m gonna watch it.

⏰ Two hours later…

I didn’t expect Nazis, elephants, and alligators.

Honestly, I don’t think the plot is interesting enough to warrant the talents of George C. Scott and Marlon Brando. The idea of big oil suppressing alternative forms of fuel is compelling in real life, or as a documentary, but it’s not very cinematic. Maybe that’s why they needed to add Nazis, elephants, and alligators.

That said, our two stars do make it worth watching. George C. Scott walking around talking to people can never be boring! Plus, it was a great time for mainstream movies in general. It’s that 1970s…

Lt. Caine (George C. Scott) begins to investigate the murder of his friend and this leads him to Germany where there seems to have been a special formula for synthetic fuel that the Nazis were working on.

As the new decade kicked off you'd think that THE FORMULA would be a certain hit. After all, both Scott and Brando had won Oscars in the previous decade and director John G. Avildsen also picked up an Oscar. So three Oscar-winners and a story involving a cover-up with the Nazi party and yet, somehow, this film turned out to be a major dud, which is really too bad.

There are all sorts of problems with this film but I think the biggest…