Take a remote setting, a sinister score, a chase scene and a spattering of blood and you have the equation for the perfect horror film.

In the latest attempt by the scientific community to offer algebraic explanations for the seemingly inexplicable, mathematicians have come up with a formula for the best kind of scary movie.

Using the equation (es + u + cs + t) squared + s + (tl + f) / 2 + (a + dr + fs) / n + sin x - 1, researchers have concluded that The Shining, the 1980 film starring a homicidal Jack Nicholson, is the ideal horror flick.

The team, from King's College London, headed by mathematician Anna Sigler and commissioned by Sky Movies, spent two weeks watching a selection of films in the horror canon, including The Exorcist, The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, and Silence of the Lambs.

They decided that suspense comprised four essential categories: escalating music (es) the unknown (u), chase scenes (cs) and the sense of being trapped (t).

Because suspense is considered one of the most important qualities in a frightening film, the equation is squared before shock (s) is added to the formula.

The Shining, where the suspense is built up gradually with premonitions and flashbacks, is the perfect example of the formula applied.

The research team also said that for a movie to be truly terrifying it had to be realistic.

That is why the next part of the equation sees true life (tl) and fantasy (f) added together and divided by two (tl + f) / 2 to find a medium between a plot which is too unrealistic and too close to life.

It also helps if there is a small number of characters (a) in an isolated setting (fs) with the lights off (dr), as in Alfred Hitchcock's classic thriller Psycho.

Stereotypical characters are a no-no, however, and there can be too much gore (sin x-1).

"Steven Spielberg [in Jaws] reached the optimum level, perfectly allowing the viewer to see just enough blood to be scared of the great white shark, but not so much that it repulsed us," Ms Sigler said.

Earlier this year researchers came up with the perfect formula for happiness after interviewing more than 1,000 people across Britain.