The Pop Culture Information Society...

These are the messages that have been posted on inthe00s over the past few years.

Check out the messageboard archive index for a complete list of topic areas.

This archive is periodically refreshed with the latest messages from the current messageboard.

This is a topic from the The 1980's forum on inthe00s.

Check for new replies or respond here...

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: JamieMcBain

What about......

Action films

- the angry sergeant in charge, always barking orders.

- strip club!

Comedy films

- the wacky friend!

- makeover!

- guy pins for girl, who haves a jerky boyfriend

Drama films

- break up, followed by rain storm! Especially in a John Cusack film!

- racing to airport, to convince girl, not to go!

- kissing outside, while raining!

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: MaxwellSmart

This is not strictly '80s --

When the bad guy has the good guys all tied up and ready to kill, he makes a speech:

"You see....you misunderstand me. I'm a reasonable man! But you, you and your friends, couldn't leave well enough alone..."

http://www.inthe00s.com/smile/04/fal.gif

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: JamieMcBain

Or the stereotypical gay male, like in the film, Mannequin!

Now that was over done!

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: robby76

The big ole switcherooo... Big Business, Vice Versa, Big, Like Father Like Son.

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: JamieMcBain

The interrogation scene, between two cops and a criminal.

;D

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: MaxwellSmart

Don't forget the happy hooker! I don't mean Xaviera Hollander here, I mean the way prostitutes were portrayed as good time girls with hearts of gold and bad taste in clothes. Examples, Risky Business, Trading Places, Desperately Seeking Susan, St. Elmo's Fire.

Great example of broken stereotype: Susan Seidelman's "Smithereens" (1982)

The hooker who hangs out with Paul in his van, who I believe was played by the late Katherine Riley, was a frumpish, dull girl with no sparkle and a flat affect.

"Whatsa matta, you here all by yourself? Ain't you got a girlfriend or a boyfriend or nothin'? You want my san'wich? It's cool, I've an egg," she slurs as she starts peeling a hardboiled egg from a paper bag. What the hell kind of movie hooker eats hard boiled eggs?

:D

Subject: Re: The Formula for 80s movies

Written By: Dude111

I approve of this thread :)