Free open-source system cleaning tool BleachBit 4.0.0 was released a few days ago. Now it’s running on Python 3 instead of Python 2.

Changes in BleachBit 4.0.0 include:

Add cleaner for Discord.

Clean more of Google Chrome: IndexDB.

Clean more of Firefox: cookies, history.

Clean much more of Opera.

Clean much more of gPodder.

Improve responsiveness of application window while cleaning.

Fix cleaning VLC.

Support for Python 3.

Clean dnf autoremove

Other improvements and many bug-fixes.

Install BleachBit 4.0.0 in Ubuntu:

While BleachBit in Ubuntu universe repositories is old. You can download the latest version from the link below:

BleachBit for Linux

Grab the .deb for your Ubuntu edition, Ubuntu 20.04 is not supported at the moment, then click install via Ubuntu Software or Gdebi.

Looking for a computer cleaning software? Well, BleachBit is the best free and open source cleaner for Linux desktop.

BleachBit was originally designed for GNU/Linux to free cache, delete cookies, clear Internet history, shred temporary files, delete logs, and discard junk you didn’t know was there. It’s the best Linux alternative to Windows’ CCleaner.

BleachBit is started in 2008, it’s written in Python and uses PyGTK. Since version 0.5.0, it added support for Windows XP, 7, and 8.

Features:

Simple operation: read the descriptions, check the boxes you want, click preview, and click delete.

Multi-platform: Linux and Windows

Free of charge

Free to share, learn, and modify (open source)

No adware, spyware, malware, or browser toolbars

Translated to 61 languages

Shred files to hide their contents and prevent data recovery

Shred any file (such as a spreadsheet on your desktop)

Overwrite free disk space to hide previously deleted files

Portable app for Windows: run without installation

Command line interface for scripting and automation

CleanerML allows anyone to write a new cleaner using XML

Automatically import and update winapp2.ini cleaner files (a separate download) giving Windows users access to 1700+ additional cleaners

Frequent software updates with new features

Download & Install BleachBit:

1. For Ubuntu and other Linux distributions, you can always download the latest installer from its website:

Download BleachBit for Linux

2. For Ubuntu, select download the package matches your release version. The package is a .deb file.

3. To install it, double click to open the .deb file with Ubuntu Software Center and click the install button.

Once installed, start the cleaner from Unity Dash. You can change the language from its Preferences window. Enjoy!