Reseña del editor:

Please note that the content of this book primarily consists of articles available from Wikipedia or other free sources online. Pages: 204. Not illustrated. Chapters: Vlada Divljan, Rambo Amadeus, Oliver Mandić, Nele Karajlić, Bora Đorđević, Zdenko Kolar, Laza Ristovski, Branko Isaković, Bebi Dol, Srđan Šaper, Dejan Cukić, Nebojša Krstić, Nikola Čuturilo, Toni Montano, Margita Stefanović, Kokan Popović, Momčilo Bajagić, Milić Vukašinović, Milan Mladenović, Viktorija, Vicko Milatović, Bilja Krstić, Mile Lojpur, Vidoja Božinović, Boža Jovanović, Srđan Todorović, Kornelije Kovač, Dušan Kojić, Rajko Kojić, Miša Aleksić, Radomir Mihajlović, Goran Vejvoda, Suba, Zoran Kostić, Nenad Milosavljević, Félix Lajkó, Ana Popović, Hornsman Coyote, Zana Nimani, Kiki Lesendrić, Ivana Peters, Zvonko Pantović, Nikola Zorić, Bajone, Goran Šepa, Marko Krasnić, Branislav Kerac, Ivan Vdović, Marko Milivojević. Excerpt: Vladimir "Vlada" Divljan (Serbian Cyrillic: ), is a Serbian singer and songwriter. He is known as the frontman for the Serbian and former Yugoslav rock band Idoli, as well as for his solo works. Divljan got interested in music in 1968, after a Drago Dikli concert in Tuepi, a seaside resort where he went on a holiday with his family. After coming back to Belgrade he asked Zdenko Kolar and Boa Jovanovi, two of his friends and neighbors, to form a band. The first instrument Divljan played was a small mandolin because he was a fan of Dubrovaki Trubaduri. Later he got a guitar, Kolar bought a bass and Boa Jovanovi used a tin barrel as a drum with metal sticks made by Kolar's father. The band was called Faraoni (Pharaohs) since Divljan had a necklace from Egypt, given by his grandmother, with a Tutankhamun medallion. Since there was a popular band from Koper named Faraoni, the band was renamed to Holipe. Both Divljan and Kolar attended guitar course at the RU "Braa Stamenkovi" held by professor Branko Perii who later appeared in the "Sve lai sveta" video. In order to have reh...

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.