Godzilla-King of the Monsters DVD 1998.

Made in 1958 this is the original Godzilla movie (Goira in Japan)with insertions of Raymond Burr as Steve Martin who plays a journalist reporting aparent sitings of a prehistoric Monster in Japan. The movie is filmed in glorious Black & White. This is by far better paced than the original which to my mind is a bit long,and could have done with at least 20 minutes cut from it.The Story unfolds when several boats go missing on the Japan sea,or are literally blasted out of the water by something unknown(i.e Godzilla). Finally, an expedition sights Godzilla who wrecks havoc in Tokyo,and the autorities hatch a devilish plan to surround him with telegraph wires and electrocute him!.This needless to say fails!.The film ends with a young Doctor using his own Oxygen Destroyer to kill Godzilla,but as we know he came back from the dead to star in to date another 31 Movies!.Read full review

Misses the mark

While the Japanese version (Gojira) is wonderful the U.S. version is only ok. If you are a Godzilla fan you know the story. The U.S. version is kind of a chopped up mess. In order to sell this in the U.S. they chopped up the Japanese voersion, inserted cut scenes with Raymon Burr and dubbed the dialogue. Unfortunately the story loses quite a bit of drama in the conversion. Still a good movie but get the Japanese version with original Japanese dialogue and subtitles, it is the superior version!

Verified purchase: Yes | Condition: New

Atomic Culture

I bought this classic movie for a course that I'm teaching on the Atomic Age. This version of Godzilla was released in the United States in 1956 and stars Raymond Burr (who starred in the role of "Perry Mason" the following year) as the reporter who investigates strange happenings around Tokyo Bay. Nuclear weapons testing roused Godzilla, "King of the Monsters," from the deep. A scientist, Dr. Serizawa, knows of a weapon that could kill Godzilla but the price to pay would be the environmental destruction of Tokyo Bay. Created in the aftermath of Operation Castle, the movie raises questions about the ecological and environmental changes wrought by nuclear testing in the wake of tests, like Bravo in March 1954 in which the Japanese ship Lucky Dragon found itself in the path of fallout. The Lucky Dragon incident in particular popularized the effects upon daily life of radioactive fallout from nuclear testing.Read full review

A blast from the past

No doubt this will always be my favorite Godzilla movie of all time. First, I was about 10 years old the first time I saw it in a movie theater, and it was the first "monster movie" I ever remember seeing. At that time, it was genuinely scarey, and actually had pretty good special effects for the day. Even viewing it over 50 years later, it still holds up well against the plethora of monster movies that followed in its footsteps. Raymond Burr plays it straight and is believeable as the dedicated, hard bitten journalist tracking the monster's appearance and the subsequent mayhew. The dubbing of the Japanese actors is much better than in most of the sequels--someone really put out an effort to match the dialogue and lip movements--and the story line is clear and straightforward. The "message"--who knows what kind of bad stuff we may dig up messing with atomic bombs?--was timely when the movie was new--and probably still has value. The love story secondary plot is interesting and the movie's end is poignant. Who knew in 1956 that this movie would become so wildly popular and generate an entire genre of sequels, copy cats, and imitators and a gazillion collectible figures. Some of the movies that followed have been reasonably good films, but the original Godzilla stands alone above them all.Read full review