STEUBENVILLE — Hills, uneven terrain, footbridges, a creek crossing. The course will be a test.

The question is, who is willing to take on the challenge that is Beatty Park?

That answer will be seen on June 15 when the Dean Martin Festival’s Dino Dash takes place.

This is the second consecutive year the event will be held inside the park. The event is being hosted by Steubenville Parks and Recreation and the Jefferson County General Health District and supported by the Friends of Beatty Park.

Located at 601 Lincoln Ave., Beatty Park’s red and purple trails will be the two nature trails in which participants will run. Due to the park’s bridge repairs, the 5k run/walk will be “an out and back race” on these two trails.

Runners will encounter dirt trails in wooded areas, small bridges, the creek crossing and small natural obstacles. The race will include uphill portions of the park and a short turnaround will be used in the adjacent Union Cemetery.

For those not wanting to use the trails, event organizers have made accommodations by adding a 1-mile Rat Pack Race.

Runners will keep to the flat surface road through the heart of the park, beginning at its entrance. Contestants will walk/run to the last pavilion prior to the bridge closure and circle back to the park entrance.

Flora VerStraten-Merrin, founder and chair of the volunteer group Friends of Beatty Park, recalled meeting with Jefferson County health commissioner Andrew Henry last year.

Following that meeting, the idea was born to hold the Dino Dash run at the park. Because of last year’s success, officials decided to once again hold the popular festival activity at the same place.

“Running or walking in our city’s nature park adds dimension to any race,” VerStraten-Merrin commented. “To be out in nature and race on dirt trails with wooded areas, plants, flowers and birds serenading a racer along the way … well, that would seem like the best place to hold a race named after Dean Martin.”

In addition, a Tot Trot is once again planned for those between the ages of 3 and 6.

The Tot Trot will start at 8:45 a.m. The event is free of charge to participate.

The Dino Dash 5K Trail Run/Walk will begin at 9 a.m. The race fee for each is $20.

The 1-mile Rat Pack Run/Walk will begin at 9:05 a.m. The cost of each is $15.

All adult runners and walkers will be charged an additional $2.45 signup fee.

Those racing will be asked to remain on site following the run/walk for announcements, awards and media photos.

Award categories will be determined based on the number of participants. All children running in the Tot Trot will receive a medal.

The deadline to register for all races and walks is June 14. Those wanting to receive a T-shirt must do so by June 1, as they are not guaranteed after the deadline. Race day registration will begin at 7:30 a.m.

The following link will take participants to the website’s homepage to register for any of the races and the T-shirt: runsignup.com/Race/OH/Steubenville/DinoDashBeattyPark5ktrailrunandwalk.

Be sure to click the “sign up” button at the top of the home page to complete the form. The Jefferson County Health Department can assist those needing to register by visiting the office at 500 Market St., Suite 6.

Race details also can be found on the Friends of Beatty Park’s Facebook group, under events.

The Nail City Brass Band will perform a concert to entertain racers and spectators.

The band was established last summer, after a few musicians from the Tri-State Community Band assembled to form a small ensemble. They blended jazz and pop music, allowing them the opportunity to perform at Wheeling’s Italian Festival.

“We are excited to welcome the Nail City Brass Band,” exclaimed VerStraten-Merrin. “They will be performing near the registration canopy from 8:30 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. They will be sharing Dean Martin-era, Rat Pack-style sounds for all to enjoy. Bring a chair, some snacks and enjoy the outdoor concert.”

The brass band will provide entertainment during morning registration, throughout the race and following the conclusion of the event.

The Dean Martin Association, for Dino, for You, for the Good Times will have a canopy set up where visitors can learn about the organization.

Founded in 1960, the group is in its seventh decade, proud to be the first and only official independent organization in the world dedicated to Dean Martin.

He was the driving force behind the formation of what eventually would become the Dean Martin Association, maintaining close contact with the group throughout the years.

Martin served as chairperson of the nonprofit group until his death in 1995.

He personally sanctioned the creation of the DMA, enabling the organization to be ambassadors of his career and to honor his talents as one of the world’s greatest entertainers, according to his website.

VerStraten-Merrin explained she is writing a book about the history of Beatty Park.

“While interviewing an elderly woman who was in her mid-90s a few years ago, she recalled a story about Dean Martin at Beatty Park,” she said. “She told me she and her twin sister lived near Martin. The girls would walk down the hill on a regular basis to the park to swim. She told me most kids back then learned how to dive by going off the low diving board before attempting the high platform.”

“One summer, she decided she wanted to learn how to dive,” VerStraten-Merrin continued. “She knew she would have to practice by going off the low diving board; but there were several times when Dean would be sitting on that board and nothing or no one could get him off of it. He would sit there and just sing for hours and hours. Later, she realized most of the songs he sang he probably heard for the first time at a picture show in town.”

“I thought that was a pretty neat story about Dean Martin,” she exclaimed. “It dawned on me that since he lived just up the hill from the newly-acquired park, back in those days all of the kids hung out in the there and swam in the pool. She said he would walk the same way the rest of the kids did who lived on the hilltop.

” Dean lived on Sixth Street where there was a path and staircases that led right into the park,” she added. “During his childhood, the pool would have been newly-built and we know from the history of the park, it was packed on a warm summer day.”

VerStraten-Merrin explained several community residents visit Beatty Park to enjoy the historic landscape and all of its amenities. However, what many people may not realize is all of the work that went into the revitalization of the park, which is now known as the city’s only 99-acre nature park.

Generations know and remember when the park was over-ridden and how it had been neglected for approximately three decades. But through the efforts of the Friends of Beatty Park, which began its clean up efforts in November 2019, the park has been declared beautiful by many and is “a breath of fresh air,” according to VerStraten-Merrin. One can now take a long walk or brief hike. Guests can have a family or company picnic, bird watch, sit back and relax or sit in a quiet place and read.

“We volunteers enjoy the park whenever we aren’t working on a project,” she noted. “We take every opportunity we can to relax and enjoy the natural amenities of the park. Several of us grew up in the South End of town and have wonderful childhood memories of spending our summers and other recreational time in the park.”

Now that there is no longer a swimming pool at Beatty Park, more and more people are starting to focus on why the park was first created.

It served as a nature preserve back in 1797. But Dr. Charles C. Beatty made a recommendation in the 1860s that Union Cemetery purchase the lands located below the cemetery to be used as park lands, VerStraten-Merrin explained. She said Beatty knew of the potential it had and of the interest from the community, who had a need for a natural area which citizens could visit.

Cemeteries were the town’s city parks, she stated. Beatty loved the lands located below the cemetery, with its hemlocks, flowers and flowing stream, VerStraten-Merrin continued. By the time the city purchased the park lands back from the cemetery, it was already 1930. Cities were seeking to uplift communities during the Great Depression Era. There was a great need for organized, recreational activities in which residents could take part.

Steubenville built three swimming pools and increased its number of parks during the depression, VerStraten-Merrin said. Outdoor concerts, swimming pools and playgrounds were a way for the city to build morale and strengthen its community. It was not uncommon for Beatty Park to be packed on a patriotic holiday and during weekends.

“My dad remembers when children were sent to the park in the early morning to get ‘their spot’ at a picnic table,” she reflected. “Parents would send the children with a watermelon to be placed in the cold creek and a tablecloth and basket for them to put on their picnic table of choice.”

She concluded her memories of Beatty Park with this, “Large groups of our ancestors, including Italian immigrants, would gather in the park at the picnic areas or shelter houses and play.

“We played bocce, morra, marbles and other games,” VerStraten-Merrin concluded. “It was common to see and hear Polish, Slovak and Scottish organizations grouped at the various picnic areas and shelter houses and just fill the park with singing, dancing and laughing.”

It is the hope of the Friends of Beatty Park to bring back some of the opportunities that have been lost throughout the years. And in doing so, perhaps today’s generation will appreciate all that Beatty Park means and what it represents as much as the older generations do.

Calendar of events

• An outdoor patriotic concert is scheduled at the old pool site at 6 p.m. July 6.

The Tri-State Community and Nail City Brass bands will play tribute music of the “good ole days,” when concerts at the park were held to boost morale during the depression and World War II.

The free concert will have food and drinks to purchase. Attendees are encouraged to bring a blanket for the bleachers.

• Historical walking tours will be given at 10 a.m. Sept. 28. Participants are asked to arrive early and bring a chair. Guests will meet at the 1880 bridge at Union Cemetery.

Historical presentations will be given by speakers Jeff Evans, Paul Zuros and Flora VerStraten-Merrin. Attendees will have the option to tour the burial locations of those mentioned in the presentations.

Participants will learn the history of the cemetery, past citizens, military, tombstone inscriptions and symbols.

Guest musicians will play and snacks and drinks will be available for a donation.

• Trick-or-Treating will be held in October. Planned by the Parks and Recreation Department and supported by Friends of Beatty Park, the event date and time is to be determined.

• Christmas in the Park is scheduled from noon to 4 p.m. Dec. 7. Activities throughout the park include a live nativity, Santa Claus, live music, caroling, a StoryWalk, snacks and a warmup by a fire at the Historic Stone Lodge.

Anyone interested in the events should watch for updates or cancellations and additional hikes being added through the Friends of Beatty Park’s Facebook page, the Steubenville Herald-Star and local television stations.

The group announced they are looking for volunteers interested in history, botany, revitalization efforts and to help during events.

To volunteer or for questions, contact VerStraten-Merrin at (740) 632-4453.