Uno condolences can be

written at Japan consulate

Star-Bulletin Island residents can pay their respects to former Japanese Prime Minister Sosuke Uno, 75, in a book of condolences at the Japan consulate here.

Uno died of lung cancer yesterday in a hospital in Moriyama, Shiga prefecture, Japan.

The book of condolences can be signed from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. tomorrow and Friday at the Consulate General of Japan, 1742 Nuuanu Ave.

William Akana, 88, of Anahola, Hawaii, a retired Lihue Sugar Plantation worker, died Sunday in Wilcox Hospital. He was born in Kalihiwai, Kauai. He is survived by caretaker Freddie Ibaan. Services at a later date.

William F. Banks, 88, of Ellinwood, Kan., a retired Isern Oil Co. production superintendent, died Sunday in Hawaii. He was born in Greeley County, Kan. He is survived by wife Ruth; sons Larry and Charles; daughters Pat Sharp and Sally Morrow; 13 grandchildren; four stepgrandchildren, 13 great-grandchildren and a great-greatgrandchild. Private services.

Millie C. Bowen, 70, died yesterday in Blacksburg, Va. She was born on Maui. She is survived by husband Lewis A.; mother Soon Yee Kim Song; sister Julia Kim Milne, and brothers Iksoo Kim and J.W. Bowen. Services on the mainland. No flowers. Donations suggested to the American Cancer Society, P.O. Box 446, Christiansburg, VA 24073.

Reymundo Butac, 72, of Eleele, Kauai, a retired milkman with Waimea Dairy, died Friday in Wilcox Hospital. He was born in Puhi, Kauai. He is survived by wife Socorro; sons Esperdion and Arsenio; daughters Lydia Juan, Teresita Roche, Maria Mizumoto, Zoraida Shatzer and Francisca Marshall; sisters Paula Labayog and Trinidad Delos Santos, and 12 grandchildren. Services: 3 p.m. Saturday at St. John's Episcopal Church. Call after 1 p.m. Burial: Hanapepe Public Cemetery. Casual attire.

Ethel K.Y. Chang, 87, of New Mexico and formerly of Waianae died Friday in Albuquerque, N.M. She was born in Honolulu. She is survived by husband Benjamin K.; sons Melvin K., Kenneth K., Mitchell M. and Gary K.; daughter Cynthia L. Kawada; brother Hoover Yau; sisters Nellie Chai, Mary Anne Lee, Edith Tsang, Annie Wong, Lily Yim and Jessie Evans, 11 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. Prayer services: 1 p.m. Friday at Mililani Mortuary-Waipio, mauka chapel. Call after 11 a.m. Burial: Mililani Memorial Park. Casual attire. No flowers.

Angela Fung-Denzler, 61, of Honalo, Kona, Hawaii, a retired preschool teacher at Mokuaikaua Church, died Thursday in Kona Community Hospital. She was born in Nanking, China. She is survived by husband Sebastian Denzler; daughters Jenny Brandenmehl and Teresa Fung Arensberg, and two grandsons. Memorial services: 6:30 p.m. Friday at Calvary Community Church. Casual attire. Donations suggested to the China Mission or Local Youth Evangelism From Her Christian Perception, P.O. Box 9011, Kealakekua, Hawaii 96750.

Eduarda V. Garcia, 88, of Aiea died May 11 in Pearl City Nursing Home. She was born in Puerto Rico. She is survived by son Manuel “Tony”; daughter Emily Domenech; sister Lucy Ramos, five grandchildren and four great-grandchil dren. Services: 10:30 a.m. Saturday at Borthwick Mortuary. Call from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Inurnment at a later date in Puerto Rico. Aloha attire.

Phyllis Gottesburen, 90, of San Diego, a retired schoolteacher, died last Wednesday in Venice, Calif. She was born on Kauai. She is survived by son Bruce; sister Verena “Birdie” Tom; brother Ernest Ching, and five grandchildren. Services on the mainland.

Samuel Grace, 72, of Kaohe, South Kona, a retired construction laborer, died Monday at home. He was born in Hawaii. He is survived by wife Stella D.; sons Samuel “Bunny” Jr., Stanley and Shannon; daughters Stevelyn, Selma and Sharmaine “Maine” Grace and Shirlene Cantiberos; brothers Henry, Lot and Charles; sisters Margaret Marbelos, Katherine Chang and Vivian Kaupu, 14 grandchildren and a great-grandchild. Wake services: 7 p.m. Friday at his home, 87-3211 Mamalahoa Highway in Kaohe. Call after 5 p.m. Graveside services: 10 a.m. Saturday at Kona Memorial Park. Call after 9 a.m. Burial to follow. Casual attire. Flowers welcome.

Frances M. Hildreth, 69, of Honolulu, a retired chief operator for Hawaiian Telephone, died May 12 in Queen's Hospital. She was born in Honolulu. She is survived by daughter Dedrie Miller; sisters Juanita Staack, Mildred Kane and Ellen Martins, and two granddaughters. Services: 11:30 a.m. Friday at Mililani Downtown Mortuary. Call after 9:30 a.m. Burial: Mililani Memorial Park. Aloha attire.

Stanley K. Kaneshiro, 76, of Honolulu, a World War II veteran, died April 29. he was born in Hakalau, Hawaii. He is survived by brothers George and Robert, and sisters Jane Takara, Mildred Higa, Molly Tobosa and Marion Hamasaki. Private services.

Terri T. Kawamoto, 46, of Aiea, a secretary for the state of Hawaii, died yesterday at home. She was born in Fukushima, Japan. She is survived by husband Gordon; daughter Kasey; father Shiro Matsuoka; brother Kevin Matsuoka, and sisters Leslie Ho and Mae Fukuhara. Memorial services: 6 p.m. Friday at Nuuanu Memorial Park Mortuary. Casual attire. No flowers.

Jacouline N. Kealoha, 58, of Kohala, Hawaii, a retired custodian at Kohala High School, died May 12 in North Hawaii Community Hospital. She was born in Lanai City. She is survived by husband Anthony; sons Edward K. Iona III, Bryant Mock Chew, Owen Kaopuiki and Samuel and Kaleialoha Kealoha; daughters Coralee Mock Chew and Antoinette and Jewel Kealoha; sisters Cecilia Kaaikala, Elizabeth O'Neil and Royalene Fernandez; mother Elizabeth Pokipala, and nine grandchildren. Services: 10 a.m. Saturday at Landmark Missionary Baptist Church in Kapaau. Call after 9 a.m. Burial: Kohala County Cemetery. Casual attire.

Chizuko Koto, 86, of Pearl City, a retired principal at Tachikawa Japanese Language School, died Monday in Queen's Hospital. She was born in Kurtistown, Hawaii. She is survived by husband Charles J.; stepson Charles Jr.; stepdaughters Alice Lum and Amy Sen; brothers Hidesuke, Hidehiko and Howard R. Uyenoyama, and sisters Tomoko Hisamoto and June Yamashita. Memorial services: 3 p.m. Sunday at Jodo Mission of Hawaii, 1429 Makiki St. Casual attire. No flowers.

Gregorio Ludasen, 89, of Hilo died April 26 in Life Care Center of Hilo. He was born in the Philippines. He has no known survivors. Graveside services: 10 a.m. Friday at Homelani Memorial Park. Burial to follow.

Paula Malupo, 95, of Haleiwa died Saturday in Wahiawa General Hospital. She was born in Tonga. She is survived by sons Whitley Unga, Topui and Kali Fifita and Alifeleti, Samuela and Afataliki Malupo; daughter Lepeka Rougeau, 34 grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren. Call from 6 to 10 p.m. tomorrow at the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Waialua Ward, and from 6 to 10 p.m. Friday at the Laie Stake Center. Services: 10 a.m. Saturday at Laie Stake Center. Call from 9 a.m. to 12:45 p.m. Burial: Laie Cemetery. Casual attire.

Minoru Manabe, 83, of Honolulu, a retired teacher for Highlands Intermediate School, died May 8 in Hale O Aloha. He was born in Anahola, Kauai. He is survived by wife Ayako; brother Charles Hachikubo, and sister Fumiyo Hashimoto. Private services.

Walter O. Merrill, 70, of Ewa Beach, former owner of the original Royal Lanai Restaurant, died May 11 in Aiea. He was born in Indiana. He is survived by wife Marjory; stepdaughter Renee Hampton, and a grandson. Private services. Call Williams Funeral Services for information.

Ida D. Miller, 81, of Pukalani, Maui died Saturday in Pukalani. She was born in Chicago. She is survived by husband Cletus J.; son Jerry H.; daughter Mary-Lynne Balczon; brother Joseph Craw, and five grandchildren. Mass: 10 a.m. Saturday at St. Joseph Church. Call after 9 a.m. Burial to follow. Casual attire. Flowers welcome.

Theodore “Toro” Nascimento, 86, of Waipahu died last Wednesday at home. He was born in Ewa. He is survived by sister Gertrude Campainah and a grandson. Mass: 10 a.m. Friday at Immaculate Conception Church, 91-1298 Renton Road. Call after 8:30 a.m. Burial: Mililani Memorial Park.

Lucille B. Northrop, 69, of Keaau, Hawaii, a retired cook, died May 11 at home. She was born in Olaa, Hawaii. She is survived by sons Paul S. Wilson and Harold Swanson; daughter Janet Alexander; brothers Joseph and William Borrozo and George, Moses and Henry Riveira; sister Hilda Yoeman; father the Rev. Henry Riveira, 12 grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren. Private services.

Toshiaki Oi, 93, of Honolulu, retired owner of T. Oi Store, died Monday in Kuakini Hospital. He was born in Sendai, Miyagi-Ken, Japan. He is survived by son Ernest S.; daughters Alice T. Katayama, Flora H. Onoye and Grace S. Yokote, eight grandchildren and five great-grandchildren. Memorial services: 4 p.m. Saturday at Hosoi Garden Mortuary. Call after 3 p.m. Casual attire. No flowers.

Mary T. Okahara, 69, of Honolulu, a waitress at Sekiya's Restaurant and Delicatessen, died last Wednesday in Queen's Hospital. She was born in Honolulu. She is survived by husband Tsuyoshi; son Baron T.; daughter Sharon N. Takao; brother Lincoln H. Morinaga; sisters Alice T. McClurg, Florence T. Takehara and Ethel A. Kubota, and a grandchild. Services: 11 a.m. Saturday at Hosoi Garden Mortuary. Casual attire. No flowers.

William P. “Butch” Pineda, 58, of Waianae is also survived by sister Bernice Godoy. Additional information for an obituary published yesterday was provided by the mortuary.

Robert W. Rhein, 70, of Honolulu died Friday at home. He was born in Lennox, Calif. He is survived by son Wade; daughters Maryann Yamamoto and Elizabeth Hodson, five grandchildren and a great-grandchild. Services: 5:30 p.m. Friday at Hawaii Yacht Club. Scattering of ashes to follow. Aloha attire.

Doris K. Rodrigues, 90, of Wailuku died last Wednesday in Maui Memorial Hospital. She was born in Kailua, Maui. She is survived by son Allan; daughters Claire Kaya and Barbara Long; brother Toshio Iwami; sisters Fusako Ohta and Hatsuno Uyeki, 12 grandchildren and 19 great-grandchildren. Private services.

Josephine K.L. “Fina” Royos, 33, of Kaneohe will be remembered in a Rosary at 4 p.m. Friday at Our Lady of Mount Carmel. Incorrect information was provided for an obituary published yesterday.

Setsuko Shima, 78, of Puhi, Kauai died Sunday in Wilcox Hospital. She was born in Puhi. She is survived by daughters Irene Niitani, Bernice Otani, Lillian Wada and Elise Fukumoto; brothers Masaichi and Kenji Shibuya, Kiichi Takahashi and George Mori, 18 grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren. Services: 2 p.m. Friday at Garden Island Mortuary. Call after 1 p.m. Casual attire. No flowers.

Dorothy H. Tamai, 70, of Honolulu, a retired real estate management secretary for Graham Murata Russell, died Friday in Kuakini Hospital. She was born in Paauilo, Hawaii. She is survived by sons James S. and Edward T.; daughter Janice H. Kageyama; sisters Tayeko Serizawa and Rachel Nagai; brother David Oda, and six grandchildren. Private services.

Ernest M. “Ernie” Tanaka, 59, of Mililani, a surfing legend and skilled surfboard maker, died Friday in Wahiawa General Hospital. He was born in Honolulu. He is survived by son Tommy; daughter Tammy; mother Jane; brother Ken, and sister Elaine Mamiya. Memorial services and scattering of ashes: 7 to 8 a.m. Saturday at Duke Kahanamoku Statue in Waikiki. Aloha attire.

Frank Vierra, 91, of Kealia, Kona, Hawaii, a retired heavy equipment operator with the state Highways Division, died Sunday in Kona Community Hospital. He was born in Hawi, Kohala. He is survived by sons Frank, Clifford, Edwin and Daniel; daughters Winifred Thomas and Charlene Lucas, and 13 grandchildren. Prayer services: 7 p.m. tomorrow at St. Benedict Catholic Church. Call from 6 to 9 p.m. Private inurnment. Casual attire. No flowers.

A. Willard Wax, 94, a former retail advertising manager for the Honolulu Star-Bulletin, died April 14. He was also a retired manager of D.C. Wax Office Equipment. He was born in Baltimore. He is survived by wife Mayrjane; sons Philip F. and David W., five grandchildren and six great-grandchildren. Services on the mainland.

Clare Wells, 85, of Honolulu, a retired manager of a men's clothing store, died Monday. He was born in Chicago. He is survived by nieces Penelope and Pamela. Services were private. Call Williams Funeral Services for information.

Gene Wilshire, 65, of Honolulu, a retired staff sergeant in the U.S. Air Force, died May 10 in Honolulu. He was born in West Virginia. He is survived by sons Leslie and Stanley, and three grandsons. Graveside services: 9 a.m. Friday at Hawaii State Veterans Cemetery. Call Williams Funeral Services for information.