For Immediate Release:

Livonia, MI- (March 29, 2005) - Software developer Stardock Entertainment announces the release of the real-time simulation game "Uplink: Hacker Elite" for the PC, now available at www.totalgaming.net.

One of the most alluring elements of the Internet is that of the hacker. They're the elite programmers working in the dark reaches of cyberspace, going where nobody was meant to. Through Introversion Software's Uplink: Hacker Elite, gamers can now take the role of one of these hidden agents. Using powerful virtual hardware, software, and an undercover network, players will hack into rival computer systems, frame the innocent, manipulate markets and much more.

Trust is a weakness.

Features:

Original gameplay: Players have the opportunity to be freelance hackers.

Freeform gameplay: Accept the missions that you want to play.

Neuromancer rating: Let your morals guide you; save the net or watch processors melt. Uplink offers two totally different paths to 'l33t' hacker status.

Exciting missions: Crack a bank, hack a rival into jail, crash the stock market, and get out before you're caught.

Thrilling action: Players have to make those last 15 seconds count and feel the tension rise, as their signal is traced.

Deep plot: The computer underground can be a dangerous place, especially if you've got to stop the world's deadliest virus.

System Requirements:

Windows 98, Me, 2000

Pentium 300 MHz or equivalent

32 MB RAM

250 MB Hard Disk space

16 MB Video Card

DirectX 8.0 or Higher

DirectX 8 Compatible Sound Card

For more information about Uplink: Hacker Elite, please visit the homepage at http://totalgaming.stardock.com/games/uplink.asp

Stardock Corp.

17292 Farmington Rd.

Livonia MI 48152

Phn: (734) 762-0687

Fax: (734) 762-0690

Web: http://www.stardock.com

Uplink: Hacker Elite

Released by Stardock Entertainment

Standalone Price: $19.95

TotalGaming.net Release Date: 03/24/05

Original Release Date: 03/11/03

Developed by: Introversion Software

Home Page: http://totalgaming.stardock.com/games/uplink.asp

About Stardock

Stardock is the developer of award winning computer games, including The Political Machine, Galactic Civilizations, and The Corporate Machine. Stardock is also the world-wide leader in the development and sales of Windows desktop customization solutions like the Object Desktop software suite, including components such as WindowBlinds, DesktopX, IconPackager, and more. For more information, please visit Stardock's homepage at www.stardock.com.

For more information, please visit the Stardock home page at http://www.stardock.com or contact kristin@stardock.com.

Contact: Kristin Hatcher (kristin@stardock.com)

Phone: 734-762-0687