2023-2024 Stevenson Clubs and Activities

Bible Club - Mr. Hoyt - dhoyt@livoniapublicschools.org - We look at scripture and interpret what it says as well as how we can apply it to our own lives. We enjoy snacks and games and offer praise and worship in the mornings. All are welcome, and Bibles are provided.

Chess Club- Mrs. Nowell- pnowell@livoniapublicschools.org - Chess Club meets every Wednesday after school until 3:00 pm. All skill levels are more than welcome. You can come with a friend and play, or you can choose an opponent when you come to room B-27. We have plenty of boards and chess sets, so if you want to leave a game in progress, you can do so. It's the game of Kings, so have some royal fun.

Class Councils -

Mr. Mestdagh (Freshman) rmestdag@livoniapublicschools.org

Mrs. Feheley (Sophomore) afeheley@livoniapublicschools.org

Mrs. Mackson (Junior)

rmackson@livoniapublicschools.org

Ms. Rozman (Senior)

arozman@livoniapublicschools.org

These are class-wide open organizations that assist the Student Senate in planning and implementing school activities. Class Councils also fundraise all four years.

Community Service Club - TBD- Are you interested in making the world a better place by volunteering your time in and around Livonia? Community Service Club might be for you! We meet monthly and discuss different volunteer opportunities for high school students.

Debate - Mr. Lusa - rlusa@livoniapublicschools.org - Debate is a fun form of competitive public speaking where students write and debate bills imitating a chamber of Congress. Students pick either affirmative or negative positions and argue for or against these bills using the evidence they have researched. During practice, we share evidence on bills and help each other write speeches and bills. We also help each other practice our speeches.

DECA - Mrs. Antonelli - cantonel@livoniapublicschools.org - DECA prepares emerging leaders and entrepreneurs in marketing, finance, hospitality, and management in high schools and colleges around the globe. Members are exposed to real-world experiences such as field trips, guest speakers, leadership conferences, and academic competitions. These experiences allow students to develop the skills needed to be a leader in any career interest.

Diversity Club - TBD - Diversity Club meets weekly to discuss current events and social issues, watch and discuss controversial videos; visit diverse area restaurants; attend movies or other cultural events; and enjoy the diversity of our club members!

Drama Department - Ms. Dimmitt - bndimmitt@gmail.com - The Stevenson Drama Department produces three theatrical productions every year. In the fall is the Three-Act play. In spring is the All-School Musical (usually in March), followed by An Evening of One-Act Plays, usually in April. All students are eligible to participate, based on auditions. Also, students can choose to join any of several crews that build the sets, run lights and sound, obtain and fit costumes, create publicity for the plays (fliers, programs, posters, etc.), and apply make-up for the actors.

ELVs - Mrs. BeBeau - abebeau@livoniapublicschools.org - Early Literacy Volunteers (ELVs) is an opportunity for high school students to share their love of reading while providing assistance and encouragement with a struggling beginning reader. The high school student is paired with an elementary student at a Livonia Public School K-4 building within the Stevenson triad. The high school student must provide their own transportation to the elementary school for the weekly session between 3 - 4 pm.

Livonia H.S. Figure Skating Club -

Mrs. McAlinden- mmcalind@livoniapublicschools.org - Skaters, according to skill level, compete in the areas of jumps, spins, and moves in the field at three local competitions to earn medals and team points. At the end of the season, the top two teams from each district advance to the state competition.

Foods Club - Mrs. Manske - smanske@livoniapublicschools.org - The Foods Club meets once a week in the Food Lab. The group was formed by students who enjoy the creativity of cooking. Students learn new cooking skills and techniques, as well as enjoy sharing and eating with friends.

Forensics - Mr. Lusa - rlusa@livoniapublicschools.org - Forensics is a form of competitive public speaking where students choose an event from a range of possibilities – Oratory, Dramatic Interpretation, Broadcasting, Poetry, Storytelling, etc., and then make short presentations/performances. Students may try out several different types of events each season.

Game Club - Mr. Kocina - dkocina@livoniapublicschools.org

Game Club is an exciting place to play board games, card games, and make new friends. All are welcome and new game ideas are always encouraged. We meet every Tuesday 2:30-3:00 in B29.

German Club - Ms. Lamb - jlamb@livoniapublicschools.org - German Club offers students an opportunity to travel overseas to German-speaking countries and experience the places and culture introduced in classes in person. It also organizes various additional cultural and language-promoting events. Students enrolled in the program are part of the club and have different options and possibilities to earn activity credits over time.

Girl Up Club - Mrs. Sharp - esharp@livoniapublicschools.org - Girl Up is devoted to improving the lives of young women around the world. Girl Up focuses on the health, safety, education, and social and economic opportunities of young women. We host fundraising events. We hold monthly meetings to discuss the needs of young women in our school, our community, our country, and our world.

Glamour Gals - Mrs. Osborne - wosborne@livoniapublicschools.org

Glamour Gals meets one Tuesday a month at 3pm, at Fairmont Senior home in Livonia. We do manicures and makeovers on the seniors. We also play games, do crafts and chat with them. Everyone is welcome.

GSA - Ms. Lamb - jlamb@livoniapublicschools.org - GSA stands for Gay-Straight Alliance as well as Genders & Sexualities Alliance. The club's main functions include support, socializing, and activism through awareness and education. We eat snacks and have great discussions.

Livonia United Girls Hockey Club - Janine Martinez - Girls High School Hockey Club with all 3 Livonia High Schools combined. The team is a member of the Michigan Girls High School Hockey League and plays their home games at Eddie Edgar Ice Arena in Livonia. The season runs from middle of October to middle of March. All skill levels are welcome to join the club.

Mock Trial Club - Mrs. Feheley - afeheley@livoniapublicschools.org

The SHS Mock Trial team fosters competitive excellence within the legal arena, enabling students to assume the roles of attorneys and witnesses in authentic courtroom simulations. Students engage in the intricacies of legal advocacy as they dedicate their season to crafting and refining legal arguments to challenge adversaries from other educational institutions across the state. Whether your aspirations align with a future in the legal profession or you seek to elevate your proficiency in public speaking, our team stands as an opportunity for personal growth and scholarly achievement. Team meetings are held on Fridays from 2:30-3pm in room E-16 with Mrs. Feheley.

National Art Honor Society - Mrs. Posh - hposh@livoniapublicschools.org - NAHS is an after-school program designed to inspire and recognize students who have shown an outstanding ability and interest in art. The program supports members in their efforts to attain the highest standards in art scholarship, character, and service, and to bring art education to the attention of the school and community.

National Honor Society - Mrs. Wojtyniak - awojtyni@livoniapublicschools.org - National Honors Society is a service organization that focuses on four main pillars: to create enthusiasm for scholarship, to stimulate a desire to render service, to promote leadership, and to enhance/develop character. Students have the opportunity to apply for NHS during their sophomore or junior year if they have an overall GPA of 3.5 or higher.

Pantomime -

Mrs. Mackson- rmackson@livoniapublicschools.org &

Mrs. Feheley - afeheley@livoniapublicschools.org -

Lip-syncing show that happens around Thanksgiving. The show is open to all students to audition.

Quiz Bowl - Mr. Barker (Varsity) cbarker@livoniapublicschools.org -

Stevenson Quiz Bowl is a club that meets weekly and allows students who enjoy knowledge and trivia games a chance to compete against other schools as part of a team. Practices begin in late September and are open to any SHS student interested in playing. If you like Jeopardy!, you'll like Quiz Bowl!

Recycling Club - Mrs. Dillon - kdillon@livoniapublicschools.org - The Recycling Club collects paper weekly from classrooms for recycling purposes. The time spent collecting is tallied, and many students use this for community service hours.

LPS Robotics - Mrs. Carlini - icarlini@livoniapublicschools.org - The Livonia Warriors High School Robotics Program consists of two high school teams. Each of these teams is made up of students from Churchill, Franklin, and Stevenson. "The Tyros Team" is an all-9th-grade team of students learning the fundamentals of FIRST Robotics, building a competition robot and taking it to competitions. The "Livonia Warriors" is our veteran team comprising of all other grades. They are an advanced team, building a highly competitive robot and submitting for consideration for advanced awards. The Livonia Warriors have participated in both State and World Championships over the past decade.

SADD - Mrs. Maier - mmaier@livoniapublicschools.org - SADD is a national organization that promotes good clean fun with community service opportunities and fundraising for causes, as well as positive role-modeling and destructive decision prevention activities. Meetings are after school every other Wednesday.

Stevenson Dance Club -

Mrs. Morrow hmorrow@livoniapublicschools.org & Allie Hamet shscompdancecoach@gmail.com - A competitive dance club coached by Allie Hamet, 3 time National NDA Champion with the GVSU Dance Team. Tryouts are held in April. The season runs from May-February with camp in June/July and choreography in late August. The dancers compete in approximately 5 competitions from November-February with the possibility of attending Nationals in Orlando, FL in mid-February. The SHS dancers also perform at SHS pep rallies, sporting events, and in the community.

Student Senate - (Interim)

Mrs. Pavlic tpavlic2@ livoniapublicschools.org and

Ms. Rozman arozman@ livoniapublicschools.org

An all-school student government of elected Senators from each class that plan and organize many activities in the school to enhance the high school experience. This includes dances, assemblies, and other student-run events.

Ski Club - Mr. Lusa - rlusa@livoniapublicschools.org - Starting in January, the Ski Club goes on trips to Mt. Brighton after school on Thursdays. The informational meeting for students wishing to join Ski Club is held in late November or early December.

Spanish Club - Mr. Demongey- mdemonge@livoniapublicschools.org - Spanish Club meets once a month on Wednesdays and has several field trips throughout the school year. Anyone interested in Hispanic culture is welcome to join.

Spectrum - Ms. Sharp - esharp@livoniapublicschools.org - Spectrum is student-created, student-selected, student-edited, and student-produced Literary Arts Magazine. It incorporates various writing genres and many artistic styles.

Activity Letter Information

Students may receive an Activity Letter for their participation in non-athletic, co-curricular activities, clubs and organizations. Sponsors of these groups may assign credits to qualified students in their activity according to the Activity Credit Allocation Sheet. A maximum of four (4) points may be given to a student per club or activity per semester. A maximum of six (6) points may be given to a student in student government (Class Council, Senate). The sponsors submit this information to the Activities Director by the middle of December and/or by the middle of May. It is the responsibility of the sponsor to assign activity credits.

Students who accumulate 50 activity credits in a variety of co-curricular activities, clubs, or organizations are eligible for an Activity Letter. Active involvement in student activities must span a minimum of a two-year period. Club team members (Figure Skating, Hockey, Dance) are eligible for an Activity Letter after a minimum of two years of active participation.

Students will receive their letter by the end of the semester it is awarded. If you have any questions, please call the Director of Student Activities, Tara Pavlic at 734-744-2660, ext. 48715.

Student Leadership 2023-2024