LIVONIA — James Bolosh saw a lifelong dream realized during the 2024 Tony Awards when a play he co-produced, "Stereophonic," won Best Play.

Bolosh, a Livonia native and 1987 Churchill High School graduate, said winning theater's biggest award was surreal. Nearly a month after the June 16 award ceremony, Bolosh still speaks about it with wonder.

"Words can’t even describe it," he said. "I go back to that little boy in Michigan who went to the Fisher Theatre and saw 'Cats.' I won theater’s highest honor. It’s humbling and it’s almost surreal. I couldn’t be more grateful."

Bolosh said he credits Livonia Public Schools' dedication to arts education — Churchill is now home to the district's robust Creative and Performing Arts program — with setting him on a road for success. Bolosh also attended Eastern Michigan University and is the school's first alumnus to win a Tony Award.

"My arts education throughout my time in Livonia was top notch," he said. "I really feel like my arts education in Livonia was so strong that it led me to where I am today. No doubt."

Co-producing a historically successful play

"Stereophonic," written by David Adjmi and directed by Daniel Aukin, follows a Fleetwood Mac-like rock band as they record an album in the 1970s. The band experiences personal and professional conflicts, leading the recording process to take longer than anticipated.

Bolosh said the play is unlike anything he's ever seen before and, when an industry connection offered him the chance to be involved in the Broadway production, he jumped at it. Bolosh's career in entertainment thus far has included television production and, most recently, consulting.

"I tried to see 'Stereophonic' when I was off Broadway four or five times, and it was always sold out," he said. "When I finally got to see it, I was so blown away by it because it was different. I felt like it was special."

Other parties felt the same. "Sterophonic" is the most Tony-nominated play of all time with 13, took home the most awards at this year's ceremony with five and was the recipient of rave reviews. The play's Broadway run is currently set to last through January 2025.

"It was a really amazing story," said Christine Rhines, a fellow Churchill graduate and friend of Bolosh's. "You got really wrapped up in the story and you were just on this journey with the actors."

More: Crash sends SUV into T.J. Maxx in Farmington

More: Democrat trustee candidates differ on 'most pressing issues' for Canton Twp.

More: 5 football players from the KLAA poised for a big 2024 season

Celebrating success back home

Lori Morgan Boor, another high school friend, held a Tony Awards watch party last month hoping to see her friend win big. She wasn't disappointed.

"I had about 10 friends over, made drinks and wore my 'Stereophonic' T-shirt," she said. "I'm proud and excited. I actually got teary-eyed because I know this is such a personal accomplishment for him."

Rhines agreed, saying it's been special to see a longtime friend achieve something great.

"I’m so immensely proud of him," she said. "He’s just a regular kid from Livonia with a lot of drive and ambition. He’s worked so hard. It’s hard to describe how proud you are when a friend you’ve known for so long achieves one of their really big personal and professional goals."

Morgan Boor and Rhines, who met Bolosh in choir at Churchill and affectionately call him "Jimmy," both described him as a kind, hardworking individual they've been glad to see succeed.

"Jimmy was always encouraging everyone else," Morgan Boor said. "He believed in me more than I believed in myself and encouraged me to try for more. That really speaks to who he is."

Bolosh said he's spent recent weeks hosting friends he knew as a high schooler to see "Stereophonic" and said his hometown friends and mentors were among the first people to reach out after the Tony Awards.

"I remember being 17 and everyone in high school went to Daytona Beach for spring break," he said. "But me and my friends went to New York City and saw shows. It’s crazy to think that I have Tony Award now."

Contact reporter Shelby Tankersley at stankersle@hometownlife.com or 734-331-0659.