Los Angeles Lakers guard Steve Blake was the unsung hero of his team's first-round series victory over the Denver Nuggets, scoring 19 points in Game 7.

But he learned quickly how a town can turn on him after he missed a potential game-winning 3 in the Lakers' 77-75 loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder on Wednesday.

After the game, both the Twitter feeds of Blake and his wife, Kristen, were inundated with criticism ranging from curse word-laden rants to threats.

"I hope your family gets murdered," read one tweet that Kristen Blake re-tweeted along with a single comment: "Wow."

"It's pretty disappointing that there are a lot of hateful people out there, but you move on," Blake said. "I just don't appreciate it when it's toward my family. You can come at me all you want but when you say things about my wife and my kids, that makes me upset."

Look, fans need to chill the fuck out. This craziness seems to be becoming a bigger and bigger problem in recent years. Maybe some fans were always like that. It's just that now they say stuff on twitter, where as before it was from the privacy of their own living room. News Flash: What you say on twitter is public. Especially when your dumbass directs it to a celebrity.

Now Boston fans, before we go throwing stones in a glass house, let's remember that this isn't just a Los Angeles thing or an everyone else thing. I do recall a ton of racist tweets from Bruins fans after their game 7 loss to the Capitals. There are idiots everywhere. But honestly some fans really need to chill. Your team wins by 1 and they are the greatest team ever, championship baby. They lose by 1 and they all suck, season over. Blake had a good look on that final shot. If he hit it he'd be the darling of L.A. right now. He missed it. Get over it. You think he meant to miss it?

And involving a player's family? Really? Blake's wife claims she had to block 500 people on twitter last night. I'm sure if Blake's young kids had twitters, some idiot would have tweeted them too. Too bad these tweeting cowards can't be met by several Metta World Peace elbows. Most likely the idiots that send these tweets won't read this, but maybe you know an idiot like this. If you do, please tell them to find another hobby.