Chauncey Billups, Steve Blake

Portland Trail Blazers Steve Blake defends against Denver Nuggets Chauncey Billups in the second quarter of their NBA basketball game Tuesday, Dec. 23, 2008, at the Rose Garden, in Portland, Ore.

(Rick Bowmer | AP)

AUBURN HILLS -- The end is nearing for Steve Blake and he's not afraid to admit it.

The veteran point guard will play for his eighth NBA team in 13 seasons when he takes the floor this season for Detroit, acquired over the summer in an insurance swap with the Portland Trail Blazers, but how much he sees of it is dependent upon the return of Brandon Jennings.

Speaking to reporters Monday during Pistons media day at The Palace of Auburn Hills, Blake, 35 said he anticipates his role changing throughout the season.

"With Brandon being hurt, playing some backup point guard," Blake said. "When he comes back, maybe not playing at all. If I have to play with another point guard at times, that's fine with me."

He's even open to playing alongside another point guard at times, be it Jennings or Reggie Jackson, the Pistons' franchise guy, locked in to a five-year, $80 million contract over the summer.

"I played alongside Steve Nash a lot when I was with the L.A. Lakers, and some other point guards," Blake pointed out. "You've got to know what your role is. Spacing the floor, I'm comfortable with guarding the off-guard position. Really, you've got to take the opportunities that you get."

Blake, who turns 36 in February, started in nearly half of the 812 NBA games he's played in but has been relegated to backup duties during his last two stops. He averaged 4.3 points and 3.6 assists per game last season with the Trail Blazers and 6.9 points and 5.6 rebounds per game in 2013-14, split between the Lakers and Golden State Warriors.

For his career, Blake has averaged 6.7 points and four rebounds per game, and those numbers jump to 9.8 points and 5.9 assists every 36 minutes on the court.

"That's exactly what we wanted," Pistons coach Stan Van Gundy said. "We needed a guy good enough to come out and be your everyday backup and mature enough, especially when Brandon comes back, that if there's not as many minutes can handle that role."

Van Gundy traded Quincy Miller for Blake in July when it was clear Jennings would not return for the start of the 2015-16 season. Blake is on the second of a two-year contract and due $2.1 million this season.

Also in the mix at point guard is second-year draft pick Spencer Dinwiddie, who averaged similar numbers as Blake (4.3 points, 3.1 assists) in fewer minutes last season.

"That was a place we had to be really picky about, in that position, because we needed both of those things," Van Gundy said, referring to Blake's ability and maturity. "And that's not easy to find."

Blake's only been with the new-look Pistons for a short while, and is still waiting on Van Gundy to dish out roles, but said he was impressed with the roster assembled so far.

He complimented Jackson's personalty and work ethic, first-round pick Stanley Johnson's well-rounded ability, and Andre Drummond's athleticism.

"The way he moves the floor, his upside is sky high," Blake said of the 6-10 Drummond. "It's always nice to be on a team with a great center, especially at my position. I love passing to guys like him."

"From the second I got traded here, talking to coach Van Gundy, it sounded exciting. I've only got a couple years left to play and it seems like one of the better basketball destinations to come to."