Editor’s note: Reporter Marc J. Spears and photographer John Leyba help readers get to know one of the team’s players on a deeper level every other Sunday. Leyba’s photographs complement a conversation with Spears about life, work and play.

The Nuggets acquired guard Steve Blake in early January. The former University of Maryland star and his wife, Kristen, have adjusted quickly to Denver since their move. Blake helped Maryland win the 2002 NCAA title. During that season he set a school record with 286 assists. He was chosen in the second round of the 2003 draft by Washington. With an infant at home, going on the road can be tough for a new father, but it makes getting home even better.

Spears: You grew up in Miami and ended up at the University of Maryland. How did the Florida schools let you get away?

Blake: I liked Florida a lot. There was a point guard named Brett Nelson who committed to Florida my same year. Maryland came down and expressed interest in me. I took an unofficial visit there and just loved it. So I had to go.

Spears: How did you meet Kristen?

Blake: We were in class (at Maryland). It was like a criminal justice class. She was sitting in the front of the class. I was sitting in the back. I talked to her after class, asked her for some notes, and that’s all she wrote. We started talking after that.

Spears: Did she know you played on the basketball team?

Blake: No, she didn’t. She just came in as a freshman and it was one of her first classes. She got to know me real quick though.

Spears: How has being a father changed your life?

Blake: You have to plan everything now. You can’t just jump up and go like you did before. You’ve got to think ahead and get someone to watch him if you want to go out. You got to pack his diaper bag. Pack his car seat. All this stuff. It changes your life. I’ve got to get more sleep because he’s up at night. But it’s a blessing though.

Spears: Is is tough to get your necessary sleep?

Blake: It’s better now. He’s sleeping now. But the first few months, three months, he was up every couple hours. Even though (my wife) would take care of him when I have games the next day, you can’t help but hear him cry. You can’t help but wake up. Well, at least for me. It makes it tough getting some rest. But I’m always able to make up some of it with some naps.

Spears: Do you feel like you’re missing out on important things in your son’s growth when you’re on the road?

Blake: Yeah. He’s growing fast. All of the sudden he’s smiling. All of the sudden he’s grabbing his feet. His mouth. He’s changing every single day. I miss that. But at the same time, when I’m home I spend every day, all day, with him. I make up for it.

Spears: You moved into a home pretty quickly in South Denver. How did you make that happen?

Blake: (The Nuggets) have (player services director) Tim Dixon to help with the move and put us in touch with people. It just happened to be that one of the first places I looked at I really loved it.

Spears: Have you walked around town?

Blake: I go out to eat downtown. & But other than that, I live by Park Meadows Mall. I walk around the mall down there. I go to some restaurants there. I get around people. People have been real friendly and they are starting to recognize me more and more. It’s all been very positive.

Spears: What is something about you that most people wouldn’t know?

Blake: I’m pretty quiet. But I love to play sports. I like playing all sports. I’ll act goofy at times around my wife and my son, around my own family. I like to have fun in general.

Spears: Do you respect your NCAA championship title at Maryland more and more each year as time passes?

Blake: Ah, man. Being in the NBA you’re around so many successful guys, more and more you realize that you’re one of the few that has won a championship. I’ve been in two Final Fours. I can always go back to it when guys talk trash. It’s a great feeling, especially watching it. You’re just like, “I did that.” It’s a feeling, I’ll never forget it.

The Blake file

* Height: 6-feet-3

* Weight: 172 pounds

* Born: Feb. 26, 1980

* Acquired by the Nuggets in Jan. 10 trade with the Bucks for Earl Boykins, Julius Hodge and cash.

* Is the youngest of four children, with three older sisters.

Marc J. Spears can be reached at 303-954-1098 or mspears@denverpost.com.