Action genre films have skyrocketed in popularity in the last twenty years, dominating the box office and often being reliable films to make for studios in terms of audience and critical reactions the how profitable it would be to make. Action has always been a common theme throughout the history of cinema, especially in Chinese cinema and spaghetti westerns in the 1950s and 60s such as Seven Samurai in 1954 and the Good the Bad and the Ugly in 1966. However, with access the more advanced technology such as CGI, action films which usually require intense fights and battle sequences between groups often require special effects, and as shown by the statistics of box office figures audiences are showing up to watch them and are enjoying them.

The usual conventions of an action films are of course the fights, car chases, battles especially in the sub- genre of superhero films, however they’re often based around the theme of family and friendship to appeal to wider audiences. For example, the Fast and Furious franchise, one of the most popular action franchises in the world, despite their often 200 million plus budgets the films are heavily themed around family and loyalty with makes it appeal to actual families going to view the film, and gives it some heart and substance not just mindless action. However, it’s the superhero sub-genre that has appealed to mass audiences but divided people in the industry. They’re seen as an experience creating worlds that we follow along over decades such as infamous marvel franchise. However acclaimed directors such as Martin Scorsese believes that they’re not real cinema, that they’re nothing more than amusement rides, which is widely debated. The film ‘Avengers Endgame’ grossed over 2.7 billion worldwide and was highly praised by critics which shows that they’re beloved by many and not by just normal movie goers.

Action films have also become more violent again in recent years, having an R rating (18 in the UK) which many studios believed would harm the films box office success, however since John Wick in 2014 and Deadpool in 2016 its shown that good films can be made for more mature audiences and still make a decent profit. John Wick has now become a franchise which is watched for its incredible action sequences and horrific violence, but under the surface looks into the world of a man mourning his wife, which demonstrates that any good action film still needs an underlying film to ground it and appeal to mass audiences. Another example is Captain America: Winter soldier in 2014 which once again is known for its incredible action sequences, with no shakey cam a lot of long takes and brilliant fight choreography, however, still bases the story around the friendship of the protagonist and the antagonist to give the film some depth.