Action Genre Definition – What’s the best definition for the action fiction genre? Books in the action genre usually put more emphasis on exciting action sequences than deep themes and character development. Of course, there are exceptions. Just because a book has exciting car chases or bar fights doesn’t mean it can’t also be intelligent. Books that fall into the action fiction category are usually written—and read—by men. However, many action books and movies have just enough character development and meaning that women can enjoy them as well.

Scroll below now to see 25 action fiction genre examples,

or click here to see all fiction genres.

* * *

Action Genre Definition – Examples

Review this list of popular examples to help you get a better understanding of the action fiction genre.

1. Unthinkable Consequences by Bob Rector

2. The Orphan Uprising by James Morcan

3. Patriot Games by Tom Clancy

4. Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton

5. The Hunt for Red October by Tom Clancy

6. The Saladin Strategy by Norm Clark

7. The Bourne Identity by Robert Ludlum

8. The Inner World Adventure by Wayne Reinagel

9. Lallapaloosa by Rags Daniels

10. Modern Marvels – Viktoriana by Wayne Reinagel

11. Sounds of War: Iraq Attack by Thomas Ferreolus

12. The Hunter Island Adventure by Wayne Reinagel

13. Corporate America by Jack Dougherty

14. Ice Station by Matthew Reilly

15. Pulp Heroes – Khan Dynasty by Wayne Reinagel

16. The Infidel Soldiers by Jams N. Roses

17. Pulp Heroes More Than Mortal by Wayne Reinagel

18. Agency Rules – Never an Easy Day by Khalid Muhammad

19. Against The Tide by John F. Hanley

20. Sahara by Clive Cussler

21. Raise the Titanic! by Clive Cussler

22. Fiji: A Novel by Lance Morcan

23. Deception Point by Dan Brown

24. Inca Gold by Clive Cussler

25. Eye of the Storm by Buck Stienke

* * *

Action Genre Definition – Related Book Genres

* Action Adventure Genre

* Adventure Genre Definition

* Espionage Fiction Genre

* Spy Fiction Genre

* Military Fiction Genre

Click here now to see all