GENRE ANALYSIS

The action genre is a class of creative works characterized by more emphasis on exciting action sequences than on character development or story-telling. The genre encompasses action fiction, action films, action games and analogous media in other formats such as manga and anime. There are many sub-genres, Including martial arts action, extreme sports action, car chases and vehicles, Suspense action, and action comedy, with each focusing in more detail on its own type and flavor of action. It is usually possible to tell from the creative style of an action sequence, the genre of the entire creative works. For example, the style of a Combat sequence will indicate whether the entire works is an action adventure, or Martial arts. Action is mainly defined by a lot of focus on any kind of movement. Action films involve one or more heroes thrust into a series of challenges requiring physical feats, extended fights, extensive stunts and frenetic chases. Story and character development are generally secondary to explosions, fist fights, gunplay and car chases. Both historically and currently, action films have wide commercial appeal and enjoy box office success. The action film revolves around a narrative, to be sure, but more importantly than that, a hero; when a moviegoer thinks of an action picture, more often than not they are thinking of a specific actor (Harrison Ford, Errol Flynn, Bruce Willis, Sylvester Stallone, Bruce Lee, Steve McQueen, Jean-Paul Belmondo, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jason Statham, or Douglas Fairbanks Sr., to name but a few) and the obstacles their character(s) must overcome. Long the most popular of genres among male moviegoers, the action picture has been the dominant film genre of American and many foreign film markets (notably Hong Kong), since action translates across language barriers. It is impossible to think of the cinema without the action adventure film (Raiders Of The Lost Ark), the cop action film (Bullitt), the confined-space action film (Die Hard), the sci-fi action film (Aliens), the martial arts action film (Enter The Dragon, the action comedy (most Jackie Chan films), and the various other action subgenres too numerous to mention. Hollywood has continued to produce more action films than ever before, especially as advents in CG have made it cheaper and easier to create action sequences and other visual effects that once required professional stunt crews, dangerous staging, integrated use of props, and other complex, expensive elements. However, action audiences’ expectations have been raised commiserate with the leveling of the movie-making playing field, and films where computer animation is not believable are often met with criticism. Additionally, a subgenre of action films have emerged wherein the filmmakers’ efforts to continually strive for more and more absurdist, over-the-top action elements is an openly understood aspect of the cinematic experience, as with films like Crank.

RISE OF THE ACTION FILM

In the West, during the 1920s and 1930s, adventure films were popularized by actors such as Douglas Fairbanks and Errol Flynn, but the settings were often period ones. The phenomenal success of the James Bond series in the 1960s and 1970s, helped to popularize the concept of the modern day action film in more recent years. The early Bond films were characterized by quick cutting, car chases, fist fights and ever more elaborate action sequences. The series also established the concept of the resourceful hero, who is able to dispatch the villains with a ready one-liner.

Early American action films usually focused on maverick police officers, as in Bullitt (1968), The French Connection (1971) and Dirty Harry (1971). These were among the earliest films to present a car chase as an action set-piece. However, the action film did not become a dominant form in Hollywood until the 1980s and 1990s, when it was popularized by actors such as Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bruce Willis and Sylvester Stallone. The 1988 film Die Hard was particularly influential on the development of the genre in the following decade. In the film, Bruce Willis plays a New York police detective who inadvertently becomes embroiled in a terrorist take-over of a Los Angeles office block. The film set a pattern for a host of imitators, like Under Siege (1992) or Air Force One (1997), which used the same formula in a different setting.

Action films tend to be expensive, requiring big budget special effects and stunt work. As such, they are regarded as mostly a Hollywood genre, although there have been a significant number of action films from Hong Kong which are primarily modern variations of the martial arts film. Because of these roots, Hong Kong action films typically center on acrobatics by the protagonist while American action films typically feature big explosions and modern technology.

CURRENT TRENDS

Current trends in action film include a development toward more elaborate fight scenes in Western film. This trend is influenced by the massive success of Hong Kong action cinema, both in Asia and in the west. Asian martial arts elements, such as kung-fu and karate can now be found in numerous non-Asian action films. Now, a distinction can be made between films that lean toward physical, agile fighting, such as The Transporter, and those that lean toward other common action film conventions, like explosions and plenty of gunfire, such as Lethal Weapon, although most action movies employ elements of both.

FEMINIST THEORY

Feminist film theory has been used to analyze action movies, owing to their rare variance from a core archetype. The separation between the physical male, who controls the scene and the gaze, and the female, who is almost always the object of the gaze, is very clear in most such films. Although female characters in most action films are nothing more than objects, a prize for the winner, hostages, loving wives and the like, there has been a move towards stronger female characters such as those in works by James Cameron and Kathryn Bigelow, and a move towards “girl power”-style feminine empowerment (e.g. Charlie’s Angels), in place of the traditional “damsel in distress”.

SUB-GENRES

Action drama– Combines action set-pieces with serious themes, character insight and/or emotional power. This sub-genre can be traced back to the origins of the action film. Carol Reed’s The Third Man (written by Grahame Greene) was an award-winning predecessor of this sub-genre.

Buddy cop– Two mismatched cops (or some variation such as a cop and a criminal) team-up as the main protagonists. Major examples are Rush Hour, 48 Hrs., Lethal Weapon, and Hot Fuzz.

Action comedy– Mixture of action and comedy usually based on mismatched partners (the standard “buddy film” formula) or unlikely setting. The action comedy sub-genre was re-vitalized with the popularity of the Lethal Weapon series of movies in the 1980s and 1990s.

Action thriller– Elements of action/adventure (car chases, shootouts, explosions) and thriller (plot twists, suspense, hero in jeopardy). Many of the James Bond series of films are icons of this popular sub-genre.

Caper / heist– Protagonists are carrying out robbery, either for altruistic purposes or as anti-heroes. The film You Only Live Once, based on the exploits of Bonnie and Clyde, was one of the first examples of this sub-genre.

Die Hard– Story takes place in limited location – single building or vehicle – seized or under threat by enemy agents. This sub-genre began with the film, Die Hard, but has become popular in Hollywood movie making both because of its crowd appeal and the relative simplicity of building sets for such a constrained piece.

Science fiction action– Any of the other sub-genres of action film can be set in a science fiction setting. The Star Wars films began the modern exploration of this combination of high action content with futuristic settings in the 1970s, based in part on the serials of the 1930s and 1940s such as Flash Gordon. An explosion of science fiction action films followed in the 1980s and 1990s.

Action horror– As with science fiction action films, any sub-genre of action film can be combined with the elements of horror films to produce what has increasingly become a popular action sub-genre in its own right. Monsters, robots and many other staples of horror have been used in action films. In the 1980s, Aliens introduced movie goers to the potential of a hybrid of science fiction, action and horror which would continue to be popular to the present day

References:

http://www.allmovie.com/genre/action-d646

http://www.filmbug.com/dictionary/action-movies.php