Action Genre

Action is a genre that is mainly comprised of portrayals of violence throughout a film. It is common to see guns, explosions, weapons, police, a villain, chase scenes and many more. These objects and elements can be viewed as being a danger to society as they have negative connotations. Having elements such as a chase scene makes the audience feel on edge as they want to see the main protagonist achieve their goal of trying to escape for example. Not only are there physical components but also having fast-paced scenes and use of suspenseful music further heightens the intensity of the action. This makes it more enjoyable to watch an action film for the audience as they are seeing the conflict between the two characters or the character against time and whether the character can succeed.

A typical action film will have a narrative that follows a hero who has an objective to defeat the villain from becoming a big threat. Usually it would go back and forth between the hero and villain where they try to eliminate each other until the final conflict and the hero wins. Along the way the hero meets characters who either help them or deter them. In popular culture, action heroes and villains are commonly played by male actors. Only in the late 20th century, have female action heroes and villains have become more prevalent in cinematic history.

In addition to popular culture, action is a relatively popular genre choice amongst audiences. Some may argue that due to the nature of the genre, it becomes a hybrid-genre with other genres such as sci-fi action, action thriller, action adventure and many more which could rule out the conflict/consensus theory by Thomas Schatz. The action genre is quite broad in representation and therefore it makes it slightly less recognisable across a variety of films.

For instance, in Avengers: Endgame, it would be recognised as being a sci-fi/fantasy film due to how it is a simulation of reality but not realistic enough with the representation of superheroes and advanced technology, hence it becomes a hyperreality film. However, the film also depicts the heroes (the Avengers) and the villain (Thanos) going against each other in the final battle, which was the goal the heroes set themselves from the beginning of the film. Thus, by using genre-hybridity it makes it more appealing towards the audience. The fighting scenes that take place highlights the super-human strength that all the heroes and the villains have.

Another example of an action film is Mr & Mrs. Smith. In this still of the film, the audience can immediately identify that the two main characters are in the middle of the action itself. They both have protective gear on and have access to guns. The full scene shows how they are getting attacked and are doing their best to avoid getting hurt whilst also trying to defeat the “enemy”.