Billy Two Hats is an odd little movie: It was produced as the old Hollywood system was ending and a new one was arriving. Old and new peer at each other with suspicion, as if not sure what etiquette applies to this gathering.

Everyone is a little ill at ease: Every cast member seems to be wearing the wrong clothes, speaking the wrong lines or playing the wrong role:

There’s Gregory Peck, lead actor of a dozen Westerns, turning himself into a supporting player and trying some sort of Scottish Gabby Hayes routine.

There’s Desi Arnaz, Jr., who was famous for playing in the sitcom Here’s Lucy with his mother (Lucille Ball) and sister (Lucie Arnaz), trying to launch into…

1974 In Review - March

#1

After a bank robbery, runaway Scottish outlaw Arch Deans and his young half breed Kiowa partner Billy Two Hats develop a father-son relationship but Sheriff Henry Gifford is determined to capture or kill them.

This is a very good Western which I really enjoyed. It was greatly paced and felt modern in a lot of ways, it had some great performances from Gregory Peck and Desi Arnaz Jr who was truly very watchable and conveyed a lot of underlying emotions. The movie concerned the relationship between diverse characters, Peck's humorous kind portrayal of a man who has turned to crime to ensure a living, to Arnaz's contained portrayal of a man caught between two…

I was baffled by the landscape dubbing in for the southern US desert until reading that this was shot in the Negev in Israel. The biblical backdrop makes for an intriguing canvas for this western pursuit film. What's most interesting is how the narrative drive is because of the outlaws refusal to kill the lawman pursuing them. It must be one of the few westerns that hinge on restraint. Like Billy Jack, whose title may have served as the inspiration for this after its success, it's also more explicitly than most other westerns about racism even if the half Cuban Desi Arnaz Jr appears to be in redface. The law's obsession with pursuing Billy Two Hats, even when Gregory Peck's…

Desi Arnaz Jr. is Billy Two Hats, a half breed on the run from the law after he and Irishman Gregory Peck made off with money from a successful robbery in the old west. Peck wants them to try and live a clean life from this point on but sheriff Jack Warden plans on bringing them to justice and nothing will change his mind. With a great early morning opening that really sets the tone this oddball western has our two antiheroes run into an interesting collection of characters including some natives who have left their people to form a gang that wears the clothing of their victims (including women's dresses and a parasol), an abusive husband and his stuttering…