Mike Dunleavy, J.R. Smith

The Cavs acquired former Bulls forward Mike Dunleavy in a trade on Thursday.

(Jeff Haynes, Associated Press)

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The Cavs added to their bench depth on Thursday when they officially acquired former Bulls forward Mike Dunleavy.

Dunleavy will be 36 in September and is coming off his worst scoring season since his rookie year. He played in just 31 games last season, averaging 7.2 points per game. But his production was hampered by off-season back surgery. Whether it was due to the injury or when he came back into the lineup, he only averaged 6.1 field goal attempts per game, putting him tenth on the Bulls in that category.

He still shot the ball well from 3-point range at 39.4 percent. Roughly 80 percent of his shots last season came from less than three feet from the basket or behind the 3-point line.

When healthy, Dunleavy is a valuable player because of his ability to score from the perimeter as well as get to the basket. For his career, he has shot 37.6 percent from behind the arc and is averaging 11.5 points per game.

As evidenced by these highlights from 2014-15, Dunleavy has a versatile offensive game that will help him fit in well off the bench.

At 6-foot-9, Dunleavy most often plays at small forward, but can move to the power forward when the Cavs go small. He is long enough and athletic enough that he can defend multiple positions if switched onto different players.

His two-way game makes him a valuable addition to the bench to go with Richard Jefferson and Iman Shumpert. Between those three players, there's plenty of wing depth behind starters LeBron James and, if he re-signs, J.R. Smith.

Dunleavy's starting experience will also give the Cavs an additional option for games when they decide to rest James.

The key will be Dunleavy's health. He has played just 94 regular season games in the last two years and has played 82 games just three times.

But the good news is on this team, especially if Smith returns, is Dunleavy won't be asked to do too much.

Even though age is not on his side, Dunleavy likely would start for a handful of teams. Adding him to the Cavs' roster makes the defending champions much deeper at the wing, which is critical in today's NBA, particularly if they hope to win a second NBA title.