Who is North Penn School District Educational Foundation

View Company Salary

North Penn School District Educational Foundation is a company that operates in the Education industry. It employs 6-10 people and has $5M-$10M of revenue. The company is headquartered in Lansdale, Pennsylvania.

1. Where is North Penn School District Educational Foundation's headquarters?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation's headquarters is at PO Box 1084, Lansdale, Pennsylvania.

2. What is the official website of North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

The official website of North Penn School District Educational Foundation: npennedfoundation.org.

3. What is the revenue of North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

The revenue of North Penn School District Educational Foundation is $5Million - $10Million.

4. What is the SIC code for North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

The SIC code for North Penn School District Educational Foundation is 8211. The SIC Industry means Elementary and Secondary Schools.

5. What is the NAICS code for North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

The NAICS code for North Penn School District Educational Foundation is 6111. This code means Elementary and Secondary Schools.

6. How many people does North Penn School District Educational Foundation employ?

There are 6-10 people at North Penn School District Educational Foundation.

7. What industry is North Penn School District Educational Foundation in?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation is in the industry of Edu., Gov't. & Nonprofit.

8. What technologies does North Penn School District Educational Foundation rely on?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation is powered by such technologies as YouTube, Google Global Site Tag, Google Workspace (formerly G Suite), ASP.NET.

9. What social media platforms is North Penn School District Educational Foundation on?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation is on these social media platforms: LinkedIn, Twitter, Fackbook.

10. What is the company type of North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation can be distinguished as a private company.

11. What is the founding date of North Penn School District Educational Foundation?

North Penn School District Educational Foundation was founded in 1988.