Atalanta Tickets

If you are a fan of Italian soccer, then you’ll recognize names such as Cristiano Doni, Nicola Ventola, Maximiliano Pellegrino, and Diego De Ascentis. All of these players have formerly played for the Atalanta football club or still play for them. Atalanta has a rich history having been formed in 1907 thanks to a division in the town’s sporting societies. The new team took on the name of the female athlete of Greek mythology and fans are always excited to go to an Atalanta football match. If you are looking for Atalanta tickets for this year’s season, then look no more. We at Onlineticketshop have all your ticket needs covered and we will deliver your chosen tickets to you in a simple and reliable way. Rest assured, your Atalanta tickets are waiting for you!

PLEASE NOTE: The dates and times shown might be subject to change. These can be amended until shortly before the game.

Atalanta Football Club

Atalanta football club fans are known to be one of the most loyal supporters today. And why wouldn’t they be? The Atalanta football club is undoubtedly one of the most exciting soccer clubs in Italy. Atalanta has won the Serie C1, Serie B and the Coppa Italia, so you know they are one of the best. Get your football club tickets to see them play now. Order your Atalanta club tickets today and let us handle the rest. With Onlineticketshop helping you out with your Atalanta ticket, all you need to do is prepare your blue and black colours and practice your chanting! With your Atalanta club tickets guaranteed to be on its way to you, you should get some rest. Atalanta will want to hear all of their loyal fans shouting their support. Order your ticket from Onlineticketshop today!

History Atalanta

For those unfamiliar with soccer, you may hear Atalanta B.C. referenced many different ways. The official name is Atalanta Bergamasca Calcio but they are often referred to as Atalanta Bergamo, Nerazzurri or even Regina delle provinciali. These are all the same team, but locals have different terms for them. Atalanta plays at the Atleti Azzurri d'Italia which is a beautiful stadium located in Bergamo, Italy. The Atleti Azzurri d'Italia has a seating capacity of over 25,000 and the team's supporters are well known for their chanting during the entire match. Atlanta is a very old club of which their founding dates all the way back to 1907. Though this club doesn't have the huge amount of titles that other clubs in the area have, they are wonderful to watch and have a very devoted fanclub.