Archivo del Autor:

Innova -comunicaciones estratégicas

Trivia

The first film that Zimmer scored was «Moonlighting» (1982). However, it was not until 1988 when the turning point of his career happened. His work on which comedy-drama film, starring Tom Cruise and Dustin Hoffman, earned him the first Oscar nomination?

Rain Man

. Hans Florian Zimmer was born in Germany in 1957. His last name, Zimmer, means room in German. In the beginning of his career, Zimmer partnered with his mentor, Stanley Myers. Among the first films that they scored were «Moonlighting» (1982), «Eureka» (1984), «Success Is the Best Revenge» (1984), «My Beautiful Laundrette» (1984), «Insignificance» (1985), «The Lightship» (1985), «Castaway» (1986), «Terminal Exposure» (1986) and «Burning Secret» (1988). «Rain Man» won the Best Picture award at the 61st Academy Awards held in 1989. Dustin Hoffman took home the Best Actor award for his role as Raymond «Rain Man» Babbitt. Also, Barry Levinson won the Best Director award. The film received a total of eight nominations and won four of them. Zimmer was nominated for the Best Original Score award but the award went to Dave Grusin, who scored «The Milagro Beanfield War».

Zimmer won his first Oscar for the Best Original Score award in 1994. His work in this Disney animated film also earned him a Golden Globe. The album featuring soundtrack from this film was a great success, selling more than ten million copies in the US alone in 1994. Which film was it?

The Lion King

. The album accompanying the film, entitled «The Lion King: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack» featured songs written by Elton John as well as scores composed by Zimmer. Zimmer’s work on the score of the film earned him an Oscar at the 67th Annual Academy Awards held in 1994. In the same year, he also won the Best Original Score award at the 52nd Golden Globe Awards, beating Alan Silvestri, who scored «Forrest Gump» (1994). The IMDb or internet movie database website honored Zimmer with the title of «the father of integrating the electronic musical world with traditional orchestral arrangements».

Instead of using conventional orchestral instruments, Zimmer employed synthesizers when composing the main theme for this submarine film directed by Tony Scott. His creativity proved to be fruitful when he won his first Grammy. Which film, released in 1995 and starred Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman, won him the Best Instrumental Composition award?

Crimson Tide

. Zimmer won the Best Instrumental Composition award at the 38th Grammy Awards held in 1996. In an interview with Edwin Black from filmscormonthy.com, Zimmer revealed that the score he composed for the film «Crimson Tide» was one of his favorites. He said, «Ironically, despite all the scores I’ve written, there are very few I’m proud of. [They are] «A World Apart», «Driving Miss Daisy», and a couple of cues in «Crimson Tide». «Black Rain» had somehow set up a new way action movies should be scored. Soon everybody was doing the «Black Rain» thing. In «Crimson Tide», I managed to break out of that trend, push it a bit further. So it was an evolutionary step.» The music in the action-thriller film, «Black Rain» (1989) was also scored by Zimmer.

Zimmer delivered another spectacular piece of work when his collaboration with Lisa Gerrard in the song «Now We Are Free» won him a second Golden Globe award. Which epic film, released in 2000, which won the Oscar for Best Picture starred Russell Crowe did Zimmer score?

Gladiator

. «Gladiator» won the Best Picture award at the 73rd Academy Awards in 2001. The main actor in the film, Russell Crowe also took home the Best Actor award for his portrayal of Maximus Decimus Meridius. The score for «Gladiator» was also nominated for both Oscar and Grammy. The first album, entitled «Gladiator: Music from the Motion Picture», released in 2000, featured 17 tracks. Due to its success, a second album, entitled «Gladiator: More Music from the Motion Picture» was released in the following year, which featured 18 tracks, including a remix of the popular song, «Now We Are Free». The first few lines of the lyrics of the song «Now We Are Free» are: «Anol shalom Anol sheh lay konnud de ne um shaddai Flavum Nom de leesh Ham de nam um das La um de Flavne» The lyrics of the song were written by Lisa Gerrard, who wrote the song in an idioglossia (a language she invented herself).

Zimmer composed the amazing scores for which popular film series that starred Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow?

Pirates of Caribbean

. The first film of the series was released in 2003 and although uncredited, Zimmer composed the score together with Klaus Badelt. The second, third and fourth installments were released in 2006, 2007 and 2011, respectively. Initially, Alan Silvestri was chosen to compose the scores for «Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl» (2003). However, the producer of the film, Jerry Bruckheimer and he had different views so the director Gore Verbinski suggested Hans Zimmer. Unfortunately, Zimmer declined the offer because he had another project at that very same time, namely composing scores for «The Last Samurai» (2003). He recommended his colleague, Klaus Badelt. Zimmer eventually helped Badelt write most of the scores. For the second, third and fourth films, entitled «Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man’s Chest» (2006), «Pirates of the Caribbean: At World’s End» (2007) and «Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides» (2011), respectively, Zimmer was credited as the music composer of the films.

The year 2003 marked another milestone for composer Hans Zimmer in his music career when he scored his 100th film. Not only did this work receive a Golden Globe nomination, but it also won the Satellite Award for Best Original Score. Which epic film, starred Tom Cruise and Ken Watanabe did Zimmer score?

The Last Samurai

. For his work in «The Last Samurai» (2003), Zimmer won the Satellite Award for Best Original Score at the 8th Golden Satellite Awards. His works also received a Golden Globe nomination, but the award went to Howard Shore, who composed the scores for «The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King» (2003). Commenting on his work in «The Last Samurai», Zimmer wrote on ew.com (Entertainment Weekly’s website), «I’m dealing with a culture I have no clue about. I kept endlessly researching Japanese music, and the more I researched it, the more I realized I had no clue about it. I went to Japan to sort of test-drive it – to see if I got it wrong. I played it to a whole bunch of people and they came up to me and said, ‘How do you know so much about Japanese music?’ So, I should worry maybe a little less.»

One of Zimmer’s most notable scores is «Chevaliers de Sangrea», which is the main theme of a mystery thriller film that was released in 2006. This amazing soundtrack was played toward the end of the film when Robert Langdon, played by Tom Hanks, finally deciphered the difficult codes and found the exact location of the Holy Grail. The film was based on a novel of the same title by Dan Brown. Which film was it?

The Da Vinci Code

. The director of «The Da Vinci Code» (2006), Ron Howard elaborated on the difficulty and challenge of composing the scores for the film. He commented, «Like every other facet of this movie, the score for «The Da Vinci Code» demanded a range of textures that recognized and reinforced the layers of ideas and emotion, which unfold as the basic story does.» He praised Zimmer for his truly original and spectacular work. He said, «Hans Zimmer has given us extraordinarily memorable music to appreciate within the framework of a film or completely on its own, where you can let the sounds carry you on your own private journey.» Zimmer collaborated with Ron Howard again in «Angels and Demons» (2009).

Apart from being well known for composing scores for Hollywood blockbusters, Zimmer also did an excellent job in composing scores for animated films. The scores he composed for the animated film «Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron» (2002) earned him a Golden Globe nomination. Which of the following animated films did Zimmer NOT score?

Toy Story

. The music in «Toy Story» (1995) was scored by Randy Newman. The first animated film that Zimmer scored was «The Lion King» (1994), which earned him an Oscar. He then composed the scores for several other animated films. Among the notable ones were «Shark Tale» (2004), «Madagascar» (2005), «Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa» (2008), «Kung Fu Panda» (2008), «Megamind» (2010), «Rango» (2011) and «Kung Fu Panda 2» (2011).

The science fiction action movie «Inception» (2010) marked the third collaboration between Zimmer and director Christopher Nolan. His work in «Inception» earned him yet another Oscar nomination. Prior to «Inception», Zimmer composed the scores together with James Newton Howard for two superhero films. Which superhero films were they?

«Batman Begins» and «The Dark Knight»

. Commenting on his scores in «Inception», Zimmer said, «It’s a very electronic score. There is orchestra, but the electronics share an equal spotlight.» Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard composed the scores in «The Dark Knight» (2008). Their work won them the Grammy for Best Score Soundtrack Album (Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media). The theme for «The Dark Knight» was introduced at the end of «Batman Begins» (2005). In an interview on soundtack.net, Zimmer revealed, «There’s a whole theme that’s written and on purpose not in the movie. We were basically betting that this movie might work out alright and there would be another one, so we wanted the character to develop.»

Throughout his career, Zimmer received numerous nominations and also won many prestigious awards. From 1989 to 2011, he received a total of nine Oscar nominations and won one of them. Which of the following Oscar Best Picture winners, starring Jessica Tandy and Morgan Freeman did Zimmer score?

Driving Miss Daisy. The score in «Titanic» (1997) was composed by James Horner, who also wrote the song «My Heart Will Go On», sang by Celine Dion. Horner won two Oscars at the 70th Annual Academy Awards, namely Best Original Dramatic Score and Best Original Song. «The King’s Speech» (2010) was scored by Alexandre Desplat while «Slumdog Millionaire» (2008) was scored by A. R. Rahman. From 1989 to 2011, Zimmer received a total of nine Oscar nominations for his work in «Rain Man» (1989), «The Lion King» (1994), «The Preacher’s Wife» (1997), «As Good As It Gets» (1998), «The Prince of Egypt» (1999), «The Thin Red Line» (1999), «Gladiator» (2001), «Sherlock Holmes» (2010) and «Inception» (2011). «The Lion King» (1994) won Zimmer his first Oscar. In his acceptance speech, he thanked his wife and daughter. He said, «I’d like to thank my wife because she’s my best friend. I’d like to thank my daughter because she now thinks I’m cool because I did «The Lion King.» I’d like to thank the directors Rob Minkoff, Roger Allers. I’d like to thank the nicest producer in the business, Don Hahn. I’m incredibly nervous. I tell you what, writing a score is much easier than this.» The movies «Rain Man» (1989), «Driving Miss Daisy» (1989) and «Gladiator» (2001) won the Oscar Best Picture award for their respective years. Zimmer composed scores for all these three films.

Eventos

Eventos del 2012 y 2011

A continuacion se hablara de algunos eventos del 2012 en los que el compositor asistió fueron :

Sábado 11 de Febrero : Fluch der Karibik- Disney LIVE concert

Lugar: Hamburgo- Alemania

Sábado 7 de Abril:Fluch der Karibik – Disney LIVE in Concert

Lugar: Frankfort del Meno, Alemania

Sabado 5 de Mayo: Film Music Gala: Royal Philharmonic orchestra

Lugar: Londres, Reino Unido

Lunes 11 de Junio : London on Film – A Snapshot of Cinematic History

Lugar: Londres, Reino Unido

2011

Por otra parte en el 2011 también se hicieron una serie de programas como lo fueron :

Viernes 21 de Enero: The pirates of the caribean: The cruse of the black pearl

Lugar: Lucerna, Suiza

Sábado 22 de Enero:The pirates of the caribean: The cruse of the black pearl

Lugar: Lucerna, Suiza

Sábado 22 de Octubre:The pirates of the caribean: The cruse of the black pearl

Lugar: Genth, Belgica

Años 1980 y 1990

1988 es un año que determina un punto de inflexión en la carrera de Zimmer. La composición de la banda sonora de la ganadora del Óscar Rain Man, de Barry Levinson, significaría su primera nominación a la estatuilla y que el mundo cinematográfico centrara su atención en el entonces joven compositor, autor de melodías muy rítmicas, con temas muy identificativos y totalmente acoplables a una película. Tras el éxito de Rain Man, Zimmer se integra en Hollywood y realiza dos trabajos muy importantes: Black Rain yDriving Miss Daisy; además de la polémica Thelma y Louise entre otros trabajos en películas de carácter más comercial como Days of thunder (Días de trueno), caracterizadas por su sello inconfundible.

Tras sus valorados trabajos en dos películas que llegaron a ser ganadoras de los Óscars a principios de los 90, Zimmer se consolida como un talento en Hollywood. Condición que se consagra en 1994 con su trabajo para Walt Disney en el El rey león(The Lion King), banda sonora que le valió su hasta ahora único premio Óscar.3

En 1998, la banda sonora de la ambiciosa producción animada de DreamWorks, El príncipe de Egipto (Prince of Egypt), de la que es autor, es nominada a los Globos de oro, Óscars, Saturn y OFCS Awards.

Premios, nominaciones y reconocimientos

Hans Zimmer, a fecha de 2011, ha sido nominado en 68 ocasiones en diferentes certámenes y categorías, de los cuales ha conseguido 19 premios en total destacando el Óscar y Globo de oro a la mejor banda sonora por El rey Leon (1994), el Globo de oro por Gladiator (2000) o el Saturn, en la misma categoría, por El caballero oscuro (The Dark Knight) (2009).

Zimmer ha sido nominado en 10 ocasiones a los Globos de oro, 9 de ellas en la primera década del siglo XXI tras ganar su primer galardón con el Rey león en 1995, y 8 veces para los Óscars siendo la última su trabajo en la película de 2010 Origen (Inception). También es de destacar su participación en la miniserie de HBO ambientada en el teatro del Pacifico de la Segunda Guerra Mundial, The Pacific, por la cual recibió su primera nominación a los Emmy en 2010

Óscar

Año Categoría Película Resultado 2010 Mejor Banda Sonora Inception Candidato 2009 Mejor Banda Sonora Sherlock Holmes Candidato 2000 Mejor Banda Sonora Gladiator Candidato 1998 Mejor Banda Sonora – Comedia El príncipe de Egipto Candidato 1998 Mejor Banda Sonora La delgada línea roja Candidato 1997 Mejor Banda Sonora – Comedia Mejor… imposible Candidato 1996 Mejor Banda Sonora – Comedia La mujer del predicador Candidato 1994 Mejor Banda Sonora El rey león Ganador 1988 Mejor Banda Sonora Rain man Candidato

[editar]Globos de Oro

Año Categoría Película Resultado 2011 Mejor Banda Sonora Inception Candidato 2008 Mejor Banda Sonora Frost/Nixon Candidato 2006 Mejor Banda Sonora El Código Da Vinci Candidato 2004 Mejor Banda Sonora Spanglish Candidato 2003 Mejor Banda Sonora El Último Samurai Candidato 2001 Mejor Banda Sonora Black Hawk Down Candidato 2000 Mejor Banda Sonora Gladiator Ganador 1998 Mejor Banda Sonora La delgada línea roja Candidato 1994 Mejor Banda Sonora El Rey León Ganador

Top 10 soundtracks

1. Inception

2. The Dark Knight

3. The Lion King

4. Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man’s Chest

5. Gladiator

6. Sherlock Holmes

7.The last samurai

8. Pearl Harbor

9. Mission Impossible 2

10. King Arthur

Hans Zimmer en el estudio parte 3

Hans Zimmer en el estudio parte 2

Biografía

Hans Florian Zimmer (Fráncfort, Hesse; 12 de septiembre de 1957); compositor alemán, es uno de los compositores de bandas sonoras más reconocidos en Hollywood. Pionero en la utilización del uso de computadoras, tecnología de sintetizadores digitales y teclados junto a orquestas sinfónicas tradicionales, en melodías de cine y televisión.

De pequeño recibió clases de piano, más tarde se trasladó a Londres donde realizó sus estudios entrando en el mundo de la música durante una larga colaboración con su mentor Stanley Myers. A comienzos de los ochenta se introdujo en el mundo del synthpop y new wave, formando The Camera Club con Bruce Woolley, de The Buggles, y Thomas Dolby, y después, Helden, al lado de Warren Cann, baterista de Ultravox, y Zaine Griff. En 1986 realizó su primer trabajo autónomo en Vardo, aunque siguió colaborando con Myers hasta 1988.

En 1988 se presenta Rain Man dirigida por Barry Levinson y acompañada con el trabajo musical de Hans Zimmer. Con esto, el mundo cinematográfico fija su atención en el joven compositor que escribe melodías muy rítmicas, con temas muy identificativos y totalmente acoplables en una película.

Tras el éxito de Rain Man, Hans Zimmer se integra en Hollywood y realiza dos trabajos muy importantes: Black Rain y Driving Miss Daisy.

1994 Será recordado por un sólo disco, The Lion King (El Rey León) que le mereció el premio Oscar a la mejor banda sonora.

En 1998 se realiza una ambiciosa producción animada de la DreamWorks, Prince of Egypt (El príncipe de Egipto) donde realizó un trabajo genial. Las canciones muestran claramente la mano de Zimmer.

Se consagra en 2000 con la autoría de La ruta hacia El Dorado y Gladiator (Gladiator) que se convierte en un éxito taquillero y en uno de sus trabajos máximos.

En los últimos años, Zimmer nos ha maravillado con la música de «El Último Samurái», «Batman Begins» (en colaboración con otro gran compositor, James Newton Howard) y las dos secuelas de «Piratas del Caribe», en las cuales ha ido perfeccionando progresivamente el gran trabajo de su predecesor Klaus Badelt.

Sin duda, podemos decir que Hans Zimmer es uno de los grandes compositores de nuestros tiempos y, por supuesto, uno de los nombres que pasará a la historia del cine.