(Originally published in Dazed and Confused)

"Is Nick Land the most important British philosopher of the last twenty years?," asks Kodwo Eshun. On the face of it, the question might seem an odd one - Land only published one book, The Thirst For Annihilation : Georges Bataille and Virulent Nihilism and a series of short texts, most of which had a limited circulation when they first appeared. Nevertheless, Eshun's question makes sense because that small canon of texts - which have been collected for the first time in a recently published volume Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987-2007 - have had an enormous but up until now subterranean influence. Their impact was first of all felt beyond philosophy - in music (Steve Goodman aka Kode 9 studied with Land in the 90s), in art (Jake Chapman has long been an admirer of Land's "technilism"; Eshun, in the 90s one of the most important writers and theorists on music, is now is now a member of the Turner Prize-nominated Otolith Group), in the rogue media theory of Matthew Fuller, in the inhuman feminism of Luciana Parisi's Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and the Mutations of Desire, and in the unclassifiable theory-fiction of the Iranian writer Reza Negarestani, whose astonishing Cyclonopedia was rated by Artforum as one of the best books of 2009. But Land's influence is now infesting the philosophy departments which tended to scorn it in the rare cases they were aware of it. Some of the philosophers at the forefront of the most exciting movement in current philosophy, speculative realism - Ray Brassier, Iain Hamilton Grant - studied with Land, and their work is still marked by that encounter. The re-propagation of Land's work via speculative realism has led younger theorists such as Ben Woodard, author of the forthcoming Slime Dynamics - which crossbreeds philosophy, science and horror fiction - back to Land. "Land's work was a welcome respite from much of the philosophy I had been reading at the time," says Woodard, who encountered Land via Reza Negerastani. "His Thirst for Annihilation is one of the more interesting texts I've read in several years as it viciously lampoons the hubris of philosophers and other intellectuals while managing to be a work of theory at the same time. Land demonstrated that one could make rigorous and important theoretical arguments without abandoning style or without being afraid to engage strange and unorthodox materials."

In the 90s, Land was what the music critic Simon Reynolds once called a "vortical presence", capable of utterly transforming those with whom he came into contact. Kodwo Eshun: “What struck me, forcibly, upon seeing, and then meeting Nick Land, at an event in Brighton's Zap Club, in 1993 or 1994, where he was seated, on a stage, next to Sadie Plant, taking turns to read the same paper, one paragraph after another, and subsequently, at the 2nd Virtual Futures conference at Warwick University in 1996, was his presence. His manner was immediately open, egalitarian and absolutely unaffected by academic protocol; his style of speaking was extremely abstract yet extremely vivid; he dramatised theory as a world geopoliticohistorical epic and he narrated philosophy in the present tense as a series of personifications that drew equally upon Asimov, Wiener, Turing, Ridley Scott and William Gibson, He positioned his thought and his self inside of a desire for multiple destructions; he identified his thinking with the death drive in a way that was exhilarating, alarming, thrilling and painstaking.”

“When you were in Nick's presence, thinking mattered,” Eshun continues, “it took on a mortal quality; it became enlivened, libidinised; intensified; it made demands upon you, it made you impatient with everything else. In the times in which I met Nick, none of these qualities ever changed. Each of the other 20somethings I met during this time recounted similar stories. Many, if not all of those people that made contact with Nick Land have since gone onto make names for themselves in literature, in electronic dance music, in art, in fiction; it is clear to me, now, that those encounters with Nick Land, then, were intensifying experiences whose effect was to make one impatient with anything less than a mode of thinking that operated at a point of speculative magnitude; after Nick, one could not turn back, towards a homeland of thought; there was no homeland left to return to.”

I was one of those who underwent this dislocating encounter.Along with a handful of others, including Steve Goodman, Luciana Parisi and Robin Mackay, the editor of the Collapse journal and the man behind Urbanomic, the publishers of Fanged Noumena, I was a founding member of the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit (Ccru). The Ccru was convened by Land's former collaborator, Sadie Plant, but, when Plant departed, the Unit became shaped by Land's ideas and methodology. Although the Ccru was notionally a part of the Philosophy department, it never had any formal institutional status. As one Warwick academic memorably put it, "The Ccru does not, has not and will never exist." This institutional non-existence parallels Land's own strange situation - a philosopher who few professional philosophers acknowledge, Land left the university in the early 2000s to live in Shanghai.

I still recall very vividly the first time I encountered Land's cyber-writings. I had read The Thirst For Annihilation but it didn't really work for me; even though I appreciated its experimental form and the way that it tried to become its subject (the work of the French anti-philosopher Georges Bataille) rather than judge it from some supposedly neutral vantage point, there was still something self-conscious about it. It was the piece "Machinic Desire" that first took hold me. I remember reading it, then immediately re-reading it two or three times. There was a great deal of cyber-theory around in the 1990s - some of Californian cheerleading for new technology, some of it academic writing - but none of it seemed to come from inside the macihines - which is to say, outside us - in the way that Land's did. The writing didn't have the distance that one expects from academic theory; it dealt with fiction and film as terrains to be occupied rather than as artefacts to be 'commented' upon. It found a "plane of consistency" where the cyberpunk fiction of William Gibson connected up with the philosophy of Immanuel Kant; where Blade Runner connected with finance capital. Theory wasn't being 'applied' here; it was being plugged in. The writing felt as if it came from somewhere real, somewhere exterior, rather than from a psychological interiority. All of this depended upon the qualities of the writing, which was generated by certain stylistic features: the use of present tense, the use of the second-person ('you') forced a kind of urgency of immersion. And the whole thing was suffused by a reckless integrity: it was entirely lacking in the dampening caution and cynicism which makes so much careerist academic writing dull and delibidinising. There was the unmistakable feeling that you get whenever you encounter an authentic project: the sense that this had to be written, that Land was in a way a puppet being used so that this Thing could get out.

"I completely share your thoughts about Thirst for Annihilation," says Steve Goodman, "which read to me to read like a writer trying to liberate themselves from the shackles of being trained in academic theory/philosophy. Of course most people who are academically trained one way or another, including myself, don't get past the pain, angst and friction such a quest generates, which is ultimately why much 'radical' post-Nietzschean academic theory is so tedious and adolescent, but its certainly a worthwhile quest. But what is interesting about Nick, is that his response to this hyper-rational prison of academic philosophy was not to retreat from it, but to accelerate it to a point where it implodes, perhaps taking him with it. So instead of reactively retreating from theory, he actually seemed to understand it better than the most dutiful academic bureaucrat ever could. And this is what made him, at that time such an amazing teacher/educator or however you want to describe what he was doing.

"Anyway, I remember coming across one of Nick's articles called 'Cyberspace Anarchitecture and Jungle warfare' at some point in the mid-90s. This was a moment at which we were all massively stimulated by jungle not just as a music, but as a theory generating machine. The article had nothing in particular to do with jungle music in a literal sense, but the more I read it, the more this abstract landscape that it seemed to be mapping, was exactly the same one created by the music. I read it about 10 times and still didn't completely get it, but the sense of the concreteness of its content, its the lack of distance but also the sense that what it was describing we were all familiar with already, but perhaps in a non-linguistic, affective mode, was so compelling - often the concepts seeped in by osmosis, through repeated reading. I think Nick's writing after Thirst for Annihilation reminds you of this psychedelic function of theory, or theory as microscope, where it has this potential to just strip back all the crusted, dead layers of the catastrophe that we usually refer to as the human race to zoom into this exposed and somewhat reptilian, info-material core with a cold indifference but simultaneously an intense excitement. Nick also has this skill of taking philosophy and building it into an theory/fictional environment that, stripped of all academic caution and tentativeness, is actually quite educational, but again in a more osmotic fashion - and all compressed into the space of a few lines, not dragged out into 300 pages of nuance, reservation, argument - as Nick once put it 'debate is idiot distraction'."

Land's texts were never 'about' 90s experimental dance music so much as they converged with it. When Steve Goodman and I first played jungle to Land, he immediately saw an affinity between his writing and the tone, themes and style of the music. Partly, it was that Land's work was in a way a remix of the same set of sources: the films that Land referenced (Blade Runner, the Terminator and the Predator movies) were extensively sampled in jungle tracks.

"Yes," Goodman says, "clearly he was drawing for a shared set of cinematic references that were in the musical air at that moment, but the thing that always got me about the resonance between Nick's writing and jungle was this theme of turbulence that seemed to recur across his writings, at dynamic, social, mathematical, physical, economic and libidinal scales - i.e. his interest in the productivity of systems on the edge of chaos, for me, basically was a direct and very literal description of what was going on rhythmically in jungle with breakbeat science. It’s one of the key organizing ideas in my own book Sonic Warfare, and I learnt it from Nick, although he clearly wasn't writing about music directly.

What about the revival of Land's work now? Is this just a case of nostalgia? Steve Goodman doesn't think so. "On one level, Nick (and the Ccru / Kodwo etc) was around 15 years ahead of the curve which is why it's so current now. I think Nick is still doing fascinating stuff which is pretty much off the radar of most of his previous followers, as he seems to broken completely with the platitudes of the so called 'radical' academy (about which he was clearly always skeptical) or the current philosophical fashions (without him some of which would not have been possible), and is involved in tracking the strange rise of China from his Shanghai base. I don't particularly concur with where he is at politically but I think his style of libertarianism is pretty complex and not necessarily inconsistent especially when read in light of his 90s writings. He's been writing urban guidebooks to Shanghai over the last few years, which in a way is a perfectly natural follow up to his earlier interests, if not particularly at full throttle intensity that we still crave."