Bilczew, Konin County

Bilczew is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland. It lies approximately 6 kilometres north of Kramsk, 15 km north-east of Konin, and 104 km east of the regional capital Poznań.

Dębicz, Konin County

Dębicz is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland. It lies approximately 2 kilometres north of Kramsk, 12 km north-east of Konin, and 104 km east of the regional capital Poznań. The village has a population of 440.

Jabłków

Jabłków is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland. It lies approximately 6 kilometres north of Kramsk, 14 km north-east of Konin, and 103 km east of the regional capital Poznań. The village has a population of 220.

Kramsk

Kramsk is a village in Konin County, in west-central Poland. It is the seat of the gmina (administrative district) called Gmina Kramsk. It lies approximately 11 kilometres east of Konin and 104 km east of the regional capital Poznań. The village has a population of 1,200.

Milin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Milin is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Podgór

Podgór is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Strumyk, Gmina Kramsk

Strumyk is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland. It lies approximately 4 kilometres east of Kramsk, 15 km north-east of Konin, and 106 km east of the regional capital Poznań.

Wielany

Wielany is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland. It lies approximately 3 kilometres east of Kramsk, 14 km north-east of Konin, and 106 km east of the regional capital Poznań.