Dębina, Lower Silesian Voivodeship

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Jelcz-Laskowice, within Oława County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in south-western Poland.

Dębina, Kościerzyna County

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Dziemiany, within Kościerzyna County, Pomeranian Voivodeship, in northern Poland.

Dębina, Koło County

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kłodawa, within Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębina, Gmina Zakrzew

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Zakrzew, within Lublin County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland.

Dębina, Gmina Ulhówek

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Ulhówek, within Tomaszów Lubelski County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland, close to the border with Ukraine.

Dębina, Gmina Strzelce

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Strzelce, within Kutno County, Łódź Voivodeship, in central Poland.

Dębina, Gmina Rusiec

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Rusiec, within Bełchatów County, Łódź Voivodeship, in central Poland.

Dębina, Gmina Kleszczów

Dębina [dɛmˈbina] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kleszczów, within Bełchatów County, Łódź Voivodeship, in central Poland.

Dębina Łętowska

Dębina Łętowska [dɛmˈbina wɛnˈtɔfska] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wojnicz, within Tarnów County, Lesser Poland Voivodeship, in southern Poland.

Dębień, Działdowo County

Dębień [ˈdɛmbjɛɲ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Rybno, within Działdowo County, Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, in northern Poland. It lies approximately 2 kilometres (1 mi) west of Rybno, 26 km (16 mi) north-west of Działdowo, …

Dębienko

Dębienko [dɛmˈbjɛnkɔ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Stęszew, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębieniec

Dębieniec [dɛmˈbjɛɲɛt͡s] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Radzyń Chełmiński, within Grudziądz County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland.

Dębiec, West Pomeranian Voivodeship

Dębiec [ˈdɛmbjɛt͡s] (German: Eichhorst) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lipiany, within Pyrzyce County, West Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-western Poland.

Dębiec, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dębiec [ˈdɛmbjɛt͡s] (German: Friedrichseiche) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kórnik, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębie, Opole Voivodeship

Dębie [ˈdɛmbjɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chrząstowice, within Opole County, Opole Voivodeship, in southwestern Poland.

Dębicze

Dębicze [dɛmˈbit͡ʂɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Grabów nad Prosną, within Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębicz, Konin County

Dębicz [ˈdɛmbit͡ʂ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kramsk, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębice, Lower Silesian Voivodeship

Dębice [dɛmˈbit͡sɛ] (German: Dambritsch) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Malczyce, within Środa Śląska County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in south-western Poland.

Dębice, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship

Dębice [dɛmˈbit͡sɛ] (German: Eichland) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Włocławek, within Włocławek County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland.

Dębica, Pyrzyce County

Dębica [dɛmˈbit͡sa] (German: 'Damnitz') is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Warnice, within Pyrzyce County, West Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-western Poland.

Dębica, Lublin Voivodeship

Dębica [dɛmˈbit͡sa] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Ostrówek, within Lubartów County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland.

Dębica, Kołobrzeg County

Dębica [dɛmˈbit͡sa] (German: Damitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Rymań, within Kołobrzeg County, West Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-western Poland.

Dębiany, Sandomierz County

Dębiany [dɛmˈbjanɨ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Obrazów, within Sandomierz County, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland.

Dębiany, Kętrzyn County

Dębiany [dɛmˈbjanɨ] (German Dombehnen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Barciany, within Kętrzyn County, Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, in northern Poland, close to the border with the Kaliningrad Oblast of Russia.

Dębiany, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship

Dębiany [dɛmˈbjanɨ] (German: Eichelgrund) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Rypin, within Rypin County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland.

Dębiany, Kazimierza County

Dębiany [dɛmˈbjanɨ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnocin, within Kazimierza County, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland.

Dębiany, Jędrzejów County

Dębiany [dɛmˈbjanɨ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wodzisław, within Jędrzejów County, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland.

Dębiany, Bartoszyce County

Dębiany [dɛmˈbʲanɨ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Bartoszyce, within Bartoszyce County, Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, in northern Poland, close to the border with the Kaliningrad Oblast of Russia.

Dębianki

Dębianki [dɛmˈbjanki] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Topólka, within Radziejów County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland.

Dębia Góra

Dębia Góra [ˈdɛmbja ˈɡura] is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Osiek, within Starogard County, Pomeranian Voivodeship, in northern Poland.

Dębe, Sokołów County

Dębe [ˈdɛmbɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kosów Lacki, within Sokołów County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.

Dębe, Legionowo County

Dębe [ˈdɛmbɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Serock, within Legionowo County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.

Dębe, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Dębe [ˈdɛmbɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Dębe Małe, Mińsk County

Dębe Małe [ˈdɛmbɛ ˈmawɛ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Latowicz, within Mińsk County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.

Dębczyna

Dębczyna [dɛmpˈt͡ʂɨna] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Baranów, within Puławy County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland.