Since its establishment in 1937 the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France has gained a particular reputation among European ensembles for its eclectic repertoire, advocacy of new music, imaginative approach to concerts, outstanding guest artists and dynamic programmes for education and outreach.

Mikko Franck, its Music Director since 2015, embodies the orchestra’s distinctive spirit, values and ambitions with his determination to make each concert a memorable musical and human experience. His contract has been extended to 2022, reaffirming the commitment that he and the orchestra have made to each other.

Among Franck’s predecessors at the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France are Myung-Whun Chung, Marek Janowski and Gilbert Amy, but over its eight decades of history, many other major musical personalities have also conducted the orchestra, including Désiré-Émile Inghelbrecht to Gustavo Dudamel by way of Aaron Copland, Pierre Boulez, Yuri Temirkanov and Esa-Pekka Salonen.

Having previously made its home at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées and then the Salle Pleyel, the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France now gives its Paris concerts at either the Auditorium de Radio France or the Philharmonie de Paris. It also tours regularly, both in France – for instance to Lyon, Toulouse, Aix-en-Provence, the Folle Journée festival in Nantes, the Chorégies d’Orange and the Festival de Saint-Denis – and internationally to such major venues as the Berlin Philharmonie, Vienna Konzerthaus, Hamburg Elbphilharmonie, NCPA in Beijing and Suntory Hall in Tokyo.

Mikko Franck and the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France record extensively, with a special relationship to the Alpha label. Their concerts can be heard and watched online at francemusique.fr as well as regularly on arte.tv and france.tv.

The orchestra believes in taking an active role in culture and society and each season it refreshes its outreach programme with creative projects for young audiences, workshops, innovative concert formats – including audience participation, and activities in hospitals and prisons. Pianist, teacher and broadcaster Jean-François Zygel hosts Les Clefs de l’orchestre, a series exploring the masterpieces of the orchestral repertoire, which is broadcast on France Inter, France Télévisions and RTBF in Belgium. In addition, the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France and Mikko Franck ambassadors of UNICEF.