Founded in 1977, Regent University’s 13,000 students are studying on its 70-acre campus in Virginia Beach, VA., and online around the world. The university offers associate, bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees from a Christian perspective in 150+ areas of study including business, communication and the arts, cybersecurity and technology, divinity, education, government, law, leadership, nursing and healthcare, and psychology. 2024 will be the first year that Regent University hosts FUGE Camps! Both Centrifuge and MFuge will be offered.

Amenities

Regent offers a campus complete with state-of-the-art meeting facilities and a range of impressive amenities. Daily worship takes place in the 710-seat proscenium arch theater, and the Student Center houses a cafe, gift shop, and game room, making it the perfect place to relax and recharge.

Accommodations at Regent are a highlight, with fully furnished apartment-style living featuring versatile floor plans ranging from studios to four-bedroom suites. Each room comes complete with a full-size kitchen, cable TV, and wireless internet, providing all the comforts of home.

Outdoor activity spaces are plentiful at Regent, including athletic fields, sand volleyball, fire-pits, and plenty of outdoor seating. And when it’s time to refuel, there are catering and cafeteria-style dining options available, as well as a daily rotation of food trucks serving up a variety of options.

It’s important to note that any damages to facilities, including the dorm rooms, are the responsibility of the group occupying them, and lost keys result in additional charges.

*Information listed above is subject to change without notice.

Tracks

Basketball, Battleball, Crafts, Creative Journaling, Creative Movement, Creative Painting, Defending Your Faith, Disc Golf, Drama, For Girls Only, Gagaball, Games Track, Growing Your Faith, Guitar, Hiking, Kickball, Lawn Games, Leadership 101, Life After High School, Percussion, Random Acts of Service, Sharing Your Faith, Sign Language, Soccer, Spiritual Gifts, STEM Track, The Man Track, Total Body Fitness, Ultimate Frisbee, Volleyball, Water Games, Worship Leadership. *Track times offered are subject to change and depend on the size of camp for the session attending.

ministry tracks (Mfuge)

Childrens, Games and Rec, PCY (Painting, Construction, and Yardwork), Social. *Track times offered are subject to change and depend on the size of camp for the session attending.