Abel Gance' first mark on cinema. 'The Tenth Symphony', the first major impressionist film.

He explores human emotion and the human experience better than anyone had. Not to say it's a masterpiece though. An overly-ambitious, convoluted and repetitive narrative is the biggest turn off.

This can be made up for as you're captive to the never-before-seen technical tricks, but then the pacing and length don't do you any favours.

Every positive comes arm in arm with a negative.

Gance would go on to make some of the greatest, most revolutionary films in existence, this feels like the final hurdle before he fully embraces and (I dare say) masters his now iconic, stylish approach to filmmaking.

Abel Gance's debut lacks the pyrotechnics that we associate with his epics NAPOLEON and LA ROUE and, at a tame 90 minutes, the novelistic approach for which he's justly famous. However, THE TENTH SYMPHONY as an early (some claim the first) exponent of Impressionist Film displays a visual sophistication lacking in pictures from 1918. It's a florid melodrama, nothing we haven't seen before, but the use of images purely for generating meaning and not for advancing the narrative is a distinctive pleasure.

In this juicy melodrama, a woman's one-time abuser barges back into her life with the intention of blackmailing her and marrying her stepdaughter. Encountering him in plush parlors and courtyards, she tries to maneuver him back out while keeping her new family together. Abel Gance tells her story using all my favorite staples of silent cinema: abundant irises; dissolves that connote memory's intrusion on the present; and inserts of expository letters that act like handwritten title cards. Although it lacks a soundtrack, La Dixième Symphonie nonetheless gets laughs out of a parrot gabbing on the phone, and despite being shot in 1.33 : 1, it boasts a proto-widescreen interlude with ornate friezes pushing in from the top and bottom of the frame. Decades ahead of its time in both respects.

Abel Gance I love you.

I wasn’t expecting much from this film. As far as I’m aware, it’s Gance’s first feature, it’s not held as a silent masterpiece or much of a classic, I don’t even know if it’s ever been released on DVD, let alone had an HD restoration (the quality of the copy I watched on YouTube was a lot more poor than this film deserves) and yet I was really surprised to see how invested I got into the story and the characters. It’s nothing groundbreaking but I still think it’s great. French Impressionism isn’t a film movement I’m too familiar with, and I know there is discussion whether it really was a movement at all, but…

What a terrific experience to catch this Abel Gance silent in front of a packed house at MoMA with the legendary Donald Sosin accompanying. Great high melodrama here. Composer believes himself wronged by his (faithful) wife, who actually is trying to save composer’s daughter from marrying a man who had blackmailed her (got that?). Emmy Lynn does great job as the wife in selling all this. Wonderful little flashes of style throughout. Symphony performance, final confrontation are true highlights.

This 1918 feature by Abel Gance was made right before his international breakthrough with J’accuse and remains overshadowed by his epic accomplishments of the 1920s, La Roue (1923) and Napoleon (1927), though most of the elements of his mature style are present, from the extravagant stylistic experimentation (including an anticipation of the widescreen framing of Napoleon) to the unbridled grandiosity shared by protagonist and filmmaker. Séverin-Mars, the agonized engineer of La Roue, here plays a celebrated composer who is driven to write his masterpiece—on the theme of “Women’s Betrayal”—when he comes falsely to believe that his wife has been unfaithful. The true situation is far more bizarre, involving a typically tortured Gance family romance.

Screening with live piano accompaniment August 5 at MoMA.

I knew there would be at least one film that sent me into cinematic ecstasy at Pordenone, but I wouldn't have guessed it would be Abel Gance's La dixieme symphonie, which I had all but ignored in the program. Gance, in my mind, was a little too rigid, a little too academic for me, by sheer virtue of films like La Roue and Napoleon often getting discussed less as sheer entertainment, and more the stuff of the most elite silent film theory.

My god, was I wrong...! La dixieme symphonie is everything I want in a silent film: the highest melodrama, full of waving pistols, dying exquisitely on animal skins, women with torn gowns and flared eyes (Emmy Lynn!!!!!!!!), parrots…

Abel Gance is most known for making some of the most ambitious French silent movies, but he also made several more standard dramatic affairs. Before his legendary J'accuse! (1919), La roue (1923) & Napoléon (1927), he made movies such as this. The Tenth Symphony, a drama about a girl getting caught up with some less then good people having to resort to killing. She gets away with it by paying off her lover, but he comes back to haunt her for more money when she finds a new love.

The main problem for me was the narrative. Too complicated for such a over-excessive melodrama. While this kind of artistic expression worked real well in his major films, it makes it hard…