The 12th annual Jordan Brand Classic, the nation’s premier high school all-star game, will be in Brooklyn, the birthplace of Michael Jordan, on April 13, 2013 at Barclays Center. The game had previously been held in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Tickets to see the world’s top high school basketball players go on sale January 11 at 10 a.m.

BROOKLYN, NY – The 12th annual Jordan Brand Classic, the nation’s premier high school all-star game, will be held in Brooklyn, the birthplace of Michael Jordan, on April 13, 2013 at Barclays Center. The game had previously been held in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Tickets for the Jordan Brand Classic will go on sale Friday, January 11 at 10 a.m. through Ticketmaster by visiting www.barclayscenter.com or www.ticketmaster.com, calling 800-745-3000, or by visiting the American Express Box Office at Barclays Center starting January 12th.

With hopes of following similar footsteps of Jordan Brand Classic alumni and Jordan Brand ambassadors such as Chris Paul, Carmelo Anthony and recently signed Blake Griffin, the next generation of superstar talent will take the floor in a nationally-televised game on ESPN2 live at Barclays Center.

Jordan Brand, a division of NIKE, Inc., will announce the rosters in early February, which will feature multiple members of ESPNU’s Top 100 players.

Along with the National game, the 2013 Jordan Brand Classic will also include a Regional Game, showcasing the top prep players from the New York metropolitan area in a City vs. Suburbs showdown, and the sixth annual International Game featuring the top 16-and-under players from around the world.

“After spending two great years at Charlotte’s Time Warner Cable Arena, we decided to bring the Jordan Brand Classic to Brooklyn at Barclays Center,” said Larry Miller, President of Jordan Brand. “We are extremely excited to host this incredible talent in a borough famous for high school basketball.”

“Brooklyn has been the home of many of the greatest-ever high school basketball players in the country, so it’s only fitting for Barclays Center to host the nation’s best high school all-star game,” Barclays Center CEO Brett Yormark said. “We are proud to welcome the Jordan Brand Classic to Brooklyn and look forward to watching the future stars of the sport.”

For more information, follow the JBC on Twitter @JordanClassic.

About Jordan Brand:

Jordan Brand, a division of NIKE, Inc., is a premium brand of athletic footwear, apparel and accessories inspired by the dynamic legacy, vision and direct involvement of Michael Jordan. The brand made its debut in 1997 and has grown into a complete collection of sport performance and lifestyle product. The Jordan Brand remains active in the community through its new corporate responsibility program WINGS for the Future, focusing on three unique community programs emphasizing Education, Sport and Creativity. For more information on Jordan Brand, visit www.Jumpman23.com.

Jordan Brand Classic Locations:

2013 – Barclays Center (Brooklyn, NY)

2012 – Time Warner Cable Arena (Charlotte, North Carolina)

2011 – Time Warner Cable Arena (Charlotte, North Carolina)

2010 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2009 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2008 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2007 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2006 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2005 – Madison Square Garden (New York City)

2004 – Comcast Center (College Park, Maryland)

2003 – Verizon Center (Washington, DC)

2002 – Verizon Center (Washington, DC)

About Barclays Center:

Barclays Center opened on September 28, 2012, and is a major sports and entertainment venue in the heart of Brooklyn, New York. Developed by Brooklyn-based real estate developer Forest City Ratner Companies, and designed by the award-winning architectural firms AECOM (www.aecom.com/architecture) and SHoP Architects (www.shoparc.com), Barclays Center has one of the most intimate seating configurations ever designed into a modern multi-purpose arena, with unparalleled sightlines and first-class amenities. Barclays Center offers approximately 17,732 seats for basketball, 14,500 seats for hockey and up to 19,000 seats for concerts, and has 101 luxury suites, four bars/lounges, four clubs, and 40/40 CLUB & Restaurant by American Express.

Barclays Center is hosting an extensive variety of events, including premier concerts, monthly major professional boxing cards, top college basketball, family shows, the Brooklyn Nets, and soon the New York Islanders.

Located atop one of the largest transportation hubs in New York City, Barclays Center is accessible by 11 subway lines, the Long Island Rail Road, and 11 bus lines.

For more information on Barclays Center, please visit www.barclayscenter.com