Moscow is the capital of Russia and the Moscow Kremlin is currently the working place of the Russian President and is also home to prolific structures in Moscow. Further, Moscow is a prominent political, cultural, economic, and scientific city in Russia and Eastern Europe. Russia’s capital has consistently ranked ninth amongst the most expensive cities globally. There are many reasons for the popularity of Moscow, including being the fastest-growing destination for tourism and the northernmost coldest megacity on the globe.

As Moscow is one of the oldest civilizations and has witnessed many historical events, it is crucial in the country. We cannot explain the beauty Moscow introduces us to with its architecture and historical sites. Some popular Moscow places include the Kremlin Palace, Red Square, and Arbat Street.

History of Moscow

In the 15th Century, after the conquest of Constantinople in 1453, the Russian Orthodox Church increased its activity. Due to industrialization, in the 1900s, the population of Moscow increased to one million. In 1917, the Moscow revolution took place, and there were more than 1000 deaths. At this time, Moscow was shifted to the capital city, thus experiencing an increase in population due to industrialization. Russians won over Nazi forces with the help of the early winter, saving Moscow from being invaded again. However, numerous bloody events took place during the end of communalism, but Moscow suffered much less than the Soviet Union.

Origin of Moscow

After the collapse of the Byzantine Empire, the center of the Orthodox Church shifted to Moscow and was named the Third Rome. Moscow played a vital role in the history of Russia. Since the foundation of Russia, there have been two capital cities of Russia named Moscow and Petersburg. Petersburg was the capital of Russia before Moscow, from the onset of the 18th Century.

Earlier, Moscow was the capital of the Soviet Union, but it shifted as the capital of modern Russia due to its new elite and unique atmosphere. The name of Moscow was first recorded by Prince York Dolgoruky, who had control over this specific region in 1147. However, later in the 13th century, Moscow was invaded by Mongols and thus became a power. After 200 years, the city was again invaded by Ivan III, and Russia was under his control.

Interesting Facts About Moscow

There are numerous interesting facts about the capital of Russia, Moscow.

The population of Moscow is approximately 12.47 million, per the estimates given by Moscow, spread over an area of 2,511 square kilometers.

Moscow is considered the least affected city by the cold Russian climate and is influenced by the Temperate continental climate.

Some rare things visible in Moscow include intense frost and destructive temperatures. Further, January is the coldest month with an average of -7.5 degrees, and July is the hottest month with 18 degrees.

The Moscow subway’s grand prize winner in international exhibitions displays its unique history and architecture.

The International Centre for Performing Arts, Moscow, is a reason for the revolution in classical music performance.

One of the prominent reasons for the popularity of Moscow is the Russian Salad featuring flavors of the Russian cuisine well-known as Solyanka.