Italian director/filmmaker Marco Ferreri (1928-1997), is widely cited as "satirical", "surreal", and "outrageous" in his portrayal of society in his films. His body of work, though not exported to America the way Fellini or Bertolucci were, is just as resonant and worthy of analysis. Enter the Marco Ferreri Collection, an 8-disc boxed set containing his greatest hits ("La Grande Bouffe." "Don't Touch the White Woman"), earlier works ("El Cochecito") and not-previously-released to DVD titles ("The Seed of Man"). The set's liner notes trumpet Ferreri as "one of Italy's most prolific, most varied, and perhaps most perplexing film directors of the past fifty years." Were they being sincere or simply sycophantic?

Ferreri's visual style is European art-house: minimal manipulation with well-conceived sets and decorum. His narrative style preceded, and possibly influenced more contemporary, literary-minded filmmakers like Jim Jarmusch, where nothing is ever fully explained and perceived "symbols" may or may not have any meaning ascribed to them. Ferreri's legacy is certainly buoyed by the renowned actors who collaborated on his projects: Marcello Mastroianni (Fellini's consummate leading man), Catherine Deneuve, Roberto Benigni, Ben "Jackie Treehorn" Garazza, Gerard Depardieu, etc. Ferreri adapted a Bukowski novel, "Erections, Ejaculations, Exhibitions and General Tales" into the film "Tales of Ordinary Madness; he transplanted the story of Custer's last stand and relocated it to (then) modern day Paris in "Don't Touch The White Woman."

Viewed as his most widely-known work, "La Grand Bouffe" ("The Grand Buffett") stars Marcello Mastroianni and three other men who shun their societal lives and decide to hole up in a ostentatious mansion in the woods where they plan on gluttoning themselves to death on food. Ferreri's trick here was to not actually explain the plan until well over an hour in. At first it just runs as four gourmands stuffing themselves. But it works because there is a certain energy in the way Ferreri arranges shots and keeps the cuts brisk and and the dialogue flowing -- even when it's tangential. Without holding your hand, Ferreri allows you to decide whether or not an image or event is important or superficial. Quite the antithesis to modern American cinema. One can't help but wonder if an American filmmaker would ever receive funding for like-minded projects, but alas, most auteurs like Jarmusch and even Terry Gilliam seek support outside of the U.S.

Fererri's foray into post-Apocalyptic life, "The Seed of Man" is so sparse that you may find yourself wondering if you've missed something watching it. You haven't. The film intentionally tests your patience, but if you trudge through it you'll see some exceptionally beautiful yet esoteric images. "Seeking Asylum" stars Roberto Benigni as an unorthodox school-teacher, is Ferreri's "family film."