Marco Ferreri (11 May 1928 – 9 May 1997) was an Italian film director, screenwriter and actor, who began his career in the 1950s directing three films in Spain, followed by 24 Italian films before his death in 1997. He is considered one of the greatest European cinematic provocateurs of his time and had a constant presence in prestigious festival circuit - including eight films in competition in Cannes Film Festival and a Golden Bear win in 1991 Berlin Film Festival. Three of his films are among 100 films selected for preservation for significant contribution to Italian cinema.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Marco Ferreri has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Strong, Perseverent, Idealistic, Independent, Optimistic, Easygoing, and Intense.

Strong and Diligent

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Marco Ferreri is someone who is a strong, diligent, and trustworthy person who approaches life with honesty and perseverance, but who is also physical, sensual, and artistic. A person who is known for being a good partner.

Charming and Sophisticated

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Marco Ferreri well know them as someone who can be classy, glamorous, and worldly, like jewelry.

Courteous and Easygoing

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Marco Ferreri as someone who is polite, modest, and diplomatic.

A person who tends to be socially popular, who loves intellectual or creative activities, who has a talent for communicating with and understanding the needs of others, and who seems to have a knack for getting recognized for their efforts.

Perceptive and Visionary

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Marco Ferreri is someone who has a natural awareness about what is going on in the surrounding environment and the world at large, and a refined vision of how to navigate it.

They are also someone who is altruistic, tolerant, and sophisticated, and who tends to be a perfectionist who is always working to try and make everything and everyone better.

Patient and Compassionate

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Marco Ferreri tends to be someone who approaches life with grace and compassion, and who has a powerful and commanding personality. Who can be analytical, patient, and deliberate, avoiding risks and seeking out stability instead.

Some of Marco Ferreri's challenges

While Marco Ferreri has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Marco Ferreri can be Stubborn, Idle, Rebellious, Emotionally Distant, Complicated, Brusque, and Indecisive.

Stubborn and Idle

One of Marco Ferreri's key challenges is that they are someone who can be seen as stubborn and, at times, lazy.

Indecisive and Materialistic

Marco Ferreri is someone who can be indecisive, indulgent, and materialistic, who can have difficulty focusing on a single career or profession, have difficulty following orders or respecting authority, and who can suffer from "analysis paralysis".

Materialistic and Aggressive

Finally, Marco Ferreri also can be materialistic, emotional, aggressive, stubborn, inconsistent, and be prone to big temper outbursts.