whore - Europe - literature - erotic fiction - literary genre - Pietro Aretino - pornography

Titles: La Puttana Errante (c.1650-1660)- The School of Venus (1655) - A Dialogue Between a Married Lady and a Maid (1659) - Venus in the Cloister (1683)

Definition

"Whore dialogues" were a literary genre during the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. Examples include the Ragionamenti by Pietro Aretino, The School of Venus (1680), Venus in the Cloister (1683), and A Dialogue Between a Married Lady and a Maid (1659). These are dramatic conversations between an older, experienced woman and a younger, inexperienced maid. They combine sex education, medical folklore, and erotic literature in a proto-pornographic form. --http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whore_dialogues [Jan 2006]

When Flesh Becomes Word: An Anthology of Early Eighteenth-Century Libertine Literature (2004) - Bradford K. Mudge

When Flesh Becomes Word: An Anthology of Early Eighteenth-Century Libertine Literature (2004) - Bradford K. Mudge [Amazon.com] [FR] [DE] [UK]

Book Description

When Flesh Becomes Word collects nine different examples of British libertine literature that appeared before 1750. Three of these--The School of Venus (1680), Venus in the Cloister (1725), and A Dialogue Between a Married Lady and a Maid (1740)--are famous "whore dialogues," dramatic conversations between an older, experienced woman and a younger, inexperienced maid. Previously unavailable to the modern reader, these dialogues combine sex education, medical folklore, and erotic literature in a decidedly proto-pornographic form. This edition also presents a range of other examples of libertine literature, including bawdy poetry, a salacious medical treatise, an irreverent travelogue, and a criminal biography. The combination of both popular and influential texts presented in this edition provides an accessible introduction to the variety of material available to eighteenth-century readers before the publication of John Cleland's Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure in 1749.

Reviews

"Bradford K Mudge's The Whore's Story is an important contribution to this project...a welcome addition to the literature on gender and sexuality in the period...with its thorough discussion of both familiar and obscure primary texts and its engaging readable style..."--ECCB

"The Whore's Story thus offers a new answer to the question of how writing that today is called the novel, and it sexuality as active agents-they became its subject....In spite of the large amount of literature already existing on the subject, Mudge finds new and striking examples."--Eighteenth-Century Studies

"The Whore's Story's most valuable contribution is in widening our understanding of eighteenth-century literary are diminished from view when we privilege one set of authors, or literary techniques, over another....In the early twenty-first century we have accepted the separation of literature from pornography as 'natural.' The Whore's Story asks us to rethink this assumption and provides a provocative literary history in which to understand pornography and literature as mutually dependent, mutually generative."--The Worldsworth Circle

"Makes an important contribution to the understanding of the genesis and historical development of pornography in 18th- and 19th-century England. The author makes the bold, yet fully persuasive, claim that women, as both literary producers and consumers, played a crucial role not only in the rise of the novel...but also in the ascendancy of pornography.... Wonderfully researched and beautifully written, this book will appeal to both students doing upper-division undergraduate work and scholars who desire a more complete picture of the development of the British novel and its early cultural context."--Choice

"A persuasively argued scholarly monograph and a good read.... Bradford Mudge's Monograph is an important study that will change our understanding of the evolution of erotic fiction."--Eighteenth Century Fiction

--http://www.oup.com/us/catalog/general/subject/LiteratureEnglish/BritishLiterature/18thC/?view=usa&ci=0195135059 [Nov 2005]

See also: libertine - 1700s

The Whore's Story: Women, Pornography, and the British Novel, 1684-1830 (Ideologies of Desire) (2000) - Bradford Keyes Mudge

The Whore's Story: Women, Pornography, and the British Novel, 1684-1830 (Ideologies of Desire) (2000) - Bradford Keyes Mudge [Amazon.com] [FR] [DE] [UK]

Book Description

This fresh and persuasively argued book examines the origins of pornography in Britain and presents a comprehensive overview of women's role in the evolution of obscene fiction. Carefully monitoring the complex interconnections between three related debates--that over the masquerade, that over the novel, and that over prostitution--Mudge contextualizes the growing literary need to separate good fiction from bad and argues that that process was of crucial importance to the emergence of a new, middle-class state. Looking closely at sermons, medical manuals, periodical essays, and political tracts as well as poetry, novels, and literary criticism, The Whore's Story tracks the shifting politics of pleasure in eighteenth-century Britain and charts the rise of modern, pornographic sensibilities.