The home appliance industry witnessed significant growth and transformation in recent years, driven by factors such as technological advancements, shifting consumer preferences and economic dynamics. In 2022, the global household appliance market surged to over $680 billion in sales, with the U.S. emerging as the largest market valued at about $58.5 billion. Haier Smart Home, a Chinese company, led the global earnings chart, amassing $35 billion in revenue. Experts project the entire worldwide market to grow beyond $900 billion by 2028, especially as smart home appliances grow in demand and popularity.

Key insights

In 2022, the worldwide household appliance market was valued at over $680 billion.

Jump to insight

The U.S. is the largest household appliance market in the world, with an over $58 billion market size in 2022.

Jump to insight

Haier Smart Home, a Chinese household appliance company, earned the most among this sector of companies at around $35 billion in 2022.

Jump to insight

The household appliance market is expected to exceed $900 billion by 2028.

Jump to insight

California has the highest number of household appliance manufacturing businesses (59).

Jump to insight

Household appliance industry market and manufacturing data

Between 2024 and 2028, the value of the U.S. household appliances market is projected to increase by 12.81% to just under $70 billion.

Globally, the market is valued at approximately $680 billion in 2022 and is projected to reach over $900 billion by 2028.

In 2023, the major household appliance manufacturing industry in the U.S. reached a market size of $26.3 billion. This market has grown, on average, by about 2.3% per year since 2018, increasing even faster than the overall U.S. economy.

The largest segment of the household appliances market is major appliances, which includes refrigerators, dishwashers and washing machines.

Top home appliance manufacturers

Six major manufacturers of home appliances around the world earned an excess of $10 billion in 2022. Haier Smart Home, a Chinese company, outearned all of the others with approximately $35 billion in revenue.

The top home appliance manufacturers are:

Haier Smart Home

LG, Whirlpool

Midea

BSH Home Appliances

Electrolux

Many top home appliance makers are located in Europe (BSH Home Appliances: Germany, Electrolux: Sweden) and Asia (Midea and Haier Smart Home: China, LG: South Korea). The concentration of major industry players in these regions highlights their strength in the competitive global home appliance market. In the U.S., the top four companies in the industry are expected to hold 32% of the nation’s market's revenue in 2024.

Factors like established brands, manufacturing scale and proximity to growing consumer markets help explain the dominance of companies headquartered in these areas. Some European companies have over a century of history and strong brand recognition globally — for example, German manufacturer Miele was founded in 1899 and over 120 years later, continues to be a high-performing and trusted brand.

Global buying trends and industry overview

There are two major home and household appliances market segments.

Major appliances include refrigerators and freezers, stoves and ovens, cookers, dishwashers, and clothes washers and dryers.

Small appliances consist of coffee makers, food processors and blenders, microwaves, and vacuum cleaners, to name a few.

Compared to the rest of the world, the U.S. is the largest household appliances market. The total household appliances market in the United States reached a market revenue of over $58 billion in 2022. Major appliances made up over half of this revenue, at about $30 billion.

Buying trends in household appliances can vary globally based on accessibility, culture and many other factors. A 2023 Global Consumer Survey by Statista found that over 90% of households in the U.S., UK, Russia, Italy, Turkey and Spain own cookers or ovens. Meanwhile, less than half of households in South Korea own cookers/ovens.

The survey also found that more than three-quarters of households in Austria, Germany, France, Sweden and Spain own a coffee machine, but only 27% do so in South Africa.

U.S. buying and ownership trends

U.S. households spent an average of $463 on major household appliances in 2021, up from $214 in 2013. For small appliances and other housewares, the average spending has been at or over $100 since at least 2013, reaching $143 in 2021.

When asked which household appliances their household owns, the top two answers given by U.S. consumers were microwaves and refrigerators. Other commonly owned appliances included vacuums, cookers or ovens and washing machines, with an approximately 70% rate of household ownership. Small appliances, such as toasters, food processors, juicers and coffee machines, showed ownership rates over 60%.

The smart appliances segment is rapidly expanding, with almost 17 million U.S. users in 2023. About 13% of U.S. households own a smart appliance. This is expected to develop into a larger segment with increasing shipments and the general increase in the presence of smart home devices in consumers’ homes.

U.S. home appliance imports and exports

Over a million home appliances are shipped in the U.S. every year. The U.S. is wholly a consumers’ market for home appliances — imports have grown almost 75% in the last decade, and the value of imports is north of seven times higher than the value of exports.

In 2022, the U.S. imported nearly $41.7 billion worth of household appliances, up over $1 billion from the previous year, and this growth has been relatively steady.

Household appliance exports from the U.S. reached a record $7.5 billion in 2022, showing positive recovery after a decline in exports during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Household appliance retail market size

In 2022, consumers around the world spent about $440 billion on major appliances, with nearly 900 million units shipped every year. More than 4.5 billion units worth of household appliances were sold around the world in 2023, as were 3.75 billion units of small appliances.

The highest revenue-generating items in the household appliances industry are major kitchen appliances, small household appliances and major laundry appliances.

Currently, the U.S. household appliance store industry employs nearly 80,000 people across more than 13,000 businesses.

In the U.S., 2022 home appliance store sales came to about $20.6 billion but fell a little short compared to 2021's record-setting $21 billion.

In the last five years, competition from big appliance retailers caused aggressive discounting, restricting profit. E-commerce also negatively affected the industry's growth, as many consumers took pandemic-related safety measures and purchased online.

Impact of COVID-19 on the home appliance market

At the start of the COVID-19 health crisis, manufacturers reduced production to match the diminishing demand for appliances, but due to the social distancing measures taken during the pandemic, many people stayed home and took on home improvement projects. The work-from-home setup further helped increase the demand for small home appliances. There was also a high demand for new homes, causing a boost in residential construction.

These factors contributed to a spike in the demand for home appliances. However, the reduced home appliance production lessened the available supply in the market and caused longer lead times and price increases. In 2024, there are still supply chain issues going on, so the demand for home appliances remains high.

Household appliances industry comparison by state

In 2021, there were a reported 350 household appliances industries in the U.S. accounting for a total of nearly $23 billion in retail sales.

California boasts the highest number of household appliance manufacturing sites at 59, followed by Texas (32) and Tennessee (22).

The future of the home appliance industry

The value of the household appliance market is expected to exceed $900 billion over the next four years. The demand for home appliances will continue to grow as unemployment rates drop and homeowners gain more disposable income for their home improvement projects. E-commerce and residential construction will also drive the household appliances market.

Small household appliances are expected to exceed a revenue of $250 billion steadily over the next several years. A record $305.04 billion in small appliances is expected to be sold by 2028.

The global presence of smart home devices in households is expected to increase to roughly 29% by 2027, with washing machines, refrigerators and air conditioning units expected to become the primary appliances sold in the smart appliances market.

FAQ

How much do U.S. consumers spend on household appliances?

U.S. households spent an average of $463 on major household appliances and $143 on small appliances in 2021.

What are major appliances?

Major appliances include refrigerators and freezers, stoves and ovens, cookers, dishwashers, and clothes washers and dryers.

What are small appliances?

Small appliances consist of products such as coffee makers, food processors and blenders, microwaves, and vacuum cleaners.

What types of household appliances do most people have?

In U.S. households, the most popular home appliances are microwaves, refrigerators, vacuums, cookers or ovens and washing machines.