This page is similar in name or subject to other pages.

See also Village of the Damned film series for a complete list of references to clarify differences between these closely named or closely related articles.

Village of the Damned Credits Title: Village of the Damned Genres: Horror Directed by: John Carpenter Written by: David Himmelstein Produced by: Andre Blay; David Chackler; Sean Daniel; Shep Gordon; James Jacks; Sandy King; Michael Preger; Ted Vernon Music by: John Carpenter; Dave Davies Cinematography: Gary B. Kibbe Edited by: Edward A. Warschilka Production Distributed by: Universal Pictures

Alphaville Films Released: April 28th, 1995 Rating: R Running time: 99 min. Country: USA Language: English Budget: $22,000,000 Gross: $9,417,567 (US) Navigation Previous: — Next: —

Village of the Damned is an American horror film of the science fiction subgenre. It is a remake of the 1960 British film Village of the Damned by Wolf Rilla, which in turn was based on the 1957 novel The Midwich Cuckoos by John Wyndham. The remake is directed by John Carpenter, who is best known for helming films such as Halloween, The Fog and the 1982 remake of The Thing. The screenplay was written by David Himmelstein and the film was produced by Universal Pictures and Alphaville Films. It premiered theatrically in the United States on April 28th, 1995. The film stars Christopher Reeve, Kirstie Alley, Linda Kozlowski, Michael Pare, Meredith Salenger and Mark Hamill.

Cast[]

Actor Role Christopher Reeve Doctor Alan Chaffee Kirstie Alley Doctor Susna Verner Linda Kozlowski Jill McGowan Michael Paré Frank McGowan Meredith Salenger Melanie Roberts Mark Hamill Reverend George Pippa Pearthree Sarah, George's wife Peter Jason Ben Blum Constance Forslund Callie Blum Karen Kahn Barbara Chaffee Thomas Dekker David McGowan Lindsey Haun Mara Cheffee Cody Dorkin Robert Trishalee Hardy Julie Jessye Quarry Dorothy Adam Robbins Issac Chelsea DeRidder Simms Matt Renee Rene Simms Casey Danielle Wiener Lily Hillary Harvey Mara, 1 year Jennifer Wilheim Mara/David, 4 months George "Buck" Flower Carlton

Notes[]

Village of the Damned was released to home video in VHS format by Universal Studios on April 30th, 1996. It was released on DVD by Universal on June 1st, 2010. The film has also been included on the John Carpenter: Master of Fear DVD collection along with The Thing, Prince of Darkness and They Live.

The setting of the film is Midwich, California. The name is taken from the original John Wyndham story The Midwich Cuckoos, which actually takes place in England. The 1960 film preserves the English setting.

Actor Christopher Reeve is best known for playing the role of caped superhero Superman in the Superman film series of the 1970s and 80s. Village of the Damned is Reeves' final role before becoming a quadriplegic after being thrown from a horse during an equestrian competition on May 27th, 1995. Reeve passed away nine years later on October 10th, 2004 due to complications from a sepsis.

Village of the Damned is the first horror film work for actor Thomas Dekker. While this may be his first horror movie remake, it won't be his last. He will go on to play Jesse Braun in the 2010 remake of A Nightmare on Elm Street.

Actor Mark Hamill is best known for portrayal of Luke Skywalker in the Star Wars film series. He has since gone on to become a successful voice actor as well.

Recommendations[]

Assault on Precinct 13

Big Trouble in Little China

Christine

Escape from New York

Fog, The

Halloween

[]

Village of the Damned at Wikipedia