893 relations: A. J. Cronin, Aaahh!!! Real Monsters, Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi, Abnormal psychology, Abortion in the United States, Abracadabra, Abraham Pineo Gesner, Academia Operosorum Labacensium, Academic degree, Acne, Active transport, Acute bronchitis, AD 90, Addison's disease, Advanced cardiac life support, Aetna, Agnodice, Aimé Bonpland, Aix-les-Bains, Al-Karak, Al-Kindi, Al-Zahrawi, Albert Abrams, Albert Schweitzer, Albert Seibel, Albion College, Alexander Borodin, Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov, Alfred Adler, Alois Alzheimer, Aloysius Lilius, Alpine, New Jersey, Amity, Arkansas, Ancient Egypt, Ancient Greece, Andreas Libavius, Andreas Vesalius, Andrew Murrison, Anencephaly, Anesthesiologist, Anna Komnene, Anson Jones, Antiseptic, Anton Cermak, Anton Chekhov, Antonia Novello, Aortic dissection, April 29, Archie Cochrane, Armed Forces of Armenia, ..., Arnold Kegel, Aroup Chatterjee, Arthritis, Arthur Johnston (poet), Arturo Umberto Illia, Aryeh Eldad, Asbestosis, Ascariasis, Ashland, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana, Assisted suicide, Assyrian people, Astrology, Ataxia, Attar of Nishapur, Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, B. J. Habibie, Barbara Cubin, Bard College, Barnes, London, Baruch Goldstein, Bath Abbey, Bauhin, Beast (comics), Beaumont, California, Beauty and the Beast (1987 TV series), Belle Fourche, South Dakota, Bernardo Houssay, Bert Fields, Bibb County, Georgia, Biochemist, Birth certificate, Blacklisting, Blood test, Blood type, Bob Brown, Bob Saget, Bobby F. England, Boris Yegorov, Boxing, Brain damage, Breast cancer, Bribery, British National Formulary, Bullying, Burke and Wills expedition, Byron White, Bystander effect, Caldas da Rainha, Calicut Medical Journal, Cambrai, Cannula, Cardiology, Carl Linnaeus, Carlo Goldoni, Carlo Urbani, Carolyn Bennett, Cataract, Catholic University of Leuven (1835–1968), Caul, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Cedartown, Georgia, Centerville, Utah, Cesare Lombroso, Chang Po-ya, Charge (youth), Charles F. Newcombe, Charles R. Drew, Childress, Texas, Chinese nobility, Chiropractic, Chokoloskee, Florida, Christiaan Eijkman, Christian de Duve, Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland, Chronic pain, Circle of Willis, Clube Atlético Mineiro, Cluj County, Cocaine, Coccyx, Collaboration, Combinatorics, Complete blood count, Conrad Gessner, Constantine Phipps, 2nd Baron Mulgrave, Coroner, County Monaghan, Ctesias, Current members of the United States Senate, Cyberpunk 2020, Dana Scully, Daniel Carleton Gajdusek, Daniel Rutherford Haldane, David Abercromby, David Duke, David Ho, David Macbeth Moir, David Owen, David Wolf (astronaut), Death, Declaration of Geneva, Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2004, Dentistry, Deodorant, Diabetes insipidus, Die Ärzte, Dietitian, Doc Savage, Doctor (title), Doctor of Medicine, Doctor Strange, Donoghue v Stevenson, Dr. Kildare, Dr. Mario, Dr. Nick, Drew Pinsky, Drug Enforcement Administration, Dudley, Dysphagia, Earl of Iddesleigh, Early Islamic philosophy, Eddie Rickenbacker, Edgcott, Education, Education in Finland, Edward Augustus Holyoke, Edward Jenner, Edwin McMillan, Electrochemistry, Elim Garak, Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, Emergency department, Emergency medical services, Emergency medical technician, Emergency medicine, Emergency!, Emil du Bois-Reymond, Emin Pasha, Emperor Higashiyama, Endocrinology, Enema, Erasistratus, Erich Hartmann, Ernest Lawrence, Ernie Fletcher, Ernst Gottfried Baldinger, Ernst Gräfenberg, Essential oil, Evan Harris, Expert witness, February 28, Fela Kuti, Ferid Murad, Firestar (Marvel Comics), Fluoroscopy, Food and Drug Administration, Foot, Forensic pathology, Four temperaments, Fox Terrier, François Duvalier, Francesco Redi, Francis Thompson, Francis Townsend, Franciscans, Frantz Fanon, Franz Mesmer, Friedrich Christoph Oetinger, Gabriel Naudé, Gabriele Falloppio, Galen, Galtung (noble family), Gardiner, Maine, Gaspard II de Coligny, Gastroenterology, General practitioner, General surgery, Genotype, Georg Ernst Stahl, Georg Trakl, Georg Wilhelm Steller, George Birkbeck, George Dewey, George H. Tichenor, George Miller (director), Georges Clemenceau, Gerald Edelman, Gersonides, Gillian Anderson, Girolamo Fracastoro, Glafcos Clerides, Glasgow Coma Scale, Goibniu, Gordon Campbell, Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus, Grace Chisholm Young, Grant Hill (politician), Gray's Anatomy, Great Barrington, Massachusetts, Great Plague of London, Guaiacum, Guardian angel, H.R. Pufnstuf, Hadassah medical convoy massacre, Handball, Harrison Narcotics Tax Act, Harry Hill, Hartmann Schedel, Health and social welfare in Communist Czechoslovakia, Health care, Health economics, Health system, Hearing loss, Heart, Heidelberg University, Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers, Hejaz, Hendrikje van Andel-Schipper, Henri Cazalis, Henry H. Arnold, Henry Mackenzie, Henry Morgentaler, Heraclides, Hermann von Helmholtz, Heroin, Hess's law, HFE hereditary haemochromatosis, Hindsight bias, Hippocrates, Hippocratic Oath, Hippodamus of Miletus, History of crime fiction, History of Germany, History of Iran, History of medicine, Horatio Nelson Jackson, Houghton, Michigan, Hugo Steinhaus, Human evolution, Human geography, Hypodermic needle, Hysterectomy, IANAL, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, Idiopathic hypoglycemia, Ilya Frank, Infant, Infant mortality, Infertility, Inquests in England and Wales, Intensive care medicine, International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, Invisible Woman, Ion G. Duca, Iridology, Islam and antisemitism, Isma'ilism, Isobel Barnett, Ivan Pavlov, Jack Layton, James Black (pharmacologist), James Hutton, James Mackintosh, James Tyler Kent, Jan Baptist van Helmont, Jan Swammerdam, Jane Harman, Janet G. Travell, Jastrzębie-Zdrój, Jean Barbeyrac, Jean Fernel, Jean Turner, Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire, Jean-Paul Marat, Jim McCrery, Joel Roberts Poinsett, Johan Galtung, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, Johann Friedrich Struensee, Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann, Johann Jakob Reiske, Johann Jakob Scheuchzer, Johann Joachim Becher, Johann Olav Koss, Johann Weyer, John Arbuthnot, John Bainbridge (astronomer), John Boyd Orr, John Caius, John Hall (physician), John Hamm, John Hersey, John Kidd (chemist), John Martyn (botanist), John Mudge, John Olerud, John Pringle, John Savage (politician), John Stapp, John Torrey, Johnny Belinda (1948 film), Jon Favreau, Jonathan Miller, Jorge Sampaio, José Celso Barbosa, José Gregorio Hernández, Joseph Bernardin, Joseph Kessel, Joseph Stilwell, Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, Josiah Bartlet, Josiah Bartlett, Jovan Jovanović Zmaj, Judith Steinberg Dean, Juniper, Juris Doctor, Juscelino Kubitschek, Kafiristan, Kalevala, Karōshi, Karl Brandt, Katipunan, Kemal Derviş, Kemp Mill, Maryland, Kenny Rogers, Kenya, Khat, Kidney failure, Kim Hunter, Kindergarten, Kiska, Knockout, Koch's postulates, Kowloon Walled City, Kurt Freund, Laryngoscopy, Law of war, Le Sage's theory of gravitation, Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease, Leonard Wood, Leslie Charteris, Lethal injection, Licensure, Light horse field ambulance, Limited liability company, Linux Gazette, Lisa Marie Varon, List of agnostics, List of companies named after people, List of counties in Michigan, List of deaths from drug overdose and intoxication, List of Ghanaians, List of lieutenant governors of Saskatchewan, List of people from Louisiana, List of prison deaths, List of psychiatric medications, List of Russian people, Littlefield, Texas, Livingston County, New York, Long QT syndrome, Long-term effects of alcohol consumption, Louis Pasteur, Louis-Ferdinand Céline, Louis-Jean-Marie Daubenton, Luis Barahona de Soto, Luis Federico Leloir, Lymph node, Macroscincus, Madame Tussauds, Madhava-kara, Mae Jemison, Maggot, Mahathir Mohamad, Maimonides, Malpractice, Marburg virus disease, Marcello Malpighi, March 30, Maritime transport, Mark Akenside, Marlboro (cigarette), Massage, Massillon, Ohio, Matador, Texas, Max Nordau, Maximilian Bircher-Benner, Mölndal Municipality, Mechanical ventilation, Medical cannabis, Medical fetishism, Medical license, Medical school, Medicare (Canada), Medicare (United States), Medication, Medicine, Meharry Medical College, Melampus, Metacarpal bones, Mexican Americans, Michael Servetus, Michel Eugène Chevreul, Middle class, Midwifery, Miguel, Duke of Braganza, Milford, Kansas, Milton Margai, Mind Dynamics, Minim (religious order), Mir, Modafinil, Models of deafness, Modesty, Moses Mendelssohn, Mount Kenya, Multimedia, Murk van Phelsum, Mustang Ranch, Mutagen, Myrmecology, Nachmanides, Narconon, Nathan Drake (essayist), Natural philosophy, Naturopathy, Nauru First, Neonatal heel prick, Nephrology, Neurology, Neurotoxin, Nicander, Nicolaus Copernicus, Niels Ryberg Finsen, Nitrogen narcosis, Noël Browne, Noel Godfrey Chavasse, Norman Bethune, Northallerton, Nostradamus, Obadiah ben Jacob Sforno, Occupational therapist, Officer Candidate School, Old Tom Parr, Ole Worm, Omagh bombing, Ophthalmology, Opodeldoc, Orchidometer, Order theory, Orthorexia nervosa, Osteopathic medicine in the United States, Osteopathy, Osteosarcoma, Oswego, New York, Otorhinolaryngology, Otto Fritz Meyerhof, Otto Heinrich Warburg, Outline of health sciences, Ouzo, Over-the-counter drug, Owyhee, Nevada, Oxon Hill, Maryland, Ozark, Arkansas, Pager, Pain, Pain management, Palliative care, Paramedic, Patent medicine, Pathology, Patient, Patrick Hillery, Pedanius Dioscorides, Pediatrics, Peter Gustaf Tengmalm, Peter Mark Roget, Peter Safar, Pharmacist, Pharmacy, Phelsuma, Phelsuma grandis, Philip Abelson, Philip Showalter Hench, Philipp Franz von Siebold, Physicist, Physiognomy, Pierre-Marc Johnson, Pietro d'Abano, Pistacia lentiscus, Pittston Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, Pituitary gland, Podiatrist, Poliomyelitis, Pope Boniface IV, Portrait of an American Family, Portuguese Armed Forces, Post, Texas, Prescription drug, Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll, Problem-based learning, Prospero Alpini, Psychiatric hospital, Psychiatric medication, Psychiatrist, Psychologist, Public health, Quackery, Quedlinburg, Quentin Davies, Queue area, Quintillus, Radley Metzger, Rattan, Oklahoma, Raymond Moody, Red River Rebellion, Reference range, Reflex, Regensburg, Reiki, René Laennec, Reputation, Resource-based relative value scale, Rex the Runt, Rheumatology, Rhinoplasty, Richard Mentor Johnson, Richard Taylor (British politician), Robert Fludd, Robert Koch, Robert McIntyre, Robert Thirsk, Robert Young (actor), Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Roget's Thesaurus, Role, Romanian literature, Romaniote Jews, Ronald Ross, Rostov, Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, Rudolf Virchow, Rutherford, New Jersey, Salvador Allende, Samuel Hahnemann, Samuel Musgrave, Sanger, California, Séance, Scapula, Scientific Revolution, Scientist, Scrubs (TV series), Scurvy, Search and rescue, Sedative, Self-governance, Severo Ochoa, Sextus Empiricus, Sforno (family), Shackelford County, Texas, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, Shoulder problem, Sigmoidoscopy, Sikkim, Simeon Stylites, Simon Flexner, Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1948–89), Small business, Snake oil, Sobibór extermination camp, Something's Gotta Give (film), Sonny Carter, Spanking, St. Paul's School (New Hampshire), Stafford, Connecticut, Stan Musial, Standing's day gecko, Stanisław Lem, Stargate SG-1, State Protection Authority, Stella, Missouri, Story Musgrave, Stryker Corporation, Stuart, Virginia, Sturgis, South Dakota, Sun Yat-sen, Supernatural, Symposium (Plato), Syngman Rhee, Systembolaget, T. J. Bass, Tabaré Vázquez, Tatyana Sapunova, Teacher, Telemetry, Terrella, Thābit ibn Qurra, The Adventures of Pinocchio, The Day After Tomorrow, The Majestic (film), The Proud Family, The X-Files, Theodoor Hendrik van de Velde, Theodoret, Thomas Bartholin, Thomas Bowdler, Thomas Gann, Thomas Linacre, Thomas Southwood Smith, Thomas Young (scientist), Tissue expansion, Tom Thumb, Toxic heavy metal, Toxicology, Transcription (linguistics), Triage, Trotula, Underemployment, United States abortion-rights movement, United States Public Health Service, University of Georgia, University of Jena, University of Pisa, University of Tokyo, University of Vermont, Upper class, Urology, Vasily Lazarev, Venipuncture, Vitamin, W. D. Hamilton, W. G. Grace, Waltham Township, Mower County, Minnesota, Washington Parish, Louisiana, Waterhouse–Friderichsen syndrome, Weight training, Werner Forssmann, Willem Einthoven, William Duncan Silkworth, William Hunter (anatomist), William James, William Jayne, William Snow Harris, William Turner (naturalist), William Withering, Woman, X-ray, Xiphoid process, Yaphank, New York, Yersinia pestis, Yvonne Caples, Zoidberg, 1003, 1006, 1231, 142, 1600 in science, 1602 in science, 1603 in science, 1604 in science, 1605 in science, 1606 in science, 1614 in science, 1615 in science, 1616 in science, 1617 in science, 1619 in science, 1621 in science, 1624 in science, 1625 in science, 1626 in science, 1629 in science, 1631 in science, 1632 in science, 1635 in science, 1637 in literature, 1638 in science, 1639 in science, 1641 in science, 1650 in science, 1651 in science, 1652 in science, 1654 in science, 1655 in science, 1656, 1656 in science, 1657 in science, 1658 in science, 1660 in science, 1661 in science, 1665 in science, 1667 in science, 1668 in science, 1673 in science, 1675 in science, 1677 in science, 1678 in science, 1682 in science, 1684 in science, 1689 in science, 1691 in science, 1695 in science, 1697 in science, 1700 in science, 1706 in science, 1707 in science, 1708 in science, 1710 in science, 1712 in science, 1713 in science, 1714 in science, 1715 in science, 1716 in science, 1718 in science, 1720 in science, 1725 in science, 1728 in science, 1730 in science, 1731 in science, 1734 in science, 1735 in science, 1738 in science, 1740 in science, 1741 in science, 1742 in science, 1744 in science, 1746 in science, 1749 in science, 1754 in science, 1755 in science, 1756 in science, 1757 in science, 1758 in science, 1760 in science, 1761 in science, 1767 in science, 1774 in science, 1778, 1778 in science, 1779 in science, 1780 in science, 1781 in science, 1782 in science, 1786 in science, 1787 in science, 1788 in science, 1789 in science, 1790 in science, 1792 in science, 1793 in science, 1795 in science, 1796 in science, 1797 in science, 1798 in science, 1799, 1799 in science, 1801 in science, 1808 in science, 1809 in science, 1811 in science, 1812 in science, 1813 in science, 1815 in science, 1817 in science, 1827 in science, 1828 in science, 1830 in science, 1834 in science, 1835 in science, 1836 in science, 1837 in science, 1840, 1840 in science, 1842, 1842 in science, 1843 in science, 1844 in science, 1845 in science, 1846 in science, 1849 in science, 1852 in science, 1854 in science, 1855 in science, 1858 in science, 1861, 1861 in science, 1862 in science, 1865 in science, 1866 in science, 1867 in science, 1868 in science, 1869 in science, 1871 in science, 1872 in science, 1873 in science, 1874 in science, 1878 in science, 1880 in science, 1881 in science, 1882 in science, 1887 in science, 1888 in science, 1900 in science, 1904, 1904 in science, 1905 in science, 1906 in science, 1913 in science, 1917 in science, 1918 in science, 1919 in science, 1920 in science, 1923 in science, 1927 in science, 1938 in science, 1951 in science, 1957 in science, 2000 in science, 2003 in science, 202, 24/7 service, 2nd millennium, 304 BC, 320, 361, 368, 375, 3rd millennium BC, 400, 460 BC, 460s BC, 525, 575, 5th century BC, 605, 809, 810, 826, 873, 887, 901, 940, 951. Expand index (843 more) » « Shrink index

A. J. Cronin

Archibald Joseph Cronin, MBChB, MD, DPH, MRCP (19 July 1896 – 6 January 1981) was a Scottish novelist and physician.

See Physician and A. J. Cronin

Aaahh!!! Real Monsters

Aaahh!!! Real Monsters is an American animated television series developed by Klasky Csupo for Nickelodeon.

See Physician and Aaahh!!! Real Monsters

Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi

Abdel Aziz Ali Abdul Majid al-Rantisi (عبد العزيز علي عبد المجيد الحفيظ الرنتيسي; 23 October 1947 – 17 April 2004), nicknamed the "Lion of Palestine", was the co-founder of the Palestinian movement Hamas along with Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.

See Physician and Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi

Abnormal psychology

Abnormal psychology is the branch of psychology that studies unusual patterns of behavior, emotion and thought, which may or may not be understood as precipitating a mental disorder.

See Physician and Abnormal psychology

Abortion in the United States

Abortion in the United States has been, and remains, a controversial issue in United States culture and politics.

See Physician and Abortion in the United States

Abracadabra

Abracadabra is an incantation used as a magic word in stage magic tricks, and historically was believed to have healing powers when inscribed on an amulet.

See Physician and Abracadabra

Abraham Pineo Gesner

Abraham Pineo Gesner, ONB (May 2, 1797 – April 29, 1864) was a Canadian physician and geologist who invented kerosene.

See Physician and Abraham Pineo Gesner

Academia Operosorum Labacensium

The Academia Operosorum Labacensium (Academy of the Industrious Residents of Ljubljana)—a forerunner of the modern Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts—was founded in Ljubljana in 1693 as an association of 23 scholars.

See Physician and Academia Operosorum Labacensium

Academic degree

An academic degree is a qualification awarded to students upon successful completion of a course of study in higher education, normally at a college or university.

See Physician and Academic degree

Acne

Acne, also known as acne vulgaris, is a long-term skin disease that occurs when hair follicles are clogged with dead skin cells and oil from the skin.

See Physician and Acne

Active transport

Active transport is the movement of molecules across a membrane from a region of their lower concentration to a region of their higher concentration—in the direction against the concentration gradient.

See Physician and Active transport

Acute bronchitis

Acute bronchitis, also known as a chest cold, is short-term inflammation of the bronchi (large and medium-sized airways) of the lungs.

See Physician and Acute bronchitis

AD 90

AD 90 (XC) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.

See Physician and AD 90

Addison's disease

Addison's disease, also known as primary adrenal insufficiency and hypocortisolism, is a long-term endocrine disorder in which the adrenal glands do not produce enough steroid hormones.

See Physician and Addison's disease

Advanced cardiac life support

Advanced cardiac life support or advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) refers to a set of clinical interventions for the urgent treatment of cardiac arrest, stroke and other life-threatening medical emergencies, as well as the knowledge and skills to deploy those interventions.

See Physician and Advanced cardiac life support

Aetna

Aetna Inc.

See Physician and Aetna

Agnodice

Agnodice or Agnodike (Ἀγνοδίκη, c. 4th century BCE) was supposedly the first female midwife or physician in ancient Athens.

See Physician and Agnodice

Aimé Bonpland

Aimé Jacques Alexandre Bonpland (August 1773 – May 1858) was a French explorer and botanist who traveled with Alexander von Humboldt in Latin America from 1799 to 1804.

See Physician and Aimé Bonpland

Aix-les-Bains

Aix-les-Bains (French: Èx-los-Bens, Aquae Gratianae), locally called Aix, is a commune in the Savoie department in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region in south-eastern France.

See Physician and Aix-les-Bains

Al-Karak

Al-Karak (الكرك), also known as just Karak or Kerak, is a city in Jordan known for its Crusader castle, the Kerak Castle.

See Physician and Al-Karak

Al-Kindi

Abu Yūsuf Yaʻqūb ibn ʼIsḥāq aṣ-Ṣabbāḥ al-Kindī (أبو يوسف يعقوب بن إسحاق الصبّاح الكندي; Alkindus; c. 801–873 AD) was an Arab Muslim philosopher, polymath, mathematician, physician and musician.

See Physician and Al-Kindi

Al-Zahrawi

Abū al-Qāsim Khalaf ibn al-‘Abbās al-Zahrāwī al-Ansari (أبو القاسم خلف بن العباس الزهراوي;&lrm; 936–1013), popularly known as Al-Zahrawi (الزهراوي), Latinised as Abulcasis (from Arabic Abū al-Qāsim), was an Arab Muslim physician, surgeon and chemist who lived in Al-Andalus.

See Physician and Al-Zahrawi

Albert Abrams

Albert Abrams (December 8, 1863 – January 13, 1924) was an American physician, well known during his life for inventing machines, such as the "Oscilloclast" and the "Radioclast", which he falsely claimed could diagnose and cure almost any disease.

See Physician and Albert Abrams

Albert Schweitzer

Albert Schweitzer, OM (14 January 1875 – 4 September 1965) was a French-German theologian, organist, writer, humanitarian, philosopher, and physician.

See Physician and Albert Schweitzer

Albert Seibel

Albert Seibel (1844–1936) was a French physician and viticulturist who made hybrid crosses of European wine grapes (Vitis vinifera) with native North American grapes.

See Physician and Albert Seibel

Albion College

Albion College is a private liberal arts college located in Albion, Michigan.

See Physician and Albion College

Alexander Borodin

Alexander Porfiryevich Borodin (a; 12 November 183327 February 1887) was a Russian Romantic composer of Georgian-Russian origin, as well as a doctor and chemist.

See Physician and Alexander Borodin

Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov

Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov (Алексе́й Алексе́евич Абрико́сов; 25 June 1928 – 29 March 2017) was a Soviet, Russian and AmericanAlexei A. Abrikosov.

See Physician and Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov

Alfred Adler

Alfred W. Adler(7 February 1870 – 28 May 1937) was an Austrian medical doctor, psychotherapist, and founder of the school of individual psychology.

See Physician and Alfred Adler

Alois Alzheimer

Aloysius Alzheimer (also known as Alois Alzheimer;;; 14 June 1864 – 19 December 1915) was a German psychiatrist and neuropathologist and a colleague of Emil Kraepelin.

See Physician and Alois Alzheimer

Aloysius Lilius

Aloysius Lilius (c. 1510 &ndash; 1576), also variously referred to as Luigi Lilio, Luigi Giglio, was an Italian doctor, astronomer, philosopher and chronologist, and also the "primary author" who provided the proposal that (after modifications) became the basis of the Gregorian Calendar reform of 1582.

See Physician and Aloysius Lilius

Alpine, New Jersey

Alpine is a borough in Bergen County, New Jersey, United States.

See Physician and Alpine, New Jersey

Amity, Arkansas

Amity is a city in Clark County, Arkansas, United States.

See Physician and Amity, Arkansas

Ancient Egypt

Ancient Egypt was a civilization of ancient Northeastern Africa, concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River - geographically Lower Egypt and Upper Egypt, in the place that is now occupied by the countries of Egypt and Sudan.

See Physician and Ancient Egypt

Ancient Greece

Ancient Greece was a civilization belonging to a period of Greek history from the Greek Dark Ages of the 13th–9th centuries BC to the end of antiquity (AD 600).

See Physician and Ancient Greece

Andreas Libavius

Andreas Libavius or Andrew Libavius (c. 1555 &ndash; 25 July 1616) was a German physician and chemist.

See Physician and Andreas Libavius

Andreas Vesalius

Andreas Vesalius (31 December 1514 – 15 October 1564) was a 16th-century Flemish anatomist, physician, and author of one of the most influential books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica (On the Fabric of the Human Body).

See Physician and Andreas Vesalius

Andrew Murrison

Andrew William Murrison (born 24 April 1961, Colchester) is a British doctor, naval officer and politician.

See Physician and Andrew Murrison

Anencephaly

Anencephaly is the absence of a major portion of the brain, skull, and scalp that occurs during embryonic development.

See Physician and Anencephaly

Anesthesiologist

An anesthesiologist is a physician trained in anesthesia and perioperative medicine.

See Physician and Anesthesiologist

Anna Komnene

Anna Komnene (Ἄννα Κομνηνή, Ánna Komnēnḗ; 1 December 1083 – 1153), commonly latinized as Anna Comnena, was a Byzantine princess, scholar, physician, hospital administrator, and historian.

See Physician and Anna Komnene

Anson Jones

Anson Jones (January 20, 1798 – January 9, 1858) was a doctor, businessperson, member of Congress, and the fourth and last President of the Republic of Texas, sometimes called the "Architect of Annexation".

See Physician and Anson Jones

Antiseptic

Antiseptics (from Greek ἀντί anti, "against" and σηπτικός sēptikos, "putrefactive") are antimicrobial substances that are applied to living tissue/skin to reduce the possibility of infection, sepsis, or putrefaction.

See Physician and Antiseptic

Anton Cermak

Anton Joseph Cermak (Antonín Josef Čermák,; May 9, 1873 – March 6, 1933) was an American politician who served as the 34th mayor of Chicago, Illinois from April 7, 1931 until his death on March 6, 1933 from complications of an assassination attempt 23 days earlier.

See Physician and Anton Cermak

Anton Chekhov

Anton Pavlovich Chekhov (ɐnˈton ˈpavɫəvʲɪtɕ ˈtɕɛxəf; 29 January 1860 – 15 July 1904) was a Russian playwright and short-story writer, who is considered to be among the greatest writers of short fiction in history.

See Physician and Anton Chekhov

Antonia Novello

Antonia Coello Novello, M.D., (born August 23, 1944) is a Puerto Rican physician and public health administrator.

See Physician and Antonia Novello

Aortic dissection

Aortic dissection (AD) occurs when an injury to the innermost layer of the aorta allows blood to flow between the layers of the aortic wall, forcing the layers apart.

See Physician and Aortic dissection

April 29

No description.

See Physician and April 29

Archie Cochrane

Archibald Leman Cochrane CBE (12 January 1909 – 18 June 1988) was a Scottish doctor noted for his book Effectiveness and Efficiency: Random Reflections on Health Services.

See Physician and Archie Cochrane

Armed Forces of Armenia

The Armed Forces of Armenia (Հայաստանի Հանրապետության զինված ուժեր) comprise two services: the Army, and the Air Force and Air Defense (a unified branch).

See Physician and Armed Forces of Armenia

Arnold Kegel

Arnold Henry Kegel (born February 1894; death date variously reported as 1972; March 1, 1972; and 1976) was an American gynecologist who invented the Kegel perineometer (an instrument for measuring the strength of voluntary contractions of the pelvic floor muscles) and Kegel exercises (squeezing of the muscles of the pelvic floor) as non-surgical treatment of genital relaxation.

See Physician and Arnold Kegel

Aroup Chatterjee

Aroup Chatterjee (born 23 June 1958) is a British Indian author and physician.

See Physician and Aroup Chatterjee

Arthritis

Arthritis is a term often used to mean any disorder that affects joints.

See Physician and Arthritis

Arthur Johnston (poet)

Arthur Johnston (c.1579&ndash;1641) was a Scottish poet and physician.

See Physician and Arthur Johnston (poet)

Arturo Umberto Illia

Arturo Umberto Illia Francesconi (August 4, 1900 – January 18, 1983) was an Argentine politician and physician, who was President of Argentina from 12 October 1963, to 28 June 1966.

See Physician and Arturo Umberto Illia

Aryeh Eldad

Aryeh Eldad, M.D. (אריה אלדד, born 1 May 1950) is an Israeli physician and politician, and a former member of the Knesset for the National Union and Otzma LeYisrael.

See Physician and Aryeh Eldad

Asbestosis

Asbestosis is long term inflammation and scarring of the lungs due to asbestos.

See Physician and Asbestosis

Ascariasis

Ascariasis is a disease caused by the parasitic roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides.

See Physician and Ascariasis

Ashland, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana

Ashland is a village in the northernmost portion of Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana, United States.

See Physician and Ashland, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana

Assisted suicide

Assisted suicide is suicide committed with the aid of another person, sometimes a physician.

See Physician and Assisted suicide

Assyrian people

Assyrian people (ܐܫܘܪܝܐ), or Syriacs (see terms for Syriac Christians), are an ethnic group indigenous to the Middle East.

See Physician and Assyrian people

Astrology

Astrology is the study of the movements and relative positions of celestial objects as a means for divining information about human affairs and terrestrial events.

See Physician and Astrology

Ataxia

Ataxia is a neurological sign consisting of lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movements that includes gait abnormality.

See Physician and Ataxia

Attar of Nishapur

Abū Ḥamīd bin Abū Bakr Ibrāhīm (c. 1145 – c. 1221; ابو حامد بن ابوبکر ابراهیم), better known by his pen-names Farīd ud-Dīn (فرید الدین) and ʿAṭṭār (عطار, Attar means apothecary), was a 12th-century PersianFarīd al-Dīn ʿAṭṭār, in Encyclopædia Britannica, online edition - accessed December 2012.

See Physician and Attar of Nishapur

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a mental disorder of the neurodevelopmental type.

See Physician and Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

B. J. Habibie

Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie (born 25 June 1936) is an Indonesian engineer who was President of Indonesia from 1998 to 1999.

See Physician and B. J. Habibie

Barbara Cubin

Barbara Lynn Cubin (born November 30, 1946) is a former Republican member of the United States House of Representatives, having served as the sole member of that body from Wyoming.

See Physician and Barbara Cubin

Bard College

Bard College is a private liberal arts college in Annandale-on-Hudson, a hamlet in New York, United States.

See Physician and Bard College

Barnes, London

Barnes is a district in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames.

See Physician and Barnes, London

Baruch Goldstein

Baruch Kopel Goldstein (ברוך קופל גולדשטיין; December 9, 1956 &ndash; February 25, 1994) was an American-Israeli physician, religious extremist, and mass murderer who perpetrated the 1994 Cave of the Patriarchs massacre in Hebron, killing 29 Palestinian Muslim worshippers and wounding another 125.

See Physician and Baruch Goldstein

Bath Abbey

The Abbey Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, Bath, commonly known as Bath Abbey, is an Anglican parish church and a former Benedictine monastery and a proto (former) Co-cathedral in Bath, Somerset, England.

See Physician and Bath Abbey

Bauhin

Bauhin &mdash; a family of physicians and scientists.

See Physician and Bauhin

Beast (comics)

Beast (Henry Philip "Hank" McCoy) is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics and is a founding member of the X-Men.

See Physician and Beast (comics)

Beaumont, California

Beaumont is a city in Riverside County, California, United States located at a half mile elevation in the pass area south of Southern California's highest peak, San Gorgonio Mountain, and north of San Jacinto Peak.

See Physician and Beaumont, California

Beauty and the Beast (1987 TV series)

Beauty and the Beast is an American fantasy-drama series which first aired on CBS in 1987.

See Physician and Beauty and the Beast (1987 TV series)

Belle Fourche, South Dakota

Belle Fourche is a city in and the county seat of Butte County, South Dakota, United States.

See Physician and Belle Fourche, South Dakota

Bernardo Houssay

Bernardo Alberto Houssay (April 10, 1887 – September 21, 1971) was an Argentine physiologist who, in 1947, received one half Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of the role played by pituitary hormones in regulating the amount of blood sugar (glucose) in animals.

See Physician and Bernardo Houssay

Bert Fields

Bertram Fields (born March 31, 1929) is an American lawyer noted for his work in the field of entertainment law.

See Physician and Bert Fields

Bibb County, Georgia

Bibb County is a county located in the U.S. state of Georgia.

See Physician and Bibb County, Georgia

Biochemist

Biochemists are scientists that are trained in biochemistry.

See Physician and Biochemist

Birth certificate

A birth certificate is a vital record that documents the birth of a child.

See Physician and Birth certificate

Blacklisting

Blacklisting is the action of a group or authority, compiling a blacklist (or black list) of people, countries or other entities to be avoided or distrusted as not being acceptable to those making the list.

See Physician and Blacklisting

Blood test

A blood test is a laboratory analysis performed on a blood sample that is usually extracted from a vein in the arm using a hypodermic needle, or via fingerprick.

See Physician and Blood test

Blood type

A blood type (also called a blood group) is a classification of blood based on the presence and absence of antibodies and also based on the presence or absence of inherited antigenic substances on the surface of red blood cells (RBCs).

See Physician and Blood type

Bob Brown

Robert James Brown (born 27 December 1944) is a former Australian politician, medical doctor, and environmentalist who is a former Senator, and former Parliamentary Leader of the Australian Greens.

See Physician and Bob Brown

Bob Saget

Robert Lane "Bob" Saget (born May 17, 1956) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, and television host.

See Physician and Bob Saget

Bobby F. England

Bobby F. (Bob) England (born May 13, 1932) was a Democratic member of the North Carolina General Assembly representing the state's one hundred twelfth House district, including constituents in Cleveland and Rutherford counties.

See Physician and Bobby F. England

Boris Yegorov

Boris Borisovich Yegorov (Борис Борисович Егоров, Boris Borisovich Egorov; November 26, 1937, Moscow – September 12, 1994, Moscow) was a Soviet physician-cosmonaut who became the first physician to make a space flight.

See Physician and Boris Yegorov

Boxing

Boxing is a combat sport in which two people, usually wearing protective gloves, throw punches at each other for a predetermined set of time in a boxing ring.

See Physician and Boxing

Brain damage

Brain damage or brain injury (BI) is the destruction or degeneration of brain cells.

See Physician and Brain damage

Breast cancer

Breast cancer is cancer that develops from breast tissue.

See Physician and Breast cancer

Bribery

Bribery is the act of giving or receiving something of value in exchange for some kind of influence or action in return, that the recipient would otherwise not alter.

See Physician and Bribery

British National Formulary

The British National Formulary (BNF) is a United Kingdom (UK) pharmaceutical reference book that contains a wide spectrum of information and advice on prescribing and pharmacology, along with specific facts and details about many medicines available on the UK National Health Service (NHS).

See Physician and British National Formulary

Bullying

Bullying is the use of force, threat, or coercion to abuse, intimidate or aggressively dominate others.

See Physician and Bullying

Burke and Wills expedition

The Burke and Wills expedition was an Australian exploration expedition in 1860–61 of 19 men, led by Robert O'Hara Burke and William John Wills, with the objective of crossing Australia from Melbourne in the south, to the Gulf of Carpentaria in the north, a distance of around 3,250 kilometres (approximately 2,000 miles).

See Physician and Burke and Wills expedition

Byron White

Byron Raymond "Whizzer" White (June 8, 1917 – April 15, 2002) was an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

See Physician and Byron White

Bystander effect

The bystander effect, or bystander apathy, is a social psychological phenomenon in which individuals are less likely to offer help to a victim when other people are present.

See Physician and Bystander effect

Caldas da Rainha

Caldas da Rainha is a medium-sized city in western central Portugal in the historical province of Estremadura and the district of Leiria.

See Physician and Caldas da Rainha

Calicut Medical Journal

The Calicut Medical Journal is an online open access medical journal published by the Calicut Medical College Alumni Association that was established in 2003.

See Physician and Calicut Medical Journal

Cambrai

Cambrai (Kimbré; Kamerijk; historically in English Camerick and Camericke) is a commune in the Nord department and in the Hauts-de-France region of France on the Scheldt river, which is known locally as the Escaut river.

See Physician and Cambrai

Cannula

A cannula (from Latin "little reed"; plural cannulae or cannulas) is a tube that can be inserted into the body, often for the delivery or removal of fluid or for the gathering of data.

See Physician and Cannula

Cardiology

Cardiology (from Greek καρδίᾱ kardiā, "heart" and -λογία -logia, "study") is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the heart as well as parts of the circulatory system.

See Physician and Cardiology

Carl Linnaeus

Carl Linnaeus (23 May 1707 – 10 January 1778), also known after his ennoblement as Carl von LinnéBlunt (2004), p. 171.

See Physician and Carl Linnaeus

Carlo Goldoni

Carlo Osvaldo Goldoni (25 February 1707 – 6 February 1793) was an Italian playwright and librettist from the Republic of Venice.

See Physician and Carlo Goldoni

Carlo Urbani

Carlo Urbani (Castelplanio, Italy October 19, 1956 – Bangkok, Thailand March 29, 2003) was an Italian doctor and microbiologist and the first to identify severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) as a new and dangerously contagious viral disease.

See Physician and Carlo Urbani

Carolyn Bennett

Carolyn Ann Bennett (born December 20, 1950) is a Canadian physician and politician.

See Physician and Carolyn Bennett

Cataract

A cataract is a clouding of the lens in the eye which leads to a decrease in vision.

See Physician and Cataract

Catholic University of Leuven (1835–1968)

The Catholic University of Leuven (of Louvain in French, and historically in English), founded as the Catholic University of Mechelen in 1834 and transferred to the town of Leuven in 1835, was considered the largest, oldest and most prominent university in Belgium.

See Physician and Catholic University of Leuven (1835–1968)

Caul

A caul or cowl (Caput galeatum, literally, "helmeted head") is a piece of membrane that can cover a newborn's head and face.

See Physician and Caul

Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

Cedars-Sinai Medical Center is a non-profit, tertiary 958-bed hospital and multi-specialty academic health science center located in the Beverly Grove neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.

See Physician and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

Cedartown, Georgia

Cedartown is a city in Polk County, Georgia, United States.

See Physician and Cedartown, Georgia

Centerville, Utah

Centerville is a city in Davis County, Utah, United States.

See Physician and Centerville, Utah

Cesare Lombroso

Cesare Lombroso (born Ezechia Marco Lombroso; 6 November 1835 – 19 October 1909), was an Italian criminologist and physician, founder of the Italian School of Positivist Criminology.

See Physician and Cesare Lombroso

Chang Po-ya

Chang Po-ya is a Taiwanese politician who is the current President of the Control Yuan and founder of the Non-Partisan Solidarity Union, a political party in Taiwan.

See Physician and Chang Po-ya

Charge (youth)

During the European Middle Ages, a charge often meant an underage person placed under the supervision of a nobleman.

See Physician and Charge (youth)

Charles F. Newcombe

Charles Frederick Newcombe (15 September 1851 – 19 October 1924) was a British botanist and ethnographic researcher.

See Physician and Charles F. Newcombe

Charles R. Drew

Charles Richard Drew (June 3, 1904 – April 1, 1950) was an American physician, surgeon, and medical researcher.

See Physician and Charles R. Drew

Childress, Texas

Childress (established 1887; incorporated 1890) is a city in Childress County, Texas, United States.

See Physician and Childress, Texas

Chinese nobility

Chinese sovereignty and peerage, the nobility of China, was an important feature of the traditional social and political organization of Imperial China.

See Physician and Chinese nobility

Chiropractic

Chiropractic is a form of alternative medicine mostly concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of mechanical disorders of the musculoskeletal system, especially the spine.

See Physician and Chiropractic

Chokoloskee, Florida

Chokoloskee is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Collier County, Florida, United States.

See Physician and Chokoloskee, Florida

Christiaan Eijkman

Christiaan Eijkman (11 August 1858 – 5 November 1930) was a Dutch physician and professor of physiology whose demonstration that beriberi is caused by poor diet led to the discovery of antineuritic vitamins (thiamine).

See Physician and Christiaan Eijkman

Christian de Duve

Christian René Marie Joseph, Viscount de Duve (2 October 1917 – 4 May 2013) was a Nobel Prize-winning Belgian cytologist and biochemist.

See Physician and Christian de Duve

Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland

Christoph Wilhelm Friedrich Hufeland (12 August 1762, Langensalza – 25 August 1836, Berlin) was a German physician.

See Physician and Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland

Chronic pain

Chronic pain is pain that lasts a long time.

See Physician and Chronic pain

Circle of Willis

The circle of Willis (also called Willis' circle, loop of Willis, cerebral arterial circle, and Willis polygon) is a circulatory anastomosis that supplies blood to the brain and surrounding structures.

See Physician and Circle of Willis

Clube Atlético Mineiro

Clube Atlético Mineiro, commonly known as Atlético Mineiro or Atlético, and colloquially as Galo ("Rooster"), is a professional football club based in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

See Physician and Clube Atlético Mineiro

Cluj County

Cluj County (Kolozs megye) is a county (județ) of Romania, in Transylvania, with the capital city at Cluj-Napoca.

See Physician and Cluj County

Cocaine

Cocaine, also known as coke, is a strong stimulant mostly used as a recreational drug.

See Physician and Cocaine

Coccyx

The coccyx, commonly referred to as the tailbone, is the final segment of the vertebral column in humans and apes, and certain other mammals such as horses.

See Physician and Coccyx

Collaboration

Collaboration occurs when two or more people or organizations work together--> to realize or achieve a goal.

See Physician and Collaboration

Combinatorics

Combinatorics is an area of mathematics primarily concerned with counting, both as a means and an end in obtaining results, and certain properties of finite structures.

See Physician and Combinatorics

Complete blood count

A complete blood count (CBC), also known as a complete blood cell count, full blood count (FBC), or full blood exam (FBE), is a blood panel requested by a doctor or other medical professional that gives information about the cells in a patient's blood, such as the cell count for each cell type and the concentrations of various proteins and minerals.

See Physician and Complete blood count

Conrad Gessner

Conrad Gessner (Conradus Gesnerus; Conrad Geßner or Cůnrat Geßner; 26 March 1516 – 13 December 1565) was a Swiss physician, naturalist, bibliographer, and philologist.

See Physician and Conrad Gessner

Constantine Phipps, 2nd Baron Mulgrave

Constantine John Phipps, 2nd Baron Mulgrave, PC (19 May 1744 – 10 October 1792) was an English explorer and officer in the Royal Navy.

See Physician and Constantine Phipps, 2nd Baron Mulgrave

Coroner

A coroner is a person whose standard role is to confirm and certify the death of an individual within a jurisdiction.

See Physician and Coroner

County Monaghan

County Monaghan (Contae Mhuineacháin) is a county in Ireland.

See Physician and County Monaghan

Ctesias

Ctesias (Κτησίας, Ktēsíās), also known as Ctesias the Cnidian or Ctesias of Cnidus, was a Greek physician and historian from the town of Cnidus in Caria.

See Physician and Ctesias

Current members of the United States Senate

The United States Senate consists of 100 members, two from each of the 50 states.

See Physician and Current members of the United States Senate

Cyberpunk 2020

Cyberpunk, mainly known by its second edition title Cyberpunk 2020, is a cyberpunk role-playing game written by Mike Pondsmith and published by R. Talsorian Games in 1988.

See Physician and Cyberpunk 2020

Dana Scully

Dana Katherine Scully is a fictional character in the Fox science fiction-supernatural television series The X-Files, played by Gillian Anderson.

See Physician and Dana Scully

Daniel Carleton Gajdusek

Daniel Carleton Gajdusek (September 9, 1923 – December 12, 2008) was an American physician and medical researcher who was the co-recipient (with Baruch S. Blumberg) of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1976 for work on kuru, the second human prion disease demonstrated to be infectious.

See Physician and Daniel Carleton Gajdusek

Daniel Rutherford Haldane

Dr Daniel Rutherford Haldane FRSE PRCPE (27 March 1824 – 12 April 1887) was a prominent Scottish physician, who became president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1881.

See Physician and Daniel Rutherford Haldane

David Abercromby

David Abercromby was a 17th-century Scottish physician and writer, thought to have died in 1702.

See Physician and David Abercromby

David Duke

David Ernest Duke (born July 1, 1950) is an American white supremacist and white nationalist politician, antisemitic conspiracy theorist, Holocaust denier, convicted felon, and former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.

See Physician and David Duke

David Ho

David Da-i Ho (born November 3, 1952) is a Taiwanese-American medical doctor and HIV/AIDS researcher who was born in Taiwan and has made many innovative state of the art scientific contributions to the understanding and technological treatment of HIV infection.

See Physician and David Ho

David Macbeth Moir

David Macbeth Moir (5 January 17986 July 1851) was a Scottish physician and writer.

See Physician and David Macbeth Moir

David Owen

David Anthony Llewellyn Owen, Baron Owen, (born 2 July 1938) is a British politician and physician.

See Physician and David Owen

David Wolf (astronaut)

David Alexander Wolf (born August 23, 1956) is an American astronaut, medical doctor, electrical engineer.

See Physician and David Wolf (astronaut)

Death

Death is the cessation of all biological functions that sustain a living organism.

See Physician and Death

Declaration of Geneva

The Declaration of Geneva (Physician's Pledge) was adopted by the General Assembly of the World Medical Association at Geneva in 1948, amended in 1968, 1983, 1994, editorially revised in 2005 and 2006 and amended in 2017.

See Physician and Declaration of Geneva

Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2004

The 2004 Democratic presidential primaries were the selection process by which voters of the Democratic Party chose its nominee for President of the United States in the 2004 U.S. presidential election.

See Physician and Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2004

Dentistry

Dentistry is a branch of medicine that consists of the study, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases, disorders, and conditions of the oral cavity, commonly in the dentition but also the oral mucosa, and of adjacent and related structures and tissues, particularly in the maxillofacial (jaw and facial) area.

See Physician and Dentistry

Deodorant

A deodorant is a substance applied to the body to prevent body odor caused by the bacterial breakdown of perspiration in armpits, feet, and other areas of the body.

See Physician and Deodorant

Diabetes insipidus

Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a condition characterized by large amounts of dilute urine and increased thirst.

See Physician and Diabetes insipidus

Die Ärzte

Die Ärzte ("The physicians") is a punk band from Berlin.

See Physician and Die Ärzte

Dietitian

A dietitian (or dietician) is an expert in dietetics; that is, human nutrition and the regulation of diet.

See Physician and Dietitian

Doc Savage

Doc Savage is a fictional character originally published in American pulp magazines during the 1930s and 1940s.

See Physician and Doc Savage

Doctor (title)

Doctor is an academic title that originates from the Latin word of the same spelling and meaning.

See Physician and Doctor (title)

Doctor of Medicine

A Doctor of Medicine (MD from Latin Medicinae Doctor) is a medical degree, the meaning of which varies between different jurisdictions.

See Physician and Doctor of Medicine

Doctor Strange

Doctor Stephen Vincent Strange is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

See Physician and Doctor Strange

Donoghue v Stevenson

was a landmark court decision in Scots delict law and English tort law by the House of Lords.

See Physician and Donoghue v Stevenson

Dr. Kildare

Dr. James Kildare is a fictional American medical doctor character, originally created in the 1930s by the author Frederick Schiller Faust under the pen name Max Brand. Shortly after the character's first appearance in a magazine story, Paramount Pictures used the story and character as the basis for the 1937 film Internes Can't Take Money. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) subsequently acquired the rights and featured Kildare as the primary character in a series of American theatrical films in the late 1930s and early 1940s, several of which were co-written by Faust (as Max Brand), who also continued to write magazine stories and novels about the character until the early 1940s. DVDtalk.com, Mar. 16, 2014, accessed Mar. 29, 2015. The Kildare character was later featured in an early 1950s radio series,. digitaldeliftp.com, accessed Mar. 29, 2015. a 1960s television series,Mcneil, Alex. Total Television: The Comprehensive Guide to Programming from 1948 to the Present - Revised Edition. Penguin Books, 1996, p. 225.. a comic book, politedissent.com, May 28, 2012, accessed Mar. 29, 2015. and comic strip. The Comics Kingdom Blog, comicskingdom.com, Oct. 24, 2012, accessed Mar. 29, 2015. based on the 1960s TV show, and a short-lived second 1970s television series., TVguide.com, accessed Mar. 29, 2015. Univ. Press of New England, 2006, p. 315-335..

See Physician and Dr. Kildare

Dr. Mario

is a 1990 action puzzle video game produced by Gunpei Yokoi and designed by Takahiro Harada.

See Physician and Dr. Mario

Dr. Nick

Dr.

See Physician and Dr. Nick

Drew Pinsky

David Drew Pinsky (born September 4, 1958), commonly known as Dr.

See Physician and Drew Pinsky

Drug Enforcement Administration

The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is a United States federal law enforcement agency under the United States Department of Justice, tasked with combating drug smuggling and use within the United States.

See Physician and Drug Enforcement Administration

Dudley

Dudley is a large town in the county of West Midlands, England, south-east of Wolverhampton and north-west of Birmingham.

See Physician and Dudley

Dysphagia

Dysphagia is the medical term for the symptom of difficulty in swallowing.

See Physician and Dysphagia

Earl of Iddesleigh

Earl of Iddesleigh, in the County of Devon, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.

See Physician and Earl of Iddesleigh

Early Islamic philosophy

Early Islamic philosophy or classical Islamic philosophy is a period of intense philosophical development beginning in the 2nd century AH of the Islamic calendar (early 9th century CE) and lasting until the 6th century AH (late 12th century CE).

See Physician and Early Islamic philosophy

Eddie Rickenbacker

Edward Vernon Rickenbacker (October 8, 1890 – July 23, 1973) was an American fighter ace in World War I and Medal of Honor recipient.

See Physician and Eddie Rickenbacker

Edgcott

Edgcott is a village and a civil parish in Aylesbury Vale district in Buckinghamshire, England.

See Physician and Edgcott

Education

Education is the process of facilitating learning, or the acquisition of knowledge, skills, values, beliefs, and habits.

See Physician and Education

Education in Finland

Education in Finland is an education system with fully subsidised meals served to full-time students. The present education system in Finland consists of daycare programmes (for babies and toddlers) and a one-year "pre-school" (or kindergarten for six-year-olds); a nine-year compulsory basic comprehensive school (starting at age seven and ending at the age of sixteen); post-compulsory secondary general academic and vocational education; higher education (University and University of applied sciences); and adult (lifelong, continuing) education. The Finnish strategy for achieving equality and excellence in education has been based on constructing a publicly funded comprehensive school system with selecting, tracking, or streaming students during their common basic education. Part of the strategy has been to spread the school network so that pupils have a school near their homes whenever possible or, if this is not feasible, e.g. in rural areas, to provide free transportation to more widely dispersed schools. Inclusive special education within the classroom and instructional efforts to minimize low achievement are also typical of Nordic educational systems. After their nine-year basic education in a comprehensive school, students at the age of 16 may choose to continue their secondary education in either an academic track (lukio) or a vocational track (ammattikoulu), both of which usually take three years and give a qualification to continue to tertiary education. Tertiary education is divided into university and polytechnic (ammattikorkeakoulu, also known as "university of applied sciences") systems. Universities award licentiate- and doctoral-level degrees. Formerly, only university graduates could obtain higher (postgraduate) degrees, however, since the implementation of the Bologna process, all bachelor's degree holders can now qualify for further academic studies. There are 17 universities and 27 universities of applied sciences in the country. The Education Index, published with the UN's Human Development Index in 2008, based on data from 2006, lists Finland as 0.993, amongst the highest in the world, tied for first with Denmark, Australia and New Zealand. The Finnish Ministry of Education attributes its success to "the education system (uniform basic education for the whole age group), highly competent teachers, and the autonomy given to schools." Finland has consistently ranked high in the PISA study, which compares national educational systems internationally, although in the recent years Finland has been displaced from the very top. In the 2012 study, Finland ranked sixth in reading, twelfth in mathematics and fifth in science, while back in the 2003 study Finland was first in both science and reading and second in mathematics. Finland's tertiary Education has moreover been ranked first by the World Economic Forum. While celebrated for its overall success, Finland's gender gap on the 2012 PISA reading examinations was identified in a 2015 Brookings Institution report, however this can be put down to many factors such as the choice of the field of work in which each respective genders go into. The performance of 15-year-old boys on that reading examination was not significantly different from OECD averages and 0.66 standard deviations behind that of girls the same age. Governments of Jyrki Katainen, Alexander Stubb and Juha Sipilä cut education funds in Finland during 2011-2018 with €1.5 billion. University and college employees were cut more than 7500 persons.

See Physician and Education in Finland

Edward Augustus Holyoke

Edward Augustus Holyoke (August 1, 1728 – March 31, 1829) was an American educator and physician.

See Physician and Edward Augustus Holyoke

Edward Jenner

Edward Jenner, FRS FRCPE (17 May 1749 – 26 January 1823) was an English physician and scientist who was the pioneer of smallpox vaccine, the world's first vaccine.

See Physician and Edward Jenner

Edwin McMillan

Edwin Mattison McMillan (September 18, 1907 – September 7, 1991) was an American physicist and Nobel laureate credited with being the first-ever to produce a transuranium element, neptunium.

See Physician and Edwin McMillan

Electrochemistry

Electrochemistry is the branch of physical chemistry that studies the relationship between electricity, as a measurable and quantitative phenomenon, and identifiable chemical change, with either electricity considered an outcome of a particular chemical change or vice versa.

See Physician and Electrochemistry

Elim Garak

Elim Garak is a fictional character from the television series Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, in which he is portrayed by Andrew J. Robinson.

See Physician and Elim Garak

Elizabeth Garrett Anderson

Elizabeth Garrett Anderson (9 June 1836 – 17 December 1917) was an English physician and suffragist.

See Physician and Elizabeth Garrett Anderson

Emergency department

An emergency department (ED), also known as an accident & emergency department (A&E), emergency room (ER), emergency ward (EW) or casualty department, is a medical treatment facility specializing in emergency medicine, the acute care of patients who present without prior appointment; either by their own means or by that of an ambulance.

See Physician and Emergency department

Emergency medical services

Emergency medical services, also known as ambulance services or paramedic services (abbreviated to the initialism EMS, EMAS, EMARS or SAMU in some countries), are a type of emergency service dedicated to providing out-of-hospital acute medical care, transport to definitive care, and other medical transport to patients with illnesses and injuries which prevent the patient from transporting themselves.

See Physician and Emergency medical services

Emergency medical technician

Emergency medical technician (EMT) and ambulance technician are terms used in some countries to denote a health care provider of emergency medical services.

See Physician and Emergency medical technician

Emergency medicine

Emergency medicine, also known as accident and emergency medicine, is the medical specialty concerned with caring for undifferentiated, unscheduled patients with illnesses or injuries requiring immediate medical attention.

See Physician and Emergency medicine

Emergency!

Emergency! is an American television series that combines the medical drama and action-adventure genres.

See Physician and Emergency!

Emil du Bois-Reymond

Prof.

See Physician and Emil du Bois-Reymond

Emin Pasha

Schnitzer in 1875 Mehmed Emin Pasha (born Isaak Eduard Schnitzer, baptized Eduard Carl Oscar Theodor Schnitzer; March 28, 1840 – October 23, 1892) was an Ottoman physician of German Jewish origin, naturalist, and governor of the Egyptian province of Equatoria on the upper Nile.

See Physician and Emin Pasha

Emperor Higashiyama

was the 113th emperor of Japan,Imperial Household Agency (Kunaichō): according to the traditional order of succession.

See Physician and Emperor Higashiyama

Endocrinology

Endocrinology (from endocrine + -ology) is a branch of biology and medicine dealing with the endocrine system, its diseases, and its specific secretions known as hormones.

See Physician and Endocrinology

Enema

An enema is the injection of fluid into the lower bowel by way of the rectum.

See Physician and Enema

Erasistratus

Erasistratus (Ἐρασίστρατος; c. 304 – c. 250 BC) was a Greek anatomist and royal physician under Seleucus I Nicator of Syria.

See Physician and Erasistratus

Erich Hartmann

Erich Alfred Hartmann (19 April 1922 – 20 September 1993), nicknamed "Bubi" ("The Kid") by his German comrades and the "Black Devil" by his Soviet adversaries, was a German fighter pilot during World War II and the most successful fighter ace in the history of aerial warfare.

See Physician and Erich Hartmann

Ernest Lawrence

Ernest Orlando Lawrence (August 8, 1901 – August 27, 1958) was a pioneering American nuclear scientist and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1939 for his invention of the cyclotron.

See Physician and Ernest Lawrence

Ernie Fletcher

Ernest Lee "Ernie" Fletcher (born November 12, 1952) is an American physician and politician.

See Physician and Ernie Fletcher

Ernst Gottfried Baldinger

Ernst Gottfried Baldinger (13 May 1738 – 21 January 1804), German physician, was born in Großvargula near Erfurt.

See Physician and Ernst Gottfried Baldinger

Ernst Gräfenberg

Ernst Gräfenberg (September 26, 1881 in Adelebsen near Göttingen, Germany – 28 October 1957 in New York City, United States) was a German-born physician (medical doctor) and scientist.

See Physician and Ernst Gräfenberg

Essential oil

An essential oil is a concentrated hydrophobic liquid containing volatile (defined as "the tendency of a substance to vaporize") aroma compounds from plants.

See Physician and Essential oil

Evan Harris

Evan Leslie Harris (born 21 October 1965) is a British Liberal Democrat politician.

See Physician and Evan Harris

Expert witness

An expert witness, in England, Wales and the United States, is a person whose opinion by virtue of education, training, certification, skills or experience, is accepted by the judge as an expert.

See Physician and Expert witness

February 28

No description.

See Physician and February 28

Fela Kuti

Fela Anikulapo Kuti (15 October 1938 – 2 August 1997), also professionally known as Fela Kuti, or simply Fela, was a Nigerian multi-instrumentalist, musician, composer, pioneer of the Afrobeat music genre, human rights activist, and political maverick.

See Physician and Fela Kuti

Ferid Murad

Ferid Murad (born September 14, 1936) is a physician and pharmacologist, and a co-winner of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

See Physician and Ferid Murad

Firestar (Marvel Comics)

Firestar (Angelica "Angel" Jones) is a fictional mutant superheroine appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

See Physician and Firestar (Marvel Comics)

Fluoroscopy

Fluoroscopy is an imaging technique that uses X-rays to obtain real-time moving images of the interior of an object.

See Physician and Fluoroscopy

Food and Drug Administration

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA or USFDA) is a federal agency of the United States Department of Health and Human Services, one of the United States federal executive departments.

See Physician and Food and Drug Administration

Foot

The foot (plural feet) is an anatomical structure found in many vertebrates.

See Physician and Foot

Forensic pathology

Forensic pathology is pathology that focuses on determining the cause of death by examining a corpse.

See Physician and Forensic pathology

Four temperaments

The Four temperament theory is a proto-psychological theory that suggests that there are four fundamental personality types: sanguine, choleric, melancholic, and phlegmatic.

See Physician and Four temperaments

Fox Terrier

Fox Terriers are two different breeds of the terrier dog type: the Smooth Fox Terrier and the Wire Fox Terrier.

See Physician and Fox Terrier

François Duvalier

François Duvalier (14 April 190721 April 1971), also known as PapaDoc, was the President of Haiti from 1957 to 1971.

See Physician and François Duvalier

Francesco Redi

Francesco Redi (18 February 1626 – 1 March 1697) was an Italian physician, naturalist, biologist and poet.

See Physician and Francesco Redi

Francis Thompson

Francis Thompson (16 December 1859 – 13 November 1907) was an English poet and mystic.

See Physician and Francis Thompson

Francis Townsend

Francis Everett Townsend (January 13, 1867 – September 1, 1960) was an American physician who was best known for his revolving old-age pension proposal during the Great Depression.

See Physician and Francis Townsend

Franciscans

The Franciscans are a group of related mendicant religious orders within the Catholic Church, founded in 1209 by Saint Francis of Assisi.

See Physician and Franciscans

Frantz Fanon

Frantz Fanon (20 July 1925 – 6 December 1961) was a Martinican psychiatrist, philosopher, revolutionary, and writer whose works are influential in the fields of post-colonial studies, critical theory, and Marxism.

See Physician and Frantz Fanon

Franz Mesmer

Franz Friedrich Anton Mesmer (May 23, 1734 – March 5, 1815) was a German physician with an interest in astronomy who theorised that there was a natural energetic transference that occurred between all animated and inanimate objects that he called animal magnetism, sometimes later referred to as mesmerism.

See Physician and Franz Mesmer

Friedrich Christoph Oetinger

Friedrich Christoph Oetinger (2 May 1702 – 10 February 1782) was a German Lutheran theologian and theosopher.

See Physician and Friedrich Christoph Oetinger

Gabriel Naudé

Gabriel Naudé (2 February 1600 – 10 July 1653) was a French librarian and scholar.

See Physician and Gabriel Naudé

Gabriele Falloppio

Gabriele Falloppio (1523 – October 9, 1562), often known by his Latin name Fallopius, was one of the most important anatomists and physicians of the sixteenth century.

See Physician and Gabriele Falloppio

Galen

Aelius Galenus or Claudius Galenus (Κλαύδιος Γαληνός; September 129 AD – /), often Anglicized as Galen and better known as Galen of Pergamon, was a Greek physician, surgeon and philosopher in the Roman Empire.

See Physician and Galen

Galtung (noble family)

Galtung was a Norwegian noble family dating from the ennoblement of Lauritz Galtung in 1648.

See Physician and Galtung (noble family)

Gardiner, Maine

Gardiner is a city in Kennebec County, Maine, United States.

See Physician and Gardiner, Maine

Gaspard II de Coligny

Gaspard de Coligny, Seigneur de Châtillon (16 February 1519 &ndash; 24 August 1572) was a French nobleman and admiral, best remembered as a disciplined Huguenot leader in the French Wars of Religion and a close friend and advisor to King Charles IX of France.

See Physician and Gaspard II de Coligny

Gastroenterology

Gastroenterology (MeSH heading) is the branch of medicine focused on the digestive system and its disorders.

See Physician and Gastroenterology

General practitioner

In the medical profession, a general practitioner (GP) is a medical doctor who treats acute and chronic illnesses and provides preventive care and health education to patients.

See Physician and General practitioner

General surgery

General surgery is a surgical specialty that focuses on abdominal contents including esophagus, stomach, small bowel, colon, liver, pancreas, gallbladder, appendix and bile ducts, and often the thyroid gland (depending on local referral patterns).

See Physician and General surgery

Genotype

The genotype is the part of the genetic makeup of a cell, and therefore of an organism or individual, which determines one of its characteristics (phenotype).

See Physician and Genotype

Georg Ernst Stahl

Georg Ernst Stahl (22 October 1659 – 24 May 1734) was a German chemist, physician and philosopher.

See Physician and Georg Ernst Stahl

Georg Trakl

Georg Trakl (3 February 1887 – 3 November 1914) was an Austrian poet and brother of the pianist Grete Trakl.

See Physician and Georg Trakl

Georg Wilhelm Steller

Several animals described by and named for Georg Steller, of whom no portrait is known to exist.

See Physician and Georg Wilhelm Steller

George Birkbeck

Dr George Birkbeck (10 January 1776 – 1 December 1841) was a British physician, academic, philanthropist, pioneer in adult education and a professor of natural philosophy at the University of Strathclyde.

See Physician and George Birkbeck

George Dewey

George Dewey (December 26, 1837January 16, 1917) was Admiral of the Navy, the only person in United States history to have attained the rank.

See Physician and George Dewey

George H. Tichenor

George Humphrey Tichenor (April 12, 1837January 14, 1923) was a Kentucky-born physician who introduced antiseptic surgery while in the service of the Confederate States of America.

See Physician and George H. Tichenor

George Miller (director)

George Miller AO (born 3 March 1945) is an Australian filmmaker and former physician.

See Physician and George Miller (director)

Georges Clemenceau

Georges Benjamin Clemenceau (28 September 1841 – 24 November 1929) was a French politician, physician, and journalist who was Prime Minister of France during the First World War.

See Physician and Georges Clemenceau

Gerald Edelman

Gerald Maurice Edelman (July 1, 1929 – May 17, 2014) was an American biologist who shared the 1972 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for work with Rodney Robert Porter on the immune system.

See Physician and Gerald Edelman

Gersonides

Levi ben Gershon (1288–1344), better known by his Graecized name as Gersonides or by his Latinized name Magister Leo Hebraeus the abbreviation of first letters as RaLBaG, was a medieval French Jewish philosopher, Talmudist, mathematician, physician and astronomer/astrologer.

See Physician and Gersonides

Gillian Anderson

Gillian Leigh Anderson, (born August 9, 1968) is an American-British film, television and theatre actress, activist and writer.

See Physician and Gillian Anderson

Girolamo Fracastoro

Girolamo Fracastoro (Hieronymus Fracastorius; c. 1476/86 August 1553) was an Italian physician, poet, and scholar in mathematics, geography and astronomy.

See Physician and Girolamo Fracastoro

Glafcos Clerides

Glafcos Ioannou Clerides (Γλαύκος Ιωάννου Κληρίδης; 24 April 1919 – 15 November 2013) was a Greek Cypriot politician and barrister who served as the fourth President of Cyprus from 1993 to 2003.

See Physician and Glafcos Clerides

Glasgow Coma Scale

The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) is a neurological scale which aims to give a reliable and objective way of recording the conscious state of a person for initial as well as subsequent assessment.

See Physician and Glasgow Coma Scale

Goibniu

In Irish mythology Goibniu (Old Irish, pronounced) or Gaibhne (Modern Irish) was the metalsmith of the Tuatha Dé Danann.

See Physician and Goibniu

Gordon Campbell

Gordon Muir Campbell, (born January 12, 1948) is a Canadian diplomat and politician who was the 35th Mayor of Vancouver from 1986 to 1993 and the 34th Premier of British Columbia from 2001 to 2011.

See Physician and Gordon Campbell

Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus

Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus (4 February 1776, Bremen – 16 February 1837, Bremen) was a German physician, naturalist, and proto-evolutionary biologist.

See Physician and Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus

Grace Chisholm Young

Grace Chisholm Young (née Chisholm) was an English mathematician.

See Physician and Grace Chisholm Young

Grant Hill (politician)

Grant Hill (born September 20, 1943) is a former Canadian Member of Parliament for the Conservative Party of Canada (2004), and a former member of the Canadian Alliance (2000–2004) and the Reform Party of Canada (1993–2000).

See Physician and Grant Hill (politician)

Gray's Anatomy

Gray's Anatomy is an English-language textbook of human anatomy originally written by Henry Gray and illustrated by Henry Vandyke Carter.

See Physician and Gray's Anatomy

Great Barrington, Massachusetts

Great Barrington is a town in Berkshire County, Massachusetts, United States.

See Physician and Great Barrington, Massachusetts

Great Plague of London

The Great Plague, lasting from 1665 to 1666, was the last major epidemic of the bubonic plague to occur in England.

See Physician and Great Plague of London

Guaiacum

Guaiacum (OED 2nd edition, 1989. in, retrieved 2013-04-30.), sometimes spelled Guajacum, is a genus of flowering plants in the caltrop family Zygophyllaceae.

See Physician and Guaiacum

Guardian angel

A guardian angel is an angel that is assigned to protect and guide a particular person, group, kingdom, or country.

See Physician and Guardian angel

H.R. Pufnstuf

H.R. Pufnstuf is a children's television series produced by Sid and Marty Krofft in the United States.

See Physician and H.R. Pufnstuf

Hadassah medical convoy massacre

The Hadassah convoy massacre took place on April 13, 1948, when a convoy, escorted by Haganah militia, bringing medical and military supplies and personnel to Hadassah Hospital on Mount Scopus was ambushed by Arab forces.

See Physician and Hadassah medical convoy massacre

Handball

Handball (also known as team handball, fieldball, European handball or Olympic handball) is a team sport in which two teams of seven players each (six outfield players and a goalkeeper) pass a ball using their hands with the aim of throwing it into the goal of the other team.

See Physician and Handball

Harrison Narcotics Tax Act

The Harrison Narcotics Tax Act (Ch. 1) was a United States federal law that regulated and taxed the production, importation, and distribution of opiates and coca products.

See Physician and Harrison Narcotics Tax Act

Harry Hill

Harry Hill (born Matthew Keith Hall; 1 October 1964) is an English comedian, author and television presenter.

See Physician and Harry Hill

Hartmann Schedel

Hartmann Schedel (13 February 1440 – 28 November 1514) was a German physician, humanist, historian, and one of the first cartographers to use the printing press.

See Physician and Hartmann Schedel

Health and social welfare in Communist Czechoslovakia

In the 1980s, Czechoslovakia had a comprehensive and universal system of social security under which everyone was entitled to free medical care and medicine, in theory at least.

See Physician and Health and social welfare in Communist Czechoslovakia

Health care

Health care or healthcare is the maintenance or improvement of health via the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease, illness, injury, and other physical and mental impairments in human beings.

See Physician and Health care

Health economics

Health economics is a branch of economics concerned with issues related to efficiency, effectiveness, value and behavior in the production and consumption of health and healthcare.

See Physician and Health economics

Health system

A health system, also sometimes referred to as health care system or as healthcare system, is the organization of people, institutions, and resources that deliver health care services to meet the health needs of target populations.

See Physician and Health system

Hearing loss

Hearing loss, also known as hearing impairment, is a partial or total inability to hear.

See Physician and Hearing loss

Heart

The heart is a muscular organ in most animals, which pumps blood through the blood vessels of the circulatory system.

See Physician and Heart

Heidelberg University

Heidelberg University (Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg; Universitas Ruperto Carola Heidelbergensis) is a public research university in Heidelberg, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.

See Physician and Heidelberg University

Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa

Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim (14 September 1486 – 18 February 1535) was a German polymath, physician, legal scholar, soldier, theologian, and occult writer.

See Physician and Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa

Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers

Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers (October 11, 1758 – March 2, 1840) was a German physician and astronomer.

See Physician and Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers

Hejaz

The Hejaz (اَلْـحِـجَـاز,, literally "the Barrier"), is a region in the west of present-day Saudi Arabia.

See Physician and Hejaz

Hendrikje van Andel-Schipper

Hendrikje "Henny" van Andel-Schipper (née Schipper) (29 June 1890 &ndash; 30 August 2005) was the oldest person ever in the history of the Netherlands (breaking the previous record of Catharina van Dam on 26 September 2003), and from 29 May 2004 was thought to be the oldest recognized person in the world until her death (although her case was later superseded by María Capovilla of Ecuador).

See Physician and Hendrikje van Andel-Schipper

Henri Cazalis

Henri Cazalis (9 March 1840, Cormeilles-en-Parisis, Val-d'Oise – 1 July 1909, Geneva) was a French physician who was a symbolist poet and man of letters and wrote under the pseudonyms of Jean Caselli and Jean Lahor.

See Physician and Henri Cazalis

Henry H. Arnold

Henry Harley "Hap" Arnold (June 25, 1886 – January 15, 1950) was an American general officer holding the grades of General of the Army and General of the Air Force.

See Physician and Henry H. Arnold

Henry Mackenzie

Henry Mackenzie FRSE (26 July 1745 – 14 January 1831) was a Scottish lawyer, novelist and writer.

See Physician and Henry Mackenzie

Henry Morgentaler

Henekh "Henry" Morgentaler, (March 19, 1923 – May 29, 2013), was a Jewish Polish-born Canadian physician and pro-choice advocate who fought numerous legal battles aimed at expanding abortion rights in Canada.

See Physician and Henry Morgentaler

Heraclides

Heraclides, Heracleides or Herakleides (Greek: Ἡρακλείδης) in origin was any individual of the legendary clan of the Heracleidae, the mythological patronymic applying to persons descended from Hercules.

See Physician and Heraclides

Hermann von Helmholtz

Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (August 31, 1821 – September 8, 1894) was a German physician and physicist who made significant contributions in several scientific fields.

See Physician and Hermann von Helmholtz

Heroin

Heroin, also known as diamorphine among other names, is an opioid most commonly used as a recreational drug for its euphoric effects.

See Physician and Heroin

Hess's law

Hess' law of constant heat summation, also known as Hess' law (or Hess's law), is a relationship in physical chemistry named after Germain Hess, a Swiss-born Russian chemist and physician who published it in 1840.

See Physician and Hess's law

HFE hereditary haemochromatosis

Haemochromatosis (or hemochromatosis) type 1 autosomal recessive is a hereditary disease characterized by excessive intestinal absorption of dietary iron resulting in a pathological increase in total body iron stores.

See Physician and HFE hereditary haemochromatosis

Hindsight bias

Hindsight bias, also known as the knew-it-all-along effect or creeping determinism, is the inclination, after an event has occurred, to see the event as having been predictable, despite there having been little or no objective basis for predicting it.

See Physician and Hindsight bias

Hippocrates

Hippocrates of Kos (Hippokrátēs ho Kṓos), also known as Hippocrates II, was a Greek physician of the Age of Pericles (Classical Greece), and is considered one of the most outstanding figures in the history of medicine.

See Physician and Hippocrates

Hippocratic Oath

The Hippocratic Oath is an oath historically taken by physicians.

See Physician and Hippocratic Oath

Hippodamus of Miletus

Hippodamus of Miletus (Greek: Ἱππόδαμος ὁ Μιλήσιος, Hippodamos ho Milesios; 498 &ndash; 408 BC), was an ancient Greek architect, urban planner, physician, mathematician, meteorologist and philosopher, who is considered to be "the father of European urban planning", the namesake of the "Hippodamian Plan" (grid plan) of city layout.

See Physician and Hippodamus of Miletus

History of crime fiction

Crime is a typically 19th-, 20th- and 21st-century genre, dominated by British and American writers.

See Physician and History of crime fiction

History of Germany

The concept of Germany as a distinct region in central Europe can be traced to Roman commander Julius Caesar, who referred to the unconquered area east of the Rhine as Germania, thus distinguishing it from Gaul (France), which he had conquered.

See Physician and History of Germany

History of Iran

The history of Iran, commonly also known as Persia in the Western world, is intertwined with the history of a larger region, also to an extent known as Greater Iran, comprising the area from Anatolia, the Bosphorus, and Egypt in the west to the borders of Ancient India and the Syr Darya in the east, and from the Caucasus and the Eurasian Steppe in the north to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman in the south.

See Physician and History of Iran

History of medicine

The history of medicine shows how societies have changed in their approach to illness and disease from ancient times to the present.

See Physician and History of medicine

Horatio Nelson Jackson

Horatio Nelson Jackson (March 25, 1872 – January 14, 1955) was an American physician and automobile pioneer.

See Physician and Horatio Nelson Jackson

Houghton, Michigan

Houghton is a city in the U.S. state of Michigan's Upper Peninsula and largest city in the Copper Country on the Keweenaw Peninsula.

See Physician and Houghton, Michigan

Hugo Steinhaus

Władysław Hugo Dionizy Steinhaus (January 14, 1887 – February 25, 1972) was a Jewish-Polish mathematician and educator.

See Physician and Hugo Steinhaus

Human evolution

Human evolution is the evolutionary process that led to the emergence of anatomically modern humans, beginning with the evolutionary history of primates – in particular genus Homo – and leading to the emergence of Homo sapiens as a distinct species of the hominid family, the great apes.

See Physician and Human evolution

Human geography

Human geography is the branch of geography that deals with the study of people and their communities, cultures, economies, and interactions with the environment by studying their relations with and across space and place.

See Physician and Human geography

Hypodermic needle

Hypodermic needle features A hypodermic needle (from Greek ὑπο- (under-), and δέρμα (skin)), one of a category of medical tools which enter the skin, called sharps, is a very thin, hollow tube with a sharp tip that contains a small opening at the pointed end.

See Physician and Hypodermic needle

Hysterectomy

Hysterectomy is the surgical removal of the uterus.

See Physician and Hysterectomy

IANAL

IANAL is a Usenet and chat abbreviation (initialism) for the expansion "I am not a lawyer".

See Physician and IANAL

Ibrahim al-Jaafari

Ibrahim al-Eshaiker al-Jaafari (إبراهيم الأشيقر الجعفري; born 25 March 1947) is an Iraqi politician who was Prime Minister of Iraq in the Iraqi Transitional Government from 2005 to 2006, following the January 2005 election.

See Physician and Ibrahim al-Jaafari

Idiopathic hypoglycemia

Idiopathic hypoglycemia is a medical condition in which the glucose level in the blood (blood glucose) is abnormally low due to an undeterminable cause.

See Physician and Idiopathic hypoglycemia

Ilya Frank

Ilya Mikhailovich Frank (Илья́ Миха́йлович Франк) (23 October 1908 – 22 June 1990) was a Soviet winner of the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1958 jointly with Pavel Alekseyevich Cherenkov and Igor Y. Tamm, also of the Soviet Union.

See Physician and Ilya Frank

Infant

An infant (from the Latin word infans, meaning "unable to speak" or "speechless") is the more formal or specialised synonym for "baby", the very young offspring of a human.

See Physician and Infant

Infant mortality

Infant mortality refers to deaths of young children, typically those less than one year of age.

See Physician and Infant mortality

Infertility

Infertility is the inability of a person, animal or plant to reproduce by natural means.

See Physician and Infertility

Inquests in England and Wales

Inquests in England and Wales are held into sudden and unexplained deaths and also into the circumstances of discovery of a certain class of valuable artefacts known as "treasure trove".

See Physician and Inquests in England and Wales

Intensive care medicine

Intensive care medicine, or critical care medicine, is a branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and management of life-threatening conditions that may require sophisticated life support and monitoring.

See Physician and Intensive care medicine

International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War

International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW) is a non-partisan federation of national medical groups in 63 countries, representing doctors, medical students, other health workers, and concerned people who share the common goal of creating a more peaceful and secure world free from the threat of nuclear annihilation.

See Physician and International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War

Invisible Woman

The Invisible Woman (Susan "Sue" Storm-Richards), previously known as the Invisible Girl, is a fictional superheroine appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

See Physician and Invisible Woman

Ion G. Duca

Ion Gheorghe Duca (20 December 1879 – 29 December 1933) was prime minister of Romania from 14 November to 29 December 1933, when he was assassinated for his efforts to suppress the fascist Iron Guard movement.

See Physician and Ion G. Duca

Iridology

Iridology (also known as iridodiagnosisCline D; Hofstetter HW; Griffin JR. Dictionary of Visual Science. 4th ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston 1997. or iridiagnosis) is an alternative medicine technique whose proponents claim that patterns, colors, and other characteristics of the iris can be examined to determine information about a patient's systemic health.

See Physician and Iridology

Islam and antisemitism

Islam and antisemitism relates to Islamic theological teaching against Jews and Judaism and the treatment of Jews in Muslim communities.

See Physician and Islam and antisemitism

Isma'ilism

Ismāʿīlism (الإسماعيلية al-Ismāʿīliyya; اسماعیلیان; اسماعيلي; Esmāʿīliyān) is a branch of Shia Islam.

See Physician and Isma'ilism

Isobel Barnett

Isobel, Lady Barnett (born Isobel Morag Marshall; 30 June 1918 – 20 October 1980), popularly known as Lady Isobel Barnett, was a British radio and television personality, who had her highest profile during the 1950s and 1960s.

See Physician and Isobel Barnett

Ivan Pavlov

Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (a; 27 February 1936) was a Russian physiologist known primarily for his work in classical conditioning.

See Physician and Ivan Pavlov

Jack Layton

John Gilbert "Jack" Layton (July 18, 1950 – August 22, 2011) was a Canadian politician and Leader of the Official Opposition.

See Physician and Jack Layton

James Black (pharmacologist)

Sir James Whyte Black (14 June 1924 – 22 March 2010) was a Scottish physician and pharmacologist.

See Physician and James Black (pharmacologist)

James Hutton

James Hutton (3 June 1726 – 26 March 1797) was a Scottish geologist, physician, chemical manufacturer, naturalist, and experimental agriculturalist.

See Physician and James Hutton

James Mackintosh

Sir James Mackintosh FRS FRSE (24 October 1765 – 30 May 1832) was a Scottish jurist, Whig politician and historian.

See Physician and James Mackintosh

James Tyler Kent

James Tyler Kent (1849&ndash;1916) was an American physician best remembered as a forefather of modern homeopathy.

See Physician and James Tyler Kent

Jan Baptist van Helmont

Jan Baptist van Helmont (12 January 1580 – 30 December 1644) was a Flemish chemist, physiologist, and physician.

See Physician and Jan Baptist van Helmont

Jan Swammerdam

Jan Swammerdam (February 12, 1637 – February 17, 1680) was a Dutch biologist and microscopist.

See Physician and Jan Swammerdam

Jane Harman

Jane Margaret Lakes Harman (born June 28, 1945) is the former U.S. Representative for, serving from 1993 to 1999, and from 2001 to 2011; she is a member of the Democratic Party.

See Physician and Jane Harman

Janet G. Travell

Janet Graeme Travell (December 17, 1901 – August 1, 1997) was an American physician and medical researcher.

See Physician and Janet G. Travell

Jastrzębie-Zdrój

Jastrzębie-Zdrój (Bad Königsdorff-Jastrzemb, originally Jastrzemb, Jastrzymbje–Zdrůj) is a city in south Poland with 92,462 inhabitants (31.12.2010).

See Physician and Jastrzębie-Zdrój

Jean Barbeyrac

Jean Barbeyrac (15 March 1674 – 3 March 1744) was a French jurist.

See Physician and Jean Barbeyrac

Jean Fernel

Jean François Fernel (in Latin, Fernelius) (1497 – 26 April 1558) was a French physician who introduced the term "physiology" to describe the study of the body's function.

See Physician and Jean Fernel

Jean Turner

Jean McGivern Turner (born 23 December 1939) is a former Independent Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Strathkelvin and Bearsden 2003–07 and medical doctor.

See Physician and Jean Turner

Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire

Jean-Baptiste Henri-Dominique Lacordaire (12 May 1802 – 21 November 1861), often styled Henri-Dominique Lacordaire, was a French ecclesiastic, preacher, journalist, theologian and political activist.

See Physician and Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire

Jean-Paul Marat

Jean-Paul Marat (24 May 1743 – 13 July 1793) was a French political theorist, physician, and scientist who became best known for his role as a radical journalist and politician during the French Revolution.

See Physician and Jean-Paul Marat

Jim McCrery

James Otis McCrery III (born September 18, 1949) is an American lawyer, politician and lobbyist who served as a Republican member of the United States House of Representatives from 1988 to 2009.

See Physician and Jim McCrery

Joel Roberts Poinsett

Joel Roberts Poinsett (March 2, 1779 &ndash; December 12, 1851) was an American physician and diplomat.

See Physician and Joel Roberts Poinsett

Johan Galtung

Johan Vincent Galtung (born 24 October 1930) is a Norwegian sociologist, mathematician, and the principal founder of the discipline of peace and conflict studies.

See Physician and Johan Galtung

Johann Friedrich Blumenbach

Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (11 May 1752 – 22 January 1840) was a German physician, naturalist, physiologist, and anthropologist.

See Physician and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach

Johann Friedrich Struensee

Johann Friedrich Struensee (5 August 1737 – 28 April 1772) was a German doctor.

See Physician and Johann Friedrich Struensee

Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann

Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann / Johann Georg Zimmermann (8 December 1728, in Brugg, Aargau7 October 1795, in Hanover) was a Swiss philosophical writer, naturalist, and physician.

See Physician and Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann

Johann Jakob Reiske

Johann Jakob Reiske (December 25, 1716 – August 14, 1774) was a German scholar and physician.

See Physician and Johann Jakob Reiske

Johann Jakob Scheuchzer

Johann Jakob Scheuchzer (August 2, 1672 &ndash; June 23, 1733) was a Swiss scholar born at Zürich.

See Physician and Johann Jakob Scheuchzer

Johann Joachim Becher

Johann Joachim Becher (6 May 1635 – October 1682) was a German physician, alchemist, precursor of chemistry, scholar and adventurer, best known for his development of the phlogiston theory of combustion, and his advancement of Austrian cameralism.

See Physician and Johann Joachim Becher

Johann Olav Koss

Johann Olav Koss, (born 29 October 1968) is a former speed skater from Norway.

See Physician and Johann Olav Koss

Johann Weyer

Johann Weyer or Johannes Wier (Ioannes Wierus or Piscinarius; 1515 &ndash; 24 February 1588) was a Dutch physician, occultist and demonologist, disciple and follower of Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa.

See Physician and Johann Weyer

John Arbuthnot

John Arbuthnot (baptised 29 April 1667 &ndash; 27 February 1735), often known simply as Dr Arbuthnot, was a Scottish physician, satirist and polymath in London.

See Physician and John Arbuthnot

John Bainbridge (astronomer)

John Bainbridge (1582 &ndash; 3 November 1643) was an English astronomer and mathematician.

See Physician and John Bainbridge (astronomer)

John Boyd Orr

John Boyd Orr, 1st Baron Boyd-Orr of Brechin Mearns, (23 September 1880 – 25 June 1971), styled Sir John Boyd Orr from 1935 to 1949, was a Scottish teacher, doctor, biologist and politician who received the Nobel Peace Prize for his scientific research into nutrition and his work as the first Director-General of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).

See Physician and John Boyd Orr

John Caius

John Caius MD (born John Kays) (6 October 1510 – 29 July 1573), also known as Johannes Caius and Ioannes Caius, was an English physician, and second founder of the present Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge.

See Physician and John Caius

John Hall (physician)

John Hall (1575 &ndash; 25 November 1635) was a physician and son-in-law of William Shakespeare.

See Physician and John Hall (physician)

John Hamm

John Frederick Hamm, (born April 8, 1938) is a Canadian physician and politician and was the 25th Premier of Nova Scotia from 1999 to 2006.

See Physician and John Hamm

John Hersey

John Richard Hersey (June 17, 1914 – March 24, 1993) was an American writer and journalist.

See Physician and John Hersey

John Kidd (chemist)

John Kidd (10 September 1775 &ndash; 7 September 1851) was an English physician, chemist and geologist.

See Physician and John Kidd (chemist)

John Martyn (botanist)

John Martyn or Joannes Martyn (12 September 1699 – 29 January 1768) was an English botanist.

See Physician and John Martyn (botanist)

John Mudge

John Mudge (1721 &ndash; 26 March 1793) was an English physician and amateur creator of telescope mirrors.

See Physician and John Mudge

John Olerud

John Garrett Olerud (born August 5, 1968), nicknamed Johnny O and Big Rude, is a left-handed American former Major League Baseball first baseman.

See Physician and John Olerud

John Pringle

Sir John Pringle, 1st Baronet, PRS (10 April 1707 – 18 January 1782) was a British physician who has been called the "father of military medicine" (although Ambroise Paré and Jonathan Letterman have also been accorded this sobriquet).

See Physician and John Pringle

John Savage (politician)

John Patrick Savage, OC, ONS (May 28, 1932 &ndash; May 13, 2003) was a Welsh-born Canadian physician and politician.

See Physician and John Savage (politician)

John Stapp

Colonel John Paul Stapp (July 11, 1910 – November 13, 1999), M.D., Ph.D., was an American career U.S. Air Force officer, flight surgeon, physician, biophysicist, and pioneer in studying the effects of acceleration and deceleration forces on humans.

See Physician and John Stapp

John Torrey

John Torrey (August 15, 1796 – March 10, 1873) was an American botanist, chemist, and physician.

See Physician and John Torrey

Johnny Belinda (1948 film)

Johnny Belinda is a 1948 American drama film based on the 1940 Broadway stage hit of the same name, by Elmer Blaney Harris.

See Physician and Johnny Belinda (1948 film)

Jon Favreau

Jonathan Kolia Favreau (born October 19, 1966) is an American actor and filmmaker.

See Physician and Jon Favreau

Jonathan Miller

Sir Jonathan Wolfe Miller, CBE (born 21 July 1934) is an English theatre and opera director, actor, author, television presenter, humourist, and medical doctor.

See Physician and Jonathan Miller

Jorge Sampaio

Jorge Fernando Branco de Sampaio, GColTE, GCIH, GColL (born 18 September 1939) is a Portuguese lawyer and politician who was the 18th President of Portugal from 1996 to 2006.

See Physician and Jorge Sampaio

José Celso Barbosa

Dr.

See Physician and José Celso Barbosa

José Gregorio Hernández

Dr.

See Physician and José Gregorio Hernández

Joseph Bernardin

Joseph Louis Bernardin (April 2, 1928 – November 14, 1996) was an American Cardinal of the Catholic Church.

See Physician and Joseph Bernardin

Joseph Kessel

Joseph Kessel (10 February 1898 &ndash; 23 July 1979) was a French journalist and novelist.

See Physician and Joseph Kessel

Joseph Stilwell

Joseph Warren Stilwell (March 19, 1883 &ndash; October 12, 1946) was a United States Army general who served in the China Burma India Theater during World War II.

See Physician and Joseph Stilwell

Joseph-Ignace Guillotin

Dr.

See Physician and Joseph-Ignace Guillotin

Josiah Bartlet

Josiah Edward "Jed" Bartlet is a fictional character from the American television serial drama The West Wing, portrayed by Martin Sheen.

See Physician and Josiah Bartlet

Josiah Bartlett

Josiah Bartlett (– May 19, 1795) was an American physician and statesman, delegate to the Continental Congress for New Hampshire, and signatory of the Declaration of Independence.

See Physician and Josiah Bartlett

Jovan Jovanović Zmaj

Jovan "Jova" Jovanović (Јован Јовановић Змај, pronounced; 24 November 1833 – 1 June 1904), also known as Jovan Jovanović Zmaj or Zmaj, was one of the best-known Serbian poets.

See Physician and Jovan Jovanović Zmaj

Judith Steinberg Dean

Judith Steinberg Dean, M.D., (born May 9, 1953) is an American physician from Burlington, Vermont.

See Physician and Judith Steinberg Dean

Juniper

Junipers are coniferous plants in the genus Juniperus of the cypress family Cupressaceae.

See Physician and Juniper

Juris Doctor

The Juris Doctor degree (J.D. or JD), also known as the Doctor of Jurisprudence degree (J.D., JD, D.Jur. or DJur), is a graduate-entry professional degree in law and one of several Doctor of Law degrees.

See Physician and Juris Doctor

Juscelino Kubitschek

Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira (September 12, 1902 – August 22, 1976), known also by his initials JK, was a prominent Brazilian politician who served as the 21st President of Brazil from 1956 to 1961.

See Physician and Juscelino Kubitschek

Kafiristan

Kāfiristān, or Kāfirstān (کافرستان), is a historical region that covered present-day Nuristan Province in Afghanistan and its surroundings.

See Physician and Kafiristan

Kalevala

The Kalevala (Finnish Kalevala) is a 19th-century work of epic poetry compiled by Elias Lönnrot from Karelian and Finnish oral folklore and mythology.

See Physician and Kalevala

Karōshi

, which can be translated literally as "overwork death" in Japanese, is occupational sudden mortality.

See Physician and Karōshi

Karl Brandt

Karl Brandt (8 January 1904 – 2 June 1948) was a German physician and Schutzstaffel (SS) officer in Nazi Germany.

See Physician and Karl Brandt

Katipunan

The Katipunan (usually abbreviated to KKK) was a Philippine revolutionary society founded by anti-Spanish Filipinos in Manila in 1892, whose primary aim was to gain independence from Spain through revolution.

See Physician and Katipunan

Kemal Derviş

Kemal Derviş (born 10 January 1949) is a Turkish economist and politician, and former head of the United Nations Development Programme.

See Physician and Kemal Derviş

Kemp Mill, Maryland

Kemp Mill is a census-designated place and an unincorporated census area in Montgomery County, Maryland, United States.

See Physician and Kemp Mill, Maryland

Kenny Rogers

Kenneth Ray Rogers (born August 21, 1938) is an American singer, songwriter, actor, record producer, and entrepreneur.

See Physician and Kenny Rogers

Kenya

Kenya, officially the Republic of Kenya, is a country in Africa with its capital and largest city in Nairobi.

See Physician and Kenya

Khat

Khat or qat (Catha edulis, qat from القات) is a flowering plant native to the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.

See Physician and Khat

Kidney failure

Kidney failure, also known as end-stage kidney disease, is a medical condition in which the kidneys no longer work.

See Physician and Kidney failure

Kim Hunter

Kim Hunter (born Janet Cole, November 12, 1922 – September 11, 2002) was an American film, theatre, and television actress.

See Physician and Kim Hunter

Kindergarten

Kindergarten (from German, literally meaning 'garden for the children') is a preschool educational approach based on playing, singing, practical activities such as drawing, and social interaction as part of the transition from home to school.

See Physician and Kindergarten

Kiska

Kiska (Qisxa) is an island in the Rat Islands group of the Aleutian Islands of Alaska.

See Physician and Kiska

Knockout

A knockout (abbreviated to KO or K.O.) is a fight-en