Adolf Meyer (September 13, 1866 – March 17, 1950) was a psychiatrist who rose to prominence as the first psychiatrist-in-chief of the Johns Hopkins Hospital (1910-1941). He was president of the American Psychiatric Association in 1927–28 and was one of the most influential figures in psychiatry in the first half of the twentieth century. His focus on collecting detailed case histories on patients was one of the most prominent of his contributions. He oversaw the building and development of the Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic at Johns Hopkins Hospital, opened in April 1913, making sure it was suitable for scientific research, training and treatment. Meyer's work at the Phipps Clinic is arguably the most significant aspect of his career.Meyer's main theoretical contribution was his idea of ergasiology (a term he derived from the Greek for "working" and "doing") to describe a psychobiology. This brought together all the biological, social and psychological factors and symptoms pertaining to a patient. It considered mental illnesses to be a product of dysfunctional personality not a pathology of the brain. Believing that whole-life social and biological factors should be central to both diagnosis and treatment Meyer was one of the earliest psychologists to support occupational therapy as an important connection between the activities of an individual and their mental health, and incorporated community based activities and services to develop people's everyday living skills.

Alexandre Emile Jean Yersin (22 September 1863 – 1 March 1943) was a Swiss and naturalized French physician and bacteriologist. He is remembered as the co-discoverer of the bacillus responsible for the bubonic plague or pest, which was later named in his honour (Yersinia pestis). Another bacteriologist, Kitasato Shibasaburō is credited with independently identifying the bacterium a few days earlier but had in fact identified a different bacterium and not the pathogen causing plague. Yersin also demonstrated for the first time that the same bacillus was present in the rodent as well as in the human disease, thus underlining the possible means of transmission.

Alphonse Crespo (aka Luis Crespo) is a Swiss orthopedic surgeon. Founder in 2007 of Medicine & Liberty [1] a medical network dedicated to the study and advocacy of liberty, ethics & market in medical services. President of the Cercle de philosophie politique Benjamin Constant [2] at the Institut Libéral [3] a Swiss free-market think tank. Author of Esculape Foudroyé, ed. Les Belles Lettres Paris 1991 [4] and of numerous essays and articles such as Medicine: Deregulated or Dead [5], Black Market Medicine an Ethical alternative to State Control [6], Outlawing Medicine [7] or The End of Welfare and its effect on the Poor[8]. From Adam Smith to Karl Marx... and back [9] Une sieste à La Havane & autres récits obituaires" (fiction). Amazon books [10] of "La désobéissance civile" (2012) in "Libres" [11]. Le serment d'Hippocrate et l'éthique de la liberté in "Au chevet du système de santé", ed. Institut Liberal 2013.[12]. His writings advocate a libertarian approach to medical ethics and a full return of medicine to the free market.