It seems like today, in nearly every corner of what’s trending, western influence is coming to the forefront again. Be it entertainment, fashion, music, and more, a new era of “cowboy culture” has climbed to the top of the list.

While this beloved way of life dates back centuries, the Western heritage and cowboy culture we see today is different from its inception in North America.

According to historical records from the Library of Congress, cowboy culture is a blend of American, Spanish, and Mexican traditions. Early influence of cowboys came to the west by way of Spanish vaqueros and Mexican influence. According to history records, the Spanish brought cattle and ranching techniques in the 16th century. As Mexican culture, which was heavily influenced by the Spanish, spread into what is now southwestern United States, the cowboy culture spread.

Cowboys in America began to grow into their own in the 19th century as large cattle ranches in Texas were established and required a demand for workers with ranching and herding skills, according to historical records. From there, centuries of cowboys would emerge, sprouting through generations of families. Whether it’s ranching, farming, finding a passion for cowboy-style sports — such as bull riding, roping, barrel racing and more – or all the above, being a cowboy is a way of life.

However, the way someone embraces one’s ‘cowboy’ varies – and there are so many versions of what that looks like today. In modern days, the western heritage and cowboy culture catapulted in the spotlight in 2018 after the premiere of Paramount Network drama series ‘Yellowstone’ captured the attention of millions of viewers across the country. As years would follow, more western flares would merge their way into fashion and music, as cowboy trends, such as cowboy boots, became more regularly worn and embedded into fashion from more than just cowboys themselves. In the music world, country music stars, like Reba and Blake Shelton, became beloved judges on massively popular performance competition shows like NBC’s ‘The Voice’. Cowboy culture fused even more when international R&B, rap, hip-hop stars with Texas roots and connections, such as Beyoncé and Post Malone, announced or released country genre and western inspired albums, Cowboy Carter and F-1 Trillion.

But with a constant evolution of cowboy culture, how does it all look to a rooted veteran cowboy? Getting the finest perspective, we sought out ProRodeo Hall of Fame Bull Rider, Myrtis Dightman.

Dightman, a born and raised Texan, grew up ranching and farming and said he knew being a cowboy was a lifelong way of life early on.

“I knew that’s what I wanted to do,” Dightman said. “I wanted to be a bull rider, wanted to rope, and really do whatever I wanted to do.”

Dightman, center back, as a child working on a ranch

Beginning his rodeo career in the 1950s, he had quickly climbed the ranks of talented riders by the early 1960s. By 1966, Dightman would qualify for the National Finals Rodeo and would place third in the world in 1967. He even made a mark at the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo along the way, bull riding for the first time in 1966 and winning the event in 1967.

“You can’t be a cowboy overnight,” Dightman said. “It takes years of work to be a cowboy. You can’t just jump in the truck and call yourself one.”

Dightman bull riding at a rodeo, year unknown

Pioneering the way for African American cowboys, being the first at NFR, RODEOHOUSTON and others, he has been at the forefront of evolution. So, we asked Dightman in a one-on-one Q&A, as a trailblazing cowboy, how does Dightman see the cowboy culture we know today?

What are some of the common misconceptions about cowboys?

That you have to ride horses or bulls. You don’t have to. You just have to work hard, put the work in, do your part and be a good person. Also, that cowboys still exist. We’ve been in New York several times and when they see you with a cowboy hat on, they look at you, like, “Wow!” You know, on TV, they portray cowboys in a certain way but that’s what on TV is – It’s entertainment. They look at that and they don’t think that, you know, that’s really going on. And even though we’re from Texas, the third largest city in the world, but they still think that that there are no cowboys.

What is your take on ‘Yellowstone’? Do you still love the classic, western John Wayne movies?

It’s very good entertainment. It’s a modern day, western type, which is still very good. I mean, to me, I think we have to go with change, you know, but we changed but we need to stay cowboys, though. I’m definitely still choosing John Wayne movies to watch, though. It’s just, I learned that cowboy style. It’s just a whole different view from the new version of Hollywood.

What’s your take on artists of different genres tapping into western culture?

I like good old country western music. The country music today isn’t the country music we grew up on. You know, we came up with Johnny Cash and Hank Williams Jr. The new music is, you know, different, but that’s the world. Things are changing but I just hope that we continue to stay cowboys, period.

What is one piece of clothing that you would say anyone who wants to be a cowboy needs to have?

Jeans. You have to have a good pair of jeans. And starch. You know, cowboys wear jeans because it’s tough and dirty work out in the field, and a good pair of jeans will hold up better than other types.

Dightman at his Youth Hall of Fame Rodeo

While jeans, the ropes and riding are all part of the lifestyle, there’s is one thing that Dightman says no one can be a cowboy without – A good head on your shoulders.

“A cowboy is just a good man. They’re a little bit of everything,” Dightman said. “You have to be a good person, a great friend, and a hard worker.”