Jim Jones and Doug Figgs…

"TheCowboyWay"

Featuring guitarist extraordinaire Mariam

The Cowboy Way is a trio of award-winning musicians from New Mexico consisting of Mariam Funke, Doug Figgs, and Jim Jones. They have been named Western Group of the Year four times by the International Western Music Association and have taken home numerous individual awards from the IWMA, the Western Writers of America, the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum, and the Academy of Western Artists, among others. Their music captures the spirit of the West…the past, the present, the future; the values, challenges, and allure, while their lively shows feature tight harmonies, high energy and smokin’ instrumentals. These prolific songwriters take you on the ride of a lifetime as they honor traditional cowboy songs then bowl you over with their dynamic contemporary original Western tunes. The Cowboy Way presents professional, crowd-pleasing entertainment.

Jim Jones is a native Texan, a student of the West and a life-long devotee of all things cowboy. His award-winning songwriting, guitar-picking and unique vocal style keeps him in demand at music venues throughout the country. Jim has produced eight Western Americana albums and three award-winning children’s character education videos. He has written three Western novels, Rustler’s Moon, (2009); Colorado Moon, (2011) and Waning Moon, (2013). His eighth Western Americana album, Borrowed Time, released in April of 2012, produced Western Writers of America 2013 Spur Award winning Western Song of the Year, “Texas is Burnin’” and 2014 Western Writers Spur Finalist for Western Song of the Year, “Race with the Wind”. His song, “Cowboys of New Mexico,” was the New Mexico Music Awards 2009 Western Song of the Year. Jim was named the Western Music Association Male Performer of the Year for 2014 and won the Academy of Western Artists 2015 Western Song of the Year with “The Fires of Goliad”. In 2017 "Halfway Down the Devil's Road" ( written by Jim Jones and Allan Chapman) from "The Cowboy Way" CD won the Western Writers of America Spur Award for best Western song.

Doug Figgs is a horseshoer, cowboy, and a Western music singer/songwriter. In the last few years he has turned his attention to his love of music with the emphasis on Western themes. The Western Music Association named him the 2015 Songwriter of the Year and his song “Socios” was named WMA Song of the Year. He also won the Academy of Western Artists 2015 Western Male Vocalist of the Year and the coveted Spur Award for Best Western Song from the Western Writers of America in 2014 “Charlie & Evangeline.” He has toured the Southwest extensively and continues to turn out his own variety of Western music, from hard driving songs with a tinge of southern rock, to beautiful ballads and everything in between. Doug released his CD “Partners” in 2014 and his award winning CD “A Cowboy Like Me” in Feb. 2016.