"Sigma female is a term used to describe women who are strong, charming, assertive and confident like alpha females, but who also are self-reliant, highly independent, and enjoy spending time alone."

Citation: https://thetrulycharming.com/sigma-female/

There is a lot of hype on the web about Sigma Males, but what about Sigma Females? Just take a look at these hashtag statistics to demonstrate my point: as of yesterday, the current number of hashtags for #sigmamale on Instagram was 405K and the current number of hashtags for #sigmafemale on Instagram was 28.1K.

Interesting, no?

It took me some time to figure this out, but once I did, it really settled with me that I resonate most with being a Sigma Female. This is a self-proclaimed identity of course, yet it highlights a very important theme for my life's work. So, I decided to write a little manifesto about it.

I have been a lone wolf my whole life because I am a Matriarch, which doesn't actually "exist" in a patriarchal society. I am not a lone wolf because I WANT to be, I am a lone wolf because I have HAD to be. My lightbody and womb-space is just too big to fit myself into the patriarchal model of vertical/linear growth. I am a multi-dimensional, quantum being and I embody the Divine Feminine.

Considering our current mainstream society makes no room for my essence, I have been relegated to the marginalized sectors of society. Our cultures and religions used to understand the important of the womb and now we all walk around with little to no connection to Her Essence. Hence, I am a lone wolf.

Furthermore, a Sigma Female embodies Sovereignty and NEVER EVER EVER submits to ANYTHING. She is whole in and of herself.

We live in a patriarchal society that operates within the parameters of dominance/submission (Alpha is dominant and Beta is submissive). A Sigma Female DOES NOT DO THIS. She does not dominate others, she does not require submission and she certainly WILL NOT submit her Sovereignty to bosses, corporations, governments, or religious indoctrination.

The Alpha is a dominant, competitive player and The Sigma swallows these patriarchal dynamics right up, and spits them out. We do not play these games.

A Sigma Female is like a massive blue whale: a very large energy with a very large presence, yet in no way is she a predator. The mainstream Alpha-Beta dynamics are Predator-Prey dymamics, which Sigma Females do their best to avoid at all costs. We know there is no need to compete with others as we are unique beings with unique talents. We know that ultimately competition is meant to be friendly, NOT predatorial, so that each person is pushed to excel through challenges. Sigma Females deeply deeply sense something out of alignment with their truth around the mainstream competitive narrative. When something is not meant for us, we know another opportunity is coming to take its place.

Yet, easier said than done in a patriarchal society run on capitalism.

So, here are my Top Ten traits of a Sigma Female according to my personal experience and self-identification:

1.) She is a free spirit and cannot be tamed. She will conform to rules that uphold integrity, honesty, and collaboration. She will follow rules that MAKE SENSE. She will throw out rules that require her to become submissive and obedient.

2.) She is actually quite extroverted but not social. Read that again. There is a difference.

3.) She is very intelligent and enjoys her solitude. She spends significant time alone processing her emotions and simply being.

4.) She is a fluid person who does not like to follow strict, rigorous routines and schedules, yet she does adhere to a flexible routine.

5.) She is an artist and a Renaissance Woman.

6.) She is fierce with a warrior spirit. She is a warrioress!

7.) She doesn't care about trends a whole lot, but she does care a little. She is aware and chooses trends that suit her spirit. She does not follow trends simply because they are popular.

8.) She lives on the outskirts of society, exiled for her independence and refusal to submit or obey authority that inherently disrespects her Sovereignty.

9.) She is authentic and rather straight-forward. She is also mysterious because she is straight-forward. Embrace the paradox everyone. She is a giant paradox.

10.) She is a woman that evolves into her complexities and paradoxes. She rarely settles and recognizes that most of society cannot handle her complexities, hence why she is maginalized.

BONUS! A Sigma Female is a true Shakti. She embodies the raw, magnetic creative energy (womb-space) that is our quantum, authentic potential. More to come!

To learn more about my work or book a Tarot reading with me, please check out my instagram page @thekatearcangeli and my Etsy store here.

About me: I hold two bachelors of arts degrees from The University of Michigan-Ann Arbor in Linguistics and Italian Studies. I am a multi-disciplinary artist currently composing and recording my debut full-length album. I am a singer-songwriter, a pianist, and vocalist weaving together modern performance art with ceremony devoted to The Feminine Mysteries. I call this project PRIESTESS HOUSE. I am a Tarot and Oracle card enthusiast and I write things. Composing and writing are my flow state and talent. I live in Kalamazoo, Michigan with my two sons, George and Peter.