at EY in Memphis, Tennessee, United States

Job Description

EY focuses on high-ethical standards and integrity among its employees and expects all candidates to demonstrate these qualities. At EY, you’ll have the chance to build a career as unique as you are, with the global scale, support, inclusive culture and technology to become the best version of you. And we’re counting on your unique voice and perspective to help EY become even better, too. Join us and build an exceptional experience for yourself, and a better working world for all.

This position could be located in NY, NJ, NC, IL.

EY is the only professional services firm with a separate business unit (“FSO”) that is dedicated to the financial services marketplace. Our FSO teams have been at the forefront of every event that has reshaped and redefined the financial services industry. If you have a passion for rallying together to solve the most complex challenges in the financial services industry, come join our dynamic FSO team!

The opportunity

We are looking for an exceptional individual to join our global FSO Advisory, System Integration (SI) Oracle team. Individuals will work directly with EY leadership and clients to integrate Oracle solutions that transform the way they do business. Individuals, like you, will work to identify business requirements and identify solutions that align with Oracle technologies supporting the finance organizations of our clients.

Your key responsibilities

As a key member of this team, you’ll be expected manage and supervise a global team of technology professionals through all phases of the technology lifecycle, including requirements definition, architecture and functional design, testing, and implementation while maintaining strong client relationship.

Skills and attributes for success

You will have a balance of knowledge of the financial services, Oracle system expertise and strong communication and leadership skills.

To qualify for the role you must have

+ 8+ years of work experience, including 5+ year of system implementation execution, system implementation design, and/or lean / six-sigma operational improvement projects.

+ A minimum of 7 years of relevant experience at a financial services company or comparable experience working

+ Deliver quality project execution by successfully monitoring project/program team economics, performance against the job arrangement and budget, and proactively adjust scope, timing, and resources as appropriate or necessary

+ Demonstrated ability in identifying and generating new business opportunities

+ Demonstrated ability in developing repeatable services, tools, points of view, and thought leadership to differentiate EY from its peers. These are leveraged throughout EY to provide consistency in our solution delivery

+ Possess strong applicable knowledge of Oracle technologies of one or more Oracle applications related to Cloud ERP, PeopleSoft, Hyperion EPM or OFSAA/FAH

+ Demonstrated ability to manage and supervise a global team of technology advisors through all phases of the technology life cycle, including requirements definition, architecture and functional design, testing, and implementation while maintaining strong client relationship

+ Willingness and ability to travel up to 70-100%

Ideally, you’ll also have

+ Post-graduate / Graduate degree in computer science, engineering, accounting, finance or a related field

+ Experience in one or more of the following areas:

+ Managing against an onshore/offshore model; definition of business and technical requirements; design of technology architecture; system selection and implementation support; data mapping and conversion; proof of concept; business and IT process reengineering; program/project management and implementation planning (PMO)

+ Previous Project experiences in:

+ Finance transformation and accelerated close; sub-ledger/ledger redesign; management reporting enhancement; business intelligence/decision support; traded products/front/back office package implementation; data warehousing/enterprise data design and management; enterprise application integration; financial planning, budgeting and forecasting; business/merger Integration, reconciliation redesign or improvement

+ Consulting industry experience

What we look for

We’re looking to develop the next generation of outstanding leaders to continue our legacy. Our top performed in the past have demonstrated:

+ Deep experience and knowledge within the financial services marketplace

+ Identified opportunities to leverage EY’s transformative solutions into a client’s solution

+ Knowledge of clients’ business and industry trends

+ Consistency in delivering project objectives on time, within budget and with the highest-quality results

+ Strong EY values, identified by all ranks as someone who actively leads and coaches

What working at EY offers

We offer a competitive compensation package where you’ll be rewarded based on your performance and recognized for the value you bring to our business. In addition, our Total Rewards package includes medical and dental coverage, both pension and 401(k) plans, a minimum of 15 days of vacation plus ten observed holidays and three paid personal days, and a range of programs and benefits designed to support your physical, financial and social well-being. Plus, we offer:

+ The opportunity to manage a portfolio of talent within a designated service line

+ A collaborative environment where everyone works together to create a better working world

+ Excellent training and development prospects, both through established programs and on-the-job training

+ An excellent team of senior colleagues, dedicated to managing and varying your workload

About EY

As a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and advisory services, we hire and develop the most passionate people in their field to help build a better working world. This starts with a culture that believes in giving you the training, opportunities and creative freedom to make things better. So that whenever you join, however long you stay, the exceptional EY experience lasts a lifetime.

Build your legacy with us. If you can confidently demonstrate that you meet the criteria above, please contact us as soon as possible.

Apply now.

Responsibilities, Qualifications, Certifications – External

EY provides equal employment opportunities to applicants and employees without regard to race, color, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, national origin, protected veteran status, disability status, or any other legally protected basis, in accordance with applicable law.

What we offer

We offer a comprehensive compensation and benefits package where you’ll be rewarded based on your performance and recognized for the value you bring to the business. The salary range for this job in most geographic locations in the US is $163,400 to $373,300. The salary range for New York City Metro Area, Washington State and California (excluding Sacramento) is $196,100 to $424,300. Individual salaries within those ranges are determined through a wide variety of factors including but not limited to education, experience, knowledge, skills and geography. In addition, our Total Rewards package includes medical and dental coverage, pension and 401(k) plans, and a wide range of paid time off options. Under our flexible vacation policy, you’ll decide how much vacation time you need based on your own personal circumstances. You’ll also be granted time off for designated EY Paid Holidays, Winter/Summer breaks, Personal/Family Care, and other leaves of absence when needed to support your physical, financial, and emotional well-being.

+ Continuous learning: You’ll develop the mindset and skills to navigate whatever comes next.