On the shores of Lake Osborne, Super explains how Ted Koppel has accused him of signing a major tennis shoe deal and exploiting it. Super and Donald show off the new "Super Dave Ark", which will be used to bring animals from the mainland to his special island zoo. Ray Charles sings "What I'd say". Super and Fuji show off the special house they built for Ray Charles, and decide to play a little trick on him by rearranging the furniture from one room to another. Super gets in the bed and plans to surprise Ray!

It's the holiday show! At Super's Souvenir village, Super and Donald show off the area with an anti-pollution theme, and there are many decorations sold at the gift shop made from trash items. They also show the picture area where kids can have their picture taken with Santa. Kids can also take a special ride up the chimney, which Super tries out with disastrous results. Back in the studio, Super has been given $3000 to give to three lucky people in the audience, and he draws three random seat numbers. Loreena McKennitt sings and plays "Greensleeves" on the harp, which also ends in an unfortunate mishap. Back at the souvenir village, Fuji helps Super try out the "Super Dave's Recycled Raft Ride", which is a white water raft ride with a "surprise ending".

Steve Kolodny shows off his latest Super Dave compilation video, and Super gives him his own office, which until recently was occupied by Bernie. Michel Lauziere once again tries to do an act on the show, performing musical tricks. Super and Fuji open the new Super Dave Fast Food restaurant, which Super claims will serve healthy food made and served by graduates of the Super Dave Food University. Super introduces the chef, who like the previous chef is an aspiring singer. They end the tour by showing how they strive to get an order done in the shortest time by having Fuji order at the drive thru.

Danny Menendez, one of the show's electricians, opens the show by juggling. Michelle Wright sings "New Kind of Love". Super and Fuji revisit Storybookland, where there have been new areas added, and they reenact "Little Red Riding Hood", with Super as red and Fuji as the wolf. The story is supposed to end with Red getting rid off the wolf while he is in grandma's house by triggering the Murphy bed.

At the Super Dave Equestrian Academy, Super and Donald give a tour of the stables, showing Super's favourite horse Darla, the horse washing area, and the saddle room. Bernie Weinthall is seen riding a very small mule, and Jean Paul Peret the famous rider performs some dressage exercises, then Super tries out some exercises himself. Sue Medley sings "Dangerous Times". Audience member Dave Ellis tells a parachuting joke before sending it to Mike Walden. At the new Super Dave Bungee School, Fuji explains how they improve discipline and concentration in students by using the mantra "Blue skies, clean air, and the weight is perfect!", and throwing down a dummy weight first. One of Super's prize students, Austin, performs a jump. Super then gets ready to do his own jump.

Super wants to hold a "Super Dave Beach Boys Contest", where the Beach Boys will perform a song and audience members will sing along to win money. However, the Super Dave Band shows up instead. (The Super Dave Band also causes a surprise when they know a SECOND song.) At the new Super Dave International Raceway, Super tries to break his own record doing a lap around the track in the Super Racer. Fuji has improved the track to make it more challenging by hiding land mines on it, which the Super One accidentally hits. Back in the studio, Laura Branigan sings "Never in a Million Years". Super appears to be okay, but he still needs to go to the hospital for testing, so he gets put in an ambulance.

At the Super Dave Confidence Building Area, Super and Donald once again run into Jose the Gardener. Donald has been trying a new positive reinforcement technique by letting Robert Gruenberg sunbathe. With the promise of ice cold lemonade, Robert finally juggles two bowling pins, and a chainsaw. KD Lang sings "Luck in My Eyes". Super and Fuji give a tour of the compound's Bond Warehouse building, showing special Bond spy equipment. Fuji then helps Super perform the "James Bond Jump", where Super will drive the Bond car out the window, and land on a bag.

Crystal Gayle sings "Never Ending Song of Love", while Super joins in playing the accordion. Fuji and Super give a tour of the new miniature golf course, where every hole features a TV screen with a tape of one of Super's stunts. At the 18th hole, the golfer will get into a big plastic ball, and a giant Super Dave statue will hit them down a special course that looks like a pinball machine towards the hole for a chance to win a million dollars. Super gives it a shot.

Super is upset because the Wall Street Journal has accused him of wrongfully spending money that should be spent on making new areas on the compound for children. Super denounces this by showing the "Old Lady Who Lived in a High Tech Shoe" area. Michel Lauziere once again tries to be on the show by performing stunts using giant balloons. En Vogue sings "Lies". Super and Donald show their new "Geiger Car", which can scan for anything underground and feed it to a computer bank nearby. Super tries it out by driving around the test area while Donald sits at the console, and it works when Super finds something metallic in the ground.

Super and Bernie are disgusted that the network wants to boost ratings by having scantily clad women on the show. He has some women give their outfits to him so he can show how revealing they are, and rounds it off by having the girls do a dance. Clarence Clemons performs "Garden of Memories". Super and Fuji give a tour of the new Super Dave's Safety Mart, which has advanced security features to deter shoplifters. As an added precaution, the till area has an air jet gun disguised as a pen.

Super is at the hospital yet again. It's the ten year anniversary of the opening of the compound, and Donald was helping him rehearse his big number at the opening where he flies around on wires lip-synching to "Wind Beneath My Wings" by Bette Midler. A miscalculation occurred and he crashed right through the bulb wall. Randy Travis sings "Singing the Blues". Super is incredibly depressed that he is in the hospital during this special evening, and Donald, disgusted that the orderlies just left Super in the hall, finds a nice small room to put him in. The Northern Pikes sing "Kiss Me You Fool". Super is still determined to do the show for his fans, so he has Donald take him back to the studio on his stretcher against the doctor's orders. On his return, the audience gives him a standing ovation. The bulb wall has even been replaced, and the billboard says "We Love You Super".

At the new Super Dave Driving School, Donald and Super reveal their plans for a Senior Citizen Driver Training Program, which has been criticized by Newsweek. Super denounces the claims by having his prize student, Bill, drive the training car. Mitchell Zeidwig performs on the piano with a string quartet, and Super has him play the piano while hanging from a chandelier to earn $1000 for the "I Can Do It" foundation. Super and Fuji show off the new "Yacht Car", which is an RV and a Yacht together that can go on water and on land. Super proudly drives it to the boat ramp while "Beyond the Sea" by Bobby Darin plays.

Super announces that KD Lang is performing on the show again, but it turns out he is mistaken. Jeff Dunham performs with Woozle dummy Peanut, then gets his dummy Walter to help him throw it to Mike Walden. Super and Donald visit the recently opened Senior Citizen's Boxing Club, where Super introduces George Foreman as the trainer. Super shows off his prize students who are better, stronger, and faster thanks to George's training program. Super and George each coach a senior contender to box, and they have a Senior Citizen's boxing match.

Super and Donald show off Super's new aviary, along with birdwatcher Gerry Bennett. They take a look at several species while Super is the unfortunate target of bird activity. Ray Charles sings "Born to Lose". At the new Super Dave's Parade Village, Super, Mike, Fuji, Donald, and Bernie show an entirely computerized parade. Donald designed the floats, Fuji remotely operates them, Bernie handles the legal problems, and Super uses it to promote his new lip-synching album. The parade gets going while the five of them ride the last float and lip synch to the "Battle Hymn of the Republic", with Super leading from the top of the float. Unfortunately, their float breaks down at a crossroads.

En Vogue sings "Hold On". Jacques Henri from Paris, when asked to throw it to Mike Walden, draws it out by performing impressions of Julio Iglesias singing "Funky Cold Medina" by Tone Loc, Def Leppard singing the Mr. Rogers theme, and imitating a saxophone. At the Super Dave Memorial Speedway Stadium, Fuji helps Super perform a stunt where Super will jump 65 feet over five burning cars in his rocket bike, and Super will think of it as his "Road to Stardom". He decides to back up a good distance to get his nerve up, and backs his bike all the way to the highway.

Super is celebrating "Elvis week", and decides to hold an Elvis Recollection Contest, where the Super Dave Band will play an Elvis song, and audience members guess the song title. One of the band, Uno Lanka, performs a balancing act. Fuji and Super give a tour of the new Super Dave Funniest Home Videos area, where families can come and make their own movies with hilarious slapstick action. Super demonstrates a breaking teeter totter and love seat, the closed doggy door, and a dummy getting hit with a golf ball. He ends by giving a tour of a specially rigged house where several bad pranks happen to him, to the point where the whole house collapses.

At the Super Dave Marina, Fuji and Super are getting ready to break the water speed record with his boat. He begins by showing off his boat, the SS Super, with its special engine which he hopes to get up to 330 miles per hour with. Back in the studio, Michelle Wright sings "Wide Open". Super manages to break the record, but something goes wrong with the engine so he takes it back to the docks. Glen Campbell sings "Rhinestone Cowboy". The engine is unfortunately shot, and Super is disappointed that he wasn't able to break the record by more.

Super once again challenges Mitchell Zeidwig to back up his claims by having him perform stunts while playing the piano. At the new Super Dave indoor arena, Fuji helps Super with his "Pent-athalon of Stunts", where he will be doing five dangerous stunts, one for each night. The present stunt is Super going up against "Robosaurus", a giant robot dinosaur that can breathe fire. Super will drive his red Super Dave sports car around the arena, and Fuji will operate Robosaurus, trying to catch him. Fuji demonstrates the robot's fire breathing, and he accidentally burns through the scoreboard monitor's support wire, which Super is unfortunately caught under. Back in the studio, Celine Dion sings "Any Other Way". The badly injured Super is put in an ambulance.

At the Super Dave Antique Car Auction, Donald has helped Super set up the space for some of Ron Fawcett's prize automobiles. Ron Fawcett himself shows up as his most valuable car, a 1898 Panhard, is unloaded from the bus cargo area, along with Bernie in his own tiny car. Super and Jim Roswold show a couple of commercials for Nike featuring Super Dave. Super also awards Jim with a Super Dave Hall of Fame plaque. Super and Fuji give a tour of the new Super Dave museum of modern art, showing off several pieces ending with the "Piano Vault", which is a player piano with a secret safe hidden somewhere that opens when you play a specific song.

Super holds the Super Dave recollection contest, where audience members get a chance to win shirts and hats by watching video clips of previous stunts and answering detail questions. One of the contestants has to perform a balancing act. A man from the audience, Eddie Rice, tells a joke about a prize cat before sending it to Mike Walden. Donald and Super hold a class in filmmaking, where they show how chroma-works with a blue screen, by using equipment in their special trailer to do overlays. Super will do his demonstration by diving from a scaffold into a chroma-key blue bag which is overlaid with a film of water to make it look like he is diving into a pool.

Michel Lauziere plays Ode to Joy on wine glasses, then changes his pants in ten seconds. Randy Travis sings "It's Just a Matter of Time". At the Super Dave Test Track, Super and Fuji explain their work with the North American Highway Patrol Association and we see a flashback of the "Bump and Rob". Super is going to drive the test vehicle around the track, and Fuji is going to call him on the car phone to warn him about upcoming hazards. Super safely avoids broken glass and a stray cow, and is warned in advance that there's a rain storm.

The Smothers Brothers open the show with Tom explaining about how one brother usually gets confused with the other, then sing a lively tune about Super Dave. Tom then becomes the "Yo-Yo Man" and dazzles the audience with his tricks. Fuji and Super give a tour of the new Super Dave Safe Soccer Stadium, which has measures in place to prevent fights between players and spectators, and to ensure the referee's safety. The biggest feature is the ejection seats people can use to escape if a riot erupts. Super intends to simulate a riot by having rows of seats filled with cardboard cutout people move closer to him until he decides to eject.

Sue Medley sings "Love Thing". Jeff Dunham performs with Peanut the Woozle, Jose the jalepeno on a stick, and Peanut's own Little Jeff dummy. At the new Super Dave Flight Training School, Super and Fuji explain how people can visit and watch planes fly, get plane rides, or even flight lessons. The planes that people ride in are actually controlled by Fuji in a special control unit on the ground. Super goes up in one of the planes and flies over the whole compound, and even chases another plane simulating an air combat, and makes a perfect landing. The school also offers the "Ultimate Flying Experience" at the highest price. Mike wants to know what it is, and Fuji explains that it simulates the plane actually getting hit by gunfire.

Dan Menendez comes back and does a juggling act, and briefly tries a ventriloquism act. KD Lang sings "Trail of Broken Hearts". Super and Donald give a tour of their new Earthquake Safety House, which protects occupants from the effects of an earthquake. Inside the house, there is a padded floor and walls, furniture made from food in case of emergency, a Super Dave survival guide, a phone with an airbag in it, and finally a chair loaded with springs that will not move around if there's an earthquake. He demonstrates this by having Donald and the crew shake the house. Super wants to simulate a bigger earthquake, but the crew isn't strong enough.