Hollyoaks star Kevin Sacre had fans of the hit show cringing when he played unsavoury character Jake Dean for the best part of a decade.

The handsome star portrayed abusive Jake perfectly as he won people over with his looks and charm, while behind closed doors his darker side began to show when he beat up Justin Burton numerous times.

He also attacked his wife Becca Dean while she was pregnant after learning of her affair with Justin, leaving fans of the show aghast at his horrific behaviour.

READ MORE: Hollyoaks star James Sutton's life - bingo caller job, health battle and Emmerdale stint

While Kevin hit the nail on the head as Jake, his own personal life couldn't be further from the bad boy character who was finally axed from the show in 2010, eight years on from his 2002 debut.

The actor has had a fairytale romance over the years with his former Strictly Come Dancing star wife Camilla Dallerup.

The couple first got together in 2008 after Camilla's relationship with fellow dancer Brendan Cole fell victim to the Strictly curse when he fell in love with his celebrity dance partner, newsreader Natasha Kaplinsky in 2004.

Camilla and Kevin then got engaged back in 2009 exactly one year on from their first date as they enjoyed a luxurious trip to Capri, Italy.

Talking about the proposal to Hello! at the time he said: "I fumbled around for the ring. I tried to say something profound about there being beautiful rocks and here's another - luckily she didn't hear that."

Camilla added: "It was quite possibly one of the worst proposals - but for us it was perfect."

As the pair prepared for their July 2010 nuptials Kevin was honest about the stresses of planning the wedding in a chat with Digital Spy where he admitted his poor organisational skills were making it a "nightmare."

He explained: "I'm so bored of them... No, it's great! She's very organised, I'm not! It's a nightmare - I'd rather elope!"

The actor also addressed his departure from the soap at the time saying he had "asked to leave" because he was "getting married in July."

Another year on from the date they got engaged Kevin and Camilla tied the knot in a star-studded but intimate beach ceremony in Ibiza.

The couple then relocated to Los Angeles in 2014 to live out their lives together with her working on Dancing With The Stars and becoming a wellness guru, while Jake changed his job entirely and became an investment advisor.

Talking about the change in 2018 Camilla said: "It was a huge risk and a humbling experience after being so comfortable back in London. But we were done with our jobs over there and once we finally figured out how LA works, we came out of it stronger than ever."

Hollyoaks airs weeknights on Channel 4 at 6.30pm followed by first-look episodes on E4 at 7pm

For the latest breaking news and stories from across the globe from the Daily Star, sign up for our newsletter by clicking here

READ NEXT: