Hollyoaks has been revisiting some of its greatest ever instalments as part of new series Hollyoaks@25, and the third week — which showcases one particular storyline covering 2006-2010 — will centre on Becca Dean (Ali Bastian) and Justin’s (Chris Fountain) ill-advised affair.

The Channel 4 soap was forced to halt production down amid the COVID-19 pandemic, and episodes which were filmed prior to lockdown were subsequently rationed out in an effort to keep the soap on air.

With only two instalments airing a week, the Wednesday, Thursday and Friday slots on E4 were filled with older episodes in a series entitled Hollyoaks Favourites.

Iconic instalments such as Mercedes’ wedding to Doctor Browning, and the train and bus crashes — as well as entire weeks devoted to icons such as Clare Devine, Cindy Cunningham, Brendan Brady, Tony Hutchinson and McDean were aired.

However, with new episodes having run out altogether, Hollyoaks devised a new series entitled Hollyoaks@25 to ensure that fans not only get their Chester fix, but that they also get to celebrate some of the soap’s finest hours ahead of its 25 anniversary later this year.

The third week — which covers the years of 2006-2010 — will focus on Becca and Justin’s affair, and will be presented by Jessica Fox and Amy Conachan.

Monday 10 August

Ep 1783

It’s 2006 and teacher, Becca is pregnant. At school, she confides in potential father, Justin that she’s bleeding after a student bumps into her. Justin takes Becca to the hospital, but dressed in his school uniform, the nurse mistakes him for her little brother.

When everything is fine with the baby, Justin questions why Becca is still upset, but it’s because she doesn’t know who the father is – Justin or her husband, Jake. Justin wants a future with Becca but she tells him it can’t happen – it’s the end of the line for them.

Tuesday 11 August

Ep 1784

Becca doesn’t feel up to going into work after her trip to the hospital yesterday, so Jake offers to spend the day with her. It’s Nancy’s birthday, but Nicole decides to tell her about Becca and Justin’s affair. Nancy laughs off Nicole’s claims, but storms off when she hears about the kiss.

Mel and Sophie ask their mum for a 21st birthday party, but Liz is unsure, given Mel’s battle with alcoholism. However, when she sees how hard Mel’s working, she changes her mind. Meanwhile, Justin has locked himself in his room, leaving his mum and sisters questioning who’s broken his heart.

Wednesday 12 August

Ep 1785

Mel and Sophie are determined to find out who Justin is heartbroken over. He tells them that it’s Becca, but they laugh in his face. Meanwhile, Nancy still doesn’t know what to believe, until she sees Becca and Justin talking together at school. Becca chases after Nancy, pleading with her not to believe Nicole, but when they get home, Nicole and Hannah are waiting for them with Jake. Jake goes out for pizza and Nancy urges Becca to tell him the truth – before he finds out from someone else…

Mel just wants everything to be normal when her mum bans alcohol at their party.

The Ashworths are surprised when Grandpa Bill appears in the kitchen for breakfast. He wants to move into the family home, but Gilly worries that it’s him who will have to make space if he does. Suzanne lets Bill stay for the weekend, but that’s it.

Thursday 13 August

Ep 1786

Mel struggles to resist temptation at the party, while Justin hopes that Becca might turn up. Elsewhere, Nicole urges Nancy to speak up about Becca and Justin’s affair. In the village, Nancy confronts Justin.

He’s surprised to hear that Becca has admitted everything but when Nancy says that he was just a drunken mistake, Justin reveals that he and Becca slept together more than once.

Jake sees the argument from the window and Becca covers. When Nancy realises that she missed out on seeing her dad for the last time because Becca took Justin away for the weekend, she sees red. Jake wants answers when the sisters start fighting and emotional Becca confesses to having an affair…

Friday 14 August

Ep 1787

Jake demands to know who Becca has been sleeping with and she reveals that it’s Justin. Elsewhere, Mel and Sophie’s party is in full swing and Craig is trying to figure out who Justin’s secret girl is. He doesn’t have to wait long when Jake bursts into the Burton’s home and punches Justin to the floor.

Everyone finds out that Becca and Justin have been sleeping together, but Justin pleads that they love each other. Back at home, Jake trashes the flat, while Frankie begs him to let her in.

Nancy finds Becca crying in the alleyway, and Liz decides to phone the police about Jake attacking her son. Becca returns home, but as Jake is telling her to leave, the police arrive and arrest him for assault.

Max and Claire celebrate their engagement with Sean and Louise. Despite their bickering, it seems there’s still a spark between the latter and Louise is upset when Sean reveals that their divorce should be final in a few weeks.

If you’ve got a soap or TV story, video or pictures get in touch by emailing us soaps@metro.co.uk – we’d love to hear from you.

Join the community by leaving a comment below and stay updated on all things soaps at our homepage.

MORE : Hollyoaks star Kirsty-Leigh Porter reveals body bag death 'could literally be anyone

MORE : Hollyoaks spoilers: Connor Calland reveals he's 'pulling hairs out' over body bag death