806 relations: Ab Ask, Ab-e Garm, Mazandaran, Abbas I of Persia, Abbas Mirza, Abbasabad County, Abbasabad District, Abbasabad, Amol, Abbasabad, Mazandaran, Abdangesar, Amol, Abdollah Javadi-Amoli, Abdollahi, Abol-Fath Khan Zand, Abolfazl Attar, Abolhassan Sadighi, Abu Mahalleh, Abu ol Hasanabad, Amol, Adil Shah, Afghans in Iran, Afsaneh Sara, Afshar people, Afsharid dynasty, Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar, Agriculture in Iran, Ahangar Kola, Dabudasht, Ahangar Kola-ye Olya, Ahangar Kola-ye Sofla, Ahmad Shah Durrani, Aidin Nikkhah Bahrami, Akbarabad-e Pain, Akha, Iran, Akhazir, Al-Tabari, Al-Tabari (disambiguation), Alam-Kuh, Alamut, Alasht, Alborz, Alborz Province, Ali Akbar Nategh-Nouri, Ali Asghar Bazri, Ali Asghar Mazandarani, Ali Larijani, Ali Nazari Juybari, Ali Reza Khan Azod al-Molk, Ali Yachkaschi, Ali-Morad Khan Zand, Alireza Mohammad, Allah Kaj, Allameh Mohaddes Nouri University, Alu, Mazandaran, ... Expand index (756 more) » « Shrink index

Ab Ask

Ab Ask (آب اسک, also Romanized as Āb-e Ask; also known as Ask) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ab Ask

Ab-e Garm, Mazandaran

Ab-e Garm (اب گرم, also Romanized as Āb-e Garm; also known as Āb Garm-e-Lārījān, Āb Garm-e Lārījān-e Pā’īn, Āb Garm-e Pā’īn Lārījān, and Ābgarm Lārījān) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ab-e Garm, Mazandaran

Abbas I of Persia

Shāh Abbās the Great or Shāh Abbās I of Persia (شاه عباس بزرگ; 27 January 157119 January 1629) was the 5th Safavid Shah (king) of Iran, and is generally considered the strongest ruler of the Safavid dynasty.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbas I of Persia

Abbas Mirza

Abbas Mirza (عباس میرزا) (August 20, 1789October 25, 1833), was a Qajar crown prince of Persia.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbas Mirza

Abbasabad County

Abbasabad County (شهرستان عباس‌آباد) is a county on the Caspian Sea, in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbasabad County

Abbasabad District

Abbasabad District (بخش عباس‌آباد) is a former district (bakhsh) in Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbasabad District

Abbasabad, Amol

Abbasabad (عباس اباد, also Romanized as ‘Abbāsābād) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbasabad, Amol

Abbasabad, Mazandaran

Abbasabad (عباس اباد, also Romanized as ‘Abbāsābād; formerly, Veresk (Persian: وَرسَك) and Varaak) is a city & capital of Abbasabad County, in Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abbasabad, Mazandaran

Abdangesar, Amol

Abdangesar (ابدنگسر, also Romanized as Ābdāngesar) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abdangesar, Amol

Abdollah Javadi-Amoli

Abdollah Javadi-Amoli (عبدالله جوادی آملی) is an Iranian Twelver Shi'a Marja.

See Mazandaran Province and Abdollah Javadi-Amoli

Abdollahi

Abdollahi (عبدالهي, also Romanized as ‘Abdollāhī, ‘Abdolahī, and ‘Abdolláhī) is a village in Shohada Rural District, Yaneh Sar District, Behshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abdollahi

Abol-Fath Khan Zand

Abol-Fath Khan Zand (ابوالفتح خان زند Abol-Fatḥ Khān Zand; 1755/17561787) was the third Shah of the Zand dynasty, ruling from March 6, 1779, until August 22, 1779.

See Mazandaran Province and Abol-Fath Khan Zand

Abolfazl Attar

Mirza Abolfazl Attar.

See Mazandaran Province and Abolfazl Attar

Abolhassan Sadighi

Abolhassan Sadighi (ابوالحسن صدیقی) (5 October 1894 – 11 December 1995) was an Iranian sculptor and painter and was known as Master Sadighi.

See Mazandaran Province and Abolhassan Sadighi

Abu Mahalleh

Abu Mahalleh (ابومحله, also Romanized as Abū Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abu Mahalleh

Abu ol Hasanabad, Amol

Abu ol Hasanabad (ابوالحسن اباد, also Romanized as Abū ol Ḩasanābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Abu ol Hasanabad, Amol

Adil Shah

Adil or Adel Shah Afshar, born ʿAlī-qolī Khan (Modern Persian: عادل شاه افشار) (died 1749) was the Afsharid Shah of Iran from 1747 to 1748, a nephew and successor of Nader Shah, the founder of the Afsharid dynasty.

See Mazandaran Province and Adil Shah

Afghans in Iran

Afghans in Iran are mostly refugees who have fled wars in Afghanistan since the April 1978 Saur Revolution in Kabul.

See Mazandaran Province and Afghans in Iran

Afsaneh Sara

Afsaneh Sara (افسانه سرا, also Romanized as Āfsāneh Sarā) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Afsaneh Sara

Afshar people

The Afshar, also spelled Awshar or Afşar, are one of the Oghuz Turkic peoples.

See Mazandaran Province and Afshar people

Afsharid dynasty

The Afsharid dynasty (افشاریان) were members of an Iranian dynasty that originated from the Turkic Afshar tribe in Iran's north-eastern province of Khorasan, ruling Persia in the mid-eighteenth century.

See Mazandaran Province and Afsharid dynasty

Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar

Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar (translit; 14 March 1742 – 17 June 1797), also known by his regnal name of Agha Mohammad Shah (آقا محمد شاه), was the founder of the Qajar dynasty of Iran, ruling from 1789 to 1797 as king (shah).

See Mazandaran Province and Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar

Agriculture in Iran

Roughly one-third of Iran's total surface area is suited for farmland, but because of poor soil and lack of adequate water distribution in many areas, most of it is not under cultivation.

See Mazandaran Province and Agriculture in Iran

Ahangar Kola, Dabudasht

Ahangar Kola (اهنگركلا, also Romanized as Āhangar Kolā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ahangar Kola, Dabudasht

Ahangar Kola-ye Olya

Ahangar Kola-ye Olya (اهنگركلاعليا, also Romanized as Āhangar Kolā-ye ‘Olyā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ahangar Kola-ye Olya

Ahangar Kola-ye Sofla

Ahangar Kola-ye Sofla (اهنگركلاسفلي, also Romanized as Āhangar Kolā-ye Soflá) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ahangar Kola-ye Sofla

Ahmad Shah Durrani

Ahmad Shāh Durrānī (c. 1722 – 16 October 1772) (Pashto: احمد شاه دراني), also known as Ahmad Khān Abdālī (احمد خان ابدالي), was the founder of the Durrani Empire and is regarded as the founder of the modern state of Afghanistan.

See Mazandaran Province and Ahmad Shah Durrani

Aidin Nikkhah Bahrami

Aidin Nikkhah Bahrami (آیدین نیکخواه بهرامی) (February 5, 1982 &ndash; December 28, 2007) was an Iranian professional basketball player.

See Mazandaran Province and Aidin Nikkhah Bahrami

Akbarabad-e Pain

Akbarabad-e Pain (اكبرابادپائين, also Romanized as Akbarābād-e Pā’īn) is a village in Kelarestaq-e Sharqi Rural District, in the Central District of Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Akbarabad-e Pain

Akha, Iran

Akha (اخا, also Romanized as Ākhā; also known as Ākhāzīr) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Akha, Iran

Akhazir

Akhazir (اخازير, also Romanized as Ākhāzīr) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Akhazir

Al-Tabari

Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad ibn Jarīr al-Ṭabarī (محمد بن جریر طبری, أبو جعفر محمد بن جرير بن يزيد الطبري) (224–310 AH; 839–923 AD) was an influential Persian scholar, historian and exegete of the Qur'an from Amol, Tabaristan (modern Mazandaran Province of Iran), who composed all his works in Arabic.

See Mazandaran Province and Al-Tabari

Al-Tabari (disambiguation)

The name Tabari or al-Tabari means simply "from Tabaristan", an Iranian province corresponding to parts of modern Iranian province of Mazandaran.

See Mazandaran Province and Al-Tabari (disambiguation)

Alam-Kuh

ʿAlam-Kūh (علم کوه; also: Alam Kooh) – Mount Alam – is a mountain in Alborz mountain range in north of Iran, Mazandaran Province, forming a peak of Takht-e Suleyman Massif.

See Mazandaran Province and Alam-Kuh

Alamut

The Alamut geographic region (الموت; Alamūt) is a region in Iran including western and eastern parts in the western edge of the Alborz (Elburz) range, between the dry and barren plain of Qazvin in the south and the densely forested slopes of the Mazandaran province in the north.

See Mazandaran Province and Alamut

Alasht

Alasht (Ālaŝt, meaning Eagle Sanctuary, also Romanized as Ālasht) is a city in the Central District of Savadkuh County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Alasht

Alborz

The Alborz (البرز), also spelled as Alburz, Elburz or Elborz, is a mountain range in northern Iran that stretches from the border of Azerbaijan along the western and entire southern coast of the Caspian Sea and finally runs northeast and merges into the Aladagh Mountains in the northern parts of Khorasan.

See Mazandaran Province and Alborz

Alborz Province

Alborz Province (استان البرز, Ostan-e Alborz) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran, centered in Karaj.

See Mazandaran Province and Alborz Province

Ali Akbar Nategh-Nouri

Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri (علی‌اکبر ناطق‌نوری; sometimes spelt Nategh-Nouri) (born 6 October 1944) is an Iranian politician.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Akbar Nategh-Nouri

Ali Asghar Bazri

Ali Asghar Bazri (علی اصغر بذری., born September 11, 1980 in Behshahr, Mazandaran, Iran) is an Iranian wrestler who competed in the 2006 Asian Games in the 74 kg division and won the gold medal.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Asghar Bazri

Ali Asghar Mazandarani

Grand Ayatollah Ali Asghar Mazandarani (1826–1911) was an Iranian cleric originally from Amirkola.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Asghar Mazandarani

Ali Larijani

Ali Larijani (علی لاریجانی,; born 3 June 1957) is an Iranian conservative politician, philosopher and former military officer who has been Speaker of the Parliament of Iran since 2008.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Larijani

Ali Nazari Juybari

Ali Nazari Juybari (born in Juybar, Mazandaran Province, Iran) is the current former technical director of the club.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Nazari Juybari

Ali Reza Khan Azod al-Molk

Ali Reza Khan Azod al-Molk (11 October 1847 – 22 September 1910) was an Iranian politician who acted as regent for the last ruling member of the Qajar dynasty.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Reza Khan Azod al-Molk

Ali Yachkaschi

Ali Yachkaschi (in Persian علی یخکشی - alternative spellings: Ali Yakhkeshi) (1939 in Behshahr, Iran) is an Iranian professor of Environmental science, environmental activist and author.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali Yachkaschi

Ali-Morad Khan Zand

Ali Murad Khan Zand (c. – 1785) the sixth Shah of the Zand dynasty, reigned from March 15, 1781 until February 11, 1785.

See Mazandaran Province and Ali-Morad Khan Zand

Alireza Mohammad

Alireza Mohammad (علیرضا محمد, born 14 July 1981 in mazandaran, Iran) is an Iranian football defender who currently plays for Paykan in the Iran Pro League.

See Mazandaran Province and Alireza Mohammad

Allah Kaj

Allah Kaj (اله كاج, also Romanized as Allah Kāj) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Allah Kaj

Allameh Mohaddes Nouri University

Allameh Mohaddes Nouri University or AMNU (Persian); is a non-profit university in the north of Iran which admits students either through the National Entrance Examination or on the basis of the applicants' prior school profile.

See Mazandaran Province and Allameh Mohaddes Nouri University

Alu, Mazandaran

Alu (الو, also Romanized as Alū, Allū, and ‘Alū) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Alu, Mazandaran

Alwan al Showaya

Alwan al Showaya (Arabic: علوان الشویع) was a singer from al-Ahwaz, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Alwan al Showaya

Amardi

The Amardians, widely referred to as the Amardi (and sometimes Mardi), were an ancient Iranian tribe living along the mountainous region bordering the Caspian Sea to the north, to whom the Iron Age culture at Marlik is attributed.

See Mazandaran Province and Amardi

Aminabad, Amol

Aminabad (امين اباد, also Romanized as Amīnābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Aminabad, Amol

Amir Pazevari

Amir Pazevari was a Mazandarani Iranian poet with numerous works written in the Mazandarani language.

See Mazandaran Province and Amir Pazevari

Amir Vali

Amir Vali (also spelled Wali) was the ruler of Astarabad and parts of Mazandaran from 1356 until 1366, and again from c. 1374 until 1384.

See Mazandaran Province and Amir Vali

Amirabad, Amol

Amirabad (اميراباد, also Romanized as Amīrābād; also known as Shahīdābād) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Amirabad, Amol

Amirkola

Amirkola (اميركلا, also Romanized as Amīrkolā, Amīr Kolā, and Amīr Kalā; also known as Amir Qal‘en) is a city in the Central District of Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Amirkola

Amlash culture

The term Amlash culture refers to an assortment of historic materials and periods in Gilan and west of Mazandaran, in north of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Amlash culture

Amol

Amol (آمل –;; also Romanized as Āmol and Amul) is a city and the administrative center of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Amol

Amol County

Amol County (شهرستان آمل) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Amol County

Amr ibn al-Layth

Amr ibn al-Layth or Amr-i Laith Saffari (عمرو لیث صفاری) was the second ruler of the Saffarid dynasty of Iran from 879 to 901.

See Mazandaran Province and Amr ibn al-Layth

Anheh

Anheh (انهه, also Romanized as Ānheh; also known as Aneh) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Anheh

Anjudan

Anjudan (انجدان, also Romanized as Anjedān; also known as Andījān, Anjidān, and Injadān) is a village in Amanabad Rural District, in the Central District of Arak County, Markazi Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Anjudan

Anna of Russia

Anna Ioannovna (Анна Иоанновна; –), also spelled Anna Ivanovna and sometimes anglicized as Anne, was regent of the duchy of Courland from 1711 until 1730 and then ruled as Empress of Russia from 1730 to 1740.

See Mazandaran Province and Anna of Russia

April 17

No description.

See Mazandaran Province and April 17

Arab Kheyl, Amol

Arab Kheyl (عرب خيل, also Romanized as ‘Arab Kheyl) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Arab Kheyl, Amol

Arud, Iran

Arud (ارود, also Romanized as Ārūd and Arood) is a village in Seh Hezar Rural District, Khorramabad District, Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Arud, Iran

Arzhang

The Arzhang (Aržang, a Parthian word meaning "Worthy") was one of the holy books of Manichaeism.

See Mazandaran Province and Arzhang

Ashir

Ashir (اشير, also Romanized as Āshīr) is a village in Kuhestan Rural District, Kelardasht District, Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ashir

Ashrafabad, Mazandaran

Ashrafabad (اشرف اباد, also Romanized as Ashrafābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ashrafabad, Mazandaran

Ashuradeh

Ashūradeh (آشوراده), or Ashur Ada, is the only island of the Iranian coast of the Caspian Sea (Gorgan Bay).

See Mazandaran Province and Ashuradeh

Aski Mahalleh, Dabudasht

Aski Mahalleh (اسكي محله, also Romanized as Askī Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Aski Mahalleh, Dabudasht

Aspahi Kola

Aspahi Kola (اسپاهيكلا, also Romanized as Aspāhī Kolā; also known as Esbāykolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Aspahi Kola

Assembly of Experts

The Assembly of Experts (Majles-e Khobregān-e Rahbari) &mdash;also translated as the Assembly of Experts of the Leadership or as the Council of Experts&mdash; is the deliberative body empowered to designate and dismiss the Supreme Leader of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Assembly of Experts

Astrakhan

Astrakhan (p) is a city in southern Russia and the administrative center of Astrakhan Oblast.

See Mazandaran Province and Astrakhan

Atropa

Atropa is a genus of flowering plants in the nightshade family, Solanaceae: tall, calcicole, herbaceous perennials (rhizomatous hemicryptophytes), bearing large leaves and glossy berries particularly dangerous to children, due to their combination of an attractive, cherry-like appearance with a high toxicity.

See Mazandaran Province and Atropa

Avestan geography

Avestan geography, is the geographical references in the Avesta, which are limited to the regions on the eastern Iranian plateau up to Indo-Iranian border.

See Mazandaran Province and Avestan geography

Avil

Avil (اويل, also Romanized as Avīl) is a village in Zanus Rastaq Rural District, Kojur District, Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Avil

Azad Khan Afghan

Azād Khān Afghān (آزاد خان افغان), or Azād Shāh Afghān (آزاد شاه افغان) (died 1781), was a Pashtun military commander and a major contender for supremacy in western Iran after the death of Nader Shah Afshar in 1747.

See Mazandaran Province and Azad Khan Afghan

Azad Kuh

Azad Kuh (آزاد کوه) is one of the highest peaks in the central Alburz Range in Mazandaran province north of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Azad Kuh

Azerbaijan (Iran)

Azerbaijan or Azarbaijan (آذربایجان Āzarbāijān; آذربایجان Azərbaycan), also known as Iranian Azerbaijan, is a historical region in northwestern Iran that borders Iraq, Turkey, the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, Armenia, and the Republic of Azerbaijan.

See Mazandaran Province and Azerbaijan (Iran)

Azerbaijanis

Azerbaijanis or Azeris (Azərbaycanlılar آذربایجانلیلار, Azərilər آذریلر), also known as Azerbaijani Turks (Azərbaycan türkləri آذربایجان تورکلری), are a Turkic ethnic group living mainly in the Iranian region of Azerbaijan and the sovereign (former Soviet) Republic of Azerbaijan.

See Mazandaran Province and Azerbaijanis

Azimabad, Mazandaran

Azimabad (عظيم اباد, also Romanized as ‘Az̧īmābād and ‘Azīmābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Azimabad, Mazandaran

Azimiyeh

Azimiyeh (عظيميه, also Romanized as ʿAẓīmīyeh) is a village in Goli Jan Rural District, in the Central District of Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Azimiyeh

Ásíyih Khánum

Ásíyih Khánum (آسیه خانم&lrm; 18201886) was the wife of Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith.

See Mazandaran Province and Ásíyih Khánum

Ba Ujkhil

Ba Ujkhil (بااوج خيل, also Romanized as Bā Ūjkhīl; also known as Borj Khīl) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ba Ujkhil

Babol

Babol (بابل,, Known as "Orange Blossom City", also Romanized as Bābol; formerly known as Barfrouch) is the capital of Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babol

Babol County

Babol County (شهرستان بابل) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babol County

Babol Kenar District

Babol Kenar District (بخش بابل‌ کنار) is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babol Kenar District

Babol Noshirvani University of Technology

Babol Noshirvani University of Technology is a public research university in Babol, a city in Mazandaran Province in the north of Iran, 20 km south of the Caspian Sea.

See Mazandaran Province and Babol Noshirvani University of Technology

Babol University of Medical Sciences

Babol University of Medical Sciences (BUMS) (دانشگاه علوم پزشکی بابل), is a medical sciences university in the city of Babol, Mazandaran province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babol University of Medical Sciences

Babolsar

Babolsar (بابلسر, also Romanized as Bābolsar and Bābul Sar; also known as Mashhadsar (Persian: مَشهَدسَر), also Romanized as Mashhad-i-Sar and Meshed-i-Sar) is a city and capital of Babolsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babolsar

Babolsar County

Babolsar County (شهرستان بابلسر) is a county on the Caspian Sea, in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Babolsar County

Babur Mirza's Invasion of Khorasan

Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza, a Timurid ruler in Khorasan, invaded other parts of the region in the winter of 1448–1449 that were held by the Timurids of Samarkand, led by Ulugh Beg.

See Mazandaran Province and Babur Mirza's Invasion of Khorasan

Badab-e Surt

Badab Soort (باداب سورت) is a natural site in Mazandaran Province in northern Iran, south of the city of Sari, and west of Orost village.

See Mazandaran Province and Badab-e Surt

Badeleh

Badeleh (بادله, also Romanized as Bādeleh and Badleh) is a village in Kuhdasht-e Gharbi Rural District, in the Central District of Miandorud County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Badeleh

Bagh-e Vahsh

Bagh-e Vahsh (باغ وحش, also Romanized as Bāgh-e Vaḥsh) is a village in Miandorud-e Bozorg Rural District, in the Central District of Miandorud County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bagh-e Vahsh

Baghala ghatogh

Baghala ghatogh or baghali ghatogh (in Persian: باقلا قاتوق) is a northern Iranian dish made with "pacheh baghali" (Rashti fava beans), dill, and eggs.

See Mazandaran Province and Baghala ghatogh

Baghban Kola, Amol

Baghban Kola (باغبانكلا, also Romanized as Bāghbān Kolā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Baghban Kola, Amol

Bahá'í Faith and Zoroastrianism

Zoroastrianism is recognized in the Bahá'í Faith as one of nine known religions and its scriptures are regarded as predicting the coming of Bahá'u'lláh.

See Mazandaran Province and Bahá'í Faith and Zoroastrianism

Bahá'u'lláh

Bahá'u'lláh (بهاء الله, "Glory of God"; 12 November 1817 – 29 May 1892 and Muharram 2, 1233 - Dhu'l Qa'dah 2, 1309), born Mírzá Ḥusayn-`Alí Núrí (میرزا حسین‌علی نوری), was the founder of the Bahá'í Faith.

See Mazandaran Province and Bahá'u'lláh

Bahá'u'lláh's family

Bahá'u'lláh was the founder of the Bahá'í Faith.

See Mazandaran Province and Bahá'u'lláh's family

Bahnemir

Bahnemir (بهنمير, also Romanized as Bahnemīr and Beh Namīr) is a city and capital of Bahnemir District, on the Caspian Sea, in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bahnemir

Bahnemir District

Bahnemir District (بخش بهنمیر) is a district (bakhsh) in Babolsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bahnemir District

Bala Hashtal

Bala Hashtal (بالاهشتل, also Romanized as Bālā Hashtal; also known as Hashtal) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bala Hashtal

Bala Khiyaban-e Litkuh Rural District

Bala Khiyaban-e Litkuh Rural District (دهستان بالاخيابان ليتكوه) is a rural district (dehestan) in the Central District of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bala Khiyaban-e Litkuh Rural District

Bala Larijan Rural District

Bala Larijan Rural District (دهستان بالالاريجان) is a rural district (dehestan) in Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bala Larijan Rural District

Balaband

Balaband (بالابند, also Romanized as Bālāband) is a village in Goli Jan Rural District, in the Central District of Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Balaband

Baladeh District

Baladeh District (بخش بلده) is a district (bakhsh) in Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Baladeh District

Baladeh, Mazandaran

Baladeh (بلده) is a city and capital of Baladeh District of Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Baladeh, Mazandaran

Baleyran

Baleyran (بليران, also Romanized as Baleyrān) known as Baliran is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Baleyran

Bamer Kola

Bamer Kola (بامركلا, also Romanized as Bāmer Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bamer Kola

Bandar-e Gaz

Bandar-e Gaz (بندرگز or بَندِر گَز, also Romanized as Bandar-i-Gaz, Bandar-i-Jaz and Bander Gaz) is a city and capital of Bandar-e Gaz County, in Golestan Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bandar-e Gaz

Bandpey-ye Gharbi District

Bandpey-ye Gharbi District (بخش بندپی غربی, meaning "Western Bandpey District") is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bandpey-ye Gharbi District

Bandpey-ye Sharqi District

Bandpey-ye Sharqi District (بخش بندپی شرقی, meaning "Eastern Bandpey District") is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bandpey-ye Sharqi District

Banesar Kola

Banesar Kola (بانصركلا, also Romanized as Bāneşar Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Banesar Kola

Bard, Iran

Bard (برد) is a village in Poshtkuh Rural District, Chahardangeh District, Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bard, Iran

Barik Mahalleh

Barik Mahalleh (باريك محله, also Romanized as Bārīk Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Barik Mahalleh

Battle of Damghan (1447)

When Abdal-Latif Mirza reached Damghan, the prefect sealed the city and showed his opposition.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Damghan (1447)

Battle of Fort Tabarsi

Shaykh Ṭabarsí, or more correctly the Shrine of Shaykh Tabarsí, was the location of a battle between the forces of the Shah of Persia and the Bábís, followers of the Báb over the period October 10, 1848 to May 10, 1849 when the prince resorted to a plan of betrayal to capture the remaining Bábís.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Fort Tabarsi

Battle of Krtsanisi

The Battle of Krtsanisi (კრწანისის ბრძოლა, k'rts'anisis brdzola) was fought between the Qajars of Iran and the Georgian armies of the Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti and Kingdom of Imereti at the place of Krtsanisi near Tbilisi, Georgia, from September 8 to September 11, 1795, as part of Qajar Emperor Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar's war in response to King Heraclius II of Georgia’s alliance with the Russian Empire.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Krtsanisi

Battle of Nishapur (1447)

During the Second Timurid Succession Crisis, The Baysonqor brothers; Ala-ud-Daulah Mirza and Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza had acted in cognizance and blocked Abdal-Latif Mirza's chances of uniting with his father Ulugh Beg.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Nishapur (1447)

Battle of Qarabagh

Battle of Qarabagh was fought on February 4, 1469 between Aq Qoyunlu under Uzun Hasan and Timurids of Samarkand under Abu Sa'id Mirza resulting in the latter's defeat, imprisonment and execution.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Qarabagh

Battle of Sarakhs (1459)

Battle of Sarakhs took place in March 1459, at a location between Merv and Sarakhs.

See Mazandaran Province and Battle of Sarakhs (1459)

Bavand dynasty

The Bavand dynasty (also spelled Bavend), or simply the Bavandids, was an Iranian dynasty that ruled in parts of Tabaristan (Mazandaran) in what is now northern Iran from 651 until 1349, alternating between outright independence and submission as vassals to more powerful regional rulers.

See Mazandaran Province and Bavand dynasty

Bayjan, Mazandaran

Bayjan (بائيجان, also Romanized as Bā’yjān, Bāyjān, and Bāījān) is a village in Larijan-e Sofla Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bayjan, Mazandaran

Bábism

Bábism (بابیه, Babiyye), also known as the Bayání Faith (Persian:, Bayání), is an Abrahamic monotheistic religion which professes that there is one incorporeal, unknown, and incomprehensible GodBrowne, E.G., p. 15 who manifests his will in an unending series of theophanies, called Manifestations of God (Arabic). It has no more than a few thousand adherents according to current estimates, most of whom are concentrated in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bábism

Behdad Salimi

Behdad Salimi Kordasiabi (بهداد سلیمی كردآسیابی, born 8 December 1989) is an Iranian weightlifter in the +105 kg category.

See Mazandaran Province and Behdad Salimi

Behshahr

Behshahr (بهشهر; formerly Ashraf and Ashraf ol Belād) is a city in Mazandaran, Iran & the capital of Behshahr County.

See Mazandaran Province and Behshahr

Behshahr County

Behshahr County (شهرستان بهشهر, Šahrestân-e Behšahr; اَشرِفِ شهرستون, Ašref-e-Šahrestun) is a county on the Caspian Sea, in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Behshahr County

Bijan Mortazavi

Bijan Mortazavi (بیژن مرتضوی), (born November 16, 1957 in Babol, Iran), is an Iranian Virtuoso Violinist, Musician, Composer, Songwriter, Arranger and Singer.

See Mazandaran Province and Bijan Mortazavi

Bish Mahalleh, Dabudasht

Bish Mahalleh (بيش محله, also Romanized as Bīsh Maḩalleh; also known as Bīsheh Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bish Mahalleh, Dabudasht

Bisheh Mahalleh

Bisheh Mahalleh (بيشه محله, also Romanized as Bīsheh Maḩalleh) is a village in Karipey Rural District, Lalehabad District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bisheh Mahalleh

Bizaki

Bizaki (بيزكي, also Romanized as Bīzakī and Bīzekī) is a village in Hasan Reza Rural District, in the Central District of Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bizaki

Bordun

Bordun (بردون, also Romanized as Bordūn) is a village in Sheykh Fazlolah-e Nuri Rural District, Baladeh District, Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bordun

Bostanai

Bostanai (Hebrew: בוסתאני) was the first exilarch under Arabian rule; he flourished about the middle of the 7th century.

See Mazandaran Province and Bostanai

Bufo eichwaldi

Bufo eichwaldi, commonly known as Eichwald's toad or the Talysh toad, is a species of true toads in the family Bufonidae.

See Mazandaran Province and Bufo eichwaldi

Bur Mahalleh

Bur Mahalleh (بورمحله, also Romanized as Būr Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Bur Mahalleh

Buran, Mazandaran

Buran (بوران, also Romanized as Būrān) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Buran, Mazandaran

Caspian expeditions of the Rus'

The Caspian expeditions of the Rus' were military raids undertaken by the Rus' between 864 and 1041 on the Caspian Sea shores,Logan (1992), p. 201 of what are nowadays Iran, Dagestan, and Azerbaijan.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian expeditions of the Rus'

Caspian horse

The Caspian is a small horse breed native to Northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian horse

Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests

The Caspian Hyrcanian Mixed Forests ecoregion, in the temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome, is an area of lush lowland and montane forests covering about near the southern shores of the Caspian Sea of Iran and Azerbaijan.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests

Caspian kutum

The Caspian kutum (Rutilus kutum) or Caspian white fish is a member of the family Cyprinidae from brackish water habitats of the Caspian Sea and from its freshwater tributaries.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian kutum

Caspian Sea

The Caspian Sea is the largest enclosed inland body of water on Earth by area, variously classed as the world's largest lake or a full-fledged sea.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian Sea

Caspian tiger

The Caspian tiger (Panthera tigris tigris) is an extinct tiger population.

See Mazandaran Province and Caspian tiger

Catocala puerperoides

Catocala puerperoides is a moth of the Erebidae family.

See Mazandaran Province and Catocala puerperoides

Central District (Amol County)

The Central District of Amol County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان آمل) is a district (bakhsh) in Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Amol County)

Central District (Babol County)

The Central District of Babol County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان بابل) is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Babol County)

Central District (Babolsar County)

The Central District of Babolsar County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان بابلسر) is a district (bakhsh) in Babolsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Babolsar County)

Central District (Behshahr County)

The Central District of Behshahr County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان بهشهر) is a district (bakhsh) in Behshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Behshahr County)

Central District (Chalus County)

The Central District of Chalus County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان چالوس) is a district (bakhsh) in Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Chalus County)

Central District (Fereydunkenar County)

The Central District of Fereydunkenar County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان فريدونكنار) is a district (bakhsh) in Fereydunkenar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Fereydunkenar County)

Central District (Galugah County)

The Central District of Galugah County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان گلوگاه) is a district (bakhsh) in Galugah County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Galugah County)

Central District (Juybar County)

The Central District of Juybar County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان جویبار) is a district (bakhsh) in Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Juybar County)

Central District (Mahmudabad County)

The Central District of Mahmudabad County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان محمودآباد) is a district (bakhsh) in Mahmudabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Mahmudabad County)

Central District (Miandorud County)

The Central District of Miandorud County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان میان‌دورود) is a district (bakhsh) in Miandorud County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Miandorud County)

Central District (Neka County)

The Central District of Neka County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان نکا) is a district (bakhsh) in Neka County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Neka County)

Central District (Nowshahr County)

The Central District of Nowshahr County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان نوشهر) is a district (bakhsh) in Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Nowshahr County)

Central District (Nur County)

The Central District of Nur County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان نور) is a district (bakhsh) in Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Nur County)

Central District (Qaem Shahr County)

The Central District of Qaem Shahr County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان قائم‌شهر) is a district (bakhsh) in Qaem Shahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Qaem Shahr County)

Central District (Ramsar County)

The Central District of Ramsar County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان رامسر) is a district (bakhsh) in Ramsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Ramsar County)

Central District (Sari County)

The Central District of Sari County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان ساری) is a district (bakhsh) in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Sari County)

Central District (Savadkuh County)

The Central District of Savadkuh County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان سوادکوه) is a district (bakhsh) in Savadkuh County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Savadkuh County)

Central District (Simorgh County)

The Central District or Simorgh County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان سیمرغ), formerly Kiakola District, is a district (bakhsh) in Simorgh County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Simorgh County)

Central District (Tonekabon County)

The Central District of Tonekabon County (بخش مرکزی شهرستان تنکابن) is a district (bakhsh) in Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Central District (Tonekabon County)

Chabok

Chabok (چابك, also Romanized as Chābok) is a village in Sakht Sar Rural District, in the Central District of Ramsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chabok

Chafa

Chafa (چفا, also Romanized as Chafā) is a village in Sajjadrud Rural District, Bandpey-ye Sharqi District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chafa

Chahardangeh District (Mazandaran Province)

Chahardangeh District (خش چهاردانگه) is a district (bakhsh) in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chahardangeh District (Mazandaran Province)

Chalandar

Chalandar (چلندر, also Romanized as Chelandar) is a village in Baladeh Kojur Rural District, in the Central District of Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chalandar

Chalus County

Chalus County (شهرستان چالوس) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chalus County

Chalus River

The Chalus River (رود چالوس) is a major river of central−northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chalus River

Chalus, Iran

Chalus (چالوس, also romanized as Chālūs, Chaloos, Chalousse and Chalous) is a city in Mazandaran Province in north of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chalus, Iran

Chamestan

Chamestan (چمستان, also Romanized as Chamestān and Chomastan) is a city and capital of Chamestan District of Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chamestan

Chamestan District

Chamestan District (بخش چمستان) is a district (bakhsh) in Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chamestan District

Chang Mian

Chang Mian (چنگ ميان, also Romanized as Chang Mīān; also known as Chang Mīān-e Pā’īn) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chang Mian

Chareh, Amol

Chareh (چاره, also Romanized as Chāreh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chareh, Amol

Charez

Charez (چارز, also Romanized as Chārez and Chāraz) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Charez

Chehreh

Chehreh (چهره) is a village and commercial hub in Babol Kenar Rural District, Babol Kenar District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chehreh

Chelav Rural District

Chelav Rural District (دهستان چلاو) is a rural district (dehestan) in the Emamzadeh abdollah District of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chelav Rural District

Chery

Chery Automobile Co., Ltd., trading as Chery and sometimes known by the pinyin transcription of its Chinese name, Qirui (奇瑞), is a Chinese automobile manufacturer headquartered in Wuhu, Anhui Province, China.

See Mazandaran Province and Chery

Cheshmeh Sar

Cheshmeh Sar (چشمه سر) is a village in Sajjadrud Rural District, Bandpey-ye Sharqi District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Cheshmeh Sar

Chutak

Chutak (چوتك, also Romanized as Chūtak; also known as Chetūk) is a village in Sakht Sar Rural District, in the Central District of Ramsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Chutak

Circassians

The Circassians (Черкесы Čerkesy), also known by their endonym Adyghe (Circassian: Адыгэхэр Adygekher, Ады́ги Adýgi), are a Northwest Caucasian nation native to Circassia, many of whom were displaced in the course of the Russian conquest of the Caucasus in the 19th century, especially after the Russian–Circassian War in 1864.

See Mazandaran Province and Circassians

Constitutionalization attempts in Iran

The Persian Constitutional Revolution was a short-lived push for democratic rule in the form of a constitutional monarchy within a highly elitist yet decentralized society under the Qajars.

See Mazandaran Province and Constitutionalization attempts in Iran

Cotton production in Azerbaijan

Historically, cotton production in Azerbaijan has been crucial to the national economy, accounting for approximately 25% of agricultural revenue.

See Mazandaran Province and Cotton production in Azerbaijan

Counties of Iran

The counties of Iran, called shahrestan (شهرستان), are administrative divisions of larger provinces (ostan).

See Mazandaran Province and Counties of Iran

Cultural depictions of lions

Lions have been an important symbol to humans for tens of thousands of years and appear as a theme in cultures across Europe, Asia, and Africa.

See Mazandaran Province and Cultural depictions of lions

Dabudasht

Dabudasht (دابودشت; formerly, Darvish Kheyl (Persian: درويش خيل), also Romanized as Darvīsh Kheyl) is a city and capital of Dabudasht District, in Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dabudasht

Dabudasht District

Dabudasht District (بخش دابودشت) is a district (bakhsh) in Amol county, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dabudasht District

Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District

Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District (دهستان دابوئ جنوبي) is a rural district (dehestan) in Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District

Daeva

Daeva (daēuua, daāua, daēva) is an Avestan language term for a particular sort of supernatural entity with disagreeable characteristics.

See Mazandaran Province and Daeva

Damghan

Damghan (دامغان, also Romanized as Dāmghān) is the capital of Damghan County, Semnan Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Damghan

Dangepia

Dangepia (دنگپيا, also Romanized as Dangepīā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dangepia

Danial, Mazandaran

Danial (دانيال, also Romanized as Dānīāl; also known as Dāneyā and Dānīā) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Danial, Mazandaran

Dar es Salaam

Dar es Salaam (Dar) (from دار السلام, "the house of peace"; formerly Mzizima) is the former capital as well as the most populous city in Tanzania and a regionally important economic centre.

See Mazandaran Province and Dar es Salaam

Darasara

Darasara (دراسرا, also Romanized as Darāsarā; also known as Darreh Sarā) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Darasara

Darjan

Darjan (درجان, also Romanized as Darjān) is a village in Seh Hezar Rural District, Khorramabad District, Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Darjan

Darzi Kola, Amol

Darzi Kola (درزيكلا, also Romanized as Darzī Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Darzi Kola, Amol

Dasht-e Naz Airport

Sari Dasht-e Naz International Airport (فرودگاه دشت ناز ساری) is located in Sari, in Central District of Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dasht-e Naz Airport

Dasht-e Sar Rural District

Dasht-e Sar Rural District (دهستان دشت سر) was a rural district (dehestan) in Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dasht-e Sar Rural District

Dau Kola

Dau Kola (دعو كلا, also Romanized as Dā’ū Kolā; also known as Dāvūd Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dau Kola

Davud Kola

Davud Kola (داودكلا, also Romanized as Dāvūd Kolā; also known as Dāvūd Kolā-ye Pā’īn) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Davud Kola

Daylami language

The Deilami language, also known as Daylamite, Daylami, Dailamite, or Deylami (دیلمی, from the name of the Daylam region), is an extinct language that was one of the northwestern branch of the Iranian languages.

See Mazandaran Province and Daylami language

Delkash

Esmat Bagherpour Baboli (عصمت باقرپور بابلی; 26 February 1925 – 1 September 2004), also known as "Delkash" (دلکش), was an Iranian diva and actress with a rare and unique voice.

See Mazandaran Province and Delkash

Demographics of Iran

Iran's population increased dramatically during the later half of the 20th century, reaching about 80 million by 2016.

See Mazandaran Province and Demographics of Iran

Deyeh

Deyeh (ديه) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Deyeh

Dibaj

Dibaj (ديباج, also Romanized as Dibadj; formerly known as Qal‘eh (Persian: قلعه), Chahārdeh, Chārdeh, and Chehārdeh) is a city in the Central District of Damghan County, Semnan Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dibaj

Dinan, Mazandaran

Dinan (دينان, also Romanized as Dīnān; also known as Ākhā) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dinan, Mazandaran

Disar

Disar (ديسر, also Romanized as Dīsar) is a village in Sakht Sar Rural District, in the Central District of Ramsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Disar

Do Ab (Iran)

Do Ab is the name of a rural area situated in the heart of Savadkuh County of Mazanderan province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Do Ab (Iran)

Do Hezar River

Do Hezar River is a river of Mazandaran Province in northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Do Hezar River

Do Tireh

Do Tireh (دوتيره, also Romanized as Do Tīreh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Do Tireh

Dodangeh District

Dodangeh District (بخش دودانگه) is a district (bakhsh) in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Dodangeh District

Dowlatshah

Mohammad Ali Mirza Dowlatshah (4 January 1789 – 22 November 1821, Al-Mada'in, Ottoman Iraq) was a famous Persian Prince of the Qajar Dynasty.

See Mazandaran Province and Dowlatshah

Duwa

Duwa (died 1307), also known as Du'a, was khan of the Chagatai Khanate (1282–1307).

See Mazandaran Province and Duwa

Dysphania pumilio

Dysphania pumilio is a species of flowering plant in the amaranth family known by the common name clammy goosefoot.

See Mazandaran Province and Dysphania pumilio

East Azerbaijan Province

East Azerbaijan Province (استان آذربایجان شرقی Āzarbāijān-e Sharqi; شرقی آذربایجان اوستانی) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and East Azerbaijan Province

Ejbar Kola

Ejbar Kola (اجباركلا, also Romanized as Ejbār Kolā; also known as Ejbār Kolā-ye Bālā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ejbar Kola

Eldiguzids

The Ildegizids, EldiguzidsC.E. Bosworth, "Ildenizids or Eldiguzids", Encyclopaedia of Islam, Edited by P.J. Bearman, Th.

See Mazandaran Province and Eldiguzids

Emam Dasht

Emam Dasht (امام دشت, also Romanized as Emām Dasht) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Emam Dasht

Emam-Ali Habibi

Emam-Ali Habibi Goudarzi (امامعلی حبیبی گودرزی., born 13 May 1931) is a retired Iranian freestyle wrestler.

See Mazandaran Province and Emam-Ali Habibi

Erik (The Phantom of the Opera)

Erik (also known as The Phantom of the Opera, commonly referred to as The Phantom) is the title character from Gaston Leroux's novel Le Fantôme de l'Opéra (1910), best known to English speakers as The Phantom of the Opera.

See Mazandaran Province and Erik (The Phantom of the Opera)

Eshkar Kola

Eshkar Kola (اشكاركلا, also Romanized as Eshkār Kolā and Āshekār Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Eshkar Kola

Eslamabad, Amol

Eslamabad (اسلام اباد, also Romanized as Eslāmābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Eslamabad, Amol

Espi Rud

Espi Rud (اسپي رود, also Romanized as Espī Rūd) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Espi Rud

Espiarbon

Espiarbon (اسپياربن, also Romanized as Espīārbon; also known as Sefīdārbon) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Espiarbon

Espiyari

Espiyari (اسپياري, also Romanized as Espīyārī) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Espiyari

Ethnic minorities in Iran

This article focuses on the status of ethnic minorities in contemporary Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ethnic minorities in Iran

Ethnicities in Iran

A majority of the population of Iran (approximately 67–80%) consists of Iranic peoples.

See Mazandaran Province and Ethnicities in Iran

F.C. Nassaji Mazandaran

Football Club Nassaji Mazandaran (Persian: باشگاه فوتبال نساجی مازندران) is an Iranian football club based in Qa'em Shahr, Mazandaran, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and F.C. Nassaji Mazandaran

Fakhr al-Din al-Razi

Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī or Fakhruddin Razi (فخر الدين رازي) was an Iranian Sunni Muslim theologian and philosopher He was born in 1149 in Rey (in modern-day Iran), and died in 1209 in Herat (in modern-day Afghanistan).

See Mazandaran Province and Fakhr al-Din al-Razi

Farahabad, Amol

Farahabad (فرح اباد, also Romanized as Faraḩābād) is a village in Harazpey-ye Jonubi Rural District, in the Central District of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Farahabad, Amol

Farahabad, Mazandaran

Farahabad (English: "abode of joy") was a palace and city built by Shah Abbas I in Mazandaran, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Farahabad, Mazandaran

Farhang Sharif

Farhang Sharif (فرهنگ شریف; – 7 September 2016) was an Iranian musician and renowned tar player.

See Mazandaran Province and Farhang Sharif

Farim, Iran

Farim (فريم; also known as Ferem and Faram) is a city and capital of Dodangeh District, in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Farim, Iran

Farrokh Khan

Farrokh Khan (also spelled Ferouk Khan, Feruk Khan and Ferukh Khan), also known by his title of Amin od-dowleh, was a high-ranking Persian official, and vice premier to the court of shah Fath-Ali Shah Qajar.

See Mazandaran Province and Farrokh Khan

Farrukhsiyar

Abu'l Muzaffar Muin ud-din Muhammad Shah Farrukh-siyar Alim Akbar Sani Wala Shan Padshah-i-bahr-u-bar (Shahid-i-Mazlum), or Farrukhsiyar (20 August 1685 – 19 April 1719), was the Mughal emperor from 1713 to 1719 after he murdered Jahandar Shah.

See Mazandaran Province and Farrukhsiyar

Farshid Moussavi

Farshid Moussavi is an Iranian-born British architect, founder of Farshid Moussavi Architecture (FMA) and Professor in Practice of Architecture at Harvard University Graduate School of Design.

See Mazandaran Province and Farshid Moussavi

Fath-Ali Khan Qajar

Fath-Ali Khan Qajar (1686–1726), was the Qajar chieftain of the Ashaqa-bash branch.

See Mazandaran Province and Fath-Ali Khan Qajar

Ferdows Garden

Ferdows Garden (باغ فردوس) is a historical complex located in the district of Tajrish in Shemiran (northern Tehran), Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ferdows Garden

Fereydan

Fereydan (فریدن, ფერეიდანი, Փերիա) is a region of Isfahan Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Fereydan

Fereydunkenar

Fereydunkenar (فريدونكنار, also Romanized as Fereydūnkenār, Fereydūn Kenār, Fāridūn Kinār, and Fereidun Kenar; also known as Qaşabeh) is a city & capital of Fereydunkenar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Fereydunkenar

Fereydunkenar County

Fereydunkenar County (شهرستان فریدونکنار) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Fereydunkenar County

Fireh

Fireh (فيره, also Romanized as Fīreh and Firah; also known as Fīreh Delārestāq) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Fireh

Firuz Kola-ye Olya, Amol

Firuz Kola-ye Olya (فيروزكلاعليا, also Romanized as Fīrūz Kolā-ye ‘Olyā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Firuz Kola-ye Olya, Amol

Firuz Kola-ye Sofla, Amol

Firuz Kola-ye Sofla (فيروزكلاسفلي, also Romanized as Fīrūz Kolā-ye Soflá; also known as Fīrūz Kolā-ye Pā’īn) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Firuz Kola-ye Sofla, Amol

Firuz Kola-ye Vosta

Firuz Kola-ye Vosta (فيروزكلاوسطي, also Romanized as Fīrūz Kolā-ye Vosţá) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Firuz Kola-ye Vosta

Firuzkuh, Iran

Firuzkuh (فيروزكوه, also Romanized as Fīrūzkūh and Fīrūz Kūh; Tabarian: Pirezcow; also known as Qaşabeh-ye Fīrūz Kūh) is a city and capital of Firuzkuh County, Tehran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Firuzkuh, Iran

Foreign direct investment in Iran

Foreign direct investment in Iran (FDI) has been hindered by unfavorable or complex operating requirements and by international sanctions, although in the early 2000s the Iranian government liberalized investment regulations.

See Mazandaran Province and Foreign direct investment in Iran

Galesh Kola, Amol

Galesh Kola (گالش كلا, also Romanized as Gālesh Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Galesh Kola, Amol

Galugah

Galugah (گلوگاه, also Romanized as Galūgāh) is a city and capital of Galugah County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Galugah

Galugah County

Galugah County (شهرستان گلوگاه) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Galugah County

Galugah, Babol

Galugah (گلوگاه, also Romanized as Galūgāh) is a city & capital of Bandpey-ye Sharqi District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Galugah, Babol

Garna

Garna (گرنا, also Romanized as Garnā; also known as Gaznā) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Garna

Gatab

Gatab (گتاب, also Romanized as Gatāb; also known as Bālā Gatāb, Bālā Ketāb, Gatāb-e Bālā, and Ketāb) is a city and capital of Gatab District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gatab

Gatab District

Gatab District (بخش گتاب) is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gatab District

Gazanak

Gazanak (گزنک) is a city in Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gazanak

Gazaneh, Mazandaran

Gazaneh (گزانه, also Romanized as Gazāneh; also known as Kazūna) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gazaneh, Mazandaran

Geography of Iran

Geographically, Iran is located in West Asia and borders the Caspian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Gulf of Oman.

See Mazandaran Province and Geography of Iran

George Forster (traveller)

George Forster (died 1792) was an English traveller and civil servant of the East India Company, on the Madras establishment.

See Mazandaran Province and George Forster (traveller)

Georgia–Persia relations

Persia and Georgia have had relations for thousands of years.

See Mazandaran Province and Georgia–Persia relations

Gerd Ab, Mazandaran

Gerd Ab (گرداب, also Romanized as Gerd Āb; also known as Gerdāb Langā and Langā) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gerd Ab, Mazandaran

Ghaffari

Ghaffari (Iranian, Persian, Islamic, Jewish غفاری): is an Iranian family name.

See Mazandaran Province and Ghaffari

Ghias Kola

Ghias Kola (غياث كلا, also Romanized as Ghīās̄ Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ghias Kola

Gholamreza Ansari

Gholamreza Ansari (غلامرضا انصاﺭی, born October 24, 1956) an Iranian diplomat.

See Mazandaran Province and Gholamreza Ansari

Gijan

Gijan (گيجان, also Romanized as Gījān; also known as Kījān) is a village in Kuhestan Rural District, Kelardasht District, Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gijan

Gil Khuran District

Gil Khuran District (بخش گیل‌خوران) is a district (bakhsh) in Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gil Khuran District

Gilaki language

The Gilaki language (گیلکی Giləki) is a Caspian language, and a member of the northwestern Iranian language branch, spoken in Iran's Gīlān Province.

See Mazandaran Province and Gilaki language

Gilaks

The Gilaki people or Gilaks (Gilaki: گیلک Gilək) are an Iranian people native to the northern Iran province of Gilan and are one of the main ethnic groups residing in the northern parts of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gilaks

Gilan Province

Gilan Province (اُستان گیلان, Ostān-e Gīlān, also Latinized as Guilan) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gilan Province

Gilas

Gilas (گيلاس, also Romanized as Gīlās) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gilas

Gobryas

Gobryas (Γοβρύας; 𐎥𐎢𐎲𐎽𐎢𐎺 g-u-b-ru-u-v, reads as Gaub(a)ruva?; Elamite: Kambarma) was a common name of several Persian noblemen.

See Mazandaran Province and Gobryas

Goharbaran District

Goharbaran District (بخش گهرباران) is a district (bakhsh) in Miandorud County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Goharbaran District

Gol Bagh

Gol Bagh (گل باغ, also Romanized as Gol Bāgh) is a village in Chahardangeh Rural District, Chahardangeh District, Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gol Bagh

Gol Mazar

Gol Mazar (گلمزار, also Romanized as Gol Mazār) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gol Mazar

Gol Pasha

Gol Pasha (گل پاشا, also Romanized as Gol Pāshā; also known as Kal Pāshā Mey-e Soflá and Kal Pāshā-ye Soflá) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gol Pasha

Golestan Province

Golestān Province (استان گلستان, Ostān-e Golestān) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran, located in the north-east of the country south of the Caspian Sea.

See Mazandaran Province and Golestan Province

Golur-e Bala

Golur-e Bala (گلوربالا, also Romanized as Golūr-e Bālā; also known as Golūr) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Golur-e Bala

Gorgan University

Gorgan University of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, a.k.a. Gorgan University is a university in Golestan Province of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gorgan University

Gorji Sara

Gorji Sara (گرجي سرا, also Romanized as Gorjī Sarā; also known as Gach Sarā) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Gorji Sara

Hajjiabad, Amol

Hajjiabad (حاجي اباد, also Romanized as Ḩājjīābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hajjiabad, Amol

Hamed Fallahzadeh

Hamed Fallahzadeh (born November 6, 1986 in Amol, Mazandaran) is an Iranian footballer who plays for Saipa in the Iran Pro League.

See Mazandaran Province and Hamed Fallahzadeh

Hamid Reza Chitgar

Hamid Reza Chitgar (7 July 1949 - 19 May 1987, also known as Hamid Bahmani) was an exiled Iranian politician who lived in France after the Iranian Revolution and was assassinated in Austria by the Iranian government.

See Mazandaran Province and Hamid Reza Chitgar

Hamzehabad, Mazandaran

Hamzehabad (حمزه اباد, also Romanized as Hamzehābād) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hamzehabad, Mazandaran

Haplogroup Q-M25

Haplogroup Q-M25, also known as Q1a1b is a subclade or branch of human Y-DNA haplogroup Q-F1096 (Q1a1), which is, in turn, a subclade of Q-MEH2 (Q1a).

See Mazandaran Province and Haplogroup Q-M25

Haplogroup R1a

Haplogroup R1a, or haplogroup R-M420, is a human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup which is distributed in a large region in Eurasia, extending from Scandinavia and Central Europe to southern Siberia and South Asia.

See Mazandaran Province and Haplogroup R1a

Haplogroup T-M184

Haplogroup T-M184, also known as Haplogroup T is a human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup.

See Mazandaran Province and Haplogroup T-M184

Har Do Ab Rud

Har Do Ab Rud (هردوابرود, also Romanized as Har Do Āb Rūd) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Har Do Ab Rud

Haraz River

The Haraz River is a notable river flowing through the Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Haraz River

Harazpey-ye Jonubi Rural District

Harazpey-ye Jonubi Rural District (دهستان هرازپي جنوبي) is a rural district (dehestan) in the Central District of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Harazpey-ye Jonubi Rural District

Hareh

Hareh (هاره, also Romanized as Hāreh) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hareh

Harun Kola

Harun Kola (هارون كلا, also Romanized as Hārūn Kolā; also known as Hārūn Kolā-ye Bālā and Hārūn Kolā-ye ‘Olyā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Harun Kola

Hasanabad, Amol

Hasanabad (حسن اباد, also Romanized as Ḩasanābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hasanabad, Amol

Hassan (Chupanids)

Amir Hasan was a Chupanid prince of the Ilkhanate in the early 14th century.

See Mazandaran Province and Hassan (Chupanids)

Hassan Rangraz

Hassan Rangraz (حسن رنگرز., born 21 March 1980 in Nowshahr, mazandaran) is an Iranian retired wrestler, He is a world champion in Greco-Roman wrestling.

See Mazandaran Province and Hassan Rangraz

Haydar Amuli

Sayyid Baha al-Din Haydar, Haydar al-'Obaidi al-Hossayni Amuli, or Seyyed Haydar Amoli or Mir Haydar Amoli a Shi'ite mystic and a Sufi philosopher, was an early representative of Persian theosophy and one of the most distinguished commentators of the mystic philosopher Ibn Arabi, during the 14th century.

See Mazandaran Province and Haydar Amuli

Hendu Kola

Hendu Kola (هندوكلا, also Romanized as Hendū Kolā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hendu Kola

Heydarabad, Abbasabad

Heydarabad (حيدراباد, also Romanized as Ḩeydarābād) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Heydarabad, Abbasabad

Hezarjarib District

The Hezarjarib District (بخش هزارجریب) is a district (bakhsh) in Neka County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hezarjarib District

History of Artsakh

Artsakh is located in the southern part of the Lesser Caucasus range, at the eastern edge of the Armenian Highlands, encompassing the highland part of the wider geographical region known as Karabakh.

See Mazandaran Province and History of Artsakh

History of Gilan

Gīlān is an Iranian province at the southwestern coast of the Caspian Sea.

See Mazandaran Province and History of Gilan

History of Iran

The history of Iran, commonly also known as Persia in the Western world, is intertwined with the history of a larger region, also to an extent known as Greater Iran, comprising the area from Anatolia, the Bosphorus, and Egypt in the west to the borders of Ancient India and the Syr Darya in the east, and from the Caucasus and the Eurasian Steppe in the north to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman in the south.

See Mazandaran Province and History of Iran

History of Shia Islam

Shi‘a Islam, also known as Shi‘ite Islam or Shi‘ism, is the second largest branch of Islam after Sunni Islam.

See Mazandaran Province and History of Shia Islam

Hoseynabad, Dabudasht

Hoseynabad (حسين اباد, also Romanized as Ḩoseynābād) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Hoseynabad, Dabudasht

Hossein Fallah Noshirvani

Hossein Falah Noshirvani (حسین فلاح نوشیروانی) was a renowned Iranian humanitarian and influential social figure.

See Mazandaran Province and Hossein Fallah Noshirvani

Hossein Ghods-Nakhai

Hossein Ghods-Nakhaï (حسین قدس نخعی.), (1894 – 1977) was an Iranian poet, politician, cabinet minister, and diplomat.

See Mazandaran Province and Hossein Ghods-Nakhai

Hossein Tavakkoli

Hossein Tavakkoli (حسین توکلی., born January 10, 1978 in Mahmoudabad, Mazandaran) is an Iranian weightlifter who won the gold medal in the Men's 105 kg weight class at the 2000 Summer Olympics.

See Mazandaran Province and Hossein Tavakkoli

Humid subtropical climate

A humid subtropical climate is a zone of climate characterized by hot and humid summers, and mild to cool winters.

See Mazandaran Province and Humid subtropical climate

Huto and Kamarband Caves

The Huto and Kamarband Caves or Belt Caves are prehistoric, archaeological sites in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Huto and Kamarband Caves

Hyborian Age

The Hyborian Age is the fictional period within the artificial mythology created by Robert E. Howard in which the sword and sorcery tales of Conan the Barbarian are set.

See Mazandaran Province and Hyborian Age

Hyrcania

Hyrcania (Ὑρκανία Hyrkania, Old Persian: Varkâna,Lendering (1996) Middle Persian: Gurgān, Akkadian: Urqananu) is a historical region composed of the land south-east of the Caspian Sea in modern-day Iran, bound in the south by the Alborz mountain range and the Kopet Dag in the east.

See Mazandaran Province and Hyrcania

Ibn-i-Asdaq

Mírzá `Alí-Muh&#803;ammad-i-Khurásání (ميرزا علي محمد خراساني; died 1928), known as Ibn-i-As&#803;daq, was an eminent follower of Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith.

See Mazandaran Province and Ibn-i-Asdaq

Industrial Estate, Abbasabad

Industrial Estate (شهرك صنعتي &ndash; Shahrak-e Şanʿatī) is a village and company town in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Industrial Estate, Abbasabad

Industrial Estate, Larijan

Industrial Estate (شهرك صنعتي, also Romanized as Shahrak-e Şanʿatī) is a village and company town in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Industrial Estate, Larijan

Intellectual movements in Iran

Intellectual movements in Iran involve the Iranian experience of modernity and its associated art, science, literature, poetry, and political structures that have been changing since the 19th century.

See Mazandaran Province and Intellectual movements in Iran

Ira, Mazandaran

Ira (ايرا, also Romanized as Īrā; also known as Iza) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ira, Mazandaran

Iran

Iran (ایران), also known as Persia, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran (جمهوری اسلامی ایران), is a sovereign state in Western Asia. With over 81 million inhabitants, Iran is the world's 18th-most-populous country. Comprising a land area of, it is the second-largest country in the Middle East and the 17th-largest in the world. Iran is bordered to the northwest by Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, to the north by the Caspian Sea, to the northeast by Turkmenistan, to the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan, to the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, and to the west by Turkey and Iraq. The country's central location in Eurasia and Western Asia, and its proximity to the Strait of Hormuz, give it geostrategic importance. Tehran is the country's capital and largest city, as well as its leading economic and cultural center. Iran is home to one of the world's oldest civilizations, beginning with the formation of the Elamite kingdoms in the fourth millennium BCE. It was first unified by the Iranian Medes in the seventh century BCE, reaching its greatest territorial size in the sixth century BCE, when Cyrus the Great founded the Achaemenid Empire, which stretched from Eastern Europe to the Indus Valley, becoming one of the largest empires in history. The Iranian realm fell to Alexander the Great in the fourth century BCE and was divided into several Hellenistic states. An Iranian rebellion culminated in the establishment of the Parthian Empire, which was succeeded in the third century CE by the Sasanian Empire, a leading world power for the next four centuries. Arab Muslims conquered the empire in the seventh century CE, displacing the indigenous faiths of Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism with Islam. Iran made major contributions to the Islamic Golden Age that followed, producing many influential figures in art and science. After two centuries, a period of various native Muslim dynasties began, which were later conquered by the Turks and the Mongols. The rise of the Safavids in the 15th century led to the reestablishment of a unified Iranian state and national identity, with the country's conversion to Shia Islam marking a turning point in Iranian and Muslim history. Under Nader Shah, Iran was one of the most powerful states in the 18th century, though by the 19th century, a series of conflicts with the Russian Empire led to significant territorial losses. Popular unrest led to the establishment of a constitutional monarchy and the country's first legislature. A 1953 coup instigated by the United Kingdom and the United States resulted in greater autocracy and growing anti-Western resentment. Subsequent unrest against foreign influence and political repression led to the 1979 Revolution and the establishment of an Islamic republic, a political system that includes elements of a parliamentary democracy vetted and supervised by a theocracy governed by an autocratic "Supreme Leader". During the 1980s, the country was engaged in a war with Iraq, which lasted for almost nine years and resulted in a high number of casualties and economic losses for both sides. According to international reports, Iran's human rights record is exceptionally poor. The regime in Iran is undemocratic, and has frequently persecuted and arrested critics of the government and its Supreme Leader. Women's rights in Iran are described as seriously inadequate, and children's rights have been severely violated, with more child offenders being executed in Iran than in any other country in the world. Since the 2000s, Iran's controversial nuclear program has raised concerns, which is part of the basis of the international sanctions against the country. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, an agreement reached between Iran and the P5+1, was created on 14 July 2015, aimed to loosen the nuclear sanctions in exchange for Iran's restriction in producing enriched uranium. Iran is a founding member of the UN, ECO, NAM, OIC, and OPEC. It is a major regional and middle power, and its large reserves of fossil fuels – which include the world's largest natural gas supply and the fourth-largest proven oil reserves – exert considerable influence in international energy security and the world economy. The country's rich cultural legacy is reflected in part by its 22 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the third-largest number in Asia and eleventh-largest in the world. Iran is a multicultural country comprising numerous ethnic and linguistic groups, the largest being Persians (61%), Azeris (16%), Kurds (10%), and Lurs (6%).

See Mazandaran Province and Iran

Iran–Russia relations

Relations between the Grand Duchy of Moscow and the Persian Empire (Iran), officially commenced in 1521, with the Safavids in power.

See Mazandaran Province and Iran–Russia relations

Iranian architecture

Iranian architecture or Persian architecture (Persian:مهرازى ایرانی) is the architecture of Iran and parts of the rest of West Asia, the Caucasus and Central Asia.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian architecture

Iranian Constitutional Revolution

The Persian Constitutional Revolution (مشروطیت Mashrūtiyyat, or انقلاب مشروطه Enghelāb-e Mashrūteh), also known as the Constitutional Revolution of Iran, took place between 1905 and 1911.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian Constitutional Revolution

Iranian cuisine

Iranian cuisine comprises the cooking traditions of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian cuisine

Iranian Georgians

Iranian Georgians (ირანის ქართველები; گرجی‌های ایران) are Iranian citizens who are ethnically Georgian, and are an ethnic group living in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian Georgians

Iranian local elections, 2003

Iranian City and Village Councils elections, 2003 took place in February 2003, the second time local elections for city and village councils had taken place since being introduced in 1999, and 905 city and 34,205 village councils were up for election.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian local elections, 2003

Iranian presidential election, 2005

Iran's ninth presidential election took place in two rounds, the first on 17 June 2005, the run-off on 24 June.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian presidential election, 2005

Iranian presidential election, 2013

Presidential elections were held in Iran on 14 June 2013.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian presidential election, 2013

Iranian Volleyball Super League

The Iranian Super League (ISL) is a professional volleyball league in Iran at the top of the Iranian volleyball league system.

See Mazandaran Province and Iranian Volleyball Super League

Islamic Azad University, Ramsar Branch

The Islamic Azad University, Ramsar Branch (also known as Azad University of Ramsar, formerly known as Islamic Azad University of West of Mazandaran) is a campus of the Islamic Azad University in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Islamic Azad University, Ramsar Branch

Islamic Republic of Iran Railways

The Islamic Republic of Iran Railways (abbreviated IRIR or sometimes RAI) (Persian: Rāhāhane Jomhuriye Eslamiye Irān) is the national state-owned railway system of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Islamic Republic of Iran Railways

Ismail I

Ismail I (Esmāʿīl,; July 17, 1487 – May 23, 1524), also known as Shah Ismail I (شاه اسماعیل), was the founder of the Safavid dynasty, ruling from 1501 to 23 May 1524 as Shah of Iran (Persia).

See Mazandaran Province and Ismail I

ISO 3166-2:IR

ISO 3166-2:IR is the entry for the Islamic Republic of Iran in ISO 3166-2, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), which defines codes for the names of the principal subdivisions (e.g., provinces or states) of all countries coded in ISO 3166-1.

See Mazandaran Province and ISO 3166-2:IR

Izadshahr

Izadshahr (ايزدشهر; formerly, Iz Deh (Persian: ایز ده), also Romanized as ‘Īz Deh, Īzdeh, Izedeh, and ‘Iz-i-Deh; also known as Īzdeh-e Bāzārsar) is a city in the Central District of Nur County, located on the Caspian Sea in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Izadshahr

Ja'far Pishevari

Sayyed Ja'far Pishevari (1893 – 11 June 1947) (Seyid Cəfər Pişəvəri, سید جعفر پیشه وری, سید جعفر پیشه‌وری) was the founder and chairman of separatist and communist Azerbaijan People's Government (November 1945 &ndash; November 1946), created and supported by Soviet occupational forces in north-western Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ja'far Pishevari

Jackal coursing

Jackal coursing involves the pursuit of jackals (usually the golden jackal and black-backed jackal) with dogs.

See Mazandaran Province and Jackal coursing

Jajrood River

Jajrood River (or Jājrūd or Jajroud) is a river of northern Iran, in Mazandaran Province and Tehran Province.

See Mazandaran Province and Jajrood River

Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar

Jalal al-Din Mirza (جلال الدین میرزا; 1827-1872) was an Iranian historian and freethinker, born in Tehran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar

Jalal Al-e-Ahmad

Jalal Al-e-Ahmad (جلال آل‌احمد; December 2, 1923 – September 9, 1969) was a prominent Iranian novelist, short-story writer, translator, philosopher, socio-political critic, sociologist as well as an anthropologist who was "one of the earliest and most prominent of contemporary Iranian ethnographers".

See Mazandaran Province and Jalal Al-e-Ahmad

Jali Kola

Jali Kola (جاليكلا, also Romanized as Jālī Kolā; also known as Jārī Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jali Kola

Jameh Mosque of Amol

The Jāmeh Mosque of Amol (مسجد جامع آمل – Masjid-e-Jāmeh Amol) is the grand, congregational mosque (Jāmeh) of Amol, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jameh Mosque of Amol

Javad Asghari Moghaddam

Javad Asghari Moghaddam (جواد اصغری‌مقدم), born 12 August 1979 in Tonekabon, Mazandran, Iran is an Iranian futsal player.

See Mazandaran Province and Javad Asghari Moghaddam

Jisa-ye Danial

Jisa-ye Danial (جيسادانيال, also Romanized as Jīsā-ye Dānīāl; also known as Jīsā) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jisa-ye Danial

Jisa-ye Kelarabad

Jisa-ye Kelarabad (جيساكلاراباد, also Romanized as Jīsā-ye Kelārābād; also known a sJīsā-ye Pā’īn and Jīsā-ye Soflá) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jisa-ye Kelarabad

Jisa-ye Khezrabad

Jisa-ye Khezrabad (جيساخضراباد, also Romanized as Jīsā-ye Khez̤rābād; also known as Jīsā-ye Bālā and Jīsā-ye ‘Olyā) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Jisa-ye Khezrabad

Juybar

Juybar (جويبار, also Romanized as Jūybār; also known as Bāghlū) is a city and capital of Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Juybar

Juybar County

Juybar County (شهرستان جویبار) is a county in Mazandaran Province in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Juybar County

Kabab torsh

Kabab torsh is a traditional kebab from Gilan and Mazandaran provinces in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kabab torsh

Kabud Kola, Amol

Kabud Kola (كبودكلا, also Romanized as Kabūd Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kabud Kola, Amol

Kachap-e Kolva

Kachap-e Kolva (كچپكلوا, also Romanized as Kachap-e Kolvā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kachap-e Kolva

Kachap-e Olya

Kachap-e Olya (كچپعليا, also Romanized as Kachap-e ‘Olyā; also known as Kachab-e Bālā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kachap-e Olya

Kachap-e Sofla

Kachap-e Sofla (كچپسفلي, also Romanized as Kachap-e Soflá; also known as Kachab-e Pā’īn) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kachap-e Sofla

Kalaj

Kalaj (كالج, also Romanized as Kālaj; also known as Kālach and Kelaj) is a village in Mian Band Rural District, in the Central District of Nur County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kalaj

Kalik Sar

Kalik Sar (كليك سر, also Romanized as Kalīk Sar) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kalik Sar

Kalleh Bast

Kalleh Bast (كله بست, also Romanized as Kaleh Bast) is a city capital of Rudbast District, on the Caspian Sea, in Mazandaran Province of northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kalleh Bast

Kamangar Kola, Dabudasht

Kamangar Kola (كمانگركلا, also Romanized as Kamāngar Kolā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kamangar Kola, Dabudasht

Kamp-e Sad Lar

Kamp-e Sad Lar (کمپ سد لار, also Romanized as Kamp-e Sad Lār; also known as Sadd-e Daryācheh-ye Lār, Sadd-e Lār, and Ta’sīsāt-e Khadamātī-ye Sadd-e Lār) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kamp-e Sad Lar

Kandelu

Kandelu (كندلو, also Romanized as Kandelū and Kāndolū) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kandelu

Kangar, Iran

Kangar (كنگر) is a village in Tavabe-e Kojur Rural District, Kojur District, Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kangar, Iran

Karatkuti

Karatkuti (كراتكوتي, also Romanized as Karātkūtī) is a village in Kelarabad Rural District, Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Karatkuti

Karen (name)

Karen is a given name.

See Mazandaran Province and Karen (name)

Kashi Mahalleh

Kashi Mahalleh (كاشي محله, also Romanized as Kāshī Maḩalleh) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kashi Mahalleh

Kateh

Kateh is a type of Iranian rice from Caspian region, which, unlike Polo/Cholo, is sticky and does not have Tahdig (the rice, bread or potato crust at the bottom, a traditional delicacy in Iran), though it does form a crust on the bottom where the salt and oil collect.

See Mazandaran Province and Kateh

Katuli

Katuli is one of the most important tunes in Mazandaran music.

See Mazandaran Province and Katuli

Kava, Iran

Kava (كوا, also Romanized as Kavā, Kevā, and Kovā; also known as Kavaz) is a village in Ashrestaq Rural District, Yaneh Sar District, Behshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kava, Iran

Kazem Kola

Kazem Kola (كاظم كلا, also Romanized as Kāz̧em Kolā) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kazem Kola

Kelar Mound

Kelar Mound or Kelar Tappeh is a Neolithic archaeological site in Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelar Mound

Kelarabad

Kelarabad (كلارآباد, also Romanized as Kelārābād and Kalārābād) is a city and capital of Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelarabad

Kelarabad District

Kelarabad District (بخش كلارآباد) is a district (bakhsh) in Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelarabad District

Kelarabad Rural District

Kelarabad Rural District (دهستان كلارآباد) is a rural district (dehestan) in Kelarabad District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelarabad Rural District

Kelardasht

Kelardasht (كلاردشت, also Romanized as Kalārdasht) is a city and capital of Kelardasht District, in Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelardasht

Kelardasht District

Kelardasht District (بخش کلاردشت) is a district (bakhsh) in Chalus County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kelardasht District

Kenar Anjam

Kenar Anjam (كنارانجام, also Romanized as Kenār Anjām) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kenar Anjam

Ketalem and Sadat Shahr

Ketalem and Sadat Shahr (كتالم وسادات شهر) is a city in the Central District of Ramsar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ketalem and Sadat Shahr

Ketel Emamzadeh Hashem

Ketel Emamzadeh Hashem Larijan (كتل امامزاده هاشم دماوند, also Romanized as Ketel Emāmzādeh Hāshem Larijan Amol; also known as Emāmzādeh Hāshem Larijan) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Ketel Emamzadeh Hashem

Khalil Shahr

Khalil Shahr (خليل شهر, also Romanized as Khalīl Shahr; formerly, Khalil Mahalleh (Persian: خليل محله), also Romanized as Khalīl Maḩalleh and Khallī Mahalleh) is a city in the Central District of Behshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khalil Shahr

Kharman Kola

Kharman Kola (خرمن كلا, also Romanized as Kharman Kolā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kharman Kola

Khashkala

Khashkala (خشكلا, also Romanized as Khashkalā; also known as Khoshk Kolā) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khashkala

Khayr al-Nisa Begum

Khayr al-Nisa Begum (known under the royal title Mahd-i Ulya, "the highest-ranked cradle") (died 26 July 1579) was an Iranian Mazandarani princess from the Marashi dynasty, who was the wife of the Safavid shah (king) Mohammed Khodabanda (r. 1578–1587) and mother of Abbas I. During the early part of her husband's reign she was a powerful political figure in her own right and governed Iran de facto between February 1578 and July 1579.

See Mazandaran Province and Khayr al-Nisa Begum

Khezrabad, Mazandaran

Khezrabad (خضراباد, also Romanized as Khez̤rābād) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khezrabad, Mazandaran

Kholeno

Kholeno or Koleh-no (خلنو and خله نو) is a mountain in Kholeno/Azadkouh massif in central Alborz range located in North of Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kholeno

Khorramabad District

Khorramabad District (بخش خرم‌آباد) is a district (bakhsh) in Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khorramabad District

Khorramabad, Mazandaran

Khorramabad (خرم آباد, also Romanized as Khorramābād and Khurramābād) is a city and capital of Khorramabad District, Tonekabon County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khorramabad, Mazandaran

Khuni Sar

Khuni Sar (خوني سر, also Romanized as Khūnī Sar; also known as Khāneh Sarā) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khuni Sar

Khush Rudpey

Khush Rudpey (خوش رودپي; also known as Khvosh Rūd Pey-e Bālā and Bālā Khvoshrūd Pey) is a city and capital of Bandpey-ye Gharbi District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Khush Rudpey

Kiakola

Kiakola (كياكلا, also Romanized as Kīākolā, Kīā Kolā, Kīā Kalā, and Kīyā Kalā; formerly, Jadīd ol Eslām) is a city and capital of Simorgh County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kiakola

Kiasar

Kiasar (كياسر, also Romanized as Kīāsar, Keyāsar, and Kīya Sar) is a city and capital of Chahardangeh District, in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kiasar

Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti

The Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti (ქართლ-კახეთის სამეფო) (1762–1801) was created in 1762 by the unification of two eastern Georgian kingdoms of Kartli and Kakheti.

See Mazandaran Province and Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti

Kojoor River

Kojoor River is a river of Mazandaran Province in northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kojoor River

Kojur

Kojur (كوجور, also Romanized as Kujur; also known as Baladeh-ye Kujūr, Kujūr, Dehe Kujūr) is a city in Tavabe-e Kojur Rural District, Kojur District, Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kojur

Kojur District

Kojur District (بخش کجور) is a district (bakhsh) in Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kojur District

Kola Kardeh, Abbasabad

Kola Kardeh (کلاکرده, also Romanized as Kolā Kardeh) is a village in Langarud Rural District, Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kola Kardeh, Abbasabad

Kolbad District

Kolbad District (بخش کلباد) is a district (bakhsh) in Galugah County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kolbad District

Kolijan Rostaq District

Kolijan Rostaq District (بخش کلیجان‌رستاق) is a district (bakhsh) in Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kolijan Rostaq District

Komdarreh

Komdarreh (كمدره) is a village in Dasht-e Sar Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Komdarreh

Komeil Ghasemi

Komeil Nemat Ghasemi (کمیل قاسمی, born 27 February 1988) is an Iranian wrestler who won a bronze medal in the men's freestyle 120 kg event at the 2012 Summer Olympics.

See Mazandaran Province and Komeil Ghasemi

Kord Kheyl, Amol

Kord Kheyl (كردخيل; also known as Kordī Kheyl) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kord Kheyl, Amol

Korsi Kola

Korsi Kola (كرسي كلا, also Romanized as Korsī Kolā; also known as Korsī Kolā-ye Bālā) is a village in Dabuy-ye Jonubi Rural District, Dabudasht District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Korsi Kola

Kuhi Kheyl

Kuhi Kheyl (كوهي خيل, also Romanized as Kūhī Kheyl and Kūhīkheyl) is a city and capital of Gil Khuran District, in Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Kuhi Kheyl

Kurdish tribes

The following is a list of tribes of Kurdish people from the geo-cultural region of Kurdistan.

See Mazandaran Province and Kurdish tribes

Kush Nama

Kush-Nama (کوش نامه), is a Persian epic poem and part of a mythical history of Iran written by Ḥakim Iranshān (or Irānshāh) b. Abu'l-Khay between the years 501-04/1108-11.

See Mazandaran Province and Kush Nama

Lahash, Iran

Lahash (لهاش, also Romanized as Lahāsh and Lehāsh; also known as Lāsh) is a village in Chelav Rural District, in the Central District of Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lahash, Iran

Lake-effect snow

Lake-effect snow is produced during cooler atmospheric conditions when a cold air mass moves across long expanses of warmer lake water, warming the lower layer of air which picks up water vapor from the lake, rises up through the colder air above, freezes and is deposited on the leeward (downwind) shores.

See Mazandaran Province and Lake-effect snow

Lalehabad District

Lalehabad District (بخش لاله‌آباد) is a district (bakhsh) in Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lalehabad District

Langarud Rural District

Langarud Rural District (دهستان لنگارود) is a rural district (dehestan) in Salman Shahr District, Abbasabad County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Langarud Rural District

Lar Dam

Lar Dam (Persian: سد لار sad-de lār) is a dam located at the foot of Mount Damavand in Amol county, Mazandaran, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lar Dam

Lar National Park

Lar National Park (Persian پارک ملی لار park-e melli-e lar) is a protected area in Mazandaran Province and Tehran Province, in northern Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lar National Park

Lar River

Lar River is a river of northern Iran, in the province of Mazandaran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lar River

Larijan District

Larijan District (بخش لاریجان) is a district (bakhsh) in Amol county, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Larijan District

Larijan-e Sofla Rural District

Larijan-e Sofla Rural District (دهستان لاريجان سفلي) is a rural district (dehestan) in Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Larijan-e Sofla Rural District

Larim

Larim (لاريم, also Romanized as Lārīm) is a village in Larim Rural District, Gil Khuran District, Juybar County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Larim

Larin, Iran

Larin (لارين, also Romanized as Lārīn; also known as Lāri) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Larin, Iran

Lasem

Lasem (لاسم, also Romanized as Lāsem and Lasm; also known as Lishan) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lasem

Lashak

Lashak (لاشك, also Romanized as Lāshak) is a village in Zanus Rastaq Rural District, Kojur District, Nowshahr County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lashak

Lazirak

Lazirak (لزيرك, also Romanized as Lazīrak) is a village in Bala Larijan Rural District, Larijan District, Amol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Lazirak

Limun

Limun (ليمون, also Romanized as Līmūn) is a village in Mazkureh Rural District, in the Central District of Sari County, Mazandaran Province, Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and Limun

List of aerial tramways

List of aerial tramways (US) or cable cars (Europe) around the world.

See Mazandaran Province and List of aerial tramways

List of castles in Iran

This is a list of castles in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and List of castles in Iran

List of cheeses

This is a list of cheeses by place of origin.

See Mazandaran Province and List of cheeses

List of cities in Iran by province

This is a list of cities in Iran, categorized by province.

See Mazandaran Province and List of cities in Iran by province

List of earthquakes in Iran

Iran is one of the most seismically active countries in the world, being crossed by several major faults that cover at least 90% of the country.

See Mazandaran Province and List of earthquakes in Iran

List of ethnic, regional, and folk dances by origin

This is a list of dances grouped by ethnicity, country, or region.

See Mazandaran Province and List of ethnic, regional, and folk dances by origin

List of festivals in Iran

The following is a list of festivals in Iran.

See Mazandaran Province and List of festivals in Iran

List of FIPS region codes (G–I)

This is a list of FIPS 10-4 region codes from G-I, using a standardized name format, and cross-linking to articles.

See Mazandaran Province and List of FIPS region codes (G–I)

List of gardens

The List of gardens is a link page for any park or garden open to the public, anywhere in the world.

See Mazandaran Province and List of gardens

List of gondola lifts

This article is a List of gondola lifts around the world.

See Mazandaran Province and List of gondola lifts

List of indigenous peoples

This is a partial list of the world's indigenous / aboriginal / native people.

See Mazandaran Province and List of indigenous peoples

List of Iranian provincial governors under President Khatami

This is a list of Iranian provincial General-governors.

See Mazandaran Province and List of Iranian provincial governors under President Khatami

List of largest cities of Iran

Iran has one of the highest urban population growth rates in the world.

See Mazandaran Province and List of largest cities of Iran

List of longest masonry arch bridge spans

The masonry arch bridges of stone or brick are the most genuine of arch bridges, some lasting a thousand years.

See Mazandaran Province and List of longest masonry arch bridge spans

List of non-marine molluscs of Iran

The non-marine molluscs of Iran are a part of the molluscan fauna of Iran, which is part of the (wildlife of Iran).

See Mazandaran Province and List of non-marine molluscs of Iran

List of places in Shahnameh

Here are the list of places represented/mentioned in the Persian epic poem Shāhnāma by Ferdowsi.

See Mazandaran Province and List of places in Shahnameh

List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area from 20,000 to 30,000 square kilometers

No description.

See Mazandaran Province and List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area from 20,000 to 30,000 square kilometers

List of power stations in Iran

By 2012, Iran had roughly 400 power plant units.

See Mazandaran Province and List of power stations in Iran

List of prisons

This page provides a list of prisons by country.

See Mazandaran Province and List of prisons

List of radio stations in Asia

This is a list of radio stat