G E M Anscombe was born on March 18, 1919, the youngest of three children and only daughter of a Dulwich college science master, Alan Wells Anscombe, and his wife, Gertrude Elizabeth, after whom she was named. From Sydenham High School she went up to Oxford in 1937 as a scholar of St Hugh's college where she read Greats (Classics and Philosophy) and in her first year converted to Catholicism. Shortly thereafter she met another philosopher convert, Peter Geach, whom she married on Boxing Day 1941, the same year in which she graduated with a first. She retained her maiden name and was often referred to in print as ''Miss Anscombe'' - even by Geach.

In 1942 she crossed to Cambridge to become a postgraduate at Newnham college. It was in Cambridge that she met Wittgenstein, whose lectures she attended, becoming increasingly enthusiastic about his revolutionary ideas. By 1946 she had returned to Oxford as a research fellow at Somerville college (where she remained in one or another capacity until her appointment to the chair of philosophy at Cambridge in 1970).

However, she maintained contact with Wittgenstein, travelling to Cambridge once a week. In the course of that year (1946-47) they became close friends. Obsessive about the originality of his thought and somewhat misogynistic, she was one of the few academics Wittgenstein ever trusted and he would address her affectionately as ''old man''. Although he stated that ''he could not possibly believe all the things they believe'', in his final year Wittgenstein asked Anscombe to put him in touch with a ''non-philosophical priest''. A few months later, in 1951, she and a few other close friends knelt by Wittgenstein's bed as the priest she had introduced to him administered the last rites.

Preparation for the task of translating his work (written in German) had begun while Wittgenstein was still alive, but now she and the other two literary executors and editors set about the project of bringing material to publication. Anscombe took the lead in this, and the appearance in 1953 of her translation of Wittgenstein's masterpiece, Philosophical Investigations, was one of the major turning points in twentieth-century philosophy. This was followed by her translations of other works: Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics (1956), Notebooks 1914-16 (1961), Zettel (1967), and (with Denis Paul) On Certainty (1969). She also concerned herself with Wittgenstein's earlier philosophy, publishing An Introduction to Wittgenstein's Tractatus (1959), and with Geach translated the work of Descartes, Philosophical Writings (1954), the figure whose ideas were among the main targets of Wittgenstein's

criticisms.

Anscombe's appreciation of philosophers with whom she disagreed profoundly was marked, as was her range. She could write authoritatively, using her own translations, of Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, Frege, and Wittgenstein. But first and foremost she was neither a historian, a translator, nor an editor, but an original philosopher. Her short book, Intention, first published by Blackwell in 1957 and republished by Harvard in 2000, is universally regarded as a classic account of the nature of intentional behaviour, and as the founding text of the theory of action.

Her 1958 article Modern Moral Philosophy introduced the term ''consequentialism'' into the English language and initiated the revival of an ethics based on virtue rather than on rule or outcome. Likewise, Causality and Determination her inaugural lecture as professor of philosophy at Cambridge (the position once held by Wittgenstein) subverted, and some believe refuted, a centuries' old orthodoxy about the nature of causation.

For the most part, Anscombe's work was highly academic, usually difficult to comprehend, and often combative in expression. It sometimes took readers years to see the point of what she was arguing, but this was because she always took on the hardest problems and had no time for slick presentation. From her student days she had also discussed and written about issues of moral, political, and religious interests. In 1939 she co-authored a highly controversial pamphlet predicting that Britain's conduct in the Second World War would be unjust, and in 1957 she protested the award by the university of Oxford of an honorary degree to president Truman, charging that he had commanded the murderous use of nuclear weapons against innocent Japanese civilians. Perplexed by defenders of Truman, she came to the conclusion that they failed to understand the nature of his actions, and it was this that led

her to write Intention.

In 1947, in debate with C S Lewis in Oxford, she demolished his favoured argument against ''naturalism''. Where lesser minds saw this as giving comfort to the enemy (atheism), Anscombe characteristically saw herself as simply exposing bad argumentation. Elsewhere, for example in pamphlets on Transubstantiation (1974), and on Contraception (1977), she argued passionately in favour of traditional Catholic teachings.

In 1967 Anscombe was elected fellow of the British Academy and subsequently received a number of other distinctions. Two collections of papers were dedicated to her: Intention and Intentionality (1979) and Logic, Cause and Action (2000), and together with Geach she was the recipient of a volume of essays Moral Truth and Moral Tradition (1994) published to honour their 50 years of marriage. In her anthology Women Philosophers (1996), gathering work from the seventeenth century to the present day, Mary Warnock describes Anscombe as ''the undoubted giant among women philosophers''. She certainly has a good claim to be the greatest woman philosopher of whom we know, and to have been one of the finest philosophers of the twentieth century.

Her later years were troubled by accident and illness but she was well-cared for by her family. Elizabeth Anscombe is survived by her husband and by their three sons and four daughters.

J