WASHINGTON -- U.S. Sen. John Boozman sat at a table with the Dalai Lama on Thursday at a National Prayer Breakfast while President Barack Obama admonished people who "twist" religion into a weapon.

The annual breakfast, which draws thousands of people from across the country, is sponsored by House and Senate prayer groups that gather at breakfast time each week to worship. Boozman is co-chairman of the Senate prayer group and is scheduled to lead the annual breakfast in 2017.

Because of the senator's leadership role, Boozman, a Republican from Rogers, shared a table with the Tibetan holy man Thursday morning. The members who lead the House and Senate prayer groups sat down with the Dalai Lama for about a half-hour after the breakfast.

They talked about "just really what the prayer breakfast is all about, the spirit of coming together, and sharing faith and praying together," Boozman said. "[There are] lots of problems in the world. The way that you solve them is through relationships like that."

The event draws guests from around the world and across the religious spectrum. Outgoing Co-Chairman Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., read a letter from Pope Francis who, it was announced Thursday, will speak to Congress on Sept. 24.

Obama offered a special welcome to the Dalai Lama, to whom he referred as "a powerful example of what it means to practice compassion, who inspires us to speak up for the freedom and dignity of all human beings."

The Dalai Lama's appearance at the breakfast angered the Chinese government, which has warned world leaders not to meet with him. The Dalai Lama fled to India after a failed uprising against Chinese rule in the 1950s.

Obama spent the majority of his speech decrying those who use religion to justify violence, pointing to sectarian war in Syria and the actions of the Islamic State, which he called "a brutal, vicious death cult that, in the name of religion, carries out unspeakable acts of barbarism."

"There is a tendency in us, a sinful tendency that can pervert and distort our faith," Obama said. "In today's world, when hate groups have their own Twitter accounts and bigotry can fester in hidden places in cyberspace, it can be even harder to counteract such intolerance. But God compels us to try."

Boozman joined the House prayer group after he was elected in 2001 and joined the Senate's version when he switched chambers. It gives him a chance to get to know other members, he said.

The lawmakers share faith and food each time they meet. The gatherings are nonpartisan and off-the-record.

"The prayer breakfast is a really unique experience. That's the one time in the week where Democrats and Republicans park the politics outside," Boozman said. "It's member-led, there's only members or ex-members there, and then a member or an ex-member gives their testimony and you learn about them, you learn about their faith."

The group's outgoing leader, Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Miss., said the Senate prayer meetings started during World War II and have always kept a low profile.

"In many ways our prayer breakfast is a welcome sanctuary from the politics and partisanship we hear about," he said.

The meeting consists of a hymn and prayer requests, after which members join hands and pray together. After that, either a Democrat or Republican gives a testimonial.

"We've heard about spiritual journeys from the heights of achievement to really, really tough times," Wicker said. "It has been said there is so much good in the worst of us and so much bad in the best of us that it ill behooves any of us to find fault with the rest of us, and that is true of the attendees of the Senate prayer breakfast."

Members of Arkansas' delegation have been involved in the groups for decades, and several current members of Arkansas' delegation attend. Former Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat from Little Rock, led the Senate prayer group and co-hosted the National Prayer Breakfast four times.

Rep. French Hill attended Thursday's event with Little Rock real estate developer Mark Saviers, who leads a men's Bible study group that Hill attends.

Rep. Steve Womack's guest was the Rev. Ronnie Floyd, the Southern Baptist Convention president who leads Cross Church in Springdale, and his wife, Jeana Floyd.

Floyd said he last attended the breakfast a decade ago, but prays daily for the president and first lady.

"I [am] really encouraged by any time we give attention to the need of God and prayer in our nation," he said. "I went there to pray and I prayed; I went there to be encouraged and I was encouraged."

He said the keynote speech by NASCAR Hall of Famer Darrell Waltrip was particularly touching. Waltrip spoke about how he became a Christian after a 1993 crash left him wondering what would happen if he died.

"If you've never gotten on your knees and asked him to forgive you of your sins, you're just a pretty good guy or a pretty good gal? You're going to go to hell," Waltrip said.