(KPRENSA) – The professional path of Enrique Bunbury has no comparison in the world of the rock en español. Aside from his most recognized phase in the band Héroes del Silencio, since beginning his career as a soloist the musician has been characterized by his pursuit of musical eclecticism.

“One tries to evolve and be defined as an artist with a body of work that, eventually, shows a clear personality that is unified through all of your efforts,” Bunbury assures.

The Spanish musician just released his sixth album as a soloist titled “Las Consecuencias.” The album was produced by Bunbury himself and it features an intimate look into Bunbury’s personal storytelling style through his lyrics and both acoustic and electric musical arrangements.

Bunbury will be in concert in San Diego on Friday, June 4th at The 4th and B (345 B Street, San Diego).

The singer and songwriter has called the album “a camara disk, in black and white.” “A few people are going to like it a lot, and many others may like it a little.” says Bunbury. “It’s an intimate, slow, difficult album. It’s the darkest, deepest, and most down tempo album I’ve recorded in my life.”

The first single, titled “Frente a frente,” is a remake of a 1981 spanish hit song by the singer Jeannette. For the song, Bunbury collaborated with Miren Iza, the singer of the spanish band Tulsa, who added a special emotion and character to the song with her unique voice. Jeannette makes a brief appearance on the video for the song. ‘Ella me dijo que no’, ‘El boxeador’, ‘21 de octubre’, ‘Lo que más te gustó de mí’ o ‘Nunca se convence del todo a nadie de nada’ as some of the other songs on the new album.

Enrique Bunbury, whose true name is Enrique Ortiz of Landázuri Izardui, was born in the city of Zaragoza in Spain. He received his first electric guitar when he was twelve years old and began to play in a bamd in 1980 in a group called “Apocalipsis.” The origin of “Bunbury,” his artistic name, was when Enrique picked the name from the book “The Importance of Being Ernest,” by Oscar Wilde.

After playing in various groups, Enrique would not become famous until 1987 when he and Juan Valdivia formed Héroes del Silencio, one of the most influencial and emblematic bands of Spanish rock. The Héroes del Silencio, they lasted in career artistica a total of twelve long years, harvesting strong successes and prizes.

After the break up of Heroes of the Silence, Bunbury began his career as the soloist, putting out the CD “Radical Sonora” in 1997. Two years later he published “Pequeño” and in the 2000 “Pequeño Cabaret Ambulante.” In the 2002 he released a new work, titled “Flamingos”. Then in 2008, Enrique Bunbury he released another new album “Hellville de Luxe.”

Now, in 2010, Enrique comes out with “Las Consecuencias.”