Param Gill Biography

Param Gill is an American film director, producer, lyricist, music composer and writer of Indian origin. Many of his films are critically well acclaimed and showcased at many international film festivals, and won him many prizes as well. Last Supper is his most famous work which won many elite awards in the year 2014 such as Best Director Award at Los Angeles International Film Festival and San Francisco Global Movie Fest, and Platinum Award at Oregon Film Festival Awards 2014 and International Independent Film Awards 2015. He was also a winner of American Movie Awards 2015. Award of Merit at Indie Fest Awards 2014 and Accolade Global Film Awards 2015 are other major awards received by this movie. His DOA Death of Amar won Audience Choice Award at San Francisco Global Movie Fest 2014.

In 2016 he directed the controversial Bollywood film, Waarrior Savitri for which he composed music as well. He penned the lyrics for all its 5 songs also. Started off his directorial journey in 2006, he has completed one decade in the industry, and within this time span he directed six films. Waarrior Savitri is his most recent release. Rocking Meera and Hotel Hollywood are other major releases. Last Supper was released in theaters as Going to America. He is the first director in world cinema to premiere his Hollywood film, Last Supper and Bollywood film, Death of Amar, over the same weekend at a film festival in San Francisco. He won multiple awards for the same. He won the elite award of best director too.

He is currently settled in Hollywood, California. Punjab is his ancestral home. He was born into an agricultural family. When he came to US for the first time, he was penniless and had a lot of struggles. He did odd jobs like a worker at gas station to keep his life going on. He took a diploma in film-making from New York Film Academy in 2005. He also completed master's degree from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and practiced dentistry in Modesto. He is the founder of Gill Dental Dental Group.

Published: N/A