We all know that the publishing industry is tough. The evolution of technology has cut into book sales, newspaper subscriptions, and printing. But one fact that is true is that publishing companies in New York City have stood tall through the years.

Many of them had published novels that landed on the New York Times bestseller list, recipients of the National Book Award and Pulitzer Prize. So, which publishing houses do you send your book proposals to? Here are the best publishing companies in New York.

The Big 5 Publishing Houses in New York

The top book publishing companies in New York City are key players in the world of publication and, for many years, have been the first place authors go to when looking to have their nonfiction or literary fiction like fantasy books or sci-fi manuscripts published.

The following Big Five publishing companies in New York have offered authors a large distribution network and a lead position on bookshop shelves:

1. Penguin Random House

Address: 1745 Broadway, New York, NY 10019 USA

Submission Guidelines: www.penguinrandomhouse.com

Contact information: (800) 793-2665

Penguin Random House Publishing Company is one of the largest consumer book publisher, with a global publishing business. It was formed in July 2013 after Penguin and Random House merged.

The company has offices in more than 20 countries worldwide, with New York being its headquarters. They publish a wide range of fiction and non-fiction under the Penguin Classics, Pelican Books, and Vintage Classics imprints, and popular young readers’ books under Puffin Books.

Other imprints owned by Penguin Random House are:

Ballentine Books

Penguin Books

Random House Books

Riverhead Books

Berkley Books

Penguin Random House publishes approximately 15,000 print and 70,000 digital books each year. They have published more than 100,000 eBooks which are available worldwide.

The company’s catalog includes bestsellers like

The Good Left Undone by Adriana Trigiani

Shadow Fire by Christian Feehan

The Palace Papers by Tina Brown

How to Tell a Story by Meg Bowles et al.

Blood And Ruins by Richard Overy

2. HarperCollins

Address: 195 Broadway New York, NY 10007 USA

Submission Guidelines: www.harpercollins.com

Contact information: 1(800) 242-7737

HarperCollins is an international publishing company headquartered in New York City. The company was founded in 1817 by James and John Harper as J. & J. Harper, publishing religious books and tracts. Their first publications were the Bible, dictionaries, atlases, and reissued classics printed in New York City.

The company changed its name to Harper & Brothers in 1833, when it began publishing general literature under its current name. They’ve expanded into various other areas of publishing, including children’s books, adult books, and cookbooks.

HarperCollins publishes approximately 10,000 books yearly, and they operate in 17 countries around the globe. The books are published in 16 different languages. HarperCollins has published more than 200,000 books both in print and digital form.

HarperCollins publishes books in a wide variety of genres, including fiction and non-fiction, under the imprints:

Harlequin

Hanover Squire Press

Harper Perennial

Ecco Books

Park Row Books

Harper

HarperCollins has published many bestseller books over the years, including:

Finding Me by Viola Davis

Autopsy by Patricia Conwell

The Smart Cookie by Jory John and Pete Oswald

The Hate You Give by Angie Thomas

Their notable authors include Martin Luther King Jr., Mark Twain, John F. Kennedy, Maurice Sendak, Margaret Wise Brown, and Dickens.

3. Macmillan Publishers

Address: 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010 USA

Submission Guidelines: us.macmillan.com

Contact information: 1-646-307-5151

Macmillan Publishers was founded in 1843 by brothers Alexander and Daniel Macmillan. The book publishing company has been owned by Holtzbrinck Publishing Group since 1999.

It has offices in over 70 countries worldwide. It is one of the largest publishers in the world, publishing more than 170,000 titles annually under 35 different imprints, including:

Caledon Books

Picador

Henry Holt and Company

Martin’s Press

Neon Squid Books, and Nightfire

Macmillan also publishes academic and professional books and journals, as well as trade books. Its core business focuses on higher education, professional and reference work, kids’ books, and fiction. Macmillan also sells digital content through its Pan Macmillan Digital division.

The best seller books published by Macmillan Publishers include:

Book of Night by Holy Black

Ordinary Monsters by J.M. Miro

Sunset Beach by Mary Kay Andrews, among many others.

They have also published all-time favorite kid’s fiction like The Jungle Book, Alice Adventures in Wonderland, The Gruffalo, and Jones’s Diary.

4. Simon & Schuster, Inc.

Address: 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020, USA

Submission Guidelines: www.simonandschuster.com

Contact information: 1 617 -450-2300

Simon & Schuster, Inc. is a major American publishing house founded in New York City in 1924 by Richard Simon and Max Schuster. Their first work was a crossword puzzle book which turned out to be a bestseller.

Simon & Schuster’s publishing groups include Simon & Schuster Children’s Publishing, Scribner Publishing Group, Atria Publishing Group, Simon & Schuster Digital, and Simon & Schuster Audio.

This New York-based publishing house publishes approximately 2000 titles annually with over 29 different imprints. In recent years, the company has moved aggressively into the international publishing arena with an eye toward both publishing and distributing foreign-language titles. It now distributes books in more than 200 countries globally.

Simon & Schuster has been expanding its presence in the children’s book market by acquiring several children’s book publishers, including:

Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers

Aladdin Paperbacks

Atheneum Books for Young Readers

Simon Spotlight and Little Simon

Notable authors published by Simon & Schuster include Hillary Clinton, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway, Donald Trump, Bob Woodward, and many more.

5. Hachette Book Group (HBG)

Address: 1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10104, USA

Submission Guidelines: www.hachettebookgroup.com

Contact information: 800-759-0190

Hachette Book Group is a publishing company founded in 1826 by Louis Hachette as Brédif, a bookselling and publishing company. It became a subsidiary of Hachette Livre, which is a part of Lagardère Group. It is one of the largest book publishers in the world, with over 50 imprints and more than 1,500 titles published each year.

The company publishes books for adults and children in a variety of genres, including fiction, non-fiction, romance, and self-help.

Hachette Book Group also owns several imprints such as:

Little Brown & Company

Grand Central Publishing

Hachette Nashville

Hachette Audio

Persius Books

Orbit

The company has offices located around the world, including New York City, London, Sydney, Paris, Madrid, Toronto, Amsterdam, Tokyo, Beijing, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Sao Paulo, Mumbai, Johannesburg, and Dubai.

Some of the famous authors published by Hachette Book Group include J.K. Rowling, Donna Tartt, James Patterson, and Malcolm Gladwell.

Other Publishing Companies in New York

There are several publishing companies in New York that provide independent writers with book publishing services apart from The Big 5. Some accept books discussing contemporary issues, while others are open to genre fiction.

Atria Publishing Group

Atria Publishing Group is a part of Simon & Schuster, one of the largest book publishers in New York. They publish books in hardcover, trade paperback, and ebook editions.

The Atria imprint was launched in 2002 as a way to offer readers a variety of different genres. Today, it’s still publishing books across multiple genres, including romance, mystery/thriller, and non-fiction.

Atria Publishing Group has several imprints:

Atria Books (general fiction and non-fiction)

Howard Books (Christian Books)

Enliven Books (Spiritual and wellness books)

Atria Unbound (eBooks)

Keyword Press (Internet Personalities books)

Atria Paperbacks (paperbacks)

Atria Espanol (Spanish Language Books)

Strebor Books (African American books and Black Erotica)

37 INK (African-American Books and other different groups)

Atria Publishing Group’s notable authors include Tina Turner, Rachel Ray, Jodi Picoult, Jennifer Weiner, Fredrick Backman, and Isabelle Allende.

Workman Publishing Company

Workman Publishing Company is a book publisher based in New York City. The company was founded by Peter Workman in 1968 and has published more than 2,000 titles since then.

Workman Publishing Company publishes non-fiction books for adults and children in multiple genres such as cooking, crafts, home improvement, parenting and pregnancy lifestyle, and calendars. The company also publishes cookbooks and pregnancy guides under the name of its imprints:

Artisan Books

Storey Publishing

Algonquin Books

Timber Press

Notable authors published by Workman Publishing Companies include Steven Raichlen, author of The Barbecue Bible series; Sheila Lukins and Julee Rosso, authors of The Silver Palate Cookbook, B. Kliban author of The Official Preppy Handbook.

Farrar, Straus & Giroux

Farrar, Straus, and Giroux (FSG) is an American publishing company of art and literary works founded in 1946 by Roger W. Straus Jr. and John C. Farrar. Its headquarters are located in New York City.

Farrar, Straus & Giroux imprints include FSG originals, Hill and Wang, which publishes academic books and also specializes in history, North Point Press which Publishes literary non-fiction in travel, natural history, music, food and ecology and MCD, which experiments with new styles and genres.

FSG has published many notable authors, including:

Ben Lerner

Carlo Levi

Denis Johnson

Edmund Wilson

Joan Didion

Bernard Malamud

Peter Taylor

Bellevue Literary Press

Bellevue Literary Press is a publishing company that publishes books of all genres and formats. Founded in 2007, Bellevue Literary Press is a sister organization of Bellevue Literary Review. Bellevue Literary Press is a nonprofit press dedicated to promoting the work of emerging and established writers who are creating literature for the twenty-first century.

They publish books of all genres and formats: essays, poetry, memoir, fiction, creative non-fiction, narrative non-fiction, plays, drama, translations, and anthologies.

Authors published by Bellevue Literary Press include Eduardo Halfon, Melissa Pritchard, Jonathan D. Moreno, and Paul Lockhart, among others.

Soho Press

Soho Press is an American publishing house that focuses on crime fiction, mysteries, and thrillers. The company was founded in 1986 by Juris Jurjevics and Laura Hruska and is based in New York City.

The company publishes fiction, non-fiction, and poetry titles for adults and children. Soho Press publishes about 20 titles per year, both new titles and reprints of classic works from the past. It also publishes an annual Best of the Year collection. Soho Press has published works by authors such as Cara Black and Timothy Williams, as well as many other popular writers.

The company also has an imprint called Solo Crime Series, which publishes crime fiction and mysteries. Some of these books feature characters from popular TV shows like Law & Order: Special Victims Unit (SVU) and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (CSI).

Soho Press has been nominated for several awards, including the Edgar Award for Best Novel (2021) for The Missing American by Kwei Quartey, best Biography for This Time Next Year We’ll Be Laughing by Jacqueline Winspear.

Scribner

Scribner was founded as Charles Scribner’s Sons by Charles Scribner I in New York City in 1846. They made their first venture with magazine publishing with Hours at Home. A magazine titled Scribner’s Monthly was published in 1870.

When the Scribner Sons took over after the death of their father, they all served as presidents of the company. The firm gained recognition for such works as Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle, which exposed conditions in Chicago’s meatpacking industry.

Scribner formed a merge with Atheneum in 1978, was sold to Macmillan in 1984, and became an imprint of Simon & Schuster again when they merged in 1994.

Its authors included Kurt Vonnegut, John Updike, Robert Penn Warren, Martin Amis, and Doris Kearns Goodwin.