So many publishing houses lined Fifth Avenue years ago that the stretch from 13th to 23d Street was dubbed ''Paternoster Row,'' after London's well-known publishing district. New York long ago became the pre-eminent publishing city in the world, and these days book publishers are scattered across Manhattan. The city's influence has extended beyond book publishing to magazines and journals, bookstore sales and book clubs.

''No other place even comes close,'' said John W. Tebbel, author of a four-volume history of publishing. Samuel S. Vaughan, editor in chief of Doubleday, a company that has been in the city since the 19th century, terms New York a ''crossroads'' city. ''It's a little like living near an airport,'' he said, ''noisy, frenetic, handy.''

Many writers who are thought of as New Yorkers are, in fact, scattered throughout the metropolitan area, but their creative efforts invariably bear a New York imprint.

Bulk Published Outside City

New York is the heart of the influential trade-book industry, the general interest books sold primarily through retail stores. Trade publishing has fallen on hard financial times in recent years, but it is still the glamour part of the industry, encompassing the best sellers, the books that are made into movies and the books that find their way into the language and literature.

Although the city dominates publishing, it does not have a monopoly. Other cities are ahead of New York in textbook, medical and scholarly publishing, which together account for the bulk of the industry's $7 billion annual sales. The great majority of the 2.4 billion books produced each year are manufactured outside New York.

Mr. Vaughan said most recent initiatives in the book world had come from other cities - from ''the rash of small, underfinanced but inventive publishers on the West Coast and elsewhere''; from such burgeoning chains as B. Dalton, based in Minneapolis, and Waldenbooks of Stamford, Conn.; from the university presses in such disparate cities as Chicago; Cambridge, Mass.; New Haven, and Berkeley, Calif., and expanded book coverage in newspapers and magazines from Philadelphia to San Francisco.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.