New York City is more than just a center of attraction for writers; it is home to some of the top book publishing companies in the world.

From science to art to religion, the cosmopolitan city has a publisher for each and every genre.

If you’re a New Yorker looking to get published, here are 21 top book publishing houses in New York City that you should consider:

1. Beacon Publishing Group

With a global presence and wide array of choices of books, ebooks, and audiobooks, Beacon Publishing Group is one of the most renowned indie publishers in NYC. Its imprints include Fox and Hound Books, Gallant Publishing, Moher Books, Kessler Books, University Press, and Trinity Book Group.

Given its imprints, Beacon Publishing Group accepts all sorts of fiction and nonfiction. Books range from Christian fiction to children’s books and even titles about Ireland and chivalry.

Some of its newest titles are J. L. Canfield’s thriller Hiding Behind Robes and Sarah H. Long’s cookbook College Cooking 101.

Beacon Publishing Group is eagerly searching for manuscripts in fiction and nonfiction — and you don’t need a literary agent. Simply read the full submission details to ensure that they won’t reject your work.

2. Workman Publishing

The Hachette Book Group owns Workman Publishing. However, it’s also a sizable publisher with imprints like Timber Press, Artisan Books, Storey Publishing, and Algonquin Books. Thus, its selection of acclaimed parenting and gardening books is complemented with bestsellers in fiction and other nonfiction topics.

Workman Publishing recently launched the second edition of Jeff Alworth’s informative and entertaining The Beer Bible. Likewise, Kaitlyn Greenidge’s well-reviewed historical fiction Libertie continues to be one of the best novels of 2021.

As of writing, Workman is open to submissions from nonfiction authors. All other imprints, except for Algonquin Books and Algonquin Young Readers, are also accepting proposals. Each imprint has its own identity, so carefully go through all the submission guidelines.

3. Skyhorse Publishing

With 20 imprints and a portfolio that will soon hit more than 10,000 books, Skyhorse Publishing has already built a significant legacy in just 15 years. Essentially, you get the best of fiction and nonfiction (including children’s titles) because of Arcade Publishing, Sky Pony Press, Talos Press, and Good Books, among other imprints.

From Melvyn Bragg’s medieval fiction Love Without End to Carolyn Schlam’s enlightening The Joy of Art, Skyhorse Publishing has stories and subjects that will keep you reading from morning till night time.

And while Skyhorse Publishing is only looking for submissions of nonfiction proposals about things like military history and true crime, you can always check its other imprints. For example, Allworth Press is searching for proposals about graphic design and photography — and Arcade Publishing can be your go-to imprint for submitting fiction.

4. W. W. Norton

W. W. Norton has been in the industry for nearly a century. William Warder Norton and Mary Dows Herter Norton founded the company in 1923. Today, it publishes 400 books each year and is still an independent entity catering to general readers, professionals, and students.

With associated imprints like Norton Young Readers, Countryman Press, and Liveright, W. W. Norton’s catalog boasts excellent reads like Ronald H. Spector’s A Continent Erupts and Kim Addonizio’s poetry collection Now We’re Getting Somewhere.

Unfortunately, the publisher is currently only accepting agented manuscript submissions. Check its submission page at another time for possible developments.

5. Knopf Doubleday

Knopf Doubleday is chock-full of literary history. Two of its imprints, Alfred A. Knopf and Doubleday, were established in 1915 and 1897, respectively. Alongside them are Salman Schocken’s Schocken, Kurt Wolff’s Pantheon, Vintage Books, and five other imprints.

Fiction and nonfiction categories in Knopf Doubleday include biographies, social science, music, thrillers, and history. Two of its noteworthy releases are Sandra Cisneros’s acclaimed The House on Mango Street and Hope Jahren’s best-selling autobiography titled Lab Girl.

In general, Knopf is only open to agented submissions — but it will occasionally accept unsolicited works as well. On the other hand, imprints like Schocken, Pantheon, and Doubleday are more strict about only accepting agented manuscripts.

6. Elsevier

Millions of university students, researchers, and healthcare professionals alike are well aware of this publisher. Elsevier began way back in 1880 in the Netherlands and has since become a global voice in elevating science and health.

As one of the top resources of invaluable knowledge, Elsevier publishes as many titles annually without compromising the integrity and scientific rigor. Just this year, it released Kenneth Maiese’s Sirtuin Biology in Medicine and Christophe Pascal’s Paleostress Inversion Techniques.

Elsevier is always in the pursuit of knowledge that can help society progress. Authors working in fields like neuroscience, engineering, biomedical research, and psychology should read about the submission process before sending a proposal.

7. St. Martin’s Press

St. Martin’s Press is one of the big publishers that form Macmillan. It handles its own five imprints such as Minotaur Books, Castle Point Books, and St. Martin’s Griffin. Thus, the company publishes romance novels and mystery thrillers alongside political nonfiction and self-help books.

Its bestsellers and acclaimed titles are present in fiction and nonfiction. In fact, Kevin Boyle’s gripping nonfiction Arc of Justice and Louis Sachar’s children’s novel Holes are recipients of the National Book Award.

St. Martin’s Press accepts agented manuscript submissions. Scroll down the linked page to learn more about its submission policy.

8. Persea Books

Michael Braziller and Karen Braziller established Persea Books in 1975. To this day, they remain as its owners and directors. The indie press is genuinely interested in both contemporary concerns and the abundant yet distinct ways American storytelling takes form.

Aside from Michael White’s relatively recent memoir Travels in Vermeer, the publisher also released the 85th-anniversary edition of Oscar Hijuelos’s debut novel and literary classic titled Our House in the Last World.

While it’s not open to children’s literature and genre fiction, Persea Books would love to publish new essay collections, YA novels, literary fiction, and biographies, among others — and budding poets are also free to submit their contemporary work. The submission guidelines for all these are on the same page.

9. Thieme

With hundreds of employees around the world and a rich history spanning over 125 years, Thieme has long been a significant factor in disseminating scientific information and accelerating medical progress.

From radiology to ophthalmology and neurosurgery, Thieme has the essential and advanced resources for medical researchers and healthcare providers across different specialties. Two of its newest titles are Donald H. Lalonde’s Wide Awake Hand Surgery and Therapy Tips and David Goldenberg’s Head & Neck Endocrine Surgery.

The submission process starts with browsing the book proposals page. Afterward, you may proceed to the authors & reviewers section for the manuscript submission guidelines and submission checklist.

10. Oxford University Press

The Oxford University Press has been at the forefront of research, learning, and scholarly endeavors since the late 16th century. Now, it has branches in at least 50 countries, with one located in NYC. In addition, the press prints not only journals and academic texts but also music scores and children’s literature.

As the world’s biggest university press, it caters to everyone from general readers to policymakers and researchers. And with titles like Laura Arnold Leibman’s Once We Were Slaves to Ben Schneiderman’s Human-Centered AI, the Oxford University Press simultaneously tackles the past, present, and future of humanity.

The proposal submission policy indicates that interested authors should only send queries to one editor. Oxford University Press primarily publishes books in distinct fields like archeology, history, and medicine, so you should identify the appropriate editor to submit your work to.

11. Simon & Schuster, Inc.

Richard L. Simon and M. Lincoln Schuster established Simon & Schuster back in 1924 — and it all began with a best-selling collection of crossword puzzles. Fast forward to the 21st century, the publisher now releases 2,000 books each year and has imprints like Atria, Touchstone, Threshold, and Saga Press.

In its hefty catalog, you can find fresh and engaging reads like Mona Awad’s occult fiction All’s Well and David M. Rubenstein’s political philosophy book The American Experiment.

Simon & Schuster, Inc. is only looking for agented submissions whether in fiction or nonfiction. You can find helpful tips about finding an agent on the manuscript submissions page.

12. Abrams

Launched back in 1949, Abrams is primarily recognized for initially concentrating on illustrated works and art resources. Since then, the publisher has also printed graphic novels and books about science, humor, fashion, history, and technology — all with the help of imprints like Amulet Books and Abrams Press.

And thanks to the aforementioned imprints, Abrams now offers books for kids and adults alike across genres. Its catalog includes not only Ted Naifeh’s YA graphic novel Witch for Hire but also Brad Kessler’s literary and cultural novel titled North.

Like other publishers on the list, Abrams will only entertain manuscripts and proposals from reputable literary agents. View the author submissions section for more information.

13. Perseus Books

Frank Pearl established Perseus Books in 1996. After two decades, his company was acquired by the Hachette Book Group. Still, the publisher handles imprints like Avalon Travel, Basic Books, and Public Affairs, the last two of which offer some of the most intellectual nonfiction in the entire industry.

Perseus Books is a seemingly limitless resource of captivating reads. From Emily Willingham’s The Tailored Brain to Joe Moshenska’s poignant biography of John Milton called Making Darkness Light, you’ll always learn something new.

Authors looking to have their project published by Perseus Books should find an esteemed literary agent to vouch for their manuscript. Scroll down the FAQs page to read more about the submission and query policy.

14. Church Publishing Inc.

Upon its founding in 1918, Church Publishing Inc. was originally called the Church Hymnal Corporation. After a little over a century in business, it has now served over 400 writers and covers topics like social justice and mental health for people of faith to learn.

Titles in Church Publishing Inc. enlightens everyone about how faith and spirituality can guide other facets of life. For example, Edwin H. Friedman’s A Failure of Nerve tackles leadership while Brendan J. Barnacle’s Financial Anxiety offers a theological perspective on money.

Even if you haven’t finished your nonfiction manuscript, you can directly submit a proposal to Church Publishing Inc.

15. Springer Publishing

Bernhard Springer created Springer Publishing in 1950. Within its first five years, it experienced a surge in sales of its nursing books and soon explored more fields in health and science. Today, you’ll even find titles in the field of social sciences and behavioral sciences.

Just like Elsevier and Thieme, Springer Publishing offers highly informative books about medicine and healthcare. Professionals will commend Lisa Lopez Levers’s Trauma Counseling while recovering stroke patients can benefit from Peter G. Levine’s Stronger After Stroke.

Feel free to send your book proposal to a relevant editor if your work belongs in one or more of Springer Publishing’s core fields. The authors’ section contains the submission guidelines and a link to a document about preparing manuscripts.

16. Penguin Random House

Arguably one of the most popular names in the publishing world, Penguin Random House was founded in 2013 but has its origins dating to the 19th century. With over 270 imprints like Bantam, Sentinel, and Blue Rider Press, Penguin Random House releases a combined total of 85,000 titles in digital and print format each year.

There is no scarcity of bestsellers in Penguin Random House — and the list just keeps on growing. Two of the biggest additions this year are Maggie O’Farrell’s Hamnet and Andy Weir’s sci-fi Project Hail Mary.

Penguin Random House is currently closed to unsolicited manuscripts. Thus, interested writers must first secure a literary agent. In contrast, two of its imprints welcome unsolicited works directly from writers: Schwartz & Wade accepts picture books and other works for young readers while DAW Books is open to fantasy and sci-fi. Go to the manuscript submission section for the full details.

17. Columbia University Publishing

Launched in 1893, Columbia University Publishing continues its mission of developing and distributing knowledge in areas like history, science, literature, and economics. From David Foster Wallace to Judith Butler, it has always worked with esteemed figures to cultivate a culture of curiosity among readers.

As the publishing arm of a distinguished university, its offerings are unfailingly valuable to everyone from scholars to legislators and young minds. In philosophy and animal studies, you’ll find Matthew Calarco’s The Boundaries of Human Nature. And if you want to learn more about world history, check out Joseph Roach’s Cities of the Dead.

Before sending your nonfiction manuscript, look at the subject areas of the press editors since authors can only send to one editor. Sociology, life science, and economics are just some of the fields of interest.

18. Spencer Hill Press

If you’re looking for modern stories about love, Spencer Hill Press is the go-to indie press in NYC. Since its inception in 2010, the publisher has kept its major presence in contemporary romance fiction while also expanding to more categories and reader segments.

For one, Spencer Hill Press has a few titles for middle-grade readers like Kathleen Bullock’s Almost Magic. Still, its catalog is primarily filled with present-day adult and YA romance novels such as Isabel Bandeira’s Bookishly Ever After and L. B. Simmons’s Out of Focus.

As of writing, you can send your manuscript if it’s in the category of contemporary romance fiction for adult or young adult readers. Authors and literary agents alike can submit, but they must all follow the guidelines for submitting manuscripts.

19. Princeton Architectural Press

When it was just starting in the 1980s, Princeton Architectural Press associated itself with design and architecture. Since then, it has launched over 1,500 captivating titles and introduced its own batch of children’s literature, memoirs, and even craft books.

A couple of best-selling works from the publisher are Nancy Lawson’s The Humane Gardener and Andrea D’Aquino’s wonderfully illustrated children’s book A Life Made by Hand.

Currently, Princeton Architectural Press is on the lookout for proposals in fields like gardening, graphic design, and architecture. In addition, fiction and nonfiction picture books for kids between three and eight years old are welcome for consideration if you send a full copy of your work.

20. Bellevue Literary Press

Jerome Lowenstein, M.D. established Bellevue Literary Press in 2007 as a haven for both literary fiction and nonfiction. Specifically, the printing press yearned to promote conversations about art, science, and their convergence through the written word.

Every single book in their catalog is a cerebral treat that can shape how people view the world — even if what they’re reading is fiction. For example, there’s Paul Harding’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, Tinkers. Similarly, Andrew Krivak’s The Bear is one of the best novels in metaphysical fiction.

The submission guidelines on the contact page state that Bellevue Literary Press isn’t currently looking for unsolicited proposals. Given the prestige accorded to the publisher and its catalog, you should still consider revisiting the page for welcome updates.

21. Soho Press

Soho Press began operations in 1986. Since then, it has published innovative and acclaimed literary fiction, adult crime fiction, and YA novels ranging from mysteries to magical realism and sports fiction. Bronwen Hruska and Juliet Grames serve as publisher and associate publisher, respectively.

Over the years, Soho Press has introduced some of the most stellar and one-of-a-kind novels to the reading public. From Binnie Kirshenbaum’s humorous yet weird and captivating Rabbits for Food to Sujata Massey’s widely celebrated mystery The Widows of Malabar Hill, the indie publisher has proven its keen eye for excellent storytelling.

At present, Soho Press is closed to unsolicited and unagented proposals. On the bright side, details on the submissions page will change once they’re willing to accept literary fiction manuscripts again.

Some More Top Book Publishing Houses in New York City

22. Sterling Publishing

With nine imprints such as Sterling Books, Hearst Books, Puzzlewright Press, and Lark, Sterling Publishing has gone beyond nonfiction categories like popular culture, parenting, and current events. Now, it offers children’s classics, craft books, YA fiction, and books about healing and personal growth.

In particular, Sterling Publishing is home to best-selling author Lisa Chamberlain’s Wicca Nature Magic and Fifi Kuo’s picture book The Magic Hug.

The author guidelines indicate all the submission details you need to know. Sterling accepts proposals of nonfiction for adults and young adults. On the other hand, you can send children’s fiction and nonfiction to Sterling Children’s Books.

23. Abbeville Press

This independent publisher has been around since 1977. Today, it has expanded to books for kids and parents. Still, readers and professionals in the book industry continue to send praises primarily for its decadent selection of illustrated titles and books on fine art.

You see, Abbeville Press effectively combines the power of text and striking visuals. Victoria Romanoff’s Mushroom Foraging and Feasting has personal photographs, stories, and recipes. Then you have Philip Sultz’s Lake Effect Days, which is a mix of whimsical short stories and the author’s acclaimed collages.

Sadly, Abbeville Press doesn’t entertain unsolicited proposals right now. Still, you should take note of the submissions page in case the publisher resumes accepting manuscripts.

24. Clavis Publishing

Clavis Publishing has its origins in Belgium when Philippe Werke launched his own children’s bookstore in 1978. After four decades, his humble business has grown into a beloved publisher of more than 200 new books each year — both in children’s fiction and nonfiction.

If you want to better understand their appeal as publishers of children’s books, browse a few of their latest releases. For one, Amal’s My Key is an award-winning fantasy picture book. Then there’s Adam Ciccio’s Maybe I’ll Be, a delightful picture book for young dreamers.

Authors and illustrators alike can submit their work to Clavis Publishing. If you’re a writer, you should send a full manuscript — this will help reviewers in providing a more accurate evaluation.

25. The Experiment

Formed in 2008, The Experiment is an indie publisher that solely publishes nonfiction. Of course, the subjects are diverse and range from current affairs and sports to parenting, gardening, and science & nature.

With its goal of educating and nourishing the minds of readers through brilliant writing and storytelling, The Experiment offers some of the finest nonfiction titles in NYC. These include Patricia Roberts-Miller’s political Demagoguery and Democracy and Adam Rutherford’s runaway success book on genetics called A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived.

The Experiment is eager to review promising new nonfiction material. Interested authors can send their work on their own — or through a literary agent. Similarly, you can send your proposal online or by mail.

Finish your manuscript and use the above list as a guide to finding the right publisher for you.

Do you run a book publishing house in New York City? Please introduce yourself in the comments box below!

Are you an author aware of any other top publishing companies in New York? Tell us about them.

21 Top Book Publishing Houses in New York City is an article from Writing Tips Oasis.

Copyright © 2014-2019 Writing Tips Oasis All Rights Reserved

My name is Adil Khan and I’m a student of English Literature and Linguistics. Writing is much more than a profession for me. It’s a hobby, a passion, and a purpose. For the past 5 years, my days have been following the cycle of: read, write, sleep, repeat.