Miles Davis – Porgy and Bess on the Six Eye Label

More Miles Davis

More Gil Evans

Here is an original 6-Eye Stereo pressing with outstanding Double Plus (A++) grades or BETTER from start to finish

Side one was sonically very close to our Shootout Winner – you will be amazed at how big and rich and tubey the sound is

Both sides are full of that vintage Columbia jazz Tubey Magic – the brass is full-bodied with lots of air, the bass is surprisingly well-defined, the top end is extended and sweet, and the soundfield is HUGE and three-dimensional

5 stars: “It was Evans’ intimate knowledge of the composition as well as the performer that allowed him to so definitively capture the essence of both… No observation or collection of American jazz can be deemed complete without this recording.”

Teo Macero was the producer and Ray Moore the engineer — it’s yet another remarkable disc from the Golden Age of Vacuum Tube Recording.

If you’re a fan of the marvelous collaborations of Miles Davis and Gil Evans circa 1959, and what audiophile wouldn’t be?, this album belongs in your collection

The complete list of titles from 1959 that we’ve reviewed to date can be found here.

(more…)

Workin’ And Steamin’ – We Were Dead Wrong about the Originals

Hot Stamper Pressings of the Music of Miles Davis Available Now

This review is from a pressing we put up circa 2010. We had never heard any clean, early pressings, and when we finally put some in our shootout, one of them was out of this world sounding.

In the commentary below we discuss what we think the early pressings probably sound like. Now, having heard how good the best of them can sound, we admit we clearly needed to do more research and development.

The record pictured above can have superb sound, much better than any modern Heavy Vinyl reissue you care to name.

The right properly-cleaned early pressings have the potential to take the sound of this music to the next level, a level we had no idea could exist until the right record came our way.

Live and learn is our motto, and progress in audio is a feature, not a bug, of record collecting at the most advanced levels. (“Advanced” is a code word for having little to no interest in any remastered pressing marketed to the audiophile community. If you want to avoid the worst of them, we are happy to help you do that.)

Our Commentary from 2010

To the Jazz Fans of the World, we here present one of the BEST sounding jazz recordings we have ever had the PRIVILEGE to place on a turntable. I cannot ever recall hearing a better sounding Rudy Van Gelder recording, and I have a theory as to why this tape is as good as it is: it’s MONO. It also sounds like it’s recorded completely LIVE in the studio, direct to one track you might say. As good a recording as Kind of Blue is, I think the best parts of this album are more immediate and more real than anything on KOB.

Better than the Originals?

The record combines two Miles Davis albums recorded in 1956: Workin’ and Steamin’. The 1974 remastering here by Brian Gardner is excellent. Since RVG probably would have mastered these tapes himself for the original pressings, I’m going to guess that this album sounds better than any original, for two reasons.

(more…)

Miles Davis – E.S.P.

More Miles Davis

More Hot Stamper Pressings on Vintage Columbia Vinyl

An E.S.P. like you’ve never heard, with STUNNING Shootout Winning Triple Plus (A+++) grades or close to them on both sides of this original pressing

There’s plenty of 1965 Columbia 360 Label Stereo Tubey Magic – the analog sound is real, tonally correct, and above all, natural

Miles fronts his second classic quintet here – saxophonist Wayne Shorter, pianist Herbie Hancock, bassist Ron Carter, and drummer Tony Williams

4 1/2 stars: “They created a unique sound that came to define the very sound of modern jazz … ESP remains one of their very best albums.”

You’re going to have a fairly tough time finding a copy that is anywhere near as impressive as this one. Trust me — we know whereof we speak. We’re always trying and all too often coming up short; but most of them are too dull and lifeless to get excited about. Many of them are too congested and veiled to make any sense of. Not here though!

(more…)

Miles Davis / In Person – Friday Night on the 70s Label

More Miles Davis

More of Our Best Jazz Trumpet Recordings

This vintage 70s reissue boasts very good Hot Stamper sound from first note to last – exceptionally quiet vinyl too

It’s rare for us to offer any Hot Stamper pressing on this label, but this one surprised us, sounding mostly tonally correct, with much of the richness and space we look for on this title

4 1/2 stars: “The first of two sets recorded during a weekend in 1961 features the Miles Davis Quintet at a period of time when Hank Mobley was on tenor and the rhythm section was comprised of pianist Wynton Kelly, bassist Paul Chambers, and drummer Jimmy Cobb. This is an underappreciated group because of its relatively short life, but as evidenced here, the bandmembers swung fast and hard and never looked back.”

Reissues

There are some very good sounding reissues from the 70s, this being one of them. Again and again my notes made it clear that on these reissue pressings the sound could have used some tubes in the chain.

On this record, more than any other, the tubes potentially make all the difference.

Now keep in mind that we are talking only about 1961 tubes, not the stuff that engineers are using today to make “tube-mastered” records. Those modern records barely hint at the Tubey Magical sound of a record like this, if our experience with hundreds of them is any guide.

Unlike so many of the audiophile reviewers of today, we have a very hard time taking any of the new pressings seriously. We think our position is pretty clear in that regard.

(more…)

Miles Davis – Green Haze (‘The Musings of Miles’ and ‘Miles’)

More Miles Davis

More Recordings by Rudy Van Gelder

Boasting excellent Double Plus (A++) grades or BETTER on all FOUR sides, these vintage Mono pressings are doing just about everything right – fairly quiet vinyl too

Spacious, sweet and positively dripping with ambience – talk about Tubey Magic, the liquidity of the sound here is positively uncanny

This Prestige Two-Fer simply combines two complete Miles Davis titles recorded by Rudy Van Gelder in 1955 – ‘The Musings of Miles’ and ‘Miles’

The 1976 transfers of tape to disc by David Turner are superb in all respects – this is remastering done right

4 stars: “… it is for the excellent rhythm sections and the playing of Miles Davis that this two-fer is highly recommended.”

If you’re a fan of Miles, this All Tube MONO Recording from 1955 belongs in your collection.

This is vintage analog at its best, so full-bodied and relaxed you’ll wonder how it ever came to be that anyone seriously contemplated trying to improve it. (more…)

Miles Davis / Bitches Brew

More Miles Davis

More Jazz Rock Fusion

Boasting solid Double Plus (A++) sound or BETTER on all FOUR sides, this excellent 360 Stereo copy of this 2 LP set is doing just about everything right

These sides are clean, clear, lively and present with tons of space around all of the players

You can hear right into the soundfield, and you can be sure that there’s a whole lot more going on in there than you can bring out, but that’s what makes audio fun

Improving your playback can reveal more and more of what’s always been in the grooves of your records

This is not an easy album to find in clean condition, let alone a copy that sounds like this and plays reasonably well throughout

If jazz-fusion is your bag, the Nearly Triple Plus (A++ to A+++) side two of this copy will take you on a trip like few other records can

5 stars: “Thought by many to be the most revolutionary album in jazz history, having virtually created the genre known as jazz-rock fusion (for better or worse) and being the jazz album to most influence rock and funk musicians, Bitches Brew is, by its very nature, mercurial.”

The incredible musicianship and Teo Macero’s innovative production each help take these jazz-fusion soundscapes to places most folks had never imagined before. And a copy like this one takes the entire production to a whole new level. I can’t begin to tell you how many crappy copies have hit our table over the years, but after finding this one I’m really glad we never gave up on this album.

I remember buying this record when I was in college and I had a hell of a time trying to make any sense of it. I also bought the first two Weather Report albums and had a hell of a time with those. But then when Sweetnighter came out, which was angular but still accessible, this kind of music started to make sense to me. This is music for those who want to be challenged. It’s as true today as it was 53 years ago when this record came out.

Our favorite track on this album, “Miles Runs The Voodoo Down,” is found on the Double Plus (A++) side four, which means the sound for it is OUTSTANDING.

(more…)

Miles Davis – In Person: Saturday Night At The Blackhawk, Volume II

More Miles Davis

More Live Recordings of Interest

This superb 6-Eye Stereo pressing boasts relaxed, full bodied, three-dimensional Double Plus (A++) sound or BETTER from start to finish

Both of these sides are huge, spacious, lively, transparent and above all real – you won’t believe how good the live sonics captured on this album is (until you play it anyway)

4 1/2 stars: “Davis himself has never played with more intensity and muscularity on record than he does here. Miles fans will need both [sets] to fully appreciate how special this engagement with this particular band was.”

(more…)

Miles Davis – Quiet Nights

This oh-so-spacious Miles Davis / Gil Evans classic finally returns to the site with INCREDIBLE Shootout Winning Triple Plus (A+++) sound or close to it on both sides of this original 360 Stereo pressing

Rich, warm, smooth and clear throughout, this 30th Street Studios recording is another engineering triumph from the legendary Fred Plaut

Produced by Teo Macero, the album is the fourth and final collaboration between Davis and Evans

In the Saturday Review, Quiet Nights received praise for Davis’ “wonderfully songful trumpet in a Latin-American vein,” set against “piercingly lustrous curtains of tone and discreet Caribbean rhythms.”“

(more…)

Miles Davis – Miles Smiles

More Miles Davis

More Jazz Recordings Featuring the Trumpet

A Miles Smiles like you’ve never heard, with superb Double Plus (A++) sound or BETTER throughout this original 360 Stereo pressing – fairly quiet vinyl too

Both of these sides are full-bodied, high-rez and spacious, with Miles’ horn uncannily present, a sound you just cannot find on Heavy Vinyl no matter who makes it

Miles here is backed by his classic ’60s All Star crew – Herbie Hancock, Wayne Shorter, Ron Carter & Tony Williams

5 stars: “This is music that demands attention, never taking predictable paths or easy choices. Its greatest triumph is that it masks this adventurousness within music that is warm and accessible – it just never acts that way… Arguably, this quintet was never better than they are here, when all their strengths are in full bloom.”

(more…)

Michel Legrand – Legrand Jazz

More of the Music of Michel Legrand

Hot Stamper Pressings of Large Group Jazz Recordings Available Now

Legrand Jazz returns to the site for the first time in close to ten years, with STUNNING Shootout Winning Triple Plus (A+++) throughout this vintage 6-Eye Stereo pressing – fairly quiet vinyl too

Both of these sides are open and spacious with real depth to the soundfield and lots of separation between the various instruments, a very important quality for a recording of a large ensemble recording such as this

Rich, solid bass; you-are-there immediacy; energy and drive; instruments that are positively jumping out of the speakers – add it all up and you can see that this copy had the sound we were looking for

Legrand rounded up 31 of the greatest jazz players of the 50s, divided them up into three groups, and the result was a landmark recording with audiophile sound to die for

We’re talking jazz giants: John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Bill Evans, Ben Webster, Herbie Mann, Art Farmer, Donald Byrd, Phil Woods — everybody who was anybody is on this record

4 1/2 stars: “Throughout this superlative album, the arrangements are colorful and unusual, making one wish that Legrand had recorded more jazz albums through the years.”

Robert Brook recently played the “award winning” Impex 45 RPM pressing from 2019 (as did we) and wants to know what you made of the sound

This album is more common in mono than stereo, but we found the sound of the mono pressing we played seriously wanting. It’s dramatically smaller and more squawky and crude than even the worst of the stereo pressings we played.

We had a copy we liked years ago, but that was years ago. We don’t have that copy anymore and we don’t have a stereo that sounds the way our old one did either.

The unique voices of each of the jazz giants featured on this landmark recording contributes memorable solos then receeds into the group to provide the structure for the rest of the music. Which is an awkward way of saying everybody does his thing in service to the song and then gets out of the way. “The Jitterbug Waltz,” which opens up side one, is a perfect example: the arrangement is completely original, and within its structure, Miles Davis, Phil Woods, John Coltrane and others solo beautifully, each taking a turn at the melody. If three minutes into this song you don’t like what you’re hearing, jazz is just not for you.

(more…)