The Swindon Heritage blue plaque was launched in 2016 with the aim to raise awareness of Swindon’s rich history over the years.

The most commonly recognised English Heritage blue plaques scheme only operates in London, and other schemes are managed by localised organisations, so Swindon Heritage workers felt the town needed its own scheme.

“They are not cheap to erect costing hundreds of pounds each and there are very strict rules about who can and cannot be on the list,” explained photographer and heritage lover Royston Cartwright.

“But every one of them tells a story, from great heroism in a time of war to sportsmen that changed Swindon, from poets to actors and from great buildings to great businesses men who made Swindon a name to remember.”

Do you think you’ve seen them all? We’ve compiled the ultimate list of all the Swindon Heritage blue plaques commemorating important people and places, so you can go and find each one.

Swindon Heritage blue plaque locations

Edith New – 24 North Street, Old Town

Born at 24 North Street in Swindon, Edith New was an English suffragette who was one of the first two suffragettes to use vandalism as a tactic.

She was imprisoned in 1908 after she broke two windows at 10 Downing Street during a major protest.

The heroic woman was the daughter of music teacher Isabella and railway clerk Frederick, who died when she was one year old after being hit by a train. She lived in Swindon until age 14.

Harold and John Starr – The Savoy, Regent Street

Harold and John Starr were Swindon brothers who served in the RAF during World War II. The brothers attended Clarence Street School in Swindon.

Harold was controversially killed after he bailed out of his plane which was being shot down, and was machine-gunned in his parachute.

Diana Dors – 62 Kent Road, Old Town

Diana Dors was a Swindon-born actress and singer who was known for being a 'blonde bombshell' and an English version of American actress Marilyn Monroe.

Sam Allen – 33 Kent Road

Former Swindon Town Football Club manager Sam Allen was given a plaque in May 2018 after being described as a 'legend'.

Born in 1868, he was a long-serving member of the football club and gave 51 years of loyal service.

Milton Road Baths – Faringdon Road

The Milton Road Baths opened in 1892 to accommodate Swindon's population growth due to workers arriving to power the new Carriageworks.

The dispensary and swimming baths were built for the GWR Medical Fund Society, and they boasted a range of health treatments and professionals, from doctors and dentists to a pharmacy and Turkish baths.

The building still stands, known now as the Health Hydro, and the plaque was added in 2018 in celebration of the NHS's 70th birthday.

First Masonic Meeting – Goddard Arms

Swindon's first freemasons met at the High Street pub in May 1818 and the group was initially made up of just 10 members.

The blue plaque was fitted to the side of the Goodard Arms to mark 200 years of freemasonry in the town.

Richard Jefferies – Marlborough Road, Coate

Described as one of the most influential nature writers of the 19th century, Richard Jeffries has an entire museum and statue in his honour.

The prolific writer was born in Coate, Swindon, in 1848 and was the son of a farmer. After a successful career depicting English rural life in essays, books and novels, he died aged only 38.

Harold Fleming – Durham Street

Harold Fleming, born in 1887, was an English footballer who played as an inside forward for Swindon Town and the English national team.

Born in Downton, Wiltshire, he is the only Swindon Town player to have ever played for England.

His career was so successful, Fleming even had a style of football boot named after him.

Norman Barbeau – Ermin Street, Stratton

Norman Barbeau was posted to the UK from Canada to support the British war effort during the Second World War.

While taking off from Ashton Down on a training flight, one of the wings of his spitfire clipped a fuel tank and then came off while in the air.

Norman was just 20 years old when his Spitfire plane plummeted down onto Ermin Street in Swindon.

William Morris – Former Swindon Advertiser office, Victoria Road

Founder of the Swindon Advertiser newspaper, William Morris, is honoured with a plaque at the former Adver offices on Victoria Road.

Morris started the paper in 1854 and made sure it was affordable for the public by making the cover price a penny.

When it first began to be printed on a monthly basis, Morris was the reporter, editor and printer.

Arthur Carron – 79 Bath Road, Old Town

Swindon-born Arthur Carron was an English operatic heldentenor. He studied under Florence Easton and made his operatic debut at the Old Vic in 1929. He later moved to Saadler's Wells Theatre and is known for performing several iconic roles.

His son Byron unveiled Arthur's blue plaque in 2022 at Arthur's childhood home.