The landmark Sharon Playhouse in Sharon, Connecticut is adding a surge of high-voltage star power to its summer theater lineup. This year, audiences will be treated to outstanding Broadway performers, including Karen Ziemba, Elizabeth Franz and Klea Blackhurst.

Under the guidance of Artistic Director John Simpkins, the playhouse is raising the bar for local theater, making it possible for residents to see top-notch professional talent right here in the comfort of their own backyard — the Hudson Valley.

The playhouse kicked off the season with the sparkling Season Benefit Gala May 21. The centerpiece of the convivial, musical evening was the inaugural Marvin Hamlisch Award for Excellence in Musical Theatre, given to three-time Tony Award-winner, Glenn Close.

“Marvin lived in our community for a time and we are thrilled to establish an award in his name,” Simpkins said. “There is no finer person to be the inaugural recipient of the award than Glenn Close, another artist and person synonymous with excellence.”

Another actress “synonymous with excellence” is Ziemba, the four-time Tony-nominated actress who will star in the playhouse’s production of “Gypsy.” With a score by Jules Styne, lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by Arthur Laurents, “Gypsy” is a cornerstone of the American musical theater. Ziemba plays Mama Rose, the fast-talking, hard-driving, ambitious stage mother-to-end-all-stage mothers, a “King Lear” of sorts that requires an actress of consummate skill, range, humor and power and who can sing! With Ziemba’s prodigious talent and experience, Mama Rose will rock the walls of the theater from June 16-July 3. The production is directed and choreographed by Richard Stafford.

Next up, Simpkins will direct “Big River: The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,” with a book by William Hauptman and music and lyrics by Roger Miller. The musical adaptation of Mark Twain’s immortal, picaresque novel will run July 21-31.

Rounding out the main-stage season will be “Quartet,” by award-winning playwright Ronald Harwood. The season’s lone non-musical features the brilliant Broadway actress, Elizabeth Franz. A local resident, Franz won a Tony Award for her portrayal of Linda Loman, playing opposite Brian Dennehy in the legendary 1999 production of “Death of a Salesman.” Simpkins also directs “Quartet,” with performances Aug. 18-28.

In the playhouse’s second space, Stage 2@The Bok Gallery, Broadway powerhouse Klea Blackhurst stars in the whacked-out new musical comedy, “Judge Jackie: Disorder in the Court,” with music by Michael Kooman and lyrics and book by Chris Dimond; it runs July 7-17. Also in the Bok Gallery, “I Love You, You’re Perfect, Now Change,” with book and lyrics by Joe DiPietro, and music by Jimmy Roberts; performances are Aug. 4-14.

The playhouse, which has been in existence in one form or another since the early 1930s, has always been a bastion of local community theater. However, in the last three years under Simpkins’ guiding eye, the theater has taken several steps up the theatrical ladder, going from a community theater to Small Professional Theatre (SPT), a low-tiered Equity theater. According to Managing Director Justin Ball, the playhouse prides itself on being a “teaching theater,” providing a practical training ground to young, non-Equity actors. The SPT contract allows the playhouse to bring in three Equity actors per show, which not only enhances the quality of the entertainment for the audience, but also allows the more experienced pros to work alongside the less experienced actors, thus augmenting their learning experience.

The theater hires four levels of actor: Equity, non-Equity, local actors and the Collegiate Company, a group of “10 terrific young actors” working in conjunction with a college program. While still in development, the program is designed to grant college credit to the students, who work at the theater through the summer and appear in two of the musicals.

Additionally, both Simpkins and Ball host weekly sessions addressing the practical nuts-and-bolts of a life in the theater, occasionally offering master classes with accomplished actors who live in the area, including Chip Zien, Laura Linney and Broadway luminary, and recent Tony-winner, Frank Langella.

It’s a full lineup at the Sharon Playhouse. Don’t miss it!

Hudson Valley residents Darrah Cloud and David Simpatico are the co-directors of Half Moon Writers, the development wing of the Half Moon Theatre in Poughkeepsie. She is an award-winning playwright and professor at Goddard College and Vassar College. He is an award-winning playwright/librettist, who also writes, directs, edits and stars in “Zombie Hideaway,” a webisodic series on his YouTube Channel, “Noiseball David Simpatico.” Contact them at enjoy@poughkeepsiejournal.com

On the Web