Fiji Labour Party Leader and former Prime Minister, Mahendra Chaudhry is questioning why the Chair of the Electoral Commission, Barbara Malimali is asking the Prime Minister and the Chair of the Constitutional Offices Commission, Sitiveni Rabuka to remove Acting Supervisor of Elections, Ana Mataiciwa.

Chaudhry says they believe from what has transpired that there are elements within government seeking to remove Mataiciwa.

He questions if it is because Mataiciwa has referred complaints lodged against some senior Cabinet Ministers to FICAC.

Chaudhry says if so, this is outright interference with the due process particularly as the appointment had already been made according to the Prime Minister who is the Chair of the Constitutional Offices Commission.

Chaudhry says the Fiji Labour Party has received communication that moves are afoot to replace Ana Mataiciwa as Supervisor of Elections.

He says this information was also circulated to Prime Minister Rabuka and other senior members of the government, including the media.

fijivillage news has received confirmation that a letter from the chair of the Electoral Commission Barbara Malimali was hand delivered to the Constitutional Offices Commission last Tuesday requesting that Mataiciwa be replaced by a former Chair of the Electoral Commission as the substantive Supervisor of Elections.

Chaudhry says this is despite a media statement from Prime Minister Rabuka on 27th January this year that the Constitutional Offices Commission had already decided on the substantive appointee and he could not see why the announcement was being delayed.

He says in response to the Prime Minister’s concern, the Attorney General had then explained that they were in the process of working out the terms and conditions of the post before making a formal announcement.

Mataiciwa is still awaiting that letter of confirmation some two months later.

Chaudhry confirms that he has written to the Chair of the Electoral Commission seeking confirmation whether or not a letter had been sent to the Constitutional Offices Commission secretariat seeking to remove Mataiciwa.

He also says at the quarterly meeting with the Acting Supervisor of Elections last week, all opposition political parties present had expressed confidence in Mataiciwa and had requested confirmation of her appointment without any further delay.

Chaudhry says they believe the Constitutional Offices Commission had decided to appoint Mataiciwa who has been acting in that position since January 2023.

We have sought comments from Rabuka on when the Constitutional Offices Commission will address the matter.

fijivillage News has also sought comments from Malimali and Mataiciwa.