GIMP for Unix-like systems

Install GIMP flatpak

The flatpak link above should open your software installer and prompt you to install GIMP (available platforms: i386, x86-64, ARM and AArch64). It may not work out-of-the-box on some platforms since the flatpak technology is new. If that is the case, ensure flatpak is installed and if clicking the link still does not prompt to install GIMP, then manually install by command line:

flatpak install https://flathub.org/repo/appstream/org.gimp.GIMP.flatpakref

The flatpak build is very new and therefore may have shortcomings. It's very likely your Unix-like system distribution already comes with a GIMP package. It is the preferred method of installing GIMP, as the distribution maintainers take care of all the dependencies and bug fix updates. Nevertheless, note that many distros decide to pin a specific version of GIMP to their releases, whereas our flatpak will follow GIMP releases closely.

GIMP can also run on Solaris and is available for the BSD family of systems such as FreeBSD and OpenBSD.

Please refer to the documentation for your Unix-like system on the installation of software.

GIMP for macOS

Download GIMP 2.8.22

via BitTorrent Download GIMP 2.8.22

directly

The download links above will attempt to download GIMP from one of our trusted mirror servers. If the mirrors do not work or you would rather download directly from our server, you can get the direct download here.

Since the 2.8.2 version, GIMP runs on macOS/OSX natively. No X11 environment is required.

Native build

The official GIMP 2.8 DMG installer (linked above) is a stock GIMP build without any add-ons. It works on OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard and later. Just open the downloaded DMG and drag and drop GIMP into your "Applications" folder.

The MD5 hash sum for gimp-2.8.22-x86_64.dmg is: 2d314ae82f686ea15a681c32b5891e20

Older Downloads

Previous installers for macOS/OSX can be found here: download.gimp.org.

Macports

An easy way to compile and install GIMP and other great Free software on your Mac is by using Macports. The installer allows you to choose from a large directory of packages. To install gimp using Macports, you simply do sudo port install gimp once you have Macports installed.

Last we checked, the GIMP port file pointed to the current stable release and we have reports from people who've built GIMP successfully this way.

Download Macports

Homebrew

Homebrew is similar to Macports and provides packages (aka formulas) to install, either by compiling them from source or by using pre-made binaries. There are indications that there is now a formula for GIMP, installable with: brew tap caskroom/cask && brew cask install gimp.

Download Homebrew

Fink

Fink is a package repository that offer mostly precompiled binaries. It provides the apt-get command known to e.g. Debian and Ubuntu users, and installing GIMP is as easy as sudo apt-get install gimp once you have installed the Fink installer.

If there's no binary package, then fink install gimp will compile GIMP from source.

Disclaimer: we haven't been able to determine if it is possible to install or build recent GIMP from Fink. Last we checked, GIMP 2.6.12 appears to be the most recent GIMP package that is offered there.

Download Fink

GIMP for Windows

Download GIMP 2.8.22

via BitTorrent Download GIMP 2.8.22

directly

The download links above will attempt to download GIMP from one of our trusted mirror servers. If the mirrors do not work or you would rather download directly from our server, you can get the direct download here.

These links download the official GIMP installer for Windows (~140-150 MB). The installer contains both 32-bit and 64-bit versions of GIMP, and will automatically use the appropriate one.

BitTorrent is a peer-to-peer file sharing system. It works by downloading GIMP from a distributed network of BitTorrent users, and may improve download speed dramatically. Choosing this option will download the torrent file for the GIMP installer. You may need to install a torrent client to make use of this file. Learn more...

MD5 Hash Sum

The MD5 hash sum for gimp-2.8.22-setup.exe is: 8e54225029a44ab6ef1fde09686fec7b

Older Downloads

Previous installers for Windows can be found here: download.gimp.org.

GIMP User Manual

These links download language-specific Windows installers for GIMP's local help. By default, they will place the help files with your GIMP installation.

Note: GIMP uses online help by default. If you want to use this local help offline, you will need to change GIMP's help settings.

In GIMP, select [Edit] > [Preferences] > [Help System]

For "User manual", select "Use a locally installed copy"

Under "Help Browser", you can choose between your system's web browser and GIMP's help browser plugin (if available).

See the online help for more settings.

Chinese Simplified (24.3 MB)

Catalan (24.2 MB)

Danish (24.2 MB)

Dutch (24.3 MB)

English (24.2 MB)

English (United Kingdom) (24.2 MB)

French (25.7 MB)

German (28.0 MB)

Greek (24.0 MB)

Italian (30.2 MB)

Japanese (23.6 MB)

Korean (24.9 MB)

Norwegian Nynorsk (20.9 MB)

Russian (24.9 MB)

Slovenian (24.3 MB)

Spanish (24.9 MB)

Swedish (24.7 MB)