Vesta Victoria Origin/Culture/Country: English

Vesta Victoria: was an English music hall singer and comedian. Although born in Leeds, Yorkshire, Vesta adopted a Cockney persona on stage. She began her career as a small child appearing with her father.Her solo career took off in 1892 when Daddy Wouldn't Buy Me a Bow Wow became a hit. Vesta's comic laments delivered in deadpan style were as popular in the United States as in her homeland and she toured and recorded in America in 1907, where she was one of the most highly paid vaudeville stars. Between appearances, she lived on a houseboat, moored near Hampton Court.

Vesta M. Roy Origin/Culture/Country: American

Vesta M. Roy: was a Republican New Hampshire politician, born in Dearborn, Michigan.As president of the state Senate, she served as acting governor of New Hampshire from December 29, 1982 until January 6, 1983 as a result of the death of Governor Hugh Gallen shortly be

Sigurd Vestad Origin/Culture/Country: Norwegian

Sigurd Vestad: was a Norwegian cross country skier who competed in the 1932 Winter Olympics. In 1932 he finished fifth in the 50 kilometre competition. At the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships 1935 he finished fourth in the 18 kilometre competition.

Margrethe Vestager Origin/Culture/Country: Danish

Margrethe Vestager: is a Danish politician representing the Danish Social Liberal Party. She has been a Member of Parliament (Folketinget) since 20 November 2001. On 15 June 2007 she was appointed parliamentary group leader of her party, replacing Marianne Jelved. On October 3, 2011, she became Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Economic and Interior Affairs under the government of Helle Thorning-Schmidt.

Albert Henry Vestal Origin/Culture/Country: American

Albert Henry Vestal: was a U.S. political figure. Born on a farm near Frankton, in Madison County, Indiana, on January 18, 1875, he attended common schools, worked in steel mills and factories and attended the Indiana State Normal School, now Indiana State University, at Terr