GIMP is a free and open-source raster graphics editor used for image manipulation and image editing, free-form drawing, transcoding between different image file formats, and more specialized tasks. GIMP is released under GPL-3.0-or-later license and is available for Linux, macOS, and Microsoft Windows. It is developed by GIMP Development Team. It is initially released on 2 June 1998. Its Original author is Spencer Kimball, Peter Mattis. It is written in C and GTK+. Its size depends on the language. GIMP has import and export support for image formats such as BMP, JPEG, PNG, GIF, TIFF, and HEIF,[86] along with the file formats of several other applications such as Autodesk flic animations, Corel PaintShop Pro images, etc.

Installing GIMP on Windows :

Follow the below steps to install GIMP( GNU IMAGE MANIPULATION PROGRAM ) on Windows :

Step 1: Visit the official GIMP website using any web browser.

Step 2: Click On the Download button.

Step 3: Next webpage will open now click on Download GIMP directly.

Step 4: Now check for the executable file in downloads in your system and run it.

Step 5: It will prompt confirmation to make changes to your system. Click on Yes

Step 6: The next screen is to choose your setup language which you want to choose and click on OK.

Step 7: Now setup will start to click on customize to change the setup basics.

Step 8: The next screen will be of License Agreement, click on Next.

Step 9: Next screen is of choosing components, all components are already marked so don’t change anything just click on the Next button.

Step 10: Next screen will ask for a Desktop Icon if you want your application On Desktop. Then tick that column and click on Next.

Step 11: Now the setup is ready to install. Click on Install.

Step 12: After this installation process will start and will take 2 – 5 minutes depends on your computer speed and specification to complete the installation.

Step 13: Click on the Finish button after the installation process is complete.

At this point, GIMP is successfully installed on the system and an icon is created on the desktop.

Run the software and see the interface.

Congratulations!! At this point, you have successfully installed GIMP on your Windows system.