Buying a new vehicle can be an exciting experience, which is why Hometown Chevrolet strives to be your most trusted dealer for new and pre-owned vehicles.

Located in Waverly, OH, drivers all over Ohio can take advantage of our quality service and affordable prices. Waverly, Lancaster, Chillicothe, and even Columbus, wherever you’re from, stop by to browse our inventory of new and used vehicles.

If you’re looking for a high-quality pre-owned vehicle, Hometown Chevrolet has your back. Our trustworthy professionals are here to help you every step of the way. We can help you compare models, test drive the ones that interest you, sort out financing options, and secure an auto loan with terms that fit your budget.

But our service doesn’t stop when you drive off our lot. Our service center is ready with a staff of highly-trained professionals to help with vehicle maintenance. We want your vehicle to be in its best condition so that you can enjoy every drive you take.

Thinking about visiting our dealership to view our large selection or buy a new or pre-owned vehicle? You can find us at 501 W Emmitt Ave, Waverly, OH 45690. Explore our website to see all of the information to help with your car-buying journey.

Have questions? You can call us at 740-835-4161 to speak to a member of our sales team or stop by to talk to a team member in person. We hope to see you soon!

About Hometown Chevrolet

Hometown Chevrolet is a Chevy dealer committed to bringing you excellent service and impressive vehicles, from our brand-new cars and trucks to our pre-owned SUVs and sedans. We have a little something for everyone who walks through our doors.

Everyone has different desires and needs when it comes to their transportation. Some people need to tow or haul heavy materials or equipment. Some people need a fuel-efficient daily driver. Some people want a stylish and flashy vehicle that will turn heads as they drive by.

Hometown Chevrolet is so much more than just a Chevy dealership - we have a wide selection of pre-owned vehicles, and we’re confident that we can find one to suit your needs, whatever they may be.

On top of it all, we’re a family-focused dealership. Nothing is better than buying local, and we see the Waverly community as our family. We take care of family, which is why every vehicle we sell comes with two years of free maintenance, and many of our cars come with our free 10-year or 100,000-mile limited powertrain warranty.

New And Used Vehicles at Hometown Chevy

For Ohio drivers, there is no better place to find new and pre-owned vehicles than at Hometown Chevy. If you’re interested in buying a vehicle from us, our service hours are Monday-Thursday from 9 am to 7 pm, Friday from 9 am to 6 pm, and Saturday from 9 am to 5 pm.

As a Chevrolet dealership, we carry Chevy’s best. You can see a full lineup of our new vehicles on our New Vehicles page, where you can use our filters to narrow your search to find the best car for you.

Is a pre-owned vehicle more to your liking? Many people choose to buy pre-owned vehicles. Buying a pre-owned vehicle gives you a wider selection of vehicles to choose from at a range of different price points.

Some more recently made pre-owned vehicles can offer low mileage, updated tech features, less wear and tear, and in some cases, even manufacturer's warranties are still in place. The drawback? Some of these pre-owned vehicles can still be quite expensive.

If you’re looking to shop within a budget, you can look at a car with higher mileage, fewer features, or from an older year. These might not offer the latest and greatest technology features, but you can still find a high-quality vehicle for a reasonable price.

You can find an up-to-date list of our full selection of pre-owned vehicles on our Pre-Owned Vehicles Page. If you’re really looking to stay within a budget, we even have a variety of quality pre-owned cars for under $20,000.

Find a car that you are interested in? Why don’t you take it out for a test drive? You can schedule a test drive online, call in, or stop by our dealership.

Finance a New or Used Car!

We know that financing a vehicle can be one of the most stressful parts of getting a new car. The Hometown Chevrolet Financing Department is here to ensure you can get a vehicle, whether you have good credit, bad credit, or no credit history at all.

Our finance professionals work to acquire auto loans for people from Waverly, Piketon, Chillicothe, Jackson, Portsmouth, and more to help you get a vehicle with a monthly payment that fits into your budget.

We do our best to offer competitive interest rates to everyone who finances with us, regardless of your credit history. Even if you have bad credit, we can help you get a vehicle and a financing plan that can help rebuild your credit.

Even if you think you have a credit problem so bad that you can’t overcome it, call us to see what we can do. Feeling good about your credit? Apply online to get pre-approved for an auto loan.

Value Your Trade

Getting pre-approved isn’t the only finance service we offer online. If you have a car to trade in, you can also get an estimate for your vehicle online. All you need to do is go to our Value Your Trade page, submit information about your specific vehicle, and get a free trade-in value for your vehicle.

While Kelley Blue Book will give you an estimate, it is important to remember that this is not an official offer from the dealership. This value might change based on the condition of your car. Major and minor car problems alike can affect this value. To get an accurate estimate, bring your vehicle to our dealership to be appraised and get an official offer.</p>

When you trade in your car, you can use whatever money you get to put towards the down payment on your new car. You might even be able to take some home as cash value.</p>

Service Center At Hometown Chevrolet

Even after you drive off our lot, our service center is to help you maintain your vehicle. We offer a variety of services from professionally trained service members. Check out our service center to see the full range of services we offer.

Some of these services include:

Oil change and parts

Brake services

Batteries

Tire basics

Parts warranties

And more!

Hometown Chevrolet - Your Pre-Owned Chevrolet Dealership in Ohio

Our Hometown Chevrolet dealership is here as your number one pre-owned Chevrolet dealership in Ohio. If you’re ready to buy, take a look at our inventory of new and pre-owned vehicles. Give us a call or stop by today to take a vehicle out for a test drive. We hope to see you soon!