Norman Mailer’s three movies of the nineteen-sixties are marked—or deformed—by his excessive devotion to the art of the actor, which he considered inseparable from improvisation. He made three features, two in 1967 (“Wild 90” and “Beyond the Law”) and one in 1968 (“Maidstone,” which is playing tonight at BAM Cinématek, followed by a panel discussion with Mailer’s son Michael; J. Michael Lennon, the author of the terrific new biography of Mailer, “A Double Life”; and the archivist and critic Michael Chaiken, whose notes to the Criterion set of these three films provide an excellent introduction). Mailer himself is the lead actor in all three of these improvised dramas, which, of course, helps to explain his emphasis.

It was impossible to be anywhere near the heart of the times in the nineteen-sixties without knowing that the movies had taken over. It was no longer just a mass audience that was yoked to Hollywood’s circumlocutions (Mailer called classic Hollywood “a mother-in-law’s mother-in-law”)—young artists and intellectuals were drawn to the cinema by the waves of international directors who also instructed them in American movies. But the art of the director is like the art of the novelist: the author is ubiquitous while remaining invisible, and invisibility badly suited the author of “Advertisements for Myself,” who made his public persona into an essential source of his art.

With movies, Mailer remained a man of the word. He understood improvisation as a conjoined exercise in verbal invention and physical risk, and his central onscreen performance in all three movies is both a supreme self-indulgence and an agonized self-revelation. In “Wild 90,” he’s one of three Italian mobsters holed up in a loft; in “Beyond the Law,” he plays the Irish police lieutenant Francis Xavier Pope in a flashback-structured drama set in a police station. In “Maidstone,” the most ambitious and the most accomplished of the three, he plays a filmmaker, Norman T. Kingsley (“Kingsley” was Mailer’s middle name), who is running for President and is menaced by a shadowy government agency. It is the film in which his methods and his theories come to fruition, perhaps only intermittently but with historic results.

As he worked on his movies (financing them himself—he paid for “Maidstone” by selling his shares in the Village Voice, of which he was a founder), he wrote about them, too, and it’s worth considering the movies in the light of his dense, flamboyant, and brilliant essays. Two of them were reprinted in “Existential Errands”; in the first, “Some Dirt in the Talk” (originally published in Esquire, reprinted in “Existential Errands”), about the making of “Wild 90,” he explains his preference for improvisation by narrating his own personal prehistory with movies and distinguishing the young readers who “cut your reflexes on Bergman, Fellini, Antonioni” with “those of us who grew up in another time, and got to hate Hollywood intimately … Hollywood was like a mother-in-law’s mother-in-law.” He joined his viewer’s hatred with his own brief Hollywood time (which went into the novel “The Deer Park”) to eviscerate movie production, starting with the screenwriter, and “then comes the director and the producer, an ugly jealous passionate fecal marriage of bitch and stud.” But the next players are the key ones: “Then we have the actors who deal with existential situations like love, sex, disaster, and death, all those ultimates whose ends are by their nature indeterminable …”

Mailer goes on for eruptively nuanced pages, exalting the quasi-religious status of the stage actor:

Rich or poor, the likelihood is great that the actor has the most existential private life of any artist—if nothing else, he is obliged to live closer than other artists to the mystery of personality itself…

Lamenting the status of the movie actor—“His eight or ten or twenty years of apprenticeship, his dedicated training, enable him to breathe a simulation of real life into the mechanical resolution of the commercial script”—Mailer sets up the theoretical premise for dispensing with the script altogether and letting his actors, and himself in the fore, invent the text and the action on the wing.

In his 1973 essay on “Last Tango in Paris” (collected in “Pieces and Pontifications”) he wrote again in praise of improvisation, in which the actor is “playing at a fictitious role, while using real feelings, which then begin to serve (rather than the safety of the script) to stimulate him into successive new feelings and responses, until he is in danger of pushing into emotional terrain that is too far out of his control.”

That’s what happened in the making of “Maidstone.” There, Mailer gave himself an even more central role, based even more closely on his actual person (as well as on his public persona), and he gave himself a more complex and more personal setup to push off from—a high-wire social world (high society on eastern Long Island), a potently deadly political regime (the C.I.A.-like grandees intent on thwarting Kingsley), the world of cinema with its starlets and its money men, and the presence of Mailer’s real-life friends and family. He had five cameramen on hand to record the action, and ended up with forty-five hours of footage. (In New York soon after the shoot, Mailer met Jean-Luc Godard and spoke of the difficulty of editing the footage down to a feature; Godard advised him not to edit, to show the whole thing, but Mailer spent two years completing the film—getting it under two hours.) And he had a superlative actor, Rip Torn, as his foil. And Torn saved the film; in the process, he nearly killed Mailer, improvising an attack on the character Kingsley at a point when Mailer, walking through verdant fields with his family, was out of character—and it’s all in the movie.

Mailer was stunned and responded violently; the two men wrestled on the ground, Mailer bit Torn’s ear, then Mailer’s family turns up—his children shriek with unfeigned horror and his wife, Beverly Bentley, threatens Torn, and both men are bloodied but continue their argument to an exhausted standoff. The scene definitively tears the curtain of character and redefines improvisation toward the real-life and physical dangers that Mailer had, until then, pursued in a metaphorical and psychological sense. In the 1971 essay “A Course in Film-Making,” also republished in “Existential Errands,” Mailer discusses “Maidstone” and its theoretical basis. His concluding flourish is a tribute to Torn’s wild, visionary audacity: “Then it was that the presence of the film crystallized into the geist of Maidstone, Rip Torn. A superb actor at a pitch of intensity was there finally to reveal the premise on which a film had been built, even offer the essence of a method which might yet become the future of the film.” Torn does save the film; without his attack, the teeming movie would have remained an exercise. With it, the movie is a literal event, one that seems like a horrible but essential lesson in the essence of documentary and improvisation—namely the first take is necessarily the last, for good, and anything short of death is just a movie.

Mailer didn’t want to make just a movie—but in his “Course” he offers, even against his will, a deeply insightful philosophical basis for doing so. In seeking an ontology of cinema (in dream and in death), he locates an existential element that adheres not to performance but to directing,

an unmistakable quality to any film which is not made as filmed theatre but rather appears as some existence we call film. That existence runs through Chaplin and “Sunset Boulevard” and “Persona”—it runs through home movies. It was Warhol’s talent to perceive that in every home movie there is a sense of Time trying to express itself as a new kind of creation, a palpability which breathes in the being of the film.

Mailer quickly takes the notion elsewhere, but the core of the idea remains, that the image that matters in a movie isn’t the metaphorical public image of the performer but the actual image itself. The crucial creation of a movie is in the existential act of the director in the composition of the image, which includes working with the actors. Having, in effect, defined the actor’s movie as a horrific impossibility, there remained the director’s movie. And Mailer made one, in 1987, “Tough Guys Don’t Dance,” an adaptation of his own novel. It’s Mailer’s most conventional film, but it’s his best movie nonetheless—because it’s the one where, for the first and last time, he contended deeply and fully with the deepest stuff of the cinema.