About This Bike Is A Pipe Bomb

This Bike Is A Pipe Bomb was a folk-punk band from Pensacola, Florida, USA in 1996 and split in 2011. Their first recording was released in 1997 on Ghostmeat Records. Their later releases have been on Plan It X Records and No Idea Records. This Bike Is A Pipe Bomb is rumored to have initially started as (or at least intended, but failed to start as) a tongue-in-cheek country band, but their punk rock roots were evident enough in their music that they became one of the premiere bands at the forefront of the folk punk genre. They have done several US tours, played at Geekfest, and have been to Europe. Much of their music is politically oriented. This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb is staunchly opposed to war and is concerned with the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s and racial equality in general. The band announced their breakup in February 2011, stating via Punknews.org, "The separation of our drummer, Teddy, has made it incredibly difficult to write, record, or perform at a level we were comfortable with. We are planning a few events on both the East and West Coasts to celebrate, but nothing is set in stone at this point. Ryan Modee and Terry Johnson still write and play together in their Chattanooga based band Zippers To Nowhere" ---------------- In the News On March 2, 2006 at 5:30 am an Ohio University police officer spotted a bicycle attached to the Oasis restaurant bearing a promotional sticker for the band. The officer saw the words, "This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb" and became concerned. The area was cordoned off, and part of the campus was closed for several hours. The bicycle was subsequently destroyed by the Athens bomb squad despite assurances from the bike's owner that it was just a sticker. The owner, a graduate student, was initially charged with inducing panic, a misdemeanor. However, the charges were dropped a few days later. Later the student was awarded money for the damages to his bicycle. A similar incident occurred in 2001, when a police officer spotted and detained a woman at an Austin, Texas peace rally. Her bicycle was also labeled with the band's sticker. The woman was released after the band's existence was confirmed. On March 14, 2006 Bellarmine Hall at Saint Joseph's University in Philadelphia, PA was evacuated because of another bicycle with the band's name painted on it. No charges were filed. -------------------- Discography * S/T 7" Ghost Meat Records , 1997 Out Of Print * Of Chivalry and Romance in a Dumpster 10" Fab Records , 1999 Out Of Print * Black Panther Party 7" Arkam Records , 2001 * Dance Party With... CD Plan-It-X Records , 2001 * Dance Party With... 10" Troy from Vancouver , 2004 * Front Seat Solidarity LP Plan-It-X Records , 2002 Out Of Print * Front Seat Solidarity CD Plan-It-X Records , 2002 * This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb/Carrie Nations Split 7" Shake/Plan-It-X Records , 2004 Out Of Print * This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb/The Devil Is Electric Split 7" Risk Records , 2004 Out Of Print * Three Way Tie for a Fifth CD Plan-It-X Records , 2004 * Three Way Tie for a Fifth LP No Idea Records , 2005 * Convertible LP Plan-It-X Records , 2008 * Convertible CD Plan-It-X Records , 2008 -------------------- The band Rymodee - Guitar, Vocals, Harmonica Terry Johnson - Bass, Vocals Teddy "Ted" Helmick - Drums, Jokes, Vocals