I’m going to confess something to you. The original title of this post was going to be “Neela says good-bye, and not a moment too soon.”Â Let’s face it, Dr. Neela Rasgotra has been a pain in the ass over the last few seasons, frustrating us with her indecision in both career and relationship. She’s been mean to some, indifferent to others, and led plenty of County General doctors to believe that she had eyes only for them. She’s been particularly tough to handle over the last few weeks as she constantly doubted herself while toyingÂ with the feelings of Simon Brenner.

With all of that hanging over her head I wasn’t going to cut her any slack at her teary-eyed departure. However, she made some moves on her last day at County that permitted her a little more respect as she embarked on her new life. The biggest was reuniting with a dear, old Â friend.

Fans of the show know that Ray Barnett is the man who’s gottenÂ jerked around the most byÂ Neela. He always seemed to beÂ “this close” to hooking up with her, but he ended up getting pushed aside for a-holes like Tony and Simon. It was utterly frustrating to watch him get dejected time after time, season after season. So, whileÂ the accident that resulted inÂ his double leg amputation was tragic, it wasÂ probably for the best as it allowed him to get the hell out of Neela’s radar and reassess his priorities.

The change of environment did wonders for Ray,Â removing hisÂ anger about the situation that led him to the accident and giving him a new perspective on life. That perspective gave him another look at his relationship with Neela. So, when he returned to Chicago earlier this season he was prepared for another dis byÂ her (thanks in no part to Simon barging in at the most inopportune moment). Deep down, though, he knew that Neela would come around this time.

Apparently, no one told this to Neela, who continued to be fearful about every step she took in both her personal and professional life. Maybe it was the constant bickering with Dubenko or the secrets being kept by Simon, but something in her finally snapped and she came to the realization that she needed to push away the fear and do what she needed to do to make herself happy. Hence, the reason why she gave County the finger and hopped on a flightÂ to Baton Rouge,Â where she and Ray FINALLY connected. And, hopefully for good this time.

It was this, and one other moment, that earned Neela a bit more respect. It was her conversation with Simon at the airport. With all the stuff going on between them, it was a sure bet that their relationship wouldn’t last. Especially after Neela tore him a new oneÂ a few weeks ago about keeping secretsÂ from her. With the airport conversation the air was cleared between the two as they both apologized for the way they had acted. With a last kiss, both started new chapters of their lives.

So, adios Doctor Neela Rasgotra. It’s been a tough haul for you over the last few seasons. We can only hope you’ve learned your lessons and have gotten past your fears. We only ask that you don’t mess it up with Ray. If you do, we’ll come find you for a good talking to!

Photo Credit: NBC