Chauncey Billups has a new business venture.

And the initial development is already operating in the Detroit market where he once starred as a point guard for the Pistons.

The 2004 NBA Finals MVP has signed a development agreement with Salon Plaza, a salon suite franchise for independent cosmetologists.

The location opened in late July in Southfield, providing opportunities for hairstylists, nail techs and estheticians.

Billups, 42, has found success as a franchisee since his final season, a 19-game stint with the Pistons in the 2013-14 season.

He owns 30-plus Wendy’s franchises in the St. Louis area, and has partnered on Blaze Pizza locations in St. Louis and Kansas City.

Billups is entering his latest venture with his wife, Piper, and said earlier this week they were attracted to the opportunity because of the location, which will provide high-end services in a community where such luxuries can be uncommon.

Billups and his wife are scheduled to attend a grand opening celebration Aug. 12.

The five-time All-Star also has found success with ESPN as an analyst for the network’s NBA pregame show, and hopes to receive more opportunities to call games.

He called Game 3 of the Milwaukee Bucks’ four-game sweep of the Pistons in the playoffs last season, and pays close attention to his old franchise.

NBA.com reports the Pistons return 65% of their total minutes played last season.

After adding point guard Derrick Rose and power forward Markieff Morris among other acquisitions this season, can Billups’ former team improve on last season’s 41-41 record and the No. 8 seed in the Eastern Conference?

Billups sees a return to the playoffs, but stops short of unbridled optimism.

“Continuity can be a good thing, just add some pieces here and there,” Billups said. “I need to see how it all works together, but we’ll see because teams got a lot better. I can’t tell you the Pistons are one of those teams that got a lot better — maybe a little better. Obviously, I’m hoping that the Pistons will jump out there and kick a lot of butt because I’m tired of people talking stuff to me about my Pistons.”

Billups also spoke about the rest of the NBA — and the importance of salon days:

[ Vince Ellis' NBA power rankings: After summer upheaval, Pistons move up ]

What was the attraction to this business opportunity?

Billups: “This opportunity is a beautiful one that me and my wife — the whole family — decided to get into because we know how important for our community that hair and beauty, stylists and barbershops, estheticians, nail techs (are). We understand how important that is to us, as a culture. Places like Salon Plaza have been really successful mostly in affluent areas, the suburbs. I know how important these things are to us so why don’t we have these high-end places in the city? There’s no reason why it shouldn’t be.”

Southfield isn’t the city of Detroit, but it’s a majority-black area that borders Detroit, so that location and that demographic was part of the attraction to the project?

“The location is the thing in places like Southfield that border Detroit or that are right around inner-city neighborhoods that are diverse. Those are the areas that we need to go into. Not just in Detroit, but all over the country. We’ve been very strategic about location and where we are going to go and why we’re going to go there. Southfield is the perfect location for our very first one. This is going to be our flagship store.”

"Flagship store" means you plan on opening more such places. Is that this market or markets around the country?

“We’re going to do more in this market, but we’re also going to Maryland next. We’re going to build this thing across the country. By flagship, it will probably be our biggest store and it will also be our model.”

Your wife is featured prominently throughout the announcement. Speak to her level of involvement in this venture.

“When you say salon and hair business, the funny thing is I don’t have any.”

Exactly! The reaction will be, "Why are you involved in this?"

Billups: “Me and you got the same issue.”

Correct!

“It’s something that’s going to be a lot of fun for my wife to be extremely involved in it. We’ve been talking about this for a couple of years and she’s been really involved in it, making a lot of decisions around it. My daughters as well. It’s like a legacy thing for us.”

Yeah, I discovered the joys of manicures and pedicures a couple years ago. I enjoy them.

“Man, I’ve loved them for years.”

You and other players have told me over the years that they were life-changing, but I was skeptical. God, they are relaxing!

“I know it. Vince, we got to start taking care of ourselves and that’s one of the things that brings you a lot of joy when you can do them.”

(Laughter)

In the aftermath of how Anthony Davis forced his way to the Lakers from the Pelicans, Paul George forced his way to the Clippers from the Thunder, do you think owners are rightfully concerned with players asserting their power in such a way?

“They should be concerned about it, but it’s a players’ league. There are probably going to be some changes made in the CBA when the time comes to protect them from that, but it’s a tricky thing.”

It’s well-documented you felt powerless at times during your playing career.

“I’ve been through every single thing you can probably be through. Amnestied, traded a million times. It feels powerless when teams feel like, ‘Hey, this guy is underachieving, we’re going to get rid of him.’ Now, they’re seeing the player look at the team. Look at (Davis’) situation. He basically did the same thing that a team usually does. ‘I’ve been there six, seven years? You haven’t put the right people around me so I’m good, I’m done. Let me try something else.”

Just like teams.

“That’s what teams do when they’re dissatisfied. Now, players are starting to have that kind of power and the owners are in an uproar.”

Back to your playing career. I think you even wondered why you were traded so much. Is it too strong to say you encourage players to use their power to better themselves?

“My dream was always to be in the NBA, be a champion, have a good career. Even when I was traded and all those times my feelings were hurt, it wasn’t like I was losing my job. I was still in the NBA, I was still living my dream so don’t feel sorry for me. It sucked seeing the business side of things, but I’m not saying I encourage guys to flex their muscle all the time, but what I am saying is know your value, know your leverage. If sometimes it needs to be exercised, you have to do what you have to do.

“I’m not sitting here telling guys to sit out. When you sign a contract, you should hold up to what you signed on to. You sign a four-year contract, you play that contract out and you are free after that. That’s the way I see, but guys have found out the ways to circumvent the situation. I don’t necessarily agree with it, but I know how it feels to be on the other side.”

Let’s transition to your role with ESPN. You covered the first-round sweep at the hands of the Bucks and you were tough on Andre Drummond, a former teammate. Recently, my media brethren ran with your criticism of Carmelo Anthony, another former teammate. When you first were hired as an analyst, did you have to overcome any unease at criticizing former teammates and competitors?

[ Andre Drummond booed by Pistons fans. Did he deserve it? It's complicated ]

“I felt like when I was in the league and listening to some of my heroes and they were up there being a little bit critical of my game, the way I took that &mldr; Isiah (Thomas), Magic (Johnson), guys like that, the way I took it was, ‘Aw (expletive), that’s Isiah. That’s Magic. I got to get my game up. I just got to get better. I didn’t take it like he was personally killing me. I didn’t take it like that. I was, ‘(Expletive), that’s Isiah. He can say what he wants. That dude is one of the best ever. That’s how I took it.”

But everyone is not you.

“I’m sure they probably don’t love it, but if they played with me, they know that I’m that same dude in the locker room. Those are the same things I would tell a dude in the locker room or say we go to dinner or go to lunch together, chopping it up. I’m the same guy so because of that, I haven’t had a lot of pushback from guys. Even when I see them, it’s still all good because I’m never going to attack a guy personally about his personal life. Anything I say is going to be all basketball-driven. I’m going to be honest. I never just want to thrash guys and beat guys up.”

“The whole thing about (Anthony), it’s kind of crazy how it went viral. I’d said that before, but it didn’t go viral the first time. Like I said, if Melo would do what Vince Carter did late in his career, what Paul Pierce did late in his career, even myself. Take that backseat and say, ‘I’m out of my prime, I just want to help a team.’ Melo still has game. Melo can still come off the bench and get buckets for somebody, but it’s that mentality of having to take that backseat. It’s hard for a lot of great players. That’s probably one of the things he has struggled with. That’s pretty much all I said, but (chuckles) it went viral. Melo is one my favorite teammates in my career. The dude came to work every single day and he was a matchup nightmare. We worked well together. They tried to make it something that it wasn’t, but it’s all good.”

Has anyone ever reached out after your criticism?

“There’s been a couple of those situations, but it was nothing major. I’ve had a conversation with a dude or two, but it was really minor.”

Your name remains associated with front-office openings. This past offseason you were a finalist for the top Timberwolves post. What are your aspirations currently?

“I liked the Minnesota situation. They have some good people. I love (owner Glen Taylor) so I was attracted to the situation. Interviewed well, but obviously they went with Gersson Rosas, who was a very good candidate and I’m sure will do a terrific job.

“But even with that situation, they reached out to me. I haven’t been reaching out or my people haven’t been reaching out to anybody. It’s just one of those things where I’ll stay ready and if an opportunity presents itself, we’ll see. I’ve been really happy doing this TV thing at the moment. I’m hoping to call more games this season and we’ll see how that goes.”

You’re known more for your studio work with ESPN. What’s the difference between studio work vs. game analysis?

“There are big differences. I like both because I love talking basketball with (Paul Pierce, Michelle Beadle and Jalen Rose on 'NBA Countdown'). That’s been fun, but I got opportunity to call games last year. Did eight or nine and it’s totally different. Calling games is a lot harder from the standpoint of all the research you have to do, but I love it because I want to talk basketball. I want to talk about what’s going on, why it’s going on, why this player did that, but talking about it in real time. Covering the game allows you to do that because it’s so spontaneous, you never know what’s going to happen.”

“With my basketball acumen, I really just want to talk hoops. The problem with the studio is it’s just a pregame show so you are guessing what’s going to happen without really knowing. You don’t have a long postgame show and that’s where I want to break down what happened in the game. That’s why I fell in love with calling games when they gave me the opportunity to try it.”

It sounds like calling games is the closest you’ve come to still playing games?

“It’s the closest thing to being out there, being able to be that close to it. You’re right there, talking to the players before the game, you’re talking to them after. You are in the action, the energy in the building. To me, it’s the closest thing to actually playing.”

Let’s bring it back to Detroit. You are a former teammate of Blake Griffin’s. Did his All-Star season surprise you?

“Absolutely not. I enjoyed my couple of years playing with Blake and one thing I learned playing with him is this dude is a worker. He’s at the gym before everybody and by the time people would show up, he was changing his shirt. This dude is a worker. I knew that he would have a great season. I knew the people in Detroit would love him because he comes to work every single day. He’s really competitive. He hates to lose. He hates to play bad and when you have those kinds of traits, most of the time you are going to be a great player.”

With all the player movement this offseason, which team stands atop the NBA currently?

“I love what the Clippers did. I love what the Lakers did. I love what Utah did. I think Denver is really good. Milwaukee is going to be really good. I still need to see Philly play out. A lot of people fell in love with the moves they made. I’m not crazy about it right now, but I need to see it. They have great players, but I need to see it together. When Victor Oladipo (quad) comes back, I really like what Indiana did, I think they got a ton better. Brooklyn got better, but they got to wait on (Kevin Durant). I really like Kemba (Walker) with Boston. There are a lot of teams that got a ton better. I’m looking forward to this season in a major way.”