Our Team

Wanderlust fuels the Skog Å Kust team. Our employees are passionate about the outdoors, and we make the high-quality, all-weather gear that wewant to use. Whether our team members are commuting to work by boat or traveling the world with a camera in hand, our company’s waterproof adventure bag keep their gear protected.

Our Values

Ensuring Quality

At Skog Å Kust, we are the experts in waterproof outdoor gear. Our team builds each product from the ground up, and we are constantly considering what new gear will fit the needs of outdoor enthusiasts. We also frequently revisit and improve our established products. Based on feedback from our customers, we might add a new feature to a time-tested favorite or introduce innovative materials.

Our products are backed by our 100% satisfaction guarantee. If you don’t love your S.Å.K. product, then you can send it back within 30 days of delivery to get a full refund. All Skog Å Kust products also come with a lifetime warranty against manufacturing defects.

Taking Care of Our World

We want to leave the Earth a better place than we found it. That’s why we consciously limit our environmental impact by using the right materials and creating eco-friendly products.

All of our products, from our foldable water bottles to our waterproof boat bags, are 100% vegan. None of our items contain animal products or byproducts, and we do not test on animals.

Taking Care of Our Neighbors

We believe that everyone should have the opportunity to lead a healthy, active lifestyle. That is why we created Skog Å Kust: To inspire you to travel and explore the world.

That’s also why we in 2017, we launched a special “first aid” red edition of our popular DrySåk, where 100% of the profits were donated to organizations assisting the victims of hurricanes Harvey and Irma. This is just one small way that we were able to give back to the community.

Uniquely Simple and Highly Functional Gear for Land, Air, and Sea

Skog Å Kust has the gear that fits your travel and adventure-filled lifestyle. Our products take you from the rainforest to the urban jungle and from the river to the sea. When you are trekking the world, you will know that your possessions are safe from an unexpected rainstorm, a splash of mud, or a fierce ocean wave.

Read about some of our most popular products to find out which of our S.Å.K. products is the right choice for your latest travel plans.

For Your Next Camping Trip, Try: The BackSåk

The BackSåk is the ideal choice if you are looking for a waterproof camping backpack. This backpack won Well Traveled Mile’s Best Waterproof Backpack of 2017 and 2018 for its large size (35 Liters), padded support, and ultra-tough construction.

For Your Next Hike, Try: The HydroSåk Water Bottle

This 26 oz., collapsible water bottle is made from medical-grade silicone, which has no taste or odor to dilute your water. The lid is leak-proof and easy-to-open, with a wide mouth. With a temperature range from -40 to 250 degrees Fahrenheit, this durable bottle can go from the microwave to the freezer, and is even dishwasher safe.

For Your Next Scuba-Dive, Try: The SCUBASåk

This collapsible, mesh duffle bag weighs just 1.85 lbs, but its heavy-duty mesh was chosen for durability. This duffle bag has a 420D waterproof nylon TPU exterior pocket to protect your phone, keys, and clothes from damage. It includes both handles and a removable shoulder strap for heavier loads.

For Your Commute, Try: The BriefSåk

This weatherproof messenger bag seals tight when you roll it down three times and snap its sturdy clips. It comes in heavy-duty 500-denier PVC with welded seams, so your valuables will stay safe and dry in torrential rain, in a winter blizzard, or on a sandy beach. This bag also features a splash-proof outer pocket that offers easy-access to your must-haves and a removable, cushioned separator for your belongings. The BriefSåk comes in 15 and 17-inch sizes.

A Few of Our Standout Features

Unique Aesthetic

The majority of Skog Å Kust products come in several colors to fit your needs and style. From a blocky camouflage to a cheerful berry pink, we have an option for every personality.

Reflective Features

The reflective trim, logo, or other aspects of many of our products will keep you safely visible during nighttime usage and make your bag easier to spot if it falls into the foliage or goes overboard.

Welded Seams

When you’re out on the river, you need your bag to stay dry while kayaking to keep your valuables safe from the water. No matter how high-tech the material, the real test of a waterproof bag is its seams. The welded seams on Skog Å Kust gear, such as our DrySåk, hold up against water, sand, mud, and snow.

Splash-Proof Outer Pockets

These protective pockets are a great place to keep your keys, ID, and other small items that you might want to quickly take out without exposing all of your other belongings to the elements.

Want to Learn More?