Skog Media Associates was created to put people at the heart of the story.

From renewable energy to climate solutions, stakeholder engagement to strategic communications, from supporting arts and culture to helping musicians make connections and build audiences, our focus is on delivering the best plan for you.

We look to combine our many years of award-winning expertise in shaping some of the world’s best known media brands with the passion, drive and foresight of those looking to connect with new opportunities.

Our proven abilities to help you shape and amplify your story are just a call or message away.

We’re all about storytelling …. whatever the platform

We have worked on multiple projects using journalism-led research and content creation skills to deliver both pro-active and reactive media engagement and on those rare occasions when needed, director level crisis communications.

Our extensive network of contacts in media and politics is extensive, and means we can also pro-actively support communication and marketing teams on a project by project basis and offer media intelligence, training and community engagement.

Live Music Industry

In 2023 we launched the Good Stuff In Between podcast, a regular show going behind the scenes of the music industry to seek out advice, creativity and stories from all those making it happen.

We work hard to support emerging talent here in Scotland and the UK, and showcase international artists trying to break into the market here.

You can listen to it at this link and follow its latest updates at its dedicated Instagram page.

INTRODUCING SOME OF OUR PARTNERS AND CLIENTS

Our consultancy was set-up with agility in mind – hence the term Associates – allowing for a natural flexibility to match appropriate strengths and talents to projects, fitting each approach around client needs as opposed to the other way around.

It also generates opportunity to work with brilliant people creating great ideas.

We use journalism-led skills and tools to audit each individual project and unearth story ideas to engage with target audiences.

Our creative, fact-checking approach allows us to work seamlessly with teams to deliver world class materials designed to be used across a range of platforms.

Collaborations are key to what we do on a national and international basis and we utilise all the skills and technologies at our disposal to make it simple. We effectively embed ourselves within the DNA of your organisation.

Fundamental to all our client portfolios is fully understanding what the key ‘mission’ is and how we can best serve your project.

Proactive in our approach, we ensure to communicate clearly and regularly in order to ensure all involved are enabled to share their voice on the journey.