Program Description

"THE WAR AT HOME is a film documentary on the anti-war movement in Madison, Wisconsin during the Viet Nam era. The program focuses on the events which took place on the campus of the University of Wisconsin, which eventually led to the bombing of a U.S Army Math [Research] building on campus and the death of a graduate researcher. The film also looks at the response of the Madison community to the events which occurred on campus, including the resulting intervention of the local police department and the beating of UW students by the police. Karl Armstrong, who was eventually arrested and convicted of the bombing on campus is interviewed in the film while he was in prison. "THE WAR AT HOME deals with the students of UW Madison during the turbulent period of the mid 1960's and early 1970's, but it is also a look back in recent American history of a national protest movement against our nation's [involvement] in a very unpopular war."--1980 Peabody Awards entry form.The documentary includes interviews from students, professors, and activists at the University of Wisconsin during the Vietnam era as well as interviews with Wisconsin government and police officials. The program details protests and demonstrations on campus as a result of the anti-war movement, beginning with the Black Student Strike of 1969, during which the National Guard was called in. Writer Allen Ginsberg is interviewed. The program shifts to an examination of how the anti-war movement grew in Madison. Footage of protests turned to riots is included, and the beginning protests against the U.S. Army Math Research Center on campus are detailed, like the National Moratorium demonstrations. Several Vietnam veterans are also interviewed about their involvement in the anti-war movement. The bombings of the ROTC offices and the New Year's Gang are discussed. The U.S. invasion of Cambodia and resulting protests are covered, beginning with the demonstrations following the shooting of the students at Kent State University. Protestors and activists talk about the students being killed at Jackson State University. Then, the bombing of the Army Math Research Center is covered, with interviews from activists, university officials, and government officials. One of the bombers is interviewed. The continued efforts of the anti-war movement as the war wound down are included as well.

Broadcast Date

1980-05-19

Asset type

Program

Media type

Moving Image

Duration

00:56:06.763