“The War at Home is an extraordinary documentary about the last time we really needed to overcome.” – Roger Ebert, CHICAGO SUN TIMES

“War at Home: A Brilliant Documentary”. – THE BOSTON GLOBE

“…Filmmaking with Extraordinary Power”. – SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICOLE

“Madison’s turbulent decade has been superbly evoked by Glenn Silber and Barry Alexander Brown’s provocative, profoundly disturbing Academy Award-nominated documentary, The War at Home” – Kevin Thomas, LA TIMES

“This is Hometown, America in Revolt…not to be missed.” – VARIETY

“One of the great works of American documentary moviemaking, The War at Home has also become…a timely reminder of how much power people have when they take to the streets in protest.” – FILM SOCIETY OF LINCOLN CENTER

“The War at Home” is an Academy Award Nominated feature documentary that tells the story of the impact of the war in Vietnam on one American city, using Madison, Wisconsin and the University of Wisconsin as a microcosm for the 1960s national Antiwar Movement. The film vividly depicts a decade of antiwar resistance from the earliest Vietnam war protest in 1963 (with male protestors wearing suits and ties); to some of the most violent antiwar demonstrations of the era (1967-72); to the signing of the Paris Peace Agreement (1973) that formally ended the U.S. role in the war that tragically cost 58,220 American lives, and more than three million Vietnamese deaths.

Using a treasure trove of all the local TV news film shot in Madison in the 1960s, illuminated by more than twenty original on-camera interviews with student antiwar activists, university officials, Vietnam veterans, community leaders and police, The War at Home details the actions and events that turned the Midwestern city of Madison into one of the major domestic battlegrounds of the Antiwar Movement.

Glenn Silber

GLENN SILBER is a documentary film director and long-time network television news producer who has produced 90 primetime newsmagazine stories for various CBS News and ABC News broadcasts, as well as ten independent documentaries, mostly for PBS.

Silber was twice nominated for an Academy Award for Best Feature Documentary.

He has also received two Emmy Awards, the George Polk Award, a Columbia-DuPont Silver Baton, the IRE (Investigative Reporters & Editors) Award; and a Writers Guild Award, among dozens of awards and citations for his work as an independent producer/director and TV network broadcast journalist.

His most recent documentary work includes: Producer/Director/Writer on the one-hour investigative report, A DEATH IN ST. AUGUSTINE for Frontline, in partnership with the NY Times which was Nominated for an Emmy for Best Investigative Reporting. He was also Senior Producer & Writer on the ABC News Productions’ one-hour Special for Discovery I.D, ADNAN SYED: INNOCENT OR GUILTY, about the crime story at the heart of the Season One “Serial”: podcast that went viral with 175 Million downloads.

Silber was the recipient of the John Simon Guggenheim Fellowship for Filmmaking; was a Directing Fellow at the American Film Institute’s Center for Advanced Film Studies; and is a member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences (Documentary Branch).

BARRY ALEXANDER BROWN has worked as a director, editor and writer in documentaries and feature films for the past four decades. Not long after completing The War at Home, he met and began a long working relationship with the director Spike Lee who was a graduate student at NYU at the time. Since, he has cut many of Mr. Lee’s films including DO THE RIGHT THING, MALCOLM X, HE GOT GAME, SUMMER OF SAM, 25th HOUR and INSIDE MAN. Most recently he edited BLACKKKLANSMAN which just won the Grand Prix du Jury at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival. He has also worked with the acclaimed Indian director Mira Nair on such films as the Oscar Nominated SALAAM BOMBAY, MONSOON WEDDING and Disney’s QUEEN OF KATWE.

As a director, he has shot music videos and commercials as well as the critically acclaimed features LONELY IN AMERICA and WINNING GIRLS. His third feature, LAST LOOKS, was shot on location in Turkey and was made to be the center piece of a transmedia novel, which he also wrote. He is currently slated to direct a feature film, based on his own screenplay, titled, SON OF THE SOUTH about Alabama native born civil rights activist Bob Zellner.