Álvaro Siza Vieira, Artur Santos Silva, Isabel Soares, João Soares and Rui Moreira present Portugal Amordaçado, works by Mário Soares about the years of fascism. The initiative is the result of a partnership between Livraria Lello and the Mário Soares Foundation and the INCM to celebrate the centenary of the former Prime Minister and President of the Republic of Portugal.

Next Friday, March 1, 2024, at 9 pm, Livraria Lello will open its doors to celebrate Mário Soares, considered one of the most recognized and determining political figures in contemporary Portugal.

The session will feature interventions by Álvaro Siza Vieira, Artur Santos Silva, Isabel Soares, João Soares and Rui Moreira, who will testify to the life and work of the Portuguese politician, through Portugal Amordaçado, a work written by Mário Soares during exile, between São Tomé and Príncipe, Rome and Paris, and initially published in French in 1972.

The event is the result of collaboration between Livraria Lello, Fundação Mário Soares and Imprensa Nacional – Casa da Moeda (INCM), which republished the first volume of the Obras de Mário Soares collection. This first volume has two volumes, the first with the publication of the French version of Portugal Amordaçado, from April 1972, and the complete Portuguese edition, from October 1974. In volume II, the prefaces to the Portuguese and foreign editions are collected. of Portugal Amordaçado, publishing unpublished correspondence that followed the publication of the book, accompanied by a dictionary of figures, institutions and events.

In the words of Aurora Pedro Pinto, Administrator of Livraria Lello, “it is a huge honor to celebrate the work of Mário Soares at Livraria Lello, an unavoidable figure for Portuguese democracy, with the contribution of such relevant personalities on the national scene. It is also remarkable because this presentation is part of the celebration of Mário Soares' 100th birthday, in a year in which 50 years are celebrated on April 25th, a date that was naturally very special and symbolic for Soares”. “Mário Soares, and also his children, João Soares and Isabel Soares, had and have a historical and very close relationship with Livraria Lello, so the presentation of this book is also a happy moment for us, in that more personal and human sense ”, he adds.

The session is free to attend, subject to prior registration here and with capacity limited to the Bookstore's capacity. It will also be possible to watch the event via livestreaming, on Livraria Lello's Facebook page.