Considered mainly as a fishing and farming community in Pampanga, the town of Candaba attracts tourists from across the nation and the world as its wetlands serve as a stopover nesting destination of many, lovely, seasonal migratory birds — looking to escape the chilling, winter winds of China and Siberia.

It is also known for sweet watermelons, tilapia, and duck eggs but none more so than the delectable “burong isda” which is a Kapampangan fermented delicacy, best composed of catfish or mudfish only Candaba can yield. This municipality, with its own distinct tradition and quirks, houses one of the most historical churches in Pampanga which is St. Andrew’s Parish or San Andres Apostol Church.

Under the administration of Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Fernando, the parish church is named after Saint Andrew who serves as the patron saint of fishermen and singers. Additionally, he was also considered as one of the disciples who became closest to Jesus Christ.

Probably an interesting fact about Saint Andrew was that the thing he cared most about and made him happy was the act of bringing people to meet and believe in Jesus which is fitting to have St. Andrew’s Parish church dedicated to him. Much like the life of Saint Andrew, the church carrying his name has experienced a vast majority of hardships and triumph as well.

The Saint Andrew’s Parish church of Candaba was established on May 3, 1575. The Spaniards were so captivated by the thriving Candaba economy and commercial potential of its lands that they decided to settle at the town which in effect resulted in the prevalent Catholic influence in the area.

The Visayan native, Fray Francisco Manrique, was the first appointed “cura parroco” and the Bishop Domingo de Salazar of Manila was the reason why Candaba became the missionary center of the Augustinian Friars in teaching and spreading the Catholic faith to the people of Arayat and Santa Ana. In addition, Padre Eulogio Ocampo first Filipino to serve as a priest in the church. A lot of hard work was done to make Saint Andrew’s Parish church appear as it is today.

From the start, Saint Andrew’s Parish church was made of light materials from 1591 until 1664. However, a master church builder, named Father Jose dela Cruz, planned and commissioned to replace those basic materials of stone from 1665 to 1669. Later successors would make further improvements to the church’s structure with the addition of a campanario, dome, bells, and a bell tower.

ST ANDREWS PARISH CANDABA

One of the most recent improvements to Saint Andrew’s Parish church was the addition of GreenMango’s Vento which is a simple, 5-blade, high-volume low-speed (HVLS) fan that comes in two sizes, 22 feet, and 16 feet. Vento s best for commercial spaces that demand comfort and wind speed.

It’s suited for sports such as fitness clubs, gym/athletic training stadium, recreation & entertainment such as amusement park, zoos, children’s playground, traffic hubs such as airport, railway station, and bus station, commercial places such as function center, shops, restaurants, supermarkets, and others uses such as warehouses, factories, museums, and outdoor venues.

All of the visitors and the people working and volunteering for the church were satisfied with the installations of these effective and efficient fans.

All of the reactions and testimonials regarding the GreenMango’s HVLS fans were overwhelmingly positive and with Saint Andrew’s Parish church’s mission and vision with spreading the words and love of the Lord, we at GreenMango are glad to help in any shape or form in making the house of our Creator feel more comfortable and secure.