Metropolitan Cathedral of San Fernando

The Kapampangans have been said to be a deeply devout and religious people, and this image is probably best reflected by the sheer number of magnificent churches scattered across the entire province. These churches are the hallmarks of Pampanga's long and rich history, with most of these structures dating back to the Spanish era. Withstanding the test of time, these churches display their splendor to both the devout or to the curious alike as part of Pmpanga's unique heritage.

Apalit Parochial Church – Apalit, Pampanga

Located at the town plaza, it was built in the year 1629-1630 and designed in Baroque architecture. The painting on the ceilings and dome are filled with beautiful paintings and are worth studying. The style of the facade is reminiscent of European neo-classic churches. It was rebuilt by Father Antonio Redondo between the years 1876-1880. Its towers were finished in 1896 by the Rev. Toribio Fanjul, who purposely made them low to minimize the effects of earthquakes.

Apu Chapel – Bgry. Lourdes Sur, Angeles City, Pampanga

This is the shrine of the replica of Our Lord of the Holy Sepulchre or Santo Entierro (Apung Mamacalulu). Devotees from all over Pampanga flock to this shrine every Friday to venerate the supposedly miraculous image of Jesus Christ lying in the sepulchre. It is also every Friday when people buy household items, clothing including audio-video equipment in a makeshift market called "tiangge" at bargain prices. It was in 2012 when the chapel was decreed by Archbishop Paciano Aniceto, at the recommendation of Auxiliary Bishop Pablo Virgilio David, as an archdiocesian shrine during the canonical rites. Aniceto also established the chapel as a "center of mercy." The original image, a gift by Fr. Macario Paras to the Holy Rosary Parish in Brgy. Sto. Rosario in 1872, is enshrined in the same parish. Aniceto also assigned Fr. Enrique Luzung as the shrine rector. (Source: Inquirer Central Luzon, March 25, 2012)

Betis Catholic Church – Guagua, Pampanga

Betis Catholic Church in Guagua, Pampanga is one of the churches in the country declared by National Museum as a National Treasure. The church was built in the early 1700s and repaired continually throughout the 1800s.

Church of Lubao – Lubao, Pampanga

Built in 1572, by Architect Fr. Antonio Herrera, the Augustinian mission constructed this church in 1614-1630 out of locally made bricks and sand mixed in egg albumin. The church was occupied in 1898 by the revolutionary forces, used as a hospital in 1899 by the American forces, and was destroyed in 1942 by Japanese shelling. It was then repaired in 1949-1952 under the direction of Fr. Melencio Garcia. It measures 82.45m. long, 21.12m. wide and 10.50m. high. The walls are 2.46m thick. It has one nave originally painted by Italian artists, Dibella and Alberoni. The five-storey belfry 15.31m. high remains unrestored.

Church of Magalang – Magalang, Pampanga

San Bartolome Church was established by the Augustinians in 1605, and it was the scene of the encounter between the followers of Andres Malong led by Melchor de Vera and the Spanish troops in 1660. Moved to San Bartolome in 1734, the church was swept by Parua River in the flood of 1863. It was re-established in Barrio San Pedro on December 13, 1863. The three-aisle church is made of stone and wood. It is 55m. long, 21m. wide and 7m. high. The interplay of arches, as seen on the main entrance, doors and niches, pediments and fenestrations, including those of the bellowers and adjacent convent suggest a touch of baroque.

Holy Rosary Cathedral – Angeles City, Pampanga

Located at the intersection of Sto. Rosario and Sto. Entierro Streets, the Holy Rosary Church was constructed from 1877 to 1896 by the townspeople of Angeles by a forced labor system known as "polos y servicios" imposed by the Spanish colonial government. From 1899 to 1900 the church was used by the US Army as a military hospital. In 1896-1898, the backyard of the church became the execution grounds to the Spanish forces in shooting down Filipino rebels and suspects. It has a beautiful transient and measures 70m. long, 20m. wide and 12m. high. The dominant element of the facade is the symmetry created by recessed arched windows which are in harmony with the segmented ones.

Metropolitan Cathedral of San Fernando – City of San Fernando, Pampanga

Metropolitan Cathedral in the city of San Fernando may have been built by the end of the 18th century, constructed most probably by Fr. Sebastian Moreno, its parish priest in 1756, and was restored in 1808. The church measures 70m. long, 13m. wide and 11m. high. The round majestic dome rising from the rotanda of the transcept is reminiscent of the baroque style with some renaissance touch. It is the seat of the Archdiocese of the City of San Fernando, Pampanga. President Emilio F. Aguinaldo and his cabinet viewed the Phillippine Revolutionary Army from the windows of the convento on October 9, 1898. The church and the convento were burned by the Philippine Revolutionary Army on orders of Gen. Antonio Luna on May 4, 1899. It was again destroyed by fire in 1939, and later restored by Architect Fernando H. Ocampo.

Minalin Church – Minalin, Pampanga

The Minalin Church (Sta. Monica Parish), located on the town's highest ground called burul (the town had moved to its present site due to flooding, hence 'minalis,' later corrupted to minalin) but despite its elevation, silt from the river has already invaded its beautiful church. The peeled palitada reveals the original red brick walls, giving the church its unique old-rose touches. The ancient mural paintings in the adjoining convent, one of which is a primitive-looking map with details of trees, ducks, crows, a boat, a hunter and a crocodile. A detail not to be missed are the corbels and beams in the convent and high up in the church's ceiling, with carvings that some say depict pre-Hispanic pagan deities like naga (serpent), dapu (crocodile) and galura (eagle), but Siuala ding Meangubie believes they depict only one creature, bulig (mudfish).

Our Lady of Divine Grace Parish Church - Mabalacat, Pampanga

Our Lady of Divine Grace Parish Church was said to have been established in the year 1768, but a more realistic date would be around the early 1830s.

San Guillermo Parish Church – Bacolor, Pampanga

San Guillermo Parish Church is named after San Guillermo, the patron saint of Bacolor, Pampanga, the Philippines, where the church is erected. The church was originally constructed by the Agustinian Friars in 1576 – also the town's founding – with Fr. Diego De Ochoa, OSA, as the town's first parish priest.having been installed as such two years after.

San Luis Church – San Luis, Pampanga

The San Luis Church (San Luis Gonzaga Parish) is located in a place that used to be called Cabagsac, referring to the proliferation of fruit bats. In fact, today, a fishnet is permanently installed high above the altar precisely to catch thousands of bats that are roosting inside the church. The interior is dark, has an ambience of antiquity and mystery and overpowering odor of bat urine. The main attraction is the three-tower facade, perhaps one of its kind in the country. Not to be missed is the ancient cemetery located in a hidden corner at the back of the church, with some tombstones dating back to the 1800s and bearing the names of the town's prominent families, including Taruc.

St. Andrew Parish Church – Candaba, Pampanga

St. Andrew Parish Church (Candaba) - The simplicity of line and scarcity of ornamentation are the main traits of the facade of this church, the triangular pediment with its protruding center helps maintain the simplicity of line. A new feature of the facade is the depressed three-centered arches of the windows on the second level. The second level is separated by a cornice decorated with geometric designs.

St. Anne Parish Church – Sta. Ana, Pampanga

St. Anne Parish Church (Sta. Ana) - The church is 58m long, 14m wide and 13 m high. The recently applied coat of red and white paint has turned this centuries old church into a gaudy 20th century anomaly. The massive hexagonal four-storey bellower has blind and open recesses, keeping with the symmetry of the facade. It ends in a balustrated dome topped by a cross.

St. Catherine Alexandra Church – Porac, Pampanga

St. Catherine Parish Church (Arayat) - One of the oldest churches in Pampanga and known for its classical architecture. There are no records on builder and date of construction of present church. The church measures 70m. long, 16m. wide and 12m. high. The presbytery, ceiling and the main altar have been recently renovated. The original stone of the facade has been covered with cement and painted white

St. Joseph Parish Church – Floridablanca, Pampanga

St. Joseph Parish Church (Floridablanca) - Pseudo-Gothic elements blend subtly along the classic design of the structure. The flame-like arch of the main entrance and lateral doors provide contrast to the triangular pediment. The structures are simple and the large voids lend drama to an otherwise bare design.

St. Michael Archangel Parish Church – Masantol, Pampanga

St. Michael Archangel Parish Church (Masantol) - The church was built by the parish priest of Macabebe who attended to the spiritual needs of Masantol. The center bell tower is of renaissance influence. The cemented facade contrasts with natural texture and color of the original stones at the sides.

St. Nicholas of Tolentino Parish Church – Macabebe, Pampanga

St. Nicholas of Tolentino Parish Church (Macabebe) - It was founded in 1575 under the advocation of San Nicolas de Tolentino. The church measures 70m. long, 17m. wide and 11m. high. The facade of the church has scantly ornamentation and its architectural symmetry is lost amid and the various forms assumed the windows and the main entrance. Simple neo-classic lines of the facade.

Sta. Lucia Parish Church – Sasmoan, Pampanga

Sta. Lucia Parish Church (Sasmoan) - The church is 45m long and 11m wide and 6m high. An author described it as "very beautiful and of very good condition". When looking at the complex of church and convent, one is struck by the impression that the round and rectangular openings are capriciously aligned. This makes the facade both interesting and unique. It attracts devotees from all over the provinces to honor Sta. Lucia and ask their petitions. She is believed to be a miraculous saint.

Santa Rita de Cascia Parish Church – Sta. Rita, Pampanga

Building of the church had to be delayed until late 19th century due to economic adjuristicial conditions. The single-nave church is 55m long, 13m wide and 10m high. It has a large and well-lit transept. The solid brass facade has baroque characteristics and the single columns are relatively slender. The parish is the site where the Holy Relic of Saint Rita de Cascia is enshrined.

Getting to Pampanga

Motorists and commuters will arrive in Pampanga in just 1-½ hours by car or bus from Manila through the North Luzon Expressway exiting via San Fernando, Angeles or Dau Toll Plaza.

All bus lines linking Manila with Baguio, Pangasinan, and Ilocos pass through the province. Philippine Rabbit serves the provincial capital (San Fernando) from Manila. Victory Liner links Angeles City and Olongapo City. Baliwag Transit and E. Jose Transport operates route services from Olongapo City to Cabanatuan City in Nueva Ecija via San Fernando, Pampanga. Arayat Express also serves the San Fernando-Cabanatuan route. Other buses that pass through the towns of Pampanga include Dagupan Bus Lines, Dangwa Tranco, Five Star Bus Co., Farinas Transit, Franco Federico Lines, Maria De Leon Trans, Partas Trans Co. and Viron Transit.

Also, there are jeepneys and/or mini-buses in each town or city that serve inter-zonal points towards other parts of the province.

Accommodations