(Eagle News) – The Catholic Archdiocesan Committee on Church Heritage (ACCH) – Pampanga has recommended a “lockdown” of all heritage churches in Pampanga following the 6.1 magnitude quake that damaged many structures in the province.

In its Facebook page, the ACCH said that it is recommending the lockdown for “everyone’s safety.”

The ACCH also received reports of cracks in some of the structures of the old Catholic chuches, many of which had been built during the Spanish colonial period. Many statues inside and outside the churches suffered cracks or were toppled down.

“Upon consulting our technical experts, the ACCH Secretariat is recommending a lockdown of all heritage churches (no activities inside and cordon off to secure the whole premises) until they are deemed safe,” its announcement posted on its FB page said.

“The Technical Secretariat is coordinating with experts and national agencies to assure everyone’s safety,” it said.

The ACCH included the “complete list of all heritage churches of Pampanga” which had been recommended to be on lockdown because of possible damages after the strong quake.

The list includes the following:

District 1

Holy Rosary Parish

Angeles City

Nuestra Señora de Gracia Parish

Mabalacat City

San Bartolome Apostol Parish

Magalang, Pampanga

District 2

San Agustin Parish

Lubao, Pampanga

Sta. Lucia Parish

Sasmuan, Pampanga

Immaculada Concepcion Parish

Guagua, Pampanga

Santiago Apostol Parish

Betis, Guagua, Pampanga

San Jose Labrador Parish

Floridablanca, Pampanga

Sta. Catalina de Alexandria Parish

Porac, Pampanga

Sta. Rita de Cascia Parish

Sta. Rita, Pampanga

District 3

Metropolitan Cathedral

City of San Fernando, Pampanga

Sta. Catalina Alexandria Parish

Arayat, Pampanga

San Guillermo Parish

Bacolor, Pampanga

Sta. Monica Parish

Mexico, Pampanga

Sta. Ana Parish

Sta. Ana, Pampanga

San Vicente Ferrer Parish

Calulut, City of San Fernando, Pampanga

District 4

San Pedro Apostol Parish

Apalit, Pampanga

San Andres Parish

Candaba, Pampanga

San Nicolas de Tolentino Parish

Macabebe, Pampanga

San Miguel Arkanghel Parish

Masantol, Pampanga

Sta. Monica Parish

Minalin, Pampanga

San Luis Gonzaga Parish

San Luis, Pampanga

Nuestra Señora del Pilar Parish

San Simon, Pampanga

Sto. Tomas Apostol Parish

Sto. Tomas, Pampanga

The 18th century Sta Catalina de Alexandria in Porac, Pampanga was severely damaged, including its belfry which the quake toppled down.

It also reported that the sanctuary table of Apung Mamacalulu Shrine in Angeles City had “sustained damage from the earthquake.”

Cracks were also seen from the belfry of Santa Rita de Cascia parish church in Santa Rita, Pampanga after the quake.

“The Linterna of the Belfry of San Agustin Parish Church in Lubao, Pampanga, was also damaged by the earthquake,” it added.

Initial reports also said that the Saint James the Apostle Parish in Betis, Guagua, Pampanga had visible damages around the Parish church bulding, as well as the convent after an initial inspection conducted right after the quake.

“Cracks were also seen on the interior of the parish church of the Holy Rosary -Pisamban Maragul, Angeles City after the earthquake,” it said in its FB page.

Cracks were noted on the ceiling of the Metropolitan Cathedral of San Fernando seen during the inspection which was done right after the quake. Pictures posted by the ACCH also showed statues inside the church which fell down.

The perimeter wall of the Monasterio de Santa Clara in Betis, Guagua,Pampanga was also damaged by the earthquake, it said.

ACCH also said that the “side entrance of the chapel in Hacienda Dolores was seen to sustain damage from yesterday’s calamity.”

In San Guillermo Parish, Bacolor Pampanga, there was reported wall damage on the old convent, “with toppled down and broken icons from the retablo.”

“From the parish of San Luis Gonzaga, San Luis, Pampanga, cracks from the belfry and on the wall with fallen debris from the ceiling were noted after the earthquake. Assessment is still ongoing,” it added.

Fallen debris were also seen after the earthquake from Pio Chapel in Pio,Porac Pampanga.