Under the Hawthorn Tree (4½ Stars)

This film is based on a true story. In the 1970's it was usual for school classes from Chinese cities to be sent to villages for a few months to learn solidarity with the farmers. I wouldn't consider myself a Maoist, far from it, but it seems like a good idea to me. Too many city children have no idea where food comes from. Meat and eggs aren't just something that's sold in the supermarket, there are real animals further back in the production chain. From death comes life.

A young girl called Jing, probably 14 or 15, meets a young soldier called Sun while staying in a village with her class. They both come from troubled families. Jing comes from a poor family, and her father has been sent to a re-education camp as a capitalist. His crimes aren't stated in the film, but at that time anybody in China who dared contradict Chairman Mao was labelled a capitalist. Jing's well educated mother was also punished by only being allowed to do menial labour. Sun's family is rich, but his mother committed suicide four years previously and was called a capitalist after her death. That's logical, because a true socialist would never have killed herself.

The romance between the two continues in episodes over the next two years. After finishing school Jing becomes a school teacher, but she's put on probation for a year to see if she has adopted any of her father's capitalist ideas. At first the relationship is kept secret, but one day Jing's mother sees them together. Jing promises not to see Sun while her probation is running, but true lovers can't be separated and the two meet again.

This is a very innocent romance, but its naivety makes it all the more moving. During all their time together Jing and Sun never kiss. On one occasion they sleep in the same bed, fully clothed, Jing beneath the covers and Sun on top. Jing panics afterwards because she thinks it's enough to make her pregnant.

The film is beautiful but sad. I won't give away any spoilers, except to say that there's no happy end. The film has never been released in England or America, but it has been released on Blu-ray in Germany with a 12-page booklet. The Germans appreciate good films.

In case you're wondering what the hawthorn tree in the title is, it's a tree on a hill overlooking the village that Jing is sent to. Normally hawthorn tree blossoms are white, but this tree has red blossoms due to all the blood shed by the Chinese defending their village against the Japanese invaders.