Hi All!

As the previous East Asian movie seen was on the more tragic end, today, we bring a somewhat happier Chinese movie, ‘Under the Hawthorn Tree’ (山楂樹之戀). Directed by Zhang Yimou, (known for his movies such as ‘Hero’ and ‘House of Flying Daggers’), the movie stars Zhou Dongyu and Shawn Dou, as a young woman, Zhang Jingqiu and young man, Sun Jianxin, from different economic backgrounds who find each other, and thus love, during the Cultural Revolution in China. Another Cultural Revolution movie, however this movie focuses less on the “re-education” aspect and more on the interactions between the two main leads. Once again, there won’t be a plot summary, as you can google that.

All in all, this movie was a love story at the core, a simple, innocent love story between two people during a time when love seemed to be unreal. So did I like the movie? Yes, yes, I did. The two main leads did their job portraying the characters. The film looks nice. The story was believable. In addition, there were some nice moves, really nice moves…

Today we are making moves…big moves. All that we need is one stick in medium to not so medium length, one large overcoat and one pull-cart wheelbarrow.

(1) The first person holds the stick to one side with both hands: the far hand at the edge, the closest hand next to the far. The second person holds the stick on the other end with only one hand, preferrably with the hand equal to the far hand of the first person. As the walk is engaged, the two persons shorten the stick to the point where the stick disappears. Where are their hands?

(2) The first person requests a coat from the second person. The first person fashions it as a cape offering enough room for the second person to also fashion it as a cape. The second person then takes the coat, stands, fashions the coat as a cape and offers the first person to do so also. How are they standing?

(3) The first person up-ends the wheelbarrow on the front wheels making a box for the second person. The first person then offers a maillot to the second person. The second person goes into the box as the first person walks away. The second person comes out of the box as the first person is wading in water. What is the second person wearing?

Overall, the movie is worth watching. If not for the story, or for the director, then for that awesome stick scene as mentioned.