Like in any good narrative, it’s the game’s characters that stand out. The most memorable cast of madmen and misfits I have ever encountered. In fitting with the game’s central themes (and title), each character is at the centre of their own tragedy. Fascinating and complex. Loathsome or lovable.

If you’ve never played Planescape: Torment, go and do so right now – you won’t regret it. If you have, then here’s a trip down amnesia lane.

“LOST ONE… IMMORTAL ONE… INCARNATION’S END… MAN OF A THOUSAND DEATHS… THE ONE DOOMED TO LIFE… RESTLESS ONE… ONE OF MANY… THE ONE WHOM LIFE HOLDS PRISONER… THE BRINGER OF SHADOWS… THE WOUNDED ONE… MISERY-BRINGER… YEMETH…”

– Tomb inscription

Protagonist and all round badass, the Nameless One is immortal, having lived countless lives over thousands of years. His myriad scars and tattoos tell the tale of his many torments.

Long ago, the Nameless One committed a crime so terrible than even a lifetime of selfless good would not save him from his punishment. Needing more time, he sought out the night hag Ravel Puzzlewell and challenged her with the riddle of making him immortal. She succeeded, but the ritual was flawed: with each death, the Nameless One would lose his memories.

Since then, his various incarnations have seen him become a powerful sorcerer, a raving paranoid lunatic, a calculating genius sociopath, and much else besides. The player joins him in his final incarnation, during which he at last manages to piece together his past and confronts his lost mortality.

“Nothing’s worse than being honest all the time.”

– Morte. Like Latin… for Death

Morte is your typical floating skull with eyeballs, and has a rather sharp tongue – impressive, considering his lack thereof. He’s the first character the Nameless One encounters and becomes the party’s much-needed comic relief. He has a huge soft spot for the ladies, living or dead.

When he was alive, Morte was a less than honest individual whose lies damned him to the Pillar of Skulls and caused one of the Nameless One’s many deaths. A different incarnation of the Nameless One later rescued him from the pillar, and Morte has been his guilt-ridden companion ever since, though he happily maintains his skewed relationship with the truth.

May or may not have been the skull of Vecna.

“When a mind does not *know* itself, it is flawed. When a mind is flawed, the man is flawed. When a man is flawed, that which he touches is flawed. It is said that what a flawed man sees, his hands make broken.”

– Dak’kon, telling you what he *knows*

A worn and withered zerth warrior of the githzerai, Dak’kon is grave, humourless, and honourable to a fault. He is the last bearer of a karach blade, a weapon that can be shaped by the wielder’s thoughts and emotions. Dak’kon’s motivations for joining the Nameless One are initially unclear. That changes.

Dak’kon’s torment is a mind divided. He once came to doubt the teachings of Zerthimon and his doubt caused the death of Shra’kt’lor, a great city of the githzerai on the chaos plane of Limbo. The Nameless One came to Dak’kon as he was drowning in chaos matter and offered him the means of his salvation, in exchange for an oath of servitude. Dak’kon has been little more than a slave ever since, forced to share the path of the Nameless One across numerous incarnations; only death can break the chains.

*Knows* a lot about *knowing*.

“I think yeh walk with chains, but yeh don’t know it yet. So I… feel for yeh, but I’m afraid for yeh… an’ that’s killing me, it is. I donnae want yeh tae come tae harm, but I donnae know what tae do tae stop it!”

– Annah (in Sheena Easton’s natural Scottish accent)

Annah is a hot-tempered tiefling fighter/thief. A potential love interest for the Nameless One, though kissing her literally makes her blood boil.

Still a youngster, Annah has little backstory compared to the other main NPCs, but still manages to hold her own as a character. All we know of her history is that she was born and raised in Sigil’s rough Hive district by the heartless corpse collector Pharod. Her torment is her doomed love for the Nameless One, which leads her from one nightmare to the next.

Has a tail.

“A lady must have her secrets.”

– Fall-From-Grace

Grace is of two conflicting natures. On one side, she is a succubus of the Abyss, a species that use their feminine charms to lure mortals unto corruption and death. On the other, she is chaste and noble and kind. A more subtle love interest for the Nameless One, a romance that is always on the verge but never fully explored.

Born in the Abyss, Grace was sold into slavery by her own mother, and to the Baatezu no less, the ancient blood rivals of her people. She later escaped by challenging her masters to a game of improvisation. When she is first encountered by the Nameless One, Grace is a high-ranking member of the Society of Sensation and is the proprietress of the Brothel of Slaking Intellectual Lusts, where sagacity is worth more than sex. She joins the Nameless One in order to experience more of the multiverse.

Disliked by Annah, adored by Morte.

“Identification of self was compromised by doubtings + mullings + analysis.”

– Nordom expressing his insecurities

Nordom is something a hidden character that I missed on my first couple of playthroughs. He is found randomly in the Rubikon dungeon construct. Nordom is a modron construct from the clockwork realm of Mechanus – the plane of perfect law – that has gradually come to question his makers and his purpose, thus going rogue.

He may seem a bit out of place in the party at first due to his amiable nature and various quirks, but his torments are no less severe – he just has trouble expressing himself.

Voiced by Homer Simpson.

“When the Planessss burnnnn and all life is but torchesss, then Ignusss ssshall at lassst… be at peace.”

– Good old sane, rational Ignus

Having Ignus in your party is a bit like having a viper in your bed – one wrong move and its bad news. Nevertheless, he is a powerful wizard and a valuable – if somewhat erratic – ally. He joins you after you douse the worst of his flames with the Decanter of Endless Water, though he remains forever alight as he floats around beside you.

Ignus was taught the Art by a previous incarnation of the Nameless One, who tortured and abused his young supplicant. Later, Ignus went on to open a portal to the elemental plane of fire in the heart of Sigil in an attempt to set the entire multiverse ablaze, but he was thwarted by an alliance of hedge wizards and witches. His body became a conduit to the plane of fire, though it was not enough to kill him.

Ignus wishes to BURN!

“Know this: There is nothing on all the Planes that can stay the hand of justice when it is brought against them. It may unmake armies. It may sunder the thrones of gods. Know that for all who betray justice, I am their fate. And fate carries an executioner’s axe.”

– Vhailor’s job description

Vhailor is another party member whose continued loyalty is dependent on a very careful choice of words. He belongs to the Mercykiller faction, a group that seeks the death of all compassion. He’s about as much fun as you might expect.

He once pursued the Nameless One across the planes (the same incarnation that freed Morte from the Pillar of Skulls), but was ultimately outwitted and trapped beneath the prison city of Curst. Over the long years, his flesh decayed to dust until only his armour remained. Justice sustained him, however, and his armour has become the vessel for his vengeful soul. He does not know that he is dead.

He can tell whether you’ve been naughty or nice.

Non-party characters coming soon eventually…