Martin Smith

Frontline

Martin Smith appears in the following:

Frontline's Look at Children Separated at the Border

Martin Smith discusses his latest documentary for Frontline, “Separated: Children at the Border.”

The Deadly Rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran

Frontline correspondent Martin Smith discusses his new documentary, “Bitter Rivals: Iran and Saudi Arabia.”

As Syrian Refugees Flee, What Happens To Those Left Behind?

While tens of thousands of refugees flee from war in Syria, what is life like for those who are left behind? Martin Smith reports in his latest Frontline documentary.

Obama's Struggle in The Fight Against ISIS

A new Frontline special explores the Syrian civil war, the rise of ISIS, and how the Obama Administration wrestled with the question of how to get involved and in what capacity.

Where ISIS Came from and How It Became So Brutally Powerful

Frontline producer and journalist Martin Smith talks about "The Rise of ISIS," in-depth investigation of the brutal terrorist group’s ascent.

How Silicon Valley Helps the NSA Spy on You

Tech companies are working with the government — sometimes willingly, sometimes not — to gather and warehouse our data. A new PBS Frontline documentary investigates how that happened...

Frontline's “To Catch a Trader”

Frontline correspondent Martin Smith talks about his documentary “To Catch a Trader,” which goes inside the government’s ongoing, seven-year crackdown on insider trading. It draws on video of hedge fund titan Steven A. Cohen, incriminating FBI wiretaps of other traders, and interviews with both Wall Street and Justice Department insiders. "To Catch a Trader" is airing January 7 at 10 pm on PBS.

Frontline's "Egypt in Crisis"

Less than three years after the popular uprising that led to President Hosni Mubarak's ouster, and just one year after Egypt's first free and fair elections, the democratically elected government has been overthrown and the Egyptian military is running the state. Writer/producer Martin Smith looks at what went wrong and what happens next. Frontline’s new documentary “Egypt in Crisis” explores those questions. It premieres September 17, at 10:30 pm, on PBS.

Planning for Retirement: "The Math Doesn't Work"

With pension plans nearly obsolete and most employees relying on their companies' 401k plans to prepare for retirement, many Americans may not know how to invest their money into thes...

Why Wall Street’s Leaders Escaped Prosecution

Frontline producer and correspondent Martin Smith talks about his investigation into why the U.S. Department of Justice has failed to act on credible evidence that Wall Street knowingly packaged and sold toxic mortgage loans to investors, loans that brought the U.S. and world economies to the brink of collapse. Frontline’s documentary “The Untouchables” includes interviews with top prosecutors, government officials and industry whistle-blowers, and reports allegations that Wall Street bankers ignored pervasive fraud when buying pools of mortgage loans. “The Untouchables” airs January 22, at 10 p.m., on PBS.

Has the Government Let Wall Street Bankers Off Too Easily?

As President Obama begins his second term, no senior Wall Street executives have yet been held criminally liable for the alleged fraud that led to the mortgage crisis. A new Frontline...

'WikiSecrets': New Documentary on Bradley Manning and WikiLeaks

It’s been a year since Bradley Manning was arrested for allegedly handing over a half million classified documents to WikiLeaks, in the biggest intelligence breach in U.S. history. The former Army intelligence analyst remains jailed in the Army brig in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, awaiting his first pre-trial hearing, while WikiLeak’s head Julian Assange lives under police watch in a home near London. Their relationship is the focus of a Frontline documentary "WikiSecrets," airing tonight. Bradley Manning’s father Brian Manning says his son is innocent. He joins Frontline correspondent Martin Smith to discuss his son and the documentary.

Student Debt Higher at For-Profit Colleges

A recent report by the College Board found students at for-profit colleges graduated with significantly more debt than their counterparts at public and private non-profit schools. President Obama recently overhauled the federal student loan program, changing the landscape for college lenders. Now Congress is considering ways to increase oversight of these for-profit colleges, which receive significant amounts of federal financial aid.

Frontline: Afghanistan and 'Obama's War'

The photo of the flag raisers on Iwo Jima has long been an emblem of U.S. efforts in World War II; photos from My Lai still represent the Vietnam war for many. After eight years, howe...

"The Madoff Affair"

Frontline correspondent Martin Smith joins us to discuss "The Madoff Affair," his investigation into the story behind the global Ponzi scheme—a deception that lasted longer, reached wider, and cut deeper than any other business scandal in history. "The Madoff Affair" airs tonight, May 12th, ...