This image is one of over 108,000 from the AMICA Library (formerly The Art Museum Image Consortium Library- The AMICO Library™), a growing online collection of high-quality, digital art images from over 20 museums around the world. www.davidrumsey.com/amica offers subscriptions to this collection, the finest art image database available on the internet. EVERY image has full curatorial text and can be studied in depth by zooming into the smallest details from within the Image Workspace.

Preview the AMICA Library™ Public Collection in Luna Browser Now

Cultures and time periods represented range from contemporary art, to ancient Greek, Roman, and Egyptian works.

Types of works include paintings, drawings, watercolors, sculptures, costumes, jewelry, furniture, prints, photographs, textiles, decorative art, books and manuscripts.

Gain access to this incredible resource through either a monthly or a yearly subscription and search the entire collection from your desktop, compare multiple images side by side and zoom into the minute details of the images. Visit www.davidrumsey.com/amica for more information on the collection, click on the link below the revolving thumbnail to the right, or email us at amica@luna-img.com .

Creator Name: Planells, Angel

Creator Nationality: European; Iberian; Spanish

Creator Role: Artist

Creator Dates/Places: Spanish; 1901-1989

Creator Name-CRT: Angel Planells

Title: Midday Sorrow

Title Type: preferred

View: Full View

Creation Start Date: 1932

Creation End Date: 1932

Creation Date: 1932

Creation Place: Europe,Spain

Object Type: Paintings

Materials and Techniques: oil on canvas

Dimensions: 39 3/4 x 37 3/8 in. (101 x 95 cm)

AMICA Contributor: The Art Institute of Chicago

Owner Location: Chicago, Illinois, USA

ID Number: 1993.259

Credit Line: The Art Institute of Chicago, Block, Serlin and Saidenberg and Twentieth-Century Purchase funds; through prior acquisitions of Chester Dale, Friends of American Art, Mr. and Mrs. Carter H. Harrison, Ella M. Schapper Memorial Fund, Joseph Winterbotham, Jr., and Charles H. and Mary F. S. Worcester Collection

Rights: http://www.artic.edu/aic/rights/main.rights.html

AMICA ID: AIC_.1993.259

AMICA Library Year: 2000

Media Metadata Rights: Copyright The Art Institute of Chicago, 2000

AMICA PUBLIC RIGHTS: a) Access to the materials is granted for personal and non-commercial use. b) A full educational license for non-commercial use is available from Cartography Associates at www.davidrumsey.com/amica/institution_subscribe.html c) Licensed users may continue their examination of additional materials provided by Cartography Associates, and d) commercial rights are available from the rights holder.