CHICAGO -- The Art Institute of Chicago is pleased to announce the addition of Claude Cahun's "Object" (1936) to the museum's rich collection of Surrealist art. This small, enigmatic work is currently on view in a new installation of some of the museum's Surrealist holdings in Gallery 273. There, viewers will find such icons of the collection as Rene Magritte's "Time Transfixed" and Salvador Dali's original plaster "Venus de Milo with Drawers" (acquired in 2005), as well as works by Yves Tanguy, Man Ray, Balthus, Paul Delvaux, Max Ernst, Angel Planells, and six boxes from the Lindy and Edwin Bergman Joseph Cornell Collection.

"Chicago collectors have long had a passion for Surrealism, and the Art Institute's collection reflects this important history. Many of the works featured in our new installation are the gifts of some of the city's greatest supporters of modern art-passionate collectors who saw in Surrealism a powerful demonstration of the effect of the unconscious on artistic creativity," says Stephanie D'Alessandro, associate curator of Modern Painting and Sculpture at the Art Institute. "We're extremely pleased to bring this wonderful object to the museum. Cahun's work is incredibly rare and wonderfully inventive. It's the right kind of work to add to our collection and continue the artistic legacy of our city."

"Object" gives form to many of the preoccupations central to the Surrealists, particularly the fascination with sight and touch, which was critical to Surrealist investigations in not only painting and sculpture but also in film and literature. Like a three-dimensional collage, "Object" combines a number of curious elements: a fully exposed eye is mounted next to a child-like, grasping hand; a stiff, cloud-shaped plane of wood rests atop the eyeball; and coarse, dark hair gathers loosely on the orb in counterpoint to the starkly erect eyelashes. The entire sculpture is affixed to a small wooden platform penned with a statement referencing the French national anthem.

For more information, visit www.artic.edu.