The Great Gildersleeve, a sitcom aired on NBC Radio from August 31, 1941 to 1957, was a spin-off from another popular comedy series Fibber McGee and Molly, or FMAM. It centered on the story of Throckmorton Philharmonic Gildersleeve, who was also the main character of the FMAM. Harold Peary, a popular radio and television personality, was given the lead role. The Great Gildersleeve, which was well-accepted back then, was sponsored by Kraft Foods for its product called Parkay Margarine.

In its first three years on air, The Great Gildersleeve was heard for 30 minutes, and then reduced to 15 minutes from 1954 up to its last episode. Although it was actually pretty different from its parent show, The Great Gildersleeve became as successful as FMAM. In fact, it was dubbed as one of the funniest shows ever aired on the radio.

Old Time Radio's first bona fide spin-off, Throckmorton P. Gildersleeve was one of the most popular of the oddball characters that lived in Wistful Vista, the home of Fibber McGee and Molly. He moved to Summerfield, where he and takes on an instant family in the form of Leroy and Margerie Forrester.

Harold Peary had made Gildersleeve into a multi-faceted character.He was shrewd,but in ways that rarely worked out like he planned. He was a ladies man, but mainly in his own mind. He was a public-minded neighbor, but always seemed to be getting into arguments and entanglements with them. The boys down at Floyd Munson's barbershop knew he was a singer, but often he seemed more an opinionated blowhard. And he was a loving uncle to his niece and nephew.

Walter Tetley played Leroy as a classic young wise guy nephew whose "ah, Unk" line was famous. Margerie (first played by Lurene Tuttle, Louise Erickson in the mid-`40s and then Mary Lee Robb) was the all-American girl-next-door type, and had the level head in the family. Birdie was their family cook and maid, played by Lillian Randolph. She ran the house with wit and warmth, while letting the men think they were in charge.

Catching Gildersleeve in his latest scheme were the druggist Peavey with his "I wouldn't say that, Gildersleeve" Rumson Bullard was Rumson Bullard, the pompous, rich neighbor across the street. Gale Gordon played both Mayor LaTrivia and Fogg Williams. Earle Ross was Judge Hooker. Arthur Q. Bryan was Floyd, the barber.

Gildersleeve wasn't married, but had several ladies he was interested in, namely the Widow Ransom. She was a southern belle type, but she also had a cousin, Adeline Fairchild, who got interested in the successful, if somewhat pompous Gildey.

Click here to read more about Great Gildersleeve, The