Philip K. Dick was born Dec. 16, 1928, in Chicago, Illinois, but his final resting place is in Fort Morgan’s Riverside Cemetery.

A science fiction writer, Dick’s many literary works explored philosophical, social and political themes. His major breakthrough came in 1962 with his alternative history novel “The Man in The High Castle,” which dealt with the United States being occupied by Imperial Japan on the West Coast and the East Coast under the control of Nazi Germany. For “The Man in the High Castle,” Dick was awarded the Hugo Award for Best Novel.

PKD died in Santa Ana, California, on March 2, 1982, at the age of 53. After his death, Hollywood would make some of his work popular with films such as “Blade Runner” (based on his short story “Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep”); “Total Recall” (based on “We can Remember it Wholesale”); “Minority Report” and “The Adjustment Bureau.”

Dick is buried at the Fort Morgan cemetery next to his twin sister, Jane, who died at 6 weeks old. That grave is a popular draw for fans of the prolific science fiction author from all over the world, with cemetery workers often seeing little trinkets related to his tales left on the stone.

Another connection to Fort Morgan with the late author is that his father’s family was from Fort Morgan.

Two years ago, an expert on author Philip K. Dick who goes by Lord Running Clam (aka David Hyde) saw his dream of having a PKD Festival held in Fort Morgan come true.

And this year, the second version of that every-two-years festival was held.

Thursday events

The PKD Festival began on Thursday, Aug. 8, with the attendees arriving and settling into their rooms at the Best Western/ Overland Inn at 1410 Barlow Road in Fort Morgan. An art reception was held at CACE from 4 to 6 p.m. Brent Houzenga from New Orleans, Louisiana, exhibited his artwork, which featured some Philip K Dick images.

Lord Running Clam began the first full day of the festival by expressing his gratitude to all the people who helped make the events happen.

He pointed to the help that Director of Library/ Museum Services Chandra McCoy and Museum Curator Brian Mack provided, as well as Morgan County Tourism/Marketing Manager Emily Goggins, MCC CACE Coordinator Suzanna Spears and MCC Instructional Specialist Debra Fowler.

Hyde went on to thank the staff at the Best Western/Overland Inn, the staff at the Cover 4 Theater for hosting the showing of “Total Recall” and the staff of The Country Steak Out.

One of the big events at this year’s PKD Festival was a panel discussion about “The Man In The High Castle.”

“The Man in the High Castle” is what many consider to be Dick’s first masterpiece, but not everyone feels that way. The panel consisted of Ted Hand, Dr. Andrew Butler, Tessa Dick and Frank Hollander.

“‘Time out of Joint’ was the deal. It was, I consider, being his first masterpiece,” panel moderator Hand said.

Butler agreed with him on that point, but others did not.

“I’ll step outside the box and vote for ‘The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike.’ As far as ‘The Man in the High Castle’ goes, it’s a great novel, but not his first great novel,” said Tessa Dick, who is the late author’s ex- wife.

There was a brief discussion on the events going on around the time Dick was writing “The Man in the High Castle.”

“Possible influences on him writing the novel were the war crimes Nuremburg trials going on in the early 1960s,” Butler said.

“He (Dick) referenced that he used ‘The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich’ by William Shirer,” Frank Hollander added. “The Israelis also had Adolph Eichmann on trail for the Holocaust.”

Friday events

On Friday, Aug. 9, the CACE (Center for Arts & Community Enrichment) at 300 Main St., held an exhibit of work by Brent Houzenga, an artist from New Orleans, Louisiana, depicting Philip K Dick.

The reception was hosted by Spears, CACE Visual Arts Committee Co-chair Mary Zorn and CACE volunteer Teresa Higgins. There were 15-20 of the festival attendees present to view the exhibit.

“So how I came to Philip K Dick was somebody gave me the book, ‘Time Out of Joint,’” Houzenga said. “Another aspect to my experience that I had with the photo album I had found that I had somehow pierced through time. I went head over heels and bought more of his books and every one had something that related to what was happening in my life.”

Later in the afternoon at the Library/Museum at 414 Main St., there was a presentation via Skype with Sean Nye on “The Music of Philip K Dick.” The event had technical difficulties at first then the audio problem was corrected. The lecture was on how the theme of time-slips, or how reality isn’t what it appears to be, influenced some composers of electronic music, such as Gary Numan and Sonic Youth. Also John Lennon formerly of the Beatles was a fan.

Saturday events

On Saturday, Aug. 10, Doug Mackey gave a talk on “the Contemporaries of PKD and their Influence on Him.”

Mackey basically spoke on who was writing then and how science fiction was just beginning to be popular at the end of World War II.

“In August of 1945, two bombs went off. One was in Japan the other was in the science fiction world with the serialization of ‘The World of Null-A’ by A.E van Vogt. The hardback was published by Simon and Schuster in 1948,” the speaker said.

Mackey credited this event with taking science fiction out of the magazine markets and bringing it to the mainstream book publishers.

Tessa Dick, the fifth wife of Philip K Dick, spoke next on her life with Philip.

“Please keep in mind that Phil was a storyteller. He exaggerated and embellished, but at the core, something did happen,” she said about personal events in Philip’s life.

The PKD Festival attendees were treated to a special showing of “Total Recall,” starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Sharon Stone, at the Cover 4 Theater on Saturday.

Later at the Country Steak Out, there was a PKD Quiz Show, and Lord Running Clam and Cameron Mitchell presented a “A Philip K. Dick Mystery Play.” Music was provided by David Allen from Denver.

Sunday events

On Sunday, Aug. 11, a farewell was given by Lord Running Clam at the Acapulco Bay Restaurant in downtown Fort Morgan.

“A fine welcome from the town of Fort Morgan,” he said. “ I love this town. It’s such a warm competent town.”

The festival drew people from all over the country, even the world, to Fort Morgan, he said.

“We had fans from all over the United States, three from the U.K., and one from France,” Lord Running Clam added.

Somewhere between 20 and 30 people attended this year’s festival, which is on an every-two-years schedule for when it will be held. The next festival to be held in Fort Morgan will be in 2021.

Times Staff Writer Jenni Grubbs contributed to this report.