Book Description:

"No Worries?"

We are profoundly aware that worry harms our bodies, our minds, and our relationships, but most of us struggle to stop our obsessive thoughts.

Mindscape builds a biblical, practical action plan for changing your mind based on Paul's rich exhortation in Philippians 4:8. Simple, clear, and pastoral, Mindscape offers worriers real-life guidance for replacing worry with a new way of thinking.

Chapter-by-chapter application questions make Mindscape perfect for personal reflection or small group use.

Author:

Timothy Z. Witmer, MDiv, DMin, is Professor of Practical Theology at Westminster Theological Seminary where he serves as Coordinator of the Practical Theology Department and Director of Mentored Ministry and Master of Divinity Programs. He has also served for thirty-five years in pastoral ministry, most recently completing twenty-seven years of service at Crossroads Community Church (PCA) in Upper Darby, PA having been designated Pastor Emeritus. Tim is the author of The Shepherd Leader and The Shepherd Leader at Home. He and his wife Barbara have three children, four grandchildren, and reside in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.

Endorsements:

"A must-have, must-read, must-share book. Dr. Tim Witmer, a seasoned soul-physician, calmly enters his consulting room. It is full of anxious people. Many have been dosing themselves on narcotic or toxic prescriptions or self-cures but continue to experience personal and relational meltdown. His diagnosis is superbly clear; his prescription is powerful. His prognosis is honest. Even his instructions are a pleasure to read. Plus, his medicine works. Try Mindscape-a great book!" -Sinclair B. Ferguson, Author; Professor of Systematic Theology, Redeemer Theological Seminary, Dallas, TX

"As colleagues, Tim Witmer and I probably spend a fair amount of time worrying about the same things. It is thus a pleasure to see that he has spent considerable time reflecting on this problem from a biblical and practical perspective. This book is both a work of demolition, as Tim dismantles the myths we tell about ourselves, and of construction, as he focuses the reader's mind on the great biblical truths that give us both a foundation in, and perspective on, our place in the universe. This is a straightforward pastoral book, which addresses a very real need in the anxious times in which we live." -Carl R. Trueman, Paul Woolley Professor of Church History, Westminster Theological Seminary, Philadelphia

Additional Information: