HAMISH BIDWELL

It was about as active as an inactive player can get.

Yelling, high-fiving, towel-waving; Paora Winitana was working up quite a sweat for a bloke who wasn't playing.

The occasion in question was the NBL semifinal between the 0800 Easy LPG Hawks and the Nelson Giants, back on Sunday, July 2, 2006. That's right, Sunday, that sacred day of the week when the devout Winitana doesn't come out to play.

The result? An 88-82 win for the Hawks to propel them to the final, in which they humbled the Auckland Stars 84-69 to claim their first NBL title.

The point of this little walk down memory lane? Just to illustrate that while the absence of the Hawks' co-captain and leading scorer from tomorrow's semifinal against the Harbour Heat is a significant blow to their chances, it's far from a mortal one.

"We've heard people talking about it and saying 'oh, they've lost their main scorer and blah, blah, blah," Winitana told SportToday.

"But we know we've got the deepest team in the league and this just provides another opportunity for someone to step up. That's not just one person, either, but everyone - even myself.

"Even though I'm not playing I've got to be there talking to the guys on the side and offering the right encouragement and direction. I've already spoken to Pauli (Henare) and Cliffy (Bush) and said 'you guys make sure you take care of on court, because I'll take care of off court'. We've got to have each other's backs as we want to go back-to-back this year."

He's not just talking it either, as those who've matched up against him in practice this week will attest.

"Right now I'm training with the second five against our first five and it's awesome, I love it. I'm pushing them really hard and they're all responding," Winitana said. "Just look at the guys' faces and see the change. We've had the most physical trainings we've had all year and there's been no joking around. Everybody knows what's at stake."

And what will be required to win. If there is such a crime as being too nice, then you'd have to say the Hawks have occasionally been guilty of it. Not this week, though.

"The thing with Harbour is that when they get their running game going, their belief in themselves builds. But when you take that away and make them play half-court and apply pressure, they can crumble," he said.

"Waikato are the same. They don't like pressure and they don't like physicality. They like to give it out, but they don't like to take it. But this is the playoffs, it's the semifinals and it's war time, really, and you've got to view it as such.

"We're where we envisaged ourselves at the start of the season, but that wasn't just the semis. "We're looking forward to this game, but also to our first training ahead of next week's finals."

The Waikato Pistons host the Nelson Giants in the other semifinal, which is at the Te Awamutu Events Centre tonight.