Images courtesy of Mosfilm

Renowned Russian fantasy novelist Alexander Grin remains one of the most influential and inspiring figures in contemporary world literature. An important contributor of the neo-romanticist movement alongside colleagues such as Eugene Berman and Pavel Tchelitchew, the author’s work has been adapted to the silver screen a total of nine times including his most beloved 1923 fantasy epic Scarlet Sails which was made into a film by Russia’s greatest fantasy director Aleksandr Ptushko and again in 2022 by Italian director Pietro Marcello currently in theaters. Seemingly in anticipation of the remake and in line with the Scarlet Sails celebrations in St. Petersburg which are now a regular part of Russian tradition, the country’s oldest film studio Mosfilm has restored the Sovscope 35mm widescreen epic in a 4K upload to their YouTube channel. In a small unnamed fishing village likely somewhere in the west as Grin’s stories always took place on a fictional faraway land, widower former seaman Longren (Ivan Pereverzev) concedes to raising his young daughter Assol while making ends meet selling toy boats hand carved out of wood. One day when wandering off by herself, Assol crosses paths with an elder claiming to be a wizard who promises her one day when she’s grown up that a prince will sail ashore in a ship of scarlet red sails to carry her off to paradise. Local villagers invariably balk at her claims but Assol, now an adult played by Anastasiya Vertinskaya in her screen debut, remains undaunted.

Meanwhile a young wealthy nobleman’s son named Arthur Grey (Vasily Lanovoy) dreams of becoming a captain of a merchant vessel much to his domineering father and equally cruel governess’ chagrin. Growing up to become a successful seaman and leader, he docks port at Assol’s village and catches a glimpse of the sleeping beauty in the forest. Eager to find out who she is, he learns from the locals of her dreams of Scarlet Sails swooping in to whisk her away and proceeds with all of his faculties available to make that fleeting romantic vision a tangible manmade reality.

Made during the Khruschev Thaw though not nearly as psychedelic or flashy save for one or two scenes of multicolored dioramas of Captain Grey’s ship wading through the winter northern lights or witnessing a volcanic eruption, Ptushko’s immediate follow up to his Finnish film project Sampo is curious for how much more restrained it is compared to his previous works. Clearly by the same cinematographers behind Sampo and Ilya Muromets Gennadi Tsekavyj and Viktor Yakushev who lens the Sovscope 35mm sets largely in soft grays and overcast ocean skies, the film was actually shot twice in Crimea and Georgia with an academy ratio camera alongside the Sovscope one ala Oklahoma! which also used two cameras side-by-side to accommodate theaters with more vintage technologies. Ordinarily entrenched in fantasy surrealism, Scarlet Sails represents a brief time when Ptushko pumped the brakes on his phantasmagorical visuals.

Soundwise, this is the third work of Ptushko’s composed by Igor Morozov, also behind Ilya Muromets and Sampo and the results are sweeping epic romantic fare. There’s also on the soundtrack the use of crashing waves for when the new Captain Arthur Grey out on the sea, searching for port to dock. The ensemble cast of characters is generally good with some of Ptushko’s recurring character actors showing up though the real star of this loose “fairy tale” of sorts is the ship itself. Appearing onscreen in full size as a real ship which was actually the training ship Alfa from the Rostov Naval School, outfitted with 2,500 meters of scarlet parachute silk for the film’s grand titular image, it is as astonishing of a site to behold on film as it was for the cast and crew when it was first unveiled.

Released initially in Sovscope widescreen in June 1961 with the academy ratio version airing two months later, the film went on to become a major hit in the USSR, garnering some 22.6 million ticket sales and further cemented Scarlet Sails not just as an important literary and cinematic work but a tradition to be celebrated annually. Fostered in 1968 after the film helped boost popularity in the novel, the Scarlet Sails tradition in conjunction with the White Nights Festival every summer is a major social event now replete with fireworks, concerts, water shows and drawing large crowds including celebrities such as Antonio Banderas and Cirque du Soliel. Even during COVID-19 with the pandemic shuttering events, people participated in the celebration online anyway.

Seen now decades later on the cusp of the 2022 film Scarlet, it represents a unique chapter in Ptushko’s filmography with the director mostly winding back his fantasy elements that so directly characterized his work. Though a bit more down-and-dirty realistic save for certain scenes that lean on the fantastical and supernatural, Scarlet Sails nevertheless is an indelible entry in the director’s illustrious filmography and helped foster an indigenous social tradition that’s still being celebrated by millions to this very day. Not my favorite Ptushko (presently that honor goes to The Tale of Tsar Saltan) but clearly an important entry in the great director’s canon.