Todd Andrew Woodbridge, OAM is an Australian former professional tennis player and current sports broadcaster with the Nine Network.

Woodbridge is best known for his successful Doubles partnerships with Mark Woodforde (nicknamed "The Woodies") and later Jonas Björkman. He is among the most successful doubles players of all time, having won 16 Grand Slam men's doubles titles (nine Wimbledons, three US Opens, three Australian Opens and one French Open), and a further six Grand Slam mixed doubles titles (three US Opens, one French Opens, one Wimbledon, one Australian Open). Additionally, he was a gold medalist with Woodforde at the 1996 Summer Olympics to complete a career Golden Slam. In total he has won 83 ATP doubles titles. Woodbridge reached the World No. 1 doubles ranking in July 1992.In 2002, he was inducted into the Australian Institute of Sport 'Best of the Best'.Woodbridge was at the Seven Network between 2006 and 2018, working for Seven Sport as a tennis commentator, where he was also a host of the network's Australian Open coverage. In April 2018, he hosted the morning sessions of the 2018 Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast for the network.

In 2014, alongside Woodforde, the International Tennis Federation (ITF) presented him with its highest accolade, the Philippe Chatrier award, for his contributions to tennis.In 2018, Woodbridge was signed by the Nine Network as a commentator for Wide World of Sports tennis, including the Australian Open after winning the broadcast rights for 6 years. Wimbledon 2018 was the final event he covered for the Nine Network.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Todd Woodbridge has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Intelligent, Brave, Creative, Loyal, Intense, and Caring.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Todd Woodbridge is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who defines themself by their friends and what groups they belong to.

Warm and Caring

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Todd Woodbridge well know them as someone who can be warm, caring, and compassionate, like a lamp or torch.

Inventive and Clever

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Todd Woodbridge as someone who is flexible, intelligent, and quick-witted.

A person who likes to be creative, and to be recognized for their artistic talents. Who possesses intelligence, mental discipline, and ambition, and who does well in relationships and partnerships.

Assertive and Protective

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Todd Woodbridge is someone who is a somewhat private person who has a strong personality and ability to read other people.

They are also someone who is confident and creative, and who has a love for starting new projects, inventing new things, and giving back to the community.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Todd Woodbridge tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Todd Woodbridge's challenges

While Todd Woodbridge has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Todd Woodbridge can be Self-centered, Short-tempered, Impulsive, Emotional, Standoffish, Hypocritical, and Unfocused.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Todd Woodbridge's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Todd Woodbridge must also exercise caution as they can have a hard time reconciling wants and needs, and can be short-tempered and aggressive.

Unfocused and Indecisive

Todd Woodbridge is someone who can be scattered, restless, and insensitive, be distracted by fluctuating professional interests, be a workaholic, and who can be arrogant and have difficulty accepting advice.

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Todd Woodbridge also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.