Todd Woodbridge has called ''disappointing'' the defection of former Australian Open junior champion Brydan Klein to Britain, his mother's birthplace, while insisting that the combustible 23-year-old must take responsibility for the poor behaviour that led to Tennis Australia cutting off the last of its funding assistance in 2010.

The world No.274 would have been Australia's 12th-ranked man on this week's ATP list, but is now the British No.4, and a potential recipient of a coveted Wimbledon wildcard. Klein has said he is yet to hear if he will receive coaching support and access to the training facilities at the British tennis base in south-west London.

Woodbridge, TA's head of professional tennis, said he did not suspect the Lawn Tennis Association of poaching the temperamental West Australian, despite the fact that talented New Zealand junior Cameron Norrie switched nationalities in the same week. But he predicted Klein would confront the same issues in England that dogged him in his homeland unless his behaviour improved.

''He's had a very chequered history of on-court behaviours,'' Woodbridge said. ''The LTA have to decide what their expectations are, and I'd imagine that they would be the same as ours, so whether he can change his ways, we'll have to wait and see.

''Brydan has had a lot of support from Tennis Australia, but not in the last few years because of his behaviour. We set strong boundaries, and his suspension from the ATP and ongoing disciplinary issues meant that we withdrew our support for him, so Brydan has decided to look for support elsewhere.

''As an Australian, I am disappointed because he's played Davis Cup for Australia, he's been through our system and for him to depart the country like this is disappointing. But there's no athletes that we don't support if they live up to our expectations of on-court behaviour and work ethic in terms of training.''

Klein's long list of misdemeanours is headed by a $14,000 fine and six-month ATP suspension, later cut by a third after his completion of a racial sensitivity course, for calling his South African opponent, Raven Klaasen, a ''kaffir'' at Eastbourne in 2009.

He has struggled with anger issues and, after multiple warnings, repeated transgressions finally led to the severing of his coaching support in 2010.