Bright lights

Tennis player Todd Woodbridge, pictured, is dancing his way into a television career.

On the strength of his appearance on Seven's celebrity hoofer show, he scored a spot as a guest reporter on The Great Outdoors in an episode airing on Saturday at 6.30pm.

While in London for Wimbledon, Woodbridge met up with his mate Winston Churchill jnr to reminisce about his famous grandfather, visiting Churchill's birthplace, Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, and strolling through the grounds of Chartwell House in Kent.

Woodbridge told Networking that a career on the box was a long-held goal, and that he has his sights on "doing more hosting as well as presenting".

Surf's up

The ABC and production company Southern Star are planning a third series of tween surf hit Blue Water High.

It is unclear which, if any, of the previous cast will return for a third time and when production will recommence on the NSW coast.

Strauchanie's story

Self-made sporting superstar Strauchanie (aka comedian Peter Helliar) from Ten's Before the Game has launched his autobiography, Bryan Strauchan: My Story.

Promising shock revelations and motivational tips for "getting off the couch", the story of the boy from Horsham who made it big with Collingwood (but has yet to play a senior game) goes on sale today.

International viewing

The ABC's documentary hit, Who Killed Dr Bogle and Mrs Chandler, about a mysterious double death in the 1960s, will have its first international screening at DOCNZ, Australasia's only international competitive documentary film festival, held in New Zealand from September 27 to November 21.

Viva Hugh

The Nine Network has picked up Hugh Jackman's Viva Laughlin!, the US version of UK comedy Viva Blackpool, which the Australian actor has co-produced with American producer/director John Palermo (The Tourist, X-Men).

US production company CBS Paramount has shown great faith in the project, sealing a two-year, seven-figure deal with Jackman and Palermo's fledgling company Seed Prods. Nine is yet to schedule Viva Laughlin!

All aboard

The Royal Australian Navy has experienced a 50 per cent increase in employment inquiries since the start of August, one month after it launched its recruitment campaign in conjunction with Nine's Sea Patrol.

While a navy spokesman said it was "impossible to define" the program's influence in lifting the inquiry rate, "Sea Patrol and its accompanying media coverage have certainly lifted awareness of the Royal Australian Navy in defence of Australia".

The navy worked closely with the producers of Sea Patrol, providing research assistance and access to vessels and equipment.

Taking the mike

Music video host wannabes (except perhaps Axle Whitehead) are invited to apply for the job of MTV's next big VJ (that's "video jockey" as opposed to "disc jockey", although perhaps a more up-to-the-minute moniker should be DVDJ?).

MTV Networks Australia is conducting a national search for its new star, starting with the places that a face of tomorrow is most likely to lurk - shopping centres.

It's Melbourne's turn on Sunday from 10am at Knox City shopping centre. For more information see http://www.mtv.com.au

Power search

The hunt is on for a game show host of the calibre of Drew Carey, who hosts Power of 10 in the US.

The Nine Network has bought the rights to the show, touted as a "high-stakes, high-tech, adrenaline-filled" romp, which involves a contestant trying to guess the results of polls on topics ranging from politics to pop culture.

One television host with a comic bent who might be up for the job is Mick Molloy, whose current affairs comedy The Nation will not see a second series on Nine.

Comedy Inc will fill the 10.30pm Wednesday spot left vacant by The Nation from Wednesday. Power of 10 will premiere on Nine in 2008.