Todd Andrew Woodbridge, OAM is an Australian broadcaster and former professional tennis player. During his playing career, he formed multiple Grand-Slam winning doubles partnerships with Mark Woodforde and later Jonas Björkman.

Todd Woodbridge was born on April 2, 1971, in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. His birth geographical coordinates are 33° 52’ 4” South latitude and 151° 12’ 26” East longitude. Todd Woodbridge is currently 53 years old.

Astrologically, Todd Woodbridge falls under the Sun sign of Aries, with Gemini as his Ascendant, Cancer as his Moon sign, and Virgo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Aries Moon Cancer Mercury Taurus Venus Pisces Mars Capricorn Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Taurus Uranus Libra Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Virgo Ceres Taurus Chiron Aries Eros Aries Hygiea Leo Juno Gemini Pallas Aries Vesta Capricorn Ascendant Gemini Black Moon Lilith Virgo Midheaven Aries North Node Aquarius South Node Leo Part of Fortune Virgo Vertex Aquarius

Sunin Aries11° 41’ 46”

The Sun in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you intense and spontaneous. As the first sign of the zodiac, Sun in Aries makes you […] Read more »

Moonin Cancer5° 41’ 44”

The Moon in Cancer in the Natal Chart makes you sentimental and caring. Your soft nature emerges when interacting with children, family, and loved ones. […] Read more »

Mercuryin Taurus0° 26’ 53”

Taurus Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you observant and intelligent. You learn best when you can apply facts to things you value. Yet you […] Read more »

Venusin Pisces4° 10’ 23”

Pisces Venus in the Natal Chart indicates you are compassionate and have a spiritual connection to your loved ones. You are empathetic and affectionate, using […] Read more »

Marsin Capricorn12° 19’ 32”

Capricorn Mars in the Natal Chart makes you eager to thrive. You are intense and can be persistent. You are patient and willing to face […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius6° 18’ 39”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Taurus20° 20’ 51”

Taurus Saturn in the Natal Chart is a placement shared by people born within three years of each other. They are part of a cohort […] Read more »

Uranusin Libra11° 31’ 18”

Libra Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates a generation that aspires to live up to their higher ideals. You are born at a time when […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius2° 52’ 9”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Virgo28° 0’ 9”

Pluto in Virgo in the Natal Chart indicates a generation dedicated to exposing secrets related to misuse of power in agriculture, healthcare, and service industries. […] Read more »

Ceresin Taurus20° 28’ 48”

Ceres in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are down to earth and practical. You find reasonable ways to express love and show others […] Read more »

Chironin Aries9° 54’ 12”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Aries26° 32’ 13”

Eros in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and strong. You are excitable and have a spicey and adventurous sex life. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Leo4° 11’ 14”

You are a pioneer who explores new health products and routines. You can be expressive and eager to lead others to improve their health. When […] Read more »

Junoin Gemini18° 52’ 9”

Juno in Gemini in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a desire to teach and connect intellectually with others. You are committed to […] Read more »

Pallasin Aries6° 28’ 45”

Pallas in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate, and you have a dramatic and zealous approach to sharing your message. You can be […] Read more »

Vestain Capricorn21° 19’ 21”

Capricorn Vesta in the Natal Chart makes you predictable and consistent. You are old-fashioned and look to the past for comfort and fulfillment. Work brings […] Read more »

Ascendantin Gemini24° 37’ 35”

Gemini Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your ideas. You are talkative and open up quickly about your ideas. You can be […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon First House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eighth House Mars Seventh House Jupiter Sixth House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Third House Neptune Fifth House Pluto Third House Ceres Eleventh House Chiron Ninth House Eros Tenth House Hygiea Second House Juno Twelfth House Pallas Ninth House Vesta Seventh House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Eighth House South Node Second House Part of Fortune Third House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 20 major aspects, alongside 14 minor aspects, as well as 7 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Opposite Uranus Sun Square Mars Moon Quincunx Jupiter Venus Square Neptune Mars Square Uranus Moon Trine Venus Mercury Quincunx Neptune Mercury Quincunx Pluto Venus Square Jupiter Moon Quincunx Neptune Jupiter Conjunct Neptune Mercury Sextile Venus Sun Trine Jupiter Moon Sextile Mercury Jupiter Sextile Uranus Neptune Sextile Pluto Sun Square Moon Moon Square Uranus Moon Opposite Mars Saturn Trine Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Todd Woodbridge’s life journey.

Sun Opposite Uranusorb: 0°

The Sun opposite Uranus makes you unpredictable and creative. You are gifted and innovative, yet you don’t always follow through on your higher ambitions. You […] Read more »

Sun Square Marsorb: 1°

The Sun square Mars can make you restless. You have an anxious personality and may be energetic and hyper. You find motivation to overcome insecurities, […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Jupiterorb: 1°

The Moon quincunx Jupiter in a Natal Chart creates an intense clash between a person’s inner sense of safety and emotional expression and their sense […] Read more »

Moon Trine Venusorb: 2°

When the Moon trines Venus in a Natal Chart, this can create an open, honest, and nurturing personality. Someone with this aspect in their chart […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Neptuneorb: 2°

Mercury quincunx Neptune in a chart creates a confusing dynamic between logic and creativity. A person with this aspect in their chart will possess both […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Plutoorb: 2°

Mercury quincunx Pluto in a chart can create an aggressive and harsh energy in a person. Someone with this aspect in their chart might be […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Neptuneorb: 3°

When the Moon is quincunx Neptune in a Natal Chart, this can create a high level of intuition and even psychic energy, which leads to […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Neptuneorb: 3°

Jupiter conjunct Neptune in a chart can bring a sense of devotion and generosity. Someone with this conjunction in their chart will likely be energetic, […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 4°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Sun Trine Jupiterorb: 5°

The Sun trine Jupiter in a Natal Chart makes you creative, gifted, and inspiring. You can be adventurous and love exploring new things. You push […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Mercuryorb: 5°

You are emotionally open and communicative if you’ve got the Moon sextile Mercury in your Natal Chart. You likely don’t find sharing your feelings challenging, […] Read more »

Sun Square Moonorb: 6°

The Sun square Moon in a Natal Chart is more potent than this aspect in a Transiting Chart. You inhibit your growth and block yourself […] Read more »

Moon Square Uranusorb: 6°

The Moon square Uranus in a Natal Chart creates a tie between emotions and chaos. Someone with this square in their chart likely seeks out […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Marsorb: 7°

The Moon opposite Mars in a Natal Chart can indicate that a person is passionate, impulsive, and volatile. Their emotions can get out of control […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Conjunct Midheaven Venus Quincunx Hygiea Mars Square Midheaven Jupiter Trine Pallas Saturn Conjunct Ceres Uranus Opposite Midheaven Moon Square Pallas Saturn Trine Vesta Saturn Square North Node Saturn Square South Node Neptune Trine Hygiea Sun Conjunct Chiron Saturn Trine Part of Fortune Uranus Opposite Chiron

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Todd Woodbridge’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Hygieaorb: 0°

Venus quincunx Hygiea in a chart typically indicates that a person will experience issues related to the darker side of Venus: over-indulgence, dissatisfaction, weakness, and […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Ceresorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct Ceres in a chart can create a strong need to nurture and care for others, but expressing that care in a way others […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Juno Square Part of Fortune Vesta Quincunx South Node Ceres Trine Vesta Ceres Square North Node Ceres Square South Node Ascendant Square Black Moon Lilith Ceres Trine Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Todd Woodbridge’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.