Stadt Leipzig

Last modified: 2013-11-20 by german editorial team

Keywords: saxony | stadt leipzig | leipzig | coat of arms: parted per pale (lion: rampant) | coat of arms: parted per pale (paly) |

Links: FOTW homepage | search | disclaimer and copyright | write us | mirrors

3:5

by Stefan Schwoon

Description Hanging Flag (Banner)

See also:

County and Municipal Flags (Saxony / Sachsen, Germany) Saxony (Sachsen, Germany) Germany

Description

Blue-yellow with the arms. The arms are the same as those of Dresden, only the bars are blue instead of black. Sources: flag from Staack 1997, arms from Bensing et al. 1984.

Stefan Schwoon, 15 February 2001

Herzfeld 1998 [hzf98] —available online— reports shortly on Flaggen und Wappen der Stadt Leipzig (Flag and arms of the city of Leipzig). He cites the Hauptsatzung (Main Statutes) of Leipzig of 22nd January 1998:

§ 2 (2) Die Stadtfarben sind blau/gelb, auf der Fahne untereinander angeordnet.

(The city's colors are blue/yellow, placed one beneath the other on the flag).

Marcus Schmöger, 9 March 2001

Hanging Flag

Banner

2:1

by Marcus Schmöger

A vertical flag, blue over gold, with the coat-of-arms in the center.

Marcus Schmöger, 15 August 1997

The design of the flag of Leipzig shown is essentially correct, but the vertical format is very unusual in practise. Although in Germany almost any (normally horizontal) flag can theoretically be rotated into a vertical format, the flags flown in Leipzig itself are, as a rule, horizontal, including the one flown in front of city hall. I would therefore recommend turning the flag around on the site.

David Dichelle, 9 March 2001

I cannot say about the frequency of horizontal or vertical flags in Leipzig. The vertical flag was sent by me long time ago, as I took photographs of this flag in June 1997 during the Evangelische Kirchentag (Evangelic Church Convention). In the center of Leipzig there was at least one place where several flagstaffs (about seven) displayed this vertical flag. It is possible that since then the use changed a bit.

Marcus Schmöger, 9 March 2001