The Artificial Kid

1980

/ Fantasy

In a future world of rampant inequality, a martial-arts video star finds himself in a real fight for survival, in this novel by the author of Schismatrix. Founded centuries ago by the enigmatic genius Moses Moses, the planet Reverie can either be hea...

Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology

1986

/ Fantasy

They exploded on the scene in a white-hot flash of pure talent. With their hard-edged, street-wise prose they created frighteningly probable futures of high-tech societies and low-life hustlers. Fans and critics called their work cyberpunk. And their...

Islands in the Net

1988

/ Fantasy

Laura Webster's on the fast track to success. A bright young star in c multinational conglomerate, she's living well in a post-millennial age of peace, prosperity, and profit. In an age of advanced technology, information is the world's most preci...

Involution Ocean

Apr-1988

/ Steampunk

A far-future Moby-Dick by the author of Schismatrix : A desperate addict on a bleak, arid planet boards a whaling vessel to hunt the drug he craves. The powerful narcotic syncophine, commonly known as Flare, comes from only one source: the oil ...

Crystal Express

Dec-1990

/ Steampunk

Here are twelve high-voltage, hyperkinetic journeys into the mind of Bruce Sterling, the newsmaster creator of future worlds. Worlds in which genetically and cybernetically altered races battle for supremacy... in which love is a high-tech weapon, et...

Globalhead

Oct-1994

/ Science Fiction

Enter a world where scientists are superstars and gene-hackers unleash "Our Neural Chernobyl," creating drooling geniuses, TV-drugged cats, and gangs of raccoon toughs. A rock star becomes the voice of the people in a crumbling America...and the u...

Heavy Weather

Oct-1994

/ Fantasy

They call themselves the Storm Troupe and they hack heavy weather, They chase the monster storms that twist erratically across the Southwestern badlands laid to waste by the green- house effect. They survive on scrap, grunge, free software, danger, a...

Holy Fire

Oct-1996

/ Science Fiction

Ninety-four-year-old Mia Ziemann enjoys all the benefits of the late 21st century. It is a world in which power is in the hands of wealthy senior citizens, who have access to the latest in life-extension technology. Mia seems to have it all. Until sh...

Schismatrix Plus

Dec-1996

/ General Fiction

Schismatrix Plus, is Bruce Sterling's new trade paperback. For the first time in one volume: every word Bruce Sterling has ever written on the Shapers-Mechanists Universe.

In the last decade, Sterling has emerged a pioneer of crucial, cutting-...

Distraction

Dec-1998

/ Science Fiction

It's November 2044, an election year, and the state of the Union is a farce. The government is broke, the cities are privately owned, and the military is shaking down citizens in the streets. Washington has become a circus and no one knows that bette...

A Good Old-Fashioned Future

Jun-1999

/ Steampunk

FROM THE SUBVERSIVE TO THE ANTIC, THE UPROARIOUS TO THE DISTURBING, THE STORIES OF BRUCE STERLING ARE RESTLESS, ENERGY-FILLED JOURNEYS THROUGH A WORLD RUNNING ON EMPTY -- THE VISIONARY WORK OF ONE OF THE MOST IMAGINATIVE AND INSIGHTFUL WRITERS AT WOR...

The Zenith Angle

Apr-2004

/ Science Fiction

Pioneering computer wizard Derek "Van" Vandeveer has been living extra-large as a VP for a booming Internet company. But the September 11 attacks on America change everything. Recruited as the key member of an elite federal computer-security team, Va...

Visionary in Residence

Mar-2006

/ Science Fiction

I'm a science fiction writer. This is a golden opportunity to get up to most any mischief imaginable. With this fourth collection of my stories, I'm going to prove this to you. With these words, Bruce Sterling -- author of New York times Notable Book...

Ascendancies

Oct-2007

/ Fantasy

"I'm an entertainer in the military-entertainment complex." -- Bruce Sterling Polemicist, provocateur, futurist, 'visionary in residence', Bruce Sterling has been out there, personally sharpening the cutting edge of science fiction for more than thir...

The Caryatids

Feb-2009

/ Science Fiction

Alongside William Gibson and Neal Stephenson, Bruce Sterling stands at the forefront of a select group of writers whose pitch-perfect grasp of the cultural and scientific zeitgeist endows their works of speculative near-future fiction with uncanny ve...

Gothic High-tech

Dec-2011

/ Science Fiction / Fantasy

THE FUTURE IS A KIND OF HISTORY THAT HASN'T HAPPENED YET He's the legendary Cyberpunk Guru. He roams our postmodern planet, from the polychrome tinsel of Los Angeles to the chicken-fried cyberculture of Austin... From the heretical Communist slums...

Hacker Crackdown

Nov-2015

/ General Fiction

Description Notice: This Book is published by Historical Books Limited (www.publicdomain.org.uk) as a Public Domain Book, if you have any inquiries, requests or need any help you can just send an email to publications@publicdomain.org.uk This book is...

Totem Poles

Aug-2016

/ Science Fiction

The saucer aliens are here. They're healing the planet. They've got to be stopped.At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied....

Pirate Utopia

Nov-2016

/ Science Fiction

Original introduction by Warren Ellis, author of Transmetropolitan and Gun Machine Who are these bold rebels pillaging their European neighbors in the name of revolution? The Futurists! Utopian pirate-warriors of the tiny Regency of Carnaro, unlikely...

Robot Artists & Black Swans

May-2021

/ Fantasy

The Godfather of Cyberpunk has emerged in this new collection of Italian-themed fantasy and science-fiction stories. Bruce Sterling now introduces us to his alter ego: Bruno Argento, the preeminent author of fantascienza. Sterling, writing as Arg...