Education Essay Topics

When students get education essay topics to write an essay about, they are normally told about school uniforms, discipline in the classroom, school lunches, prayers before lessons, and others. So, appears a need to come up with education essay topics that will attract the audience's attention and make your readers engaged in what you write about.

Moreover, you are more likely to impress your teacher with more unique and interesting education topics for essays. To help you come up with fresh ideas for essay writing, our company’s professionals have composed a list of topics split into five categories. They may well suit a successful education essay.

But if you are hesitating, will your topic perfectly match your assignment, and will this topic be relevant and actual? You should ask for help from our affordable essay writing service. Our writers know all about how and about what your essay should be to get an A-Grade. Check the price for your assignment on the call below and order your perfect, custom essay.

MiniCalc with vip services

Argumentative Essay Topics about Education

When starting to search for interesting topics, it is essential to find out what kind of essay you need to provide, i.e. If you are required to write an argumentative paper, you should find argumentative essay topics on education. Look at school topics to write about our writers offers to you.

Argumentative Essay Topics Related to the Organization of the Educational Process

Can online education be equaled to conventional classroom education?

Can homeschooling be as effective as traditional classroom education?

Can video games be beneficial in the education process?

Should school uniforms be made obligatory?

Are tests the best way to evaluate the knowledge of students?

What classrooms are better: mixed or single-sex?

Should parents take an active part in their children’s educational process?

Are our small classes more effective than large ones?

Should gadgets be allowed to use during the studying process?

Does the usage of tablets and computers have positive effects on the studying process?

Argumentative Essay Topics on the Educational Content

Should students study foreign languages at school?

Should all students have classes on sex education?

Should physical education be an obligatory subject for all?

Should students be taught the history of the world or only the most important events?

Should students be first taught typing instead of writing?

Should students be taught a coding language from elementary school?

Should colleges and universities introduce parenting classes?

Argumentative Essay Topics on State Policy in the Educational Sector

Should the state be financially liable for funding compulsory education?

Should the state fund higher education?

Should student-athletes be given scholarships?

Should homeschooling be officially acclaimed as a type of education that all students have the right to?

Should the school menus be regulated on the state level?

Should teachers undergo a regular and thorough evaluation of their professional skills?

Who is to be held accountable and responsible for students’ poor academic performance?

Should the state hold a more active position when rewarding teachers with bonuses for excellent academic accomplishments their students demonstrate?

Argumentative Policy Essay Topics

Should religious discussions or prayers be separated from the daily school routine?

Should students’ right to freedom of speech be restricted on campus?

Should guns be allowed for students’ usage?

Should schools have armed security?

Should bullying at school be somehow regulated?

How can parents and teachers monitor cyberbullying?

Should class attendance influence the final grades?

Should sports contests be allowed in schools?

Should beauty contests be encouraged at schools and colleges?

Should school administration regulate what products students bring for lunch?

Elementary School Essay Topics

If you would like to focus on the features of education on different academic levels, check out the list of essay topics on education provided below.

Essays on Elementary Education

Should elements of play be officially introduced into the curriculum of elementary school students?

Whether children in elementary schools should be given home assignments? If yes, how much homework should be assigned?

The use of technology in elementary-level education. How much technology should be implemented into the lessons? Should children get some exercises and tests online?

Advantages and disadvantages of using technological gadgets in elementary school daily.

Should children be taught handwriting, or should teachers pay more attention now to typing skills?

Essays on Secondary Education

The necessity of a school uniform or a specific dress code.

The issue of prolonging the start time in high school. What is the ideal time to start a new day at school?

Should there be unified standardized tests for evaluating the knowledge of high school students?

Are placement tests a necessary thing before a student wants to enroll in a specific course?

Should students be obligated to learn some foreign language when at school?

Essays on K-12 Education

Provide a comparison and contrast paper on the advantages and disadvantages of online vs. conventional education.

Highlight similarities and differences between charter schools and public schools.

Contemplate the necessity of ensuring armed security in all schools and other educational establishments.

Pros and cons of long breaks at schools. What do you think about the idea of studying all year round without any long interruptions?

Should student-athletes be given some additional payment or scholarships?

Essay Topics for Teachers

The best ways of managing the classroom a teacher can learn. How to manage the studying process when the classroom is full of students? Write an essay about effective strategies and tips a teacher can use to ensure a productive atmosphere in class.

How to manage the studying process and ensure effective education in a classroom with special needs students?

What psychological and social skills should a teacher have to ensure a friendly and effective atmosphere in the classroom?

Essay Topics on Education

If you do not want to delve into the specifics but would merely like to focus on some broad topics, look through the following essay topics on education:

Discuss the impact of rewards on motivation in the educational process. What about discipline when it comes to studying?

What role does education play in the overall development of society?

How can ICT be effectively used for education?

What role does education play in the development of an individual?

Discuss the benefits of high-quality education in the life of every individual and society as a whole?

What impact does politics have on education?

How can the rights for quality education be protected for children from a poor background or belonging to minority groups?

How does culture influence the level and quality of education?

How does education impact the future probability of employment and unemployment rates?

Discuss the issue of gender equality within the realm of education.

Should girls and boys be educated in their specific ways? Can it play a negative role in the way towards attaining gender equality?

Do wealth and money have a direct impact on the quality of education one gets?

How can one’s belonging to a specific social class impact the quality of education one gets?

Provide a discussion on the racial inequality within the realm of the educational sector in the USA?

Do you agree that people will never be able to achieve equality when receiving proper education?

Compare and contrast the educational campaigns and policies put forward by the most famous private schools in the USA.

What trends can you notice now in modern education?

Is the gap between rich and poor students becoming wider and wider?

Can education be used as a powerful instrument for initiating social and economic change?

What bad policies do you know that have negatively impacted education?

Physical Education Essay Topics

Even though many students undermine the role of physical education, it is worth considering, so check out the PE essay topics for your essay writing on education provided below.

Physical education is a significant constituent of education since movement and physical activity are a must for the healthy development of a person. Sports can help us get the necessary hormones that are vital for healthy well-being. Moreover, physical activities and sports are usually helpful for transforming the knowledge and experience we have gained over the day or a specific period. Another benefit is that sports are a kind of interaction, so it becomes possible to learn something new about others and even delve deeper into our inner world. Some people use sports as a kind of meditation, so you can claim that physical activity enables us to function effectively.

It is an undeniable fact that physical training is an essential constituent of proper education. Students should not only focus on broadening their outlook and developing their personality in terms of acquiring new knowledge. They should also focus on their physical health and strive for body perfection.

PE Essay Topics

What part of your PE class is your favorite?

Create your own creative game that will involve hopping, jumping, skipping, and running.

Name your favorite team sports.

What are your favorite sports that make you energetic?

How do you feel after physical exercises?

What emotions do you feel in the process of exercising?

Can sports be promoted as an essential activity in school? How often do you think students should have physical training classes at school?

What about health education classes? Are they as important as physical training classes? Is proper health education essential for promoting better health and a healthy lifestyle?

Describe your favorite kind of sports. What is so enjoyable about it that you like it so much?

What kind of sports is the most suitable for PE classes in high school?

What new type of sports should be introduced into the school curriculum to provide some kind of effect to the school activities?

How important are physical education classes on the level of elementary education?

Which sports can be considered the most dangerous for students in school? Is there a kind of sport that you should ban?

What types of interaction in sports should be maintained to ensure proper children’s development?

Should physical training education always be a part of the school curriculum?

What impact may some sports have on the overall academic performance?

What are the disadvantages of youth team sports?

Should all school athletes undergo drug testing before competitions?

What impact do physical exercises have on development in early childhood?

How can the curriculum for physical education be developed and adjusted to each student’s needs?

Education Research Paper Topics

If you are assigned a research paper, please consider these education research topics that will enable you to carry out extensive research:

Critical and analytical thinking development is the core purpose of the educational process.

How has the educational system developed over history to end up where it is now?

The pros and cons of technological advancements in the education process.

Virtual reality classrooms. Are they as effective for studying as conventional classrooms are?

Provide an analytical overview of the major approaches to the educational process.

Advantages and disadvantages of introducing sex education into the school curriculum.

How do educational approaches differ among genders?

Specifics of theoretical versus practical education.

The role of internship in the studying process.

What should preschool education be aimed at basic social skills or in-depth knowledge in certain subjects?

What kind of education can be considered basic? How to differentiate it from the other kinds of education?

Emotional intelligence is the ultimate goal of many educational approaches and theories of modernity.

What is the proper way of calculating grades? Do they objectively demonstrate the level of students' knowledge?

Pros and cons of inclusive classes. How to find the best approach for all students for the teacher?

What are the features of educational discrimination?

What are the negative impacts of bullying at school? What factors differentiate a healthy atmosphere in class from an unhealthy one?

The main differences between modern education and traditional one.

How do mentally impaired students cope with studying? What are the main challenges?

Are tests and exams still needed for evaluating students’ knowledge?

Ways of motivating students and making them interested in a subject.

List of Research Topics in Education

In the list of research topics in education presented below, you will find some fresh ideas about what to write about, especially concerning the variety of college subjects.

Who is to be held accountable for the level of knowledge a student acquires?

Pros and cons of homeschooling.

Discuss charter schools.

Education of Hispanics in America.

Education of African Americans.

What may affirmative action be taken when it comes to higher education?

The concept of Afrocentric studying.

Are dropouts from school serious for students’ reputation?

Causes and effects of violence at school.

Alternative means of schooling.

Benefits of multicultural education.

What relationship should be maintained between teachers and students’ parents?

Information overload and emotional burnout among students. How are these concepts related?

Should religion and education go hand in hand?

Professional development of teachers.

Special Education Essay Topics

If you are interested in some unusual aspects of education, explore the following special education research topics:

What assessment should be devised for exceptional students?

What methods of intervention are applicable for regulating deviant behavior in schools?

Determine the strategies for teaching students with autism spectrum.

Principles of inclusive education. What are its strengths and weaknesses?

Teaching students with dyslexia: The basics.

How to educate deaf children?

What is the most suitable way of educating children with physical impairments?

The importance of analyzing students’ behavior for teachers.

Is there any universal learning design?

What are specific strategies for teaching students with ADHD?

Research Topics on Education

Among the other research topics on education, you can find the following:

Should students be placed into specific classrooms based on their academic skills and knowledge or age?

The importance of putting grades. Pros and cons of students’ evaluation.

Inflation of grades. Why do so few students get A’s?

Corporal punishment at schools. Analyze its ethical aspect.

How should you meet teachers’ demands to improve the educational system?

Traditional education vs. multilingual education.

Should violence be tolerated at schools?

Who is to be held responsible for bullying and violence at schools: parents or teachers?

Advantages and disadvantages of exams.

Pros and cons of separation between school and church.

Research Paper Topics about Education

If you have been assigned a research paper, browse the following research paper topics about education grouped into a few interesting categories.

Adult Education Topics

Importance of adult education and lifelong learning.

What education programs are recommended for adults?

What is the reason why the rates of education among adults are increasing?

Andragogy.

The popularity of learning foreign languages in adulthood.

Should English be taught as a second language to all adults who are obtaining their second degree?

GED programs.

The problem of career transition among adults.

The principles and main ideas of the Adult Learning Theory.

Compare and contrast industrial-based and work-based educational processes.

Alternative Types of Education

Environmental studies.

Vocational education.

Agricultural education.

Magnet schools.

Naturalist education.

Religious education.

Tribal education.

Benefits of private schools.

Alternative ways of obtaining education apart from studying at college.

Military education.

Planning and Organization of Curriculum

What makes educational courses effective?

Pros and cons of organizing field trips at school.

The KIPP program.

The importance of enrolling in internship programs for students.

Pros and cons of same-sex classrooms.

Elective courses at schools.

What is the purpose of an integrated curriculum?

Studying design at school.

The importance of organizing parent-teacher conferences.

School orientation.

Educational Theory

Behaviorism.

Progressive education.

Theory of mind.

Cognitive theory in the educational process.

The principles of the attribution theory.

Sociology of education.

Constructivism.

Multiple types of intelligence. Are they all equally important?

Experiential learning.

Anthropology within the realm of education.

More Examples of Education Essay Topics

More Educational Topics to Write About