Location

Glendale, Arizona

Arizona Christian University offers students a rich, Christ-focused community centered in the beautiful and vibrant city of Glendale, Arizona. With an average daily high of 80 degrees during the academic year, you’ll always find students outside on campus playing ultimate frisbee, participating in club or varsity athletics, sipping coffee and completing school work.

Endless Opportunities

Arizona Christian University (Glendale, Arizona) is in the heart of the 4.5 million Phoenix metropolitan area. From a world-class restaurant and shopping scene to a wide-variety of trendy local coffee shops, there’s something for everyone. The Phoenix metro area is a growing economic hub offering career opportunities in all industry sectors for students and graduates. Arizona hosts five major league sports teams, numerous national championship athletic events and is the home for spring training’s Cactus League. The Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League play their games in Glendale, a short drive from the new ACU campus.

Close to Everything

We are located just 30 minutes north of Phoenix’s thriving arts culture and just a short drive from Sky Harbor International Airport.

Glendale Campus

With a rich campus history dating back to training pilots for action in World War II, with tree-lined walkways and ample student living and community space, Arizona Christian University offers an ideal setting for equipping students to transform culture with truth through a sound biblical foundation and an excellent education.

Spanning nearly 70 acres in the heart of Glendale, Arizona Christian University offers nearly 500,000 square feet of campus buildings, which includes dozens of large classrooms and auditoriums, an expansive library, a campus store, coffeeshop, a large student union and large dining hall.

With space for more than 500 students to live on campus and multiple housing options, students find a home and community that fits them perfectly. All students who live on campus receive access to an outdoor swimming pool and a membership to the YMCA adjacent to campus.