( Listen? / I ) Amstelveen is a municipality in the Netherlands, North Holland province. Their population was 84 295 (as of 1 January 2013). The community was called until 1964 Nieuwer - Amstel. Amstelveen has a small part of Ouderkerk aan de Amstel.

History

Until 1964 the church Nieuwer - Amstel said. The Amstel country was divided (east of the Amstel ) and Nieuwer Amstel, west of the Amstel River, in the Middle Ages in Ouder - Amstel. In the Torfabbaugebiet west of the Amstel Amstelveen arose. In the 17th and 18th century, many wealthy Amsterdam citizens settled, looking for peace, there to. Amstelveen was at this time also a Ambachtsherrlichkeit, which was awarded by the city of Amsterdam to various rulers and patrician. Among others were Cornelis de Graeff and Johann van Waveren Hudde Ambachtsherren of Amstelveen. The boundary between Nieuwer - Amstel and Amsterdam was still south of the Buitensingelgracht, approximately at today's Van Baerlestraat and Ceintuurbaan. Along the Amstel dike near the Amsterdamse Tolstraat still stands the former town hall Nieuwer - Amstel, built in 1890. According to the annexation of the northern municipality part to Amsterdam, here the Amsterdam Municipal Archives was established.

In 1896 and 1921, Amsterdam verleibte a densely populated northern part of the municipality, Nieuwer - Amstel was reduced to the old village core. The municipal border was now on the Kalfjeslaan. For wealthy Amsterdam it had lost nothing of its appeal. This is visible in the 1930 scale in northwestern make residential areas. Because of this residential area today enjoys Amstelveen nor the reputation of being a bedroom community for the wealthy.

After the Second World War Amstelveen was collecting community and officially part of the residential community Schiphol. New residential areas were created very quickly, Amstelveen was in the 1960s, the fastest growing city in the Netherlands. Despite the rapid growth, we put a high value on quality of life and extensive green spaces. 1964 was the now grown to a suburban community the name of the former village of Amstelveen.

Since the late 1990s, growth has slowed, and there are also no major development area planned more. In the southwest residential area located in the southwest Westwijk are still 800, and even 700 apartments to be built in the southeast. To satisfy the needs of the rapidly growing population, a new center was built, the Stadshart Amstelveen. Here also, the Central Library, other cultural institutions, administration buildings and catering establishments have been located next to over 260 stores.

2003 Amstelveen is voted most popular residential town of the Netherlands. Reasons for this are the easy accessibility, safety, the rich cultural offerings and proximity to Amsterdam. Amstelveen is originally a small farming village, but grew strongly in the 20th century due to its convenient location near Amsterdam.

Location and economic

Amstelveen is a suburb of Amsterdam, bordering the Dutch capital. To the west of Amstelveen is Schiphol Airport. In the village is one of Amsterdam's hospitals, as well as the administration building of the airline KLM. Total 2006 6.062 establishments in Amstelveen were reported, of which seven percent industrial and 76 percent of service providers. Agriculture has a share of only one percent. 2000 inhabitants were unemployed.

Traffic

Amstelveen is traversed in an east-west direction from the A9 motorway. About the runs 4 and 5, you reach the city. In the north, the A10 runs. The main north -south is the Beneluxbaan, an urban motorway in the median strip metro line 51 and tram line 5 run. The Südtangenten bus route connects with Amstelveen Amsterdam Zuidoost, Schiphol, Haarlem and Hoofddorp. There are also thirteen other bus routes, almost all meet at the bus station in Amstelveen Stadhart.

Since 1950, Amstelveen has no rail link, but it is easy to reach from the train stations of Amsterdam Zuid, Bijlmer ArenA and Schiphol.

Attractions

Amstelveen has numerous notable parks, including the " Amsterdamse Bos ", located on the west side between Amstelveen and Amsterdam. It covers about 900 acres. The park has existed since 1930, and was created by unemployment, which the city wanted to give a job during the Great Depression. Every year on the Bosbaan, a race track, several rowing regattas. But even dragon boat competitions - like the 9th European Nations Championships in 2010 - be and have been performed. Also, an outdoor theater, arenas, camping, cafes and restaurants are available in the spacious recreation area. In the southwest lie the small and the large Poel. Among many other sports venues is the Wagener Stadium, which hosts the regular national and international hockey tournaments. From Easter to October runs every Sunday, the Historic Tram

In Stadshart the Cobra Museum with CoBrA art. In the courtyard of a Japanese rock garden was created by the artist Tajiri. In the old village of Amstelveen, you can visit Modern Art Museum Jan van der Togt.

By Amstelveen runs a historic tram the Electric Museumtramlijn Amsterdam.

Twinning

Amstelveen maintains partnerships with cities

Tempelhof- Schöneberg, Berlin, since 1957

Woking, United Kingdom, since 1983

Óbuda - Békásmegyer ( 3rd district of Budapest), Hungary, since 1991

Villa El Salvador, Peru, since 1997

Sons and daughters of the town