SAN FRANCISCO, April 18 - Adobe Systems, a leading seller of software for editing and managing documents, announced on Monday that it had acquired Macromedia for $3.4 billion in stock.

The deal combines two well-known brand names in software at a time when both are facing increasing competition from Microsoft in the market for electronic document management programs.

Adobe, based in San Jose, Calif., is the maker of Acrobat, the leading program for sharing documents, as well as desktop publishing and photographic software for use by graphic design professionals. Macromedia is known for Flash, a software program for animating Web pages, and Dreamweaver, a program for designing Web pages.

The acquisition, first reported in The Wall Street Journal, is also intended to bolster Adobe's presence in the market for design tools for the Web and document management software for mobile phones and other wireless devices, markets in which Macromedia has gained an early lead.

"This combination is all about growth," said Bruce Chizen, Adobe's chief executive, who will head the combined company, in a conference call on Monday with financial analysts. Mr. Chizen said the deal would either break even or result in a small profit in the first year.

In the deal, Macromedia shareholders will receive 0.69 share of Adobe stock for each Macromedia share. The purchase price of $41.86 a share is 25 percent higher than Macromedia's closing price of $33.45 on Friday. After the deal closes Macromedia investors will own about 18 percent of the combined company. Adobe also announced it would repurchase $1 billion in stock in the 12 months after the deal closes in the fall.

But many investors saw the deal as posing a substantial risk to Adobe's stock value as the two companies attempt to integrate their businesses. Shares of Adobe fell $5.89 on Monday, to close at $54.77. Macromedia's shares rose $3.27, to close at $36.72, then fell slightly in after-hours trading.

Eugene A. Munster, an analyst at Piper Jaffray, said the acquisition made sense from a product point of view because there was little overlap in the companies' products. However, he said, investors have become leery of the short-term impact of software mergers, given that such deals often weigh heavily on the share price of the acquiring company.

Macromedia, based in San Francisco, had a profit of $41.5 million in 2004, on revenue of $370 million. The company has about 1,200 workers, while Adobe, with annual sales of more than $1.7 billion, employs about 3,700.

Stephen Elop, president and chief executive of Macromedia, will become Adobe's president of worldwide field operations.

The merger follows Symantec's purchase of Veritas and Oracle's acquisition of PeopleSoft, two major deals in the software industry in recent months

It also comes as the software industry awaits Longhorn, the next generation of Windows from Microsoft, that is expected to incorporate much of the same capabilities as Acrobat.