Adobe Systems said Monday it had agreed to buy Macromedia for about $3.4 billion in stock, in order to extend its lead in the market for creating and distributing digital documents.

Adobe, best known for its Acrobat document-sharing software, said the deal would help it meet rising customer demand for audio and video documents and images that are compatible with handheld devices.

Macromedia also gives Adobe access to the dominant animated graphics software on the internet, which is aggressively expanding into mobile phones.

Under the terms of the deal, Macromedia shareholders will get 0.69 shares of Adobe, worth $41.86 at Adobe's closing price of $60.66 Friday on the Nasdaq, for each Macromedia share. That is a 25 percent premium over Macromedia's closing price of $33.45 Friday, also on Nasdaq.

"This is all about growth," Bruce Chizen, chief executive officer of Adobe, said in a conference call. He said he expects the combined companies to grow faster than they would as stand-alone players.

Both companies have performed well in the past year, riding the wave of mobile devices. Their offerings are relatively inexpensive and easier to absorb than those of enterprise software companies.

The deal is the latest move in consolidation of the software sector, following Symantec's acquisition of Veritas and Oracle's purchase of PeopleSoft.

The deal was welcomed by industry-watchers.

"Management is quite capable, but I think it is quite a big deal to be swallowing," said Robert Sellar, a technology fund manager at Britain's Aberdeen Asset Management, which owns Adobe shares. "$3.4 billion is a lot of money to be spending but (Adobe is) hugely cash generative."

The deal, set to close in autumn, would likely yield cost savings, said Adobe's Chizen, without giving further details.

Adobe said it was unable to provide any estimates on future earnings under generally accepted accounting principles due to uncertainty over restructuring costs related to the deal. But Adobe said the deal would be from break-even to adding slightly to earnings in the first 12 months.

Adobe also announced a $1 billion stock-repurchase program to start after the Macromedia deal has been completed.

Chizen will remain CEO, Adobe said, while Stephen Elop, Macromedia's president and CEO, will become president of worldwide field operations at the combined company.

The Hidden Ties Between Google and Amazon’s Project Nimbus and Israel's Military

A WIRED investigation found public statements from officials detail a much closer link between Project Nimbus and Israel Defense Forces than previously reported.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

This Viral AI Chatbot Will Lie and Say It’s Human

Bland AI’s customer services and sales bot is the latest example of “human-washing” in AI. Experts warn against the consequences of blurred reality.

Apple, Nvidia, Anthropic Used Thousands of Swiped YouTube Videos to Train AI

Creators claim their videos were used without their knowledge.

Tiny Texas Village Seeks Billion-Dollar Bitcoin Miner to Pave Potholes, Scare Dogs Away

In a roundabout bid to win public opinion (and a juicy tax abatement,) Riot Platforms is preparing for its prized bitcoin mine to be annexed by a minuscule village in rural Texas.

Inside a Violent Gang's Ruthless Crypto-Stealing Home Invasion Spree

More than a dozen men threatened, assaulted, tortured, or kidnapped 11 victims in likely the worst-ever crypto-focused serial extortion case of its kind in the US.

At 25, Metafilter Feels Like a Time Capsule From Another Internet

After a quarter century the community-driven site hasn’t changed much. And don’t ask it to license its archive to AI.

French AI Startups Felt Unstoppable. Then Came the Election

With polls suggesting voters are about to swing toward the far right or hard left, the AI industry is starting to freak out.