Zagreb weather in July (Croatia)

Will it be rainy or sunny in Zagreb this July? Want to know if this month is ideal for visiting? Our guide provides detailed weather information.

Temperatures

Experience perfect weather in Zagreb during July, featuring high temperatures and moderate rainfall. Enjoy the summer season during this month. Daytime temperatures are expected to be around 29°C, cooling off to about 17°C at night. It's the hottest month of the year. Make sure to come prepared with breezy outfits. Whether you're out exploring or just lounging, being prepared can make your experience in this warm month much more enjoyable.

Precipitation

Zagreb in July usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 82 mm for the month. Looking at the last 30 years, the data shows about 14 days with rain.

Average sunshine

There are approximately 280 hours of sunshine this month, meaning plenty of sunny days and a vibrant atmosphere.

If you favor pleasant temperatures and minimal rainfall, July is one of the better months to visit Zagreb. May, June, July and August typically offer the most agreeable circumstances. On the other hand, January, February and December tend to be characterized by conditions that may not be as optimal.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Zagreb climate page with graphs.

Zagreb, monthly averages in July

Min Temperature 17°C

Max Temperature 29°C

Chance of Rain 45%

Precipitation 82 mm

Rainy days 14 days

Humidity 69%

Windspeed 11 km/h

Sunshine 280 hours

Percentage Sunshine 63%

Where to go in Croatia in July

Find out more about the weather in Croatia and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

It's going to be warm! Consider airy clothing, t-shirts, and other summer clothes. Shorts for men made of cotton or linen are good options for staying cool.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 9/10

Cycling 7/10

Walking 7/10

Camping 8/10

Outdoor sports 7/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Zagreb.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Croatia? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Croatia. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.